THE FOREST OF Fancy.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED VEry pretty Apothegmes, and pleasant histories, both in
meeter and prose, Songs, Sonets, Epigrams and Epistles, of diverse matter and
in diverse manner.

With sundry other devises, no less pithye then pleasant and profitable.

Read with regard, peruse each point well, (thee and then give thy judgment
as reason shall move For ear thou conceive it, twere hard for to tell, if
cause be or no wherefore to reprove me.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Newgate Market, within the
new Rents, at the Sign of the Lucrece. 1579.

The Book speaks to the Buyers.
To those that be welthy, and pass by this place.
My talk only tends, so conster the case.
WHat kind of thing I am,
my shape does show the same:
No Forest, though my father pleased,
to term me by that name.
But Fancy fits me well,
For I am fully fraught,
With Fancies such as may correct
but not corrupt the thought.
In me my friend thou may,
(though thou be young or old)
Ritche, poor, of high or low degree,
thy duty here behold.
For Yonkers I have fond,
and foolish trifles store:
For ancient syres, such seemly sightes,
as shall content them more.
If thou a Lover be,
come learn thy lesson here:
Where wilful works of witles wightes,
shall perfect plain appear.
What treason is in trust,
how fickle friends are found:
How wretched is the state of man,
what mischief does abound.
What follies fond we frame,
our foolish fancy to:
Here may thou see, and so discearne,
what best beseetes to do.
Since then such profit may,
by means of me redounde:
To thee my friend, before thou pass,
this present plot of ground.
Put hand in purse for pence,
to purchase me withal:
What fool a Forest would forsake,
that sees the price so small,
A Shilling is the most,
a very slender share:
No hurt to him that has enough,
so small a piece to spare.
Finis.
quoth. Fancy.

The Author to the Reader.
THe Husbandman when meetest time shall serve,
does plow his ground, and sow good seeds therein,
Then seeks he how he should the same preserve,
From carryon crows, that gape the grain to win,
Until that it to ripen do begin.
And being ripe, he makes no more delay,
But reapes it up, so soon as well he may.
His corn thus cropped, and scattered on the ground,
Straight into sheafes he does the same divide,
And to his Barnes he bears it ready bound,
Whereas a while he suffers it to bide.
Till at the last he thrashers does provide,
Who from the corn the straw and stubble take,
And on a heap the grain together rake.
Which as it is, they put into a Fan,
And so devise to drive the chafe from it.
My self I count to be the Husbandman,
For in this book, as in a ground most fit,
To sow the seeds of my unwieldy wit,
I scattered have my fancies in such wise.
And senst them so, as I can best devise.
All being done that does thereto pertain,
Good Reader I present to thee the same,
Desiring thee that thou will take the pain,
All things amiss to put in perfect frame:
And bear with me although I merit blame,
Considering that I sought of mere good will,
in all I might thy fancy to fulfill.
In Forest wise here fancies I present.
To thee, with heart that fervently does crave,
Each courteous wight to way my good intent,
And note the cause why I presumed have,
To thrust my self amidst the surging wave.
Not glory vain, or hope to purchase praise.
But sloth to shon, my mind thereto did raise.
R. W. to the Reader, in the Authors behalf.
What led Leander to presume,
so often to swim through surging seas:
But hope to find his Hero there,
where he ariu'de his heart to ease.
What moude the Troyan to attempt,
to go to Greece, but hope to have
The princely pearl, the promised pray,
which most of all his heart did crave?
And what procured Aesans soon,
to put his life in perrill so,
To fetch the Fleece from Colcos Cost?
where to augment his grief and woe,
So many perrils were preparde,
but that he hopte thereby to gain:
Such glory great as after death,
should make his fame for aye remain.
If all these hopte, and had in fine,
the thing that they did hold most dear:
Let him that has this pretty book,
for thy delight compyled hear,
Good Reader, reap his just reward,
to recompense his mere good will,
Receive his gift in grateful wise,
and of the same conceive none ill.
For evil none he meant thereby,
(what ever envious mates surmise:)
Right sure I am: conceive therefore,
of him and his none otherwise.
So shall thou make him think his pains,
employed well in each respect.
And happy count his hap that some,
will with good will his work protect.
Finis.
The Epistle to the Reader.
SO variable are the minds of men (gentle Reader) and so diverse their
opinions, that amongste twenty, it is hard to find twain that agree all in one
thing. For commonly that which one man lyketh, another loatheth, that which one
man praises, another reproves, that which one desires, another disdayneth,
and whatsoever pleases one, does as much displease another. The young man
takes pleasure in all youthful excersises, as Daunsing, Synging, playing on
instruments, dallying with daynty dames, and such like, whereby his pleasure
may be procured, and increased, without respecting any perrill that may ensue
thereof. The aunciente Sire, whom experience has taught to be more wise and
wary of such vain vanities, has an eye to his profit, and rejects pleasure
as a thing unprofitable. The courageous Captain accompteth it for his greatest
glory to be in the field, marching among his men of war, or skirmishing with
his enemies, to try his strength and courage, with the hazard of his life,
for the furtheraunce of his fame, and increase of his commodity. The man
likewise that is inclyned to learning, is always best at ease when he is
settled in his study, there to toss and turn his books, perusing the works of
ancient wrighters, whereby he may in time be able both to profit his
country, and purchase such praise to himself as is due to his good desires.
But as these great clerks do not all delight to study one only science, but
some apply themselves to deuinity, some to Philosophy, some to physic, some
to Astronomy, and some to every one of them alike, not making any special
choice of either of them. So likewise the common sort whose learning nor
capacity cannot attain to the full perfection or perfect understanding of
such deep mysteries, have their several delights, as well in reading such
works, as are in their vulgar tongue, as in any thing else. For one will
peruse pleasant Histories, and other poetical devises, this man merry tales,
and other like toys: that man divine and morrall matter, every one severally,
according to his several affection, and natural inclination, and there is no
man be he never so well stayed, that will adict himself to one thing only,
and refuse all other. For as the stomach is quickly cloyed with feeding
continuallye upon one kind of meat, so is the mind greatly grieved, to be
always musing upon one matter, and therefore desires change.

Which considered, after I had gathered together in one small volume diverse
devises, as well in prose as meeter, of sundry sorts, and several matter,
which at idle times (as well to sharpen my wits, and shake of sloth, as to
satisfye my friends, that had occasion to crave my help in that behalf) I
have heretofore as occasion served, diversely framed, supposing the same to be
fit for this present time, and agreeable with the minds of most men, I have
(as well for the disordered placing of every particular parcel thereof, being
rudely and dispersedly divided, as also for the several fancies therein
contained, fit for every degree, and agreeable to their diverse affections)
thought good to name it The Forest of Fancy, and so causing it to be
imprinted, I do here friendly Reader, present it unto thee as a gift, of my
good will, desiring thee to accept it. And though my young years and small
experience, will not permit me to wryghte so pithily as some have done
heretofore, whose worthy works are extant, and in great estimation, yet
considering that I have not done it either for gain or glory, but partly to
make my self more apt in other matters of more importance wherein I may
happen hereafter to be employed, and partly to procure thy pleasure and profit
(which may easilye be obtained) if thou do duly consider, and rightly
conceive of that which shall be offered to thy view, I beseech thee conster my
doings to the best, take this my small labor in good part, amend the faults
escaped. Let my good meaning serve to excuse my rashness, in presuming thus
boldly to publish a thing of so small value, and vouchsafe me thy friendly
assistaunce against the slaundrous reports of envious Zoylus and his
mallicious mates, and in so doing, thou shall encourage me hereafter to search
my wits, and apply my travail to contriue some thing more worthy thy reading.

The Forest of Fancy.
A morrall of the misery and mischief that reigns amongst wicked
worldlinges, with an admonition to all true Christians, to forsake their sin
and amend their manners.
WHo so he be that silent sits,
and sets his mind to see,
The subtle slights that wily wights
do work in each degree.
shall surely find full great abuse,
In every place committed:
And virtue boyde and out of use,
all reason quight remitted:
Might maistereth right, the pore are pincht,
almost in every place,
Fraud, flattery, gold, and greedy gain,
each where does purchase grace.
But truth and plain simplicity.
reapes hatred every where:
Good deeds are dead, and charity,
has hid her head for fear.
Whores hold the place that Matrons ^^lde,
do merit most to have:
And flattery flocks about the Court,
in steed of fathers grave.
The covetous carle does scrape for coin,
the royotous son spendes all:
The true man cannot escape the thief,
but in his hands must fall,
The Usurer now does use his trade,
The Landlord raise his rent:
The powling Lawyer plays his part,
the truth to circumuent.
Our Gentles now do iette it out,
in bravery passing measure,
Till they have lost by vain expense,
both credit, land and treasure.
The yeomans son not liking of,
his fathers honest state,
Will climb to be a gentle man,
and every Gentles mate.
The Gentleman will be a Knight,
the Knight a Lord likewise,
The Lord an Earl, the Earl a Duke,
the Duke will higher rise,
And make himself a puisaunt Prince,
the Prince will Monarke be,
So no man now will be content,
To bide in his degree.
The son does seek his fathers death,
his living to obtain,
Faith fayles in all, few trusty friends,
do any where remain.
The master seeks by rygorous means,
his servants to suppress,
And servant work all means they may,
their masters to distress.
Now mothers train their Daughters up,
In loathsome liberty:
Whereby often times their honest names
they bring in ieoperdy.
Excess is used in every place,
the pore no whit releude,
Labor is loathde, and Idleness
each where his web has weude,
The Tauernes tiplers ply a pace,
each alehouse has his knights:
In dice and dancing, deuilish trades,
are all their whole delights.
All law is left for liberty,
all virtue changde for vice:
All truth is turnde to Trecherye^,
all things inhaunce their price.
Each crafts man now has craft at will,
his neighbor to defraude,
They swear, and often forswear themselves,
for every foolish gaude.
But is it well where every thing,
does seem so much amiss?
No doubtless no: a wicked world,
and wretched state it is.
A world in deed, divided quight,
from godliness and grace:
A world that greatly God abhorres,
from which he turns his face.
A world it is, which will not last,
a world whose end is nigh:
A world that shall his fury taste,
that fees our sins from hye.
A world that will full well content,
the enemy of our joy.
A world that works his lewd intent,
that would our souls destroy.
Therefore let each true christian heart,
his secret sins forsake:
To God let him with speed reuert,
and meek subjection make,
Committing all his actions still,
to his divine protection,
So shall he surely shun all ill,
and live without infection.
Finis.
After the death of Oedipus King of Theabes, his two sons Ethiocles and
Polinices striving whether of them should succeed him, in the end it was
agreede, that they should reign by course, one year the one, the next year
the other, But Ethiocles reigning first, when his year was expired, would not
give place to his brother Polinices, which caused him to write unto him in
effect as follows.
THy cruel dealing has prue^^de,
thy Brothers trembling hand,
O Etheocles for to write,
and let thee understand
what injury thou do offer me,
in going thus about
To break the promise made to me,
wherein thou do no doubt,
Both God and nature much offend,
for when we were at strife,
when deadly discord twixt us twain,
and envy was so rife,
That each of us the Kingdom craude,
our father then decest,
It was by counsel grave decreede,
to cause our countries rest,
That each should yearly reign by course,
whereto thou did agree,
Then drawing Lots who should be first,
the lot did light on thee.
I gave thee place, as right requyrde,
thou have a year and more,
Enioyde the same most peaceably
without anoy, therefore
Thou should permit thy brother now,
thee therein to supply,
To rule as thou haste done before,
but thou do it deny,
So much ambition does thee blind,
and fylthy lukers lure,
That to resign to me my right,
thou may now now endure,
For when I did the same demand,
thou proudly did refuse,
To render it, wherein thou do
thy brother much abuse,
But do thou think I will receive,
such aunswers at thy hand
And suffer thee against my will,
to rule the Realm and land.
Which I should do, that will I no
for all thy power and strength,
But in despite of thee I hope,
to have the same at length.
And make thee feel the smake thy self,
of this thy offered wrong,
If that to yield to my request,
thou do the time prolong.
Adrastus is a mighty King,
whose Daughter is my wife,
And for that cause which all his power,
will aid me during life,
whose force conjoined shith mine own,
does far surpass thy might,
Therefore let reason i^ me the rain,
do yield to me my right,
Let us like brethren live and love,
each other as we ought:
Let us not stray from natures bounds,
and stir up strife for naught.
Least that Report reproach (...),
on us do rumor raise,
And so the race of Oedipus,
be wicked deemde always.
what though our father did offend,
in taking to his fere
Jocasta fair unwittingly,
that was his mother dear,
Shall that to us a pattern be:
to teach us to offend.
Nay rather let it be a mean,
to make us to amend.
Shall it be said that we have wrought,
the ruin of our land,
And of our selves so wilfully,
let all things well be scand.
Consider well what dangers great,
we may incur thereby,
And what great mischief may ensue
if thou this thing deny,
Thou know that from the mighty Jove,
decendes our royal race,
Let us not therefore do the thing,
that may our birth deface,
Let not the Thebans justly be
compeld to curse us both,
For thy ambitious greedy mind,
whereof I would be loath,
For what if in this cursed strife,
we both should chance to dye,
what great contention should there be,
who should our place supply?
what great disdain? what priny grudge?
what tumultes then would grow?
what hurly burly would there be?
what treason then would flow?
Through civil war the country would,
be topsy turuy turude
Strong holds would then be battered down,
whole Towns and Cities burnde,
What clamours then. what doleful cries,
would be throughout the land?
Now many Orphans would be made?
who should in safety stand?
Chaste Uirgins would be then deflourde,
young infantes would be slain,
The rich men should be spoylde and robde,
the porer put to pain,
Oh what disorder then would grow?
what murder made of men?
what sacraledge, what raunsack rude,
what bloodshead would be then?
way well these things, my brother dear,
which if thou do proceed,
Is lykely for to come to pass,
therefore I say take heed,
For if thou be the cause thereof,
then truly shall thou try,
Their blood on thee for thy deserts,
from heaven will vengeance cry.
And I not to be blamde at all.
since that I nothing crave,
But that which does to me partaine
and I of right should have,
Take heed in time, advise thee well,
hereafter comes not yet,
The house can not stand long, that is
on ill foundation set,
The ship that at sure anchor lies,
is safe in every place:
Twirt back and tree, thrust not thy hand
beware in any case
Thou put not fire unto the tow,
sharp not thy knife I say,
If thou therewith wilt not be hurt,
but take this by the way.
That if thou tread upon a worm.
she will turn back again:
Care Stead be stolen, shut stable door,
else is it all in vain.
For he that takes not heed before,
shall afterward repent it:
Wherefore I say look to it well.
whilst that thou may prevent it.
A man when he does see the stroke,
may soon avoid the same,
So thou if that to reasons lore,
thou will thy fancy frame.
Thou may this mischiefee easly shun,
that hangs over thee:
But who so blind the proverb says,
as he that will not see.
Thou know all this as well as I,
I need not make relation
Thereof to thee, words are but wind,
where will has domination.
Rain nothing profit can the corn,
which on dry stones is sown:
Nor council, him which does mislike,
all counsel save his own,
I can and do bide wrong enough,
but cannot to much bear:
Look ear you leap, for fear you catch,
awrong sow by the ear.
As by his Trumpe, the trumpiter
does show his meaning plain,
So bymy letters in likewise,
my purpose I explain.
Do therefore as you shall see cause,
the blame shall bide in you:
If any thing amiss do chance.
and so I say adue,
Finis.
A warning to young men to fly the flattery, and shun the deceiptes of
dissembling dames.
WHat hard mishaps does hamper youth,
when cursed Cupid list to frown:
And yet he will not credit truth,
Till froward fortune fling him down.
But when he is with dole distressed,
Then all to late he can perceive,
what madness did his mind mollest,
His wretched woe by wrong to weaue,
yea then he does all Dames defy,
And vows in vain their fraud to fly,
Must hory hears needs make us wise,
Discovering naked treasons hook,
whose glittering hue by slight device.
Does make them blind that thereon look,
And till in trappe they taken be,
That turns their pleasure all to pain,
Their folly fond they cannot see,
Such madness moves their busy brain,
In wisdoms ways they think they walk,
And so for chese do champe on chalk.
If living wightes might plainly see,
The wily works of women's wits,
which covered close in bosom he,
Disclosde at last by frantike fits.
Then would they learn to leave their looks,
And glaunce no more their glaring eyes,
Upon those baits on hidden hooks,
Which whosoever shall attempt to taste,
Is like for aye in woe to wast.
Where suitors serve with long delay,
In daily hope of some good hap,
Tormenting griefs at length does pay,
Their pencion with an after clappe,
For such rewards they daily find,
That fyxe their fancy faithfully,
On any catte of Cresseds kind.
That never countes of constancy,
whom Eve instructed long ago,
To work to man all grief and woe.
Behold the gwerdon due to love,
Bestowde upon a fickle Dame,
As good of xotten redes to prove,
Some precious iem in form to frame,
For why repentance comes at last,
And gripes his heart with griesly grief,
That erst fond fancy followed fast,
which left him void of all relief:
A just reward for rechelesse wightes,
That will not shun such vain delights.
Youth bends his net to catch the pray,
which some enjoy that take no pain,
Ht toils, yet sees every day,
His labor wasted all in vain,
He beats the bush, and in mean space,
Another bears the birds away,
He fiercely does pursue the chase,
whilst others do possess the pray,
And so the end of lovers gain,
Is loathsome labor for their pain.
Finis.
A plain description of perfect friendship.
TRue friendship unfeigned
Does rest vnrestrayned,
No terror can came it:
Not gaining, nor losing.
Nor gallant gay glosing,
can ever reclaim it.
In pain, and in pleasure,
The most truest treasure.
That may be desired,
Is loyal love deemed.
Of wisdom esteemed,
and chefely required.
Finis.
An Inuectiue against covetous persons.
AS after Summer winter comes,
so age does youth ensue:
And after age comes sickness in,
then death does life subdue,
And after death the winding sheet,
which bringes us to the grave,
This is the state of mortal men,
this is the end they have.
Wherefore do men then heap up coin,
and hord it up so fast,
why do they care for worldly much,
as life would ever last.
why do they take such pains for thee.
which they must leave behind.
To them that will dispearse the same,
as chafe against the wind.
Of feigned friendship.
AS Swallows do in Summer time appear,
And in the winter cold cannot be seen,
So faithles friends will unto us draw near,
so long as wealth does flourish fresh and green,
But when that fayles, then farewell friendship to,
All is for gain, that these vile vipers do.
The commodities of Marriage.
IF marriage bring a wife,
the wife good children bringes,
Those children happy life,
of happy life love springes,
Of love eternal joy,
of joy does health proceed,
Of health long life for aye.
lo this is marriage meede,
In contrarium.
If marriage bring a wife,
the wi^e ill children bringes,
Those children endless strife,
of strife all hatred springes,
Of hatred care and grief,
through care does sickness come,
Through sickness death in brief.
lo this is all the sum.
Finis.
Of the wickedness of women and how prone they are to the procatious of the
flesh.
Jove on a day disposde to jest,
with Juno for delight,
The wicked wiles of women's wits,
in words did plain resite.
And said that they to fleshly lusts,
more subject were then men.
Juno denyde, to have it tryde,
they craved judgment then.
And for because Tiresias had,
both man and woman bin,
Supposing him the metest man,
and most expert therein,
They did elect him for their judge,
the truth thereof to try:
He sentence past with Jupiter.
and boldly did replye,
That women were the wantonner,
although for shame they sought,
For to conceal from open show.
what was their secret thought.
But Juno as the nature is,
of all the femine sect,
When as she saw Tiresias did
her wished will reject,
In giving so his sentence grave,
contrary to her mind,
(Inflamde with ire to work revenge,)
she made Tiresias blind,
Therefore I must of force conclude,
that neither fury fell,
Nor Serpent dyre, not Tiger fierce,
nor all the fiendes in hell.
May more torment the mind of man,
or work his wretched woe:
So much as can one wicked wench,
in whom does fury floe.
Finis.
What small trust there is to be reposed in friends or kinsfolks.
Since friendship is as rare a thing to find,
As it is to see a Swanne all black of hue:
Wise Esope in his Fables as we find,
Does warn us well to think no friend so true.
That will be pressed, our pleasure to fulfill,
So redily as we the same require,
For why in trust is treason tried still,
And fairest looks do lack the best desire:
Wherefore (says he) let no man trust his friend,
To do the thing which he himself may do,
For fear he be deceived in the end,
By those whom he has leaned most unto,
For proof whereof a Fable he resightes,
which who so notes, shall find to great effect,
The fraud of friends he plainly there resites,
who to their promise have but small respect.
A Lark there was upon a certain time,
That trained up her young ones in a field,
Where Corn did grow, which then was even in prime,
To be cut down as ripe, the Lark to shield
Her little ones from harm, when as she went
Abroad to get such meat as should suffice
To feed them with, did give commandment,
That they should have regard in any wise
To that they heard, and at her back return,
To tell her all: it happened on a day,
whilst she was forth, that thither came the Borne,
which ought the field, which to his son did say,
This gear is ripe and ready to be cut,
wherefore to morrow go thou in my name,
Unto our friends, and them in mind do put
To come and help me to dispatch the same.
which charge his son dischargde in each respect,
whereto his friends in friendly wise did frame
Their answer straight, that they would not neglect,
To work his will when night approached was,
This Lark come home her byrds did flitter fast,
About her all and showing what did pas,
Desired her, that she in all the haste,
would them transport unto some other place,
But she persuading them to be content,
Commanded them next day to lend good ear,
To that they heard, and so away she went.
Next day in Field the farmer does appear,
with Sim his son, where all that day they spent,
But of his friends there came not one of all,
wherefore unto his son again he said,
To morrow to my Cosines go you shall,
And say that I require their friendly aid,
To reap my corue: the young ones hearing this,
More earnest were with their beloved damme,
To be removed from thence, but she ywis,
Did let it slip until the next day came,
For why quoth she, no cosins are so kind,
That by and by will come at kinsemans call,
To morrow therefore mark what news you find,
And then if need require, I Will help you all.
Next day the Cosins came not into place,
wherefore the good man said, all friends farewell,
And kinsmen to, now will I change the case,
And trust no trifling tale that they shall tell,
Trust to our selves we will, go thou my soune,
Provide to sickles for thy self and me,
And by our selves it shall to morn be done.
when as the Lark hard this, nay now quoth she,
It Is time indeed to pack away from hence,
Unles we will each one destroyed be,
And so she bare her little ones from thence,
Finis.
A Letter written by a young maiden to a Lover of hers, wherein she detecteth
the treachery of many men, and their great dissimulation.
THe crow would seem a milk white swan to be,
So likewise would the prattling rooke appear,
Like Iunos byrd, which cannot well agree,
For kind bewrayes his craft, this is most clear
yea Copper often in Silver is inclosde,
In glittering gold, great store of dross does bide,
In purest shells, as trial has disclosde,
Carnels corrupt, themselves (...) often hide,
The wily wolf we diverse times do find,
In sheep skin cloathde, and eake the dusty wall,
with hangings fair is hid, in human kind,
We also see the like effect to fall,
For many a one there is, that makes a show,
Of perfect love, when he means nothing less,
Men seek to bring poor women to their bow,
And in the end to leave them in distress.
And for because I thought you one of those,
whose pleasure is pore women to deceive,
with tatling tongue you flatteringly can gloss,
As by your deeds I daily do perceive,
I sent to you a flower for Flatterers fit,
Regarding naught how ye the same would take,
So free I am from biting on the bit,
As yet not drencht in Lady Venus lake.
If ought beside be done that you like ill,
And that the same in evil part you take,
Go seek your mendes you may whereas you will,
I reke you naught, this answer do I make,
And though before, offense were none committed,
yet this your writing fond would it procure,
which has full well with your demeanor fitted,
Being rude, and imprudent, and ill to endure,
No more I need at this time here to say,
For well you may by this my mind perceive,
yet of one thing I warn you by the way,
That with vain hope your self you not deceive,
And so to conclude, I bid you adue,
wishing you advisedly my letters to view.

A young man enamoured of a very fair Gentlewoman, declares the dollorous
passions that he suffers for her sake, and craves mercy at her hands.
THe more I look upon her lovely face,
whose like before dame nature never framde,
The more I like, and long to live in grace,
Of her that may Pandora well be namde,
whose deeds as due, the highest place have claimde,
A Phenic rale, she may be termed right,
That so surmountes each other earthly wight.
Of Silk and Silver, seems her hear to be,
Her teeth of pearl, her eyes of Crystal clear,
Her lips of Ruby, wrought in each degree,
She does excel, and vaunteth void of peer,
Her like did never live, that I could hear,
who would not then account himself in blis,
That might enjoy, so rare a iem as this,
Sir Aleran as may by books appear,
A sily Sacon, sought her love to gain
That was the Emperor Othos Daughter dear,
And did in fine his wished will obtain,
She granted grace to quite his careful pain,
And fearing naught her fathers furious ire.
Did yield her heart all whole at his desire.
And Acharisto he but basely borne,
Besought the love of fair Euphimia
who seemed naught his courtesy to scorn,
Though she were Queen of rich corinthia,
Young Jason eke obtained Medea,
who though she knew not him nor his estate,
Forsook her friends to be his matched mate.
A million more I might allege of those.
That did by seeking soon obtain their will,
And when they were bewrapt in wretched woes.
Had speedy help to shield themselves from ill,
which otherwise their youthful days would spill,
yea some we see from seruill state aduaunst,
By worthy dames whose grace to gain they chaunst.
Then speak and speed, be still and want thy hyre,
For many a time and often I have hard say,
And sometime proud, that he that would aspire,
To that which will does wish, the wisest way,
Is to expulse despair which makes men stray,
Far from the path of perfect peace and rest,
Since Fortune still, does help the bouldest best.
For can the Leach recure his pacientes pain,
Before he see from whence his grief does grow,
Or can the Lawyer plead a matter plain,
Unles to him, his case the client show,
Then should this dainty dame on me bestow
Her loyal love before she try my truth,
The meetest mean to move her mind to ruth.
Then welcome hope, and foolish fear farewell,
Farewell all care, and welcome pleasant joy,
That guilefull gest no more with me shall dwell,
That would my health and happy hap destroy.
What should I doubt, since she is nothing coy,
Her gentle heart can not his hurt procure,
That for her sake would any death endure.
On her my health, on her my happy days,
Do whole depend, on her my mirth or moan,
My wealth or woe, my pain or pleasure stays,
My life and death does rest in her alone,
By her I must, alas, or else by none,
Receive relief, and hope to have redress,
Of all the pains that do my mind oppress.
And as her bewty brane binds me to love,
So does her courtious countinaunce comfort yielde,
And as the pain I feel my mind does move,
So hope persuades that grace shall gain the field,
But hap what may, both love and pain that build
Their bower in breast, my sorrows so renew,
That forced I am for grace to seek and sue.
Behold therefore dear dame thy servant hear,
Lies prostrate at thy feet to plead for grace,
Oh rue my state let pity plain appear,
For thou alas haste brought me in such case,
As if I find not favor in thy face,
Like one that loathes his life I wish my grave
To quench the cares which do my health deprave.
The bale I bide, I would right happy count,
And think my self in Paradise to be,
Yea in good hap all others to surmount,
might it but please you once to deem of me
As I deserve, and graciously agree,
To take me for your servant, slave or swayne,
Whose mind to please, I would refuse no pain.
Few words will serve a righteous cause to plead,
If Judge be just, by whom it must be tryde,
How said I? what shall I her dealing dread,
No no, I know she will not shrink aside,
From reasons rule, at any time or tide,
But render me my due deserved hyre,
Which is the sum of all my whole desire.
Who serves, deserves, his recompense to have,
Who truly loves, ought to be loud again,
Whose greefes are great, must needs a medicine crave,
Or else permit himself to pine in pain,
Let me dear dame my guerdon then obtain,
And do not now in lieu of lasting love,
with deep disdain, my rash attempt reprove.

Finis.
Certain Verses written in commendation of the Nut cornell.
AS late for my delight,
when dumpes oppressed my mind,
I walkte abroad the pleasant fields,
in hope some help to find,
By chance I lighted then,
Upon a huge great wood,
whereas in ranks right goodly trees,
of sundry sorts there stood,
There were of large and lofty Oaks,
great store in every place,
Of Aspe and Elm, with byrche and Box,
where ever I did trace.
There was great store of Holly to,
of willow asp and ew,
And all the ground was clad with flowers,
of sundry sent and hue.
Amongst the rest of Philberts fair,
was plenty every where,
And every thing that heart could wish,
a man might find it there,
Then from this Philbert tree I pluct,
A cluster that were clong,
Together fast in seemly sort,
as on the tree they hung,
And when I had them in my hand,
not knowing how to use them,
I was at last by reason taught,
betwirt my teeth to bruise them,
which having done I found therein,
A Cornell fair enclosde,
which for to be of pleasant taste,
I also then supposde.
And found it so, for in my life,
I never tasted thing,
More pleasant then the Cornell was,
which from that tree did spring,
The Philbert Cornel is a dish,
for any Princes meet,
And they that of the same will taste,
shall find it wondrous sweet.
Above all other kinds of fruit,
the philbert in my mind,
Does seem most pleasant in the taste,
as they that prove shall find,
Such virtue in this cornel is,
that I have heard men say,
Physicians use it many times,
their patientes pains to stay,
For many things this cornel is,
commodious yet beside:
As they can witness wondrous well,
that have the virtue tryde.
And therefore as I did begin,
even so I will not miss,
To say that of all fruict the best,
the Philbert cornel is.
Finis.
A Lover having long concealed his love, at the lastre. ^uealeth it, and
craves favor at the hands, of his beloved mistres.
Often have I seen in others, and sometime proved it in my self, that want of
audacity, and fear of repulse, has brought many cares into the mind, and
grievous thoughts into the head. which being reveled and manifested to the
causer thereof, the party grieved has fed on joy, wholye bathed in pleasure,
and received worthy consolation, wherefore calling to remembrance this saying
of Seneca, that he which fears, and suffers opportunity to slip, when he
knows the wight that can cure him, may well be accounted a wilful destroyer
of himself.

Expulsing fear, I have at the last adventured to crave a remedy at your
hands, on whom my help wholly depends, whose wisdom and curtesy being
such as can easily by outward Iestures, perceive the inward meaning of the
mind, and by secret signs and privy practices, soon perceive where good will
and affection is fixed. It were superfluous to use any large discourse in
declaring what great love I bear unto you, which by howmuche it is of longer
continuance, by so much is it more extreme, and my torments thereby the more
intolerable. For as fire the longer it lies covered, the more forcible it is,
when it bursteth out, and harder to be quenched, so love the longer it is
lodged in any man, and conceled, the more vehement it is, and more difficult to
be suppressed. Seeing then that my life being only sustained by the favor of
your deuinegraces, cannot be maintained one only minute of an hour, without
the liberal help of your sweetness and virtue, I beseech you, (if the hearty
prayers of any mortal tormented man, may ever have force and power to move
you to pity) that it may please you of your rare clemencye and accustomed
courtesy, with the dew of grace proceeding from your seemly self, to redeem
from henceforth your servants most miserable and afflicted mind from death
or martyrdom, by reaping the fruit of his unfeigned affection, as his
heartchieflye desires.


A Lover whose friend for his sake was frowardlye delte withal, writes unto
her, to persuade her with patience, to suffer it for a season.
AS one bewrapt in wastefull woe,
in dryry dread I stand,
Least that my ship on Rocks should rend,
or perrish in the Sand.
Least blustering blastes should drint my bark.
to unacquainted shore,
Least swelling waves should soke it so,
as naught may it restore,
To former state and strength again,
least foes of foreign land?
should make encounter with my men,
that may not long withstand.
Or least with song some Siren should,
the pilate so allure,
As by that means, his loss and mine,
unwisely he procure,
A thousand thoughts in head do swarm,
which will not me permit,
Ne night nor day my rest to take,
as nature deemes it fit,
You are the ship, whose safety so,
my heart has ever sought,
you are the Bark for whose mishaps,
my head with care is fraught.
Such craggy cliftes, such greedy gulfes,
such sundry sorts of Sands,
Such dangers great, such perrilous ports,
am idst your passage stands,
Such whirling winds, such blustering blastes,
which clean contrary blow,
Such tempests strange, such wallowing waves,
about you still do flow.
Such sirens with their subtle songs,
allure your pilate still:
I mean your mother that thereby,
she seeks to work you ill.
Such homebred hateful hellish hagges,
such friendly fawning foes,
whose privy malice pricks far worse,
then bryre amidst the rose.
which breeds my bale, and to my mind,
does daily bring unrest,
For fear least you by their despite,
should be to much oppressed,
But since as yet I see no way,
these evils to prevent,
with perfect patience arm your self,
till help from God be sent,
And pray to him with heart and voice,
to further my desire,
which once obteind, doubt not to find,
such rest as you require,
And thereby be in such estate,
as they that now devise,
To work your woe, to gain good will,
shall then all means devise,
Thus leaving now for lack of time,
a long discourse to make.
I bid adue, and kiss this scroule,
that you in hand (...) take,
Hoping it shall as thankfully,
of you received be,
As I desire most willingly,
your heart from harm to free.

Finis.
An admonition to Masters, how they should behave themselves toward their
servants.
THose whom we fear we cannot love,
And whom we love, not them we hate,
And whom we hate, we would remove.
From former health and happy state,
And trapping them in traitorous snare,
In steed of joy inioyne them care.
Let such therefore as masters be,
And have the charge of many men,
To them be courtious, frank and free,
And well they shall be served then,
Loud and obayde with faithful heart,
As they do merit by desarte.
But such as seek by rigorous wise,
To be obaide and fearde of all,
Their servants will them much despise,
And seek all means to work their thrall,
Although for fear they do obey,
Thus proof shows plainly every day.
Finis.
A young man finding her to whom he had plighted promise, to be fraught with
another man's fruicte, wrighteth unto her as follows.
ALl is not Gold that glistereth fair,
Nor all things as it seems to be,
Fair hangings hide the dusty wall,
So does the bark the hollow (...),
The flower that fairest seenes in sight,
Has not always the sweetest smell,
But time that bringes all things to light,
And doubtful dread from mind expel,
Has tryde thy treason and my truth,
Thy seeret slightes it does detect.
Yea time has now bewrayde thy w^iles,
Thy wavering wit, thy small respect
To plighted vow, thy cloked craft,
Thy filthy life so close concealde,
Thy double dealing devilish driftes
And (...)ild desires it has reuealde,
Unto my praise and thy reproach,
But who would look for other gain,
At hands of her in whom no truth
Did ever yet vouchsafe to rain,
Like as the Siren with her songs,
And Crocadile with doleful cries,
Procures the Pilat to approach.
The place where greatest perrill lies,
So have thou longled me to love,
And like of thee above the rest,
By flattering words by feigned vows,
And mere good will which thou professed.
But words are wind I well perceive,
And women's vows are made in vain,
Their wavering wits delight in change,
And reason never rules the rain,
Excuses now shall serve no more.
To bleare mine eyes as they have done,
Thy filthy fact bewrayes thy love,
For which great shame thou shall not shon,
The wine another (...)ioyde,
To me the dregs thou mind(...) to leave,
But think not so, for if thou do,
Thou greatly do thy self deceive,
No mistress, no, to yield to that,
Be sure ye shall not me compel,
I need not one to taste my meat,
My self can serve the turn full well,
Let him therefore that sowde the seed,
Enjoy the fr(...)e thereof ac will,
His last is fittest for thy foot,
To ro^^ thy Barge he best can skill.

Finis.
A Letter written to a young widdowe, that was before matched with a very old
man, persuading her to make choice of one whose years wear more agreeable
with her own.
Mistress, if I thought it necessary for you to morn for the death of your
dead Husband, or if his life had been so delightful unto you, as his death was
happy for himself, (because thereby he was not only cid of the great
torments that his pore afflicted body sustained in this world, but also
attained to a more blessed life in the kingdom of heaven) I would neither blame
you for wishi^g him alive again, or persuade you from lamenting his death
(though I know it is nothing auayleable) but rather would exhort you thereunto,
and with tears, (as an unfeigned friend) help you to bewail the loss of so
comfortable a Companyon. But seeing he was old, angry, weak, impotent, and
continually so afflicted with sickness as he was; and you so young and comlye a
gentle woman as you are, you have no cause to lamente his loss, or be sorry
for his death; seeing it pleased God, by calling him to his mercy, both to
release him of pain, and (...)se yon of (...) great trouble long sustained
with him, and therefore I would wish you to shake of the vain Ceremonies, that
in such causes are commonly used, and frame your self again to that blessed
estate of matrimony, chasing one, who as well in years as otherwise, may be
more agreeable to your seemelye self, then your late husband, whose old age,
was rather and corsy then a comfort to your heart, being in nothing
correspondent to your mind, or meet for your personage, for so ought every
true christian woman to do, as well for procreation of Children, as for other
necessary commidities incident thereunto, whereof by means of your greater
years, and more often exercise in worldly affairs, you have better
experience then I, and as you are not ignorant how convenient it is to marrye
and how inconvenient to lead a single life, so am I well assured that you are
not to learn what kind of person were most meet for you to match with all.

The Discommodities growing by the company of an old man you have already, to
your pain, over long experimented, and therefore I doubt not, but you will
beware how ye light on the like again.

And to marry with a young man, unless it be one, of whose dem^anour you have
made some trial, may be as perrillous as the other, for if he be rich, he
will over rule you, if he be prodigal, he will waste your substance, and his
own patrimony, if he be covetous, he will keep you bare, and withhold from
you that which is necessary to be had, if he be la^iu^^u^he will leave you, and
like better of others: Finally, if he be viciously bent, how rich or young
sooner he be, yet were you better to be buried then matched with him.

Let n(...) them the vain vanities of the world so allure you, or the
persuasion of your friends bear such swaye with you, as you will thereby be
moved to take one for his w(...) whom ye cannot love, and to refuse him whom
ye well like of, for want o^ (...)* considering what incon(...) grows by the
(...), and what pro(...) may arys of the other, waying withal, how great an
offense both to Bad and your own conscience it is, to do a thing so contracy
to your own liking.

Wherefore it were best for you to make choice of some poor young man, whose
conditions and behauioure is already partly known unto you to be good; with
whom you may with a contented mind, lead a quiet and peaceable life, and have
all things at your own desire, without interruption.

And if I thought not my self to sy(...)le, for one so worthy as you are. I
would both offer my self (...) you, (not as a Husband, but as a Steward, to
do al things at your direction,) and also hazard my life to obtain such favor
at your hands, assuring you, that if it might so please you, to accept of me,
you should of a pore friend, find me so faithful, so conformable to your
will, so careful for your welfare, so ready to please you, and so loath to
offend you, as you shall not have cause either to think your love evil
imploted, or repent you of the election of so base a personage.

And although in birth I be far inferior, and in wealth nothing comparable
unto those that I know you may have, if you please, yet dare I thus much
vaunt of my self, that there is not in the whole world, any one that would
more love, esteem, and cherish you, then I would do, if my hap might be so
good to enjoy you.

And if my purpose be not as my words do pretend, and my deeds agreeable
with my promises, I wish the earth might gape and swallow me up, or fire from
heaven consume me, for I protest unto you before God, from whom no secrets
are concealed, that it is not so much for your wealth or living that I desire
you, as for your wisdom, curtesy, comely behauyour, and other commendable
virtues that abound in you, wherefore long before your husbands departure, I
was so greatly enamoured, as if fear of your displeasure, and mine own
infamy had not detained me with the raines of reason, I had long since
revealed it unto you. But now that time has offered me so meet opportunity,
as I may more lawfully, and with less danger do it, I have presumed though
peradventure more rashly then beseems me, yet not without vrgente cause, to
manifest my meaning unto you, craving both pardon for my bold attempt and
easemente of my sorrow so long sustained for the love of you, which without
yours grace or mine own great perrill, cannot possible be repressed,
wherefore hoping of your accustomed clemency, to find you favorable in the
furtheraunce of my desire. I do wholly commit my health life and liberty unto
you, whom I do and will faithfully serve and obey for ever, as your most
humble servant.


A pretty fancy of the fynding of a White, wherein is collourablely included
the course of a Captive Lover, in purchasing his desired purpose.
NOt long ago with bow in hand,
and arrows by my side:
An Archer like I went abroad,
my cunning to have tried,
And being entered in the field,
(...) cast mine eye a (...),
And loc a goodly glistering white,
before my face did glaunce,
Which pleasant sight did please me so,
as to suruay the same,
Me thought it did my heart much good,
and was my greatest game,
Narcissus fond did never ga^^,
Upon his shadow more,
Nor by the Image which he made,
Pigmallyon set such store.
As I did by that (...)y wbyte,
which so reuiude my heart,
As whilst it was within my sight,
I felt no pain nor smart.
But if I once did turn away
from it my dazeling eyes,
Good Lord: what cares within my breast,
did by and by arise.
So that as one berefte of sense,
as still as any stone:
I stood at last and could not stir,
But stared still upon,
This passing white, much like to those,
whom worthy Perseus made,
For to behold grim Gorgons head,
that causde their force to fade.
And turnde them all to stocks of stone,
for their outrageous pride,
In seeking causeless his decay,
whom Jove himself did guide,
Then rusht in reason by and by,
in comely colors clad:
And calde alowde, to cause me hear,
that erst no hearing had,
And when I was again reuiude.
with countinaunce grave and sad,
why standst thou senseless thus,
beholding of the thing,
That still the more thou look thereon,
the more thy pain does spring.
Looks will not serve, to swage thy grief,
they rather cause thy care,
Therefore to put my words improofe,
see thou thy self prepare:
Resort with speed to pitties place,
entreat her for to wrighte,
Some piteous plaint in thy behalf,
to show thy painful plight,
To Lady bewty, that she may,
When she has tryde thy truth,
Receive thee as her servant just,
and on thy woe have ruth,
Then teaching me which way I should,
the path to pity find,
And how I might in each respect,
declare to her my mind.
She went her way I know not how,
but I to gain relief:
And purchase that which was in deed,
my joy and comfort chief.
Did every thing as she had wild,
and when I had obtainde,
At pitties hand my bill of plaint,
Straight ways my steps I straind,
To bewties bower and there ariude,
and knocking at the gate,
Straight started out an ongly wighte,
whose heart did harbor hate.
He asked me what was my will,
and why I did resort
Unto that place, to whom in brief,
I made a true report
Of all my state, and why I came,
which done he said to me.
Alas pore Lad thou art unwise,
and void of skill I see:
what think thou hear to purchase ease,
no no thou art deceaude,
Therefore depart, or else be sure,
thy woe will soon be weaude,
My mistress she to lofty looks,
to lend an ear to thee,
She will not harken to thy sut^,
but if thou earnest be,
And move her mind with many words,
in Dungion deep be sure
Thou shall be cast, and during life,
with danger there endure,
where sadness shall assail thee still,
and sorrow seek to share
Thy vital thread, yet shall thou live,
and lead thy life in care.
So long as destinies do permit,
beware therefore I say,
Take heed in time, turn back again,
and seek some surer way.
These words did fill my heart with fear,
and made me doubt to do
The thing which comfort did command,
and fancy forced me to.
And had not hope been hard at hand,
to harte^ me herein:
Despair had put me from that place,
such force his words did win:
And in this sort said Hope to me,
Fond fool why do thou fly,
The pleasant plot wherein thy rest,
and happy health does lie.
Return again, and fear thou naught,
thy practice put in proof,
To Lady Bewty move thy sete,
as best for thy behoof.
For such her gracious goodness is,
as never will she bide,
That any suffer bale for ought,
but that when time has tryde,
His true intent she will vouchsafe,
to him his hearts desire
In each respect, assure thy self,
then hope for happy hyre,
I gave her thanks for good advice,
and said I would obey:
Wherewith she brought me to desire,
who made no longer stay.
But led me unto Bewties bower,
and bad me there attend:
Till she with all her train came sorth,
and meekely then to bend
My knee, in offering up the bill,
unto her gracious hand,
Desyring her to view the same,
my mind to understand.
Which I obserude in each respect,
my bill she does detain,
God grant it work so good effect,
as I some hope may gain.
To purchase that which pleases me,
much more then all the Gold
That Midas or King Crossus had,
my joys might not be told,
If I inioyde that Jewel rars,
That pearl, that precious whyfe,
Which though it clad my corpse with care,
does yield me great delight,
And if Dame bewties curtesy,
commit the same to me,
How much I would accoumpte thereof,
she would perceive and see,
As Diamond dear I would it set,
in color of my heart,
And keep it still with busy care,
till death do clean convert,
My corpse to clay from whence it came,
and leave me void of life,
Ye heavenly powers then grant it me,
to make my joys more ryfe.
How Altamenes having unawares slain his own Father Cartareus died for sorrow,
when he had knowledge thereof.
IN Crete which now we Candie call
a fertile fruitful Land,
One cartareus sometime raignde,
and Septure bare in band.
Who had to son a noble youth,
a stout and vallyaunt knight,
In prowes proud to have no peer,
and Altamenes highte
This young man's name, who being then
desirous for to know
What destiny should to him betide,
the Oracle did show.
That he should cause his fathers death,
which sentence when he heard,
Desirous for to shun the same,
with speed himself preparde
To go and dwell at Camiros,
which town in Rodes does stand,
But that which God pretended has,
no Creature may withstand:
For after in a little space,
Cartareus for to see,
His son desyring very much,
such lucklesse lotte had he,
That he by might at Camiros,
arrived on this sort;
But with the there inhabitauntes,
as wrighters do report,
His men then falling at debate,
whereby a tumult rose,
In which was Altamenes then,
to cause his treble woes,
And sieve his Father unawares,
which when he understood,
A shamed sore, and half dismayde,
he went with heavy mood.
To wander in the wilderness,
and dangerous deserts wide,
Where after many pittious plaintes,
at last for dole he did.
Finis.
The Author writes this in commendation of his mistress.
YOu Ladies now leave of your strife,
For Golden fruicte without delay,
And thou that art Vulcanus wife,
resign the same with speed I say,
To mistress mine, that does deserve,
for to possess the same by right,
From this my hest seem not to swetue,
Least thou be forced in open sight
Perforce to yield it unto her,
and so be put to open shame,
Let not thy God head make thee err,
If thou will shun all blot and blame,
It is not all thy glory great,
Nor yet thy soune Cupido he,
That makes thee so with pride replease,
Or else thy fathers high degree,
That may my mistress once distaine
In any point, who does thee pass
As far as Gold does copper plain,
Or perfect Emrod brittle glass.
As far as Phoebus does surmount,
The star that lendes least light of all,
Above thy reach then do not mount,
Least thou receive the greater fall,
To her good Grisell may give place,
Though great her pacicnce were in deed,
And constant Constance in like case,
For Constance does them both exceed,
Her name and deeds so well agree,
That they do varry in no thing,
In sooth it is a joy to see,
The virtues that from her do spring,
I know when she meet time shall see,
On any one to fyxe her heart,
She will like chaste penelope,
Continue his till life depart,
That flattering words or fyled phrase,
Or golden gifts, or greedy gain,
Her constant mind shall never crase,
Or make her change her former frame,
That vallyaunt deeds done for her sake,
Nor fetured for me, nor fine device,
Shall cause her fly from chosen make.
Or to fond folly her entice,
That neither Fortune good nor bad,
Nor store of wealth nor woeful want,
Nor smyling cheer, nor countinaunce sad,
Nor absence shall oblivion plance.
That neither threats nor lowering looks,
Nor dread of danger shall her draw,
From him whom first for friend she takes,
No man may keep her so in awe,
No grief can gripe her heart so sore,
No pain can pinche her so, that she
Will leave her faithful friend therefore,
How hase of birth so ear he be*
Though this I have not yet seen proud,
I am right sure it will be so,
For never saw I her mindemoude,
With trifling tales for friend nor for,
That she would take in hand the thing.
Which was contrary clean to right,
but even as under virtues wing,
She had bine trainde, she seems in sight,
Thrice happy therefore shall he be,
Whose hap shall be so good to get,
This precious Jewel frank and free,
That will by him so highly set.
And will not any time neglect,
The duty of a loving wife,
but please her mind in each respect,
Still studying to enlarge his life.
And blessed am I above the rest,
That have obtainde to be her man,
who purpose still to do my ^ett,
To please her mind in all I can
Finis.
An Exhortation to Patience.
When griping ge^efes do grieve the mind,
The nicetest means that men may find,
which God and nature has assignde,
Is patience well applyde:
For patience puts all pain to flight,
Yea patience makes the heart delight,
And does revive each dulled spright,
by reasons rule and guide.
For every sore, a salve it is.
It turns all bitter bale to bliss,
And he that has it, shall not miss.
To taste of heavenly joys.
Through it the miser likes his life,
Through it he bydes his brawling wife,
Through it he flies all hate and strife,
And nothing him anoyes.
Through it he suffers false reports,
And loathes to live in lawless Courts,
Yea patience daily him exhortes,
To hold himself content:
And though his hap be good or ill,
Yet being armde with patience still.
No evil once he shall fulfill,
But be to betrue bent.
Therefore for paclence let us pray,
To drive all drowsy dumpes away,
That every hour does us anndy,
Through froward frowning fate,
For ^ext we are on every side,
Not knowing safely where to ^yde,
And therefore lack so good a guide,
To better our estate.
God grant us ever of his grace,
That perfect patience to embrace,
We may be moude in every case,
And fly all ^utious ire.
Let patience put us still in mind,
And make us hope good hap to find,
when most with cares we are combynde,
To kindle good desire.
Finis.
A Lover writing to his chosen friend, who for his sake sustained much sorrow,
exhorts her to continue constant, and patiently to tolerate her present
adversity in hope that better happes will ensue.
MIne own good Pamena, when on the one side I consider with my self, thy
incomparable curtesy, in requiting my faith full and unfeigned affection with
the like, and granting me principal possession of thy heart, and on the other
side remembering the sorrow thou sustainest, through ye unnatural dealing of
such, as under show of friendship, intend nothing but fraud.

And therewithal waying my vnhabillity at this present, which will not serve
to provide for thee as I would, my joy, for inioying thee that art my only
salace is not half so great, as my grefes are grievous for the sorrow thou
sustainest, but for as much as patience as Cicero says, is such a virtue as it
comfort the heavy, rejoices the sad, contenteth the pore, helps the
sick, eases the paynefull, and hurts none, but helps all, I exhort you to
embrace it, and to the uttermost of your power to use it, comforting your self
in this callamitie, with assured hope, that after these hard happes, will
follow a more blisseful and quiet estate, considering the mutabillitie of
Fortune to be such, that she never stands long at one stay, but as after a
most terrible storm, always insueth a more pleasant calm, so she seeming
most extreme, will on the sudden wax most favorable, as appears by the
Example of one Adulatia Daughter to Otho, the third Emperor of that name, who
firing (...) fancy upon one Aleran, a Gentleman of small accoumpte, and the
youngest of all the brethren of the Duke of Saxony, who likewise loved her
intyrely, left her father, friends and country, for his sake, and wandering
with him, unto whom she wholly committed her self, into places unknown, and in
the way as they fled, being taken and spoiled by thieves, and robbers, and
afterward forced for extreme need, to make coals, and sell them for their
own sustenaunce, patiently suffering that miserable adversity, and comforting
themselves with hope of better hap in time to come, in the end by Gods
providence, and the vallyaunce of their young Sonue, who by that means was made
known to his Grandfather Otho, they were removed from that miserable estate,
advanced to high dignity, and made beyres to the Empire.

By this worthy Example, it appears how careful God is for the preservation
of those, that patiently suffering adversity, do put their whole trust and
confidence in him, nothing at all dispayring of his mercy, but hoping by his
only means to be delivered from all their callamity, which hope he will not
leave frustrate, and though he suffer them for a season so to be a fllieted,
yet will he not give them over, but in the end, when they least look for it,
will to their great joy and comfort, bring them to a more happy and blissful
state, as he did the good Earl of Engers, and in any other that patiently
suffered the Cross that god had laid upon them, and reposed their whole trust
in his mercy, which never fails the faithful.

By this Historye of Adulatia we are also admonished faithfully to love, when
promise is plighted, and neither for pleasure nor pain, for joy nor anoy, for
wealth nor woe, for force nor fear, for fraud nor flattery, for friend nor foe
in prosperity or adversity, to alter our first fyrme and faithful
determination, or forsake whom we have once chosen, so long as life lasts,
but constantlye to continue, and faithfully to persevere in the same so shall God
bless us and prosper all our doings, and after the mistes of misery if any
happen to assail us, bring us to the clear light of felicitye as he did
fair Adulatia, who neither for fearro^ fathers displeasure, or care to
continue his good will, for love of Imperial dignity, or dread of any danger,
no, not for the fierce assaults of froward Fortune, or for any other cause
would forsake her Aleran, but preferring his loyal love, before all worldly
pleasure, and his presents before al princely Ornaments, both in health and
sickness; in wealth and woe, and finally at all assayes continued his true and
faithful companion, for term of life. Be fyrme therefore my good Parmena,
and fail not, but as I intend still to continue as loyal a lover to thee, as
ever was Aleran to his Adulatia, so be thou as faithful a friend unto me, as
was Adulatia to her beloved Aloran. So shall no emnity but am(...) no
repentance but contenentment, no (...)ing, but joy be ever between us, and
though one friends frown upon us, or hindered contemn us, and our Parents
reprove us, yet through patient (...), in trace of time which breeds change
in all things, we shall by Codes help, and our own dilligent iudultrye,
recover all former good will and favor, and after all the assaul(...) of
adverse Fortune, attain to the happy port of rest and tranquillity, with
which hope I purpose always to comfort my self, wishing you also to do the
like, as I (...) you will, and heartily require you to do, so near as you can
as well for your own relief, as for the rest and comfort of him that loves
you, no less then his own proper life, Fare you well.


Finis.
The Aucthour wrighting to a friend of his, that was toward marriage, exhorts
her to make choice of a wise and verteous person.
THere is nothing wherein we ought to take,
So great advise, as says (...) wise,
As when we mind a marriage for to make,
wherein we must be careful and presise,
Or else thereby great perrill may arise,
Because the knot once (...) in (...) do,
May not be broke, whateuer chance in sue.
But some there are, that will without respect
Of future harms that may to them befall,
The council of their aged friends reject,
As frantic wightes, to folish fancy thrall
And harkening to the S(...) s^^ the call,
Procure thereby, their (...) and decay,
Where else they might have liude in lasting (...).
Yet would I not that women so attend,
To friends advice, or so by them be led,,
That fancy fix upon some faithful friend,
They should forsake the same for fear or dread.
For so they may wone bring a fool to bed,
And being linckt, to one they cannot leeke,
be moude amiss reuengement due to seek.
Some sorts there are, that welthy husbands choose,
Because they should maintain thomsine and brave,
Some sorts there are, that others all refuse,
A comely wight desyring most to have,
A vallyaunt venter^ns youth some (...),
Some like of those that be most frank and free,
And some of those that hard and sparing be.
The gallant gay some chiefly do esteem,
In one that courteous is, some most delight,
A cunning crafts man, some for best do deem,
But few or none esteem the virtuous wight,
By wise and prudent men they set but light,
Few link for love, but all for greedy gain,
Though in the end it turn them most to pain.
Bewty does fade, when crooked age creepes in,
And like a Flower the summer season past,
Nipt with the cold when winter does begin,
Does wither soon, and wear a way at last,
And sickness makes the mighty man aghast,
And takes from him all strength and courage quighte,
But virtue still abides in perfect plight.
In wealth or woe in pain or pleasure still,
Virtue remains without reprofe at all,
Not dreadful death that does the Carcas kill,
The power of virtue may in ought appall.
It lives with praise; and never perrish shall,
For after death his glory reflech rise,
That whilst he liude, did lead a virtuous life.
Therefore my friend I friendly thee advise,
To match with one that is to virtue bent,
For bewty brittle is and of no prise,
Money but muck, and quickly will be spent,
Strength soon destroyde, if sickness so consent,
But virtue still in perfect state does stand,
It keeps his course as well by Sea as land.
Moreover I would wish thee for to make,
Thy choice thy self whereas thou likest best,
And though thy friends persuade thee for to take,
Some other wight with greater wealth possessed.
Yet if thy mind and fancy be not pressed,
To like of him, then would I thee advise,
To leave that loathsome lot if thou be wise.
For whereas love does lack, twice man and wife,
There harred needs must harbor in their heart,
Where hatred has his hold, is endless strife,
where strife is styrde, there pleasure has no part,
where pleasure is displaste; ear keeps the mart,
where care does keep, life cannot long endure,
Then ear thou link let love be settled sure.

Finis.
Of the great patience and clemency of King Antigonus.
WHen as Antigonus did hear,
His Soldiers cursing him apace,
Because that in an evening dark,
He led them through a myry place,
That thence they hardly could escape,
He came himself to them unknown,
And very well did help them out,
which friendship when he had them shown,
He said now curse Antigonus,
That led you lately in the mire,
But pray for him that helped you out,
Acording to your hearts desire.
Finis.
What misery and misfortunes mankind is continually subject unto.
WHat kind of state can any choose,
but he there in shall find,
Great bitterness and endless woe,
to move his troubled mind,
In field much toil, at home great care,
and fear in Foreign Land:
If ought, we have, by fortune lent.
In youth Dome Follyes hand
Does hold us fast, her she embrace,
and wisdoms lore do leave,
In age does sickesse us assail,
and so our strength bereave.
In marry age is unquietness,
in lacking of a wife
All sollitary we remain,
and lead a loathsome life.
If God to us do children send,
we have continual care.
If none, then are we half dismayde,
far worser do we fare.
Therefore one of these twain is best,
desired for to be:
Not to be borne; or else to dye,
before these days we see.
Finis.
A lover having long concealed his love, at the last reuealeth it and craves
grace at the hands of his beloved mistress.
LIke as the silly soul,
That feels himself distressed,
With heavy burden on his back,
does seek to be at rest.
So I whom love longtyme,
has led in Captive hands,
Enforced am at last to sue
for favor at thy hands,
That have my heart in hold,
who only may apply,
Some pleasant potion to a s^wage
the grievous mallady,
Which long with little ease,
and most incessaunt grief.
Has me conserude, twixt life and death,
denoyde of all relief.
But needs I must confess,
There is no fault in thee:
That I do want my wished will,
the blame does bide in me.
For fear, Loves mortal foe,
which caused me to hyde
My secret sorrows long sustainde,
from thee in whom does bide,
The cure of all my care,
has made me fail to find,
The thing that most might joy my heart,
and ease my troubled mind.
But now all fear expulst,
Love, hope; and hot desire,
Has forced me in lieu of pain,
to crave deserved hyre.
Which gwerdon either grant,
else shall then shortly see,
That life will leave my leathsome corpse,
and all by means of thee,
Which loath I am should chance,
least to thy great reproach,
It blazed be, that thou art she,
that set my bale abroche,
Take pity on my pain,
peruse my doleful vearse.
Let trickling tears and secret sighs,
into thy intrailes pearce.
Oh rue my rufull state,
my youthful years respect,
And let the torments I sustain,
enforce thee to reject
All retchlesse rigor, take, embrace,
love; like, and never leave,
The wight that will in spite of spite,
to thee for ever cleave,
Who hear in lieu of love,
does vow himself to thee,
Thy slave, thy servant, and thy friend,
till dying day to be.
Finis.
Certain verses written in commendation of the Rose.
AS sundry sorts of men in world there be,
So sundry minds in them also remain,
And in one point they sieldome do agree,
That one thinks good, another thinks vain,
That one desires, another does disdain,
And I that do in Flowers great pleasure take,,
Desire the Rose, my nosegay sweet to make.
The vallyaunt man does most delight in war,
The coward craves to live at home in peace,
Thastronomer to view each twinkling stars,
The covetous carle his substance to increase,
The prisoner pore does covet most release.
But I that do in Flowers great pleasure take,
Desire the Rose my nosegay sweet to make.
The husbaudman full barnes desire to have,
The Faulkener does in Faulcon most delight,
The Hunter be good hounds does chiefly crave,
The mighty man reioiceth in his might,
The amorous Daine to show her hewry bright,
But I that do in Flowers great pleasure take,
Desire the Rose my Nosegay sweet to make.
The pretty color I commend.
Though in the same no sweetness restes at all.
From Basil does a savor sweet assend,
yet does the same the senses sore appall.
The appetite is marred much withal.
Therefore do I, in Flowers that pleasure take,
Desire the Rose my Nosegay sweet to make.
Distild it makes a water wondrous sweet,
Of virtue great, and good for many things,
The oil thereof, full many think more meet,
Because much case in them it often bringes,
The Flower is worn of Ladies Lords and Kings,
And I that do in Flowers great pleasure take,
Desire the Rose my Nosegay sweet to make.
From point to point, to praise this pleasant Flower
And yield it that it does deserve by right,
For learnings lack it lies not in my power,
Therefore to them that better can indighte,
I leave the same to put in perfect plight,
But still I will in Flowers that pleasure take,
Desire the Rose my nosegay sweet to make,
Finis.
The Lover after long absence having onewed his love, by beholding the bewty of
his beloved mistress, sueth unto her for grace, for the appeasing of his
passions.
Whether it were by my good of evil adventure, that of late I beheld ye, I
know not, but surely at the same time; I did so contemplate the rare bewtye and
other excellent Ornaments of nature. Where with you are most plentifully
enriched, as ever since I have (...) in my self, so cruel and continual a
Combat, as I fear me without your special grace and favor, for
furtheraunce of my seruent desire, I shall not be able long to continue; love
on the one side assayleth me, Reason on the other side inuadeth me, Hope
pricketh me forward, and fear pulls me back from attempting that which
may either reaue my life, or restore my liberty, according to the good or
evil success that it has.

But love at the last vanquishing reason, and hope abandoning fear, the rather
by means of the good intertemment, friendly fauiiliarity and undeserved
curtesy, which I have hither to found in you, I am the more imboldned by these
few lines, to make you privy to y^ passions, which I continually suffer for
your sake, thereby to case my mind of the greefes that grow by concealing it,
and to purchase remedy for the greeuons mallady that puts me to such
importable pain, which being only in you to grant, I hope you will not be so
cruel hearted as to denaye it me. For as my love toward you, far excels
all others, and as my faithful service, and true intent deserves better
recompense, then a rash and rigorous refusal. So am I fully persuaded to find
your pitiful heart ready to rue my calamities, and with the balm of your
benevolence, faluing the sore that so afflicieth me, render me a recomdence
worth my deserving, wherein referring my self wholly to your clemency I leave
to trouble you any further for this time.


Of a Souldyer who for couirousnesse of a little money, lost his own life.
WHen Prenest had bine long besiegne,
by enemies strength:
With hunger and thyrst they were full sore,
oppressed at length,
That many a one for lack of food,
was forced to dye.
Amongst which sort there then was one,
did likewise lie,
As did the rest in extreme pain,
vntillhe caught,
A little Mouse, which one of him,
for money bought.
A hundred pence he more esteemde,
then life to save,
Although long time the use thereof.
he might not have.
So conitons was this mysers mind,
of worldly muck,
That when he might have saude his life,
such was his luck,
For love of money he lost the same,
but was not he,
Requited with a just reward,
as he should be.
Finis.
The complaint of one Sidaspo, who was imflamed with love through the bewty of
his servant Aletha.
OL^thsome life, oh (...)ning fate,
Oh Fortune most unkind,
Oh death come pierce my painful breast,
to ease my troubled mind.
Oh love, nay lust, oh foude desire,
oh cursed blinded boy,
What meanst thou thus to work my w^,
and breed my great annoy,
I burn alas continually,
in such ercessiue heat,
That nothing may therewith compare.
it semes to me so great,
More hot it is a thousand times,
then Loathsome Limbo lake,
Or Aetna hill, whose flashing flames,
no thing has power to slake,
And yet some time more cold then ye.
I am pore wretch again,
Then by and by abundantly.
the raging heart does rain,
Whereas I was a master late,
and had each thing at will,
Now must I serve as seruill slave,
to please my servant still,
What remedy, it boteth not
for me at all to strive,
Against the mighty power of love,
or any man alive,
The Prince for all his Princely power,
cannot his force withstand.
The valyauntest wight that ever liude,
durst not hold up his hand,
Against Cupido for to strive,
or combat for to make,
The wisest can not shun his wiles.
he causes all to quake,
yea even the Gods themselves I find,
do rest at Cupids grace,
And be but Subjects unto him,
in every kind of case,
Then how should I amortall man,
devise to shun the same,
Now dare I once resi^^ the wight
that every thing can tame.
Aletha oh my darling dear,
thou thou a lone art she,
which so have laid thy snares abroad,
for to entangle me.
Thou art the dame that I desire,
to serve and honor still,
Thou art the jewel of my joy,
thou may me save or spill.
But stay: what words be these I speak,
shall I become a slave,
And bondsman to my servant so,
her favor shall I crave,
That should by reason still remain,
at my desire and will,
To do the thing that I command,
though it be good or ill.
No no I rather first will choose,
unto the naked knyfe
My throat to yield, that so I might,
bereave my loathsome life,
What if I should attempt the same,
what if I should require,
The same of her, I am not sure,
to purchase my desire,
But why do I misdoubt the same,
before I have it tryde,
why he that loves fervently,
fears not to be denyde,
why should I any dangers dread,
to win so fair a dame,
well hoping for to gain some grace,
my letters will I frame.
In doleful wise unto my dealee,
whose splendent bewty rare,
Has so inflamde my heart with love,
and cloyde my mind with care,
A Letter which the said Sidaspo sent to his servant Aletha.
THy bewty brave O Aletha,
thy breasts like driven snow,
Thy Currall lips, thy cristall eyes,
and hear which to the show,
Appears like gold, thy fyngers small,
with skin as yuorye clear,
And eake thy worthy quallities,
which make thee to appear,
More like a Goddess for to be,
then any earthly wight,
would sure allure a stonye heart,
in thee to have delight.
For as the Fowler in his net,
the silly birds does take,
So has the same intrapped me,
which makes my heart to quake,
The Adamant stone would never draw,
the iron to it more.
Then has your bewty drawn my heart,
which makes me now deplore,
For love of you I live in care,
my sorrows do abound,
And death will shortly end my days,
if help there none be found.
By you I have receaude this harm,
which none but you can cure;
In you it restes to ease the pain,
that I do now endure,
Therefore I crave you, show some grace,
to cure me of my greet,
Let pity in your heart take place,
to bring me some relief,
Oh who is able to resist,
the fervent force of love,
Or who once wounded with the darte,
is able to remove
The same from him, now surely none,
though Hectors heart he have,
Or Hercules strength it will not serve,
from Cupid him to save.
Therefore O loving Lady dear,
how down thy eyes of pity,
Consider in thy skillful brain,
that art both wise and wittye
What torments for thy sake I bide,
which by no means will cease.
way well how like a wretch I live,
till thou do me release.
By granting me my hearts desire,
to cure my deadly smart,
whereby no harm may^ grow to thee,
but all to joy conuart,
My life my goods and all things else,
shall rest at thy desire,
Even as thy own at every time,
if thou the same require:
Let reason therefore O my dear,
persuade thee for to yield,
To my request by means thereof,
from sorrows me to shield,
Thus for this time I make an end,
and wish thee well to fare,
In woeful wise, desyring thee,
to think upon my care.
Finis
The abject Lover complains of the crueltye and disdainefull looks of his
Lady.
THe most incessaunt painful panges,
that I have long sustainde:
By sundry means my feeble hand,
to write has now constrainde,
Thereby to let thee understand;
oh stony hearted Dame,
The thing that this my doleful heart,
(to thy eternal shame)
Cannot conceal, and seeing that
thou rather seekst to be,
My mortal foe, then faithful friend,
I do the like by thee,
If (as I am) thou were a man,
then weapons would I use,
For to revenge my wrong on thee,
that do me so abuse,
But since the tongue the weapon is,
wherewith fond women fight,
My tongue and pen shall now suffice,
to work the like despite.
Who strives against the stream I see,
or sails against the wind,
Or sows seed in barren soil,
but little gain shall find,
So he that sets his love,
where pride has taken place,
shall sooner catch his bitter bane,
then win one spark of grace,
As I unto my pain,
have proud to late alas
By serving thee, oh scornful dame,
that naught therefore do pass.
For when by letters I,
my meaning do declare,
Thy answer seems as bitter gall,
for to increase my care,
When as I smyle, thou frownest,
and eake when I am sad,
Then greatly seemst thou to rejoice,
as one whose heart is glad,
If I do thee salute
in friendly wise, I see
Thou turnest then thy head aside,
and windste away from me,
The Tiger fierce in time,
is made both meek and tame.
The stone through often drops of rain,
that fall upon the same,
Does wear, the mountains bye,
and strongest holds of all,
In time may by some casualtye,
be forced to ground to fall,
Yea Nilus may in time,
(for all his scope of streams)
Be dried up, and clean consumde,
through heat of Phoebus beams,
There is no thing on earth I think,
but may in time conuart:
Except it be in woman's breast,
a hawty stubborn heart.
Which neither reason, gentle words
nor pity can procure,
For to revoke her wilful mind.
that settled is so sure,
My wound was wondrous deep,
the pains I did endure,
By means of thy great cruelty,
my sorrows did procure,
For thou in whom it only lay,
to remedy the same,
In steed of salve did poison yielde,
my ruin for to frame,
Oh cursed wretchlesse raze,
of wicked woman kind,
How can your hearts so cruel be,
to them that you make blind,
what heart of flinte has he,
who having hurt a man,
That is his friend, to cure his pain,
will not do what he can.
But thou a cruel Crocadile,
Engendered in the floode,
Of foul Onilus wilt not grant,
to do thy pacient good.
Few women at this day do live,
that guide themselves so well,
But if one virtue good therebe,
which in their breast does dwell,
Two worser vices for the same,
is found in them to be,
which do the virtues clean deface,
and force them for to flee,
They can conditions change,
to cause their friends unrest,
As the Chameleon changes hue,
When as it likes him best,
If that they be disposde,
pore lovers to allure,
They can as wily ways invent,
their purpose to procure,
As the Hiena can,
by learning of the name,
And calling them whose present death,
they purpose for to frame,
Such pitiful complaints,
the Sirens can not make,
As can these wicked women do,
if once they undertake,
No beast so brute as they,
if once they fall to vice,
No ass more foolish then they are,
yet do they think them wise.
If one their bewty praise,
then do they look so hye,
As though they straight wais would presume
to scale the lofty sky.
Yet do I not condemn herein,
all women to be ill,
But some yea even the greatest part,
are subject to their will,
As I have had just cause to say,
who proved have the same,
Through thy unkindness shewde come,
O most disdainefull Dame,
And therefore humbly do I crave,
of heavenly Jove above.
That thou for this thy crueltye,
like grief to mine may prove,
And thus I make an end as now,
of this my bitter vearse,
As one compeld by woman's pride,
their dealinges to rehcarse.
Finis.
A commendation of the Cock.
WHo can such worthy praises give,
unto the Cock as he,
Deserves to have, now surely none,
for first of all we see,
How careful of our healthes he is,
who least we should be harmde,
At midnight with his crowing often,
does warn us to be armde,
And at the dawning of the day,
to lerify our mind.
He does the like, and bids us,
good morrow in his kind,
Again were not the Cock I pray,
what Poultrie should we have,
What other bird or pleasant foul,
that we so much do crave,
Our dainty Dames should be content
to feed on courser fare,
If that it were not for the Cock,
that dainties does prepare.
A commendacion of the Robin read breast.
When Hyems with his hory frostes,
and blustering Boreas blaste,
Had run his race, and Lady Ver,
his pleasant course had past,
Then Aestas entered in by course,
and Phoebus golden rates,
Whose scorching heat mild Zephirus,
asswagde at all assayes,
were spread abroad through every cost,
which causde each thing to joy,
Then was it pleasure great to see,
the little Fishes play,
And friscoes fetch about the banks,
to find some pleasant bait,
whiles they unawares entangled are.
by Fishers foul deceit,
Then every tree is fresh and green,
then Flora on the ground,
Her mantell spreades, and fertile fields,
with pleasant Flowers abound,
The dainty Dames from every place,
do thither fast resort,
And Garlandes make of cropped flowers,
of sundry sent and sort,
In every street great stirring is,
some quasse and make good cheer,
Some leap, some dance, some sing, some play
some chase the light foot Dear,
Here Orpheus with his pleasant Harp,
there Amphion with his Lute,
Do make most pleasant melody,
and carping cares confute,
The amorous youths do stray the streets,
and with their Ladies walk.
And some again do pass the day,
with passing pleasant talk,
So every man to please his mind.
some pastime does frequent,
To drive away all drowsy dumpes.
and sluggish sloth prevent.
It chanced so this time,
that as in bed I lay,
Oppressed sore with painful pangs,
about the break of day
I started up, and forth I walkte,
into the fields so fair,
My self to solace there at will,
and take the pleasant air,
The ground that garnisht was with flowers,
did yield so sweet a smell,
That noisome sauoures none were felt,
It did them all repel,
Then past I forth with stealing steps,
and lookte about me round,
To take a view of every thing,
wherein I pleasure found,
And by and by from far me thought,
I seemde a sound to hear,
which still the further that I past,
more pleasant did appear,
It was so sweet a melody,
that sure I thought some muse,
Or else some other heavenly wight,
did there frequent and use.
But as I cast mine eye aside,
on branch of willow tree,
A little Robin redbrest then,
there sitting did I see,
And he it was, and none but he,
that did so sweetly sing,
But sure in all my life before,
I never hard the thing,
That did so much delight my heart,
or causde me so to joy,
As did that little Robins song,
that there I hard that day,
That did so much delight my heart.
or causde me so to joy,
As did that little Robins song,
that there I heard that day,
The Poets feign that Orpheus made,
both stones and trees to dance,
When he upon his Harp did play.
They also do advance
So much Arion for his skill,
that when into the seas
He should be cast they said that he,
a Dolphin so did please,
That safe she brought him unto shore,
when death he did aspect,
And from all perrils perrillous,
did him right well protect,
Mercurius made the hundred eyes,
of Argos all to sleep,
With elsying on an Oren pipe,
his knowledge was so deape,
Yet sure I think their harmony,
might not co^quall be,
With that this little Robin made,
it so delighted me.
Nay sure I think the Muses nyue,
may not with him compare,
Nor yet Apollo for his skill,
whose music was so rare.
Full often (...) my heart does wish,
this pretty byrd to have.
For more then any worldly thing,
the same I still do crave.
And if my luck might be so good,
this Robin once to gain.
Then greatly would my joys abound,
and heart should feel no pain,
For never did I see the thing,
that I so well could leeke,
Therefore above all other things,
to have the same I seek,
For color and for ^omlinesse,
all birds he does surmount,
His flesh as very delicate,
full many men accoumpt,
God grant therefore that I may gain,
this Robin at my will,
Then do I hope to use him so,
that he shall tarry still.
For rather would I lose my life,
and all things else beside,
Then from my Robin I would part,
at any time or tide.
Finis.
The long acquainted Lover writes to his beloved, whose grace he desired.
LIke as no fire does yield so great a heat,
As that which longest lies in kindling this is sure,
So can no love so vehement be and great,
As that which does the longest time endure,
For why the fire that by and by does flame,
Is straight consumde, that none may see the same.
Even so the love that on a sudden grows,
Does straight ways waste, and vanish as a shade,
As very well this ancient Proverb shows.
Whote love soon cold, and soon away does fade,
But as a tonne does still the taste retain,
Of that which first did in the same remain.
So I my dear whose love in tender age,
Has taken root cannot the same suppress,
Or else the grief thereof by skill assuage,
For It I can by no means find redress,
But as your thrall I rest in w^full case,
Expecting still with great desire some grace.
Oh Lady dear do not therefore disdain,
The humble suit of him that loves you best,
but arm your self to show the like again,
For otherwise you breed his great unrest,
Forget not my good will think on your friend,
And thus with tears my humble suit I end.
Finis.
Of one Vrbina a Virgin vestall, taken in adulterye,
VRbina a Uirgin vestall in adultry being taken,
with rods about the city was whipped therefore,
And of all her friends then being forsaken,
was buried alive, whom none did deplore,
And of the Adulterers that did her deflower,
The one did stay himself that present hour,
The other the ouersecers of the temple then,
Caused to be executed in the market place,
That he might be a warning to all other men,
To teach them the path of virtue to trace.
Finis.
Of one Cianippus, who in his drunkenness deflowred his owue daughter ciane.
OF Siracuse cianip
Behause that he did offer,
His Sacrifise to all the Gods,
and none to Bachus proffer,
was stroke with such a drunckennesse,
that meeting in the dark,
His Daughter Ciane, her deflourde,
but what did follow mark,
She to the end to understand,
and know who did the deed,
From of his finger p(...) his ring,
whereby she saw with speed,
That it had been her Father dear,
and after when the City,
was plagued all for this foul fact,
and that by sentence witty,
Of the oracle it wined was,
the Author of the act,
For to be sacrifised up,
for this foul fylthy fact,
whereas none knew who it should be,
or what did cause the same,
Ciane with afflitted mind,
remembering it die frame,
Her Fathers death, who being dead
herself she also (...),
And on his corpse her corpse she (...),
for every man to view.
Finis.
Of one Ceselius Bassus a Carthagenian, who deceived the Emperor Nero.
CEselius Bassus on a time,
unto king Nero told,
That in a Lane within his ground,
was hid great heaps of Gold,
which he (he said) supposde. to be,
of Didos hiding there,
Unto which words he credit gave,
and from that place to bear,
The same, he did full many send,
the Orators in mean space,
(...)ded Nero saying that,
he stood in fortunes grace,
And that he was of all the Gods,
beloude and fauourde most,
within whose time such wealth was found,
That had so long been lost,
And hidden in the bo(...)le of
the earth full many a day,
Wherefore in hope of new found Wealth,
this Emperor made away,
The store he had but in the end
when they were at the place,
whereas thy(...) should (...),
(...)lius ma^^ them trace,
From this to that place up and down,
to seek the foresaid ^aue,
And myners many one did seek,
by (...) the same to have,
If any there should hidden lie,
but labored all in waine,
He said sort sprite had him dertaude,,
and did a fury fayrte,
But to avoid the present tear,
and sh(...) that should arise,
He slow himself and N(...)ft,
still gaping for his prise.
Finis.
The Lover woried with long love; taking assurance of succor, enduceth his
Lady to receive (...) to her service.
FOr as much as every thing by nature enforces it self with all dilligent
industry (so much as it may) to resist the great enormities wherewith it is
afflicted, I am now constrained (after long sufferaunce) to let you understand
the ardent desire which by little and little cons(...) me; as may plainly
appear by many manifest tokens, which show suffieiente testimonye of my true
intence. And think not that I have been moved her(...) at all adventures, or
without some hope and assurance that I have, in time to obtain that which by
the liberal help of your accustomed clemency may bring me such comfort as
shall well content me, assuring my self, that from a thing of such excellency
as is your seemly self (in whom besides your ^euine bowty there are
assembled so many good graces and heroical ve(...)) man may not expecte any
other but a sincere and good inclination to immitate almost in all things the
customs of amorous humanitys, making him to appear pitiful in deed and
word, and redye to impart his liberal favor to all those that crave it, and
by their good behavior do duly deserve it. This also yeldeth some
satisfaction to my troubled mind, that my words which were of late restrained,
have now found free issue, whereby I require help at your hands, whilste I
yet feel in my self sufficient habillitye to receive it, assuring you that
it will be to late for so sitall a benefit, if you delay the time to let me
enjoy the formine of your friendly ^^uour, whereof being very desirous, I attend
your courteous answer, with assured hope that your good pleasure will be to
accept me for your humble servant, that so long as any spark of life remains
in me, have vowed my self to your service, and cannot but accounte you for my
only mistress. Assure your self the refore that my life may not long endure,
if my (...) destinye do deny me the favor to find you agreeable to my
affectionate desire.


Finis.
The Lover having long time loved a fair Gentlewoman, at whose hands he had
reciued small hope of obtaining his purpose, wrighteth unto her as follows.
TO use any long discourse my dearly beloved Parmenia, in the declaration of
my great good will and seruent affection toward you, I coumpte it but
friuotous, seeing I am well assured that you have long since perceived, and from
time to time made perfect ^ryall of my true ^uer toward you yet to the hope so
uncertain that I have hitherto received from you, as I cannot assure my self of
any further favor at your hands, then he that has never deserved any at all,
and as it is the property of all those that love faithfully so fear the worst,
so do I many times misdoubt least through my own evil destenye, or the
fained flattery of some false dissembler, I shall be deprived of that comfort
which does more content me then the Conquest of a whole kingdom: wherefore
being greatly grieved with the uncertainty of my present estate, by means
(...) y^ mutability, that many times I find to be in you, not able any longer
to sustain the torments that it puts me unto, I have thought good to write
these few words unto you most humbly beseeching you to dissolve me of this
doubt without delay that if I find not your answer agreeable with my desire
I may seek if I can to suppress the seruente affection that is now so
deepelye rooted in my harft, as I fear me I shall hardlye remove it.

Do this my good Parmenia, and fear not any inconvenience that may grow
thereby.

For, I hope that by granting me your friendlye favor, you shall have no
cause to repent you of any thing that shall happen unto you unless it be
because you have so long lacked the company of so comfortable a companyon, by
whose means with the help of God you shall not only be deliurred of your long
and grreuous sickness, which cannot be otherwise cured, but also leaving the
life that now you ^eade be cid of all these your mallicious Enemies, that with
their envy on devil dealing do daily undeservedly devise to do you
displeasure, and withal purchase to your self so faithful a friend as for
any adventure will never forsake you but using his dilligente and careful
industry to provide for your maintenance, which need I hope shall never happen
unto you, howesoeuer you esteem my present state to be, for I know there is
nothing so difficult, but the wit of man if will be with it may well bring it to
pass, comforting my self with this assured hope, that God will never suffer
them to perrishe that put their trust in him.

Thus much my good harmena, I have thought good to write unto you because I
could not find conuenic(...) time or mete opportunity to deliver it unto you
in (...) I pray you consider of it advisedly, that I may know your resolute
answer therein, And so fare you well.


The Lover being promised a resolute answer to that he desired, wrighteth to
his beloved Mistress, in this manner, wherein he persuades her, to pity his
passions.
THe pore miserable wretch that has long continued in Captivity, and knows
not what shall become of him cannot be more troubled in mind, or tossed with
more intolerable torments to increase his callamity then I am at this
present, for fear to find your answer contrary to my expectation. And
surely were it not that I know your clemency to be such as cannot with
crueltye counteruayle the courtesy of so faithful a frind as I to my small power
have always showed my self to be toward you, I

should long since rather have bereaved my life to prove my loyalty, then by
attending the dreadful sentence of my condemnation, be adjudged to dye without
deserte, by her whose welfare I have preferred, before all worldly Treasure.

The law of nature binds you to bend most to him that loves you best, and
bydeth most sorrow for your sake. Justice also inioyneth you to render to
every one his right which if you perform accordingly, as you must needs do if
you desire to be demed worthy of the estimation which belongs to such a one
as you are, I doubt not but I shall receive from you that comfort which I have
long time couited, I mean your friendlye favor and frank consent in love,
to knit with me the knot of perpetual amitye, as with him that for his loyal
love, has above all other best deserved it, and desires rather to die, then
live and lack it.


The tragedy of Meliager, son to Oeneus King of Calcedonia.
PArthaons son, Oeneus King
of calcedonia land,
To all the Gods did institute,
and offer with his hand,
His sacrifise save only to
Diana dyre, whom he
For hatred or forgetfulness
remitted, wherewith she
Full greatly gretude, a huge great Bore,
did send to waste the land,
That made much spoil in many a place,
and no man might withstand,
Until Oeneus at the last,
in mind oppressed with grief,
A general hunt ordained had,
whereof his son was chief.
That Meliager hight, with whom,
besides his uncles twain,
That ^oxeus and Plexippus hight,
there went as books show plain,
A Uirgin fair the Daughter,
of Iasius great of Fame,
Through alf Arcadia where he reign de,
Atlanta was her name,
who with a stroke she gave that Bore,
Did make him first co bleed,
And therefore when the Bore was slain,
to recompense that deed,
To her the head and humbles both
did Meliager give.
which soon from her his uncles took.
so much it did them grieve,
Wherewith Meliager sore displeasde,
did therefore slay them both,
Which when his mother Althea knew,
she waxing wondrous wroth,
Into the fire the brand did cast,
whereon his life depended,
Which being wasted clean away,
then straight his life it ended,
For whose dicease his Sisters all,
full lamentably mourned,
Till they at last amidst their woe,
to Turkey Hens were turned.
Lenuoy.
THese foresaid things who notes well,
to fire them fast in mind,
He shall not fail for his avail,
good fruicte therein to find.
First by Oeneus are we taught,
at no time to neglect,
The duty which we owe to God.
but chiefly have respect,
To honor him, and laud his name,
that leddeth life to all,
which errth cont^ines, who lifts us up,
and likewise lets us fall,
whom Seas obey, whom heavens a door
and all things else beside,
who sees and knows our secret thoughts,
though we the same would hyde,
And as he is a God most just,
so justly will he render,
His grace unto the penitent,
although a great offender,
Deserving death most damnable,
so merciful is he.
That as he says, he does not seek,
a sinners death to see,
For when from depth of heart we will,
our heinous crimes confess,
And crave forgiveness at his hands,
we soon shall find redress,
But when no mendment he perceiues,
nor warninges to prevail,
Then with his mighty hand he does,
us wicked wight as assail,
And us and all our progeny,
unto the death pursues,
Then praise we God, and unto him,
all reverence let us use,
And you O Captains that do guide,
and govern Armies great,
Ye Magistrates and Rulers all,
that are with pride repleate,
Leave of like lawless Lords to live,
Of Meliager learn,
To yield to each his due desert,
as reason shall disearne,
Who merrits golden gain to get,
for worthy works committed,
In countries cause let his reward,
in no wise be remitted,
So shall you surely reap renoune,
and purchase peoples love,
Yea valiant minds to vallyaunt acts,
thereby you soon shall move,
you envious sort at prosperous state,
of men that do repine,
That grutch to see another gain,
with most mallicious eyne,
Forsake that foul infyrmitye,
that hurt with virtue heal,
Which vexes every vain of you,
for grace to God appeal.
Else shall confusyon come to you,
and that which you did crave,
To light on others that be sure,
your selves alone shall have,
By Meliager murderers may
a good example see,
To cause them shun to seek their blood,
with whom they grieved be,
Least that the same to heavenly Jove,
from earth do vengeance erye.
and so their souls be damde in hell,
when corpse in grave do lie,
For God so much a murderer hates,
that be he Priuce or pear,
yet blood craves blood, and unto God
the Beggar is as dear
In all respects, as is the King,
that rules in regal reign,
Who murdereth shall be murdered,
who slays shall be slain,
What measure men to others meat,
with that they shall again,
Be measured this find we true,
by trial every day,
Now last of all let s^sters learn,
where virtue bears chief sway,
To love their brethren fervently,
as nature does require,
So shall they purchase praise of all,
that know their good desire.
Finis.
A letter written by one to a ritche Widow, wherein using earnest perswations
he soliciteth his suit, and craves to be accepted.
LIke as the Captain may well be counted a Coward, and unworthy of victory,
that for a small discomfiture at the first encounter will be clean
discouraged, so may he be deemed but a dissembling Lover, that for one denial
will be drawn clean away, neither does he deserve to reap so great a
commoditye, as the consent of her that he loves may bring unto him.

But my love being grounded upon good occasyons, and settled on so sure a
foundation, as it cannot be easily overwhelmed, so long as any spark of life
abides in my body, it were great crueltye to contemn me, or careleslye to
cast me of, without rendering me a recompeuce worthy my deserving, which I am
fully persuaded that your courteous condition cannot consent unto, and therefore
am the more imboldened once again to trouble you with my Letters. And although
you words have hitherto given me small hope of any further favor then I have
already found, yet am I so blinded with affection, as I cannot but still
persevere in the same.

It pleased you at our last conference amongst other things, to inquire of
my estate, which being in deed very simple, in comparison of that which it
has pleased God to call you unto. If I should have made it better then it
was, when you should afterward have proved the contrary, you might well
have deemed me a Dissembler, and worthy of great blame, for dealing so
dublely with you, and therefore I sought rather to abase then better my self,
as I trust your seemelye self have well perceived.

Yet would I not have you think me so simple, but that I shall be able always
to get an honest living to mainetayne me withal, although I had none other
helps then that which God has given me by nature, much more then being
matched with such a one as you are, whose wealth is better known to others,
then wished of me for mine own private profit.

For as I know my self altogether unworthy of so great a benefit, so must I
needs acknowledge the Favor that I have already found at your hands, far
to exceed my desartes.

And yet, if you were privy to my purposes and knew my true intent, and the
great god will and unfeigned affection that your clemencye constrayneth me to
bear unto you, I doubt not but I should find that friendlye favor at your
hands, that otherwise were unmeet for one of my degree.

But peradventure, because I am a young manne, and have but little to take unto,
you think I would if I were once possessed of you, seek only to live upon
that which you have, and not being careful for your commoditye, nor respecting
your person as I ought to do, would carelessely consume your substance, and
when nothing remains to maintain my ryots, would leave you to to shifte for
your self, (as many vyld varlets do at this day the more is the pity) But
they be such as have in them neither honestye nor wisdom, or will do well.

And if you so conceive of me (as I hope you do not,) how far this
imagination differs from my good meaning, God and mine own conscieuce only
knows, I beseech you therefore suffer no such thoughts to sink into your
mind, for if my derdes be found any thing differente from my words, I wish
that the earth may gape and swal low me up, or Fire from heaven consume me,

Diverse are the reasons that induce me thus earnestlye to solicit my suit
unto you.

First your personage, which pleafeth me more then any that ever I saw.

Secondly, your courteous condttions, virtues, and wisdom, being such, as would
well content any honoste and well minded man, though the rest were wanting.

Teyrdelye, your years which being at the full perfection, neither to young a
wanton, or to old a Dotarde, but one that are both hable for your experieuce,
to minister good council to such an unskillful young man as I am, and also
sufficiently satisfye me in all other things requisite for my young years.

Fowerrhlye, your wealth to supplye my want, which being so well ordered as
I assure you it should be, if I inioyed it, it might not only be conserved,
but also increased to the great commodity and comfort of us both.

These be the causes that encourage me so effectually to prosecute my purpose,
wherein if I find you favorable as I hope I shall, I will not only be
readdye to perform my promyses in all respects, but also would be most
humbly at your commaundment, as your most bounden and obedient servant,


Finis.
The first Letter written to the same widdowe, extolling her virtues, which he
allegeth to be the cause of his ardent affection, he requires marriage of her.
THe commendable quallities together with the incomparable curtesy that I have
heard and partly seen to be in you has in encouraged me thus boldly to
presume to present you with my disordered Letters, therebye to let you
understand the hearty good will and vntained affection which I have long time
borne unto you though tear to offend you have caused me hitherto to conceal
it, hoping that although my degree be far inferior to yours, in every
respect, yet will you not scorn my curtesy, or requite my good will with
crueltye.

My request is reasonable, and my desires not dishonest and therefore deserve
the rather to be favored, marriage is the mark I shoot at, which is a holy
thing, and ordained by God, from the beginning.

And although I crave to be matched with you, yet if I might find the favor
at your hands to be so accepted, considering our inequallity, and not desyring
the Privilege which pertains to those that inioye their equals, to were,
obedience in the wife toward her husband, I would refer my self wholly unto your
discretion, and yield you the pre-eminence in all things as reason wills, and
being but as it were your steward, would discharge you of those weighty and
troublesome affairs, that are incide^t to your calling.

As for my quallities and conditions what they are, I will leave tothe report
of others. But in deed my wealth is very small, yet is that w(...) so supplied
with good will, as I hope you should have no cause to repent you of the choice
of so base a persouage, but rather rejoice that it was your lotte, to light on
so loving a friend, For I am sure that the man lives not on earth at this
hour, that would more esteem, love and cherrish you then I would do, and if
it would please you once to make trial of me, I hope you should find me in
all things according to your hearts desire, which considered, I doubt not but I
shall find you ready to relieve me, by recompensing my good will with the
like, with which hope I will comfort my self, till I hear the contrary, and
so craving pardone for my boldness, I commit you to God.


A young Gentlewoman wrighteth this for answer to a Gentleman's Letter, that
craved her love, and exhorts her to keep promise with him, wherein excusing
her self, by her over young years, and his vnhabillitye, she prays him to
cease of his suit.
YOur Leeters sir I have received,
and pondring well the same,
Have now preparde my self thereto,
an answer fit to from,
Though in your writ you rome and raunge,
about the bushe a while,
And use huge heaps of needelesse words,
my senses to begyle.
I see you seek, but all in vain,
to win me to your wife,
Which I may not vouchsafe to grant,
for fear of further strife.
Because it is not in my power,
to do it, though my will,
were wholly bent thereto: but in
their hands whose prudeut skill,
And wisdom great is such,
as knowing what for me,
Most meetest is; to your demand
will never once agree,
And as their care is very great
to do me good, so I
(As duty binds) in all things will,
my self to them apply.
your wealth likewise is very small,
as you your self confess,
And mine not great, and am right sure,
it would be so much less,
If following fancyes flattering words,
or fained vows, I should
Contrary do to friends desire,
and that which worst I would,
Their love and favor lose thereby,
therefore cease of your suit,
Content yur self with reasons rule,
and do no blame impute
To me at all, whose tender age,
ne wit ne wealth will serve,
To take in hand so great a charge,
but I therein should swerue.
And for that cause I do not mind,
to match with any one.
Until I be of ryper years,
nor promise plight to none,
yet when I do, I will apply
my self in all I may,
To choose a wise and prudent mate,
That walks in virtues way:
Providing therewithal,
that wealth do never want,
sufficient always to maintain,
the fruicte o^ such a plant:
For whereas living lacking is,
to maintain such estate,
Their perfect love will soon pervert,
to cruel cancred hate,
And whereas rooted rancour reigns,
all things to ruin run,
yea virtue chaungde to vice most yilde,
decay they cannot shun
That shall be matched so, wherefore,
does wisdom always will,
In time conueniente heed to take,
if we will shun such ill,
But though I know right well, the use
of many men to be,
With flattering words, and fyled phrase,
as did Aeneas he,
To Dido, and falfe Demophon
to Phillis fair his friend,
For to deceive us silly souls,
that never hurt pretend,
But credit all their cloked craft,
that bears a simple shoe,
Till we be caught in Cupids snare,
so fast, that forth to go
We have not power, and then unkind
they leave us in the lash,
A just reward no doubt for such,
as will be over rash
In that they take in hand, yet I,
not judging so of you,
But thinking that your love professed.
both perfect is and true,
Do yield you thanks therefore,
and humbly pardon crave,
For that I may not give consent,
to that you seek to have,
The cause and reasons told before,
that do in deed deteine me,
Persuading still the contrary,
at all times do restrain me,
As for the promise which so much,
you urge me for to keep,
Assuring me by breach thereof,
to run in danger deep,
No promise have I made, whereon
you may so much take hold,
I am right sure, but that I may,
to break the same he hold,
But if I had, yet every one
would judge you far unwise,
To challenge any al my hands,
in whom it nothing lies
For to perform the same, since of
my self nothing I have,
Nor wit to know what thing is ill,
or what is good to crave,
And therefore aiming very wide,
and as one wanting sight,
Does throw his staff, so do you shoot^,
but shall not hid the whight,
And therefore now to make an end,
I humbly you require,
No more to move me in such sort,
but brydeling your desire,
And pondring rightly this reply,
which here to you I make,
To feed no more on foolish hope,
But this for answer take.

Finis.
A. B. wrighting to his sister C. B. admonishes her of such things as he
fyndeth amuse in her, and instructs her how she should behave herself to
preserve her good name.
Well-beloved Sister, for as much as both nature and conscience binds me to be
careful for your commodity I have thought good (as a friend) to admonish you
of such things as I find amiss in you, which I pray you take in good part,
and judge none evil in me for the same, for I protest unto you before God,
that it is not of any envy or malice that I bear unto you, but of mere good
will, and to discharge my duty both toward God, and you,

I see and hear and am sorry to understand, what reports are daily raised
against you, for that you keep company, and make your self acquainted with
so many lewd disposed persons as you do.

In deed it is a great presumption of an evil life to be conuersaunt with
those that be evil, for commonly like will to like.

Peradventure you think it a goodly grace, and greatly to your commendation,
with friendly looks, and courteous intertainements to draw men unto you, but it
is not so, and surely if you did consider the issue that it has, and the
inconvenience that grows thereby, you would rather shut your self up in
some secret chamber, and live a sollitary life for ever, then set to the show
so often as you do, for trust to this, and surely you shall find it most true,
that as the Fowler with his feigned notes, brings the the birds to his Net,
so those subtle serpents, whose minds are always bent to mischief, will
with their flatring speeches, and false fained fetches, allure you to their
lubidious lusts, if they can.

But lend no ear unto them, nor give no credit unto their words, for he that
amongst them makes the gretest show of good will, will be the man that shall
soonestdeceiue you.

It is not any honest love that they intend, but their desire is to despoyle
you of that which is the Jewel, wherein you ought cheefelye to joy, whereof
if they fail, they will then raise the most vilde and slanderous reports
against you that can be devised, and will not stick to report their pleasure
of you, in every place where they come, to your great reproach and infamy, and
though it be never so faice that they feign, yet the report thereof, entering
into the ears of the common sort, (that are redier to believe leasings, then
creditt the verity,) they will sone imagine it to be true, and blaze it abroad
for a certainciye, into the ears of all men, and so where by good government
you might have gotten great commendation, through this your disordred liberty,
you grow in great defamacion. Leave then to lend care to the lewd perswations
of those corrupt Caterpillars, be not in any wise cenuersaunt with them, but
fly from them, as from a most pestilent evil, so shall you preserve your good
name unspotted, and give no occasyon to be ill thought of, which in my poor
opinyon, will be more beneficial to your self, and less hurtefull to others,
then by following your former course it would be, and so fare you well.

The lamentable complaint of a lover, who not withstanding his diverse
dangerous travails, and continual sorrow sustained could find no favor at al
at her hands that was the causer of his callamity, but cruel contemt, to
counteruayle his curtesy.

OF many torments, strange and tedious toils,
That grisly ghostes in Limbo lake sustain,
Of fearful facts, and bloody beastly broiles,
That there are used, the pleasant Poets feign,
As how that Phlegias to his treble pain,
Upon a turning wheel is fixed fast,
which makes him loathe his life, that long does last.
How Sisiphus does roll the restless stone,
which to the top attaind, turns back again,
How silly Titius making mostful moan.
Unto a Rock fast tide, does still sustain,
The griping greefes that rauerring byrds constrain,
who on his entrails daily feed their fill,
And yet he lives, to try these torments still.
How Tantalus amidst the stream that stands,
Up to the chin, is like for drouth to dye,
And goodly Apples, almost in his hand,
with hunger nipt, in extreme pain does lie,
How Danaus daughters do themselves apply,
with pailes that bottomes want, a tubbe to fill,
That wants bottom to, which passes still.
But all their paiues may not compared be,
To that which I do every hour abide.
For all at once assembled are in me,
There is no torment that I have not tryde,
To me the heavens have happy ha(...) denyde,
The Plannets all appointed me by fate.
to live and lead my life in loathsome state,
All day my mind with fancies fond is fraught,
which greatly wastes my wit and breaks my brain
To no effect at all, when sleep has caughte
Some hold of me at night, alas my pain
Grows greater far, for dreadful dreauies restrain
My quiet rest, all mirth is moan to me,
All pleasure pain, I loath the light to see.
Of all the wightes that ever liude in love,
was neueralone whose (...) was like(...) my(...),
though grefe thein gript, though pain they long (...) prove
yet did they gain their wished will in fine,
Their Ladies liking did it love ^iclyne,
And they inioyde their joy and hearts delight,
At wished will their wretched woe to quight.
Though pastor Paris past the surging Seas,
And many perrils more for Holl(...) sake,
yet he at last his heavy heart to ease,
Enioyde her love, and reft her from her make,
which deed the Greelies so greeuousely did take,
As Troy therefore they did to ruin bring,
The fittest fruicte that of such love does spring.
when Peseus had with tedsous foil distressed,
The Monstet huge that labored to deuoke,
Andromada, that (...) Rock did rest
Fast bound with chains, expecting every hour,
For dread ull death, he cropped the costly flower,
which fancy forced him seek, with such annoy,
And after led his life in lasting joy.
And many more such like a^^enge Ieoulde,
who after pain did (...)hase their desire,
I might bring in Nastagio if I would,
Hippomanes that fryde in Cupids fire,
And Pelops to if cause did so require,
But these will serve my faying true to try,
That none for love has led such life as I.
For Ialas of all men most a(...),
Have spent much time with care and busy cure,
And when I thought me best, my ha^ was worst,
when safe I seemde, then sat I most unsure,
Not deadly dole that I did long (...),
Not trickling tears(...) could serve,
To purchase that which I do well deserve.
When as I glaunce my glaring eyes on her,
She bendes ger looks upon some other thing,
When as I would with words my suit prefer,
Then angry she away from me does fling,
Saying take heed; the Siren now does sing,
And when with pen my passions I depaint,
She rentes my writ and scorns my pittious plain.
If messengers I send with her to treat,
And plead my caufe as they can best devise.
Their words so set her haughty heart in heat,
who causeless still does meso much despise,
As when she hears me narnde, her blood does rise,
An when my friends do her present with aught,
She frets and fnmes as one with fury fraught.
Through places scarcely known, both day and night,
through wods, through groves, and marish grounds I rode
Through Forests, fennes and furrows void of light,
yea over hautye hills where I abode,
Full many bitter blastes before I trod
The trustlesse where I this Tiger found,
whose devilish deeds does cause my cares abound.
Then cursed be the hour and eake the days,
wherein I did to her my journey frame,
I would I had been murdered by the way,
Before I came to see that cruel Dame,
who for good will does yield me bitter blame,
For then the death had me depriude of all,
The dangers dyre, wherein I daily fall.
But all to late to shut the stable door,
When, so says the prouer be old,
I wisely should have thought of this before
I did attempt her bewty to behold,
Who has my heavy heart so hard in hold,
As needs I must both love and serve her still,
Though she me loathe, and seek my blood to spill.
you yonglinges all, where ever that you be,
That sibiect are unto the laws of love,
Take heed in time, be wisely warnd by me,
On whom you look, least looks that liking move,
Ingendring love, make you more pains to prove,
Then I pore wretch, that daily wish to dye,
And yet do live, these torments strange to try.

Finis.
A young man being in love wiih a fair Gentlewoman, that was but his equal,
desires to be accepted for her husband.
THe passions extreme which for your sake I have long sustained, being now
through continuance of time, so wonderfully augmented and increased, that
being no longer able to collerate the extreme pain thereof, I am coacted and
perforce constrained in most humble wise to crave grace at your hands, which
is the only mean whereby I may be cured of this most grievous and in
fupportable mallady: Refuse not therefore I pray you this my petition, which is
both honest and reasonable let not my good will be required with disdain, nor
my courtesy with cruelty, for that were a point void of all humanitye, and
far different from all maydenlike modesty: Dido Queen of Carthage loved
Aeneas a stranger and a banished man, Euphinia Daughter to the King, and heir
to the crown of the Kingdom of Corinth, matched herself with Acharisto her
fathers dondman. The Duchess of Malsey chose for her husband, her servant
Virico. And Venus also, (if we may give credit to the fixions of Poets, who
for he surpassing hewry was cauonized a Goddess,) refused noe to be the wife
of lame Vulcanus.

Much less need you then, that are mortal, and but of a mean progenye in
comparison of the worste of all those princely Dames before repeated, to think
scorue of me that am no Stranger, but your own native contreyman, no
wandering exile, but a true and faithful Subject, continuing in the country
where I was first borne and fostered, neither servant to you, nor slave to any
other, but utterly free from the yoke of servitude and bondage, until such time
as by contemplating the bright beams of your surpassing hewry, my poor heart
was so captinated, that I was constrained to commit my self wholly unto your
clemency, nor yet so monstrous and misshapen a creature, whereby you might have
just occasion so mislike of me, but God I give him thanks for it, as
plentifully enriched with the gifts of nature, as another man.

All which being well and advisedly of you considered. I am persuaded and
fullye resolved in my cogitation, that you will not refuse my gentle offer, or
disdain to elect and accept me for your loyal lover, and lawful husband.
who (above all other earthly Creatures) am most desirous for term of life to
be lincked with you in league of perfect love, and amity.

Thus hoping that by means of your bountiful henignitie, and accustomed
clemencye, I shall not fail to find all things correspondent, and according
to my hearts desire, I leave to trouble you a ny further for this time. And so
fare you well.


Finis.
C. D. Being enamored of a fair and vertous young Gentlewoman he craves speedy
comfort.
Dearly beloved, without whose grace and good will, nothing seems sweet or
pleasant unto me, no not to enjoy my life, unless I may therewith obtayn thy
love which my heart above all things terrestiall does chiefelye covet and
desire.

Love only has caused me to wright unto you, your surpassing bewty has
perforce procured me to love you, and your rate and singular virtues have
chiefly kindled my affection toward you, which affection does so greatly
abound in me, and so incessaunclye tormente my poor captive carcas, that if
you in whom it only rests to redress the same do not speedily render some
pleasant and precious pocion, to assuage the intolerable anguishe of this my
most grievous and painful mallady, my life is like to be put in great
perrill thereby.

The plant whilst it is yet young and tender may be easily cut down. but if it
be let alone untouched, it will in time grow so great, as with much labor it
shall be almost impossible so to roof it out, but that some small sprigs shall
still abide behind in the bowels of the earth which may afterward receive
again the former force, and accustomed greatness.

The wax whilst it is warm, may be easily redused into what form or fashion
that a man will, but being let alone till it be cold, it wareth so hard and
brittle, that it will sooner brea^^, then be brought to any perfect proportion,
or vniformitye.

So likewise is it in love, for the lover that loves faithfully, being daily
fed with fair words, if he do not in short time obtain the full effect of
his desire, the flame already kindled in his breast, will in the eude wax so
wonder full great, as all the water in riber and Nylus, shall not suffice to
qu^^^^ the same, until the body of the pore miserable lover, be dissolved into
dust.

Consider therefore I beseech you of my sorrowful state, way my good will and
faithful affection toward you, po^ de^^ my pittious plain^s, and deny not
grace to him that loves you more heartlye then his own proper life, who to
obtain your love would not fear to pass the perrilious waves of unhappy
Helispont, but as a faithful Leander to please my beloved Hero, would be ready
to attempt it how dangerous soever the adventure were.

Refuse not then this my reasonable request, seeing that by yielding thereunto,
you can no way be pr(...) any (...) hindered, and yet by (...) it, shall put my
life in great perrill, purchase your self an evil report, and be of all men
accounted for cruel.

Thus hoping that your pitiful heart will, through this my most humble
submission be moved to take pity and compassion upon my sorrowful state, I
do for this (...) commit you to the tuition of the Almighty, whom I pray
still to protect you.


Finis.
The Lover perceiving the love of his beloved mistress, not to be so perfect
as before time it had been, wrighteth unto her as follows.
BEing of late my dearly beloved Mistress, by means of your comely personage
adorned and garnished with so many good gifts of nature, allured or rather
proc^^ed to love you, and (...) (...) ^^^ion or ^^^en of disdaynefulnesse to
appear in you, but that rather as it seemed to me you burned with the like
flame, and had as fyrinly fixed your fancey upon me, as I was fully determined
for ^earme me of life to love you.

But alas, at this present, to my great grief and contynuall vexation both of
mind and body. I (...) the contrary.

For now your mind, upon what occasyon I know not, is clean altered on a
sudden, so that in steed of friendly looks I find a scowning countinaunce,
and in s^eede of the gentle words, and courteous communication which before you
used with me, I have now nothing else but froward and unfriendly aunsweres,
ungrateful words and privy poisoned nippes, which seems to me far more
bitter then gall so is my good will requyted with disdain and my curtesy with
unkindness.

Oh who would think that in one endued with so many (...) virtues as you are,
there should be abiding so foul a vice as is ingratitude, who would judge
that in so comely a body, there should remain so unconstant a heart, what have I
done that misliketh you; wherein have I offended you? whereby have I deserved
this great discurtesy at your hands? Are you intrapped with the love of any
(...) on^ (...) our love in suspicion, have you at any time been vpbrayded with
the same, or else has some mallicious person practiced by slanderous reports
to raise reproach upon me in my absence, or vitered (...) (...) words against
me, thinking thereby to hinder our love, and cause you to conceive some evil
opinyon of me.

If it be so, or howsoever it be, I pray you let me have intelligence, and
before the truth of the matter be thorowlye tryde, to their great shame that
shall report it (as I hope it will fall out in the end, when my answer is
hard,) condemn me not without desert, for certainelye to my knowledge, I
never yet did any thing wherewith you should be offended, neither have I offered
any occasyon whereby you might be justly moved to think evil of me, if I have
it was unwittingly, and being heartily sorrye for the same, I do most humblye
crave pardon at your hands.

Great is the love I bear unto you, and so grievous is the wound that I have
received thereby, that if you, who are the jewel of my joy, preserver of my
health, and the very lengthner of my lingering life, do not minister some
comfortable consarne, or pleasant potion, to mittigate the intolerable
torment of my most mischievous malladye, I am not able long to abide it, and
therefore I most humbly beseech you to have go^^ (...) to my sorrowful state,
and seeing I am so fyrmely bente, for term of life, to love you above all
other, cast clean from you all disdainfulness, and render me like love
again, on your part.

For thereby you shall purchase to your self so faithful a friend, as will
always continue most constant.

Needelesse it is for me to make any plainer declaration of my desire, for I am
certain that my good meaning is already well known unto you, but this I say,
and I take God to witness, I speak it vnfaynedlie, that the woman lives not
on the earth at this hour, which I could so will like of, as I do of you, or
with whom I had rather match my self, so greatly have I been affectioned
unto you, even from the very first hour that I behealde you, until this
present time, and therefore committing my self into your hands, in whom it
only rests to redress my sorrows, and comfort my careful heart in hope
to receive such answer from you, as shall be greatly to my contentation I leave
to trouble you any further for this time.


Finis.
A Lover being doubtful of the good will of his Lady; by means of the
mutabillitie that many times he found to be in her, craves more assurance at
her hands.
HOw great good will I have long time borne you, my well-beloved Parmenia, both
by my words and deeds you have plainly perceived and albe it that you have
diverse times in plain speech professed the like unto me, yet have I to my
greet (...) (...) so variable in all your actions as I know not bow to
conceive of you.

I pray you deal with me as a friend, feed me not with fair words
vnlessedeedes do follow accordingly, promise no more then you mind to
perform, give me not hope to putme afterward in despair, nor receive me
into your favor, and afterward reject me, for surely in so doing, you shall
not only deceive me, but also greatly defame your self, when your double
dealing shall be known to others.

If you can fancy me, then without any exceptions consent to take me for him
whom you determinete love and live with all for over.

If you like not of an) then answer it directly, that I may know what to
trust unto, and so by refraining your company, prove to repress my fund
affection, which is so firmly fixed upon you, as I fear me, I shall hardly
reprove it.

Feign would I more often frequente your company, but fearing to purchase
your displeasure, and wishing rather to suffer my self the greatest sorrow
that may be sustained, then you by any means should abide any blame at all for
my sake I have hitherto restrained my desire with the rule of reason, and
satisfied my self often times with the only sight of the place where you
frequent, as if your self had been present with me, such is the force of
affection, but yet desyring rather to have it so in deed, then to deem it so,
to the end I may have conference with you, for uerse occasyons.

I most heartily, pray you let me either understand your mind by writing or
else devise some means that I may have access unto you to talk with you in
proper person till which time I shall never take rest, but be continallye
troubled with a thousand imaginations.

Thus wishing you as well to fare, as your heart would desire, I commit you to
the tuition of the Almighty whom I pray still to protecte you.


Finis.
The Auctour writing to his sister that was toward marriage, teaches how to
make choice of a husband and how to behave her self being a Wife.
Dearly beloved Sister, understanding that you are disposed to enter into the
blessed state of Matrimony, but with whom I know not; and remembering the sage
sentence of that wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius, that the greatest reward which
one friend may imparte to an ^ther is to succor him with good council,
knowing also that there is nothing wherein council is more requisite then in
marriages, for that whosoever falls in the perrilles there of can find no
remedy for it, without far greater perrill, I have thought good, as far as
my weak wit, and slender skill can serve me, to show you my simple opinion
therein.

Like as fire my well-beloved Sister, which lies long in kindling, yields
far greater heat then that which by and by takes flame, so love which has
had long continuance is of much more force then that which grows upon the
sudain; for as fire that flameth at y^ first blowing is but as a flash that by
and by vanishes, so is the love which grows on the sudden like unto a shadow
y^ whilst the son shines, shows plain and perfect to the sight of every
man, but when it is darkened, cannot be deserned at all. So are there some men
of so lewd a condition that so long as her bewty abides, to whom they
profess good will, her wealth not deminished and her countinaunce seems
cheerful, they continue their love, but if the contrary happen, then by and
by their love waxeth-colde, for if her beauty by sickness be abated, her
wealth through any casualtie deminished, or her cheerful countinaunce by
sorrow changed to the contrary, then forgetting her virtues which still remain
perfect, they are clean changed to another likeness, their sweet meliferons
words, become as bitter as wormwood; their seeking plain misliking, and their
great love disdain. This is the fruiet of such sudden love, this is the best
commoditye that may thereby be reaped, for this we see by experience, that the
fruict which is sonest ripe, is sonest rotten, and the Fire which is sonest
kindled, is soonest quenched, and so likewise is the hotest love sonest cold.
wherefore I pray you, and friendly advise you; in any wise to take good
deliberation in the choice of your husband, try him thorowlye, before you
trust him that shall make you any offer of his love.

And though his outward behauyoure seem honest, though his proffers be large,
his perswations great, and his person please you never so well, yet till you
have well considered of the matter and consulted with your friends, who will
neither advise you to do any thing that is hurtful, nor persuade you from
that which may be profitable unto you, yet give not your consent in anyewyse
to their flattering intisementes.

For as the Fowler with his fained Notes deceiues the sillye birds, and
bringes them to their have, so be there some that under a fair show of feigned
friendship, seek by all means possible to corrupt the minds, of honest
maidens, and entice them to folly, which they shall hardly withstand, if they
lend care to their lewd language. But were it so that you should light upon
one that indeed loved you dearelye, and meant to deal plainly, and honestly
with you, if you have not respect as well to other matters as to that, it will
in the end redo(...)d to your great discommodity, for although in the
beginning, few marriages seem unpleasant, yet being made only for love without
further aduisement they cannot chose but have a sad and sorrowful ending: and
therefore I would advise you to chose such a one as should not only be wise and
welthye, but also well inclined welthy to maintain you, according to your
desire, and his degree, wise to govern those goods that God has sent him, with
reason and discretion, and of a good conversation to the intent that he may not
only order you as he ought to do, but also bring up his famely virtuously and
in the fear of God for so shall God bless him the better, and al his actions
shall have a good and prosperous end, whereas if he be vicious, and of a lewd
disposition, his inferiors following his example; will be the like, for such
husband such wife, such father; such children, and such masters such servants,
so is it commonly seene^ and so were he neuerso subtle witted or endued with
never so great abundance, one way or other al would quickly go to wrach, and
come to nothing, and for as much as the wealth of y^ husband does chiefly
depend upon the good behavior of his wife, in y^ disposing of his household
affairs, I would advise you to be careful in all honest order to conserve and
increse y^ which your husband shall get, and not to spend super fluously upon
such trifles and toys as are but spurs to provoke pride, which is the pathway
to perdition, whereof the wife (being the cheifest member of her husbands
body,) shall be the first that shall feel the smart of it, when exchanging her
gorgious garments for a pore patched cote, her sine dellicate dishes for such
scraps as she can get for Gods sake, her soft fetherbeds, and beds of down,
for a Pallet of straw, her gorgious buildinges, for a silly sheep cote, or
such like, to be brought to that extremity, that she shall rather wish to dye
then line in that miserable estate, when having been a mistress of many
servants in her youth, she shall her self in her old age, be feign to be a
slave and servant to such as sometime she could command, for it is no doubt,
a right miserable and wretched state, atorment intolerable, and a grief in
erplicable, after so great plenty, to feel such extreme pennry, but it is
thee meetest reward for them that will not take heed before hand, to repent
them afterward when it is to late, for when the steed is stolen, it is no time
to shut the stable door, and it is most certain, one far from their good,
are near to their harm, for every man basteth the fut hog, but the lean
shall burn before he be basted, my meaning is, and it is daily seen, that he
that has enough shall have more, he that has a little shall have less, but
he that has nothing at all of himself, let him be sure that he shall get
nothing of another, wherefore (if you covet to be accounted wise and virtuous)
knowing how great an enemy she is to her self, and into how many dangers
she intrudeth herself that is negligent and care to conserve her husbands
goods, you will rather forbear things necessary then you would be any
hinderaunce to your husbands profit, yea, and travail all that you can to
increse his stock, rather then one whit to deminish it, wisely waighing that if
any thing happen to her husband, otherwise then well, she is not one of the
last, as I said before, which shall feel the smart of it. And thus praying
you to print these precepts in your heart for fear to be o^e^ cedious, I leave
to trouble you any more at this time.


Finis.
A pore young mau being vehemently vexed for the love of a fire young
Gentlewoman, craves her favor for the conservation of his life, almost
consumed.
SO rare is your bewtye, bounty and grace that as the Adamante draws iron
unto it, so does the same draw the minds of men unto you, and like Cirses
charms, transporte them into what likeness you list.

What marvel is it then though many worthy Gentlemen being bleared with the
bright beams thereof, be enforced for the appeasemente of their pain, to
seek all means possible to purchase your gracious good will and favor.

But my good mistress, amongst so many that have made suit unto you, I
marvel you make choice of none, peradventure it is because you cannot
conceive any constancye or faithful fidelitye to be (...) in them, if it be so,
behold I am he that can and will, if you please, supply that want in you, and
as you should well know, if you made proof of me, I doubt not but you should find
me such a one, as in all respects, would sufficiently satisfy your mind, yea,
and so content you, as the choice of me, should not once move you to change,
the baseness of my birth be any blemishe to your dignity, or your gentle
accceptance to my offered curtesye, move you to repent you of so gracious a
deed. Pardon me I pray you, if in this my rude writing, I have committed any
crime, or done that which is contrary to duty, and impute the fault only to
love, whose burning flames having long time boiled in my breast, not being able
now, any longer to concele the same, I am through vehemence of the pain, that
thereby oppresses my pore pensive heart, enforced at the last, in hope of
redress, to reveal my hidden greefes unto you, being the only Mistress of
my health, life and liberty, without whose grace or mine own great perrill
may not possiblye be repressed, nor my pains appeased, for if they could,
then either fear of your displeasure, reason or duty would have detained me
from this my present purpose, and presumptious attempt, and not have permitted
me with woe to wade so far, in so dangerous a Sea, seeing therefore that the
passion which oppresses me is so paynefull, the fire that wastes me so
vehement, the cause proceeding from you, and the remedy resting only in your
hands, I think you cannot be so cruel hearted, but that pity will move you in
the end, to rue the callamitye that your poor Servant has for your sake so
long sustained, and to hasten the remedy for his relief, that with the dew of
grace issuing from your most delicate body, you may speedilye quench that
consuming fire, which so continuallye inflameth his heart with desire to do
such seemelye service as shall be acceptable unto you, who accoumpting all
pain but pleasure that he sustaineth for your sake, yields himself wholye
unto your clemencye, to render him the final sentence of life or death, which
her daily expects.


Finis.
How foolish women are in the choice of their Lovers.
THe Smith whose toyling trade,
besmeard his face with sweat,
And made him like a Croyden Knight,
with working in the heat,
More lucky was in love,
then Hercules the stonte,
The one inioyde a dainty Dame,
the other went without,
Vulcanus had to wife,
the Lady chief of love,
Whose passing bewty peerless was,
as Paris plain did prove.
But long Alsides serude,
fair Iole at her will,
In woman's weed, and yet did fail,
to find her favor still,
For often it is the trade
of women, to ellect
Lewd lumpish loutes deuoyde of wit,
and wiser wightes reject,
A Clown that from the Cart,
is come in court to serve,
In whom there is no kind of cause,
good liking to deserve,
Shall catch a gallaunt gyrle,
and purchase at her hands
That others lack, whose faithful hearts,
were scortcht with Cupids brands,
Then let him love that list,
for I will leave the lure,
Of those lewd Dames whose devilish driftes,
such cursed cares procure.
Finis.
Damion wrighteth to his friend Sulippo exhorting him to seek preferment
whilst the time serves.
Surely my Sulippo, when I remember the poor estate wherein thou presently
stand, and compare it with the misery of this our age, I cannot but greatly
marvel to see thy slacknesse in seeking preferment considering how hard a
time it is to attain to any thing, or to keep y^ which we have with
quietness, every one being ready to pull the meat out of an other man's
mouth, that happy is he who has any thing to stay unto, for if he want he
shall find few friends in his necessity that will pity his poverty or set
to their hands to help him, be his need never so great, and therefore in my
poor opinion, it is good (as they say) to hold open the poke whilst the pigge
is proffered, and taking the time whilst it serves, to stryke whilst the iron
is hot, and not with Esopes Dog, leaving the flesh for the shadow, forgo a
thing certain, for a hope uncertain, least repentance follow, when it is to
late, for better it is to have one bird in hand, then two in the Bushe,
seeing that often times whilste the Gratie grows the steed starues, for he
that hops after dead men shoes many times goes barefoote many things happen
between the cup and the lip, and therefore diverse means there may be
hereafter to hinder that which may now without any great difficulty, be
achieved seeing there is nothing but only the want of master Moliscus good
will, to prevent your purpose, which by good perswation and earnest entreaty,
may possibly be obtained the rather or yt he sees master Glomerok so desirous
to do you good, I pray you therefore find some good time, so soon as
conveniently you can, to talk with him about it, for as it greeueth me to see
the life that now you lead, without either profit or pleasure, so am I very
desirous to have you provide in Summer, against the extremity of the winter,
and seek somewhat in your youth, to maynetain you in your age, to the end that
you may be a comfort, and not a corsie, to the hearts of such your poor
friends, as wish you well, who will not fail to do their vtturmost endeavor
to further your preferment in all they may.

Thus praying you to remember what I have written unto you, and to put it in
practice so soon as you may, I bid you safe well.


Finis.
Varinus having found in the night time that which plesed his fancy he
commends it much, and craves to be accepted for her servant whom he intyrely
loved.
THough many much mislike the long
and weary winter nights,
I cannot but commend them still,
for diverse dear delights,
The night we see, brings silver sleeps,
sleep courseth care away,
Cares being cast from out the mind,
there harboures happy joy.
Where joy aboundes, there health has place,
where happy health does bide,
There life lastes long, this proof shows plain,
and may not be denyde:
Lo this the happy night procures,
which wrought my wished will,
Therefore I must before the day,
prefer and praise it still,
But some perhaps will marvel much,
my fond effect to hear,
Let them not spare none knows the cause,
why I so strange appear,
In this my unacquainted verce,
such dark conceits to write,
Nor never shall, but only I,
and she whose bewty bright,
Did in the dark beth bleare mine eyes,
and lend me perfect light,
She she it is that knows full well,
from whence my Muse proceeds,
Yea she it is that both my bliss,
and hale together breeds,
Her presence does procure my rest,
her absence works my woe,
Her cheerful lokes do cheer my heart,
her sorrow makes to flow
Whole floodes of tears from out mine eyes,
and killes my heart with care,
Whose comely grace and courtious deeds,
do make her seem as rare
As in the world the Phoenix is,
and blessed would I count
My self, and say that in good luck,
all others I surmount,
Might I but once such grace obtain
at her sweet hands, to be
Accepted as a servant still,
no more is craude of me,
Which if I might atchieue, no doubt,
I would my self apply,
To please her so in each respect,
as she should truly try,
And so confess, she never found
so fyrme a friend before,
Or servant of such secresy,
that did esteem her more:
What so she could command or will,
by day or else by night,
On sea or Land I would fulfill,
though death appeard in sight;
Or all the greefes that griefly ghostes,
in Limbo lake sustain,
Should me assail with furious mood,
to make me to refrain:
Yet should it not withdraw my mind,
from doing her desire,
Hap good or ill, what so beside,
I would thereto aspyre,
And wages none at all Ieraue,
but leave it to her will.
According to her curtesy,
her fancy to fulfill.
But when she has made proof of me,
as she shall best devise,
And sees my service what it is,
if she in any wise
Mislike thereof, let her withdraw
From me her favor quight,
And use what kind of way she will.
to work me more despite,
For as my health on her dependes,
So if I want her grace,
I loath my life and wish for death,
to reaue my rufull race.
Finis.
A pore young man being in love with a rich Gentlewoman, fynding it somewhat
difficult to obtain any favor at her hands, sought to suppress his fond
affection, but could not, wherefore he wrighteth unto her in effect as
follows.
THere is nothing in the universal world, that may more aptly be compared to
the hateful Hidra, then the painful passions of lawless love, for the Hidra
being assailed by Hercules, always when he cut of one of his heads, there
sprang two in the place of it: so love, the more it is suppressed, the more it
increases and grows still the greater, as is plainly proved by me, though to
my pain I report it, for considering on how high a place my mind was
settled, whereunto to attain without great pertill, I found it almost
impossible, I sought by reason to remove it, if I might, but love so abounded,
that reason bare no sway and therefore being, ordained as it were by destiny to
live and dye your loyal lover, and poor faithful Servant howesoeuer it
shall please you to dispose of me, yea, though I never gain any grace at all
at your hands, yet must I perforce still perceuer in the same, what soever
betyde me, desyring rather to dye to confyrme my constancye, then live and
lack your friendlye Favor, whereby I am only sustained, knowing that when
my unhappy death, shall happen to come to your hearing, it will move such
remorce in your heart, considering that the cause proceeded from your self,
as you cannot but be greatly grieved, for the small regard you had of so
faithful a friend, and then, when it is to late will repent you of your great
ingratitude.

Be not therefore so obstinately bent (I beseech you) to seek his confusion
that would accoumpte all pain but pleasure, which he should suffer in
seeking your safetye, consider in what case your divine bewtye has brought
him; and be not so careless of his welfare as you will suffer him to perish
for want of pity that cannot receive any comfort but by your clemencye,
which to deny him, wear extreme crueltye, and would procure your perpetual
infamy. The rather for that the remedy rested in you, and that my grefe being
taken in time might be easily cured, to my comfort and your contentment, as you
shall be forced in the end of your self to confess, if you have pity upon
me, as I hope you will, wherein being fully resolved, I rest for ever.

Your pore faithful friend and obedient servant.


The great love that Itafernes wife bare to her brother.
WHen I tafernes with all his famely,
Were taken captive By Darius army,
And cast into prison with great extremity,
His wife every day,
Came to the kings gate making pitiful moan,
That these her plaints to take pity upon,
At last he was moved with (...)rcye alone,
As wrighters do say,
In so much a^ one unto her he sent,
Who willed he then with right good intent,
In the Kings name to ^cast to lament,
And freelye to chose
The delivery of one, and she should him have,
Then she (...) the rest, her Brother did crave,
Whose life and liberty she most sought to save,
To lessen her woes.
The King then wondering that she would prefer
Her Brother before the rest that were there,
(...) and children most dear,
This answer she gave,
An other husband I may get quoth she,
And other Children if Gods will it be,
But my Parents being dead, more brethren then he,
I never can have.
A Lover that stood at an uncertain stay, wrighteth this for answer to a
Letter that he received from her whom he loved.
MYstresse (...) I received your Letters which (...) unto me so (...) as I
a(...) thereby brought as it were into a (...) (...) of which I know not
well how to wind me. Some time you give me hope, and by and by cross me with
the contrary, your words are so obscure, as my simple capacitye cannot
conceive the meaning of them, plain dealing is best among friends, good
meaning must not be covered with a counterfeit color, I have made you an
honest demand, but can receive (...) certain answer of it, if you think
me unworthy of you, let me understand it in plain speeches, and I will soon
seace my fute, for if you cannot fancy me, I neither may, nor will enforce you
to it.

If you like of my demand, drive me not of with doubtful delays, for that
is very dangerous.

Your virtuous education, and commendable quallityes, are the only causes that
have constrained me to love you. for the which I more esteem you (being as you
are) then otherwise I would do, wear you never so welthye, you say my suit
is reasonable, and yet ye reprove it as unprofitable, you confess me to be
worthy of you, and yet refuse to render your self unto me, being the party,
whom above all other I chiefly desire, and would most willingly possess, if
so it pleased you. In deed I confess, that good deliberation and careful
consideration is to be had in so weighty a cause which I had in remembrance,
before I made any motion thereof unto you, yet if there be any thing that I
have neglected, if you would let me understand wherein, and what it is, it
should be better respected, and being amiss, most willingly amended. And
whereas you refuse to yield your consent without the counsel of others, to ask
council in any thing, it is commendable, and to follow it (if it be good) is
right profitable, but whose counsel you crave I know not, ^^les it be your
parents, which if it be, the same I hope will not be contrary to my
contentation: yet do I not so much depend upon that, as I will thefore seek to
them, before I have assayed you, and have some assurance the thing, I seek
for, which is only in (...) to grant, and without you cannot be obtained, or
if it be, it must be by compulsion, and then were a man better be without it,
for forced marriages have never good effect: But peradventure you have some
further purpose in it, then I am privy unto, it may be that you imagine my good
will to be grounded upon so light an occasyon, as gaining my purpose, I would
quickly fly from my former professions, make more haste in the matter then
reason requires, or use some drifte to deceive your present expectation, but
how far my good meaning is from these imaginations, God and mine own
conscience only knows, you challenge me as if I had been over lauishe of my
langwage in blazing things abroad, that are not yet brought to pass which if I
should do (as I take God to witness. I have not) I might worthily be
condemned for a fool, and serve as a laughing stock to all men, that shall see
it fall out otherwise hereafter. And therefore I beseech you put such
imaginations out of your mind, and condemn me not as guiltye before you have
cause to accuse me. And in conclusion I heartily beseech you, not to trifle out
the time any longer, but to render me a ready answer to that which I
demand of you, howsoever it be, I care not, for I can better brook a flat
refusal, then suffer my self to be fed with foolish hope, for a thing so
uncertain: and therefore where subtlely you say at the foot of your letter
(yours, for so it may be) henceforward either refuse me flatly or else put
down plainly in the place of it (yours I am and will be) so shall you both
satisfy me sufficiently, and also greatly ease your self of the trouble that
my tedious writing (if so you accoumpte it does presentlye put you unto, and so
fare you well.


The strange pangs of a pore passionate Lover.
NOt as I am, nor as I wish to be,
But as falce Fortune frames mytroward fate,
Even so I am not bound nor fully free
Not quite forlorn, nor yet in quiet state,
I wish for death, and yet the death I hate,
This life lead I, which life is wondrous strannge,
yet for no life would I my life exchange,
I seek the sight of that I sigh to see,
I joy in that which breeds my great unrest,
Such contraries do daily comber me,
As in one thing I find both joy and rest,
Which gain he gets that is Cupidos guest,
For whom he catches in his cursed snare,
He gives great hope yet kills his heart with care,
Finis.
Of the thankfulness of a Dragon toward a man that had brought him up.
AS Bruson mention makes,
one Thoas in his youth
Brought up a Dragon young,
and of a certain truth,
when as he greater grne,
fearing his nature fell,
Conuaide him thence into a wood,
and left him there to dwell,
It happened after Thoas was,
within that wood beset
with many Thieves, at which self time
not making stay or let,
when as the Dragon heatd his voice,
which he remembered tho,
He rushed forth and rescued him.
from those that wished his woe.
Finis.
R. D. Being inflamed with the love of a very bewtifull Gentlewoman, by a
sudden view that he took of her, does colourably declare his case unto her.
AS late I walkte abroad for my delight,
To put all ^oolish fancies from my mind,
It was my chance upon a plot to light,
Wherein I did great cause of comfort find,
A goodly Garden garnisht every where,
with fragrant flowers of sundry sort and sent.
No strange device could be that wanted there,
That ever wit of man might well invent,
A goodly crystal spring ran through this place,
whose banks with sundry trees was bravely dec^^,
To show each thing by course, would crave long space,
And yet some part I should of force neglect,
But that which made me most of all to muse,
was to behold each thing so well conuaide,
And could not find that any one did use,
To make abode therein, yet half afraid
(Though cause were none) I durst not enter in,
But stood as one amasde, this sight to see,
That whosoever then had present been,
would not have thought that life had lodgde in me,
My senses failde, my feet were fixed fast,
My sight waxt dim, yet staring stood I still,
But coming to my self again at last,
And seeing there no sign of any ill,
Nor none that would my passage once restrain,
But that the gates wide open stood to all,
I banished fear which erst procurde my pain,
And did determine what so should befall,
To enter in, and view it round about,
And so I did in deed without anoyt,
For nothing was there which I need to doubt,
But all things turnde unto my treble joy.
when as I fully had each thing suruaide,
And fed my fancy as it likte me best,
Into an Arbor I my self conuaide,
And there lay down to take my quiet rest,
Into a heavy sleep straight ways I fell,
And then me thought there did appear in place
Two gallant Dames, whose bewty did excel,
whereof the one beholding long my face,
At last with stealing steps approcht more near,
And drawing forth a knyfe in dreadful wise,
Did pierce the part which I esteemde most dear,
which done from of the ground she began to rise,
And by and by did vanish out of sight,
which way or how, I could not well perceive,
Wherewith I wakened (being sore afright)
So much it did my quiet rest beleaue,
And then my naked body I behilde,
To sec if any wound would there appear,
But every place with flesh was fully filde,
No wound was seen, each place was fair and clear,
But when I rose, with mind to walk from thence,
Such gri^ly grief did gripe my tender heart,
As for a time it hindered my pretense,
And from that place I scarce had power to part,
yet as I could, although my pase were slow,
I at my lodging did at last ariue,
And laid me down in grief which still did grow,
And greater wax, and happy health deprive,
I sought Physicians help, my hurt to heal,
But Physic could no whit at all prevail,
And therefore still I must the same conceal,
And as a wight forlorn my we bewail,
Until the lovely Dame that did the deed.
Uouchsafe her grace to ease my present grief.
In her it lies my bitter bale to breed,
Or if she please to render me relief,
which if she once refuse I am right sure,
My lothed life that hope does now prolong,
Shall not long time be able to endure,
But die I must, because she does me wrong.

Finis.
An answer to a Letter that was not only dark, but also so disordered, as
their could no sense be perceived in it.
Unlooked for, I did receive of late,
Such lines as led me into double doubt,
First whence they came, and from what minyon mate,
And secondly I mused where about,
And for what cause they should to me be sent,
But when I had perusde them over well,
was near the nere in knowing thy intent,
For such a senseless tale thou seemdste to tell,
And so confuse, as what I should couceiue.
Of any part thereof I knew not I,
To stayed Studients I the same will leave,
By learned skill the secret sense to try,
Unless that thou that did devise the same,
wilt take the pains to gloss upon the text,
And set to show the figures thou did frame,
Whereby it seems thy mind is much perplexed,
For neither does the matter match aright,
Nor yet the vearce but varries every where,
I speak in sport, no cause I have to spite,
And as thou wished, so with thy want I bear,
Love is a lawless Lord, both he and his
Are free from blame what so they do or say,
And therefore though they sometime rome amiss,
That once have leaned to his lucklesse lay.
The fault is in the troward fittes they feel,
which leads their minds to like of many things,
And still to turn as does the whirling wheel,
where of the fruicte of folly freely springs,
Thy worthy work may well compared be,
Unto A building bravely decked without,
The inward parts whereof, who so shall see,
May find it framde of clay and dirt no doubt,
For on the same when first mine eyes I bent,
The entrance bare so brave a modesty,
That sure I thought some Muse the same had sent
From Helicon to please my fantasy,
But when I had a little further past,
Such paltrie pelf presented was to me,
As brave me into other thoughts at last,
So great a change so suddenly to see,
But borrowed ware will bear no better show.
Au Ape's an Ape, though robes be near so ritche,
The good from bad a man may easily know,
This makes thee claw whereas thou do not itch,
well galdback well, although I rubde thee now,
If that thou winche, I way it not a might,
Such cloked cunning can I not allow,
Halt not henceforth when Criples are in sight,
For trust to this thy Peacockes borrowed tail,
Cannot so craftily be coucht on thee,
But that the fine device thereof will fail,
If it be matchte with those that kindly be,
In fine I wish thee if thy mind be moude,
To bear the matter more at large set out,
which to provoke thou have so blindlye proud,
Then make it plain, and clear it clean of doubt.
Let finenesse go and use no secret slight,
To cover that which cannot be consealde,
And then will I as well pluck up my sprightes,
To open that I have not yet reuealde,

Finis.
C. L. Wrighting to a special Friend of his, that was somewhat grieved in
mind, for certain troubles that were happened unto him, geneth him such
friendly consolation as was riquisite for one in his case.
SIr I am well assured, that in seeking to give council to one so wise, and
consolaon to one of such constancy as you are, I shall rather reap reproach for
my rashness then any ways purchase praise for my good meaning.

And although you that know what cause moved me there unto, do not so
conceive it, yet they that shall hear report thereof, being ignoraunte of the
great good will that I hear unto you, will be ready to imagine the worste of
it.

But let them think what they list, I had rather that all others should
accuse me of presumtion, then that you should have just cause to condemn me of
ingratitude, or think my friendship to be of small effect. And therefore
though that I wright, be not such as should seem to proceed from a man endued
with great learning, and wisdom, yet being well assured that whatsoever it
be, you will acceptablely receive it, and conster it to the best, I will not
fail either by that or any other mean I may, at all times to manifest my good
meaning unto you, and the willing mind I have to do you good, so far forth
as my weak wit and small habillitye can reach unto. It is not at al to be
doubted, but y^ miseries that rain in this wretched world are very many, and
very great, but as they are necessary means to make us know our selves, and
acknowledge the weakness of our human nature, so should we patiently
tolerate the troublesome toils and cormentes thereof, as it is the part of a
wise and well disposed person always to do.

What though you be now forbidden the court whereyou have long time liude in
great estimation* will you therefore so vnmeasurably vex and torment your self?
as though your sorrow should never take end. It were no doubt a thing clean
contrary to your wisdom and gravity, and would be a great disgrace to your
noble nature, and the haughtiness of your liberal heart, to be found unable by
the rule of reason to resist the fierce assaults of froward Fortune: For as in
time of prosperity you governed your self with great modesty, so should you
now that the contrary is happened, be armed with as great patience to sustain
the senister and sorrowful events that this wretched world renders unto all
them that therein have their abiding. Assure your self that those of your
friends which now remain in the court, are well contented that you have so
forsaken it, without hope ever to return again, not because they are
willing to want your company, for that is the thing they cheefely covet, but
because they know the misery of that place to be such, as it should rather
be shunted, then sought for by all those that love to lead a quiet and
peaceable life.

And I am well assured, that if you had the power to enter into the hearts of
men to search their secret thoughts you should find those of the Court
accompanied with such continual cares, frighted with such fearful fancies,
and fraught with such follyes, subject to so many dangerous discommodities and
perplexed with such strange and perrillous passions, as you your self since
your departure from the Court never assayed the like, but would be foreed to
confess that their greefes do far surmount your own.

Now by how much more grievous and difficult it is to see then to hear those
things that molest the mind if by means of the miseries and callamities of
this wretched world, which so greatly disturbeth the quiet state of all earthly
creatures, you suppose one place more painful and troublesome to continue in
then an other, by so much should you think the same to be in the Court rather
then any where else: for surely so it is, as your self know right well, what
semblaunce soever you seem to make to the contrary. But you wright sometime
like a Gnato enforced of necessitye either to praise that which is praise
worthy, or to do that which is not desent, but deserving great blame: both
which are clean contrary to your natural inclination. Such is the
wretchedness of our age, that every one esteems his own estate to be most
miserable, what though men dispoyle you of those transitory riches which
Fortune sometime gave you in great abundance, yet can they not bereave you of
that rare and renowned riches, to wete, the excellent virtues of the mind,
which God and Nature has so graciously grafted in you from the beginning, as
they cannot by any means be altered or changed but do continually grow and
increase in you, and are sufficient though all things else were wanting, for
a heart conducted by honor, and governed by reason, to live well and happily
withal.

Thus much have I thought good to write unto you to make proof of your
wisdom, to the end she should again receive into her hands the reine of
reason, which she had of late let slip, whereby you were driven for want of
her good guiding to wander out of the right way, which you have so long
indueoured to follow. I pray you wright oftener unto me, but let your letters
contain more mirth, then those that heretofore you have sent me, to the end
that I may find for my satisfaction that my words were of the force to remove
from you al careful cogitations, and fill your mind with joy and gladness,
praying the Almighty to grant you your health and hearts desire in all things.


Finis.
A young Gentleman whose love was hindered by falce reports, wrighteth to his
Lady that had promised her good will, so her friends would agree unto it.
THe poor wearied Traueyler that after long sailing the Seas in no small
danger, and at the last attaineth to the wished Haven, is blown back again
and brought into greater perrils then before, may most easily judge the
greatness of my greefes, who being raised to the top of all felicity by the
favor I found at your friendly hands for furtheraunce of my desired comfort,
I am now by mine own evil desteny and the malice of malicious makebates,
who more respecting their own private profit then honest reputation, the
rather to prefer those that they like better of, have raised such slanderous
reports against me, utterly void of truth, as have moved them to mislyke,
that of late liked well of me, whereby I am driven into such dangerous doubts,
as if your good nature (which I know cannot conceive any ill of them that
deserve well) did not somewhat relieve me, all hope of comfort would quickly
die in me, and my cares so greatly abound, as my heart should never be able to
harbor such joy as is meet for my young years.

Your mother as I hear, is so incensed against me, as not withstanding the
many reasons alleged, and plain profes made to the contrary, she will not
revoke that evil opinyon which the false perswations of lewd persons has
caused her unjustly to conceive of me, but let her or any other think of me
what they list, so long as I know my self clear of crime, and may be assured
of your favor I care not it all the world were bent against me, for as you are
the first that ever my fancy could frame to like of, so I assure you, if my
faithful meaning find not good effect courtesy, which was so greatly
commended, hoping that at the least, you will afoord me a friendly answer,
though I fail of that which may better concent me, I know there be many of
greater wealth that you may match withal if you will, but I am certain that
if you should seek through out the whole world it were not possible for you
to find one that would so well account of you, or be more careful for your
commodity then I would be, if it might be my good hap to enjoy you, with
whom you might be assured to lead a more quiet and better contented life, then
with one whose parents has left him a large patrimony, of evil gotten goods,
which is commonly as ill spent. And therefore if there be in me that may
content you, or it your fancy can frame to like of me as I am, let me find
it by your friendly answer, which I will expect with assured hope to find it
in all things agreeable to my good desires, that greatly covet to be
accoumpted.

Wholly yours, or not to be at all.


Finis.
Seigneor Francisco Vergelis, for a fair ambling gelding, suffered one Seigneor
Richardo Magniffico to talk with his wife, who gave him no answer at all, but
he aunswering for her, in such sort as if she her self had spoken it, according
to the effect of his words, it came afterward to pass.
MAny there are that conceive so well of themselves, as in respect of their
own wisdom and knowledge, they think all other men to be but fools, and
void of understanding, and yet my oftentimes see, (...) those five headed
follows whilst they ^^deuour by their subtle devises, to deceive others, are
in the end most deceived themselves.

And therefore many opinyon he is worthy much blame, that goes about by such
indirect means, to make more narrow (...) of other men's wits thru is(...). And
for more perfect proof of their folly, you shall hear what happened to a
Knight of Pistoy, upon the like occasion.

In the City of Pistoy hard by Florence, there was sometime amongst the
famely of the Vergelesies, a Knight called Fransisco, a man very rich, wise,
and well experimented in many matters, but there withal beyond all measure
covetous. He having occasion to go to Millan to be Potentate there, was
provided of all things fit for his purpose, and agreeable to the honorable
estate he was called unto, save only of an (...)ling Selding, for himself to
ride upon, and could get (...) to his contentmence, but that he always
thought the price to great that he should pay for it. There was the same time
in Pistoy a young man named Richardo, decended of a base pare^tage, but yet very
rich who for the neatness and bravery that he used in his apparel, was of
every man commonly called Magniffico, and had of long time loved, and diverse
times courted (without any comfort of that he craved) the wife of Seigneor
Fransisco, that was exceeding fair, and withal very honest.

Now it so happened, that this Magniffico had the fairest ambling gelding in
all Tuscan, which for the bewtye and goodness of it, he highly esteemed: And
being manifestlye known, throughout the city, that he was enamoured of the
said Lady, there was some that told Seigneor Fransisco yt if he would request
it in gift, he might easily obtain it for the love he bare unto his wife.
Seigneor Fransisco burning with auirice, sent to seek Magniffico, and
requested to buy his Horse, to the end he should offer to give it him.
Magniffico hearing this, was very well pleased, and answered: Sir if you would
give me all that ever you (...) world I would not sell him, but yet you may
have him in gift if you please, upon the condition, that before you have him.
^^uay with your lean, and in your presence (...) to your wi(...)so far from
you, that none may (...) only she, Seigneor Fransisco being led by covetousness,
and hoping to delude Magniffico, answered that he was very welcontent
whensoever he would, and having left him in the hall, he went to his wives
Chamber and cold her how easilye he might obtain the ambling Gelding,
commanding her to come and hear what Magniffico would say, but not to answer
him to any thing that he should allege unto her. The Lady misliked much of
this practice, but yet being bound to obey her husbands mind, she promised to
do it, and followed him into the Hall, to hear what Magniffico would say.

Who having again confyrmed the couenaunte, made with her husband, set
himself down by her, in one of the Corners of the hall, far enough from any
body, and began to say in this manner.

Madame, I know your wisdom to be such, as I am well assured, you have long
since plainly perceived how great the love is, that your bewty (which passes
without comparison all other that ever I saw) has constrained me to bear
unto you, I leave to speak of the commendable quallities and rare virtues that
remain in you, which have power to vanquish the most hawty heart in the whole
world, wherefore it is not needful by words to declare unto you, that the
love I bear you, is far greater and more fervent, then ever man bare to any
other woman living, whereby I am almost brought to that pass, that my
miserable life is scarcely able to sustain my poor weakened members, and yet
dare I be bold to say more unto you, that if it be lawful for men to love
when they are dead, as they may do being alive, I will love you for ever.

And therefore you may well assure your self, that you have nothing
whatsoever it be, either dear or good cheap that you may so well esteem your
own, or make so sure accoumpt of, as of me, and of that I may be, and
semblably of all that ever I enjoy, and to the end you may be the more certain
of that I say, I assure you I should accoumpt it for a singular favor that you
would vonchsafe to command me any thing that I am able any way to perform,
and may be agreeable to your good liking, for whatsoever it were, though all
the world should say and swear the contrary I would surely put it in practice.

Now Madame being so much your own, as you hear I am, I take boldness (not
without great reason) to address my prayers to your highness, on whom
only, and on none other, my rest wealth and safety wholly depends, and as
your most humble servant, I humbly beseech you, my dearest good and ye only
hope of my love, which nourishes it self in the amourous fire, hoping in you,
that your good will shall be great, and your rigor (which you have of long
time extended toward me that am your own,) so mollified, that feeling my
self recomforted by your compassion, I may say that as by your be wit I
became amourous, so do I thereby also enjoy the life (which if your hauty heart
incline not to my prayers) would without doubt be in such sort consumed, as I
should shortelye dye, and so might you be called and accoumpted the Murderer
of me, and yet should my death be no honor at al unto you, notwithstanding I
believe that when at any time, the same should come to your hearing, you
would say to your self.

Alas what evil have I done, in not having compassyon of my Magniffico, and
being then to late to repent you of any thing that is past, it will be unto
you an occasion of very great grief. Wherefore to the end that it come not so
to pass, have now some compassion upon me, and before I be past remedy,
render me that which may releue me, for in you only does it rest to make me
the most contented, or most discoutented Creatureliuing, hoping always that
your curtesy shall be so great, as you will not suffer me to receive death, for
recompense of such and so great good will, as I bear unto you, but will with
a joyful and gracious answer, recomforte my pore sprightes which altogether
overcome with fear, do tremble at your presence.

Then Magniffico making an end, and having shed some tears, after many
grievous sighs, he began to harken what the Lady would answer, now she whom
neither the long suits made unto her, the Iustes and Turneyes, nor lost time,
or any such like thing which Magniffico had done, for the love of herre, had
never before moved any thing at all to love him, was now moved thereunto by
the effectual words uttered by her most feruente Lover, and began to feel
that which she had never felt before, and judged this to proceed only of love,
and though to fulfill the charge that her husband had given her, she held her
peace, notwithstanding by the secret sighs which she sent forth it might
easilye be coniectured what answer she would willingly have made to her
beloved Magniffico, if she might.

He having a while attended her answer, and perceiving that she answered
nothing at all, greatly mernailed, and began to perceive the deceipte and
subtlety of her husband, but yet in regarding her countinance and perceiving
some glaunces of her eyes cast upon him, and besides that, remembering the
sighs which she sent forth from the bottom of her heart, he received some
good hope, And building herevppon bethought himself, and then began to
answer her, as though she her self had said, in this manner.

Friend Magniffico, I did long since surmise that thy love toward me was very
great and perfect, and now am more certain of it by thy words, which are of
far greater force wherewith I am as well contented as may be, notwithstanding
if it seem unto thee, that I have hitherto been hard and cruel unto thee, yet
would I not have thee to think that my heart has been such as my
countinance has showed me to be, but rather y^ I have loved and held thee more
dear then any other, but it was meet I should for y^ time conceal it, as
well for fear of others, as to keep my good name unspotted, but now the time
comes, that I may make thee more plainly to understand whether I love thee
or no, and give thee a meet guerdon for the love which thou, have so long
borne unto me. Wherefore comfort thy self, and have good hope, for Seigne or
Fransisco must go within these few days, as Potentate to Millan (as thou thy
self know) when thou for my sake have given him thy good ambling Gelding,
and so soon as he is gone, thou shall be most welcome unto me, and we will then
give full accomplishment to our love, and therefore have regard from
henceforth, when thou find two, Kerchefes hanging out of my chamber window
over the garden; and then in the Evening, when it is somewhat dark, repair
thou unto me, by the garden door, having good regard that no body see thee, and
there thou shall find me ready to receive thee, then will we take our pleasure
together, all the whole night, and make as great cheer as we may.

When Magniffico had in the person of the Lady spoken all this; he began to
answer for himself and said.

Dear Lady, my spirits are so much occupied by the aboundaunt joy that I
conceive by your words, that I can hardlye frame an answer or utter any
thing, to give you condign thanks for the same, and if I could, yet should I
not find sufficient time to gratify your good will as I desire, and as it is
mere I should, and therefore I beseech you, that what soever I desire to do,
(and cannot by words declare it) you will vouchsafe to conceive the same in
your mind. Only I assure you, that without fault I will perform your charge,
and order all my actions according to your good direction, and when meet
opportunity shall serve me, to receive the favor which you have so freely
promised, I will enforce my self in all I may, to yield you the greatest thanks
that I am able. And now having no more to say unto you at this present,
wishing you such joy and welfare as your heart desires, I commit you to God.

For all this the Lady answered not a word wherefore Magniffico rise and began
to return toward her husband who seeing him up, went to meet him, and said
O sir, what think you now? have I kept promise with you? No Sir answered
Magniffico, for you promised me that I should talk with your wife, and you have
made me to speak with an Image of stone.

This answer greatly pleased Seigneor Fransisco, who although he had a good
opinion of his wife before, yet now he thought better of her then ever he did,
and said: but yet the ambling gelding that was yours, is now mine. Whereunto
Magniffico answered: yea sir, but if I had thought to reap no better Fruit
then this, by the favor I found at your hands, without demanding the same, I
would freely have given you my Gelding.

And would to God I had done so in deed, for then had I not in selling him,
bought mine own sorrow, nor in seeking safety, lost my former liberty.

Seigne or Fransisco laughed heartily at this answer, and seeing himself so well
provided of an ambler, shortly after set forward on his journey toward Millan.

The Lady then remaining in her house all alone, thinking upon the words that
Magniffico had before time used unto her, remembering his love, and how he had
for her sake, given her Husband his good ambling Gelding, seeing also the said
Magniffico diverse times to pass to and fro before her door, she said unto her
self.

What shall I do? wherefore should I lose my youth? my hand is (...) to
Millan, and will not return again these six mouths; and when will he ever
be able to pay his arerages, what when I am old and care not for it? besides
that; when shall I ever find such a friend as Magniffico? I am now alone, and
in fear of no body, and if it were known, yet is it better to do it; and
afterward to repent me, then not to do it, and to be sorrye that I did it not.

And having thus debated with her self, in the end determining to take the time
whilst it served, she hanged one day two Kerchefes out at the Garden window,
which Magniffico perceiving (being very glad of it) he wet all secretly so
soon as the night was come, to the garden door and found it open, and from
thence went to an other door which was at the entrance of the house, where he
meet with the Lady that attended his coming, who seeing him come, rise up, and
went to meet him, and received him with great joy, he having kissed and
imbrased he a hundred times, followed her up the stayres into her chamber,
where bing arrived, they went by and by to bed together and then they knew the
fynall end of their love. And although this were the first time, yet was it
not the last. For whilst Seigneor Fransisco was at Millan, and also after his
return, Magniffico, frequented the house, to the great comfort and
contentment of them both.


Finis.
Theodore enamoured of Master Emories daughter, that was his Master, got her
with child, for the which he was condemned to be hanged, and as he was whipped
through the Streets to the place of execution, being known to his Father he
procured his pardon, and so Thodore married the maid whom he had before de
flowred.
Whereby is signified the diverse dangerous and troublesome accidents that
dayelye happen unto us, by the power of love, and frailty of fortune the only
tormenters of man's life.
AT what time the good King William governed Sicille, there was dwelling within
his dominions a young Gentleman, named Myster Emery the Abbot of Trappani, who
(amongst other wordly goo(...) where with God had (inducd him) had many fair
children, wherefore having great need of Servants, as he came from the east
parts, certain Galleys of Genouiah Pirates, who in costing Armenia, had taken
diverse young children, whom they meant to make money of, being aryued in the
Country of Leuant at the same time that he passed through it, he bought
certain of them, thinking they had been Infidels, amongst whom though the
rest seemed to be but Sheapheardes, there was one that appeared to be proceeded
of a higher progenye, and to be of more estimations, whose name highte.
Theodore, who bring grown to man's state, (though he were used as a Slave,) was
notwithstanding brought up, and nourished with master Emeries own Children,
and inclining more to his natural disposition then to his present Fortune, he
began to be very courteous, and well condicioned, whereby he so much pleased
master Emery as he made him free, and for that he thought him to be an
Infidel, caused him to be baptized, and named him Peter. And so good affiaunce
he had in him, that shortly after, he committed to his charge all his most
weighty affairs.

Now as Master Emeries Children incresed, amongst the rest, a daughter of his
waring very fair and dellicat, after she had long remained unmarried, seeing her
parents so slow in bestowing her, at the last she fell very far in love with
Peter her fathers man: and as she esteemed him greatly, and took delight in all
his doings, so was she determined (if shame had not withheld her) to give him
understanding of it. But love eased her of that pain: For Peter having thereby
conceived some secret hope, became so enamoured of her, as he never thought
himself well without her company, notwithstanding he was still in great
fear least some body should perceive it, thinking that therein he did amiss.

The Maid that easily perceived his inward meaning, the better to imbolden
him, made semblance unto him (as it was true in deed,) that she allowed of his
love, and was well contented with it.

And in these terms either of them remained long time without daring to say
any thing ye one to the other, though they both desired it very earnestly. But
whilst they equally consumed in this amourous flame, Fortune (as if she had
willed that which came to pass) found out a way to expel the fear, that so
greatly hindered them. Which was, that Master Emery had not far from the town
of Trappani, a very fair house, whereunto his wife, with his Daughter and
diverse other their friends and familliers, resorted often times to pass the
time, and make merrye together, and one day amongst the rest, Peter being with
her, after they had re mayned there a while, it happened, (as diverse times it
does in the summer season) that the wether ouercast, wherefore the Gentlewoman
and her company, (because the storm should not take them there) prepared them
selves with all speed to return to Trappany. But Peter and Violenta that
were young and lusty (peradventure no less pricked forward by love, then for
fear of the foul wether) so far out rid all the rest of their company, that
they were clean out of sight, after a little thunder, there came suddenly a
great Dayle, and withal a foul foggy miste, which caused the old Gentlewoman
and all her company to go back again with a Pessant of the country. But
Peter and the maid having none other refuge, but an old ruinate house, that
was almost al fallen to the ground, where no body inhabited, they were forced to
enter into it, and there under a small conerture, that was yet remaining, they
closely couched themselves, to defend the storm, which close couching was an
occasion more fyrmely to unite their hearts, and also the time and place aptly
serving them to discover their amourous passions. Peter gave the first onset,
and said:

Mistress Violenta I would to God that it would never leave hayling, and that
I might still continue in this estate.

Whereunto Violenta replied: Surely so would I, and then taking each other by
the hand, and afterward imbrasing and sweetelye kissing (the Storm still
continuing) before they departed from thence they inioyed the final fruition
of their unfeigned affection, determining after that more often to take their
pleasure together.

At the last the storm ceased, and then they went to the next town, where
they attended the coming of the rest of their company, that they might go
home altogether, and after this, diverse times in a wise and secret manner,
they excercised their love, and so applied their business, that Violenta grew
big, which greatly disliked either of them, wherefore she used all the means
she might, to find remedy for it, but it prevailed not.

And therefore Peter fearing to lose his life, determined to take his flight,
and told her of it, which Violenta hearing, swear unto him yt if he went away,
she would slay her self. Then Peter that loved her exceeding well said unto her.
Alas my dear, why would thou have me tarry, thy greatness will discover our
offense, which being known, thou may easily procure thy pardon, but I poor
wretth shall abide the punishment both for thy offense and mine own^ whereunto
Violenta answered, Peter my of fence must needs be known in deed, but as for
thine, assure thy self (if thou bewray it not) it shall never be known to any
Seeing you promise me so (said Peter,) I will tarry, but take heed you keep
promise with me. Violenta that had covered her^ crime so much as she might,
perceiving yt her belly grue so big as she could no longer hide it,
Discovered the same one day to her mother (weping vitterly) and besought her to
save her life, her mother grieved hereat beyond measure, and with a thousand
threatenings demanding who was the author of it, Violenta to the end that Peter
should receive no hurt thereby, fained an excuse altogether contrary to ye
truth, which her mother believed, and to cover her daughters fault, sent her to
a house that she had in the country, being there when the time was come yt she
should be brought a bed (crying as women use to do) and her mother not thinking
that master Emery (who sildom used to pass that way) would then come thither,
it happened that as he returned from hunting, and passed along by ye chamber
where Violenta remained, he suddenly entered in, maruatling to here her cry in
that manner, and demanded what the matter was. His wife seeing him there, rise
up in great gree foes and told him all that was happened to their daughter,
but her (not so excudulous as his wife) said it was not possible she should be
in that case, and not know who was the author of it, and therefore would
understand the truth, for so (said he) she may peradventure purchase my
fa(...), where otherwise, she must make account to dye without pity. His wife
fought all he means she might, to satisfy her husband with that which her
daughter had said, (...) all her persuasions prevailed not, for running
furiously with his naked sword in his hand to his daughter (who whilste her
mother held him in talk,) brought forth her child, and said unto her. Tell me
who is the father of this child, or else thou shall presently die. His daughter
dreading death, brake the promise which she made unto Peter, and told him how
it happened, Master Emery hearing it, became so desperate through extreme
anger, that he could hardly withhold his hands from killing her.

But after he had said that which choler constrained him to speak, he
took his horse, and rid to Trappany.

And having recounted all the injury that Peter had done him, to one Master
Conrade, that was Liefetenant for the King in the same Town, he sodaynely e
caused Peter to be taken, before he doubted it, and examining him of the
matter, he confessed all that was done. And being within a few days after
condemned by the liefetenant, to be whipped through the Town, and afterward
hanged.

Master Emery (to the end to rid the world at one instaunt of the two poor
Lovers, and their sillye infant) not having yet appeased his his wrath, by the
death of Peter, which he had so procured, he put poison into a cup of wine,
and deliuerd it to a servant of his whom he most trusted, and withal a naked
Sword, saying.

Go thy ways with these to Violenta and will her in my name to chose one of
these two deaths, either of poison or of the Sword, if not, I will cause her
to be burnt, in the face of the world, as she has well deserved, and when
thou haste so done, take the brat^e that she has brought forth, and having
dashed out his brains against the wall, cast him out to be devoured of Dogs.

When he had given this cruel Sentence against his Daughter, and his little
Nephew, the Servant more apt to do ill then good, went to the place where
Violenta remained.

Peter being condemned as you have hard, was drawn and whipped toward the
gallows, and so passing forward (as it pleased the^, yt were the ministers of
justice) over against an Inn, where at the same time were lodged three great
personages of Armenia whom the King of that country had sent to Rome as
Ambassadors to the Pope, about certain necessary affairs, for a voyage that
he had in hand, and being come thither to refresh and repose themselves for
certain days and greatly honored of all the gentlemen of Trappany, and
especially of Master Emery.

These Embassadoures hearing them to pass by, that led Peter, came to the
window to see what was the matter.

Peter that was all naked from the girdle upward, with his hands bound behind
him, being dilligentlye marked by one of them, that was a man of good years,
and great authority, named Phinec his blood began to rise through a certain
natural motion that he felt within himself, which perceiving he remembered him
of his only son that about. xv. years before was taken from him by
certain Rouers, on the sea cost of Iasa of whom since that time he never had
hard tidinges, and considering the age of the pore unhappy wretch, whom they
whipped, he advised him that if his son were living he should be of the
age that he seemed to be, wherefore seeing his bosom, he began to suspec^e that
it was his son, and thinking that if it were he, he would yet have some
remembrance of his own name and his Fathers, and of the Armenian tongue.

wherefore when he was over against him, he called him by the name of Theodore
which Peter hearing, by and by lift up his head, and then phinee speaking to
him in the Armenian tongue, said.

Of whence and whose son art thou? The Sergeaunts that led him, stayed in
reverence of the Ambassadoures, so that Peter answered, I am of Arminia, the
son of one named Phinee, and was brought hither by certain people. I know
not of what country.

Which Phinee hearing knew certainly that it was his son whom he had lost,
wherefore weeping, he came down with his companyons, and ran to embrace him,
amongst all the Sergeauntes, and having cast over his shoulders a ritche
mantle that he bore about him, requested them that led him to let him lose, and
stay the execution, till they heard further of the matter, whereunto they
willingly accorded, and led him back again to the place from whence he came.

Now had Phinee by this time knowledge of the cause, for the which theyled him
in this sort to hanging, by the speech of the people, wherefore he went
incontinentlye with his Companions and servants, to master Conrade, and said
unto him.

Sir, he whom you send to be executed as a Slave, is a free man, and my
son, and is ready to take to his wife, her whom they say he has deflowred,
may it therefore please you to remit the execution, till it be known whether
she will have him to her husband, to the end it be not found (if she he
content) that you have transgressed the Law.

Master Conrade hearing that he was the son of this Ambassador, maruailed
greatly, and imputing great fault to Fortune, confessed that which Phinee had
said, to be most truet So he returned incontinently to his house, and sent
one with all speed, to seek Master Emery, and to tell him all that was
happened, master Emery, that thought his Daughter and her young son were
alredye dead, was the heauiest man in the world, for that which he had done,
knowing well that if she were not dead, all that was amiss might now be amended,
wherefore he sent with all speed to the place where his Daughter remained, to
the end that if they had not fulfilled his commandment they should not do it
at all, he that went thither, found the servant that master Emery had sent
thither, who having set the sword and poison before his Daughter, because she
made no have to take the one nor the other, used many threatenings against her,
and would have constrained her to take one of them.

But when he heard the commaundment of his master, he let her alone, and
retourning unto him, told him how the case stood.

Master Emery very well contented with it, went to the Ambassador Phinee,
and weeping, excused himself so well as he could for that which was happened,
requyring pardon at his hands, and promising him that if Theodore would take
her to his wife, he was right well content to bestow her upon him.

Phinee willingly excepted of his excuses, and answered.

It is my will and intent that my Sun take your Daughter: and if he will
not, I am content the sentence pronounced against him, be put in execution:
Phinee and master Emery being agreede, they went together to seek Theodore,
at the place where he was, yet fearful of death, and joyful that he had
found his father, who asked him what he was determined to do in this matter.

Theodore hearing that Violenta should be his wife if he would, his joy was so
great, that he thought he leaped out of Hell into Paradise. And said, he would
think himself right happy to have it so.

They sent likewise to Violenta to know her intent, who hearing that which
was happened to Theodore, and what should come to pass, where before she was the
heauiest Creature living only expecting death, after many doubts, in the end
giving confidence to that which they told her, she received some comfort,
and answered, that if she might obtain her desire in this behalf, there
could not happen a thing that would more content her, then to be the wife of
Theodore.

But notwithstanding, she said she would do that which her father had
commanded her, if so it pleased him, when this match was thus agreede upon
on all sides, master Emery made a sumptious feast, to the great contentment
of the whole City.

The young wife comforting herself and causing her young child to be nourished,
became shortly after more fresh and fair then ever she was. And when Phinee
returned again from Rome, she used such reverence toward him as apperteined
to her Father, and he being very well concent to have so fair and honest a
Daughter, having celebrated the Nuptials with great cheer and feasting, he
received her for his Daughter, and ever after so accoumpted her, and within a
few days after, he, his son, his fair Daughter, and his little Nephew
took shipping and sailed to Laiazze where the two Lovers remained so long as
they lived in peace and quietness.

Finis.
One named Salard, departing from Genes, came to Montferat where he
transgressed three commandments that his Father gave him by his last will
and Testamente, and being condemned to dye, was delivered, and returned again
into his own country.
Right happy and blessed is that child which with dutiful reverence,
shows himself obedient to his Parents, For in so doing, he fulfilleth the
commandment that God has given him, and shall therefore live long upon the
earth, having good success in all his affairs, where contrariwise, the
disobedient child, is always accoumpted miserable, and most unhappy, for
commonly his enterprises have an euel and wicked end, as you may easily
perceive by this fable following.

In Genes (which is a very ancient City, and possibly as full of pleasant
delights as any other) there was dwelling not long since a Gentleman named
Renaulde Scaille, a man truly no less abundant in the gifts of fortune, then
in the graces of the mind: moreover (being so rich and learned as he was) he
had a son named Salard, whom he loved most intyrely. Wherefore like a good
and loving Father: he instructed and taught him, not suffering him to want any
thing that was profitable or praise worthy for him.

Now it happened that Renauld being well stricken in years, fell into a great
and grievous mallady, and perceiving himself to be at the point of death, sent
for a Scriuener to make his will, whereby he constituted Salard for his heir,
praying him as a good father, to observe three commandments which he
prescribed unto him, without ever transgressing them.

The first was, that for any love that he bare to his wife he should never
reveal his secrets unto her.

The second was, that he should not nourish and bring up as his child, or take
for his heir one that was not of his own issue.

The third was, that he should never subject himself to any Lord that
governed his country after his own mind.

This done, having blessed him, he turned his head toward the Wall, and
shortly after yielded up the Ghost.

Now Salard, that after his Fathers death, remained sole inheritour of all his
goods and possessions, perceiving himself to be young, rich, and of a good
progeny (whereas he should have wholly applied himself to consider of his
fathers commandments, and the weighty affairs which were fallen unto him by
the new possession of his patrimony) he determined to take a wife, and such a
one, and of such a famely as should well content him. So well he applied his
business, and followed the matter so effectually, that ere one whole year was
fully expired after his fathers decease, he matched himself with one
Theodore, Daughter to one master Odescale Doria, a Gentleman of Genes, and one
of the chief in all the city.

This Gentlewoman being fair, and very well favored, though she were somewhat
shrewish, was so well beloved of her husband, as neither by day nor night he
could well abide to be out of her company. When they had continued a while
together, without having any issue at all between them, Salard with his wives
consent, was minded to chose some one for his child Adoptiue, contrary to the
will and commandment of his father, purposing to bring it up as his own, and
according to that his determination, presently putting the matter in execution,
he chose for his child adoptiue, a young gyrle named postume that was Daughter
to a poor widdowe, dwelling in the same City, whom they brought up,
somewhat more wantonly then well besee men.

Shortly after, Salard determined to depart from Genes, and to inhabit in some
other soil, not because he had any disliking of the place (for there was no
reason he should, having there no want of any thing that was meet for his
degree or agreeable with his mind) but was moved thereunto by a desire of
change, which is commonly incident to all those that be at their own
liberty, and not subject to any superior wherefore having gotten a good
Purse of Money, with Jewels and other great riches, being also well furnished
with Horse and Armoure, he departed from Genes with his wife Theodore, and his
adouted Daughter Postume, and passing toward Piemont, at the last he arrived
at Montferat where he was honorably received of the inhabitauntes, and there
in short time growing in acquaintance with diverse, he often times rid on
hunting with the towns men and citizens, using with them diverse other
excersices, wherein he took delight. So that his magnificence being well
known throughout the whole Littie, he was not only beloved of the common
sort, but also greatly esteemed and honored amongst the cheifest, which
coming to the ears of the Marquis, that governed those parts, he desired to
be acquainted with him, and perceiving that he was young, rich, noblye borne,
wise and apt to all things, he began to bear so great affection toward
him, as he could not suffer him one whole day together to he out of his
company.

To be short, so great was the love of the Marquis toward Salard at he would
never vouchsafe his favor to any man, unless his suit were first preferred by
him. wherefore Salard, seeing himself in so great credit with him, sought all
means possible to please him, in doing that which might be most to his liking.

The Marquis that was but young, took great pleasure in Hawking and to hunte
wild Beasts, for which cause as it appertained to the degree of so great a
Lord, he kept continuallye great store of Hawks and Hounds, and would
never go abroad but he would have Salarde with him.

It happened one day about the rest, that Salard being alone in his chamber,
began to think of the great honor that the Marquis had done unto him. Then he
began to consider the good graces, honest behavior and good manners of his
adobtiue daughter Postume, and how obedient she was to him and his wife at al
assayes, and in this sort discoursing with himself he said.

Was not my Father greatly deceived? surely I holeeue he doted, as commonly all
old men do. I know not whether it were through follye or madness that he did
with such instance expressly command me not to bring up a child that was not
of mine own issue, nor to subject my self to will of a Lord that governs
his Subjects after his own fancy.

Now do I plainly perceive that all his commandments were utterly void
of truth: For Postume that is my adopted Daughter, and not of mine own issue,
is so good a child, so witty, gentle, well borne, and obedient, as may be
required.

Besides that, is it possible that I should any where be better beloved then
I am of the Marquis: It is certain that in these parts he has no superioure,
neither is there any his equal and yet the love he bears me, and the honor
that daily he does unto me, is so great, that it is commonly said I am his
governor, whereat I have great meruale.

There are many doting old men, who having utterly forgotten what they
themselves were in their youth, would prescribe new Laws and ordinances to
their Children, and all in vain do trouble their heads to bring them to that
which they themselves never observed. whereunto they are not moved, for any love
that they be are unto them, but only to trouble them long time with the
observation of such things as are to no purpose. But seeing in two of those
points which my Father prescribed unto me (contrary to my expectation) I have
had so good success, I mind ear long to make trial of the third, though it
be nothing needful, for I am well assured that my sweet wife, and friendly
companion, will soon confirm the same by her hearty good will, and loyalty
toward me.

Then shall she, whom I more esteem then the Apple of my epe, gene the world
plainly to understand, with what great folly these old men be commonly
infected, that add to their will such ridiculous conditions. Now may I well
suppose that my father when he made his will was deprived of his right sense,
and that as a witless old man, and one void of al good judgment, hedid the
deeds of a child.

In whom may I better have confidence, then in mine own wife, that has
forsaken her Father, her mother, her brethren, her Sisters, and her own
famely, to be made one only soul and one only heart with me, so ye I may
safely reveal my secrets unto her of what importance soueuer they be: I will
then make proof of her loyalty, not for that I do any thing misdoubt her,
(being well assured that she loves me more then her self) but to follow
therein the custom of other young men that do fondly suppose it to be a very
foul offense, to break the lewd and beastlye ordinances of their parents,
which do continually run into some foolish fransie, as men that are beside
themselves.

Thus Salard with himself deriding his fathers wise and profitable precepts,
purposed to break the third, and thereupon, departing from his own house,
went straight to the Marquis Palace, and going to the place where his Hawks
were kept, he took the best of them, and that which the Marquis made most
account of, from the perch, where it stood, and secretly conuayde it to the
house of a dear friend of his named master Frauncis, and presented the same
unto him, praying him of all loves to keep it, until such time as he did
further understand his mind, and then retourning home again, he secretlye sine
one of his own Hawks, and carried it to his wife saying unto her in this
manner. By well-beloved Theodore I cannot as you may well perceive, have one
hour of rest for the Marquis. For be he a hunting hawking, excercising feats
of arms, or using any other exploit, he always keeps me occupied with one
thing or other, in so much as I am often in the case that I know not well
whither I be dead or alive, wherefore to prevent our daily exercise in
hawking. I have played him such a pranke, as when he knows of it, will not
very well content him, and peradventure it may be a mean to make him keep at
home for a while, and so shall we take our ease together. Then said his wise,
what have you done unto him? he answered, I have slain the best and most
beloved hawke that he had, and I believe when he misseth it, and can hear no
ridinges of it, he will die for anger and despite, and therewith pulling out
the dead hawke from under his cloak, he delivered it unto his wife, charging
her to cause it to be dressed, saying: that he would feed upon it for the
Marquis sake. Theodore hering her husbands words, and seeing the dead hawke,
made great moan, and turning toward him, began to reprove him for the offense
he had committed, I marvel (quoth. she) how you could find in your heart to
commit such a trespass against my Lord Marquis that bears you so great good
will, he has always been ready to pleasure you in any thing yt you would
require of him, appointing you alwais the place next to his own person: Alas
husband you have hereby wrought our utter ruin. It by il hap the Marquis have
the least inkeling in the world that you have done this e(...)l deed, what
shall become of you, surely you shall be in great danger of death where unto
Salard replied, how should the Marquis have understanding of it. There is none
but only you and I that kneweth it, wherefore I pray you for the love that
you always have borne, and yet do bear unto me, that you will not in any
wise reveal it, for if you do, it will be an utter undoing to us both.

Doubt you not of that (said she) For I had rather dye a thousand death then
open such a secret. when ye hawke was dressed and ready to be eaten, Salard and
Theodore seite them down together at the table, but Theodore notwithstanding
that he requesting her very earnestly would not eat one morsel of it,
wherefore perceiving how small accoumpt she made of his words, as one
thoroughly angered, he gave her so great a blow on the face with his fist, yt her
cheek waxed very red withal, which she taking most greeuouslye fell
straighte on weeping, and complained greatly of his hard dealing with her. And
then rising from the table in a furye, m^^bling the Devils Pater noster,
threatened him, and said, she would remember that injury all the days of her
life, and would be sufficiently revenged both of the time and place.

The next morning rising before her ordinarye hour, without longer lingering
she repaired to the Marquis, telling him from point to point of the death of
his Hawke.

Which when the Marquis heard, being inflamed with fury, not attending what
Salard could says for himself, presently caused him to be apprehended, and
without further consideration of the matter, condemned him to be hanged, and
to lose all his goods, which he willed to be divided in three parts.

whereof the first should remain to his wife for accusing him, the second to
his Daughter, and the third to him that would do the execution upon him.

Now Postume that was grown to be a proper and well favored wench,
understanding what sentence was pronounced against her father (for yt which she
was not greatly grieved) went presently to her mother, and said unto her.

Mother were it not much better that I by doing the execution upon my father,
should gain the third part of his goods, then a stranger. Then her mother
said surely my Daughter this is very well considered of thee, and I would it
were so, for by that means all his goods shall remain unto us two.

Then went Postume to the Marquis and made suit unto him that she might be
suffered to do the erecution upon her father, to the end that (as he had
ordayded) she might thereby be the inheritour to the third part of his
goods, unto which her request, the Marquis willingly accorded. Salard having
now secretly informed his friend Fraunces of the whole matter, entreated him
that when he was at the point to be led to the place of execution there to be
put to Death; he would presently repair to the Marquis and entreat him that
he might be brought before him, and that he would vouchsafe to hear him speak
a few words unto him before he was put to death, which Fraunces when time
served performed accordingly.

In the mean time Salard remaining in Prison with Fetters on his feet,
expecting every hour when he should be led to the place of execution, there
to suffer a shameful and villainous death, weeping bitterlye said unto
himself. Now do I plainly perceive but all to late that my good aged father
with his long experience did council me to nothing but that which might have
been for my health and singular commoditye, if I had well wayed it.

He like a wise and grave person gave me good precepts, and I unhappy and
witles wretch made no accoumpte of them. He commanded me for my ease and
benefiete, to fly from these my domestical ennemies, and I to offer them the
occasion whereby they might bring me to this shameful end, and to make them
conceive great pleasure in the same, have yielded my self unto their
discretion, my father likewise knowing ye nature of Princes to be such, that in
one hour they will both love and loathe, exhault and pull down, counsayled me
to separate myself from them, and I (fool that I am) to be deprived of my
goods, honor, and life, have most unwisely sought after them. O Salard,
Salard, how much better had it been for thee, if thou had followed thy
fathers steps, suffering flatterers and lewd persons to follow the courts of
princes and great Lords. Now see I well to what pass I am like to come, by
trusting to much to my self, my wicked wife, ungracious child, and above all
by to much believing the fained friendship of the ungrateful Marquis. Now do I
certainly know how well he loved me, what might he do worse unto me^surely
nothing, for at one instaunt would he take from me my living, life, and honor,
alas how soon is his great love converted to cruel and bloody hatred. I see
this proverb is not used in vain, that these great Lords are like unto wine in
a Bottle, which is good in ye morning, and naught at night. O unhappy Salard,
to what pas art thou come? where is thy nobillitye? where are thy dear
parents? where is thy great riches? where is thy loyalty? thy good
inclination, and accustomed curtesy, O my loving father, I am sure if you were
alive again to behold me in this place, ready to suffer death, For noue other
offense but only for infringing your fatherlye precepts (through the deed)
deferue far greter punishment the^ this that is now allotted unto me, you would
not only seek and sue to save me from it, but wouldalso heartily pray to God to
have pity upon my youthful sollies, and the offenses where unto only ignorance
has led me, and I for my part, as an unthankful and disobedient child, that
have not regarded your grave and gracious commandments, would most humbly
beseech you to pardon me. whilst Salarde was thus debating and complaining to
himself, his daughter Postume (like a good and well instructed hangman)
repaired to the prison where he was, and there most arrogantly presenting her
self before him, she used these or such like words.

Father for as much as froward fortune has ordained that according to the
sentence which my Lord Maques has pronounced against you, you shall this day
without fail suffer death, and that the third part of your goods is allotted
unto them that shall do the execution upon you, knowing the love that you
bear unto me, I hope you will not be offended, if I take upon me to discharge
that office my self, for in so doing your goods shall not fall into the hands
of strangers, but remain still to those of your own famely, wherewith me
thinks you should be well contented. Salard yt gave attentive ear to his
daughters words answered in this manner, God bless thee my daughter, thy
reasons are very good, and please me right well, and though before I were
unwilling to die, now would I gladly end my life, do then thy office my
daughter, and defer the time no longer, Then Postume craving pardon and
kissing him, took the halter and put it about his neck, exhorting him to take
his death patiently, Salard seeing ye sudden alteration of things, was greatly
astonished, and issuing out of the prison, with his hands bound behind him, and
the halter about his neck, accompanied with the bailey, and all the rest of the
officers, and ministers of justice, he passed with all speed to the place of
execution, and being come thither tourning his back toward the ladder that was
set against the Gibbet, he went leyserlye from step to step till he came
to the top, where with a stout courage and stable countenance, he beheld
the people on every side, declaring treateablye and with great deliberation,
why he was brought thither and then in loving and friendlye mauer, craving
pardon for-al his faults and offenses committed, earnestlye exhorted Children
to be obediente to their Parents and Elders, when the people had hard the
whole cause of Salards condemnation, there was not one in the company but
wept, and greatelye lamented the hard hap of this pore young man, and desired
GOD to give them the grace to take example by him.

Whylste these things were a doing, his friend Frauncis (that was not
unmindful of him,) took his way to the Marquis Pallaice, and having found
fit opportunity, in most humble wise besought him that Salard might be
brought to his presence, to answer for himself, before he were put to
death, assuring him that he was not gilty of the crime for which he had
condemned him, and there upon pleadged his life: So that at the last with much
ado, the Marquis caused Salard to be repriued, and willed he should be brought
unto him with the Haltex about his neck, and the hangman with him, which was
performed accordingly.

So soon as Salard was come into the Marquis presence, whose face was yet in
flamed with furye, he began with a bold courage, and steadfast countenance
(not being any thing troubled in his mind,) to utter these and such like
words.

Sir, the service that I have done you, and the love that I have borne unto
you, has not deserved the outrage and shame that you have done unto me, in
condemning me to dye so shameful and villainous a death. And although the
displeasure that you have taken against my great follye, (if it may be termed
^olly) has provoked you to use such cruelty toward me, contrary to your
natural disposition, yet should you not so suddenly condemn me to death
without hearing me answer in my own behalf, for the Hawke, for the which
you are so much offended, (thinking that it is dead) is yet living, and in as
good case as ever it was.

And think not Sir that I would presume to kill or hurt it by any means, but
this that I have done, was to make try all of certain things that I was
before warned of, as I will manifest unto you.


