THE THEATER OF CATHOLIQVE AND PROTESTANT RELIGION, DIVIDED into Twelve Books.

Wherein The zealous Catholic may plainly see, the manifest truth,
perspicuitie, evident foundations and demonstrations of the Catholic
Religion; Together with the motives and causes, why he should persevere therein.

The Protestant also may easily see, the falsitie and absurdity, of his
irreligious, and negative Religion; Together with many strong and conuincing
reasons, why he is bound to embrace the Catholic faith, and to return again
to the true Church from whence he departed.

WRITTEN By I. C. Student in divinity, With permission, Anno 1620.

MAgni periculi res est, etc. It is a thing of great danger, it after the
oracles of the Prophets, after the testimonies of the Apostles, after the
wounds of the Martyrs, thou presume to discuss our old faith, as if it were
new; if after such expert guides, thou nevertheless wilt remain in error: if
after the combatts of such as did strugle unto death for the defense thereof,
thou will yet oppugn it with idle disputation: let us therefore reuerne^ce our
faith, in the glory of the Saints. S. Ambrosius in sermon de SS. Nazario and
Celso.

TO THE BLESSED and unspotted Virgin Marie, Mother of God, and Queen of
heaven, by whom salvation and redemption, came to the world.
1. BOOKS of greatest estimation and noblest subject (most gracious Virgin)
ought to be dedicated and offered to the noblest and eminentste personages, and
that for two causes; the one to be protected and patronized by them against
malignant and malicious people, to whom the object or matter might be
offensive: the other to gratify them for the benefits received of the^. the
obiecte of this book which is the theater and true representation both of the
Catholic, and protestant religion, being so eminent that it excels and
exceeds all objects whatsoever, ought to be dedicated and consecrated unto
thee most sacred Virgin, being the worthiest creature amongst all mere
Creatures that ever were.

Contraria se posita magis ilucessit.
2. The opposition of two extremities can never be better declared or known,
the^ to oppose the one to the other, as things positive, and things privative,
light and darkness, things contrary, as heat and cold, things
contradictory, or things affirmative and negative, as a man, and noe man:
nothing is so repugnant or hurtful to the Catholic religion, as heresy,
and especially that of the sectaires of our unfortunate days: nothing so
contrary to Christ as Antechriste: nothing so offensive to the Catholic
Church, as the malignant Congregation of Caluinistes and Anabaptists. So as
the truth of the one, cannot be made more apparent, more evident, and more
clear, then by the falshoode of the other: nor the goodness of the one, be
better made known, then by the mischief and evil of the other.

3. Vouchsafe therefore (o gracious virgin and mother of the Savior of the
world) that the truth and goodness of the one, being made known, and the
falshoode and wickedness of the other, being detected: with thy most precious
intercession to thy Son Jesus, to lighten and illuminate the hearts and
understandings of such as are overwhelmed, and ingulfed in the dangerous abisme
of darcknesse, and are gone astraye in the intricat labernith of heresies.
Deliver the^ (o blessed mediatrixe) that do walk awry in the darcknes and
shadow of death. Protecte and defend the Catholic Church (for the saftie of
which, Christ Jesus took flesh of thee, and for the establishing whereof, he
suffered his bitter passion, yealded himself to death, and triumphed over the
powers of darcknesse) from the malice and dangerous purposes, of all such as
bend all their plotts and pollices to destroy her.

4. By whom should the religion of virgins, vows, and votaries be protected
and vpholden, but by her that made the first solemn vow and profession
thereof? To who^ should the religion of Christ be dedicated, but to the mother
of Christ? Or the law of grace be addressed, but unto her that is full of grace?
What better advocate can the Church have, then she who is placed betwixt the
sun and the moon, as S. Bernard says, which is mary betwixt Christ and his
Church? What better defense can there be against heretics, then she (as S.
Bonauenture says) that destroys all heresies? and according to S. Bernard,
omnis haeresunt in^eremptrix, that kills all heresies. Therefore, o blessed
Virgin, Dignare me laudare te Virgo etc. Vouchsafe me to praise thee, o sacred
virgin: fortify me against thine enemies, and the enemies of the Church of
Jesus Christ; which being his only como^wealth, kingdom, patrimony, vineyarde
and mystical body, every member thereof, ought to defend, yea is more bound
thereunto, then to the defense of any earthly common wealth.

5. As for thine incpmparable, and unspeakable merittes and benefits toward
me, and toward the whole world, all true Christian hearts do acknowledge
them; and with Aristotle I confess, Qui beneficium accipit, De co^gruo uon de
co^digno.
libertate^ perdidit, He that receueth a benefit loses his liberty and
becomes a slave to his benefactors. How then should not I and the whole world,
confess our selves to be obliged unto thee for so general and so worthy a
benefit as we have received at thy hands, Jesus Christ taking that flesh of
thee, in which he would dye for our offenses? Therefore (o blessed virgin) I
offer my self with this my labor as a poor slave unto thee, I prostrate my
self like a poor wretched and sinful creature before thee, confounded and
oppressed with many imperfections and defects, void of merits, destitut of
grace, ouercharged with the dreadful assaults and machinations of powerful
enemies, they to strong to offend, and I to weak (without thy help) to
defend my self against them. We therefore, Sub tuum praesidium confugimus
sancta Dei genitrix, etc. fly under thy sauegard, o mother of God, for none
that ever relied upon thee, was frustrated of his expectation, none was ever
deceived of his hope, none was ever confounded or discomforted, who has at any
time fled to thy intercession, as holy Church in all ages by experience has
proved, and all holy saints, that ever were, have solemnly avouched.

6. Thou therefore, o only Aug. ser. 2. de Annunc.
hope of sinners. Thou, o S. Ephre^ de laud. B. Mariae.
joy, salvation, and peace of the world. Thou, o Damasc. orat. 2. de Assump.
ocean and gulf of grace Thou o Damasc. orat 2. dormit. Virg.
living arc of the living God. Thou, Epiph. l. 3. Hier. 78
the mother of all living, and the cause of life, who broughtest forth life
unto the world. Thou Cyril. Alex. hom. 10.
the precious marguerit of the world, the inextinguible light thereof, the
crown of virginity, the scepter of the Catholic faith, and the indissoluble
temple containing him, who can be no where contained. Thou, o Ierem. adu. Iouiu.
East gate, ever shut, and ever shining, bringing forth the holy of holies.
Thou o S. Greg. in 1. Reg.
mountain which far surpassest in height, all height of creatures. Thou, Rup.
lib. 3. in cant.
in heaven the queen of Saints, in earth the queen of Kingdoms. Finally
thou art she, then which S. Chry. ser. de Natiuit.
nothing was ever seen more noble or more excellent, thou art she who only
surpassest heaven and earth: what can be more holy then thou? Not Prophets,
not Apostles, not Martyrs, not Patriarchs, not Angels, not Dominations, not
Seraphins, not Cherubins, nor any thing amongst the visible or invisible
creatures, can be found more excellent then thou, o Marie, for thou art his
mother, who was begotten of his father before all begininges. Will we know
therefore how far thou excellest all celestial powers? These with fear and
trembling stand hiding their face, but thou do offer up mankind unto him
whom thou have begotten, by whom we obtain the pardon of our offenses.

I therefore thy humble and most unworthy suppliant, do here present and offer
unto thy protection, this work and labor (though far unworthy of thy
patronage) beseeching thee, that through thy favorable assistance (O most
glorious virgin) it may serve for the reclayming of deceived souls into the
sheepfould of Jesus Christ; for the confusion of Heretics, and consolation of
Catholics; for the detection of falsitie, and advancement of verity; and
lastly, for the greater honor and glory, both of thee, and of thy B. Son,
our Lord and Savior Jesus, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
honor and glory, world without end, Amen.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
1. A Certain Protestant (gentle Reader) quassinge, and caurroussinge in a
place, cried out against the Pope, which is a custom now a days, as well with
the meanfest, as with the greatest, and cheifest personages, having their
ministers at their elbowe when they are at meat, to sclander the Pope,
Priests and Catholics. I would they had read and observed the verse of S.
Augustine.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
Who so speaks ill of those that absent be,
Forbidden is this tables company.
But these men when they are in their greatest dissolution, then they rail
against religion, which should bridle, and restrain them from their riotous,
and wanton excess. This party being reproved by a certain Catholic
gentleman, that was at the boorde, began presently to defend his liberty, and
licentiousnes by holy scripture, and by the words of our Savior mistaken and
ill applied, answered, that whatsoever enteretd into the belly, does no harm
to the soul, but that which comes from the heart. This is noe new practice
in the malignant Church, as Eusebius says of the Heretic Cerinthus, who
because he was given to the bellye and beastly pleasures, framed holy scripture
according to his sensuality, as this protestant alleged Scripture against
fasting, and began to provoke the Gentleman to dispute with him; who answered
him, that it was not his part to reason or judge of holy Scripture, being so
mystical, and so far exceedinge his capacity, especially in such disordered
places amoungest the cups; the fruit whereof would rather tend to
confusion, then to edificatio^ or devotion. The Protestante replied, that if
any man could answer to his demaundes or questions at the full, and satisfy
him truly and effectually, he would become Catholic: the Gentleman said he
would do his endeavor to propounde such demaundes to others; and so he went
unto the cheifest protestants of that place, who have set down these
challenges and delivered the^ unto the said gent. who delivered them unto me;
being in one house with him.

2 These propositions were nothing else, but the old heresies of ancient
heretics, and were long since condemned, and anathematized by the auctority of
the Catholic Church in all ages, wherein those heretics did spring up. As
by S. Peter against Simon Magus. By Liberius the Pope, S. Athanasius and S.
Hillary, against Arrius. By S. Damasus, S. Gregory Nazianzen and S. Basil
against Macedonius. By S. Celestinus Pope and S. Cyrill of Alexandria, against
Nestorius. By S. Leo against Eutiches. By Irenus against Valentine. By
Tertulian against Marcion. By Origin against Celsus. By S. Cyprian against
Nouatus. By S. Hierom against Heluidius; Iouinian, Vigilantius, Luciferans. By
S. Augustine against Donatists and Pelagians. By Agath against Montolistes. By
Tarasius against Imadge breakers. By Lanfrancus, Guitmundus and Algerius,
against Beringarius. By Petrus Cluniacensis against Henricians and
Petrobrusians, and against Adelhard. By S. Bernard against Thomas Waldensis,
and Witcleefe. By the Bushoppe of Rochester, as well by his books as by his
blood, against Luther and Zuinglius. By King Henry the 8. himself, against
the said Luther, whose book I have. Finally by so many general Counsels of
the world in all ages, and by the most famous and general Council of Trente,
which sat upon this matter the space of 16. years.

3. Touching the aforesaid propositions, truly ^ was loath (though earneastly
entreated by the Gentleman) to trouble myself to answer them, and that for
many causes. First for that Protestants are void of all humility, whose
religion is nothing elce the^ a perverse and self-wild denial of religion,
never learning the truth simply but oppugning it wilfully. The second, because
whatsoever Protestants write, they do it not nether for gods sake, or for
their own edification, but for the destruction and confusion of others, as
Luther himself their Author did confess disputinge with Eckius, who said,
that it was not for gods sake, he took that matter in hand: and therefore
none more maleparte or saucy then they be, Osuis. lib. 1. de here. Sur. hist.
Anno. 1519.

Beza in pref. noui testam. An 1565.

Tom. 2. Lib. 3. Regem Angliae to. 5 ad Galat. c. 3.

Beza act. c. 10. in pref. noui test.

Mus. in locis co^munib. c. 10. Bren. in Apolo. conf. wittenb. c. de council
Calu. de vera eccl. reformat.

Musc. de comm. loc. c. de ministrat, inter. prep locor. commu. Martyr de votis.

Illir. pref. noui testa. Pet. in pref. 1. cor. Humfred. in vit. Iuelli par.
212.

Calu. in pref. instit. ad Regem Galli.

Martyr de votis page 566. 10. res. Camp. 5. ratio.

Beza exempla Theologica.


for they deny all grounds of disputation; all traditions of the Apostles,
Doctors, Counsels, and testimony of holy Martyrs. For as when S. Augustine,
and the holy Doctors of the Church, reasoned with the Donatists, Arrians,
Maniches, and others, and urged them with the authority of gods Church, with
the iudgmente of the sea Apostolic, with the succession of Bishops in the
same, with the Counsels, and finally with the name Catholic, those heretics
quite rejected all those grounds and means of trial: even so Luther the
captain and ringleader of these late heretics said. I set not by a thousand
Augustines, and a thousand Cyprians alleged against me alone: calling S.
Augustine, S. Hierom and S. Gregory, the Justices af the Papisticall kingdom.
Thus also did that proud Beza, charge Origines with blasphemy, adding that
neither S. Chrysostom, nor any of the Greek fathers, did ever declare the
truth simply: and charged Saint Hierom with shamles errors, as invocation of
Saints, and the practice of chastity or virginity in the Church. Musculus
also said, that S. Hierom did deserve rather hell then heaven. Brentius did
charge the first Council of Nice with foul errors. Calvin called the fathers
thereof Lunatic and francticke people. Musculus says, they were instigated
and led by the diuill, and that all Counsels were pernitiouslie fallen into
errors. Vrbanus Regius said, that in the best times of the Church, Satan
ouerruled all Bushoppes. Peter Martyr called the aunciente Fathers, pratlers,
but no divines. Illiricus rejected the said Fathers. Peter Martyr also said,
that as long as men rely upon the Fathers, they must be deluded with errors.
Doctor Humfrie at Oxford said, that Iuell gave a great scope unto the Papists,
and did himself great wrong, in alleadginge the Fathers for himself: for
what have we to do with fleash and and blood? The same also Calvin and Peter
Martyr wrote. Whitakers also unto Doctor Sanders answered saying. We care not
for your histories. Doctor Toby Mathewe said to Father Campion. If he should
believe the Fathers, he could not be a protestante. Beza cried out against
Athanasius, and the Fathers of the Council of Nice, for that (says the)
Athanasius found out this Tripartite god (he meant the blessed Trinte.) He said
also that he Fathers of that Council were blind sophists, the ministers of
the the beast, and the bond-slaues of Antechrist.

4. The third cause of this mine auersion was, because protestants are hard to
be reclaimed: for that amou^gest all the sects that ever were none were more
inconstant, or variable in their Doctrine then the Protestants. For neither
birds, or beasts (as Pliny says) do watch to break other birds eggs,
or destroy others of-springe, Plin. natural. hist. lib. 10. c. 74
as these Protestants watch to destroy and abrogat the Doctrine which was
hatched before them: so as whatsoever the first gospeller does settle, the
whelpe that comes from him does destroy it: as in steed of many examples the
confession of Augusta may serve for one, so called for that in that city,
Colloq. altenbar. f. 4 39.

Colloq. altenb. fol. 464.


the Lutheranes did exhibit to Charles the 5. a book wherein were written all
the articles of their Doctrine, which was 50. times changed and mangled, as
they themselves affirm, in all which, the last is nothing like the first, and
so, they call it. Cothurnum etc. A dislikinge unto all the rest,
notwithstanding Luther said it to be. Fundamentum quod hactenus papistis
opposuimus. The fundation which hitherto we opposed against the Papists, the
ground of our religion according to the word of god, and the only rule of the
peace and establishinge of tra^quillitie in Germany (says he) but in very
truth was the cause of all the wars, and troubles thereof: and which was
abolished out of Germany, yea out of Augusta it self, and within few years
became zuinglians and Zuingfeldians, and is in noe place accept in Saxony:
For other sects (with which that miserable Country do abound, being in
number 20. as Stanislaus Rescius describes) carrienge with the^ all the sway,
did step in amoungest them, and so at the last Luthers Doctrine was utterly
rejected. Count Palatines Country can bear witness of this mutabilitie, which
from Zuinglianisme, turned to Lutheranisme, and again from Lutheranisme to
zuinglianisme. Smidlerus in vita Bullen. f. 15.
As also upper Germany when one Prince, or great superintendent dies, the
people after their death do change their religion.

5. England also cannot deny this to be true, which a certain Pope many
hundred years prophesied of them, saying. English men, of all nat^ons are most
inconstant and waueringe in their faith, the time shall come (says he) that
when Christendom shall have most need of them, they shall suarwe from their
faith, and fall into sects, and heresies. For in our days it changed her
religion 4. times within 30. years: under king Henry the 8. king Edward his
son* Queen Marie; and Elizabeth; And as Fox says, king Edward being a
child after his fathers funeral, by the instigation and settinge on of his
Uncle the Duke of Somersett, did abolish the religion, which his Father had by
law ordained viz. The six articles, containing. 1. The truth of the Reale
presence. 2. That both kinds for all persons, are not necessary. 3. That
marriage of Priests is prohibited by the law of God. 4. That Vows and
votaries are confirmed by the law of God. 5. That the Mass is agreeable to
Christ's inst^tution. 6. That Auricular confession, is warranted by the word of
God. This king set forth two books of reformation and afterward a third.
These articles of our faith were made at one parlemente by the said king Henry
the 8. and were abrogated as superstitious inventions by another Parleame^t.
Anunas and menstruas fides, as Hillarie and S. Basil say of the Arrians, every
new year and month a new faith. And what I pray you can be amoungst
Christians, more disgraceful then this? For ought not our Religion, and every
article thereof, to be as the same S. Basil says; eadem heri, hodie and in
saecula? to admit noe change, but to continewe his vigor, as well yesterdaye,
to day, as also for ever? According whereunto our Savior also says, that
heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass, nor any iott, nor
syllable thereof till al be fulfilled. Is there any Christian to be found, who
dares be so bold to say that our Parliament exceeds the power of God? But god
by his absolute power (as Aristotle and all divines, and Philosophers affirm)
cannot make two contradictories or contraries to be true, because of the
implication therein (for if the one be true, the other must be false) and
truly noe more can these opposite and contradictorie Parleaments, be possibly
true.

6. The 4. cause was, that Protestants make but a mockery of all religion, for
that they follow Nicholas Machauailes precepts, holding that the Catholic
religion is a hinderance to state, and that Princes should follow that
religion (though the grounds thereof be never so false) which does advance
their present estate: but contrary to this S. Thomas says, that wisdom and
power are companions of true religion, which when it fails, the power of
state also fails: non veniat anima mea, says S. Bernard, in Concilium eorum
qui dicunt etc. my soul shall not follow their Counsels who say, that the
exaltation and and peace of the Empire, will hunder the peace of the Church. If
Justice be a virtue to give every man his own, to give to Caesar his own, and
to God his own, how does the Prince keep Justice with god, that takes from
God his right, which is religion, and depriues his divine majesty of that
worshipp and reverence which is due unto him? This is proved, for that Princes
followinge this false reason of state, have been put by God from their state,
as Jeroboam the servant of Salamon, to co^tinewe himself in the kingdom which
he had taken from Roboam, did alter the Religion and made a false religion. For
he made two golden calves, one at Dan, and the other at Bethell: and also
altered the order of priestoode, by ordaininge others that were not of the
order of Levy. For which both he and his issue were deprived of their
kingdom, and destroyed of their lives. The Princes of the Jews, by reason of
their state, put Christ to death, least the Romans should come upon the^,
nevertheless the Romans came upon them, and destroyed them.

7. Vetiza a king of Spain and his successor Rodorigus, fearinge the
rebellion of their subjects, for their own wicked acts, destroyed and rased
down all the strong holds of Spain: which was the cause that, that Country
was brought in one quarter of a year in subjection by the Moors, which were
not expelled Spain in 700. years after. The kings of France, Francis the
first, and his son Henry the second, the one brought in the Turcke,
thinckinge to bring him in to Spain against Charles the fifth Emperor and
king of Spain, to destroy Spain. But whether did the tempest drive the
Turcke, but to Tolouse within France, which afterward with great a do,
making many spoils of that Country; were driven out, after burninge the
City of Nicea and other cities out of which they brought with them 5200.
Christians as slaves, amongst which number were 200. consecrated virgins; the
other did join with the rebellious protestant Princes against the said
Charles, by whom they were overthrown and brought to subjection. King Henry
the third of France, being persuaded, that he should never be obeyed of his
subjects, unless he should make away the Catholic Princes, as Henry of Loren
Duke of Guise and Luyes of Iore^, the Cardinal his brother: murdered them in
the assembly of Bloys 1588. but for that he was led rather by the wicked
Council of Macheuillians, and not by the law of God, he was punished himself
by a poor sillye friar without the procurment of any, but of his own head,
who thrust him thorough with a knife being in the midst of his army,
purposing to besidge Paris. John Frederick Duke of Saxony, intendinge to take
the Empire from the house of Austria, followed Martine Luthers Council, that
he should change his religion, so that by the procurment of Luther he rebelled
against his sovereign. But the fruit that he reaped by this false reason, was
to be apprehended, put in to prison, deprived of his estate, Dukedom and
dignity of elector shipp: was not Absolon destroyed by the false Council of
Architofell? And Aman by his wicked plottes, by which he tought to destroy
Mardocheus and the chilren of Israel? For there is noe wisdom or Council of
Macheuillians against God and his Church. Thomas Cromwell was put to death (as
Fox says) by the cruel law he made himself, as by a certain fatal
destiny (these be Foxes words) that whosoever should be cast into the Tower,
he should be put to death without examination; the said Fox calls this
Cromwell the wall and defense of protestant religion. But, qui hominibus
placent confusi sunt, quoniam Deus spreuit nos, those which do please men are
confounded, for God despises them.

8. The principal and last reason or cause is, for that these articles are
already condemned by the general Judgment and verdit in so many general
Counsels as have been in the world, and specially by the last general
Council of Trent, therefore now they ought not to be called in question.
Whereupon Gelasius the Pope says. Maiores nostri diuina inspiratione
cernentes, etc. Our Ancestors foreseinge by divine inspiration, did most
earnestly pray the faithful, that whatsoever was decreed by any Council
against anny heresy, for the faith of the Catholics and the Catholic truth,
it should never be brought in question again. Also Leo the Pope did desire
the Emperor Marcianus, that there should be noe retractation in any thing
defined by the holy Council, and so the said Marcianus established by law
according to his request, that none should dispute of the definition of the
Council. The said Leo also taught the same in his Epistle to the Council of
Chalcedon, and to Maximus the Bushopp of Antioch. The same is also decreede in
the Council of Ephesus, and in the Council of Chalcedon, S. Augustine also
said, that it is an insosolent madness to disputed against any thing, that the
Catholic church had defined. For our Savior says, whosoever hears your,
hears me, and whatsoever they will you to do, that do ye.

5. For as much therefore, as these heresies were condemned (as I have said) by
the general Council of Trent, unto whom protestants refused to come to try
their doctrine (for none ever refuses the trial of general Counsels, but
heretics) therefore we ought not to dispute with them any more. Which also
rightly agrees with the counsel of S. Paul unto Titus saying. A man that is
an heretic after the first and second admonition, shun, knowinge that such
a one is perverted. And to Tomothy he says, these be they that craftily enter
into houses, and lead captive silly women, always learning and never
attaininge unto the knowledge of the truth, but as James and Mambris resisted
Moses, so these also resist the truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate
co^cerninge the faith. All the while that S. Augustine was an Heretic S.
Ambrose would never dispute with him; And the Empress Placilla, wife unto the
great Theodosius, understanding that Eunomius the Heretic would feign reason
with her husband, for eschewinge danger of being corrupted by him, did with
great wisdom hinder the conference. And Nazianzenus says, we ought to abhor
Heretics as the destruction of the church, and the poison of truth, not
carienge any hatred unto their persons, but having pity of their errors.
Ignatius likewise says, vt siilij ^^cis fugite diuisionem vnitatis, and malam
haereticorum doctrinam. As the children of light, shun division of unity,
and the wicked doctrine of Heretics, by whom the whole world is defiled,
resraine from those evil herbs, which Christ did never plant, for they be
not the seed of God, but of the devil. Be not deceived brethren, says he,
whosoever shall follow a seducer, shall never possess the kingdom of heaven:
and whosoever departes not from a false preacher, shall purchase everlasting
damnation.

10. Thus he admonished, that we should beware of wicked Heresies, the reason
of his caveat is, for that Heresy (as the holy Doctors say) is a certain
mischief of the diuill and a firebrande, that comes from hell, a pestilente,
corrupt, and poisoned aier, a cancker that consumes the body in which it is
norished, a certain disease, that does penetrate the intralles, and does
corrupt and infest the souls of Christians: and not only does kill with her
touch as the Viper does, or with her sight as the Basilike, or with her
belching as the dragon, but after all these fashions and many more, does
destroy, confound, and cast away all that approache it, neither is there any
other remedy but to fly, nor any other refuge then to depart from such a
one, as is entangled with it; no other security, then to be far from such an
infernal and contagious mischief, which with the name of Christ, destroieth
Christ in our hearts, and under the pretense of faith, destroys faith. And S.
Augustine says; let every Catholic fly and abhor them, with whom the Church
communicates not: for we ought not, says he, to have part with them, that
have no participation with themselves, and which are not united to the body of
the whole Church; and to conclude with our Savior, one should never otherwise
account of them, then as of heathens and publicans, and his holy Evangelist S.
John forbids us to salute them.

11. Therefore (gentle Reader) these be sufficient reasons wherefore we should be
loath to dispute with Protestants, which through their fall from gods Church
are void of all humility, intoxicated with pride, and are so blinded with
malice, that they cannot learn or embrace the truth, or have any true
wisdom. For as the holly scripture says, into a malicious soul, wisdom
shall not enter: For in all civil conversation or disputation, especially in
matters of religion, we should intend nothing else but the consolation of our
souls, and the edification of our neighbors, and as the Apostle says, Non
nosmetipsos, sed Iesum Christum praedicamus, not our selves or our own glory
should we aim at, but that of Christ Jesus, whose cote without seame is rent
in pieces by so many wilful inverted opinions of protestants: whose mystical
body (I mean his Church) is despised, forsaken, and persecuted: the fruit of
whose doctrine, and the project of their strange devises, tendes to nothing
else, then to shake the very pillars, stroungest foundations, and fortresses of
all Christianity: and at lenght to bring in all coldness, and doubtfulnesse in
our belief, and misbeleefe in the principaleste mysteries in our Catholic
religion, plain Athesime and confusion of all Christian piety, a gate for all
disorders, and dissolution of life and manners, a shipwreacke of Conscience,
and other marckable and suitable effects to their doctrine and behavior, which
are practiced by them daily in all places where they bear sway. And although
every man (as S. Naz. says) may think of God, but not every man dispute of
him, so every man ought not to dispute or doubt of the cheifest mysteries of
Catholic religion, but believe them simply with the universal Church, which
is (according the Apostle) the firmamente and foundation of truth: and
therefore can not in any sort deceive us.

Lib. I.
CHAPTER I. WHether the Religion which Protestants profess be a new Religion,
or whether the Romish Religion be new, and that of the Protestants be ancient
and old. CHAPTER II. The occasion of Luthers, and of other heretics fall from
the Catholic Church. fol. 13 CHAPTER III. By what deceit, hypocrisy, and
dissimulation this heresy crept in to other Countries, by what perjury and
forgerie they were deluded by it, and what destruction, and desolation it
brought with it. fol. 21 CHAPTER IV. That heresies are the cause of Reuolutio^
of Countries; and destruction of state. fol. 30 CHAPTER V. A prosecution of the
last Chapter, that heresies are the causes of troubles and disquiettnes. fol.
49 CHAPTER VI. That God does extend the rod of his wrath upon Princes and
common welthes infected with heresies. fol. 43 CHAPTER VII. Of the miserable
death and ends of such as devised and defended the protestant Religion, as
also other heresies. fol. 61
Lib. II.
CHAPTER I. Whether there be nothing that the Protestants affirmatively
believe, confess, and profess, but the Church of Rome does believe the same,
and cannot be denied by Catholics, but that they are most ancient and
consonant to the word of God. fol. 71 CHAPTER II. A further Confirmation, that
these new ghospellers, tend directly to Turcisme. f. 83 CHAPTER III. Whether
Papist Priests do amiss in taking any thing for their Masses. fol. 86
CHAPTER IV. Of prayinge unto Saints: And whether the Church does offend in
praying unto them. fol. 91 CHAPTER V. Whether Papists do err in worshipping
and adorning the relics of Saints, and whether they sell their Mass and
prayers for te^porall gain. fol. 102 CHAPTER VI. Whether Papists do commit
Idolatry, in worshipping the Cross of Jesus Christ. f. 129.
Lib. III.
CHAPTER I. Whether Papists blaspheme against God, in saying that any man can
merit. fol. 150 CHAPTER II. Protestants say, that a Christian though never so
virtuous, or so acceptable to God, has no grace, or virtue inherent in him;
because they would have no good act to come from man, by reason of that grace,
fol. 157 CHAP. III. In that heretics reprehend the Catholic Church, yea
condemn her of great folly, for endeavoring her self to receive gods graces:
they by this mean take away free will from man, and all due preparation, and
disposition to receive gods grace, and divine influence. fol. 161 CHAP. IV.
Whether we derogate from the merits of Christ, in making our merits partakers
of his merits. fol. 169 CHAP. V. The absurdity of this doctrine, that every
one should assure himself that he it predestined unto life everlasting, and
that we ought to be as certain thereof as we should not once fear the
contrary, or to misdoubt the same, is discussed. fol. 186
Lib. 4.
CHAP. I. Whether the holy scriptures be for Protestants, and not for
Papists, and whether we rely upon traditions, not warranted by holy Scripture.
fol. 193 CHAP. II. Whether every man ought to be judge of the scripture, and
rely altogether upon his own judgment touching the interpretation thereof,
being inspired by the holly ghost concerning the same. fol. 208 CHAP. III. How
heretics would feign take away all tradition, alleging for their purpose
that of S. Math. 15. In vain you worship me, teaching for doctrine men's
precepts fol. 213 CHAP. IV. Certain objections answered against traditions,
taken out of the first Chapter of S. Paul to the Galathians. fol. 231 CHAP. V.
Whether we prohibit the scriptures to be translated into the vulgar tongue.
fol. 234 CHAP. VI. Whether we forbid the ignorante to pray in a languadge which
they understand. f. 240 CHAP. VII. Whether a man ought not to pray, either by
himself, or by another, but in a language he understands. fol. 251
Lib. V.
CHAP. I. Whether the Church universal can be charged with errors, contrary to
the first institution of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. fol. 259 CHAP.
II. Whether the Catholic Church does add to this Sacrament, in making it both
a sacrifice, and a Sacrament. fol. 286 CHAP. III. Whether the Catholic Church
commit offense, in leaning to the litterall sense of Christ's words, in the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar. fol. 318
Lib. VI.
CHAP. I. That there is a purgatory, which is proved as well by Scriptures, and
ancient Fathers, as also even by testimonies of Protestants themselves. fol.
350 CHAP. II. Touching the Popes Authority, in releasinge of souls out of
purgatory. fol. 359 CHAP. III. Whether it be against the law of God, to forbid
Priests to marry: and whether vows and votaries are rather the inuentio^s of
men, then the ordinance of God. fol. 363 CHAP. IV. Whether we ought to confess
our sins to priests, and whether that priests cannot remitt or forgive them.
fol. 372 CHAP. V. Whether fasting from one sort of meat, more then from
another, or for to use any observation therein, be superstitious, according as
protestants do affirm. fol. 377
Lib. VII.
CHAP. I. Whether the Protestant assertion be true, which affirms, that
general counsels can err. fol. 386 CHAP. II. That the catholic church, in
those things she does propound to the christians to believe (whether they be
contained in the Scriptures or not) cannot err. fol 395 CHAP. III. Whether
Catholics are to be charged with arrogancy, for thinking that their church
cannot fail. fol. 396 CHAP. IV. That this Church which shall never be hid, but
remain visible, is manifest by the parable of Christ our Lord. fol. 402 CHAP.
I. Li. VIII.
Whether that papists do amiss, in having their churches and monasteries
so sumptuous, their alters and ornaments so rich, and ecclesiastical
possessions so great, the poor wanting the same. fol. 407 CHAP. II. Of the
unhappy ends and other punishments, by which God does chastise those that
presume to robb Churches, or otherwise to profane and abuse sacred things fol.
416 CHAP. III. A prosecution of the last chapter. fol. 426 CHAP. IV. Whether
the king may take away church liuinges at his pleasure; And whether as he is
absolute king of the temporal goods of his subjects, he be so also of the
Church and church liuinges. fol. 440
Lib. IX.
CHAP. I. That the protestant religion, whose principal foundation and
grounds are these articles aforesaid, is nothing else then a denyinge of all
Religion and piety, and a renewinge of all heresies. fol. 447 CHAP. II. That no
jot or syllable of Christian religion, ought to be counted a thing indifferent
or of small moment, and that whosoever does not agree with the Catholic
church in all points of belief, cannot be saved. fol. 459 CHAP. III. That the
new Religion, for that it takes away all religion, is worse then that of the
Turckes and Gentiles. fol. 452
Lib. X.
CHAP. I. An answer unto Protestants, barking against the religious
institutions of holy Orders, saying that religious vocations were not
instituted by our Savior. fol. 467 CHAP. II. That the Apostles and their
followers in the primitive church, followed this estate of perfection. fol. 473
CHAP. III. Of the increase of religious orders, and how the same continued from
time to time until our days. fol. 476 CHAP. IV. That priests in the
primitive churh, even from the Apostles time, were religiouse, and observed
religious order of life. fol. 486 CHAP. V. Of the multitude of religious
persons. fol. 491 CHAP. VI. Of many great and eminent men, who forsook and
contemned the world, to become religious. fol. 499 CHAP. VII. Of Emperors
Kings and Princes who forsook the world to become religious. fol. 504 CHAP.
VIII Of Empresses, Queens and Princes who likewise forsook the world to
become religious. fol. 518 CHAP. IX. How greatly religious people fructify unto
God and to his Church: and that they are the best laborers which are therein.
fol. 525
Lib. XI.
CHAP. I. The name of those that suffered death by the Gewses of Flanders, where
the protestants are so called. fol. 534 CHAP. II. Certain cruel and bloody
factes committed in France against the Catholics, by those that the vulgar
sort do call Hugonotes, from the time that they stirred rebellion against the
king, Anno 1562 fol. 544.

A Catalogue of those that suffered death, as well under king Henry, as Queen
Elizabeth, and king James, from the year of our Lord 1535. and 27. of king
Henryes reign unto the year 1620. fol. 555

CHAP. III. A Compendiu^ of the martyrs and confessors of Ireland under Queen
Elizabeth. fol. 569
Lib. XII.
CHAP. I. Every sect of heresies challinging unto themselves the true and
Catholic church, there is here set down, the true notes and marks, by which
the same may be discerned. fol. 587 CHAP. II. That there are many excellencies
and effects which should allure every one, to follow and embrace the
Catholic religion; And contrariwise, many inconveniences and blasphemies
which the new religion houldeth and teaches. The first excellencies. fol. 609
CHAP. III. The 2. excellency, is the pure and hollie doctrine which it
professes. fol. 610 CHAP. IV. The 3. Excellency is, most divine Sacraments,
which confer grace. fol. 613. CHAP. V. The 4. Excellency is, to favor the
good, and to punish the wicked. fol. 616. CHAP. VI. The 5. Excellency is, the
conversion of all nations unto Christ, and driving Idolatry out of the world.
ibid. CHAP. VII. The 6. Excellency of the catholic Religion is, that the
same is proved and auerred by so many good witnesses, as sacred and learned
doctors, blessed saints, martyrs, and general counsels. fol. 617.
APPROBATIO.
Hic Liber cui Titulus (The Theater of Catholic and Protestant Religion)
nihil continet quod fidei vel moribus aduersatur, quin potius multa, quae tam
ad fidem Catholicam stabiliendam, quam ad haereses huius temporis impugnandas
optime inseruiunt.

Matthaeus Kellisonus S. Theol. Doct.

WHETHER THE RELIGION WHlCH Protestants profess be a new Religion: or whether
the Romish Religion be new, and that of the Protestant be ancient and old.
CHAPTER I.
1. IF Protestants were of sound judgment, or not distracted of their wits,
they would never suppose, much less auerre so manifest an untruth, as that the
religion of the church of Rome is a new religion: or defend an absurdity so
egregious, as Protestant religion, to be the more ancient; Wherefore this first
assertion being so evident, and known an untruth, such as do follow, are the
less to be believed.

2. It is well known, that before these 80. or 100. years, all Christendom
did embrace the catholic Roman religion, so that it was, terra vnius labii,
Genesis 11. Act. 4.
as it is written in Genesis, a country of one language, and one speech; and
as we read of the christians in the Acts of the Apostles, that first believed
in Christ, that they were of one heart, and of one accord; and as one God was
honored, and worshipped of all, so one faith was embraced of all, they
observed one order of administration of the Sacraments, they used, and kept
one observation of ceremonies: all were called Christians, (which blessed name
none disdayned) none were called Gospellers, Lutherans, Caluinists, Zuinglians,
Protestants, or Puritans, Anabaptists, Trinitarians or any other sect, with
innumerable others which the Protestant religion has set abroach and
invented: men were simple, and honest in their dealinges, faithful of their
promises, charitable in their works, zealous in their belief, obediente unto
their Prelates, and Pastors. This is so evident a truth, as that all books,
records, general and provincial counsels, all parleamentes of kingdoms,
all unctions, and inuestinge of Emperors and Kings, all consecration of
Bishops, all holy orders of Priests, all churches, monasteries, and
chapels, in the world, all the gates of towns, and cyttyes, all monuments,
and records both spiritual and temporal, all universities and doctors of
Christendom, both common and civil laws of all countries, yea Protestants
themselves do plainly witness.

3. But that Protestant religion is new, is a thing most certain, for there
are men yet living at this, day more ancient then it, and can remember, when
it first came into England, and Irelande. We can show you the first
inuentours, and authors thereof. The place, the time, and the occasion by which
it crepte in, and infected these miserable nor then countries. Who have opposed
themselves against it. What garboyles, and callamities came into those
countries, that nourished the same. What rebellion and insurrectio^ of subjects
against their princes, for defending the same. What were the motives of such as
invented yt, and occasions of others, that embraced it. The success of the one
and the other, and by whom, and how the same was condemned. I pray you what
can be more evident signs and tokens of novelty? for novelty in all common
wealths (but especially in matters of religion as S. Nazianzenus says) is to
be avoided, yea the Emperor of the Turckes did advise the Queen of
Transiluania, to beware of the novelty of heretical sects, and that she
should never suffer the same to creep into her country. It is well known
also, that the name of protestant religion was never heard of, before the year
of our Lord 1529. in the town of Spira in Germany, where the Lutheranes being
as it were combined against the Emperor Charles the 5. did use a kind of
protestation, whereupon afterward they were called Protestants.

4. If thou say, that it lay lurkinge and hidden in the world, I ask where,
or in what place of the world, in what kingdoms and towns, or who were the
defenders thereof? Truly no writer or historiographer, did, or could ever make
mention of any such, nor ever before that time any mention was made of them,
nor was it ever heard, that any heretical sect was so closely hidden in the
world, but it might be known: at least, when Luther himself taught the same,
they should then have manifested themselves, and yet we can find none such:
for such as followed Luther, they were before Catholics. Ex nobis prodierunt
(says Saint John) sed non erant ex nobis. Joan. 2.
They went forth from us, but they were not of us, for if they had bin of us,
they had remained with us: it is clear therefore they were not good Christians,
who forsakinge the narrow way of salvation, run headlonge into the broad
way of perdition, and licentious doctrine of new sectaries; Whereas the
religion of Christ, is a religion most ancient, sacred, immutable,
impregnable, inviolable, always the self same, holdinge and continuinge his
vigor and force, unto the worlds end, it is the soul, and life of the
Church. For even as by the soul, fleash is united unto the living man: so by
religion ma^kinde is joined unto the church of Christ, being his spiritual
kingdom, and all that ever were saved either before, Justinius mart. orat. ad
Anto. Aug. l 10 confess. ca. 43.
or after Christ, ought to be called Christians, as Justinius martyr, and
other holy Doctors do say, for that they embraced Christian religion, and as
saint Augustine says. Ipse vnigenitus Dei silius homo propter nos factus est,
etc. The only begotten Son of God became man for us, that he should become
the head of his whole Church, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail, Matt. 16.
unto whom Christ promised to remain withal, unto the consumation of the
world. Matt. vlt.
So that the religion by which this church is vpheld and Christ professed, did
and shall allwaies continue.

5. It is well known that the name of hugonots began in France an. 1562. (as
themselves, of their asse^blies made in the night at a gate in Tours in France
called Hugon confess to have taken their denomination) went out of the
Catholic church, and did embrace the impiety of Calvin. In Scotland they
fell also from the Catholic Church into Caluinisme, anno Domini 1560. In
Flanders the Geuses revolted from the said church overwhelmed in the pit of so
manny heresies, anno 1566. In England they changed religion anno 1535. and
first fell unto Lutheranisme, afterward to Zuinglianisme, afterward the
body of the realm fell from Zuinglianisme, to puritanisme, the next degree
unto Anabaptisme: and since what numbers are fallen to the family of love? And
what swarms of Athistes are sprunge up in every shire, as Whittguifte notes
against Cartwrith?

6. Are not the first Authors of the protestancy also known, as Luther,
Carolastadius, Oecolampadius in Germany, Pharell in France, Thomas Crammer in
England, John knox, and Paul Methen a baker in Scotland, George Brown in
Irla^d? In the Apology of the church of England page 142 it is said, that
Luther and Zuinglius came first to the knowledge of the truth, Luth. tom. 7. f.
307.
and preaching of the gospel. Luther said that God revealed unto him the
knowledge of his Son, that he at lenghte might euangelize it to others, and
that the Gospel was first preached by him. (D Kellyson reply to Surcliffe fol.
149.) But we know that they cannot allege the author of our religion,
neither can they nominate us from any particular man, nor can they chardge the
Catholic church with any private opinion, or faith, that is not universally
allowed and embraced of all Catholics: neither can they nominate the time
that she failed of her faith. Neither can they object that our church has
separated herself from the greater church: or that such as did adhere to the
Pope, were in number less then any Church. For it is written in S. Gregory's
Epistles to the Bishops of the East, that Affrique, Spain, France, Italy,
and all the world, did communicate with him. This very argument other Doctors
did use against other heretics, as Tertullian. Tertull. lib. de praescrip.
Qui estis vos inquit, etc. What are ye (says he) from whence, and when came
you? where did you lie hidden all this while? also. Optatus mileuita. lib. 2.
contra Parmenand. Vestrae, inquit, Cathedrae originem ostendite etc. Show the
beginning of your Chair, you who challenge unto your selves the church, and
so other doctors do speak to this effect.

7. Calvin your chief prophet, when he oppugneth our religion, he says
plainly, Calu. l. 2. instit. 2. parag. 2.
se toti ^ntiquitati repugnaturum. That he opposes himself against all
antiquity, and says, that he will admit no ancient Father, but S.
Augustine. And in another place he reprehendes S. Augustine himself for sainge
that our wills do cooperate with the grace of God. For God made all things
perfect, Lib. 2. c. 3.
and in co^plete order, but innouatio^ came by the devil: We read in the
gospel, that after the good seed was sown by God, Matt. 13.
the diue^l did sow darnell and cockle: even so after the true christian
religion was sown by the Apostolical, and catholic Pastors in every place
of the world, the enemy of mankind by Martyn Luther an Augustine Friar, did
sow and teach the darnell of absurd, dangerous and damnable heresies anno
1517. being the first author of the protestant religion. So we know the
author of the Arrian heresy, to be one Arrius a Priest of Alexandria in Egypt
anno 324. Of the Nestorian heresy, to be Nestorius Archbishop of
Constantinople, who taught his heresy in Thrasia anno 431. as the other also
have taught, the one in Egypt first, and the other in Saxony afterward.
We know the author of the catholic religion to be Christ, from whence we
are called christians in all ages, before Luther first invented the name of
Papists, for that we obey and embrace Christ's vicar general, our holy Father
the Pope, the successor of S. Peter unto whom Christ committed the regimente of
his church, feedinge of our souls, and the charge of his flock. Matt. 16.
This christian religion was first preached in Jury the 15. Joan. vlt.
year of Tyberius Caesar: as also we know that the same was oppugned and
gainsaid first by the Scribes and Pharisees, afterward by the Gentyles, and
with all penal statutes of forcible laws made by the Roman Emperors, and
other potentates of the world, which were practiced and put in execution for
the space of 300. years, to supplant and deface the same. This christian
religion was vpholden and defended by all the Popes, and confirmed by all the
general approved counsels that ever were: But the protestant religion was
disproued and condemned for heresy by Leo the tenth, and by the general
Council of Trent, and by all Catholic universities of the world; as the
Arrian heresy was contradicted and condemned by Syluester then Pope, and by
the general Council of Nice, by S. Athanasius and Hilarious, and other holy
Doctors: as the Nestorian heresy also, was rejected by Pope Celestinus and
the Council of Ephesus, S. Cyrill and others. So that though we have showed
your authors or ofspringe, the time and place, when it began, and where it
began, yet the like you cannot once nominate of us since Christ, and his
Apostles, who are the only authors of our belief, and religion.

6. You affirm, that the protestant religion was since Christ, and his
Apostles in the world, but it was hidden. I answer that seeinge the Church and
religion of Christ ought to be a city placed upon a mountain, or hill, to
be seen of every one, (as in many places the holy scripture does prove) it
ought not to be hidden, but manifest to the whole world, otherwise it should
not be the religion of Christ, Matt. 5. Isa. 2. Psalm. 71. Daniel. 2.
so that I must conclude with S. Hierom saying. Bre^em tibi apertamque animi
mei sententiam proseram, in illa Ecclesia esse permanendum, quae ab Apostolis
fundata vsque ad diem hunc durat: Dial. lucifer in fine.
I must be plain and declare my mind sincerely, that we must abide in that
Church, which was founded by the Apostles and continewed unto this very day.
If you shall hear such as be christians to be nominated rather of some other
head then of Christ, Marcianistes, Valentinians, Montanistes, know then they
ought not to be called the church of Christ, but the synagoge of Antechriste:
even so such as are nominated Gospellers, Caluinistes, and Lutherans etc. which
are the founders of your religion and the inuentors of strange new and devised
opinions, contrary to the universal catholic church, and to the ancient
Doctors thereof: ar rather as S. Hierom says, members of that synagoge, then
of the church of Christ, and as they were most perverse and obstinate in their
doctrine: so they were most shameless and licentious in their lives; and as the
tree bears in his branches the corrupt humors, that they draw from the
root: as the virtue of the cause is known by the effect, and the nature of
the spring does show it self in the brook, and as the spring being
unclean, the brook cannot be clear, and the root being withered, the
branches can bear noe fruit: so Luther and Calvin being your root and
of-springe, and being unclean, filthy, leacherous, and altogether wedded to
carnalitie and licentiousnes, being rebellious apostates, noe doubt of such
as shall follow or embrace them, no better fruit can be expected of them:
hence Zuinglius himself did confess, Zuing. c. 2. Resp. ad Luth.
that as soon as he did embrace this gospel of Luther, he was attached with
the raginge flames of fleshly concupiscence and sensuality.

The occasion of Luthers fall, and of other he^tikes from the Catholic
Church. CHAPTER II.
1. WE may apply S. Augustine his sentence unto this subject, Ang. sermon. de
tempo- 44.
that there are two roots planted in two fields, by two tillers, or
husbadmen: the one Christ does plant in the hearts of the good, the other the
devil planteth in the hearts of the wicked And as this is Covetousness, which
is the root of evil: 1. Tim. 6. Ephesians. 3.
so tho other is charity, being the root, and of-springe of all goodness:
according to the saying of the Apostle, that we should be planted and rooted
in charity, for as no evil can spring from charity, so no goodness can come
from covetousness, so that you may perceive from which of these roots Luthers
cause proceeded, and which of these husbandmen did plant the same. For, not
obtayninge the promulgating of certain indulgences, whereby he hoped to get
money; first he rayled against them who denied him the same; then he was
infected with a desire of vainglory; thirdly with a desire of revenge, for
that he had a repulse from the Pope called Leo the tenth; afterward pricked
forward with a most filthy appetite of fleashlye concupiscence, being a
professed friar fifteen years, he came out of his monastery, and took with
him a professed Nun whereby he might satisfye his filthy lust withal, so
that he committed such sin, and sacrilege by breakinge and violatinge his
vows, that all the world were scandalized thereat. And so far did he defend his
riotousnes and beastly debauchednesse therein, as to teach that a woman was as
necessary for a man, as meat, drink, or sleep: and said moreover, that if a
married woman would not render the conjugal debpte of matrimony, Lib. ae vita
coniug. sermon. de matrimonio.
that the husband should not spare his maid. The like filthy lust (but far
more detestable) was the occesion of Calvin his heresy. For it is well known
as may appear by the judicial acts and records of Nouodiu^; Bolsecus in
vita Calu. cap. 5. Iul. Brig. page 59.
that he was condemned of the filthy sin of the flesh against nature, and
had it not been for the entreaty of the bishop there (which obtained that his
punishmente, should be turned, unto a hoate burninge iron on his back) he
should have been altogether burnt. John Witcliffe, for that he was deprived of
his personnage in Oxforde, for his vicious misdemenor, began his heresy.
Arrius, because Alexander was preferred to the Archbishopricke of Alexandria
before him, Nicep. de pen. l. 5. c.
gave occasion of the Arrian heresy against the deity of Christ. Mo^tanus
for that he was denied the primacy of Asia, which he sought very earnestly,
troubled the Church with new heresies, as Nicephorus wyttnesseth, de
penitentia l^b. 5. cap. 15. Aerius also, for being denied of a Bishopric
fell into Arianisme, and afterward invented himself a new heresy, which
was, that we ought not pray for the dead.

2. Henry the eighte (as John Fox a great puritan in England does wyttnes,
Fox. in historia pa. 512. edit. 1
and all the world knows to be true) for his divorce made from Queen
Catherine his wife, was by the Bishop of Rome excommunicated: who being sore
exasperated thereby, assembled a parlamente, by which he brought to pass, that
he banished the Popes authority out of England, and made himself head of the
Church: thus far John Foxes own words. Hollin. in descrip. Brita. l. 1^ cap.
7.
For it is certainly known, that from the conversion of England by S.
Augustine duringe so many hundred years, unto King Henry the 8. as all
English historiographers and ministers themselves do acknowledge, the
Catholic or papisticall religion (as it pleases them to term it) did
flourish in England, and that the chief point thereof was, that the Pope was
judge, moderatour and chief Pastor as well of the English Church, as of all
other Churches of the Christians in Ecclesiastical matters: which Catholic
faith the said King Henry defended the space of xx. years, as long as he
lived with his lawful married wife, as well against domestical heretics,
that were his subjects, by all penal statutes and exquisit torments, at also
against foreign heretics by a most learned book in the defense of the 7.
Sacraments (which book I have in mine own custody) for which he was ennobled
and honored by Pope Leo the tenth, with the title of defe^der of the Catholic
faith, which was never given to any king in the world before, which he
received as Fox says, with great joy: for when it came to the king, being
then at Green which, he went to his chapel, accompanied with manny nobles and
Ambassadors, Cardinal Wolsey said Mass, the Earl of Essex brought the basen
of water, the duke of Suffolk gave the assay, the duke of Norfolk held the
towell, the Heraldes with their company began their accustomed cries,
prononcinge. Fox. anno 1528. fol. 441.
Henricus Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae defensor Fidei, Dominus Hiberniae. And
amongst his other magnificent titles, he left to this day this title to his
posterity, as is well known to the world. Neither only with books, but also
with his victorious and invincible arms did he defend the Catholic Roman
faith, and the dignity thereof, for the which he fought against sundry
princes, and their confederates; as against Lodowicke the 12. king of France,
and James the 4. king of Scotts, though married to his sister. Who being
vanquished, and his great army overthrown by the Earl of Surrie in England,
and the said king himself being slain in the battle, for that he was
excommunicated, was not suffered to be buried in any Christian grave. Also he
sent his Army by sea to join with the Spaniardes against the king of
France, to assault France in the frontiers of Spain by the powerful force of
the English. John Albertus the king of Nauare was driven altogether out of the
kingdom being, excomunicated by the Pope, which Spain does possess at this
day. Did not the said king within few years after send an Army into Italy
against the Emperor Charles the first, in the defense of Clement the 7. then
Pope? And notwithstanding he was his great frinde and his Nephewe, for that
Queen Cathrine was his Aunte, yet through the filthy concupiscence by which
he was besotted and blinded to marrye Anna Bul^ene, and so to be divorced from
his lawful married wife, he turned all things topsie turuie, rejected the
Popes authority (which he before as well by Gods laws, the holy scriptures, as
by the fathers and Counsels of the Church defended) and so by a parliament of
one Realm or kingdom, he disanulled and abrogated that which was established
by so manny general parleaments and general Counsels of all Christendom,
yea by Christ himself and by all such as truly believed in him. And for not
yealding unto his desire herein, manny religious and constant Martyrs offered
their lives, and their blood, amoungest whom was the light of England that
most sacred Martyr and learned divine John Fisher Bishopp of Rochester, and Sr.
Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England: of these sort of people our Savior
wished us to beware: Act. 20
the Apostle also says, woulues shall enter after my departure and shall not
spare the flock. Romans 16.
Therefore in another place he requested us to mark and know what people they
be, that raise dissentions and scandalls in the Church, and do teach
otherwise then we have already received, and to fly from them. Heb. 4. John.
4.
He also exhorted us, that we should not be lead away with mutable and
strange doctrine. S. John also wished us not to believe every spirit, but
that we should try whether they be of God.

3. But the doctrine of Luther cannot by any trial be found true, so that as
Christ says, John. 7.
my doctrine is not mine but my fathers which did send me: so Luther may say
his doctrine is not his, but his fathers the devil that did send him, Luth.
lib. de Missa Ang. to G lenens. Ger and 10. 7. witte^b. 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 14.
whom he boasted to have suggested unto him arguments to overthrow
priest-hoode and sacrifice, that by that means he should overthrow and
confound the true worshipp of the true God, for God as the Apostle says is
the God of peace and charity, not of dissension. For whosoever procures sects
and division betwixt brethren (says the prophett) is a devil. When therefore
by Luthers means, we see so manny sects against Godds Church, we must not
think that ever his doctrine was of God, for in his disputation against
Eckius, he fell into such rage and fury, that being admonished, Hosius lib. 1.
de heresi. Zurius hist. Anno 1519.
forasmuch as the cause of God was handled, he should not transgress the
bounds of modesty, he answered, that this matter, as it was not begun for
gods sake, so it should not be ended for his sake, for that truly not
charity, but envy and malice, was the motive and cause of Luthers doctrine,
against the Pope and Church of Christ. The malediction of Luther. Theod. co.
4. operum Lutheri in Joel.
For when he even departed from his disciples he was wont to say; Benedicat
vos pater caelestis omni benedictione and odio Papae. The celestial Father,
bless you with all benedict^on, and with the hatred of the Pope, so as you
may perceive of what spirit he was. For I am sure you would not think that
spirit to be of God, which dissolueth the union of the body of JESUS Christ,
but of Antechriste: for whosoever endeavors to disioyne the Church from Christ,
or to dismember himself from the said Church, Aug. trac. in epist. John.
Ephesians. 5.
or goes about to divide and separate the Church in herself (as S. Aug.
says) he dissolueth and diuides JESUS, and his Church which Christ boughte
with his precious blood, who declared in his death how displeasant division
and dissension should be unto him, so as without any other scripture, as
Theodoretus says. Impia and execranda dogmata per se sufficient ad suum patrem
ostendendum: wicked and execrable opinions are sufficient of themselves, to
declare unto the world their father and patron.

4. In the last of these lamentable examples, I ought not to let slip that
of Constance the uncle of Michaell Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, who
puttinge away his married wife, married his daughter in in law, for which he
was excomunicated by Ignatius the Patriarch of that City of Constantinople:
and the Emperor and his uncle being offended therewith, Photius was invested in
that Sea, and so to maintain himself in that dignity, he said that the Pope
was an heretic, and that the whole latin Church erred; so as you see, lust
and envy brought in heresy, heresy other mischeefes and wickedness into the
world.

By what deceit, hypocrisy, and dissimulation this heresy crept into other
Countries, by what perjury and forgerie they were deluded by it, and what
destruction, and desolation it brought with it. CHAPTER III.
1. AS in the time of the Roman Emperor Heraclius, Gusp in mahometo.
one Mahomett a souldior did combine with others against the said Emperor, by
the crafty devises of which companion, many Provinces banded themselves
against him, That league was renewed, first betwixt the lantgraue and other
princes 22 of Dece^b. 1530. and afterward the 29 of March 1531. against
Charles the 5. Sleyd. l. 18
where upon ensued a sudden decay, both in the ecclesiastical and civil
government of the East: even so Luther no sooner had hatched his heresy, but
that he procured by his deceit and hypocrisy, the Princes of Germany to
enter into the like combination or conspiracye against Charles the fifth at
Smacalde, notwithstanding they swoare allegiance unto the said Emperor, which
Luther said was not lawful to be observed or performed. So Sleydan a
protestant writer says, that because Caesar went about to hinder the religion
which they lately brought in, he gave them cause in conscience to oppugn him,
where upon there followed a cruel and bloody war betwixt Caesar and the
Protestants, Surius. An. 1525. Michell ab Iselt in sua hist. 1525.
which brought many provinces to ruin and destruction, besides the miserable
thraldom and slavery of the Turcks, under whose dreadful yoke, Hungary and
other Provinces adioininge thereunto, do lie grouelinge at this day.

2. At that time also Thomas Monzer priest, by Luthers instigation did stir
up a weak and slenderrable of Peasantes against the nobility and Clergy,
so as there were slain of them more then an hundredth thousand in Germany
that year. He burned 200. Castells and monasteries, murdered the Earl
Heluesten, with manny other nobles, so as Germany suffered more calamities
that present year of the Lutheranes, then they received of the Spaniardes and
French men the space of 10. Surius. An. 1525
years before. Also the Duke of Lorrayne slew in one Day 27. thousand
Peasantes that made insurrection against him, by the said Luthers procurement:
in Franconia 200. Castles and and Monasteries were burned by those rebels. The
like hauoke they made at Francfort, Mongontia, and Collen. The like garboiles
combustion and bloody tragedies, surpassinge the other in horror and
detestation, in all other Countries where this Hydria and infernal heresy
once got footinge, was stirred up and enkendled, as in Sauoy, Scotland,
France, Flanders, and in other borderinge Countries: and by what falshoode,
perjury and dissimulation yt infected Flanders, you shall imediatly see.

3. First this heresy was never known in Flanders before Anna Saxonia,
Michell ab Iselt in hist Surius historia. Florentius vander Haer de initijs
tumu^tuum Belgioru^.
a woman of Saxony, who was infected with Luthers heresy, was married to the
Prince of Aurenge, as other noblemen in Flanders unhappily were married to
other weomen heretics, as Herman was married with Count Hermans sister,
Florentius Pallentius, the Count of Cullenburge, and William Count of
Herenberge, all which were married to women of Germany. Idem in sua hictoria.
By these women the wicked people called the Geuses of Flanders, made their
insurrection against Margarett de Austria, Duches of Parma, and gouernesse of
Flanders, who was feign to fly from them as being over strong for her. But
yet to putt her in some comfort, one of her nobility said unto her. Non, non
Madame, ne craigne pas les Geux, that is to say, do not fear these wicked
people: from which time the heretics of Flanders were called Geuses, that is
to say, a sort of ragamuffines or miscreantes, The prince of Aurenge the
enginer of all the troubles of Fla^ders
whom the said Prince of Aurenge made his instruments to make a strong
rebellion in Flanders against Philipp the 2. king of Spain by whom he was
made Governor and deputy of Hollande, and by whose father the Emperor Charles
the fifte, he was made so great, as he was.

4. This rebellious prince of Aurenge, under pretense of deliueringe Flanders
from the bondage of Spain (as he alleged) brought this heresy into that
Country, which was the cause of all the troubles of Flanders for the space of
60. years, but by what dissimulation, perjury, and deceit the said Prince of
Aurenge did infect Flanders with this heresy, the Chanceler of Lone does
witness. Epistola Michaell Baysane Loua. de union statuum. An. 1578.
I was present (says he) when the Prince of Aurenge (the cause of all the
troubles of Flanders) made a protestatation at Mons, that his drifte was not to
disturb or vex any priest or religious person, or to offend the Catholic
Church in any thing, but to deliver Flanders from the slavery of the
Spaniardes. This very oathe he made before Mathias Arch-Ducke of Austria, unto
whom he was made lieutenante general, but this lewed companion never kept
his word, as the histories of Flanders do relate, but became a most cruel
persecutor of all ecclesiastical and religious persons, spoiled Churches,
violated and abused sacred virgins, destroyed Alters, troad underfoot the holy
sacrament of the alter, took away all the ornaments, which he profaned,
robbed all Churches and Monasteries of their Challices, and other sacred
implements dedicated to the service of almighty God, embrewed his filthy
murtheringe hands with the inocent blood of most virtuous priests and
religious men, not sparinge any order of persons though never so holy,
whereupon many of the nobility being offended thereat, with many Cities, as
Mastrick, Mo^s, Douay, Arras, and others forsook him, and yealded themselves
to the Prince of Parma.

5. Of the like falshoode, deceit and perjury was the bastard of Scotland
called James detected, base brother to the last Queen of Scotts, by whom
also he was made Regent of Scotland, and advanced by her means, to the
greatest dignity and wealth that Scotland could yealde. Notwithstanding for
all these kindness and obligations, as well by nature, as by such singular
promotions, benefittes and deserts, yea his vow and promise so often
iterated and solemlye confirmed with wicked oaths, yet being infected by John
Knocks an Apostate Friar, and afterward a minister and instrument of Calvin,
to enkendle the flames of that most wicked and damnable Heresy in that
Country (the Author and instrument of all the rebellion of Scotland) he
conspired against that sacred sovereign, murdered her husband, and
appeached her with the ymputation of that murder, who being most innocent
thereof, plotted, and stirred up such strong rebellions by her subjects
(himself being the chief Captain of this combustio^) as she was taken and
cast into a most filthy prison, where her death was threatened unless she would
resign the government of her kingdom unto that ouglie monster. And being
delivered out of that prison, she was feign to fly into England, where by the
procuremente of that bastard, she was cast into prison, which she suffered the
space of xx. years, and at lenghte, being Queen of France and Scotland,
notwithstanding was putt to death.

Hollens in hist. scholast. page 500.
6. This bastard and the rest of his Caluinian Confederates, sought nothing at
the beginning (as they pretended) but liberty of their conscience: which
being granted, they protested and swoare all dutiful allegance to the Queen
and state. Lib. 16. page 590.
But after they obtained what they sought for, they took perforce the whole
civil government into their own hands, and by their faction and combination,
suddenly grew so strong and insolente, that they denied the same liberty
of conscience unto her; and her husband. And as Buchanan in his Scottish
history says, when upon all saints day the Queen would in her Chapple
have had Mass after a solemn manner, the ministers of the Gospel (says
this auctor) encensed the nobility against her, that by force and violence they
should compel her to leave off: so that she was enforced to obey a crewe of
Caluinian ministers, which could do more in Scotland at that time, by their
new heresies (never in any request in that Country before) then their
aunciente and Catholic religion, by which they were converted from gentyles
to be Christians, which they professed so many hundredth years before, or the
duty of subjects to their Prince, or the power of the Prince her self, or
any fear of God, or respect of his laws, divine, natural, or any human
honesty or Civil modesty. Where you may perceive what liberty this wicked
and licentious heresy gives, how turbulente it is, what garboyles it brings
with it, unto which dissolute and wanton youths are most inclined: whereof a
number of that Country being in France to try their wits, or to raise their
fortunes, they brought with them from Calvin this poisoned doctrine, that
infected all that Country.

7. Not unlike unto this hypocritical pretense of Conscience, Calvin, Beza,
and his ministers used, to get footinge in France, although not with the like
success. After they had most solemly protested that they intended nothing but
only liberty of their conscience. And so in the assembly of Poyse, they did
swear obedience to Charles the nynth, and his successors, and uttered these,
words. We swear before God and your majesty who are our sovereign, that if
any of us hereafter shall misbehaue himself in kindlinge any sturr in France,
that we will ourselves persecute him with fire and sword. This protestation
was made by Beza, which not withstanding was the only author and firebrand of
all the misery, and calamities of France (as John Knockes and Buchanan in
Scotland) by whose plottes, and pollices, all France was in an uproar, all the
nobility divided by faxions, the civil government and political laws of the
kingdom utterly despised, the ecclesiastical laws and Censures of the Church
quite rejected, all sacred things profaned, Churches and monasteries burned,
sacred Virgins defloured, many preistes, and religious persons with most
unusual torments, murdered and massacred, the nobility destroyed, their
howses ransaked, by whose cruel hands most of the blood Royal of France was
extinguished, as the king of Nauare at the siege of Roane, the Duke
Monepenser, Rosorgomus. The Prince Dellphine. The Duke Memorose, the Duke of
Longauile. The Dukes Niuer, the father, the son, and the son in law, the
Constable of France, And manny Marshalls thereof, Saincta Derane, Mount
Moransius, Mattugon, Dauillan, Brisarus, Touanus, Byron, Francis Duke of Ioys,
besides manny thowsandes in the battles of Drintts, Saint Dennys, Iernan, and
Mount Counter, and at many other towns, as Roane, Rochell, and Saint Angel,
so as in one year more then a hundred thousand Frenchmen were slain, Beza
in praefat. noui testa menti ad Reginam Angliae. An. 1564.
yea Beza who made the said speech before the king, said that such as were
killed in these Battles (being rebels) were blessed Martyrs, because (says
he) they were the first that shedd their blood for the restoringe of the
gospel in France; And yet he with his fellow ministers, gave a solemn oath
as before is recited, to be true to the King, Crown, and Country. How many
thousand were also killed at other times in France, in other Civil wars, so
often renewed by these fellows?

8. Luther also says, Luther tomo in ser. f. 270 An. 1553.
that in seven weeks betwixt Easter and Whittsontyde, were killed of the
Peasants of Germanye, more then one hundred thousand; besides many millions of
people in other wars of that Country, especially when Albert the Marquis of
Bramdeburge did destroy with fire and sword all things that came within his
reach. Besides the destruction and desolation he caused in many places of
Germany. In Norriberge he burned a hundred villages, Towns and Castles, and
shutt up in them men and women, with children and old people which the fiery
flame consumed, Surius. An. 1553.
viz. at Alterfum and Laufum. Again did not Christiernus king of Denmark,
execute the like cruelty upon those of Stocholum the chief City of
Suethlande, after that he invited all the nobility with the two Archbishopps
viz. Sarcen and Stringeron, and then murdered them every one, and afterward
all the rest of the Citizens, notwithstanding he had given his royal word
to the contrary: in the execution of which murder, Surius. An. 1517.
he continued for many days.

That heresies are the cause of Revolution of Countries, and destruction of
state. CHAPTER IV.
1. Saint Gregory says that the conservation of the Common wealth, does
depend of the peace of the Church, and that for two reason; for that the law
of God commaundes us, that we should obey our kings and princes in things
that are not contrary to the said law of God, so that he that obeyes God, he
must needs obey his lawful Sovereign, because God almighty so commanded,
for that obedience we owe to the king, is part of that we owe to God. But
when men does cast away this bridle by heresy, or by anny other occasion of
their unbridled and incorrigible humors, as they have no fear of God, so bear
they noe duty to their Prince, or Sovereign. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 1. c.
11. Zozo. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Wherefore Constantius Clorus, father to Constantyne the great, a most prudente
and valiante Prince, intendinge to assay and prove the loyalty of some
Christian soldiers, he said unto them, that if they would renounce their
faith, and sacrifice to the Idols, Carol. Sig. lib. 2. de occiden. imperio.
they should abide with him and possess such honors, and promotions as they
had received of him: otherwise such as would refuse so to do, they should
depart from him. Some there were who for to gain the Princes favor did as he
commanded, and renounced their religion, others refused so to do. But
Constantius putt away such as did sacrifice to the Idols, and kept with him
such as refused so to do, saying that they were his best subjects, for
(quoth he) he that is a Traitor unto God, will also be a Traitor unto his
Prince.

2. Carol Sig. lib. 16. de occid. imp. Theodor. histor. l. 5. cap. 36.
The like also did Theodoricke being an Arrian heretic killing a Courtier of
his own whom he loved intirlie, for that from a Catholic he became an
Arrian only to please the kings humor, saying, that he could never keep
touch with man, that was not faithful unto God; Also the most valiant Martyr
S. Hornusta said unto the king of Persia, who commanded him to deny his
religion, and become an infidel, that if he should deny Christ, that was Lord
and Redeemer of the world, he should more easily deny him that was a
mortal man. Through want of faith therefore and good religion, rebellions are
stirred up against their Princes and Sovereigns, as also insurrections of
subjects, spoils and garboyles of Traitors, combustion and confusion of
Common wealths, and all other enormities and trespasses are committed. And as
Aristotele says: Cuius vsus est optimus, eius abusus est pessimus, the more
excellent and eminent a thing is if it be well used, so the more mischief it
ingenders, and the more ruin it brings with it, if it be abused. For as
nothing in this world is comparable in goodness to the Christian Catholic
faith: so when the same is abused by sects and divisions, nothing did ever
more trouble the Christian Common wealth: for that discordes in matters of
faith, do procure and engender discordes and differences in the hearts and
minds of them that profess the same, from which discords and variances
proceeds so manny mischeefes and reuolutions of Countries and kingdoms: and
kingdoms divided (as our Savior says) cannot long endure. Therefore
Theodosius the younger, being at Constinople, and saying his Empire divided
into sects by the heresy of Nestorius, he wrote an Epistle to that most
virtuous and holy man Simon Stylites, which at that time did flourish with most
rare example of sanctity, Act. Conc. Ephesians. edi. tom. 5. Ces. Baro. tomo 5.
An. 43^.
by which epistle he requested him very earnestly, that he should ask of God
peace and union for the Church; and added these words. Because that its
division does so afflict us, that it is the root and fountain of all our
evils and calamities. Wherefore whosoever will read the Chronicles of
kingdoms, and the ecclesiastical histories of the saints, he shall find
this to be true, by the wars that the Catholics had in the East with the
Arrians, and in Afric with the Donatists, and the Gentiles and Jews against
the Christians in all places.

3. And neither Jew nor Gentile are so infestuous and pernicious against the
Church and Christian Common wealth, as heretics, and especially those of our
unhappy times, and of all sects the Caluinistes, which are flames of sedition
and destruction of Church and Common wealth, an infernal firebrand that
burns wheresoever it takes place, which consumes to ashes all states and
Cities where it is nourished, not unlike the Cancker that eats and gnawes the
body that feeds it: thus much you shall know by readinge a book called
Incerdium Caluinisticum, printed 1584. Hollensen. hist. Angl. Anno 1554. idem
in histo. Scot. Anno 1567. Also the histories of the troubles of France lib. 1.
Anno 1565. The history of Flanders Anno 1555. in the additions of Surius 1585.
Stanislaus Rescius Ambassadors and Treasure, for the king of Poland in Naples,
did write a book 1596. De Atheismis and Phallerismis Euangelicorum nostri
temporis, videl. of Atheismes and Phallerismes, I mean cruelties of the
Evangelists of our time, neither only do they destroy kingdoms, but also
seek to deprive Princes of their lives, that oppose themselves against their
doctrine, for some of them conspired to kill Queen Marie, and one of them
confessed the same at his death, which was at Tiborn the 18. of May 1554.
Norman Lesby, James Meluine, and other Caluinists in Scotland murdered the
Cardinal of S. Andrews in his own house and chamber the year 1546. Stowe.
1554.
and this by approbation of John Knockes Buchanan and others, of the Geneuian
Consistory.

Doctor Hancraft in his book of dangerous positions. Lib. 4. c. 14. and in
historia. Ioh. Lesley ep. Ros^e.
4. Buchanan in his most wicked and ungodly declamation made at London against
his dread sovereign the last Queen of Scotts, incensed both English and
Scotts against her, to deprive her of her life and of her kingdom, whose
wicked desires, and desigmentes was putt in execution by the English in the
month of January 1587. which was a wonderful president and a miserable
spectacle to the whole world. Knocks and one Lindesay another reprobate
assistinge him, by their secrett combination with the Earl of Morton and
others, set up the Bastard of Scotland who after he was promoted to the
Earldome of Moraye and Regencye of that kingdom, Knox in the Scottish history
said that if princes be tyrants against God, subjects be freed from their
obedience. Call. in ep. Daniell. ver. 22. alleged by kellys d. Reply to
Sutcliffe the hugonots of France in their congregation, ar. 34 Luther also at
Sleydan has l. 8. Chro^. Zuing. lib. 4. Epist.
he went about to advance himself unto the Royal Scepter of the kingdom,
boasting himself to be borne in lawful weadlocke, and therefore that he was
the only legittimate son of his Father James the fifth. These impudent mates
write in their books, that by gods laws women should not be admitted to the
gouernmente of kingdoms: that the people of the gospel should not be tied
unto the laws of kindred: that kingdoms should not be given unto the next
degree of flesh and blood: and that it stood in the power of the people to
create kings, to depose or punish them at their pleasure, if they give cause
of offense: and this to be not only lawful for all the people, but for every
one: that he is praise worthy whatsoever private person he be, that should
kill any king that misgouernes himself: that the supreme authority
consists in the people and not in the king, and this they did write only to
take away the last Queen and her issue (as it is related by Adame Blackwoode)
who being big with child, was pitifully amazed and terrified at the bloodye
cruel and most horrible murder of her Secretary David Rice (a man of an
innocente life and a most devout Catholic) without law, Blacuodaeus Apolo
pro regibus cap. 2.3. and 4. Buchan.
reason, or any justice, which was practiced by these men's procurmente and
sinister devises, in her own sight and Chamber of presence, calling for her
help, who was not able to relieve him, her self being in the like danger, as
being strait conueide to close prison, and there taxed with an infamous
report and imputation of her honesty (she being most innocent thereof) which
was diuulged and spread abroad by their calumnious practice of slanderous
libells, reports, and letters to all Princes.

5. Did not these lewed mates, as soon as they revolted from the Catholic
Church, rebelle also against their Princes, and at one instant become enemies
of priests and Princes, so Stephen Bosgaie the Hungarian, and the Emperor
Rodolphe, his page, noe sooner became a Caluiniste, The rebellion of the low
countries is known by their own edic. printed at Francfort. 1583.
then he made all Hungary for the most part to join with the Turcke, and to
rebel against the said Emperor. Geneua noe sooner opened the gates for Pharell
and Calvin, but they shutt them against their lawful Princes. The Princes of
Germany revolted from Charles the 5. Emperor, as soon as they forsook their
faith and became Lutherans. Flanders has done the like especially such as
embraced these new sects, who rebelled against their lawful king and against
all his governors, as against Margaret Duches of Parma, and gouernesse, of the
same, who was threatened to be murdered if she should in any thing gainsay
them. In the same danger was her son, the Duke of Parma by gunnpouder and
vilde fire, which was prepared for him in a vaute to destroy him and all his
train at Antuerpe, and before him, Dom John de Austria by the treachery of
one Boniuetius a frenchman, Surius hist.
who was suborned by the Prince of Aurenge to murder him, and missinge of
their purpose, they devised his death by many other miscreantes; Also 1560 at
Geneua Calvin and Beza conspired and combined together to murder the king,
and to ransake and destroy all the Court of France, Surius 24
and persuaded Spifamius to be the Architecte of this detestable practice
being backed and entised therein by Otoman the Turque: the chief instruments
and compassers of which plotte, were punished the 24. of March of that year.
Lodowick the 13. Surius. 1567.
They set up and crowned also Lodouicke the Prince of Conde king, and called
him by the name of Lodouicke 13. the first Christian king of the Franckes,
against the true king thereof, this is proved by Peter Carpenters book a
hugonot, who writes that to noe other purpose were intended all the devises
and machinations of the Causaries (so he calls the hugonotts adi^cted to this
cause) then to abolishe and destroy the Queen mother with all her whelps,
and therefore said he; Beza charge and accuses the lompishnes and slow
endeavors of the causaries, through their quiett rest and peaceable disposition,
relented in their rancor and malice against the papists, and the king, and
that he accused he Hugonott princes for not destroyinge and killinge the
Princes of France, and that in all their assemblies and meetinges they never
once make any motion of peace, of God or his religion, but rather of wars,
troubles, tumultes and sedition: they also complotted the kings death at
Amboise, before the edict of pacification which was anno 1561.

6. The like is read of that unlucky Luther who wrote and wished the Citizens
of Hall, Sur. hist.
and the subjects of the Bishopp of Mongontia, to putt away, or murder their
Archbishop. And called Caesar, and all Christian Princes Traitors, Tirantts
and reprobatts: Idem ibid
he exhorted all those princes to wash their hands in the blood of the people
and Cardinals. Sur. hist. 1568.
Did not Farnar the kings governor at Rochell, betraie that town as soon as he
was infected with Caluinisme, and made the same to rebel against their king
by the instigation of North? Beza commended deceit, and that it is good to
embrace it sometimes, videlicet, to feign one thing, and to do another. Also
they sought to murder Herrestus Archbishop of Coline, and the Prince
Ferdinand his brother. What shall I speak of the two kings of France, Francis
and Charles the 9. how often have they rebelled against them, and how often
have they sought to murder them, as they have don Frances Duke of Guise by
the instigation of Beza, and by the treachery of Poltrot, for they never spare
to plott the like tragedy, when they can bring the same to pass, by
whatsoever means of dissimulation, deceit and hypocrisy as they write in
their own Books? Were not the Ministers of Scotland in the field with the
Earls of Anguish and Mar, and others against his majesty that now is? was
not their detestable plott of betraying their Country and Prince, detected by
the Earl of Gory, before his death? For that conspiracy did not Patricke
Galoway minister of S. John's, on Andrew Pollard subdeane of Glasco, James
Carnibel minister of Haddington, Andrew Hea person of Panfroe, Andrew Meluin
professor of divinity in S. Andrews, and diverse others chief ministers of
that Contry, fly into England, and for this traitrous fact were there received
and cherished? Did not Robert Pont and walter Baquanquell minister, by the
instigatio^ of James Lanson chief preachers oppose themselves against his
majesty's edict that now is, publicly at Edenborough? Did not these ministers
demand of his majesty, also to be admitted in parleame^t above their
bishopps? Is it not one of their chief articles, that it is heresy for any
king, to call himself head of the Church within his realm?

A prosecution of the last Chapter, that heresies are the causes of troubles
and disquiettnes. CHAPTER V.
THe other reason of these reuolutions, is the favor that kings and Princes
do give unto heretics, when they do not in time punish them, or at least
rid their Countries of them, because that kings or Princes, growinge
forgettfull of God, have a more respect to their temporal commodity, then
unto the will of God, or the good of his Church, thinkinge by their own
industry and reason of estate, themselves and their estate, be sure and
secure: yet God almighty does often suffer them to fall into great miseries,
and calamities, and their kingdoms to be overthrown and ruynated. Tripert.
hist. lib 8 cap. 13. Theod. l. 4
Valent. an Arrian Emperor did send against the Goathes his great Captain, and
a devout Catholic, who was called Traian, and was overcome by them, when he
returned he reprehended him, and called him Couard, he answered, it is you,
and not I that have lost the victory, for that you have forsaken God, he gave
the victory to the Barbarians against thee. Also the said Emperor in his
journey against those Goathes, was met by the holy Monk called Isacius, who
said unto him whether do you go having God against you, Theod. l. 4 cap. 30.
Metas. in vita Isacij
for against him thou make this war etc. give over thy wars against God,
and he will give over his wars against thee.

2. Valentinian the younger who being deceived of his mother Iustine, Theod
lib. cap. 14.
did favor the Arrians, was put to flight by Maximus the Tyrante, who made
himself Emperor, and so Theodosius the great did write unto him, that is was
goods just judgment, Carol. Sig. lib. 9.
that he should suffer that infamy, for that he forsook the true Christian
catholic religion, and favored the enemies thereof. So Winceslaus the 12.
Eneas Syl. hist. Bohemia. c. 35.
king of Bohemia by his false reason of estate, giving tolleration unto the
heretics, was both by them deprived of his life and kingdom.

3. Boleslaus Prince of Polland, In Chron. lib. 6. hist. Polo.
did suffer the people of Prusia to renounce their Christianity, and live in
Idolatry, for which they sent him a very rich present but was after
overthrown by them, with the ruin of all the kings and the nobility of
Polande.

Sabel. Aeneas 8 c. 6 Carol. Sig. de regu. Genebr. in Chron. An. 607.
4. Nicephorus Constant for that he favored secrettly the Manichees was
overthrown and slain by the Bulgares. The like example we have of Gessulfe
Duke of the Lombardes, who for fauoringe the Arrians, his army being
overthrown, was slain himself by the Auoros, whose wife betrayed the City
wherein she and her husband lived, to the captain general of them, thinkinge
to marry him after: but she first was dishonored in her body, and then hanged
a live upon a Gibbett.

Number. 16.
5. Not without cause did God say unto Moses, depart from the Tabernacles and
tents of wicked people, and touch nothing that belonges unto them: 4. Reg. 17.
God sent lio^s amoungst the people of Samaria for having Idols, Geneb. in
Chron.
both to kill and destroy them, wherefore the City of Parris has this for a
monumente engraven upon her gates, one God, one king, one faith, one law.

6. Hence it is written by the holy Ghost in these words. All the kings,
besides David, Ezechias, and Josias sinned, and that the kings of Judah
forsakinge God, and his laws, were with all their kingdoms delivered unto
others, and their glory to strangers: and although David did committ
adultery, and so Ezechias also offended by his ostentation, 2. Reg. 11. Isa.
39.
yet because they forsook not their faith, and religion, nor made shippwracke
thereof, it is not counted that they sinnned, for that to forsake our faith, is
the greatest sin that is.

That God does extend the rod of his wrath upon Princes and Common welthes
infected with heresies. CHAPTER VI.
1. THe sore punishmente and affliction, by which almighty God, does prosecute
this wickedness, many authors do treat thereof, esepcially the ecclesiastical
histories, Designis Eccl. lib. 5 cap 11. signo 16.
and of late Thomas Bozius. For none are more prone to wantones and riotous
misdeameanors, which every Heresy bringes with it then Princes, because
commonly they are brought up without due chastisment and correction, and
because each man soothes them to flater and misreporte the truth. As also
because they are loath to submitt themselves to the ecclesiastical discipline
and censure of the Church, or to acknowledge anny spiritual power in the
Church of Christ, to constrain them as it does heretics, of whom it is said
by the prophet and proved by experience, that the nation and people that
serves her not, shall perish: whosoever obeieth her not must be accounted as
Ethniques: and yet (to mantaine their absurd heresies) they do labor to
deface and infringe her authority as we see in all ages, yea only the
disobeinge the authority of the Church, and the censure of S. Peter, and his
successors, is the cause of all the heresies, that ever were, and the Princes
that hearken unto them, and forsook the Church, by defendinge them, were
utterly destroyed with their states. For what punishment does he deserve, that
under the pretense of Christianity, makes war against Christ, and he that
shall call himself the child of the Church, destroies and rayses a flame
therein? all which examples it were to long for me to repeat, for I will not
allege here, the dolfull and ruynous example of Constans and Valens Emperors,
who were enemies of the Church; neither of Hunericus king of the Vandals;
neither of Basiliscus the capital enemy of the Council of Chalcedon, who was
deprived of the Empire by Zenon; neither of Zenon himself, which was buried
alive by the commandment of Ariadne his wife, nether of Heraclius which in the
beginning was a catholic, and a valiant Prince, but after became an heretic,
Jonas 1.3. ibi. Ion and Paulus Diaconus lib. 7. c. 1. Carol. Sig. lib. 7. de
occid. imp.
and lost so many noble Provinces in the East, and dyed of a most shamfull
disease; nor of Anastasius, unto whom a vision did appear of a terrible and
dreadful man, with a book in his hand who opened the book, in the which the
name of the said Anastasius was written, and said these words, unto him; For
thy errors and perverse faith I will cut short of they life 14. years, and
blotted out his name, who a l^ttle afterward, was slain by a thunderbolte;
neither will I handle the miserable end of Constantius Copronimus, who was so
forsaken of God, that he cried out and said, I am cast into a fire, Sigib. An.
776.
which shall never be quenched; neither of Philip, who impugned sacred Images,
degraded and put from the Empire, and his name taken out of the Coin, and
public Roules, yea and blotted out of the Mass; neither of Leon Isaurus
Emperor also, Ion. lib. 7. de vitis illust. Geneb in Chron. Cedrenus and
Zonaras greci scriptores. Mich. ab Iselt hist. Surius hist.
who lost the occidental Empire, and was the cause that Gregory the 3. did
transfer it to Germanye, and the same translation confirmed by Leo the 3.
Nether of George Pobibratius, who persistinge in his obstinacy, and
perfidiousnes, was excomunicated by the Pope, and lost both the kingdom of
Bohemia and his life. The like did happen also in our days, to Christiernus
king of Denmark, who forsakinge the Catholic faith, was deprived both of
his kingdom and liberty. For omitting more examples, it is well known, that
God does not only punish wicked Princes with woeful ends, but also their
kingdoms and Provinces, who embraced heresies. And although the inconsta^t
course of this chaungeable world is such, that noe kingdom or monarchy can
houlde it self steadfast, or firm, or free from reuolutions, yet fatal
chance, and alteration for the most part proceeded of heresies and diversity
of sects in religion, and this you shall know by historical discourses, if
you will rippe up and peruse the anciente beginninges of these disastorous
euentes.

The reuolutions of of the Roman Empire began by the Goathes.
2. The Goathes were the first, that made their inundation in the provinces of
the weast Empire, and made also hauock of the ancient momuments of the Romans,
the monarkes thereof abusinge their powerful force and strenght, according to
their own sensual affections, and beastly concupiscence: ecclesiastical
censures being not obeyed, for that the most part of the Christian Princes,
held in contempt (by the instigation of heretics then springinge up) all
spiritual regiment and jurisdiction of the Church. The Goathes brocken by
heresy. Carol. Sig. de occid. ^mp. l. 8.
The Goathes themselves as long as they were Catholics, were most valiant
conquerors, but by the instigation of their Bushopp called Vlsillus, an Arrian
heretic, they were presently divided by sects and discordes, and overcome
by the Hunnes. Atilla their king like a most raginge swifte stream
ouerunning, and destroying all where he came till, he had dispossessed those
Goathes of all the Provinces they had taken. Libr. 2. sacrae hist. epist. 93.
And when those Goathes came to Spaigne and overcame it, the heretics called
the Priscillians, infected it. When the Vandalles destroyed Affrike and made
themselves Lords of the same, Africque confounded by heresy.
the heretics called the Donaitstes, perverted and sowed their heresies there.
Africi abundantes immense multitudine Donatistarum quibus praecipites se
dederunt in gurgitem turpitudinum, vnde Deivindicta factum est, vt dedignantes
sanctis obtemperare sacerdotibus etc. As Saluianus Bishopp of Marcell and
Caesar Baronius seteth down, Ann. 427. and 428.
when Affricke did abound with infinite swarms of Donatistes, by which they
were owerwhelmed in the gulf of all filthiness: by means whereof, and for not
obeyinge the holy priests, the wrath of God was executed upon them, and by
the just judgment of the almighty, they were rendered up to the merciless and
bloodye hands of the Barbarians. France destroyed in time of heresy.
Likewise when the Franckes breakinge out of Germany, wasted all France, the
heresy of Vigilantius took footinge therein. And when the Longobardes occupied
and spoiled Italy, Italy destroyed by heresy.
diverse sorts of heresies were embraced there, especially against the council
of Constantinople, and Chalcedon. As also when the Normanes violently rushed
into France, the French showed little obedience to the Church.

3. But what shall I say of that wreatched and miserable time, when the
Sarasins breakinge out of Arabia, despoiled and wasted the most notable parts
of all Asia, with so many sharp storms and troublesome garboiles? The East
in a miserable estate by heresy.
Was not this pestilente generation, first set abroache by the instigation of
wicked Mohomett, borne for the ruin and destruction of mankind: whose force
(the division and heresies of Nestorius in the east encreasinge) more, and
more increased? Was not Sergius, for that he was exiled out of Constantinople
for that heresy of Nestorius, the helper of this Mahomett against the
Catholic religion, as Luther and Calvin do now a days help and further
the Turcks and other reprobates of that sta^pe and liuerie, against the
Catholic Church? Marcell. in Chron. Cesa 10 6 An. 445.
Was not such a tumultuous broyle and confuse disorder made at Constantinople
by the procurement of the heretics, the very time when Nestorius hatched his
heresy, as that Marcellinus does report, 445. that the sedition was so
great, that many killed themselves? yea such a slaughter was committed, that the
streates did stincke with dead carcasses, famine, and pestilence, disease, and
wreacke of all things, which did happen there, the chief Church of that noble
City being burned: so as no sooner did that ougly blossom bud forth, Marc.
24. Daniel. 9.
but that noble City of all Cities (before that heresy) most florishinge,
was become most lamentable and desolate, for heresy ever brings with it
abomination, and desolation, as the sacred scriptures prove. Constantinople
taken.
Afterward in the year of our Lord 1453. the said City was distroyed and
taken by the Babylonian and Turkish Pharao, for that they held diverse heresies
against the holly Ghost, and for that they did break from the determination
of the Counsels of florence, wherein they were reunited unto the Roman
Church, their Emperor John Paleogus, and their Patriarche consentinge thereunto.
And as long as religion did flourish in Greece, their Empire also did flourish;
and when religion failed, their Empire was turned unto a perpetual moorninge
and pitiful slavery of insufferable tyrants, and Sathanicall crewe of
Turkish burden. And in the year 1558. the Province of Libonia which was of the
knights of our Lady de Teutonica, was taken by the Duke of Muscouia, when they
lost their faith and ymbraced the heresy of Luther. Hungary and Trasiluania
may to their great cost bear witness also that this is true, who forsakinge
their Catholic faith, are overwhelmed with the infernal thraldom of turkish
Pharao.

4. Wherefore should I not spreake of great Britain, since Gildas that most
eloquente and aunciente true writter of that time, says. The Britains
brought for their a^de the Englishmen against the Pictes, and Scotts, at
which time it was altogether destroyed by the heresy of Pelagius give a Moncke
of Bangor: for chastisment whereof, almighty God suffered the Englishmen to
turn the edge of their sword upon those that sent for them, for their
defense, Vortiger was the leader of the Church when old Britans wear destroyed.
and dispossessed them of their Country, and made themselves Lord thereof, and
called Brittanie England by their own name: so that heresy did so increase
in that kingdom about the time that S. Gregory did send S. Augustine, and
other holy mounckes thither to preach the Catholic faith therein, that 9.
heretical bushoppes being there before them, no one catholic bishopp was
found. Ireland also when the English in king Henry the 2. got footinge
therein did little esteem the sacred censure of holly Church, Bern. in vita
Malachiae. Dolman. Lib. 2.
and the noblemen of that kingdom did usurp Church liuinges as may appear by
S. Bernard. Edward the 3. being a most glorious king, his end was pitiful,
his heir king Richard after infinitt sedition, contention, and blood-shedd of
the nobility and others was deposed and made away, the bloody division of the
house of lancaster, and yorcke came in, and endured almost one hundredth
years, with the ruin not only of the royal line of La^caster, by whom
especially John Wittcliffe a perverse heretic condemned in the Council of
Constance, was favored at the beginning, but with the overthrow of many other
Princes and families and most pernicious wars and garboyles continued both at
home, and abroad with the loss of all the states and Provinces of France.
Thomas Walsingham settes down the Commotion of King Richard the 2. his time,
against the nobility and Clergy under their seditious Captains, Jack
Straw, Watt Tyler, and the rest, and so again under other kings whilst
this heresy lasted, and namly against the two most valiant Catholic Princes
Henry the 4 and 5. his son: in the first year of whose rain, to wit king
Henry the fifth, John Stowe writes thus. That the favorers of Wi^cleefe his
sect did nail up scedulles upon the Church doors of London containinge,
that there were an hundredth thousand ready to rise against all such as could
not away with their sect. The first tumu^tes of Pollardes and Wicliffians in
England were Anno 1414. and hereon followed the open rebellion of Sr. John old
Castle and Sr. Roger Acton and others in S. Giles f^lde by Holborne,
nevertheless this sect could never take hold or prevail in England, neither
then or after: until four points thereof, being renewed by Luther and
Zuinglius, the later, I mean Zuinglius his sect, was admitted in king Edward
h^s days.

5. Did not the king of Denmark bring the people of Thretmarse which were a
free state, into a vilde thraldom, after they were Lutheranes? whereas, as
long as they were Catholics they were a free state of their own. Ces. to. 4.
An Christi 379. S. Amb. in libris ad Gratianu^. Caes Baro. to. 4. 379.
S. Ambrose also does prove the same as Caesar Baronius does allege, and
says: Vna cum haeresi in regna cladem inuehi, and cum fide catholica salutem
ferri etc. that noe sooner heresy was brought in, then presently the
kingdoms where it crepte in, were overthrown, and quickly destroyed: and were
again restored and established by Catholic religion. This he spoke of the
Empire of the east, sicque in occidente accumulari victorijs Gratianum: that
in the weast by the Catholic religion, Gratianus the Emperor did increase in
many victories. Cum in castris excubant cum gratia atque precibus Sacerdotum
sancta religio, when the priests in the Camp did watch in prayers and other
exercises of sacred religion. Contrariewise you shall see the happy and
florishinge Empire to decay and cast topsie, turuie when the Emperor did favor
heretics, or at least when they were slack in defendinge the Catholicque
religion, adeo, says he, vt perspicue intelligas claram victoriam religionem
penitus consequi, hereses tristes erumnas euocatas ab inferis secum ducere, so
as you may plainly perceive, that by religion victory was gotten, and also by
heresy woe and wreake, and all other dolfull calamity and hellish confusion
was brought to the wo^lde. The like assertion has holy Basil, Basil. ep. 69
Caes. Bar. to 4. An. Christi 363.
quod enim comune est ciuitatibus omnibus vt cum semel hereticis aurem
praebent, mox vna cum heresi dissentiones, rixae, ac mala omnia sugata recta
^ide paceque subintrent, ita plane Neocesarientibus accidit, that which is
incident to all Cities, when once they give ear unto hereticques, presently
true faith being once abandoned dissentions, debates, and all other
mischeefes will creep in, as we see an evident example to those of
Noecessaria, what heresy, says he, but which was contraire to the traditions
of S. Gregory the great, his words be these, aduersaria traditioni magni
reuera Gregorij.

6. tomo 4. An. Christi 371. many heresies in the East.
The like misery you may read by the Epistles of those holy Saints videlicet
Mile^ita^us, Eusebius and Basilius to the Bushoppes of Italy and France and
related by Caesar Baronius, in which he wrote as follows. Miserandus status
orientalis ecclesiae etc. The state of the East Church is to be pitted, for
not only two or three Churches have fallen unto this dangerous tempest, but
that mischief of heresy has extended her self from the bonds of Illi^ia
unto Tebaira the seed of which was first sowed by Arrius, and afterward was
gathered by wicked people, who have brought forth wicked and pernicious
fruits: and discipline and doctrine of piety and goood life is overthrown,
all bonds and obligation of honesty and charity is confounded and decaide,
none has sway over others, but he that is most wicked: whose reward is the
government of others, and he that exceedes others in blasphemies, exceedes all
in the episcopal dignity. The gravity of Bishopps is lost, the honesty of
Pastors is gone, the holy Canons of the Church are troade underfoot, the
relief of the poor is altogether abused to their filthy use. The occasions
of all such mischeefes are laid open by Saint Optatus Milenitanus, who
having reckoned the bloody and cruel acts of the heretics called
Donatistes, he applied that place of the scripture unto them. Veloces pedes
eorum ad effudendum sanguinem, Cruelty of heretics Mauritaniae videl. the sea
coast of Affrique next unto Europe.
their feet are very swifte to shedd blood. And then adds In Maritaniae
ciuitatibus etc. In the Cities of Mauritania by your procuremente they were
affrighted with many garboiles, Children were kilde in their mothers bellies,
men were murdered and torn in pieces, matrons were violated, infantes were
slain by riping up their mothers bellies, behold this your Church which was
mantained and vpholden by cruel and bloody Bishops, whose greatest fury,
and vildest fact, although in their estimation it seemed the lightest, was
extended unto that which was most sacred and holy, which those ympious
sacrilegious, and Sathannicall Bishops have violated, they cas^ the Eucharist
unto dogs, not without manifest tokens of Gods divine revenge, for those
dogs being enkendled with rage and madness, insulted upon their masters. Hi
sancti corporis, guilty of the holy body, and toare them in pieces, and some of
them did cast forth out of a window a box of holy Chrisme to break it, but
the angelical hand by Gods protection preserved it from being broken,
amoungest the stones; The like sacrilege the heretics of our days being
misled by the same Sathanicall spirit do co^mitt and perpetrate. And having
recorded other wickedness of those hereticques in all these execrable
procedinges, said this blessed Author, the Bishops, and priests felt their
greatest smarte, so that the Bishops, and priests being taken away, the
people would be utterly and easilye deluded, and overcome, for how can the
flock defend themselves when a multitude be governed without a rector, noe
otherwise then the Pastor being taken away, the sheep would be a booty for
the wolfes: by your wicked advise the faithful are disarmed, the priests are
dishonored and spoiled of that reverence, which ought to be given unto them in
honor of his holy name, by whom they were ordained. For they were made
perfect by him and worthy of all reverence; and therefore you abuse Gods
vocation, and with all hostility you proceedee utterly defacinge Gods
work, destroyinge by the engines and inuentious of your malice, Psalm. 10.
Gods divine ordinance, and therefore of you it is said. Quoniam quae tu
perfecisti, ipsi destruxerunt; for whatsoever thou (o God) broughtest to
perfection, they brought to destruction. What is more wicked then to exorcise
the holy Ghoast, to break altares, to cast the Eucharist unto brutish beasts?
And in the 9. book he says; Quid enim tam sacrilegum est quam altar dei in
quibus vos aliquando obtulistis, frangere, radere, and remouere. What is more
sacrilegious then to break, to cut, and remove thoses altares, upon which
sometimes your selves did offer, in which the suffrage of the people, and the
members of Christ are carried, in which the omnipotent God is called upon, in
which by your prayers the holy ghoast comes, and descendes? Vnde a multis
pignus salutis aeternae etc. from whence comes the pleadge of everlasting
salvation, the safeguarde of our faith, the hope of our resurrection is
received; for what is the alter but the lodginge and seat of the body and
blood of Christ? All these you in your fury and rage have either torn, or
brocken, or removed: wherein has Christ offended you whose body and blood
dwelled there for certain momentes? You have brocken Challices which carried
the blood of Christ, and converted the use thereof and form into Lumpes,
exposinge them to a wicked sale, and have herein redoubled your villainy by
sellinge them to filthy women, pagans have boughte them to turn them for to
make sacrifice to their Idols. O wicked act, o unspeakable villainy, to take
from God, that which you have dedicated to Idols, to rob Christ to the end
you might exercise more sacrilege. What horrible feats have you practiced
toward sacred Virgins, consecrated and dedicated to almighty God, from whom
you have taken away they veyle of their dedication? Thus far this blessed
Saint Optatus Milleuitanus, Caes. tom. An. Christi. 362.
as Caesar Baronius does relate. The like tyranny was exercised and atchiued by
Julian the Apostate Emperor, for he made an edicte, which he diuulged in all
places, to rob, and spoil Churches, against whom S. Nazian. framed his
speech thus. Naz. oratione prima in Iul.
Your edict was as well priuatlie and actually executed, as it was publicly
diuulged, and proclaimed against sacred and religious howses. For that I should
let slip, the spoylinge and ransakinge of Altares, taking away of all
religious ornaments, and donatiue^ from sanctuaries, and holy places, which
were a booty unto his insatiable and greedy desire, which was putt in
execution by wicked instruments, his impiety and covetousness instigatinge him
thereunto, he determined also to deprive the Christians of all liberty, and
trust in the common wealth, and to inhibitt them of all Counsels, marcketts,
assemblies, and iudgmente: neither could any have the benefitt of thies
things, but such as would sacrifice to Idols. O laws and law makers and
kings, who as the beauty of the heavens and splendour of the sun, yea as the
brething of air, by common clemency exposed, to all; and that truly
superabundantly, do you so make the use of laws equal to all free men, and
reverenced of all, that you decree to deprive Christians of it, that being
even tiranically oppressed, they may not be able to exact the penalties, nor to
sue any one for any wrong or extortion done against them. For to practice
these things, the hangman, yea that homicide (said, the said Saint) pretended
justice, Matt. 5. Romans 12.1. Cor. 6. Matt. 10.
and did use a collorable defe^se of scripture, in so doing. For he alleged
the places of scripture that Christians ought patiently to bear all wrongs,
to suffer al injuries, rather then once offend any. That we should possess
nothing or have any propriety, and that we should despise, and set at naught
all things, that either the ear does hear, or the eye does see, or the flesh
can feel, that we should render good for evil, if a man would strike us upon
the one cheek, we should turn the other, and that we should possess
nothing but our Cloak, Ruff. lib. ^ cap. 32. Annianus lib. 22.
or our Coat, with many such places.

7. But that of all most to be deplored, he inhibited Christians the schools
of Rhetorique or Gra^mer, wherefore the said Naz. did most bitterly inueigh
against him saying: what reason have you of all men most inco^stant, to go
about, to take away from Christians the use of learning, thus far S. Naz.
against Julian. Also in the year of our Lord 366. when the Arrian heresy was
promoted by the favor of the Emperor Valens, the said holy man made a most
eloque^t Oration, the title whereof is called ( Ad sancta Laminia) when that
heresy (said he) was guarded and adorned with the ymperiall crown of Valens
and so like a sawsie princocke grew so insolente, not unlike the daughter of
Herodiades, being not contented with the gift of the head of one S. John
Baptist, was made droncke with the blood of many Bishops and holy people, in
the repressinge whereof, the blessed Saint showed his great desire, and as in
the state of the East Church in those days if the Lord of hoastes, non
reliquisset Hobis semen etc. had not left some seed with us, we had been like
to Sodom and Gomora, and as they had S. Naz. and holy Basil, so we have most
virtuous holy and learned Doctors to repress this wicked heresy, which as it
does exceed all the heresies that ever were in ympietie of Doctrine and
wickedness of life, so it does also surpass all Heretics, Infideles, Turcks,
and Jews in all bloody feats, cruel exploites, Babilonian confusion,
tragical desigmentes, devilish purposes and plottes, yea and strange invented
laws newer heard of before, with their most rigorous execution.

You see the fruit of heresy the complotters and compassers thereof, the
chief Architects of her detestable practice, her effiminacye and luxurious
wantones, her inducementes to all abominable pleasures and licentious
liberty, her bloody imbrumentes and lamentable tragedies in every country,
where she was nourished and invented, which brought a mass of misery and
calamity with it to those places that received her, the shipwreck of whose
opulente and aboundante fortunes, can bear witness thereof, obstinate pride,
presumptuous and turbulent spirittes, dislike and disdaininge of good order and
sound discipline, contempt and despising of authority, curiosity and
affectation of novelty, coffeehouse and disquietnes of minds, through
ympatience of filthy lust, and other malignante private humors, which were
never inspired by the spirit of God, but by the suggestion of the diuill who
was the cause thereof.

Of the miserable death and ends of such as devised and defended the
protestant Religion, as also other heresies. CHAPTER VII.
1. THe first plotter of this heresy was Martine Luther, Luthers death.
whose life as it was most wicked, so his end was noe less miserable. He
after that he had surfeyted through one nights gossopinge, himself being
filled intemperatlie up to the throat, was found dead in the morninge with his
wife, and as it is suspected was choked by her. Henrye Zuthphan, which was the
first that brought Lutheranisme into Breame, was afterward burned at
Meldorphe in Thretmarsse Anno 1524. Hulderique Zuinglius, an Apostate Priest,
in a furious skirmish, being leader of the Tigurians, whom he brought to that
doleful battle, animatinge them to the combatte, as surmountinge their
adversaries in multitude of soldiers, were all overthrown, and he himself
was found dead amoungest the dead carcases, and was cast into the fire,
Zuinglius death. Conrad. in Theolog. Fox. page 444.
so as he suffered a double death by fire and sword. Of whom the Epitaph was
made thus. Occul uit patrio bellator Zuinglius ense,
Et gressa est armis gens populosa suis.
Zuinglius the Warior was slain in the field And the sword of his Country
did pierce, Genebrardus in Chron. 2. fol. 72.
His side by many bloody batles fought: His Country unto ruin he brought.

Co^radus a Lutheran protestant writes, that God manifested his iudgmente
upon Calvin, even in this world, whom he visited in the rod of fury, and
punished him horribly before the dreadful hour of his unhappy death; Caluins
dreadful death.
for (says he) God by his powerful hand did so stricke this heretic, that
being in desperation, blaspheminge, and cursinge the name of God, and calling
upon the diuills, he yielded up his wicked ghoaste, having an vglye and
filthy apostume in his privy parts, out of which there issued such a number
of loathsome and stinckinge woormes, Carolostadius his death. Epistola de morte
Carolastadi^. Oecola^padus death.
that not any could abide to come nere him: this far the said Author;
Carolastadius was slain by the diuill, as the ministers of Basil themselves
do witness. Oecolampadius also a married Mounque of the order of S. Brigget,
and one of the first and principalest Architectes of the protestante religion,
was found slain in his bed, by his wives side, and that by her or rather, by
the diuill himself, Luth. lib. de Missa priuata.
as Luther thincketh. The Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgraue of Hesse, which
were the chief promotors and Patrons of lutheranisme, were in battle
vanquished by Charles the fifte, deprived of their dominions and kept in
prison by him many years. The Prince of Condye, The prince of Condys death.
and the admiral of France, which were the Patrones of the sect of Calvin,
or hugnottes in that Country, were also vanquished and overthrown in the
field with their king, after many other overthrows and slaughter of their
adherentes, the one, I mean Condie, was slain in the battle of Iarnan, the
other was killed in a triumph at Paris his carcass being cast from the topp of
a high house, his neck being broken and his body torn, was drawn by a rope
through the streates, and hanged not much unlike to Iezabell, where also the
Prince Montgomery was beheaded, being a great defender of Caluinisme.

2. The death of such in England as were ^atrons of Protestancie.
The same miserable end they tasted also that were the patrones of this wicked
gospel in England as Queen Anne Bullen Thomas Cromell, the Duke of
Somersett, and Thomas Cranmer Bishopp of Canterbury. The first was accused,
arraigned and convicted of a filthy incest; her supposed Father being the
judge thereof, and by his sentence putt to death, who was so besotted of her
filthy love. The next was condemned and putt to death for heresy and high
treason by king Henry the eighte unto whom he yealded himself both soul and
bod^e before, by the law he made himself videlicet, whosoever should be cast
into the tower, he should be put to death without examination. Fox act and
monuments 563. whom he called the wall and defense of the protestant Chruch.
The third which was the Duke of Somersett, being uncle unto king Edward, his
vicar general in all ecclesiastical causes and protector, and as it were
king of the whole Realm, was deprived of all authority, and publicly
beheadded. The last which was Cranmer, after abiuringe his wicked heresy at
Oxford by Queen Marie. Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, William Ierom, being
the first chief instruments that King Henry the 8. had to persuade the people
touching the kings supremacy in ecclesiastical causes, were by the said
king Henrye burned afterward, and the said Barnes being there at the stake,
and the flame ready to lay hold upon him, said these words. By our means
the king was made absolute king of England, whereas before, he was but half
a king, and for our pains, this is the reward we have. Anno Domini 1540.

Prince of Aurengs death.
3. The Prince of Aurenge that was the author and enginer thereof in flanders,
was slain with a pistole in his new wives lap, by Balthazer Gerard.

Ludouicus Nalconius, brother to the said Prince, and the chief author of the
rebellion of the said low Countries, in the battle of Mokens which he lost,
the Spaniardes having gotten the victory, was burned in a little cottage
alive, whether he fledd for safeguard. In that battle also, his Brother Henry
perished, as his brother Adolphus, did perish a little before in Frisla^d,
William Lumenus the Earl of Mansfil, after defilinge his murtheringe hands
with the cruel death of many religious persons, priests and Catholics in
Holland and Zeland and other places, was killed by an English dog that
himself brought up.

4. The Bastard of Scotland, The Earl of Moray his death.
James Earl of Moray, that troubled Scotland with the same heresy in his
greatest triumph being accompanied with 500. horsemen at Lith, was shot by a
gunn, by which he was slain, the author thereof escapinge harmles: and
notwithstanding he was admonished the night before, that there was such a plot
laid for his destruction, yet he did not shunn it. James Duglas Earl of
Morton, a great defender of Caluinisme and persecutor of the Catholics, was
beheaded at Edenborough for treason against his majesty's Father.

5. The first that brought it to Denmarque was Christiernus king of that
Country, who was deprived of his kingdom, and banished by his subjects, and
being by the entreaty of Charles the fifte, and Henry the 8. his kinsmen
returned home, was apprehended of his subjects and cast into a filthy cave,
where he ended his life most miserably.

The first who preached protestancy in Ireland.
6. The first that ever preached protestancie in Ireland, was George Brown, who
in king Harries days was made Archbishop of Dublin, the capital city of
the kingdom of Ireland, and the first sunday he preached the protestant
religion at Dublin, he made a Catholic sermon at Christ's Church, and desired
his audience never to believe him, if (through frailty of the flesh, fear of
the Prince, or love to temporal interesse) he should preach the contrary:
and the very next sunday ymediatly followinge, he preached protestant
religion, which was nothing else then a denial of that which he preached the
sunday before. Unto whom some of the Aldermen of that City said. My ^o. do
you not remember that you wished us not to believe you, if happily you should
preach the contrary of that you preached the sunday before? To whom he
answered sainge, I must needs have done so or else have lost my living. This
man, when Queen Marie came in, upon his recantation, was restored to his
living, and the night that his Bull came over, he was found dead in the
morninge. Some said he died for very great joy about midnight when upon the
sudden he received news that he was restored to his Archbishoprique.

7. Norfolks his death.
The Duke of Norfolk which gave his verditt for the supplantinge of Catholic
religion, and for the aduancinge of the protestancye with Queen Elizabeth in
her first parleament assembled for that purpose being thereunto solicited by
his Brother in law the Earl of Arundell, under pretense to marry the said
Queen, unto whom she made a promise of mariadge, Sanderus de schismate
Angliae.
if the said Earl with his faction would help her, for the alteringe of
religion, was arraigned, condemned of high treason, and was beheaded for the
same, which a certain ^atrone meeting him goinge from the pleament prophesied,
tellinge him that he should never have a better end or reward of them, for
whom he gave his voice and suffrage against the Catholic religion. And the
said Earl being frustrated of his purpose, and deceaud of his hope, died
soon after for very grief, and without issue, and perhapps if he should have
lived longer, he should have tasted that Cup for his labor that his brother
in law had done before him. The said Duke his eldest son called Philip
Howarde and Earl of Arundell, was arraigned condemned of high treason, and
died in the Tower of London.

8. Sr. John Perott, when he was Lord presidente of the Province of Mounster in
Irelande, was the first that caused the parish priests, and other incombents of
port Towns in that Province, to ymbrace the English service, which when they
told him they could not understand the English, his aunsweare was, that they
should chatter like Geese. He putt to death a priest called Sr. Thomas
Coursie, vicar of Kinsale by marshall law, for that he went to persuade Sr.
James fitz-Morice to restore the pray which he had taken from Kinsale. This
man in the midst of his greatest honor being lord deputy of Ireland, and
one of the preuie Council of England, was apprehended, arraigned, and
condemned of high treason, and died very miserably in the tower, his lands
and goods being all confiscated.

Deuteronomy. 31.
9. Laudate gentes populum eius, quia sanguinem seruorum suorum vlciscetur and
vindictam retribuet in hosts eorum. Let the gentiles praise gods people,
because he shall revenge the blood of his servants, and will pay home, their
enemies with a revenge: as may appear by the horrible and dreadful punishment
of all other persecutors and heretics. As of Pharao the first persecutor of
Gods Church Exodus 14. Of Dathan and Abiron the first Scismatiques Numeri 16. of
Iezabell 4. Reg. 9. of Antiochus 2. Machab. 9. Of Pilat who killed himself, as
Eusebius writes lib. 2. c. 7. and declares the destruction of the Jews which
Josephus setts down lib. de bello Iudaico. Of Herod Ascolonita who was eaten
by woormes after he had slain his wife and Children and went about to slay
himself as Josephus declares lib 17 antiquita cap. 9. Of Herod the Tetrach
who lost his kingdom lived in perpetual banishment according to the said
Joseph. lib. 18 cap. 14. of the daughter of Herodiades read Nicheporus lib. 1.
caput. 20. of Herod Agrippa read Act. 12. Nero Domitian and other wicked
Emperors who persecuted the Church, either slew themselves or else were slain
by others as all histories do wyttnes. Dioclesian for that he could not
destroy the Church, for very grief gave over his Empire, the Emperor
Maximianus and Maximine were chasticed with such a horrible disease, that the
Pagan Physicians said it was the plague of God, as Eusebius wrieth in Chronico.
and lib. 8. hist cap. vlt. and lib. 9. cap. vlt.

10. As touching old heretics, they tasted the like dreadful death. Simon
Magus when he would fly, by the prayers of S. Peter, he fell headlonge down
and was kilde Egesippus lib. 3. caput. 1. de excidio. Also Arnobius l. 2. con.
gentes. Manicheus the heretic was flaid alive by the king of Persea, because
intendinge to cure his daughter, he killed her. Epiph. here is. 66. Montaine,
Theodotus and their prophets, hanged themselves Eusebius. lib. 5. hist, cap. 19.
The Donatistes that cast the Eucharist unto dogs, were torn in pieces by the
said dogs. Optat. lib. 1. Parmenianum. Arius goinge to Church, went to purge
nature when together which his excrementes, he did cast fourth all his
intralles and presently died, as S. Athanasius wittnesseth, oratione cont.
Arrianos and Ruff. lib. 10. hist. cap. 13. And although there may be some
heretical Princes or Common wealths that have not felt as yett any of these
calamities, and perhaps they brag and boast of their great pleasures and
prosperity, noe otherwise, then the woman does in the Apocalipes, sedeo regina
and vidua non sum, and luctum non videbo. I sit as a Queen, I am not a
widdowe and I shall not bewail, truly at lenght after all their great
security they shall have a sudden fall, and let them take example by the
doleful overthrow of others that have lead their lives in pleasures, and have
abused their power against gods Church, and the members thereof, let all men
know that all heresies be fatal, ominous, and unfortunate, especially to the
first professors thereof. Vltio sanguinis seruorum tuorum qui effusus est
introcat in conspectu tuo gemitus compeditorum. Psalm. 7.

Whether there be nothing that the Protestants affirmatively believe, confess,
and profess, but the Church of Rome does believe the same, and cannot be
denied by Catholics, but that they are most ancient and consonant with the
word of God. CHAPTER I.
1. ALl Heretics say (as Lactantius reports) that their own religion is
very good and agreeable to the word of God, Lib. 4 diuinist. cap. vlt.
and better then others. It is natural to every beast according to Pliny to
think his own shape more beautiful then the rest, Plin. lib. 8. cap. ^4.
Plin. ibid.
yea such as are most deformed, thinks themselves most beautiful, as the Apes
do, which though they do counterfeit men's shapes, or gestures never so much,
cannot be said to have the form of men: so these sectaries, though they like
Apes in imitation, have taken from us some, parts out of the Mass as may
appear; and in their spiritual courts, visitations, conuocations, and
excommunications (although in deed none ought to excommunicate, but he that
can absolve, they by their own doctrine cannot absolve therefore they cannot
excommunicate) yet for all that, they cannot be said to have the true form of
Religion, or the true Church, for the ecclesiastical form, and government of
your Protestants is rejected by the Puritantes, contemned by the ministers of
Calvin and Beza, and other Hugonottes of France, as part of the relics of
Antechrist, your common prayer book being called by them in contempt, the
missall of England. If such as you yourselues cales protestants, do disprooue
your Religion to be altogether against the word of God; how much more will the
Romish Church, say the like who do differ from you almost in every point?

2. In the Book of dangerous positio^s in the 9. chapter set forth Anno 1593.
by Doctor Bancraft of Canterbury, it is alleged, that the Puritants do say
of the common book of public prayers videlicet: that it is full of corruption,
and that many of the contents thereof, are against the word of God: the
sacraments wickedly mangled, and profaned therein; the Lords supper not eaten
but made a pageant, and stage play: that their public baptism is full of
childish superstitious toys: and so many Puritants did write against it, that
England will never do well until that book be burned. 1. admonitio ad Parla.
page 9 41. 43.
Also the superintende^t of Rateburge, and the cheifest ministers in Germany
having read Caluines woorckes printed An. 1592. at Francfort. In timore Domini
says he, legi and relegi, dico in Christo Jesus etc. Caluinistarum lib. 3. in
pref. Apost. lib. 1. a. 2. fol. 9.
I have read and perused them the space of 23. years, I auoutch it before
JESUS Christ, says he, that all the Caluinistes do nourish in their breasts
the Aryan and Turkish ympietie, and that they open windows and gates, for
Arianisme and Mahometisme, as our books publicly set forth do manifest the
same; and so brought an example of Adam Newser, the chief Pastor of the Church
of Hedelberge, Ibid. f. 9.
who from a Zuinglian, be came an Arian, and afterward a Turcke: which three
sects I mean Caluinisme, Arianisme, and Mahometisme, John Schutz in lib. 50.
Causarum causa 48.
another protestant Doctor calls them three briches of one cloathe, and that
fellow having gone unto Constantinople Anno 1574. did writ that none became
an Arian which first was not a Caluinist, and brought example of Seruetus
Blandrata, Alciatus, Franciscus Dauidis, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus and
others.

3. There was printed a book 1586. at Iena in Saxony by a Lutheran minister,
the Tittle whereof was. An admonition from the word of God, that Caluinistes
be not Christians, but Jews, and baptized Mahometts. Also 2. years
afterward, another was set fourth at Tubinge by Philipp Nicholas minister; the
tittle whereof was a detection of the Caluinian sect to agree with the Arians
and Nestorians in the grounds, and foundations of their religion, and that no
Christian can join with the Caluinistes, but that he must defend the Arians
and the Nestorians. Sleid hist. lib. 19. An. 47.
Bernardinus Ochinus being the first principal Apostle of England in king
Edwardes his days, with Peter Martyr, Martyne Buzer, Okinus in lib. dialog.
Zanchius de vno Deo. Beza ep. 1. par. 11. Bal. in pref. act. Rom Pontific.
Calu. lib. 1 de scandalis pa. 136 An. 1593. page 44.
and Paulus Phalangius, unto whose direction both the universities of England
were committed, did oppugn the blessed Trinity, the deity of Christ, and of
the holy Ghost, so as Beza called him the fauorer of the Arian heresy, and a
scoffer at all Christian religion: yet nevertheless one John Bale, sometimes
Bishopp of Ossorie in Ireland, calls this Bernardin, and Peter Martyr, the
light of the Gospel of England, and Calvin says that the said Bernardine
was borne for the happiness of England. It is said also in the survey of the
pretended holy discipline printed at London, that the sect of Caluinistes is a
cancker, and another Thalmud, which by their wicked rebellion against their
lawful Princes, have founded their gospel, and Church, which by their
intolerable arrogance do oppose themselves against all sacred Doctors, against
all venerable Counsels, and against all the flourishing Churches, that ever
were from Christ his time until our days, and that there is no place of
Scripture, which they do not wrest from the lawful sense thereof never before
known by the Church of God, and that it had been good for England, that none
brought up in the filthy school of Geneua or Scotland, had ever entered into
England.

4. Conradus a Protestant, writes that Calvin says, that the merittes of
Christ cannot prevail against the judgment of God; Also he affirmed Calvin to
write, that the blood of Christ was of no force to blott out sins, and that
above 1500. years it was putrified fo. 84. 85. 87. Curaeus in spongia fol.
250. Erast. page 29. Fridericus Borussius page 45 Osiander in confess. have
written the like impiety, with many other blasphemies which you may read in
the Caluini Turcismo lib. 4. c. 22: Other Lutheran writters, make books of the
contradictories and contradictions of Calvin, Caluini. Theolog. lib. 1. f. 85
Luth. lib. de Sacrament. fol. 376. Orthodox. Conf. en le Tigurine tract. 3.
fol. 127. Luth. tom. 6. Ienues. Germa. fol. 257.
the tittle whereof is called Laberinthi inextricabiles contradictionum. The
intricatt Laberinthes of contradictions. Luther says that the Zuinglian
doctrine and gospel was from the diuill, and that the diuill made an
instrument of him, and that by him he did govern and raygne. In another place
he called him. Perdiabolatum, indiabolatum, and superdiabolatum, sceleratum
cor, and mendax os habebat. That he was persathanised, insathanized, and
supersathanized, and that he had a wicked heart and a lyinge mouth. So
Zuinglius calls Luther, a false prophett, an incorrigible heretic, Zuinglius
tomo 2. in exegesi ad Luth. and in corresponsione ad Luth. lib. de Sacra. Ort.
conf. eccles. Tiguri trac. 1. f 3 5. Ibid. fol. 106.
foolish, arrogant, blasphemous, and lyinge, a devil, a beast, a deceauer, a
seducer an Antechrist. Luther also said of him again. I had rather burn, then
to hold the opinions of Zuinglius and Oecolampadius and all other wicked bedlam
companions, and cales them Archdiuills, and so he says. I that am now ready
for the grave, God is my witness, and this will be my glory before his
tribunal, that I have labored the condemnation of all these hellish people,
videlicet, Carolastadius, Ziuinglius, Stinckfeld, and those that are at Tigur
and Geneua; yett these are the chief pillars of the protestant religion.
Luther also did divorce a certain wooman being married to a Zuinglian, and
bid her to marry whom she listed, for that says he, it is not lawful for
you to marry an infidel. Again, Colloquiu^ Alte^burg. elect. 3. resp. ad
Saxo. Zuingl. tomo 1 in exempl. ar. 18.
It is said of Luther and Melancthon that there is as much difference betwixt
them as betwixt Sumer and Winter. Zuinglius said, that nothing did grieve him
so much, as for being called a Lutheran. Brentius says, being a kind of a
Lutheran, nos Zuinglianam etc. We cannot ymbrace with a safe conscience, the
heresy of Zuinglian and Osiander. 1560. Ce^turici 4. Elizab. Reg. dedicata.
Do not the madeburgenses inueigh against the Zuinglians, for denyinge the
reale presence? and does not Luther say, that the holy scriptures are
corrupted of the Zuinglians? In the Duchy of wittenbergue where Brentius was
superintendent, an edict was proclaimed against the Sacramentaries. The
ministers of Ienua did exhibit a petition to the Princes there, to have an
assembly, to the end they should condemn the Sacramentaries and the
Ziuinglians as adversaries. And in the year 1560. in that Town, Hesutius
printed a boooke against the Sacramentaries. Calvin did also writ a book
against Hesutius. William Clebitius did writ against the Lutherans with this
tittle. The ruin of the papacy of Saxony videlicet, Lutheranisme. Also John
Sturmius writ against the Lutheranes. Brentius writ against Bullenger. The
Lutheranes of Saxony in their Conuenticle, did condemn Albert Hardenburg a
Zuinglian of heresy. In Transiluania Lutheranes are against the
Sacramentaries, and the Sacramentaries against them. The people of Breme in
Saxony after they were in Lutheranisme, fell to Caluinisme and banished all
Lutheranes,

5. Neither can they excuse themselves their debate or strife to be of things
indifferent, or of ceremonies, or such like small and trifling things, but of
the cheifest points and articles of our faith. For Nicolas Gallus a protestant
preacher of Ratisbon, does declare the same, saying. In suis Thesibus ita
scribit.
Non sunt leaves inter nos etc. Betwixt us ghospellers, it is not in light
things we differ, nor our variances are not of things of small moment, but
concerning the cheifest articles of Christian religion, videlicet, of the law
of the gospel, of justification, of good worcks, of the Sacraments, of the
use and order of ceremonies, which by no means can be decided or compounded.
Wherefore Luther says we esteem seriously and in good sadness, all
Zuinglians, heretics, Luther. These. 77. 1545.
and alliens from the Church of God. Beza calls Lutheranes, Eutichia^s, and
Nestorians. And Caluinistes do count Lutheranes no better the^ Manychees,
Marcionistes, and Monotholites who were oulde heretics. Illiricus says,
Caluinistarum liturgia non vno sacrilegio viciata est. Illir. in confess. Ang.
17.
The liturgy of Caluinistes, is not spotted with one only sacrilege: the like
censure Conradus gives of the same liturgy. Oecola^padius most bitterly writes
against Lutheranes, and also in the like bitterness Lutheranes write against him
by Brentius. Iohanes Pomeranus did also write against Brentius. Did not the
Duke of Saxony punish most severely Zuinglians, by the instigation of Luther?
Did not the king of Denmarcke expel Caluinistes out of Denmark? and did not
Caluinistes expel Lutheranes out of Count pallentine his Country? did not
Weastphalus write most bitterly against Calvin, and Calvin against him 1557.
entitled, An admonition unto Weastphalus, which if he shall not obey, he
shall be counted an heretic? and the said Weastphalus has these words: no
doctrine is more spatiously dispersed, none with greater devises and hypocrisy
defended, none that seduceth more people with greater errors, then the false
doctrine of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Oecolampadius says these words of
Luther and his sect. Lutheranes, says he, they have a kind of show of the
word of God, but the right word of God they have not, and herein they follow
other heretics who relies, althogether on the word of God. Did not (after
that Caluinisme was admitted and ymbraced in Transiluania, and Hungary)
Arianisme, and Sabellianisme take place there? En la reformation des fausses
suppositions lib. 2 Brent. in recognit. prophetici and Apostolici, item in
Bull. def. tract. 3. cap. 6. page 278. Bullenger. contra Brent. c. 1.
Does not Lannoy say that the cheifest point of all these fellows doctrine is,
that Christ is not God, nor by any means begotten of the substance of his
Father? Did not Brentius say: that the doctrine of the Zuinglians and
Caluinistes, tends directly to Athisime, Iudisme, and Mahometisme? Some
others say, that this sect of Calvin, tendes to Ethnisme, others to Atheism,
as John Whitgifte affirms, with which says he, England aboundes. And
Bullenger writes, such is the dissension betwixt Zuinglians and Lutheranes,
that none hereafter will believe ought, but what it pleases him.

6. Do not Protestants say, that the Englishmen as long as they be of this
religion, Admonitio 2. ad parla. vide act in Comitijs parla. Londini. An 1503
f. 10. 11. 12. 13.
which they profess, that they are not baptized, nor ought to be counted
Christians, the ecclesiastical regiment thereof to be as unlawful, as that of
antechrist, and that the Church of England is so profaned, and like Babell
governed by the power of Satan, and not by the order of Christ, that none in
which there is any sparcke of Gods grace, or any feelinge of conscience can
live in England, and that all that live in England, and that goes to their
Churches, and whosoever that hears the sound of their belles, ioynes with them
in their Churches, are conuocated thither by the name of Antechrist, and are
addicted unto the slavery of Babylon and Egypt. Ibid. f. 15.
And a great protestant minister, in a supplication sent to the last Queen,
said that she was one of those Princes which made profession of the gospel,
but opposed her self against the gospel, and that they are flatters that
tell her the contrary: and if that she could get the crown without the
gospel, it is doubtful, whether ever the gospel would have footing in
England. Stanchares said, that Calvin iumped very well with Arrius, and that
both of them makes the Son of God to pray in the divine nature, that he is a
minister, a Bishopp, and a mediator in that nature, and that the ministers in
Germany, Hungary, Transiluania, and Polonia, have celebrated many Counsels
and sinodes to take away our Catholic faith of the Trinity and mediator,
Tiguri ep. ad Polonos Anne 1560.
and have made many books full of Arrian blasphemies to that effect. In
Heluetia the ministers of the Church of Tigure, do profess the Arrian faith.
Tiguri epist. ad Polonos, Anno 1560. And all those that are of the Chruch of
Geneua and Tigurie are Arians, thus fare the said Stancharus. Many says Josias
Simlerus, ( in pref. lib. de eterno dei) that are brought up in Geneua, are
become Turckes, for they came unto Polonie and so they did ymbrace Mahometisme,
as Ochinus, Alamanus, Blandrata, Paulus Alciatus, and Gregor. Paulus, minister
of the Church of Cracouia, who having denied the Trinity, became a Turcke, as
Gonesius and Gribaldus, and Franciscus Dauidis, for this last was
superintendent of Hungary. So did Adam Nimser the chief superinten. of
Heydelberge in Palatyne of Rhene, with his fellow John Syluanus, Stan li. de
mediatora fol. 38.
who of Caluinistes, became Turckes and went to Constantinople, where they made
open profession the^eof, and protested that the religion of Caluinistes, tended
directly to Turcisme, and before these people went out of Palatyne, they
subverted many great preachers, who by their means became Turckes, and taught
publicly the Alcoran in Germany. Also John Socius being brought up at Geneua
did not only preach the Turkish religion, but also published books confirminge
the same. So did Volanus being brought up in that place not only become
Turcke himself, but also set forth books defendinge Turcisme, and auoutched,
that he learned the grounds of his doctrine from Calvin and Beza. Lucas
Sternebergerus, a minister of Morauia did the like, for 1. he preached against
the Trinity, took away all invocation thereof, because says he, there is no
mention thereof made in the Scripture. 2. that Christ was not God but man, but
more excellent then all the prophetts. 3. that the holy Ghoast is not God 4.
that we must not keep holy days to Saints. 5. that we must keep Saturday
holy, and not Sunday, because says he, God so commanded in the scripture: and
by the same argument he brought in Circumcision.

Prateolus in Elench. Alphabetica lib. 10 c. 12.
7. And did not some of the family of love, publishe these articles at London,
that Christ is not equal with his Father, as by Calvin his interpretation
they prove it, and that Christ in no sort is God. 3. That there is no Trinity,
etc such as calls God, the Father, God the son, and God the holy Ghoast do
speak blasphemouslie, for, say they, this is to profess there are three
Gods. Did not Thomas Lyth, Cartwrites companion, for puritanisme in the weast
part of England, as the other in the North part (being brought to Ireland by
Sr. John Dowda^l to Yonghull a Town in Mounster in Ireland) say that the
Angel Raphaell was a witch, and that the blessed Virgin Marie was not blessed
amoungest all woomen: with many other such blasphemous spechees? And lastly,
did not this Turkish doctrine, infect many Northern Provinces by the infection
of one Lastus, which was a chief superintendent of England in king Edwardes
days? This man being a Disciple of Zuinglian, did labor in Polonia to abolish
the blessed Trinity, and the Deity of Christ, by whose instigation Nicholas
Badz^dius the Duke of Olice and Palatine, did of vilanie send one Martyne
Secouitus with letters to Bullenger and Calvin, to join with them in this
wicked doctrine of taking away the Trinity and Deity of JESUS Christ.

A further Confirmation, that these new gospellers, tend directly to Turcisme.
CHAPTER II.
1. THe first and cheifest of the Protestants did affirm, the religion of the
Turckes to be far better then that of the Papists, and when the Turcke invaded
Austria, Luther writ books, that the Germans should not take part with the
Emperor against him, as Eras. in epist. ad fratres Germaniae inferioris,
saying. I had rather fight for a Turcke not baptized, then for a Turcke
baptized: meaning the Emperor Charles the fifth. The rebels of Flanders in
the begininge of their insurrection, against their lawful Prince, Phillipp the
2 of Spain, in their standart, gave the ensigns and Arms of the Turck,
videlicet a silver figure of the increase of the Moon with this ensign.
Plutost Turckes que Papaux. We will rather be Turckes then Papists. How many
protestant Princes did sollicitt Amurate, and other princes of the Ottoman
house, to come to Hungary, Math. de ^annoy en la. repliq. lib 2. c. 13
Austria, and other places? Also, anno 1575. the Prince of Co^de, being broken
with France, and at Basil consulting with the ministers there, what were best
to be done to renew the wars against his king and country, they gave him
counsel to submitt himself to the Turckes, and that by that means, the
wars would be reinflamed again. Did not in the second rebellion of France
the Hugonotes by many messengers seek to bring in the Turcke to the ruin of
France and the rest of Christendom An. 1589. for said they, our religion, is
nearest unto your religion, unless that you observe more fasting, and
praying, unto which our religion does not tie us: also that we have given a
great impediment by the Princes of Germany who followed our Council against
Charles the fifth: Ex literis Constanti ad Venetu^ patrium in fine ^ibri de
fucoribus Gallicis vide Surium 1568.
also we dissuaded our kings of France, not to give help to his brother the
king of Spain in the wars of Millan seas against you, for the king of
Spain had the possession of those lands which he had lost about that sea, had
not our Brethren the gospellers of France dissuaded our king from helpinge
him: also we promise unto you, whenever it shall please you, that we will
be ready to broach any stu^ or insurrection in Germany and in France.

Did not the English Ambassador, labor to putt away the Iesuittes out of
Constantinople, which are there for the relief of poor christi^as, Resp. ad
iusta^ Brittanicum. page 167. Par. 1584.
whisperinge into the Turckes ears, that they would bring his monarchy unto
great peril? And that the said English Ambassador, solicited the great
Turcke to make wars upon Spain, the chief reason he moved, was it not that
the king of Spain was the Chief defender of the Romish Idolatry, An. 1567.
Pet. Saxonius lib. inscriptio admonitio ad fideles Germanos caueant a
Caluinistis
infestiue and of ensiue to both of their religions, I mean the Protesant and
Turkishe religion? And the said Ambassador concluded, that if those Idolaters
were overthrown, all nations would become Turckes, and so both they and
themselves would reverence one God.

De Elemosina eroganda Sacerdotibus. Whether Papist Priests do amiss in
taking any thing for their Masses. CHAPTER III.
1. S. Paul did receive offeringes (as the Church does for their just
liuelyhood) from the Phillippians, been fecistis, (inquit) you have done well
communicating to my tribulation; and you also know, O Phillippians, that in
the beginning of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, noe Church
commmunicated unto me in account of gift and receipt, but you only: for unto
Thessalonica also once, Phil. 4.
and twice you sent to my use: not that I seek the guifte, but I seek the
fruicte aboundinge in your account. He counts it not mere alms, or a free
gift, that the people bestows on their Pastors or preachers, but a certain
mutual traffic, as it were an enterchange, the one giuinge spiritual
things, the other rendringe temporal things in lieu thereof: for so it
puts one the condition of an oblation or sacrifice, offered unto God, and is
most acceptable and sweet in his sight.

2. Behold the Apostle received of them godly and charitable helps, and
means, and ^east he should only preach or pray for them, in lue of those
corruptible guiftes, he avouched: non quia requiro datum, not that I aim at
any temporal gift or reward, but that I may perceive the fruitt of your
devotion. Priests are worthy of a double honor, especially such as do labor
in word and doctrine, and by this commandment we are bid, vt boui trituranti,
os non claudamus a^ alligemus, that we should not stopp, or moosell the mouth
of the Ox that treads out the corn, for according to the counse^ of our
Savior, the workman is worthy of his wages, D. Hiero: Homilia lib. 2.
Comentar. in cap. 15. Math. and as Waldensis says against Witcliffe, he did
not comaunde to sell spiritual things, sed bouem edere de tritura, but that
the ox, or cow should ea^ of his thressinge and labor. 1. Cor. 9.
He does not seek herein the proffit of him that receives, but of him that
gives, as S. Paul says: if we give unto you spiritual food, it is not much
if you give us corporal St. Paul sought helps for the Saints at Jerusalem,
sainge. Now I go to Jerusalem to minister unto the Saints: and as S. Hierom
says. Si spiritualium etc. why should not the Gentiles ymparte their
corruptible goods for their relief, by whose dispensation they are made
partakers of spiritual graces, and therefore the abundance of the one, ought
to supply the want of the other. And as the Apostle S. Paul says. 2. Corinthians. ca. 8. Exodus 16. and 28. Let in in this present time, your abundance
supply their want, and their abundance also may supply your want, that
there may be an equality, as it is written, he that had much abounded not, and
he that had little wanted not: his meaning herein is, that such as abound in
worldly riches, should communicate for supply of other their bretherens
necessities whatsoever they may; that on the other side those whom they help
in temporal, may ympart unto them again some of their spiritual riches, as
prayers, and some other holly woorckes, and graces which is a happy change for
wealthy people.

3. In the ix. Chapter of this Epistle, he exhorted the Corinthia^s very
earnestly to give their Alms for the releife of the Saints, saying he that
sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap, and he that sows in
blessings, of blessings also shall reap, as it is written, he distributed,
he gave to the poor, his justice remains forever. Alms is compared to
seed, for as the seed thrown into the ground, though it seem to be cast
away, yet it is not lost, but is laid up in certain hope of great increase.
Read the x. Chapter of S. Math. the x. and 16. of S. Luke. S. Ambrose upon
the second epistle and 8. chapter, says that the Corinthians had no more
privileges, then other Churches, auouchinge that the laborer was worthy of
his wages. Where behold that it is never granted to any nation to have the
Gospel freely preached unto them, without giuinge relief to the preachers
thereof, our Savior confirminge the same; dignus est operarius mercede sua;
the laborer is worthy of his hyre.

4. But the heretics of this time do imitate the Donatistes, to preach
poverty to others, when they gather riches to themselves, faininge poverty,
but most falsely, as S. August. writes lib: 2. against Petilian, who says. Nos
spiritu pauperes etc. We (says Petilian) being poor in spirit, and careless
of wealth, we abhor riches. John Witcleffe (as Thomas Waldensis writtes of
him) did object to the religious priests, and preachers, that they did
administer the Sacraments, and preach for gain. Waldensis de Scrament ^libus
cap. 99.

5. S. Paul in the 6. to the Galathians says. He that is catechized in the
word, does communicate to him that catechized him in all goods, addinge, for
what things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap. The woorcks of mercy
be the seed of life everlasting, and the proper cause thereof. Lo here S.
Paul shows the great duty, and respect that we ought to have to such as
preach, or teach us the Catholic faith, and not in regard only of their
pains taken with us, but that we may be partakers of their merittes, we
ought especially to do good to such, or (as the Apostle says) communicate with
them in all our temporal goods, 1. Cor. 9.
that we may be partakers of their spiritual. Whereupon. S. Aug. lib. 2.
Euangel. 48. Know you not (says he) that they which work in the holy place,
eat the things that are of the holy place, and they that serve the alter,
participate of the alter? So also our Lord ordained for them that preach the
gospel, and such as labor at the alter, whose sacrifice, and oblations
redoundes to the comfort of the Christian flock, as also as are dedicated to
serve God in recollection, prayers, and contemplations, or any other
spiritual, and godly functions which also is beneficial to the Church, and
the faithful ought to be relieved, and mantained by the liberality, and
devotion of them.

Hiero. lib. 5. vig. Cap. 5.
6. S. Hierom upon that place of S. Luc. 16. says. Make unto your selves
frindes of the mammon of iniquity, that when they shall fail, they may
receive you into the heavenly tabernacles. Which cannot be meant of the common
vulgar sort of poor. Number isti etc. shall their poverty (says he) in the
midst of their filth and nastines, whose raginge concupiscence is nothing
the less abated, purchase unto themselves those heavenly tabernacles, who do
neither possess things present, nor things to come? for it is not every
poor that is called happy, but the poor in spirit of whom it is said. Psalm
40.
Beatus qui intelligit super egenum and pauperem etc. Blessed is he that has a
respect to the poor and needy, for in the evil day our Lord will deliver
him: which is understood of the poor in spirit, who is ashamed to receive what
is offered unto him.

Of prayinge unto Saints: And whether the Church does offend in praying unto
them. CHAPTER IV.
1. Job. 42.
DIcit Dominus ad Elephaz Themanitem etc. I conceive a great displeasure
against thee, and against thy two frindes, because thou have not spoken right
before me, as my servant Job has done. Take therefore 7. Bulls and 7. Rames,
and go unto my servant Job, and offer sacrifice for your selves, and my servant
Job shall pray for you, and for his sake this fault shall not be imputed unto
you. The same Job says. Turn unto some one of the Saints. Judas Machabeus
did see Onias lifting up his hands to pray for all the people of Iewrie 2.
Mac. 15. Dan. lib. 4 cap. 16.
The old fathers, and the children of Israel did pray in the name of Abraham,
Genesis 48.
Isack and Jacob, when it was said. Inuocetur super eos nomen meum etc. That is
to say. Let may name and the name of my fathers, Abrahaman and Isack be called
upon these children. Afterward they did call on the name of David. And Christ
by the intercession of the Apostles did heal the mother in law of S. Peter,
being attached with a great fever. Act. 9.
The said S. Peter at the intercession of the poor widows that were relieved
by Tabita, did raise her from death to life, so as we see the prayers of our
Alms folks, and beads men, may do us great good after our departure.

Ioh. 11.
Did not the faith of Martha help her brother Lazarus dead, saying, did not I
say to thee that if thou believe thou shall see the glory of God. S. Cyrill
Hyerofoll: says, tantum enim, inquit, potuit illa fororum fides, vt mortuus a
porta inferi reuocaretur, the faith of the sisters living was of that force,
that the dead was brought back again from the gates of hell.

2. When poor miserable sinners can pray, and be heard, what absurdity is it,
that the blessed Saints now in heaven may be heard of God, and also prayed
unto, otherwise we should deny them perfect felicity, which is to be able to
help, their poor frindes subject to many calamities in this miserable life.
The old heretic Vigilantius, and also these new heretics of our time, do
answer unto this: the Saints being living in this world, and not when they
be dead may pray, and be heard for the living. But S. Hierom in the 3. book
that he made against the said Vigilantius, does sufficiently convince them,
saying. Si Apostoli, etc. if the Apostles living in their bo^ies could pray
for others, how much more now being crowned for their victorius T^yu^phes. One
man Moses, obtained pardon of God for 6000. armed men. S. Stephen the true
follower of Christ, and his first Martyr, did desire pardon for his
persecutors, and shall they be of less force, and their prayers less heard of
Christ, enioyning his familiar and blessed presence? The Apostle S. Paul
avouched that God at his intercession gave unto him 28. souls that were
sailing in one shipp with him, and now being received to everlasting glory,
shall his petitions and prayers be rejected in the behaulfe of them, that
received the Gospel of Christ?

3. Vigilantius (ympairinge the glory, and felicity of the Saints) said,
that a living dog is better then a dead lion; but God does declare unto us,
that neither S. paul, nor other Saints are dead in spirit, which are not
said to be dead, but at rest, and as it were sleepinge. So Lazarus which was to
be raised, was not said to be dead but a sleep; did not Onias, and Hieremias
after this life pray for the people? So Noe, Job, and Daniell after this
life, were appointed intercessors by God for the people. Did not S. Ambrose
writ that the Emperor Theodosius after this life, was both a prelate, and a
tutor with Christ, in the behaulfe of his children Archadius, and Honorius, and
for their Empire which they possessed after their Father? Was not Abdias and
Amos, intercessors unto God for the young heirs of their succession Iosue and
Asaph? who then can be in doubt but that Theodosius is a protector with God,
in the behaulfe of his children, so as by the favor of God, and the
intercession of Theodosius, Archadius is now a valiant Emperor?

4. We must therefore honor the saints as the frindes of Christ and the
heirs of God, as the learned divine S. John the Evangelist says cap. Io. cap.
1.
1. As many as received him, he made them the children of God wherefore not
servants, but children, and sons, if sons, then heirs, yea heirs of God,
and coheires of Christ. And Damasus says, when you call on the Saints in your
prayers, you must esteem of them, as the shining light, more bright then the
beams of the sun, which do see all good things by contemplatinge the vision
of God: as in another place S. Aug. says, quid est quod non videt, qui
videntem omnia videt; what is it, that he sees not, that beholds him that
behouldes all things? And S. Hierom says. Si prophetae sunt, etc. if there be
prophetts, Lib. 5. Coment.
and that the word of our Lord be in them, let them withstand the Lord of
Hoastes: upon which place S. Hierom shows, that a true prophett by his
prayers may resist, our Lord, as Moses stood in the persecution against our
Lord, that he might turn, and appease the wrath of his fury. Samuel did the
like, and our Lord said unto Moses. Suffer me, said he, to strike this people
for when he said suffer me, he gives us to understand, that by the
intercession, and suffrages of the saints, he may be appeased, and retained
from putting his wratn in execution.

5. S. Ambrose does set down very larglie, the virtue, Lib. 5. epistolar.
clero and populo These.
and marvelous effect of the intercession of the saints, and of the great
victory gotten by Theodosius by their prayers, and therefore he said, he had
rather have the prayers of the poor, then a stroung Army, sainge that they
are far strounger, because they as it were, bind God himself. When we direct
our prayers unto the Saints, we direct them unto Christ, and as we follow
or reverence no other in the Saints but Christ, so we do not invoke, or
pray any in them or by them, but Christ, which as he lodged in them when they
were charged with their corporal lump, Gal. 2. Ephesians. 3.
so much more now when they are exempted from it. So as we direct our
prayers, and petitions unto Christ in his Saints, and by his Saints, whether
they remain with us in earth or whether they Triumph with him above in
heaven, vsinge the one as our intercessors, and acknowledging the other the
bountiful giver, for benefits are asked of Saints, not as the authors, and
giuers thereof, which we reserve for God alone, but as intercessours only, as
by our daily Littanies we say to God, miserere nobis, be merciful unto us,
but unto Saints we say, pray for us.

6. Secondarilie we say, that Saints are our intercessors unto God, but yet by
Christ, and by the meritts of his death, and passion. And so the Church in all
her collects, and prayers says and concludes without intermission. Per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum etc. Dan. 3.
The three children in the furnace of Babylon did pray unto God, propter
Abraham dilectum tuum: for the intercession of Abraham thy beloved, and Isacke
thy servant, Isayai 63.
and Israel thy holy one. So prayed Isayas saying Turn unto us O Lord by the
intercession of thy servants. So prayed Hester by the intercession of Abraham.
Hester 13. Psalm. 131.
So prayed Solomon by the merittes of his Father. 1. Paral. 29.
Memento Domine David and omnis mansuetudinis eius. So prayed David himself,
naminge Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for his intercessors, Elias 2. par 5. Deuteronomy.
9. Genes. 48.
so prayed Elias so prayed Moses say^ng. Recordare Domine seruorum tuorum
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: so prayed Jacob calling, and interposinge the name
of his father Isaac, when he did pray unto the Angels to bless his children,
meaning noe doubt but he should obtain gods blessing for them.

7. Orig. lam. l. 2. in Job.
This the ancient fathers do likewise testify, saying. O sancti Dei (says
Origines) vos lacrimis ac stetu plenis obtestor, with sobbinge tears, and
mourninge eyes, I beseech you that you will prostrate your selves at Gods
merciful feet for me a wretched sinner. Heu mihi pater Abraham deprecare
prome ne definibus tuis aliener. O blessed Abraham pray for us miserable
sinners. S. Gregory Nazianzen never writts all most of any Martyr or Saint,
but prays hartelie unto them. So writing the life of S. Cyprian the Martyr,
before he was converted to Christianity, he first shows that the Martyr
finding himself tempted with the beauty of Iustina the Virgin afterward
martired with him, prayed most humbly, and devoutly to assist him in that
combat against the flesh, addinge moreover, that he did assist himself by
fasting, and aflicting his body. S. Gregory Naz. did pray also unto him,
saying. Tu nos e Caelo benign aspice, behold us from heaven most
charitablie. The very like prayer makes he to S. Athanasius and S. Basil
deceased a little before him. S. Ephesians. Sermo. de sanctis martirib. Nect. orat.
de Sa^t. Theodoro.
S. Epiphanius writing the life of certain Martyrs prayed unto them. S.
Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople, writing an oration of Theodorus
Martyr, prayed unto him.

Hom not. apollog. c.
8. After these men lived S. John Chrysostom, who prayed unto S. Peter, and S.
Paul: he prayed unto S. Peter also for the Emperor that then lived. S.
Chrysostom in his liturgy has these words. Apostles, Martires, Prophetts,
Priests, Confessors just men, and woomen which have ended your fight, have kept
your faith, and observed your promise and fidelity to our Savior, Cyrill.
homil. in die John. Concilij. Ephe. 428
pray for us. etc. S. Cyrill Archbishopp of Alexandria did pray unto S. John
the Evangelist in his sermon made in the festiual days of him in the council
of Ephesus. The General council of Calcedon did affirm, that the holy
Bishop S. Flamianus, Archbishop of Constantinople and Martyr, whose death
was procured by Dioscorus Bishop of the same Sea, Conc. Calci. 17. Au.
did pray for them using these words. Flamianus post mortem viuit, 453.
Socrat. lib. 7 histor. cap 32.
Martyr pro nobis orat. S. Hierom wrote the lives of S. Hilarious and Paul and
others, and prayed unto them. Paulinus Bishopp of Nola wrote the lives of S.
Celsus and S. Felix. The same is confirmed by Prudentius in the Himnes S.
Laurence, that glorious Martyr of Spain. And by S. Hipolitus. I pray read S.
Gregory Turonensis, and S. Gregory the great to this effect. Can. 27.
This is likewise avouched in the council of Orleance in France, held upon the
year 512. Cap. 3. Cap. 1. Cap. 9.
the council of Gerundia in Spain, held the next year after. The fifte
council of Tolleto likewise in Spain held upon the year 640. the council of
Bracaren the second, held two years after that. Again the council of Ments
in German, held under Pope Leo. 3. and Charles the great anno 613. All these
counsels, I say, ordaininge Littanies and invocation of Saints to be used in
solemn procession upon certain days in the year, as namely in the rogation
week, three days before the Ascension. The Greek Church in the year of
Christ 663. cap. 7. does sufficiently set down the sense of both Churches in
these words. Soli Deo Creatori adoratio etc. Let adoration be given to God
alone, but yet let a Christian inuocat the Saints, that they may intercede
the divine Majesty for him. Of the heretics called Albigenses S. Bernard
says. Irrident nos hereticici quod sanctorum suffragia postulamus. Heretics
scoff at us, because we crave the suffrages of Saints. Ber. hom. 6. in Ca^t.
The said S. Bernard did pray holy S. Victor to help him.

9. Next we ought to know, that amoungest all the Saints there is none whose
petition is sooner heard, then the petition of the Blessed Virgin, at whose
entreaty our Savior did work his first miracle, which is declared unto us
by S. Bernarde, O homo securum accessum habes apud Deum etc. O man, thou have
secure access unto God, thou have the mother to the son, and the son to
the father, the mother showing her son her breast with her pappes, the son
showing unto his father his side, and his wounds. Again did not the Angel
say unto Tobias, Tob. 12.
I have offered thy prayers unto God? Did not the Angel also say unto Daniell,
Daniel. 7.
from the time that thou purposedst to chastise thy body before God, thy
prayers were heard, and I being moved by them came for thine assistance: And
your selves in the Comunion book, do auouche the same, having translated the
Collect which the whole Catholic Church in her masses does use upon S.
Michaell the Archangells day: which Collect is set down by your selves in
your book of Common prayers, the words are these. Everlasting God which have
ordained and constituted the services of all Angels, and men in a wonderful
order, mercifully grant, that they which always do thee service in heaven, may
by thy appointment succor and defend us in earth, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Mat. 18.
etc.

10. Did not Christ bid us that we should not despise any of these little ones
for I say unto you, that their Angels in heaven always do see the face of my
father which is in heaven. Two manner of ways S. Thomas says we offer our
prayers to any, D. Thom. 1. 2. q. 83. ad 4.
primo vt sit per eum petitio implenda, secundo vt per ipsum impetranda, first
that our desire by our prayers may be by him accomplished: secondarily that our
desire may be obtained by him. In the first manner we offer our prayers unto
God only, because that all our prayers, and desires ought to aim at gods
graces, and glory which none can give but God alone: In the second manner we
offer our prayers unto the holy Angels, and Saints, that by their
intercession, God almighty may be moved to take commiseration on us; as it is
alleged by S. John, saying. Apoc. 8.
And there ascended the smoke of the incenses of the prayers of the Saints
before God. This also is proved by so many apparitions of Saints made unto the
living, ymploring their help and protection as are registered by the holy
doctors. S. Euthimius did appear unto Phillipp Deacon being cast away in the
mediterranean Sea, Caesar. Baron. An. 477. apud.
and having prayed unto that holy S. f^rayde, he took him by the hand, and
brought him safe to the shore. S. Bernabas did appear unto Anthemias Bishopp
of Salamina thrice, Caesar. Baron. An. 485. Ibid. 604.
being sore vexed by the Heretics that were then rising up. S. Peter did
appear unto the widdowe Galla, confortinge her, that her sins were forgiven
her. So the blessed Virgin Marie appeared unto Seueriana, about her death, with
many other apparitions which we both read and hear daily etc. but I cannot
omit that which S. Gregory of Niss. relates in the life of S. Gregory
Thaumaturgus, how that the blessed Virgin Mary, together with S. John the
Evangelist appeared unto the said S. Gregory Tha. and did instruct him in the
mystery of the blessed Trinity. Lib. de Anglia martyrum cap. 9.
S. Gregory of Tours declares that the blessed Virgin appeared unto the master
carpenter that was set to woorck by Constantine the great to buyld a church in
her honor, which was so huge as it was hard to be builded, but she instructed
him the manner how to bring the same to perfection. The like apparitions of
other saints do witness. S. Basil. in oratione de Sancto Mamante. S. Greg.
Naz. in orat. in Julian. S. Sulpitius in vita S. Martini. Theodoretus lib. 5.
hist. cap. 24. Paulinus natal. sancti Felicis. S. Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis
habenda cap. 16.

Whether Papists do err in worshippinge and adorninge the relics of
Saints, and whether they sell their Mass and prayers for temporal gain.
CHAPTER V.
1. I Answer, that the holy relics of of Christ, or his Saints, are not
used for temporal gains, but for the spiritual consolation of the faithful,
which by those blessed relics have received great comforts and blessings, as
you may read, that the Iron chains, the Napkins, yea the very shadow of the
holy people, and Apostles did relieve many, Act. 12. Act. 5. Mat. 5.
and revived some. And if the devout Christians do offer any thing at the
Alter where those blessed relics are kept, the same being praetium
peccatorum, the price of their sins, and the relief of the poor, they were
not principally instituted for that purpose.

2. Lib. de Sacrament. tit. 12.
This very objection against the Catholic Church, was first invented by John
Witcleffe in England in king Richard 2. his time, as that most learned man
Thomas Waldensis, then provincial of the order of the Charmilitts writes, and
his answer may serve as well for you as it did for Witcliffe, which you shall
read in the 2. book. As for the Adoration or woorshippinge of Relics, or
Images, we must consider that this adoration does signify honor, and
reverence which is commonly used both unto God, and to his creatures, Hieron li.
contra.
as S. Hierom says. Veni Bethlem, praesepe Domini and incu^abile adoraui. I
adored the Cribb, and Craddle of our Lord when I came to Bethlem. Abraham
adored the Angel that appeared unto him, Genes. 8. Exodus 3. Number. 22.
so did also Moses and Iosue, Nabuchodonoser adored Daniell. S. Hierom
alleges the fact of Alexander the great in kneelling at the feet of Ioyda
the high priest of the Jews.

3. So Jacob dyinge did bless his children, and adored the topp of his rodd.
Adore ye his footstool. Psalm. 98. Apoc. 3.
Which rodd did signify the holy Cross. In the Apocalips it is also said. I
will make them come before thy feet; Psalm. 5.6. 3 Reg 8. John 7. Hier contra
Vigi. 2 syno Nyceni. Aug. de ciuit. c. 8.
which is mente of the Bishopp or Angel of Philadelphia. Again the Temple,
the Arcke, the Tabernacle, the Propitiatory, the Cherubins, the Alter, the
bread of proposition was adored, and because Vigilantius gave not unto the
Saints and Images, their due reverence, he was condemned as an heretic of the
Church of God.

1. Reg. 20.
4. It was a custom of holy people to adore great men, and David adored
Ionothan fallinge down upon the earth. So Abigall adored David. We adore
says S. Augustine, those good people with Charity, Io. 5.
not with servitude. So Iosue adored not the man that he saw, but the Angel
which he understood. Elizeus having received the new spirit of Elias, did
suffer himself to be adored of the children of the prophets at the river of
Jordan. Regum 2. Number. 22.
Balaa^ adored the Angel. Saul adored the soul of Samuel. 3. Reg. 18 (...).
2.
Abdias honored Elias. Porphe^i an old enemy of Christian religion, whom John
Witcleffe did object unto the Church says, that against the old law of God,
she does adore the Angels, the law prohibitinge any adoration to be extended
toward any besides toward God, saying. Deum tuu^ adorabis, and illi soli
seruies, unto whom saint Augustine answers, Aug. lib. 10. de Ciuit. Dei.
cap. 20.
that we living in this miserable peregrination, honor and reverence the
Angels, as the most blessed Citizens of heaven, neither does the law of God
prohibit the same, but rather commend it, the law only forbides that the due
reference and adoration which is due to God, should not be transferred unto any
other creature, or that we should offer sacrifice unto it, which belongs
unto God, which God did forbid the Hebrews, saying. S^crificans dijs alienis
eradicabitur. He that offers sacrifice to strange gods, shall be rooted out.

5. For we must note, that the sense of adoring the creature may be considered
either in the creatures themselves, or else as they be in the first pattern or
example. Creatures in the first rank as they are in themselves, they are
never adored with that divine honor, which is due to the Creator, and therefore
the Image of any, or the Crucifix of Christ in it self, without a reflection
made upon the first pattern, or example that the same represe^teth, must not be
adored, or reverenced either by external ceremony, or internal affection or
cogitation, as no king does ever reverence the legate, but only for the kings
sake as our learned divines do auouche. Alexander. 3. p. q. 30. nu. 3. ar. 3.
and. 1. D. Th. 3. p. q. 25. ar. 3. 4. S. Castanus and others in that place.
Albert. in 3. d. 9. ar. q. Bonauentura 3. did. art. 1. q. 1. Capreolus. q. 1.
ar. 1. cond. 2. and 3. and others: also the council of Trent. sess. 25.
Decreto de sacris imaginibus, also the 7. general Council being holden at
Nisse does declare the same action.

6. Another reason that those learned Doctors do give, is that the Image
without the pattern or example, cannot be adored: Nulla res inanima aut
irrationabilis etc. noe irreasonable, or insensible thing without reason can
be capable of any reverence, worshipp, Antoninus Turrianus Castro. Alma.
honor, or adoration: but the Image in it self without the exemplar, or
reflection, or relation to it, is insensible and without life, therefore without
the exemplar, it must not be adored; For adoration, which is here meant, is
according to S. Damascen. oratione 1. de imaginibus page 5. signum
submissionis and honoris, a token of honor, and submission, and as Anastasius
Bishopp of Theopo. being alleged in the 7. council. act. 4. Adoration is
nothing else, What adoration is.
says he, then Significatio honoris alicui exhibiti veluti Emphasim 1.
(simbolum) then an express signification of honor, or worshipp exhibited
toward any, which adoration is performed by two means videl. by external
tokens, as the inclination of the body outwardly, and internal will, and
affection inwardly: for the outward appearance of this honor must be
correspondent to the inward affection, so as by one act of adoration, we
reverence the Image and the exemplar, so as the Image cannot be reverenced but
by the example.

7. This is the sense, August. de verbis Domini ser. 59.
and meaning of saint Augustine, saying, who will adore the purple robe of
the king being not upon his back, but when the king puts it on his
back, he that will not reverence the same with the king, shall incurr the
danger of death. So in Christ I do not adore his humanity alone, but joined to
his divinity, and whosoever disdeyneth to adore the same, shall purchase the
pains of everlasting death, this saint August. Leont. in 4. Dialog. contra
Iudaeos.
This is also proved by Leontius, related in 4. action of the 7. council,
saying; Si and ego etc. In adoringe the Image of Christ, I do not adore the
matter, or color thereof, God forbid. But I adore the liuelesse charecter and
figure of Christ. S. Hierom also has the like speeches. Why do you reprove us,
says he that we should adore the dumb stones, and wood eaten of worms? Do
you esteem them to be blind, which by these things do Contemplate the Lord
of our faith? Does not the Psalmist say. Inclininge to the earth, we adore
his foot stool which is the earth? And saint Thomas beholdinge the wounds
of Christ, and the printe of the nails, did forth with adore Christ, and so he
did adore the creature with the Creator, saying. Dominus meus and Deus meus.
My Lord and my God. And if the dishonor offered unto his flesh redoundes unto
God, why should not the honor, done unto the same flesh redounde also to the
person of God, being as well united in respect of the one, as of the other?

8. Neither is the humanity of Christ only to be adored, but his Cribe, his
Cross, and every thing that are ordained to represent and express Christ
unto our vewe and understanding. Wherefore S. Damascen. says. Adorandum signum
Christi etc. Let us says he, adore that which represents Christ, where his
sign shall be, there Christ himself will be. Let us therefore adore every
thing that are adjoined and adjacent unto him, unto whom herein we yield the
reverence. And therefore this holy saint says, that Christ is present where
his sign, or representation is. And although he be not in body united unto
the Cross, or unto the Cribbe, or unto the nails, as he was when he suffered
upon them, yet by a special eminent virtue diffused into them, they show and
declare his presence more then any other things, and are express siggnes and
tokens ordained, and instituted to expose Christ to the vewe, and consideration
of the devout christian, betwixt whom and the heart of him that does adore
them, there is both union and relation, different from any other thing.

9. You will say with John Witcleefe, In Enchiridion.
that we ought not to worshipp any but God: Quia solus Deus adorandus. S.
August. does answer you in his Enchirid. Imo, says he, De ciuit. lib. 10.
solus Deus colendus est, and tamen homo colendus and ter^a colenda, and in
another place he says, So^i Deo, honor and gloria: unto God alone be honor and
glory. Even as the heat of the fire though the wood be never so much cannot
be infinite, that is to say, it can not be so much but it may be more, and
more, so the adoration of honor that is given to any creature cannot have any
proportion with the adoration due unto God. And although he should adore a
thing more then he should have done, it is not material, for a false adoration
is nothing as saint Paul says. I^olum nihil est. Therefore we must
consider, that the word (Solus) alone, or only according to the sense of the
scripture, and the interpretation of the Catholic Church, does exclude
things of another kind, for that thing which is proper to that alone, cannot
be common to many, neither does it expel all other things in another
fashion, vt solus Deus adoretur, that God alone should be adored with that
kind of adoration which is Latria, which is only due to God, and not to any
creature, and so nothing in that kind of adoration is adored per se, videlicet
in it self as God, as in the Hymns of the Angels, the Church does sing of
Christ; Tu solus Sanctus, tu solus Dominus, tu solus altissimus, Jesus Christ.
Thou only art holly, thou only art Lord, and thou only art most high, but the
Father and the holy ghost are included in that kind of adoration, and as S.
Augustine says: Non est cui alteri, none can challe^ge unto himself that
which Virgilius translated out of Sybilla her verses.

Te Domine, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua, soluent formidine terras.
By thee alone we be released
From dregs of filthy sin.
And eke the earth received peace,
From foe, and dreadful feind.
10. Although God is said to be only good, only holy, only Lord, the only
giver of grace, all these perfections, and attributts be given unto him, per
essentiam, and per se, and per naturam suam independenter ab omni alio; by his
essence, nature, and being independent of any other, yet there are many so
called, videlicet, holy, Lords, etc. who are so called, not by nature or
offense, sed participatiue, and dependenter ab authore gratiae, but have the
same grace dependinge of God, and so are made partaker of his grace, and
justification, of which justification, God is the universal, and efficient
cause. The blood and passion of Christ, is the meritorious cause, the
Sacraments are the isntrumental causes, the Priests are the administeriall
causes, and gods glory is the final cause thereof. And although God is said
to remitte sin, because as the Philosopher says, Illi tribuitur actio, a quo
dependet operandi virtus, he is the worcker of the act, by whose virtue, and
influence the same proceeds, yet other causes do concur for the remission
thereof in their own kind, and operation, although god has the cheifest
stroke therein, of whom those causes principally do depend, and so we adore
God with the word Latria. And as God does communicate his goodness unto good
men, and holy people, and never does ymparte unto them the excellency of his
goodness; so we never give unto them the excellency of Latria which is divine
adoration, but we give unto them, according to their goodness correspondent
titles of woorshipp, and reverence. So the holy Saints we worshipp with the
style and title of Dulia, which according to S. Thomas, est obseruantia qua
maioribus honorem deferrimus. 2. 2. q. 102 q. 103.
Is an observation by which we offer honor to our elders, and betters, by
which we reverence the Saints in God: for he that honors the Martyr in God,
does honor God in the Martyr. The blessed Virgin is honored by the title of
reverence which is called Hyperdulia, quod idem est, quod excellens and eximia
dulia, because that as in meritts of grace, and sanctity, being the mother of
him. De cuius plenitudine nos omnes accepimus; from whose fulness all grace did
spring into the world, she exceeded all the creatures that ever were: so her
honor, and respect of reverence ought to excel the honors and reverence which
we exibite to any other creature whatsoever.

11. Ioannes Catacuzenus in Apologia. 3. and 4. contra Mahometanos, credimus
inquit. We believe says he, that no man like to Marie was ever borne nor
ever shall be unto the end of the world, and though according to humane nature
she is inferior to the Angels, yet according to her holiness, and sanctity
she surpasses the Angels. Epiph. haeres. 79.
S. Epiph. says, that by the mystery of the Incarnation she is more honorable
then all other saints.

S. Bernard in sermon 1. de natiuitate beatae Mariae and 1. de assumptione,
does call her Advocate of the Church, calls her spes nostra our hope, as also
the same S. Bernard: ser. illo. 1. de natiuitate. Holy Ephrem in oratione de
Laudibus Virginis gaudium and salutem mundi ipsam esse praedicat. And though
these titles of honor may seen proper unto God, yet there are other titles due
unto God, and so proper unto him, that they can never be given to any other, as
that God is infinite, Naz. in tragedia de Christo.
omnipoten^, and eternal: there are other titles which are common to God, and
his saints, as ^he title of Pastor, Master fundation, and rock, which are
not accomodated to the blessed Virgin.

12. Where you say that we comitt Idolatry in giuinge all these titles of
honor unto the saints in reuerencinge their relics and so you call Images
Idols, Epiph. does answer such people, saying. O insanientem linguam, quam
instar macherae veneno imbutae possident. O furious and raginge tongue, which
is like a sharp poisoned sword, which calls the devout and innocent faith of
Christians, Idolatry. No Christian under the heavens did give the worshipp of
God which is called Latria unto any image. Latria nostra, says he, in spiritu
est: our adoration is in spirit. Ephesians. tomo 4. and 2. contra haereticos. ^.
Aug. lib. 20. contra Faustum arguit, si per cultum qui latria dicitur etc. If
as S. Aug. does argue against Faustus, how by the adoration of Latria which is
due unto God, do we serve rather the creature, then the Creator, when our
purpose, and meaning is to serve God therein? For our thought therein being
referred to God, and not the creature, we honor God only, and not creatures.
7. Synod.
And therefore he is condemned as an heretic in the 7. general Council, that
calls Images, Idols. Qui venerandas imagines idola appellant, Anathema sit.
Whosoever calls the venerable Images, Idols. Let him be cursed.

Read the 26. of Leuit. where idolum is said: Non facies vobis idolu^.
13. Origenes declaringe that of Exodus. Non facies tibi sculptile, which the
70. called Idolon says, aliud est facere idolum, aliud similitudinem. It is
not all one to make an Idol, and the likeness of any thing, for an Idol does
represent a thing unto us otherwise then it is, as the Gentiles made an Idol
of the Image of Jupiter, thinking him to be God, which he was not. An Idol is
such a thing as is not God, and is reverenced as God, whether it be a
similitude or any thing, which we think to be God. But an Image is the
similitude of any pattern, or exemple, which if that similitude do represent
unto our vewe, any thing worthy of veneration, is reverenced and honored with
the example: so as an Image is not a very similitude, but which is putt, Tomo
3. de Sacramen. talibus.
and ordained to represent and express this thing or that thing and there-
Thomas Walde^sis says, Idolum a dolo dictum est, that is to say of deceit.

14. Doctor Sanders does say, that the old heretics, Marcionists, and
Manychies, after the Euthichians were the first ympugners of Images, imitatinge
herein the Hebrews, Sarrecens, Gentiles, and Samaritans, as heretics do.
Amoungst the Emperors the first that opposed himself against Images was
Phillipp, as Paulus Diaconus does relate in his life: this Emperor being at
Constantinople, did see a picture, wherein was written the acts, and monuments
of the 6. general Council, which he commanded to be taken away, in which
Council there was two wills defined in Christ; this is related by Paulus
Dianius. Next unto him was Leo Isauricus, who by the instigation of some Jews,
commanded Images to be broken, as Paulus, Zonarus does relate, and so he is
called Leo the Image breaker, his son called Constantinus, Capronimus, did
the like after him Leo Armenius the Emperor. So in France the Albigences
certain Heretics in the time of Pope Innocent the third, and Frederick the
second Emperor, waged war against Images. After them John Witcliffe Anno
1372. and now in this last miserable age John Calvin lib 1. institut. cap. 2.
said that in the first 500. years, there were no Images in the Temples of
Christians. How false it is, let the Reader perue^se Eusebius lib. 3. and 4.
of the life of Constantine the great, who says that there were great stoare of
Images in the temples that were made by Constantine the great, Sozomenu^ lib.
5. cap. 20. Nicepho. lib. 5. c. 30. do write, that the Image of Christ in the
time of Julian the Apostate, was bought into the temple by the Christians, see
Tertulian. in lib. de pudicitia. Naz. ad Olympium. Damasc. in vita Siluestri.
Basil. in vita Barlaam. Chrisost. in missam, quam Erasmus latinam reddit.
Euodium lib. 2. de miraculis S. Stephani. Prudentium in libro de sancto
Cassiano. Paulinum epistola ad Seuerum. August. lib. de consensu Euangelistarum
cap. 10. and a little before him, Carolastadius in this heresy was the first
that opposed himself against Images.

15. That there were many Images of Christ from the beginning of the Church
it is well known, and in the life time of Christ himself there were two
Images. The first himself taking a napkin, and rubbinge his face with all, in
the which he drew his own picture, and did send it to the king of Edessa,
called Abagarus, which to this day is kept in a certain Church. Euagr. li. 4
cap. 26. Damasc. oratione 1. de Imag. Metaphr. in vita Constant Leo in 7.
Synod. act 4.
Of this very Image Euagrius makes mention and Damascenus, and Simon
Metaphrastes, and others who also do confirm the said history to be true, as
Stephen and Iuo do declare 4. part decreti cap. 83. and Adrian in script. de
Imaginibus ad Carolum magnum.

16. The second was the picture that the wooman of Paneades made, after that
she was heald from the issue of blood, in token of her thankful mind for
receauinge such a benefitt. And as many, receauinge great benefitts of great
potentats, in remembringe their benefactors, they put up, Eusebius. l 7. hist c.
14. Sozome. lib. 5. cap. 1. 20. Damasc. oratione 1. de Imag. Gregor. Papa
epist. ad Germa. quae habetur 7. Syn.
and keep the^r pictures in their howses: so the Church of Christ, which ought
to be most thankful unto Christ for sufferinge death for her, do embrace and
putt up his picture in her Churches, and Chappells. Of this pictu^e Eusebius,
Sozomenus, Damasce. and S. Gregory make mention. It is also recorded that in
the Vatican Library at Rome in hand writing, in the time of Tiberius Emperor
this Image was brought to Rome.

17. Also it is recorded by S. Athanas. lib de passione Ima. cap. 4.
Athanasius that the ^mage of Christ which was made by Nicodemus, being
brought by a Christian to a City called Beritho in Syria near Antioch, was
crucified by the Jews in horror, and hatred of him, (whom the same did
represent. This history is avouched in 7. Synd. act. 4.) and even so heretics
do now in the countries where they rule, where with their cruel hands,
profane thoughts, and blasphemous acts, they pollute, defile, deface, cast
down, burn and massacre all sacred Images, and relics, as the Jews have
don at Beritho, and in all places were they can lay hands upon the Image of
Christ. Was not that a most lamentable president committed at Showards, alias
Swards in Ireland, within six miles of Dublin, by one Hewson an English
minister of that village, in the first year of the kings reign, in the
Monthe of May, who rushed vehemently upon one of the village called Horishe,
and took from him the Crucifix, which he held in his hands, and did hang the
same upon a gallous, not in despite of the Catholics, as he himself said,
but rather in hatred of him the same did represent, writing this poesy. Help
all strangers, for the God of the papists is in danger: the poor man Horish
bringinge with him the said picture so defaced by the said minister, that it
was a pitiful thing for a Christian to behold the same, went before the
Council of estate of that miserable Country, and told them the dishonor
offered by such a base fellow unto the Image of Christ. One of that Council
called Sr. Geffrie Fenton Secretary to the state, insulted upon the poor
fellow most furiously, snatched the Crucifix from him, and cast it on the
ground under his feet, and the poor fellow for complaining against the said
minister of that abuse, was cast into prison.

18. The said Sr. Geffrye Fenton did set a poor fellow on the pillorie in
the markett time at dublin with the picture of Christ about his neck for
carienge the same before a frind of his that was dead at that time. Loys de
Perusiis in his book, discourse des guerres, writing of those tumultes which
were stirred up by the Hugonotes in France about Auignion in Province,
reports that in one place they took an Image of the Crucifix, bound it upon
an Ass back, and so went leadinge the Ass whippinge and scourginge the
Crucifix through the Town. I ask of this sort of people, if any should hang
the kings picture upon the gallous whether he should incur the ^inge and his
subjects ill will, or no, yea and perhapps suffer death for so doing,
referringe herein the injury, and indignity of abusinge his picture, to the
kings own person? I pray was it not the cheifest article against O Roerke a
noble man of Ireland, as you may read in the Chronicles of England, that he was
charged that he did hang Queen Elizabeth her picture at a horse tail, so as
the said noble man was hanged drawn and quartered at Tyborne Anno 1592. and he
that hangs Christ's picture, shall rather be favored, and countenanced then
punished for the same, and poor zealous Christians for findinge fault with
him, or for declaringe their grief for that indignity shall be be aflicted. Woe
be to that age wherein this wicked fact is done and suffered with ympunitie. Was
not the people of Thessalonica punished by the edge of the sword of the Army
of the Emperor Theodosius the great, for that they at their gate in despighte
of the Empress did hang her picture, for which that holy Bishopp S. Ambrose
did excommunicate, the said Emperor. All these Princes did esteem the injury
done unto themselves, which was done unto their Image: for in Persia they have
this custom, what punishment they inflict upon malefactors, the same they
ympose upon their Images, and as the Image of God or his saints, or their
relics, is not capable of honor, or estimation, but all the honor due unto the
same is related and referred unto the example, or pattern: so the injury, or
irreuerente handlinge of them, redoundes also unto them: this is proved by
Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople in dialogo cui titulus est
orthodoxus, Turri. lib. 1. pro Ca^. apost. c. 25.
as Turrianus translated. Liquet Christum etc. It is lawful for Christ to be a
pattern, or example of his own Image, forasmuch as in all things he ought to
resemble his brethren: although it be not written in plain words; and when
the Heretic shall ask, where is it written, that we must adore the Image of
Christ? I answer, that in the same place it is written, where we read that
we must adore Christ, saying his shape and likeness is inseparable from
himself.

Sand. li. 2. de Imag. cap. 1.
19. And as D. Sanders said, as dead things have there denomination from the
the things unto which they have their reference, or relation so such things
unto whom any sanctity belongs are called holy. Terra in qua stas locus
sanctus est. Exo. 3.12 Exodus 28.
Dies Paschae. Easter day his called holy. Saint Paul called the Scripture
holy; in as much as it is hol^e we must reverence it, 2. Tim. 3.
forasmuch as veneration is due unto holiness. And so the Angel said unto
Moses. Terra in qua stas etc. the land whereupon you stand it is called the
holy land, and therefore he bid him to put off his shoes in token of reverence.
And so as things without life, cannot be called holy, but in order,
reference, or relation to another, and being joined with him, unto whom honor
is due can be, and ought to be adored, as S. Paul says. Cui honorem honor
etc. Let us give honor, unto whom it is due: Even so in the same order, and
observation, Images are holy, and venerable, when they be referred, and
related to their examples, form, or pattern with which only they are to be
adored, no otherwise then the Image of the king is reverenced for his
majesty: Turria. li. 1. epistolis Cano.
therefore the Image of the saint, for his sanctity is to be reverenced.

20. Sigib. An. 1733. Amoi. in animalib. li. 4. c. 67. Emil. lib. 20. de gestis
francorum.
The venerable use of Images is proved by the cannons of the Apostles, by the
52. cannon of the sixth general council, by the Roman council under Greg.
the 3. as Sigibertus setts down, by Amoinus, Adonienensis, Regino in suis
Chronicis, Anno 766. by Paulus Emilius, by another council at Rome under pope
Stephen. 3. as Sigibertus setts down, Aenead. 2. lib. 1. by Sabellicus Aenead.
8. lib. after all these counsels, the same is proved by one of the 7. general
council of the world, which was the 2. of Nice. of which Paulus Diaconus,
Cedrenus, and Zonaras, and Photius Patriarche who in this council was the
Popes Legate, and the legates of three Patriarchs, Alexandria, Antioche, and
Jerusalem, and the Patriarche himself of Constantinople. This is proved by
the council of Trent. sess. 25. in decreto de reliquijs.

21. This is proved also by the miracles that God does daily work by the
Images, and relics of his saints, by which miracles. S. John Chrysostom
amoungest other arguments proves the God head of Christ, for had he not been
God, how could his Image and the Images of his saints do such wonders, as the
Image of Christ which was peirced with a lance in dishonor of Christ, cast
forth pesentlie streams of blood as S. Athanas. and Leontius setts down, Ath.
lib. de passione Imagi. Christi and Leone.
how the Image being thrust with the lance of a Jew that dwelt at Beritho a
city nere Antioch, did the like; he records moreover the miracles of Cosma
and Damia^; other miracles are recorded in the 7. 2. general council action
5. Act. 5.
and that miracle which Eusebius. lib 7. cap 9. de Homorrissa which our Lord
healed, who made the picture of Christ in token to remember him for his
benefitts, upon the place where the picture was, there grew an herb which
did reach unto the hemme of the Image, which did cure all diseases. Sozo lib.
cap. 20. Theoph. in c. 9. Mat.
Sozomenus says, when Julian the apostate did remove the Image from that
place, and put his own p^cture in the rome, a fyrie flame came from heaven and
cast of the head thereof. But what should I register old examples, when we
have so many daily at home before our eyes?

22. An. 1600
When the earl of Essex took the castle of Cahire in the Province of Mounster
in Irland, one of the gallants whom he left in garrison therein, went to a
dissolved monastery in that place, cast down, Gods punishment inflicted
upon Image breakers.
and burned the Image of our Savior Christ, the next night after he was cast
into madness and cast himself, headlonge from the top of that castle down
into the river that runs underneath. In the town of Yonghull in that
province 3. soldiors that were there in garrison, one served under Captain
Peers, another served under Captain Tanner, another under Sr. William Morgan a
welshe knight, which were left there in garrison in the wars of Gerrot Earl
of Desmond, did insult upon the holy Roode that at that time stood up in the
Abbey of S. Dominicke, 2. of them were caled Clough and Poed.
which is called in that Town the North Abbey, and castinge it down did burn
the same in the markett place of that Town. One of the principal actors
therein was taken with a raginge madness, by which, he was so tormented, that
he could never sleep or take any rest, cryinge out and saying, that the holy
Roode was following him, of which fury he died at night time in the street.
At Yonghull within a seven night after that cursed fact, his second companion
died, eaten up with lice and vermin. The third was killed by the earls
sentinelle in a sallie out of that Town, and all this happened within one
seaue^ night: which I proteste to be true, and whereof many living yet in that
Town were eye witnesses.

23. In the county of Wexford in a country there called the Morrowes, in a
certain Church dedicated to S. John Baptist, called Castle Elice, one Sr.
James Deuereux an apostate priest keepinge court there, for the Bishopp or
superintendent of that Diocese, and findinge the Image of that glorious saint
at the alter (for the Caluinian profane Common table never came to that place)
and saying the poor people offringe little pence, and beads unto the Image,
ran to the Image in a rage, saying what a superstition is this, and threw
down the Image: and thinckinge to carry it out of the Church, he was
presently strocken dead upon the ground, nor never went out of the churchyard
of that Church; And with much a do could any abide to stand by him, when he
was stripped of his apparel to be buried, by reason of the loathsome stincke,
and smell that issued from him: this is most true, as all that country can
auouche, being done in such a general assembly, of which many of the best
sort are yet living to testify the same, and happened in the year anno 1600.

24. I could bring many examples that do daily happen, as the Catholics can
tell, and the Protestants do daily see before their eyes. Sed vt videntes non
vident, and audientes non intelligunt. But you are those of whom our Savior
says, saying you do not see, and hearing you do not understand, you may
say with the Prophett: Defecit in me virtus mea, and lumen oculorum meorum non
est mecum. Grace does fail you, and the power, or sense of saying is not with
you, and although many of you have with-no less despightfull indignity then
Samaritans, Jews, and Mahometts with your cursed hands, and blasphemous lips,
polluted, and defaced the Image of Christ and of his Saints, and have not
received condign and worthy punishment in this life, yet you ought not to
brag of gods mercy, in sparinge you, for as S. Augustine says, if God
should punish every wicked man in this world, it should be an argument for
you, that there is not a place of punishment for transgressors besides this
world, and therefore he does not inflict punishment upon all in this life, but
reserues the same unto the other, that we may assure ourselves, that our
wickedness and trangressions, which we our selves do daily perpetrate and
practice, and which are rigorously punished in others, shall not escape the
damnation of gods judgment, whose merciful forbearinge with us will increase
his wrath, and augment our woe, which we ought to prevent by other men's ruin.

The manner how to reverence Christ his Image.
25. The manner how to reverence Christ's Image, Gregorius lib 7. as Vasquez
Cites in his second book de adoratione, disputatione. 8. cap. 13. and in the
council of Rome under Pope Stephen the 3. his words be these. Et nos quidem
etc. We truly, says he, not as it were before the divinity, prostrate our
selves when we come before the Image of Christ, but we do adore him, which
by the Image, either in his birth, passion, or sittinge in the Throne of
Judgment we contemplate, and behold. Read the verses which Sabellicus wrote l.
8. Aeneade 8. and as some do think were composed in the 7. general council
and are written with letters of gould at Venice ingraued in an old wall.

Na^ Deus est, quod imago docet, sed non Deus, ipse
Hanc videas, sed mente colas, quod cernis in ipsa.
Christ's picture humbly worshipp thou,
Which by the same do pass,
Yet picture worshipp not but him,
For whom it pictured was.
Nor God, nor man this Image is,
Which thou do present see,
Yet whom this blessed Image shows
Both God and man is he.
For God in that which the Image shows
But yet no God it is.
Behold this form, but worshipp that,
The mind beholdes in this.
26. The same does Hieronimus Augustus set down. Hic est colendi modus,
publicis concionibus sedulo inculcandus, this is the order of reuerencinge
Images, and in pulpitts we must inculcate the same to the people, that by the
Image we may worshipp in spirit, and truth, and eleuate our minds and
wills excitated by them to God, and to direct our prayers, and petitions unto
him, and to his holy Saints. Where we must consider, that we ought not to
give the praises of the pattern to the Image, neither thinck the same capable
of any prayers, for it being a dead thing, it is not capable thereof; and
although the Church in the passion Sunday has these words. O crux aue spes
vnica
Hoc passionis tempore,
Auge pijs iustitiam
Reisque dona veniam.


O Cross^ of Christ, our only hope, and healpe in time of need, In time of
these bitter pains voutchase, to help us with relief, the godly to confirm
in grace and sinners to forgive. We mean not to apply to the Cross it self,
but unto Christ figuratively, per^figuram prosopopeiam, which is common to
poets and Orators. When we speak to dead things in the person of the
living; and also by the figure called Metonomia, when the Cross is taken for
Christ, vt continens pro contento, as the author of the Cross for the Cross
it self, so that to the Image it self, our petition has noe relation being
not capable thereof. And therefore the council of Trent says, Sess. in decreto
de Imag.
that in the Images themselves there is no virtue or excellency for the which
they should be reverenced, or praide unto, or that we should repose any hope
in them, neither sacrifice is offered to Images, which can be offered to none but
to God, for it is a protestation of the omnipotent power and majesty of God as
he is the author and Lord of all, neither are oblations properly offered unto
them, because that oblation is offered only to God unto whom all sacrifice and
oblations do belong, 7. Synod. act. 9.
as S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 85. ar. 3. and 3. teaceth. And although the 7. general
council has these words. Merito nos ad Imagines reuerenter accedere debemus
oblationibus suffultum and luminarium. We ought to aproach reverently before
the Images with oblations of incense, perfumes and lights. The holy doctor
did not think those things to be properly oblations as they were offered unto
Images, neither that general counsel says that the oblations should be
offered to Images, but says that we should approache before Images with
oblations: for the council intends, that those oblations offered unto Images
should be properly offered unto God, unto whom principaly they have their
reference, and not unto Images, unto whom adoration and not oblation
belongs, unless you will call those things that are offered before Images
Donaria, videlicet guiftes which are hanged about Images.

Whether Papists do committ Idolatry, in Worshippinge the Cross of Jesus
Christ. CHAPTER VI.
1. THe first heresy touching the adoration of the Cross, was of Claudius
Bishopp of Thaurum, as Iuo Carnotensis avouches. The second heresy was, of a
certain sect called Pauliciain, as Photius the Patriarck does allege, and as
Euthimius in sua panoplia, declares. The third heresy was, in the time of S.
Bernard, by one Petrus Brius, against whom Petrus Cluniacensis did write. The
fourth was, of those that followed John Witcleeffe, as Thomas Waldensis
declares, homil. 3. cap. 160. The first heresy was, of Calvin in his book of
Institutions the 11. chapter q. 7. his argument is. The cross of Christ was
the instrument of the grief and death of Christ: therefore we ought not to
honor the same, neither the relics of his other passions. This Calvin was
he, who threw down the Image of Christ, and permitted his own Image to be
reverenced and worn about men's necks. And when a certain familiar frind of
his own, told him that the people did so ymbrace his Image; he answered him
scoffingly and said. If any man be offended therewith, either let him not behold
the same, or let him pull out his eyes, or go hang himself.

2. We for our parts do not reverence the Cross of Christ, in respect of the
torments of Christ, and of his pains, but as those torments and passion were a
remedy for mankind, and a sacrifice grateful unto God* as also an evident
argument of his affection, love, and charity toward mankind, and as the
Cross was the standarte of our redemption by which he destroyed him, qui
mortis habuit imperium, that had the command of death: pacificans omnia sanguine
crucis, appeasinge gods wrath by his death upon the Cross, which he
conceived against mankind. Calvin herein does imitate Julian the Apostate,
who objected unto the Christians the adoration of the Cross, saying. Crucis
lignum adoratis, imaginem illius in front, and ante domos pingentes. You adore
the cross of Christ, you make his Image in your forehead, you paint his
picture before your howses: who therefore may not whorthilie hate your wisest
men, or pity your ignorant and silly sort, who at lenght are sallen into
that callamitie, that having forsaken the eternal God, you pass unto a dead
Jew, thus far the said Apostate, against the Christians. Apud Cyrill. Alex.
lib. 6. in Iulianum.

3. As for the catholic doctrine it does teach, that not only the cross, in
qua Christus mortuus, sed quaecumque crucis figura etc. in which Christ
suffered, but any other figure of the cross, is to be honored and reuere^ced:
this is proved by the seventh general council the 2. of Nice. act. 7. where
the council defined honor, and reverence to be given to the tipe and form of
the holy Cross, much more to the Cross it self, for both of them are the
sign of Christ crucified. 2. Coloss.
This is proved by S. Paul, sainge. Christ wyped out the hand writing of
decree that was against us, and the same he has taken away, fastening it to
the Cross, and spoilinge the principalities and potestates. And in the first
epistle he says, 1. Epist. Coloss.
he reconciled all things by himself, pacifyinge by the blood of his Cross,
I mean his death which he suffered upon the Cross. 1. Pet. 2.
And as S. Peter says. Christ himself did bear our sins in his body upon
the tree. Why should not then that blessed Cross be reverenced, as the sacred
Altar of that sacrifice, and the instrument of so great a triumph and
redemption? And as Leontius said, any thing that belonges to our father or
friend whom we desire to behold, we reverence and esteem, and we kiss the
same, yea sometimes with weepinge eyes, why then should not we also with
reverence kiss the tree and Cross, which was the instrument of our
redemption, and approach unto it with weepinge eyes? If a captain had frought
a combat for the common wealth, the ensign or standart by which he had
overthrown his enemies, would be houlden for a great monument, and why should
not the standart of Jesus Christ be highly reuere^ced by which he has
owerthrowen that enemy of mankind, and obtained victory against the power of
Satan? Triumphans eos palam in ligno etc. as has been written in the old
greek translation, bringinge the Princes of darkness in a triumphinge manner,
under the standart of the Cross?

Cyrill. Epist ad Constable. August^ Amb. de obit^ Theodo. Chris. ho. 84 in cap.
^9. Ioh. s. Ruf. li 12. hist c. 7. Euir. l. 11 Paul. Epi. 11. ad Sever. Sulp.
l. 2 sacrae hist. c. 18. Theod l 1 hist. c 18. Sozom. l. 2 cap. 1 Damasc. 4 de
fid. c. 12 Cyrill. 10. and 13 Nyse. in vita Marcin^ soror. Paul Ep. 11. Hiero.
Aug. l. 22. de ciui c. 8 Amb. in orat. de ^bitu Theo. Eusebius l. ^. vita Cosl.
cap. 15.
4. This reverence belonginge to the holy Cross is proved by the invention
thereof by S. Helena as S. Cyrill of Jerusalem S. Ambrose. Chrisost. Rufinus
Paulinus, Sulpitius, Socrates lib. 1. cap. 17. 1. Iustinianus imperator in
nouella co^stit. 28. do write. Truly had not that holy Cross been worthy of
reverence and honor neither Helena should have bin moved with divine
inspiration to search for it, neither by gods divine providence should she
have found it, neither yet in the findinge of it, those miracles should ever
have been wrought, as also since in all ages as the holy doctors do auouche.
Damascenus, Cyrillus. Hierosolimitaenus. Nyscen^s, Paulinus. Chrysostom.
Homilia quod Christus sit Deus. in. 5. Homil. Hierom epist. 17. which not only
made mention of the Cross, but of other relics of Christ. S. Gregory in the
7. book epist. 126. did send a parcel of the Cross unto Recaredus king of
Spain. S. Augustine does testify that a part of the earth of the holy land,
being brought into Affricke, did great miracles. S. Ambrose does declare that
one of the Nails of Christ his Cross, was fixed in the helmett of Constantine
the great, the same is testified by Eusebius.

5. The veneration of this Cross, is proved by the wonderful victory gotten
by Heraclius the Emperor in recoueringe the holy Cross from the Persians,
which when it was restored to its former place, many miracles were wrought
thereby, as Paulus Diaconus, In vita Heraclij.
Zonaras, and Cedrenus make mention, and Sigibertus in Chronica; for which
cause the feast of the exaltation of the Cross was instituted by the Church:
Mat. 24. Cyrill. Aug. ser. 130. de tempore. Damasc. l. 4 ca. 12. Cypr li. 2 ad
Quir. cap. 1. and
Again the sign of the Cross is proved by S. Mathewe in the day of
Judgment, the sign of the Son of man shall appear, as Origines,
Chrysostom, Theophilactus, Euthymius, Hilarious, Beda, Cyrill. Hieroso. and S.
Aug. do declare, and all the rest do testify the same. S. Cyprian does
teach, that the sign of the Cross is so expedient, as in old time the sign
Tau. Ezec. 9. which place S. Hiero^ expoundinge says, that in the beginning
the letter Tau was like a Cross. Origines, Tertulian, and Cyprian hold, that
such as were living in any battle, were set down by this letter T. and
such as were dead were described by this letter. O. The reverence of the Cross
is proved also, by the reverence that Constantine the great, and other
Christian Emperors did exhibit toward the same, as stamping it in their
moneys and gould, puttinge it in their ensigns, carryinge it before them, and
as holy Doctors do say, that in things natural it is of great virtue, Amb.
ser. 56. Ruf. li. 12. hist. 2. cap. 29.
as Justinius Apologia. 2. Ambr. ser. 56. for the sign of the Cross serves to
the mariners to sail, to the birds to fly, and as Rufinus does write, the
figure of the Cross with the Egiptians in their Hieregtiphes, does signify
life everlasting.

6. And we must observe, that when we express the sign of the Cross upon
any thing, we do not mean by that sign, to ympart any virtue unto the
same, but only by the sign of the cross expressed upon the same, we implore
the help of Christ crucified, so that it is an impudent lie of Heretics to
say, that the sign of the cross is superstitious. Heretics cry against the
catholic church for making the sign of the cross or the picture of Christ,
saying. Confusion be to all those that do worshipp any engraven thing, and
qui adorant sculptilia. I answer that it is meant to worshipp it as God: and
so, Cassiodorus does interpret it an Idol or to make an Idol of it. For as in
the Temple of Salomo^ there were pictures and graven Images: so in the Temple
of the Christians; yet neither the one nor the other are Idols, for the
picture of Christ and of his Saints, of which we do not make gods, are but
signs to bring us to remember the true God. If to painte the picture of
Christ were Idolatry, why should S. Luke, Comes Sancti Pauli in euangelio, the
fellow of S. Paul in the gospel, painte both the Image of Christ and his
Mother as we read in the fourth book of the Sentences ca. 5. and as learned
Saints do write? S. Luck painted the Image of Christ.
Damascenus said as Thomas Waldensis reports, Accepimus, Lucam Euangelistam
etc. We have received, that Luke the Evangelist painted Christ and his mother,
and that the famous City of Rome has the same picture. Origines declaring in
his 8. homily upon Iosue, how that the king Hay was hanged upon a double
tree, says. It follows that the cross of our Lord, was a double cross, the
one a visible cross, whereon the son of God was crucified in flesh: the other
was an invisible cross, whereon inuisibly the diuill with all his power and
Princes was Crucified, 1. Epist. Coloss.
as S. Paul says, he ouerthrewe the power and mighty Princes of darcknesse,
and tryumphed over them on the tree of the cross: so as this cross has two
singular considerations. The first is, that which S. Peter says, that Christ
was crucified, leauinge unto us an example to follow his stepps. The second
consideration, wherein he got the victory over Zabull, wherein he was
crucified: therefore S. Paul says, woe be unto me says he if I glory in any
thing, but in the cross of Christ, by which the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world. So as you see two effects which he does allege, for he
says that two contrary things are crucified, the virtuous liver, and the
sinful sinner, the mortified body, and the wicked world, according as
Origines says of Christ and of the devil. Thomas Waldensis and others here
upon do say, that the cross is called both the wood, and Christ, as
Hieremias says, venite mittamus lignum in panem eius. Let us cast wood into
his bread, so as he means by the wood the cross, and by his bread, his
tender flesh. Christ himself avouches the same: panis quem ego dabo etc. the
bread I shall give, is my flesh. S. Hierome says, he has not left his cross
upon the earth, but he carried it with him unto heaven, and so he shall come
with his cross, so as he meant by his cross his body and flesh and himself.
Of which cross Sybilla said. O ter beatum lignum in quo Deus extensus eit. O
thrice happy wood upon which God was elevated.

7. S. Ambrose speakinge in the person of Hellen^, has these words. Quomodo
me redemptum arbitror, si redemptio ipsa non cernitur; video quid egeris o
diabole, vt gladius quo percussus es* destrueretur. How shall I know my
redemption if the redemption it self be not seen, I know o diuill it is thy
craft to hide the sword by which thou were overthrown. It is written in the
book of wisdom. Benedictum est lignum per quod fit iustitia. Blessed be the
wood by which Justice is done cursed be the hand by which an Idol is made, and
also him that makes the same, behold he did bless the wood of the cross, and
did curse the Idol of impiety. Was Iosue an Idolater, when he said to the
sun, thou shall not move against Gabaon, neither the moon against Haylon?
for we know that Iosue did speak unto the Creator of them. The 3. children
also did singe and say, benedicite sol and luna. O sun and moon, day and
night, bless ye our Lord, and so did David say to all creatures; and will
you charge the Church of God with Idolatry for honoring God in his creatures?
And so we say the like unto the green wood, and to the blessed cross, not
adoringe the nature of wood herein, but the living cross of him that was
crucified, whose grace and favor in the same we implore.

Epistola 140.
8. S. Bernard speaking of the holy cross, Confessio sanctae crucis, non nisi
crucifixi confessio est, the confession of the holy cross, is no other then
the confession of the crucified. Therefore Thomas Waldensis speakinge of the
invention of this holy cross. Quid in hoc festo infestum sit, what harm is
in this feast, but that we give God thanckes, which procured that gracious
wooman, and as S. Ambrose says. Infudit ei spiritus vt lignum requirat.
Inspired her with his spirit to search the wood. S. John Chrysostom adds in
his book of the cross these words. Si scire desideres charissime virtutem
crucis etc. Most dear, if you would know what virtue the cross has, and how
much I could speak in the praise thereof, know that the cross is the hope of
the Christian, the cross is the way for people in desperation, the cross is
the resurrection of the dead, the cross is the guide unto heaven, the cross
is the staff for the lame, the cross is the comfort of the sorrowful, the
cross is the bridle of the rich, the cross is the destruction of the proud,
the cross is the pain of the envious, the triumph of devils, the tutor of
youth, the patience of the poor, the pylott of mariners and sailors, the wall
of those that are beseeged, the father of orphans, the defense of widows,
the comfort of martyrs, the chastity of Virgins, the solace of priests, the
victory of the Romans, the bread of the hungry, and the fountain of the
thirsty, thus much saint John Chrysostom, John Chrisost. homil.
and much more of the glorious cross. And in his homily upon S. Mathewe 16.
Laeto animo crucem Christi circumferamus etc. Let us with a willing mind
carry the cross of Christ, the same being the badge of our salvation, by
which it was effected, without whose presence we cannot be regenerated, when
we be fedd and sustained with the holy food of life, or consecrate the same;
the enseigne or standarte of the victory must stand by. Wherefore let us fix,
and place it in our chambers, on the walls, in the windows, yea let us sign
our foreheads and our hearts withal, for that is the collizen and mark of our
saftie, of our common liberty, yea of the humility and lenity of our Lord.
And in the same homily, he says: Hoc signum nostris and priscis temporibus
clausas januas reserauit, etc. this has opened the doors that were shut, has
abated the force of poison, has tamed wild and cruel beasts, healed deadly
bitinges of serpents, broken the gates of hell, opened the gates of heaven,
renewed the way to Paradise, it also did break the serpents head: what should
we wonder that the same overcame cruel beasts and pestiferous poisons. This
sign converted the whole world, and revived it, took away fear, and brought
truth and tranquillity again, restored the earth unto heaven, and made of
men Angels.

9. S. Hierom writing unto Letham said. Quicquid comederis, quicquid biberis,
muni semper signo Crucis. Whatsoever you eat or drink, putt the sign of the
cross upon it. And as S. Gregory does witness S. Benedict, by the sign of
the cross did break a glass full of poisoned licoure. Iulia^, though
otherwise a wretched Apostate, with the sign of the cross did chase away
diuills. Cassiodorus upon those words of S. Chrysostom. Crux mortuorum
resurrectio, Crux claudorum baculus etc. the cross is the resurrection of the
dead etc. said that he did utter them by divine inspiration, and he added these
words himself. Crux est tuitio humilium etc. the cross is the safeguard of
the humble, the destruction of the diuil, the victory of Christ, the
overthrow of hell, vita iustorum and mors infidelium haereticoru^, the life of
the just, and the death of vnbeleeuinge Heretics. And inconfirmation of the
history of Constantine the great and Heraclius, he did interpose the victory
of the Romans: now are these words, and confirmation of those glorious
saints touching the cross to be reputed Idolatry? Lib. Tripart. c. 10.
Cassidiorus says, that S. John Chrysostom made crosses o^ silver which were
carried with wax guilte with Gold and silver at the expenses of Eudoxia the
Empress, wherefore the Arrians repininge against those crosses, insulted upon
them. thus Cassiodorus. Lib. 9. Eccles. hist.
Eusebius writes, that when the Emperor Constantine the great gathered his
Army against Maxentius the Tyrant of Rome (for at that time he was a fauorer
of Christian religion) he saw in his sleep in the air toward the east, the
sign of the cross shininge with a fiery flame, and being astonished with
such an unusual aspect, he saw two Angels saying unto him. Constantine in
this sign thou shall overcome. And as Isayas says, Leuo ad gentes manum mea^.
Isay. 49.
Ecce leuo etc. behold I will carrye my strenght to the Gentiles, and I will
exal^ my sign toward the people, and they shall with a low countenance
toward the earth adore thee, and shall lick with their tongue the dust of
thy feet, and you shall know I am your God, what sign I pray then is this,
but the cross of Christ which is his only sign as S. August. says? Ipsam
crucem suam signum habiturus es, Super John homil. 36.
ipsam crucem de diabolo superato tanquam tropheum in frontibus fidelium
positurus, it is his cross says he, that was his sign, it is the mark and
badge, I mean his cross by which he triumphed over the diuill, as the ensign
of his victory which he fixed in the forehead of every Christian, as the
Apostle says. Absit mihi gloriari etc. Woe be unto me, if I glory in any
other thing then in the cross of Christ.

Psalm. 98.
10. Upon these words. Adorate scabellum pedumeius, quia sanctum est. Adore ye
his foot stool because it is holy S. Hierom says there are many opinions
touching this foot stool, very like it is, it is meant by his body, in
which the majesty of his divinity stood as upon a foot stool, which ought
to be adored, his foot stool, says S. Hierom is his body, his foot stool
is his soul, De fide. Gratiam.
his foot stool is his cross. S. Ambrose says, iam ergo aucthoritatem
habent etc. now therefore says he, they have the ecclesiastical authority,
and the authority of the Apostles, and also the authority of so great
fathers by whom they may carry the sign of Christ's cross, amoungst the
people in ecclesiastical processions and conuents, in assemblies of prelates,
in the standarts and crowns of catholic kings, to the end that his foot
stool might be humbly worshipped and adored, thus much S. Ambrose. Signatum
est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine. O Lord thou have imprinted the
impression of thy light in our foreheads. Cassiodorus says upon that verse.
In Crucis impressione lumen est vultus Dei, quia semper in eis noscitur
radiare. Gods gracious favor is extended toward them that are marked with his
sign, because he is known allwaies to shine in them. S. Gregory wrote unto
Secundinum, that he would send unto him two Images and a cross, that so he
should be defended from malignant spiritts, and in rescripto ad eum duas
tabulas: we have sent unto you two tables the Image of our Savior, of the
blessed Virgin his mother, and S. Peter and S. Paul, by our said son or
Deacone, pro benedictione, for a benediction, that by it you may be protected
from evil spiritts, Cap. 4.
by whose blessed cross you shall be sure to be defended from evil spiritts.

11. This is that blessed cross, Ioh. 12.
of which our Savior spoke saying, when he should be exalted from the earth,
he would draw all things to himself. If the Adamant stone with its virtue
draws Iron unto it, the fish called Remora being so little, holds fast the
greatest shipp that ever was, notwithstanding all the devises both of nature
and art endeavor to put her forward, if the stone in latin called Gagates, in
English Agat-stone, by a certain hidden virtue chaseth away devils, how much
more this blessed Cross, by the virtue of him that died thereupon does, and
shall chase away devils and evil spiritts? And as the Apostle says, the
word of the cross to them in deed that perish is foolishnes: but to them that
are saved is the power of God, for it is written I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise and the prudence of the prudent I will reject, 1. Cor. 1.
for that which is the foolish of God, is wiser then men, and that which is
the infirm of God, Isa. 33.18
is strounger then men: and as God almighty commanded Moses when he would
deliver his people, from the servile yoke of Aegipte, Exodus 4.
to take into his hands a piece of wood, that is to say his rodd, by which he
was to work all those miracles that he wrought, Exodus 7.8.9.
so when our Savior was to deliver mankind from the thraldom of the devil,
he took this wood which is his cross, of which Moses rod was a figure, by
which our Savior has redeemed us, and by which both he and his spouse the
Church do work miracles, of which the spouse in the Canticles says. Cant. 7.
Ascendam in altum and apprehendam fructum eius. I will climb up into the
top thereof, and I will take some of the fruicte. The fruit of this noble
cross is the mortifications of our passions, the bridlinge of our filthy
concupiscense, the crucifie^g^ of our luxurious carcass, the restraint of our
insatiable appetites. The fruitt thre^^of, are all the virtues both moral and
supernatural. The fruicte thereof is a chaste body, a contrite heart, an
instant prayer, a fervent spirit, a sound religion, a quiett conscience, a
perfect life, a pure intention, and a contemplative mind; the foundation of all
these virtues, is true humility, which was never known in the world, before
the cross was exalted in world: which as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1.
as unto the Jews ^ertes a scandal, unto the gentiles foolishnes, so now
adays unto the heretics of this time is Idolatry, but glory and salvation
unto the virtuous catholics, who do learn daily by this sign of the holy
cross, the principal mysteries of our faith which are two.

12. First, the mystery of the unity and trinity of God; secondly the
incarnation and passion of our Savior. We make the sign of the cross in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, and in this form:
Puttinge the right hand under the foread, when we say in the name of the
Father: then under the breast, when we say, and of the son: lastly from the
left shoulder unto the right, when we say, and of the holy ghoast. And saying
in the name, and not in the names does show the unity of God, and the divine
power and authority which is one only in all the three persons, these words
of the father, of the son, and of the holy Ghoast, do show unto us the
trinity of persons: the signinge in form of a cross represents unto us the
passion, and consequently the incarnation of the son of God: the passinge
from the left shoulder to the right, signifies that by that passion of our
Savior, we were transferred from sin unto grace, from transitory things
unto eternal, from death to life: and we that for our demeritts were to be
placed with goats upon the left hand, he transferred us with his sheep unto
the right, where we may hear that blessed voice. Matt. 15.
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you etc.

13. This sign also is made, to show that we are Christians, to wit
soldiors of Christ, because this sign is as it were an ensign or liuerie
which distinguishes the soldiers of Christ, from all the enemies of the holy
Church, videl. Gentiles, Jews, Turckes, and Heretics: besides, this sign is
made to call for Gods help in all our works, because with this sign the
most holy Trinity is called to help by means of the passion of our Savior:
and therefore good Christians use to make this sign when they arise from bed,
when they go to sleep, and in the beginning of all other things. Finally
this sign is made to arm us against all temptations of the diuill* because
the diuill is afraid of this sign, and flies from it as malefactors do
when they see the sign of the Officers of justice, and many times by means of
this sign of the holy cross, a man escapes many dangers.

14. S. Gregor. Nazianzen, Naz. in oratione priore qua^ scripsit aduers.
Iulianum.
writes of Julian the Apostate. Ad crucem confugit, ac ob timore^^ signatur,
adiutorem facit quem persequebatur etc. He flies unto the cross, he signs
himself therewith, he does ask his help, whom he persecuted: the sign of
the cross did prevail, the diuills are overcome. Theodoretus, most famous
amoungest the Grecians, says also of him. Theod. li. 3. hist. eccle.
Apparentibus demonibus etc. When the diuills did appear unto him, he was
compelled to sign his forehead with the sign of the cross, and presently
the diuills at the sight of the sign of Christ's ensign, remembringe their
overthrow, they presently vanished away. And Zozomenus says of him th^s. Ex
consuetudine pristina, symbolo se Christ^ clanculum obsignauit, spectra illi
subito euanuerunt. According the old custom he did sign himself secrerlie
with the badge of Christ, and the ghoastes forthwith disappeared.

15. Tertulian also, wishes every true soldiear of Christ, Tert. de corona
militis.
to defend and arm himself with the sign of the cross. Quamobrem ad omnem
progressum etc. Wherefore it was used, that every one should make the sign of
the cross in his forehead, at his progress and promotion, at his goinge in,
and cominge forth, in apparellinge himself, in puttinge on his shoes, in
washinge himself, at the table, at the lights, at his goinge to bed, at his
rest, in all his actions and conuersations. Unto which agrees S. Chrysostom
saying. Neque sic regia corona ornatur caput, Chrysostom. in demonstr. aduersus
Gentiles quod Christus sit Deus. to. 3.
vt Cruce: subinde omnes ea se signant etc. The cross is a better ornament for
the head of a Christian, then the Diadem or crown of a king, when as all men
do sign themselves therewith, in their cheifest and principalest member, which
is the forehead, being the pillar in which the same is engraued: so it is
used in the Eucharist and in the holy Orders of priesthood: likewise it shines
at Christ's body, at his mystical supper, at home and abroad, (...) and in
company, in your journey, at sea, in the shipp, in your apparel, in your
weapons and arms, in the bodies of beasts ill at ease, in the bodies of men
possessed by the diuills, so as all men ought to be greedy of this maruailous
and precious good, of which they ought to be very carfull: thus fare S.
Chrysostom of this noble cross, of which none that is a good Christian is
ashamed, but the Heretic is confounded therewith.

16. The same also S. Augustine insinuated, saying. Aug. in Psalm 141.
Let him delude and triumph over Christ crucified, insultat ille Christo
crucifixo etc. I may behold the cross of Christ in the forehead of kings,
that which he despises, is a salvation to me, none is so proud as the
diseased man, that scorns his own cure, if he will not scorn it, he should
himself receive it, and therewith be healed: the sign of the cross is the
sign of humility, but pride will not ymbrace the means by which her
loftiness may be remedied. And in another place he says. Idem trac. 118. in
Ioannem.
Quid est quod omnes nouerunt signum Christi? etc. What is the cause that all
men do know the sign of the holy cross, which sign if it be not used in
our fore-heades, or in the water by which we be regenerated, or in the holy
oil by which we be anointed, in the Chrysme or in the sacrifice by which we
are nourished, nothing of all these is well done. Again in another place he
says. Crucis mysterio rudes cathechisantur etc. Idem ser. 19. de sanctis.
By the mystery of the cross, the ignorant are cathechised, the fountain of
our regeneration is consecrated, by imposition of hands the baptized receive
the gift of graces, Churches are dedicated, Altares are consecrated, Priests
and Levites are promoted unto holy orders, and all ecclesiastical Sacraments
by the virtue of the cross are perfected and consumated. Abdius that was
disciple unto the Apostles, who wrote their lives, and their acts, does also
observe, how often at all occasions of dangers they made the sign of the
Cross on their fore-heades, which every Christian also does observe in all
ages, in all dangers and perils: all Christian Churches, in every kingdom and
Province, from age to age, from posterity to posterity, are framed and shaped
in likeness of this blessed Cross, in which cross S. Paul did glory so much,
Gal. 5. 1. Pet. 5. Gal. 2. Gal. 6.
that he said the world was crucified unto him, and he also crucified unto the
world, by which S. Peter says he himself was joined and fastened unto Christ.

Whether Papists blaspheme against God, in saying that any man can meritt.
CHAPTER I.
1. THe cause, wherefore you will not have merittes in man, is because you say,
that no man though never so just, or by any grace of God a man may have, can
keep, or observe his commandments. Iosue. 11. 3. Regum.
Which is most false, for in the holy scriptures, many godly men are praised
because they have kept and observed gods comaundements, as may appear in
diverse places. Luca 10.
Was not Zachary and Elizabeth just before God, because they did walk in the
comaundements and iustifications of our Lord without blame? Ezec. 36.
This is confirmed by Ezech. Spiritum meum ponam; I will fix my spirit in the
midst of you and I will cause you that you shall walk in my precepts, and
that you shall observe and keep my comaundements. And although without gods
grace, the comaundements cannot be performed, yet by the grace of the holy
ghost which is promised to the just, they may be kept, Matt. 11. John. 5.
for by that grace the yoke of Christ is made light, and his burden sweet, and
as S. John says, his comaundements are not heavy. Aug lib. de nature. and
gratia. cap. 43.
This is proved by the holy fathers, especially S. Augustine. Non igitur Deus
impossibilia iubet etc. Therefore God does not comaunde things impossible, but
commanded you to do, what you may do, and to ask of him what of your self
you could not do. And according hereunto holy S. Hierom says. Symbo. ad
Damas.
Execramu^ (inquit) eorum blasphemias etc. We execrate their blasphemies,
because they said, that God commanded any thing impossible, and that Gods
comaundeme^ts may be kept not only of some, but of many. The same very
words S. Augustine has, unto which agrees S. Basil, saying; Aug. ser. 100.
91. de te^pore.
It is a wicked saying, that precepts of the spirit are impossible. Basil.
in oratione super illud. attende'tibi. Con Trid. sess. 6. Cano 18.
Wherefore by the holy council of Auransica in Affrique, and of Trent, the
contrary is defined as a matter of faith, for if men could not observe the
precepts of God, it should be no offense to transgress them: for noe man
offends in that he cannot shun. And therefore almighty God without cause
and most iniustlie should punish transgressors, either in this world or in the
next, but he does not iniustlie punish offenders, but justly, for the offenses
which they could have avoided, and for not doing the good which they could
have done.

Objection.
2. But the heretics object against this catholic doctrine, that by the
commandment, thou shall love thy Lord thy God, withal thy heart etc. and thou
shall not couett, we ought so to direct and ordain all our actions, thoughts,
and affections unto God, suppressinge, and mortifyinge. all concupiscence of
our proper desire or comoditie, as the Apostle says. Referr all your actions
unto God, 1. Cor. 10. and 16.
and let all you actions be don in charity: but noe man can perform this
thing, for as long as a man lives in the flesh, he does couett against the
spirit. Wherefore in all our actions though never so just, those two precepts
are violated, touching the love of God, and not to couett any thing.

3. We* answer that the precepte of louinge God is affirmative, and never
binds any man allwaies, and at all times, so as we should never cease from
louinge God actually, that is to say, in every time or moment to show and
declare the effects of our love, by external signs and tokens, but by that
precepte we are bound, to show our love outwardly, and to putt it in due
execution, when just opportunity and fit occasion shall be offered, and never
to prefer any creature before God; For, to think of God allwaies, and to
direct all our actions unto him, is not meant or comprehended in the obligation
of this precepte, but is a good council, and a thing which shall be
accomplished in the state of bliss and everlasting felicity, as S. Thomas
and S. Augustine do declare. D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 44. art. 6. Aug lib. de perfect.
just.


4. Secondarilie we answer, that the precepte, thou shall not couett, byndes
us that we should not obey or yield unto the filthy motions of concupiscence
which are called, motus primo primi, by free delectation and consent, which
commandment the Apostle inculcateth in other, saying: Romans 6.
Non regnet peccatum in vestro mortali corpore, vt obediatis concupiscentijs
eius. Let not sin reign in your corruptible body, that you should yield or
consent thereunto, so long as the concupisce^ce of the same do not reign,
that precepte is not violated, for to feel the unbridled motions of
concupiscence is not a sin, Aug. li. 1. de nuptijs and concupis. c. 23. and
lib. 5. contra Iulianum. D. Greg. and Ozius in confess.
but to yield consent thereunto is a sin; for it is manifest that many do not
yield unto filthy concupiscence, but with all speedy means and force, they
resist the same by the grace of God, which is ready to be offered to every one
that will imploie his best endeavor. So avouches S. Augustine and S.
Gregory, Ozius and other holy fathers. To the intent therefore that you may
take away all good endeavors, from man in the buysines of his salvation, and
that we should do nothing therein, you take away all cooperation of man with
gods grace, and that grace it self without which we can do nothing in the
work of our justification, you take it quite away, saying that man has not
this grace inherent in him. 2. lib. de capt.
To this purpose you say with Luther in his second book of the captivity of
Babylon, that to teach that good works are necessary to salvation is
deuilishe. You say also with Calvin, Calu. 3. de instit. c. 19
that never any good works were done of any saint, which did not deserve
reproache. And a little before, he said, that all our works are pernicious,
and whosoever does them is cursed. And the said Luther in the 30. articles
condemned of Leo the Tenthe says: all the evil that we do is by the
inspiration of God, and that by sinninge we do well, God being the cause of
all evil, as Calvin says, lib. 1. inst. cap. 28.
in so much says he, that not to sin, is sin, and to restrain any
appetite or motion of any thought, is to resist God and to sin. And so Luther
says in his book, Lib de ser. arbit.
the more wicked you be, the nearer you are to purchase gods favor. How
damnable these articles be, let any Christian judge that will open his ears
to hear them. I would every one would stop his ears from hearing such
horrible blasphemies, so contrary to holy scriptures, and all honesty. Noe
profane Philosopher or wicked heretic though never so damnable, ever said
the like. And therefore these blasphemous and wicked articles, are condemned by
the whole Senate of Christianity, in the council of Trent, and most
worthily: Con. Trid. sess. c. 11. and cano. 28. and 21.
because they be against common honesty, and against the holy scriptures, in
which many times the works and endeavors of good people, are commended and
praised as good and holy, in which works there was noe sin, as it is said in
Job. In all these things Job has not offended: Job. 1. Lutae 1.
and in the Gospel of S. Luke it is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, that
both of them were just before God, walkinge in gods comandements and
righteousness without grudge. And as S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 7.
if a virgin should marry, therein she should not sin, and in many other
places we are commanded not to comitte sin, therefore the holy scriptures
do mean that we may do, many good works by gods grace without sin.

5. Heretics answer unto these scriptures saying, that the cause wherefore
the scriptures says that there are many good works of just persons, is,
because it is not imputed unto them to damnation for the faith of Christ,
although say they, they be sinful. I reply against that, for the scriptures
do distinguish betwixt this which is to sin, and that which is to remitte
sins, or not to impute unto us the sin which we have committed, as it is
plain; Scribo vobis vt non peccetis: 1. Ioh. 2. Conc. Auranc. c. 9. 18. and
20. Hier. li. 3. contra Pelag. In Proemio super epist. ad Philomen. Ephesians. 1.
Aug. sup. Luc. 1. Amb de Spiritu and litera. cap 36. De natura and gratia reg
super Co^c. Trid.
I write unto you that you should not sin, for if any man shall sin, we
have an advocate with the Father etc. this truth is confirmed by the tradition
of the Church, and the holy fathers. It is also defined against Pelagius, that
without the grace of God, a man cannot live justly without sin: yet says
the council by the grace of God we may live without offense. Therefore S.
Hierom says. Hoc (inquit) and nos dicimus, posse hominem etc. And this self
same we say also, that a man may live without sin, if it please him
according to the time and place, according to the frailty of his nature as
long as his mind is well disposed etc. And the same he teaches upon that
place of S. Paul: Vt essemus sa^cti and immaculati, as S. Amb. sup. Luc. S.
Aug. and other saints do teach the like.

Protestants say, that a Christian though never so virtuous, or so acceptable
to God, has noe grace, or virtue inherent in him; because they would have noe
good act to come from m^n, by reason of that grace. CHAPTER II.
1. THe general Council of Trent against this your heresy says; Co^c. Trid.
sess. 6. c. 7.
The only formal and intrinsicall cause of our justification, is the justice
of God, not by which he is just himself, but by which he makes us just, by
which we being endued, and invested, we be renewed by the spirit of our
soul, and not only that we be so reputed, but that we are truly just, not
only by name, but by deed; and the said holy council has these words.
Whosoever shall say that men are justified, either only by remission of our
sins, or only by the imputation of the justice of Christ, excludinge and
taking away grace and charity, which is diffused in their hearts, by the
holy Ghost, which is given unto them, and by which the same grace does lodge
in them, Anathema sit, let him be anathema. Thus far the council. This also
is proved by reason; for when we see a man to change his wicked life, and
ungodly custom of sin, and to putt on the new man, which according to God
was created in sanctity and justice, we see so palpable a change in him, that
we say. Haec est mutatio dextrae excelsi. From the right hand of the highest
comes this alteration, from bad to good, from impiety to justice, from
spiritual death to spiritual life: but this true alteration and mutation
cannot be without some feelinge or spark of grace in man inwardly inherent in
him. The Mayor proposition is proved by the gospel. We are translated from
death to life, 1. Ioh. 3. Ezec. 36.
and Ezeech. I will give unto you a new heart, and I will put into the midst
of you heart a new spirit, and I will take away a stony heart, Coloss. 3.
and S. Paul says. Spoil yourselues of the old man with his acts, and putt
one the new, that is renewed in knowledge according to the Image of him that
created him. And to the Ephesians, 4. Ephesians.
he said, be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and putt one the new man,
which according to God is created in justice and holiness of truth, I mean in
true holiness and justice, and not in feined imputative justice. John. 4.
This is proved by S. John of whom it is said of the grace, and justice by
which we be ordained to life euerlasstinge, there will be in him a fountain
of water issuinge to life everlasting. And in another place he said, Ioh. c. 7.
whosoever believes in me, there shall flow fountains of water of life out
of his belly: this he said of the spirit, that the faithful should receive,
I mean of the spirit that should sanctify and justify us inwardly, and
further us to work, and to fructify to life everlasting. Ioh. 3.
And as it is said, he that is borne of God does not comitt sin against him,
because his seed remaynes in him, which is the grace of God fructifyinge, and
buddinge forth to life everlasting. Bellarmine, and Ozius bring many places to
prove this amoungest many I will alleadg a few. S. Basil. Basil lib. de
Spiritu sancto. cap. 29.
Gratia Spiritus in eo quire^^pit illam est etc. the grace of the spiritte, who
so receaues the same, is as the eyesight in a sound eye, and as an art in him
that works by art: and S. Ambrose does compare that grace to a figure or a
beautified Image. Wherefore he says. Do not blott any beautiful picture, not
framed in wax but in grace: Cyrill. lib. 4. in Isay^. oratione 2.
and as S. Cyrill says that the just is framed by grace to be the child of
God. In the same manner do speak Ireneus, Cyprianus, Hieron. S. August. and
other fathers.

2. This is confirmed by very reason, for if a man be not saved by gods grace
inherent in him, but only by this that God does cover and hide our offenses,
and that he does not impute unto us our said offenses and trespasses, then it
follows that that they be not blotted or taken away by the meritts of Christ's
passion: which is most false, and against the scripture, for S. John says,
Ioh. 1. Hebr. 9.
behold the Lamb of God that takes away the offenses of the world: and in
another place. The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all our sins;
and S. Paul says, the blood of Christ does purge us from deadly works, that
is to say, from wicked desires, to serve the living God which was offered to
abolishe our offenses. This is proved, for the passion of Christ should be of
greater excellency and efficacy to disroote, blott and take away altogether
our sins and the blemishes thereof, restoringe unto us by grace an inherent
quality of gods inspiration, then if he should cover, or hide them only,
therefore in not grauntinge this, you derogate from the passion of Jesus Christ.

3. Another absurdity does follow, that one just parson has no more justice
or grace then another, and that all in the kingdom of heaven, shall have
equal glory which is against S. Paul saying, that as one Starr excels
another in brightness, so one just does excel another in justice and grace.
Hence follows also, that noe just man by gods grace, meritts by any good
work that he does, and that those that are predestined, never comitt any
deadly offense: all which notwithstanding so great absurdities and damnable
heresies, yet heretics do grant them, and build their belief upon them.

In that heretics reprehend the Catholic Church, yea condemn her of great
folly, for endeuouringe her self to receive gods grace: they by this means
take away free will from man, and all due preparation, and disposition to
receive gods grace, and divine influence. CHAPTER III.
1. LVther (as the holy Martyr Roffensis said) in his 36. articles does bark,
and speak many blasphemies against contrition, the fear of hell, the
endeavors in his salvation: yea he said the more wicked you be, the nearer you
are to get the favor of God, Lutherus de piscat. (...)
and if you adorn your self with good works, you prevail nothing with God.
But the holy catholic church has condemned these wicked propositions as
damnable and execrable heresy, both repugnant, not only to the holy
scriptures, but also contrary to good manners and civil honesty. For God
does exhort and comaund sinners, that they should convert themselves unto him,
and that they should prepare their hearts, that he might confer his grace and
his justice unto them. Zach. 1.
Conuertimini etc. Turn unto me with all your hearts and I will turn unto you:
the Council of Trentt says, when God says, turn you unto me, Sess. 6.^.5
and I will turn unto you: we are admonished of our own liberty in this
matter, and when we say. Turn us to thee, we are putt in mind that God by
his grace does prevent and help us, and as it is the work of Gods grace, to
raise and eleuate our souls to receive the influence thereof: so it pertaynes
to the will of man so raised and elevated, by gods motions and inspirations, to
consent thereunto, and to turn to God almighty. 3. Reg. 7.
And as it is said, if you will return from your heart, take away strange
gods from your hearts, and prepare your hearts to our Lord. And it is said
also; Prou. 16.
hominis est praeparare. Let man prepare his soul: qui timet etc. Whosoever
fears God, they shall prepare their hearts, and in his presence they shall
sanctify their souls. Ezech. 18.
Cum auerterit se impius ab impietat^ sua etc. when the wicked man shall turn
from his impiety, and shall do judgment and justice, John. 6.
he shall sanctify his soul. And, make to your selves a new heart and a new
spirit. All you that have heard the the Father and learned from him, let him
come unto me. Ad. Phi. 2 Cant. Apoc. 3.
Work your salvation with fear and tremblinge. My sister, and my spouse come
unto me etc. Behold I stand at your door, and knock at your gate, if any man
will open, I will enter etc. In which, and other places we are bidd to turn
to God, and to cleanse our hearts from the filth of sin. And as God gives us
his help so we receive the same without resistance, and yealde our hearts and
resign our thoughts unto him. Wherefore S. Augustine says, the beginning of
our salvation we have from the mercy of God, but to condescend to his
hoalsome inspiration, it is in our own choice or power. Aug. li. de
ecclesiasticis dogmaetibus cap. 21. lib. de Spiritu and litera cap. 34. and
lib* 1. retract. cap. 22.
And in another place, in all things gods mercy does prevent us, but to
condescend to gods vocation, or to disagree from the same, it is in our will.
It is in man's power to change his will into better, but that power is nothing
unless it be given of God. And the same holy doctor comparing Pharao with
Nabuchodonosor said, that in all things they were all a like, Aug. de praedest
and great. c. 15. Aug li de ciuit. c. 6.
and that both of them were equally prevented by gods divine mercy, yet
notwithstanding they had different ends, because Pharao against gods mercy
did oppose his free will. Nabuchodonosor being touched with gods discipline,
bewailed his own impiety; And in another place, he says, that if two persons
had equal graces, and equal temperature, both of body and soul, one of them
may behave himself well by his free will, another by the same free will may
behave himself ill.

2. That a man must dispose himself to receive gods grace S. Thomas proves it
by natural reason, D. Tho. q. 1. 2. q. 11 T
for the form can never be received into the subject, without as well the
disposition of the form, as of the subject, especially when the subject has
already a disposition repugnant to the form: but a miserable sinner is laden
with sin, then the which nothing is more repugnant to gods grace, by which
we be grateful unto him: therefore that this may be introduced, there must be
a convenient disposition, which ought to be correspondent unto man. This is
proved, for as sin was voluntarily committed, therefore a man must have a
voluntary disposition to forgo sin: almighty God would have al men to be
saved, therefore man is in fault, and not God that he is not saved. Otherwise
if this doctrine had not been true, in vain did the Prophetts, Apostles, and
preachers in their sermons, admonitio^s and exhortations cry unto the people,
that they should turn them unto God, and prepare themselves with due penance
and other blessed works, to reform themselves, and to dispose themselves to
serve God, to obtain his grace and remission of their sins, by means of
those virtues which are given unto man to save him. It is proved likewise by
the holy councelles, Aurant. ^^lest. epistola. 1.
and namlie by the council of Auransican, of which Celestine pope makes
mention to the Bishops of France; It is defined, says he, that we ought to
cooperate with the help of gods grace in these things that appertain unto
our salvation, that by the means of our cooperation and disposition, we may
be saved before God.

3. This is also proved, for that we have already proved that sinners are
justified by a certain form or grace inherent in man: therefore there must be
some disposition in respect of the free will to receive that form or grace.
For according to the ordinance of God, noe subject receaues any form,
without a disposition in the subject, according to the natural inclination of
the subject: but natural subjects are disposed naturally, therefore free
subjects are to be disposed freely, according to the exigence and condition
of their nature.

4. Heretics do object against this doctrine, that of the Romans. Non
volentis neque currentis etc. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, Ad Titum. 3.
but of gods mercy. Not of the works of justice, that we have done, but
according to his mercy, he saves us. Isa. 64. Hier. 18. Romans 9.
Man in respect of his own justification is as it were a mass of claye in the
hands of the potter, or else a dead instrument without any proper motion, as
Isayas says, Isa. 10.
shall the axe glory or boast against him that cuttes with the same, or shall
the saw lift it self up against him that draws the same? otherwise it
should not be said that man is justified freely, but for his, good woorks, and
rather that he should justify himself.

5. We answer that the whole work of our justification is attributed unto
God, because he is the principal doer and agent thereof, not only by powringe
his grace upon us, but also in disposinge our wills to receive the same by a
special motion of his divine grace. Notwithsta^dinge it is ascribed unto man
also in that we cooperate, and that we do somthinge in the work of our
justification, as I have allreadie alleged out of scripture: otherwise they
should not be praised that with all their hearts should turn unto God, neither
should they be dispraised that do resist gods vocation, otherwise they
should contradict the prophett. Expandi manus meas tota die ad populum
incredulum and contradicentem mihi. I have stretched my hands all the whole
day to an incredulous people and contradictinge me. And also it should not be
said. Vos durae ceruicis resistitis Spiritu sancto. You stif-necked people, you
resist the holy ghoaste.

Sess. 9. c. 5
6. Therefore the Council of Trentt has damned those heretics that said, that
we have noe free will in the work of our justification, and that we are dead
and without life in those actions. For though a man being left to his own
natural forces and strenghte, has noe active force to obtain the grace of
God or yet any disposition thereunto, notwithstanding as a man is helped and
moved of God, and elevated above his own nature by Gods help, he does
cooperate actiuelie, freely disposinge himself to receive the same. And
therefore S. Paul says. Non ego, sed gratia Dei mecum; not, I in respect of
mine own nature and force, but in respect of the grace of God with me. And to
that which you object ou^ of S. Paul videlicet: we should not be said to be
justified gratis or freely. I answer it is not so taken, but in respect of
meritts, which is called meritum decondigno, that is to say, that a man has
done woorks before Gods grace worthy of Gods grace, which catholics do not
say; and that gratis takes not away the freedom of man, neither does it
follow that a man can justify himself, yet may it be said that a man may
dispose himself to receive Gods grace, as 2. Eccl. In conspectu illius
sanctificabunt animas suas. And Ezech: in his sight they shall sanctify their
souls: and, he has quickened his own soul.

7. This is proved by natural reason as also in all supernatural actions, for
the means by which man does turn unto God, is by the acts of faith, hope, and
charity, and a penitent heart, but it should be an implication against all
reason, that a man should believe in God, hope, and love God, and be penitent
for offendinge God, and that he should do nothing therein, or that when a man
does pennaunce, or loves God, it should be said he loves not God or does noe
pennaunce: in which we see two contradictories true, which cannot be, for one
must be false when the other is true, for if it be true that a man has faith,
or belief in God, therefore the contradictorie is false, that man has no
faith, nor does not believe in God: even as it is false that the fire does
burn, and the sun give light, and yet that none of them does any thing. For
to believe, or to hope, or to love, in man are called vital, and immanent
actions, which cannot be supplied by any other cause, then by such principles
out of which they be produced; but to believe, or to love, are produced out of
the two principles of man, I mean understanding and will, for it is not the
action of God immediately, but the action of man of whom immediately and next
it is produced, for it is not said that any other creature does love God, but
man when man does love God: and therefore you must not say, that man
beleeuinge, hopinge in God, and louinge God, are not the actions of man when he
has the principles, I mean understanding and will out of which they proceed.

Whether we derogate from the merittes of Christ, in making our meritts
partakers of his meritts. CHAPTER IV.
1. GOd forbid that the merittes of the just should derogate from Christ's B.
passion, or should be injurious unto him, they rather are a great glory unto
Christ, being the fruicts of the merittes of his passion, which of themselves
have noe valor or excellency, but as they are bedewed and sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, unto whom we owe the merittes of them by his grace, and not
unto our selves, as Albertus magnus says. Iustitia meritorum Christ, fulge^ in
virtutibus sanctorum. Albett. ar. 3. q. 2. in 29. d.
The justice of the merittes of Christ, does shine in the virtues and woorks of
the Saints. Take away this justice from them, and they may be condemned, yea
they cannot be saved. Therefore we say that a reward is given unto them, not
as they come from us, but as they come from his grace, which works in us. And
he himself says. Matt. ^
Merces vestra copi^sa est in Caelis: your reward is great in heaven, which
reward is given unto our works by Christ, who makes our works worthy
thereof.

2. This argument is weak. Christ sufficiently merited for man, therefore a
man ought not to meritt any thing himself, Christ prayed, Christ suffered,
Christ preached, Christ fasted, and offered himself unto God for our sins;
therefore we should not merit; we should not pray, nor suffer; nor preach;
nor fast; nor offer our selves to God. Whereas Christ merited, prayed, fasted,
suffered, and offered himself, that I should merit, fast, pray, suffer etc.
When as the actions of Christ are our instructions, and although Christ
suffered for all, yet he left us, as S. Peter said, an example to follow his
stepps. And though the meritts of Christ's passion are of themselves sufficient
to purchase; and merit life everlasting for all men, yet he would not have
the efficacy thereof to be applied unto us, unless we would endeavor by his
grace, to join also our meritts thereunto; which yet derogates nothing from
the passion of Christ, for it is more excellent to obtain glory by deserts,
then without the same: and therefore our meritts are not required for the
insufficiency of the meritts of Christ, but rather are required for the great
excellency of the meritts of them, and of his great love, and charity
toward us.

3. We say with the whole catholic church, the good works of just persons,
if they proceed of the grace of God, do deserve and meritte life everlasting
which does consiste in the clear vision, and fruition of God, this is proved
by many places of scripture. Good gives every man according to his works:
and in the Apocalips. I come, and my reward is with me to give every man, as
his work shall be: Psalm. 65. Matt. 16. Romans 2. 1. Cor. 3.
and with the Apostle; Every man shall receive according to his own labor:
where in truth, he spoke of the reward of life everlasting. And when our
Savior says, blessed be the poor in spirit, blessed be the poor in heart,
he concludes, rejoice and be glad, Matt. 5.
for your reward is great in the kingdom of heaven: in another place he says.
Come ye blessed of my father, Matt. 25
I have been hungry and you gave me to eat, come and possess the kingdom of
heaven. And as the Apostle says, Gal. 8.
qui seminat in Spiritu, he that sows in the spirit or spiritual works: he
shall purchase life everlasting: if you will enter into life, keep the
comaundements. Every one that shall forgo house etc. he shall receive an
hundredth fould, and he shall possess life everlasting. Matt. 19.
Blessed is that man that suffers tentation etc. when he shall be tried he shall
receive a crown of life which God promised to those that love him. The Apostle
says piety is profitable to all things having promise of the life, that now
is, and of that to come.

4. Some heretics answer these places, that God gives life everlasting to
those that work well unto the end, but not that our works deserves the same.
Unto this I reply, when it is said that life everlasting is the reward of
good deeds, and that by the promise of God it is given to those wotkes, it is
sufficiently explicated, that good works do merit life everlasting. Merits
and rewards are correlatiues which are said to be the promise, hire, or
recompense that are given for works, the very word is declared by S. Paul.
Heb. 13.
And beneficence and communication do not forget, Eccles. 16.
for with such hosts God is promerited; and it is said in another place, all
mercy makes place to every one according to the merittes of his woorks.
Con. Ara^. cap. 16.
It is avouched by the counsels. Debetur merces bonjs operibus si fiant, sed
gratia, quae non debetur, praecedit, vt fiant. Reward is due unto good works
if they be done, but grace which is not due does go before that they may be
done. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3.
By the council of Lateran. cap. firmiter de summa trinitate. Omnes iusti
cuiuscunque conditionis sunt and statim per opera bona praelucentes Deo
merentur ad aeternam vitam peruen^re. All just men of whatsoever condition they
be, Con. Floren. in decreto de purg. Con Trid. sess 6. cap. vlt.
shininge by their good works before God, they deserve to come to everlasting
life. The council of Florence says, that by diversity of works, one sees
God more cleerer the^ another. This is proved by all the fathers. Ignatius,
Ireneus, Justinius, Origines, Basil. Chrisost. Nazian. and Nisse: Tertul:
Cyprian: Hillar: Ambro: August: Paulinus: Prosper: Gregorius Papa: and Bernard:
as Cardinal Bellarmin cites.

5. S. Augustine says; Sicut merito peccati tanquam stipendium redditur mors,
ita merito iustitae tanquam stipendium redditur vita aeterna. As sin is
rewarded with death, so justice is rewarded with life everlasting: Ad Epis.
Galliae cap. 12.
and as Celestinus says. Tanta erga homines est bonitas Dei, vt nostra velit
esse merita, quae sunt ipsius dona. So great is the goodness of God toward
men, that he would have to be our deserts, which are his gifts. He that
labors in the service of any man, whatsoever he is promised by his bargain,
he ought to receive the same according to the promise made: but the just
people do labor in gods service by a bargain to receive, denarium diurnum,
the daily hire which is life everlasting, according the exposition of the
Doctors upon S. Mathewe: Matt. 20.
therefore almighty God ought to give unto just people according to his
promise, and according to their deserts, which deserts are called. Merita de
condigno, condign meritts as S. Paul says, 2. Timoth.
I have fought a good fight etc. there is laid up for me a crown of justice
etc. Glory is called a crown of justice, because it is given as the debt of
justice, and because it is given by the just judge in the day of just
judgment. And in another place God is not iniust that he should forget your
works; ^ep. 6. Psalm. 17. Apoc. 3. These. 1. Luc. 10. Luc c. 10. Sap. 3.
God will retribute unto me according to my justice. They did walk with me in
white because they were worthy. That you may be made worthy of the kingdom
of God, for the which you suffer. The workman is worthy of his wages. They
shall be worthy of that world and the resurrection from the dead. And in another
place. God did assay them and found them worthy of himself. For life
everlasting is given to just persons as the reward of their works,
according to the 20. gospel of S. Mathewe, where denarius diurnus, is the
daily penny or wages, that is given unto every one for his work: but it is
certain that those laborers did deserve by justice the daily pennye, as it
is manifest that the husband man said in that gospel to one of the laborers;
frind I do you noe wrong, did not you bargain with me for a penny? take your
own and depart in peace, that is to say; so much must I give you as I promised
and bargained, and unto that, and to nothing else you have right, and if I
should deny you that, I should do you great wrong. Aug. li. de not and great
ca. 2. lib 4. aduers ^ul. cap. 3.


6. S. Augustine, says. Non est iniustus Deus. God is not iniust, that he
should deceive the just of the reward of justice. In another place he says.
God should be unjust, if he should not admit just people into his kingdom.
And S. Bernard says. Bern. de great. and lib. arb.
Promissum quidem ex misericordia, that which was promised by his mercy, must
be performed by his justice. Unto this agrees S. Basil saying. Basil. in
oratione super prouerbia Salomonis.
All we that frame our life according to Christ's ghospel, we are as
merchants, and by the woorks of the comandements we purchase unto our selves
celestial possessions. Therefore it is lawful to labor, for to purchase the
kingdom of heaven, as the prophett says. Psalm. 18.
Inclinaui cor meum etc. I inclined my heart to keep these comaundements for
retribution or recompense. It is lawful also to repose hope and confidence in
our proper meritts secundarilie, although principally, and cheeflie we must
repose our hope in God, as in the cheifest cause, who gave us grace and virtue
to work well, as S. Thomas says. D. Tho. 2. 2 q. 17. Ad Gal. 6.
For if our works done by gods grace, had not been meritorious, why should
the Apostle say; in doing good let us not fail, for in due time we shall
reap, not faylinge. And therefore says he, whiles we have time, let us work
good to all, but special to the household of faith: these be the worke^ that
are done of a man, that is in gods favor. Qui seminat in Spiritu etc. he that
sows in the spirit, he shall reap life everlasting. I beseech you
brethren, Coloss. c. 1. Romans 10.
says he, that you will walk worthily, pleasing God, fructifyinge in all
good works. For these blessed works done of the good, do not only redounde
to the salvation of man, but also to the glory of God, as it is said in the
gospel. Sic luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, vt videntes opera bona vestra
glorificent etc. Let your light so shine before, men that seeing your good
worckes, they may glorify your father which is in heaven. So heretics
condemning the woorks of good men, take away gods glory, the good example
that we are bound to give unto our neighbors, and Gods promise to give life
everlasting for them, and consequently take away man's endeavor and labor in
the exercise of them, which is against S. Peter saying. Petr. 1.
Fratres magis satague, vt per bona opera etc. Wherefore brethren endeavor the
more that by good woorks you make sure your vocation, and election. And finally
take away all christian religion, which is nothing else then precepts,
admonitions and counsels, to imploie our life and our lymmes in the exercise
of them. Luc. 16.
Unto the rich people Christ bids them to make unto themselves freindes of
the Mammon of iniquity, that when they fail, they may receive them into the
eternal tabernacles. Unto all sorts of christians he proclaims and
diuulgeth, Matt. 5.
that unless their justice abound more then that of the Scribes and Pharisees,
they shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

7. Wherefore the purity and sanctity of life in the professors of this
christian catholic religion, which not only with subtle arguments and
crafty devises rather suggested by the diuil then invented by man, heretics
impugn, but also with all the straungest laws, the seuerest policies, and the
cruellest persecutions that ever were, or could be invented, or imagined, or
apprehended by any creature, they go about to overthrow and confound, the
reformation of their manners, the mortification of their passions, their
angellicall conversation in in their behavior, their blessed and heroical
resolutions in suffringe all exquisite torments in the defense, testimony and
confirmation thereof, their moral life adorned and replenished with all moral
and supernatural virtues, their eminent learning and science, tempered with
all humility of spirit void of pride or ambition, their admirable and
incomparable works of charity, piety and devotion, which is the life and
fruictes of true and unblemished religion, have been motives unto the gentiles,
pagans, yea and to the stiff-necked Jews themselves to abandon their
idolatry, and to embrace this christian religion.

8. That these blessed endeavors and works of charity are the badge and
distinctiue token of the true religion of christian Catholics by which their
conversation should be acceptable unto God, grateful unto their neighbors
admirable to pagans, terrible to the diuills, and offensive, hurtful or
scandalous to none. S. Paul avouches the same. Ephesians. 4.
I prisoner, says he, in our Lord beseech you, that you walk worthy of the
vocation in which you are called with all humility and midlnesse, with
patience, supportinge one another in charity, careful to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. And in the same chapter he says, I testify
in our Lord that now you walk not as the Gentiles walk ^n the vanity of
their sin, 1. Pet. 4.3. Romans 1.21.
having their understanding obscured with darcknes, alienated from the life
of God, by the ignorance that is in them* who dispayringe have given up
themselves to impudicitie, unto the operation of all uncleanness, unto
avarice, but you have not so learned Christ. Lay you away according to the
old conversation the old man which is corrupted according to the desires of
error. For before the catholic christian religion came into the world, it
was nothing else, then a dungeon full of all filth, a den of thieves, and
most wicked livers: a fair or markett where there was nothing to be bought but
all kind of craft, deceit, and diuilish inventions: a school where there was
nothing else to be learned, but to let loose the raynes to all voluptuous
pleasures, beastly appetites, and inhumane concupiscence of unspeakable and
shamles impudicitie, of beastiality, and Sodomiticall riotousnes, not only of
the gentiles, but also of the Jews themselves, Isa. 35.
who had the knowledge of God. Therefore Isayas the prophett did compare the
people of those ages, with dragons, serpents, woolues, lions, bears, and
Basilisks, and for that cause he called the world at that time the land of
wast, dried, sterrill, without tyllage, which was nothing else then the denn
of wild beasts, the cave of serpents, the brothell howl and stews of all
filthy livers: but the christian religion and preachinge of Christ's gospel,
not only by miracles, but by the sanctity and holiness of the lives of the
prechars, did convert wolves into sheep, lions into lambs, serpents into
doves, and wild fruitles trees into most florishinge branches, bearinge
everlasting fruicte, as the said prophett said, that there should be a time,
that the desert should be translated into a pleasant orchard, and the dry
withered soil void of trees or herbs, into a place of pleasure, which do
signify by this comparison the pulchritude and the beauty of the sanctity of
such as should flourish in the world by the christian catholic religion, and
the true preachinge of his religious gospel, and so the son of God did
appear that he should dissolve the the works of the diuill. Job. 1. Ioh. 3.
which he has done by his own passion and death, as also by the preachinge and
virtuous life of his servant.

9. If any man will know further of this matter, let him read
ecclesiastical historis which do treat of the same, relating the lives of
the holy Saints and fathers, which lived in the wilderness, and the
Chronicles of the holy orders of religion, where he shall have aboundante
stoare of holy Bishops, Confessors and Virgins (which have crucified their
flesh with the vice and concupiscence thereof) innumerable store of blessed
Moncks, whereof some lived in their conuents, some other segregated and
estranged from humanie society, where they lived rather like angels then like
men, whosoever I say shall read over the lives of these people written by the
best wyttnesses that ever were, he shall there behold, how they have spent
whole nights in devout prayers, as well vocal as mental, without sleep,
having noe other bed then the earth. He shall see that the Cells of these
fathers were so narrow, that they should seem rather sepulchers then Cells.
In vita S. Paul Eremitae.
He shall understand that many of them had noe other meat then bread and salt
with water and with Roots of herbs, that as Saint Hierom writes, to taste of
any thing boiled upon the fire was counted riotuousnes, he shall perceive such
poverty in their attire that it cannot be more, such was their recollection
and retired life wherein they were estranged from all inordinat affection and
passion, in which they used such wonderful mortification, as they would not
suffer their nearest in blood to approach unto the^. What should I declare
their constant abidinge and perseverance in continual prayers without
wearines, their spiritual exercise without loathsomnes, their discomfortable
sollitarines without gruding, having noe other company then that of wild
beasts, ugly serpents and fierce lions, which with a confident hope fixed in
God, they tamed and overcame. This life was so admirable and so supernatural,
as they without supernatural help and grace of God could not endure it. What
should I speak of their constant sufferinge of all kind of exquisitt,, and
cruel torments, how many battles they fought, how gloriously they have
triumphed over the world and the diuill, and all their wicked instruments, and
ministers.

10. When our Savior gave us a caveat of false prophetts, Matt. 7.
he gave us noe other token to discern them, then by their fruicts, and
woorks. Do men, says he, gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles, even
so every good tree yeldeth good fruicts, and the evil tree yeldeth evil
fruicte. Are not you those false prophetts whose religion is most false, in
as much as noe good fruicte came ever into the world by it, noe reformation of
our manners, noe amendment of our lives, noe mortification of our passions, noe
restraint of our filthy appetites, noe motive or impulsive mea^es that should
stir us up unto any devotion, but rather giuinge us all liberty to
dissolution, and to all wanton exercise? Have you not taken away all the
Evangelical Counsels of our Savior in his gospel? Have you not forbidden
all vows and votaries, all Sacraments and sacrifice? Have you not quite
abolished confession of our sins? inward contrition in our heart? and
external satisfaction, and restitution outwardly? charity from our heart?
and mercy from our works? piety from our souls? and humility from our
spirit? and consequently all consolation from our aflicted consciences, with
the damnable liberty of your wanton and lascivious gospel as is avouched by
the cheifest professors thereof? For after this manner does Smidline speak. Vt
totus mundus cognoscat eos non esse papistas nec bonis operibus quidquam fidere
etc. That all the world may know that they be not papists, neither that they
care for good works, they exercise none at all. And having reckened infinite
wickedness of them, this kind of life (they say) the gospel has taught
the^: thus he. Erasmus in his epistle ad Neocomum, says. Profer mihi etc.
Episto. Eras. ad Neocomu^. 1529.
Tell me I pray thee, what man was ever made any thing the bettter by that
gospel: was there any epicure or gurmandizer made sober or temperate, or any
unchaste or shamlesse fellow, become chaste, or honest, or cruel made gentle,
or extortioner persuaded to become liberal, or the cursed to become blessed,
but I car show you many made worse then themselves.

11. Luther the root of all these Rugamuffines has these words; Luth. in
postilla s^per 1. Dominic. aduentus.
mundus indies fit deterior etc. The world (says he) is every day worse and
worse, now men are more greedy of revenge, more covetous, more remote from all
mercy, more immodest, more indisciplinable then they were in popery. These be
Luthers own words. As touching their learning or knowledge in divinity,
Stanc. lib. de trinitate and mediatore.
Francis Stancarus witnesses one of their prophetts, one Petrus Lombardus is
more worthy then one hundredth Luthers, two hundred Melancthons, three hundred
Bullingers, four hundredth Martyrs: five hundredth Caluines. Who all if they
were pounded in one mortar, there could not be beaten out of them one ounce of
true divinity, especially in the articles of the trinity, incarnation,
mediator, and sacraments.

12. You see what testimony your own prophett does bear against you, look
to all those countries where they have stirred up their tragedies, was there
any country the better for this gospel, or was the wicked life of any one
reformed by it, or were the professors themselves amended any thing in their
wicked lives by it? Compare the wicked life of the professors of this new
religion, with the virtuous life of the holy fathers that have planted the
religion that we profess. No kingdom gained unto thirst by the word.
Have they not shined in all holiness of life, in all heavenly conversation, by
which they have allured the hearts of faithles and stiffnecked gentiles, did
they convert any kingdom unto Christ by the sword, have they ever surprised
cities or overthrown kingdoms, or ever brought with them armies into the
field, no, not by the sword but by gods word and humility of spiritte have
they overcome the devil. Was not Luther a professed Friar many years, who
being given to loosenes of life, did transgress the law of God in breakinge
his vow by which he consecrated himself to serve God in holiness of life and
continency of body all the days of his life, who rann away and took a
Nun with him out of her Cloister? Was not John Calvin the fire bra^d of
France and Scotland and other countries also, he being a priest, for
Sodomitticall wickedness burned in the back, and continewinge his wicked life
still, in that filthy sin surprised Geneua; Was not Beza his next successor
given to that wicked and abominable sin with a boy called Andebertus, and
that manifestly. And to defend their wicked lines and filthy sensuality,
they cast forth poisoned doctrine, as that vows and votaries are not made by
the law of God, that we are not justified by works done by Gods grace, and
that the same be not meritorious before God, but that we are justified by
faith only, and that all our works though never so good are sinful before
God: that to bridle or restrain our filthy desires, is to resist Gods
ordinances, that God is the cause of all evil, and that from him all
mischief comes. Therefore they take away free will from man, saying that man
does not concur to his own justification, with many such damntble heresies
which were to long to relate, and whether these be false prophetts who bring
into the world such poisoned doctrine, let every man judge, at least let him
take heed that his soul be not poisoned therewith, in followinge their lives
or imbracinge their cursed heresies, out of which as our Savior wittnesseth
noe good fruicte can bud forth, and consequently noe meritorious works of
religion or charity can we ever expect at their hands.

The absurdity of this doctrine, that every one should assure him self that he
is predestined unto life everlasting, and that we ought to be so certain
thereof as we should not once fear the contrary, or to misdoubt the same, is
discussed. CHAPTER V.
1. THis doctrine is most false, wicked, and heretical, since the holy
scriptures say. Cogitationes mortalium timidae and incertae prouidentiae
nostrae. Sap. 9.
The thoughts of men are fearful, and their providence is uncertain, by
reason that the body which is corrupted does aggrauate the soul, being in
great danger by reason of the inclinations of the flesh, occasions of the
world, and tentations of the devil, and we being in the country of our
enemies, whereupon S. Bernard says, faciles sumus ad seducendum, debiles ad
operandum, and sragiles ad resistendum: we are easily to be seduced, weak to
work and labor well, and frail to resist manfully and courageously. And
so our Savior said to the Apostle. Luc. 10.
Neminem per viam salutaueritis. You shall salute none by the way, as S.
Vincentius expounds. Ser. 11. post trinit.
Saluum dixeritis viatorem, to him that is a poor pilgrime^ or stranger, you
cannot assure his saftie without danger, nor security without fear, for the
shipp is not safe without fear in dangerous seas, otherwise we should not be
admonished. Lauda post mortem, magnifica post consumationem; praise none before
his death, nor magnify any before his end. The scripture confirminge the
same. Eccle. 9.
Nemo scit vtrum ^dio, vel amore dignus sit, sed omnia in futurum seruantur
incerta: None knows whether he be worthy of hatred or love, when all things
are reserved in time to come. And therefore the Apostle which was one of the
greatest Saints that was, says. Nihil mihi conscius sum, 1. Cor. 4.
sed tamenin hoc non iustificatus sum: I am not guilty in conscience of any
thing, but I am not justified herein. The Apostle durst not assure himself
that he was justified, neither would he judge whether this thoughts were pure
or not, but the trial thereof he left to Gods judgment. And for this cause we
are wild to work our salvation with fear and tremblinge.

2. As for predestination which is almighty God his election, foresight,
purpose and decree of his dear children, as also his other acts touching
their vocation, inspiration, illustration and illumination of them, and
consequently their justification, and last of all their glorification, we do
not deny but it ought to be reverenced, and embraced of all men with
tremblinge, fear and dreadful humility; but that we should not cast our
selves with headlonge fall into any precipitat madness, and presumptuous
malipartnes; for this has been the gulf, wherein many proud persons, as well
at this time, as before have by gods just judgment perished: groundinge
thereon most execrable heresies, and damnable blasphemies against gods mercy,
good life, free will, humble behavior and religious christian modesty. Romans 8.
S. Paul has these words of predestination, whom he has forknowen, he has
also predestined to be made conformable to the Image of his son, that he
might be the first borne in many brethren, and whom he has predestined,
them also he has called, and whom he has called, them also he has
justified, and whom he has justified, them also he has glorified. S.
Augustine answers those that are curious of Gods foreknowledge and decree,
who says. Si quaeras etc. If any man will ask wherefore God does make choice
more of this man, then of that man, let him search gods inscrutable and
unsearchable judgment, and in that search let him take heed of a headlonge
fall. It is true that God has elected his people before the constitution of
the world, Romans 8.
according to the Apostle, ^^he. 1.
but he said afterward that they should be holy and imaculate in his sight
in charity: for in gods predestination are implied and inuolued, good life
and works of mercy done by gods grace; It is an infallible and theological
rule, when God ordaines any end, he ordaines means without which we cannot
come to that end, as God has ordained his glory to be the end of man, so he
ordained grace, and the works done by that grace, to be the means to obtain
it.

3. If a k^nge will make any of his noblemen governor or deputy of any
province or kingdom, it must be understood that he must observe justice,
although it be not expressed in his pattent: if God does predestinate us, it
must be understood that he should give us his grace whereby we should be just,
and work by that grace and our endeavors, our justification, and therefore S.
Peter; 1. Pet. 1.
says. Fratres magis satagite vt per bona opera certam vestram vocationem and
electionem faciatis etc. Wherefore brethren, labor the more that by good works
you may make sure your vocation and election, for in doing these things you
shall not sin at any time. Was not S. John saved by his innocence, and Peter
also saved by his pennaunce, for the end of man was never ordained without
ways or means to come to the said end; And therefore you must not say God
has ordained my end, and I will not endeavor my self to come to that end
otherwise you take away the one half of predestination, that is to say, the
way and means appointed for the same. And therefore S. Gregory says. Greg 1.
Dialog. and ponitur d. 23. q. 4. 2.
Ipsa perennis regni praedestinatio etc That everlasting and endless
predestination of gods perpetual kingdom, so it is of the omnipotent God
disposed and determined, that unto the same the elect may approache by their
own labor, that they may ask by their deserts that which the omnipotent
God before the world, was disposed to give, if you will not go to hell, take
away your sins and amend your wicked life, and thither you shall not go,
otherwise, ve impis a malo, woe be unto the sinful through his wickedness, and
confusion be unto him for his iniquity.

4. Neither ought we to say, almighty God knows all things to come, and
whether I shall be saved, therefore I ought not to labor my self for my
salvation. God knows that this day you shall dyne, therefore you ought not to
provide for dinner. God knoueth that you shall be cured of your disease, therefore
you ought not to provide any medecin for your cure, God also knoueth that the
king shall have the victory against his enemies, that the husband shall have
a good harvest of corn, that the mariner shall ariue safe in Spain, that
Christ should escape the bloody hands of Herod, therefore neither the king
should levy an army, nor the husband man sow the seed or till the ground:
even so the means are to be used to purchase the victory, and to fill the
barn with corn, and to ariue safely in Spain, and to be secure from Herod.
Unto this agree the holy scriptures, that predestination and gods
foreknowledge, takes not away man's free will and endeavors. Deus ab initio
constituit homiminem and reliquit eum in manu consilij etc. Eccl. 5.
God from the beginning made man and left him at his own choice. He has
putt before us his precepts and comaundements, if we will keep the
comaundements they will keep and preserve us; he has putt before us fire and
water, unto which of them we list we may stretch forth our arm, for before us
he has placed both good and evil, life and death, of any of which man may
take his own choice.

5. S. Paul was predestined, yet spares not to say. Castigo corpus meum
etc. I chastise my body and I bring the flesh in servitude to the spirit,
least that preachinge to others I should become reprobate my self, therefore
we may see, that our own good endeavors, which gods holy grace does work
with us, are not excluded from our election, but those works are both the
means, and effects thereof, and therefore it is a desperate folly, and a great
sign of reprobate and damnable persons to say, if I be predestined, do
what I will I shall be saved. Did not Christ promise and assure his disciples of
the cominge of the holy ghoast, notwithstanding did not those disciples with
the devout weomen and the blessed Virgin, continewe together in prayers and
fasting, disposinge themselves to receive the same? Actor. 1.
Neither in their prayers or fasting did they misdoubt the cominge of the
holy ghoast, according as our Savior promised the same, notwithstanding
they knew that they ought to prepare themselves to be clean vessels fit for
the receipt thereof. If the Pope should promise unto you to fill your vessel
full of Balm or Chrisme, which are most precious liquores, if you will bring
an unclean vessel unto him, he will not give unto you what was promised, for
in his promise was included that you should bring a fit and clean vessel to
receive the same. So Christ notwithstanding he promised to fill their
consciences, understanding, memory, and will with the balm of the holy
ghoast, yet the Apostles ought to have their consciences and their souls
withal the powers thereof, clean and void of all filth of sin and
wickedness to receive the same, for such as are predestined are written in a
white paper in golden lettres as S. Vincentius says: neither only the persons
so predestined are written there, but also the works and means by which
they are saved and predestined, videlicet that such people shall be baptized,
that they shall be merciful, patient, chaste, godly and penitent: even so such
as are damned are written in a black parchement, not only the person but their
works, by which they be damned and reprobate, that is to say, that he is
cruel, leacherous, impenitent, proud, covetous. etc.

Whether the holy scriptures be for protestants, and not for papists, and
whether we rely upon Traditions, not warranted by holy Scripure. CHAPTER I.
1. S. Cyrill does answer this objection saying. Epist. 28.
Omnes haeretici de scriptura diuinitus inspirata, sui colligunt erroris
occasionem: all heretics do found their errors upon the Scriptures which
were infused by God, which words were pronounced in the 7. general council,
and are inserted in the council of Calcedon. S. Augustine also does confirm
the same saying. Aug. trac. 18. in lo^.
Non aliunde natas esse haereses, and quaedam dogmata peruersitatis illaquentia
animas, and in profundum praecipitantia nisi cum scripturae bonae intelligantur
non been, and quod in eis non been intelligitur, etiam temere and audacter
asseritur: heresies and other perverse opinions, infectinge and intanglinge our
souls, even to the deep pit of confusion, do spring of noe other root
then when good scriptures are ill understood, and the badd understanding
thereof, is bouldly and rashly applied. S. Ambrose does likewise declare the
same, saying. Ambr. 3. ad Titu^. S. Hill. in lib. ad Constable.
Haeretici per verba legis, legem impugnant. by the words of the law it
self, the heretics do impugn the law. S. Hilarious also says. Neminem
haereticorum esse qui se non secundum sacras scripturas praedicare eas quae
blasphemat, mentiatur, there is noe heretic that does not allege falsy the
scriptures, for his blasphemies. Also he says, de intellige^tia heresis sit,
Lib. 20. de Trinit.
non de scriptura, sensus non sermo fiat crimen: heresy is of the
understanding, not of the scripture, the fault is in the sense, and not in the
word, Hiero ad Lucif.
unto which agrees S. Hierom. Neque sibi blandiantur etc. Let them not
flatter themselves, if they allege or affirm any thing of the scriptures,
when even the devil has alleged the scriptures for his purpose. The
scriptures says he, do not consiste in readinge of them, but in
understanding of them. Origines also declares the same, Orig hom 9. in Exo
saying. Non raro etc. Sometimes the diuill does wreast gods words from many,
for that there is nothing so holy but the enemy of mankind, does abuse the
same to the destruction of man. Tertulian also says, de scripturis agebant, De
pref^cript. her.
de sciptu^is suadebant etc. They plead the scriptures, they persuade the
scriptures, they inculcate the scriptures, unto this they move some at the
first dashe, they weary the strong, they co^nfound the weak, and men of
indifferent judgment they dismiss with scrupules. Thus far Tertulian: so the
Arian heresy, the Macedonian, the Nestorian, Eutichian, and all other old
heresies, would allow nothing but scripture: and last of all, these new
fantastical heresies, do ground all their turbulent spirittes, and
singular, maleperte, and headie devises, upon holy scriptures.

2. For example, Luther in his first book against Z^uinglius says that
amoungest Zuingilans, the Zuinglians themselves concerning these 5. words
there arose tenn several sects of different religion I mean, 270. sects of
heresies in this time. Lib de here. fabulis.
hoc est enim corpus meum. Stanislaus Rescius has divided the heretical sects
of this time into two hundred and 70. different heresies, every one
alleadginge scripture for his own fancy. Theodorus did reckon 76. heresies in
his own time. Aug. lib. de here is.
S. Augustine also did reckon 88. heresies unto his own time. And unto Luther
his time there were 290 sorts of heresies, all which did allege scriptures.
Yea was there ever any heresy that did allege more scriptures for herself,
then that of the Arians; did not the Jews allege scriptures against Christ,
that he should not be holden for a Prophett? saying. John. 7.
Scrutate scripturas, and vide quia a Galilea propheta non surgit, search the
scriptures, say they, and behold that a prophett does not arise from Galile:
and by scripture they did endeavor to prove that he was worthy of death.
John. 19.
We have a law say they, and by our law he ought to die, because he made
himself the son of God. Did not Julian the apostate allege scripture as S.
Cyrill says, lib 10. in Iulianum for visitinge Martyrs Relics, alleadginge
that place of S. Mathewe 23. that the Scribes, Pharisees, and Hipocritts are
like to white monuments, and they ought not to visitt them etc. Also he
alleged many places of scripture as Math. 5. To. 12.1. Cor. 6. Math. 10.
against the christians for repininge against him for taking away their goods,
but to bear all tyrannical oppressions patiently. Did not Osiander a chief
secretary allege 20. different opinions touching the article of
Justification* and at last he cited his own opinion, contrary to them all?

3. Of all these sects it is said. Obscurum est insipiens cor eorum, dicentes
se esse patientes, stulti facti sunt. Their foolish heart is darkened, saying
themselves to be wise, but they be made fools; for heretics can never have
the knowledge of the scriptures. In male^olam animam non introibit sapientia,
Sap. cap. 1
nec habitabit corpore subdito peccatis, true knowledge shall not enter into a
wicked soul, nor lodge in a body subject to sin. Therefore the prophett
says. Discam in via immaculata: I will learn in an unspotted way, and when
heretics through pride, and malice, have most maliciously, opposed
themselves against the catholic church, the pillar, and foundation of all
truth, and have sought by all wicked and malicious means to deface the same,
we must not think they have had any true knowledge or perfect wisdom, for if
once a foundation of a house or a rock (upon which are builded many chambers)
do fall, all those chambers cannot stand up: the catholic church is the
firm rock, upon which the faith of every christian is builded, if he once
fall from the church he has no faith, nor any understanding of the
scriptures, and therefore S. Augustine says, he would not have believed the
ghospelll, without the authority of the church, which being inspired by the
holy ghoast, has taught things, which the scritures have taught the
contrary: as that we should not observe the old law, nor obstaine from
things suffocated or straungled and such like: for the letter says S. Paul
kills, 1. Cor. 3.
but the spirit quickneth. And as the letter in the old law, not truly
understood nor referred to Christ, did by occasion kill the carnal Jew, so
the letter of the new testament, not truly taken nor expounded by the spiritte
of Christ, which only is in his church, kills the heretic, who also being
carnal, and void of spirit, gains nothing by the scriptures, but rather
takes hurt by the same; Aug. to. 10. de te^pore and li. de Spiritu and litt.
c 5. 6. 2. Pet. 3. 2. Tim. 3.
as S. Augustine avouches, for in the new testament (says S. Peter) are
certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned, and unstable
deprave, as also they do the rest of the scriptures to their own perdition: of
whom S. Paul himself says; always learning and never attayninge unto the
knowledge of the truth, men corrupt in mind, reprobate concerning the faith,
but they shall prosper noe further, for their folly shall be made manifest to
all, and as James and Mambres resisted Moses, so they also resist the
truethe.

4. If Daniell, after that God had revealed unto him things to come,
concerning the militant church, says. Ego audiui and non intellexi, I have
heard, but I understood not, the Angel said unto Daniell, vade quia clausi
sunt, signatique sermones vsque ad praefinitum tempus: Go your ways for these
speeches are shutt up and sealed until the time appointed, if so great a
Prophett heard and understood not what he heard, what will heretics and
wicked arogant presumptuous people, make glosses upon every ^illable of holy
scripture? Aug. Con. ep. c. 4.
Wherefore S. Augustine says. Sacra scriptura etc. The holy scripture are not
known to the proud, nor manifest, or plain to boys; in the beginning thereof
it is easy, but when you enter into it, it is lofty and covered with
mysteries, and I was not of that capacity that I might intermedle therein. Aug.
lib. de vtil. cred. c. 7.
And in another place, he persuaded a young man learned in humanity, and
Philosophy and other liberal sciences, that he should not ras^lie read holy
scriptures, saying to set upon Maurus a Comedian, or Tere^ce, because thou
have noe skill in poetry, thou dare not without a master, and to understand
him being a common poett thou searchest the commentaries of Asper, Cornutus,
Donatus, and infinitte others: and dare thou without a guide, or judge
venture upon holy scripture? which as S. Paul speaks, in ^js qui pereunt
velatum est, 2. Cor. 4.
in them that perish is hidd, in quibus Deus huius seculi excaecauit sensum
incredulorum, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of the
infidles, that the illumination of the gospel of the glory of Christ, might
not shine in them, and as S. John says, Ioh. 1.
the light shined in darcknes, and the darcknes did not comprehend it, the
heretics having not the light of Christ's spirit which is given to the
church, not true humility by which they should obeie the same, cannot have the
shininge light of Christ his gospel, nor the true understanding thereof.
Credit and intelligetis, says the Prophett, believe the church and you shall
understand the scriptures, Esa. 7.
unto whom almighty God has given the true interpretation thereof, and to noe
particular spirit.

5. S. Hierom being so well learned as he was, and furnished with the
knowledge of all the tongues, did stumble in many things, Lib. 1. de Doctr.
chr. c. 6.
for he sweateth in explayninge the prophetts: the same difficulty S.
Augustine had as he himself declares, when he would expound that place of
scripture of the sin against the holy ghoast, and when he alleged many
places, he was not satisfied in them: all so he says that many obscure places
be in the scriptures, almighty God ordayninge the same, to abate the pride and
arrogancy of man, and to submitt his private spirit, to the universal
spirit of Christ his church, and therefore Tertul. says. Fides te saluum
fecit, non exercitatio scripturae, it is thy faith that saves thee and not the
readinge, or exercise of scriptures, the mysteries whereof are hidden from the
wicked, for they be like Margarittes, and precious stones, and which ought not
to be given to swine, noe more ought they to be common to every one, and as a
holy man says. Non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi simplicitas te saluum
fecit: it is not the quicknes of understanding, but simplicity of beleeuinge
that shall save thee. Omnis prophetia (says S. Hierom) in Ezech 45. prophetts
are obscure, what the disciples do hear inwardly, the common people knows
not what is said in them: and according to this the prophett says, tenebrosa
aqua in nubibus aeris; obscure water in the clouds of the aier, the ordinary
gloss in that place has, obscura doctrinae in prophetis, the prophets are full
of dark, and difficult doctrine.

6. Was not the Eunuch Threasurer to the Queen of Ethyopia, exercised in the
scripture, and yet he confessed he could not understand them? Act 8. Did not
Christ interpreate the scriptures to the Jews and his disciples Luc. vlt?
Act. 8. Luc. vlt.
S. John Chrisostom upon that place, scrutamini scripturas. Christus, says he,
Iudeos etc: Christ did not referr the Jews unto the bare, and naked readinge
the scriptures, but unto the diligent examination and inuestigation thereof. S.
Hiero^ says, Lib. 1. praef comment. in epist. ad Alga. q. 2.
that all the Epistles of S. Paul to the Romans be very obscure and
intricate. Luther himself upon the Psalm 88. Thronus eius sicut dies caeli:
his throane is like the day of heaven says; I would have noe man to presume
in my behalf, that I can understand the Psalms in their lawful sense, which
was never performed of any, though never so learned or so holy, for the
scriptures must be considered, either litteralie in themselves, or according
to their method and sense, for in themselves they speak, and contain things
supernatural and mystical, which are hidden from the capacity of the vulgar
sort: or if they should be considered according to their method or sense,
they should be divided into foures kinds of senses, and understanding as,
sensus Anagogicus which is called the celestial sense, The scripture has 4
senses or understanding.
Allegoricus which is the spiritual sense, Tropologicus which is the moral
sense, and Historicus which is the litterall sense. Therefore the prophett cried
out unto God saying, da mihi intellectum etc. give me understanding and I
will search into thy law; faciem tuam illumina super seruum tuum Domine.
Illuminate my understanding with thy grace o Lord: that I may understand thy
word; sacrae scripturae (says Hylarius) non in legendo sed intelligendo, Lib.
ad Constan.
non in praeuaricatione sed in charitate: the holy scriptures do not consiste
in readinge of them, but in the true sense and meaning of them, not in
corruptinge or in preuarication of them, but in the charitable interpretation
of them. And when S. Augustine did see the manifest and false applyinge of them
by the Pellagia^s, he did appeal to the Bishopes both of the east and weast.

7. Calvin says of the protestants that they would have the scriptures to
patronize and support their errors, saying. In praefat. ad lectores ex Phyco.
Ibi quid non ^nuertunt, quid non deprauant, what is there but they pervert and
deprave? Lutherus in hist. Sacrament. foll. 22.
Luther would not admit any translation of scripture but his own translation:
noe more would Zuinglius his adversary. Zuingl. to. ^2. resp. ad Luth.
Luther was offended with the printer that did send him Zuinglius his
translation, who would not once peruse it, and so Zuinglius with Luther. King
Henry the 8. after he made himself head of the Church, he caused the
scriptures to be translated into English, which afterward he suppressed and
inhibited. Fox. in Henri. 8. in fine, hist.
Afterward he caused another translation to be made by the authority of the
parliament Anno regni sui 34. and proclaimed under pain of death, that noe
other translation should be used but that, and this he did to mantayne his
opinion. Also when his children, king Edward and Elizabeth came to the Crown
and held contrary opinions, they caused contrary translations to be
published. Fox. ibid.
Vulgar translations of scriptures profitts nothing, unless we know the
true sense of them, and as for the true sense, the protestants give us no rule
at all for the same. For in England they cannott judge of the controversy of
religion by the scriptures, because they are bound by their ^awes to believe
according to the will and decree of the parleament house and of the king. And
in other protestant countries, where the parleament or the will of a prince is
not of force, there are so many sects and heresies, as they cannot be
reclaymed, every one wreasting the scriptures, to his own private, and
fantastical opinions; for the Protestants, do not care for the vulgar
translation: unless they may pervert the sense thereof, according to their own
turbulent brains.

8. Neither is there any people, that do reverence, and honor the scriptures
more then those of the Catholic religion. Which as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 4.
does renounce the adulterating of the word of God, wicked constructions,
deceitful interpretations, and sinister application thereof, and which is
common to heretics (as Luther affirms) that the root of all heresies has
been the scriptures, yea he added that the scriptures ought to be called the
book of heretics. There is neither iott, nor syllable in the scripture, but
the catholic church does embrace, and allow the same as written, and set
down by the holy ghoast; and although the private spirit of some have
thought some books of the sacred scriptures not to be canonical, yet the
whole catholic church has received them; and has taken away that doubt.
Touching the books of the old testament videlicet Judith, Tobyas, the book
of wisdom, Ecclesiastes, the two first books of the Machabees, and of Baruch,
as also of the new, as the Apocalips, the Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebreues,
the Epistle of S. James, the 2. of S. Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. John, and
therefore the heretics of this time do not allow those, for that some in
times paste have doubted thereof. Did not S. Tho: doubt also of Christ's
resurrection, and therefore ought he or we doubt thereof still, Christ having
manifested his scarres and his wounds unto him? Even so though some learned
men have doubted of those books, yet by the universal consent of the church
these books were made known to be Canonical scripture. As concerning the
book of Judith, the council of Carthage under Aurelius Bishopp thereof,
Innocentius the first, Ge^asius with 70. Bishops, the council of Florence
under Eugenius the 4. have pronounced it to be canonical, as also of the book
of Tobie, Ecclesiastes, and wisdom. As for the two books of Machabes, the
Canons of the Apostles (the author whereof is said to be S. Clement) in the
end thereof the two books of the Machabees, are inserted as Canonical, those
two books are confirmed by Innocentius the first and by the council of
Carthage, and confirmed by the 6. General council, in such like manner the
said 2. books are confirmed, both by the two general counsels, of Florence,
Aug. li. 18 de ciuit. Dei c. 16. con. Gaud. epist. lib. 2. cap. 23.
and Trentt, and as S. Augustine says, that the Church and not the Jews,
does allow the Machabees for canonical: and not only S. Augustine, does
produce witness out of them, but also Ireneus, Tertul. Cyprian. Chrysostom. and
others, so as to doubt of these books, is rather the infidelity of the
Jews, then the faith of the Christians, especially when the Church has once
decreede the same, and so are all the rest of the said books made Canonical
by the Church, and by her determination, which is of greater force to allow,
or disalowe of them (as also of the true interpretation of them) then all the
private spirittes in the world, unto whom all private men's judgment ought to
submit themselves. Basil the great, and S. Gregory: Naz. being the cheifest
divines amoungest the Grecians, and having cast away all other books, they
recollected themselves, to study the holy scriptures, the true meaning and
interpretation thereof, as Ruffinus testifies, Ruff. lib 2. cap 9. in Eccl
hist.
they gathered out of the authority and comentaries of their predecessors, and
not of their own private presumption or proper imagination.

Gal 2. Aug. lib. 28 in Faust. c. 4.
9. Did not S. Paul being an Apostle, before he preached the Gospel, go up
to Jerusalem, that he might confer with S. Peter, Lucc. 22.
James, and John, and especially with Peter touching the preaching and
expoundinge of the Gospel, for that our Savior did pray particulerlie for
S. Peter, that he should not fail in his faith; unto whom he promised the
assistance of his holy spirit? If this so great a doctor being illuminated
by Christ, and receauinge his gospel from him, did nevertheless conferr the
same with S. Peter, the foundation of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the Pastor
of Christ's sheep, the captain of his army, the son that shines in this
hemispher of christendom, and head of the mystical body of Christ, which
is his church, how much ought others to do the like, which have not so much
security, nor so good a warrant to be favored and inspired of God, as he had?
How can we think or believe, that heretics can understand the scriptures,
who have not the spirit of God to instruct them in the knowledge thereof? For
as no member of the body, has the spirit of the body, unless it be united
and joined to the body; so noe member of the mystical body of Christ which
is his church has the spirit thereof, that is separated from the same.
Whereupon S. Augustine says; nihil magis debet christianus formidare etc.
there is nothing that a christian ought to fear more, Aug trac. ^7. in John.
then to be separated from the body of Christ, for if he be separated and
disunited from the body of the church: he is not a member thereof, and if he
be not a member of the same, he is not quickened by her spirit, and whosoever
has not the spirit of Christ, as the Apostle says, he is not his, it is the
spirit that quickneth, the flesh avails nothing. Therefore you being not in
the Church, unto whom the spirit of God is promised, to direct her in all
truth, and to guide her from all errors and heresies, we ought not to believe
that you have the knowledge of the scriptures, or the true understanding or
interpretation thereof, for it cannot stand with any reason or rule, that this
spirit of truth can be in turbulent minds, or malicious heads, as hetiquees
be, Esa. 66.
qui non requiescit nisi super humilem, and mansuetum and trementem sermones
suos: never rests, but upon the humble, and meek, and tremblinge at his
words and speeches.

Whether every man ought to be judge of the scripture, and to rely altogether
upon his own judgment touching the interpretation thereof, being inspired by
the holly ghoast concerning the same. CHAPTER V.
1. THis is the assersion of William Whitakers in his book against Cardinal
Bellarmin, for that says he, counsels, fathers, and popes be men. And the
scripture auerreth, all men to be lyeares, and so no man can be assured his
faith to be certain and infallible. Whereto I answer, that no private man can be
assured of the certitude of an infallible faith, and therefore not of the good
spirit, rather then of the badde, by whose suggestio^ many are intoxicated
with dangerous and damnable opinions, for according to the Apostle. 2. Corint.
Satan often times transfigureth himself into an Angel of light, and the
fore the holy scripture wills us, 1. Ioh. 4. Th 4.
to be very careful in discerning of the spiritts, and not to believe every
spirit, for it is the holy catholic church that we ought to believe and
obey, 1. Tim. 3.
which the scripture bears witness to be the pillar and firmament of
truth: but it gives no certitude or evidence of any private spirit, or
pecular judgment of any one in particular, and therefore the holy council
says. It seems good to the holy ghost and to us, Act. 15.
which holy ghoast is said to be not with every particular man, but with the
church in general, and with those that have charge and direction thereof. Ero
vobiscum vsque ad consummationem seculi, even to the consummatio^ of the world.
Matt. 28.
And unto S. Peter and his successors is said. I have praid for you that your
faith may not fail; Luc. 22.
and seeing this priuiledg is given to S. Peter for the good of the church, as
the first and chief pastor thereof under Christ, and to no other in particular,
as long as the church shall continewe, the prayers and intercession of Christ
shall not be frustrated. And therefore S. Cypria^ affirms the fountain of all
heresies to have proceeded, for that one priest for the time being, and one
judge for the time being, under Christ, is not regarded. For which way, says
he, can heresies be prevented that they spring not, or being sprung already,
that they be not extended or increased, where there are so many masters as
disciples, and so many judges as barristers? And for this cause S. Hierom says
against Iouinian, amoungest 12. one is chosen, that a cheef being ordained,
occasion of scisme should be taken away.

2. The tables of both the testaments referred us over to no particular
judgment, but altogether to the small decree and arbitrament of the high
priest, Deuteronomy. 17.
as it is said. If there be any hard or doubtful judgment amongst you, go
to the priest of the Leuiticall stock, and to the judge that shall be ordained
for that time, and he shall inform you of the truth. Whose lips, according
to Malachias, Mal. 2.
shall keep wisdom because he is the angel of the Lord of hoastes: if he
will not hearken unto the Church, Matt. 18.
let him be unto you an ethnic and a publican. And in the new testament our
Savior appointed one pastor above the rest, unto which he has committed the
feeding of his flock, which should have been frivolous if the flock would
not receive food from him; Ephesians. 4.
Afterward he ordained pastors and doctors in his church which should be also
a frivolous ordinance, if every one should be a proper pastor and doctor to
him self. And although counsels, fathers, and popes are men, so the
testimonies of the scriptures may also be taxed with the imputation of humane
errors: so were the Apostles and prophets men also, yett we ought to believe
them because the holly ghost was not a liar that spoke in them; And so the
ecclesiastical counsels, fathers, and popes being lawfully assembled together
and assisted by the holly ghoast, Matt. 28.
which in such a case is promised unto them, did not err.

3. Another objection they bring, Joan. 14.
saying S. Peter was not promised unto the Church to direct the same, butt the
holly Ghost which should direct and instruct all the Apostles, and not S,
Peeter. I answer that God promised the holy ghoast as an invisible and
internal doctor and director. S. Peter his visible and external doctor he
left in his church. And therefore S. Augustine says, Aug. in Ioh. 14.
after promising the holly ghoast let no man think that he shall so give the
holly ghoast unto his church in his own place, is though him self also would
not be with the same, for he auowtched he would not leave them orphans, but
would come unto them.

4. And although the holy ghoast was promised to instruct the Church in all
truth, yett not without the Father and the son for their external worcks,
are indivisible: for there is but one indivisible substance, and because the
Church is a visible body, so it ought to have a visible viccar under Christ the
invisible head thereof. And therefore he said unto S. Peter Ioh. 11. Simon of
John, love thou me more then these, feed my lambs, which he repeated thrice,
first commending unto him his lambs, afterward his little ones, the third time
his sheep, and so expounds. S. Ambrose in cap. vlt. Luc.

5. Now the power and jurisdiction which was promised unto S. Peter Math. 16.
that the Church should be builded upon him, that the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, should be also given unto him, is accomplished and performed in the 21.
of. S. John, feed my sheep, of whom he is actually made the general pastor and
viccar.

6. And although the rest of the Apostles were lights and priests, and had
authority also in the 20. of S. John, yet theirs was extraordinary which
should end with them selves, and whatsoever authority they had, was by the
sacraments by which they remitted sin. S. Peter had authority to bind and
loose immediately, and by him the the Apostles as depending upon him as S.
Thomas says in 4. did. 19. q. 1. art. 3. and so he makes a distinction of
the two powers videl of order, and jurisdiction, the first was equally given to
all the Apostles. John. 20. and consequently to all priests, but the second
power was principally given to S. Peeter, and from him to be derived unto the
rest of the Apostles.

How heretics would feign take away all tradition, alleadginge for their
purpose that of S. Math. 15. In vain you worshipp me, teachinge for doctrine
men's precepts. CHAPTER III.
1. THis is it says S. Augustine that all heretics do brag of, Lib contr.
Maximu^.
if I should answer all such trifles, I should never make an end says he,
so as he would not answer to this place, for he says that the traditions of
the Apostles ought to be of as great force as the holy scriptures. But to
those words of our Savior, S. Basil does answer, saying. Nihil aliud ijs
recepi verbis intelligi, Bas. in Ethicis.
quam quod humanis traditionibus ad mandatum Dei reprobandum, obsequendum non
sit, that nothing else is meante by those words, then that we ought not obey
such traditions as are repugnant to Gods laws; as many observations of the
Jews, and also of the pharisees were then, and the like traditions of
heretics are now: yet we ought to obey the custom of the church, otherwise
we should be counted by the words of Christ, as Ethnicks and Publicans. But
the traditions delivered to us by the pastors and fathers thereof, which are
the foundation of our faith, and which are not repugnant to Gods precepts, nor
to his laws, or scriptures, but do rather confirm the same, are not meant by
those words: for Gods word does not consiste only of the scripture, Upon
what occasion heraesie did grow.
but also of tradition, for such as were old heretics did not gainsaie the
written word, but because they did not believe the tradition of the church, and
the definition thereof, they were so counted, and accursed.

2. That the son is of the same substance with the father, the catholic
fathers have defined by gods word: but because the heretics did not find
the same written, they would not believe the church, which did grant it was nor
written, but delivered by tradition. So as you may see the difference betwixt
the heretic, and the catholic. Felix Pontifex, writing to Benignum 130.
years before the council of Nyce says, that it was an Apostolical
tradition, that the son was of one substance with the father, and that the
holy Ghoast is to be adored, as the father and the son, and that he is of
the same substance with the father; and when the same heretics did ask where
it was written, the church did answer them, that it was delivered, unto them
by tradition which two points continued afterward by the 2. council of Nyce
and Constinople. Articles of faith by traditions.
Also in the council of Ephesus, that the blessed Virgin Marie should be
called the mother of God. In the council of chalcedon, that there are two
natures in Christ. In the 3. council of Constantinople, that there are in him
two wills, and two operations. In the second council of Nyce against
heretics, that the church should use Images. In the general council of
florence, that the holy ghoast proceeds from the father, and the son; And
when heretics did rely all upon the scripture, the catholic fathers did
convince their interpretation of scriptures, by tradition of the successiue
doctors and fathers in all ages. The tradition also that easter day should be
observed upon the sondaie next after unto the 14. day of the new Moon (as
some do write) S. Peter and S. Paul ordained; so as in all points of
doctrine we recurr to the tradition of our ancestors: and when you teach that
all things are ^on by necessity, and not by the free will of man, we recurr
unto the successiue age, and we find out, that the first author was Simon
magnus, next unto him was Marcion, next unto Marcion, was Manichaeus, next unto
him, was Petrus Adelhardus. Next unto him, was John Wicklief. Next after whom
followed your great master Martyne Luther: so that we find in all antiquity of
times, that this doctrine was detested by the holy doctors, that lived in those
ages.

3. Again when you object unto us your tradition of your imputative justice:
where you say that our faith is imputed unto us by the justice of Christ, as if
it had been our own justice, as also that every one under pain of damnation
is bound to believe, Tradition of protestants.
and to be certain that his sins be forgiven him, and that he should not
mistrust his proper infirmity therein; also that not any one is justified, but
he that beleues for certain that he is justified, and that his justification
and absolution of his sins, is effected by faith only, without any relation
to the Sacraments, and that every one is bound to believe, that he is in the
number of those that are predestined, and that by all infallible certitude he
has the guifte of perseverance to be the true seruante of God unto the last
gasp of his life: this and such like we can not find in the scriptures, nor
in the fathers, nor in the doctors of the church, but rather the contrary,
and that which the holy catholic church calls pennaunce, All things
perverted by the protestants.
you call terror of conscience, and that which she calls Sacraments and
sacrifice, you call it the Lords supper: we search the fathers, and we can
find noe such words, and although sometimes they make mention of the supper,
yet more often do they call the same a sacrifice. Did not S. Paul wish
Timothy to keep his depositum and to avoid the profane novelties of voices
and oppositions of false termed knowledge? For the scripture is not subject
to lofty skill, or arrogant or presumptuous minds; who I pray has greater
skill or knowledge and understanding of the scriptures then the deuilles, and
yet it avails them nothing, because their minds are possessed with malice,
and their hearts are empty of charity, so as men do not sin so much by
the ignorance of the understanding, as by the malice of the will, Aug. de
doctrina Christi, an. cap. 35.
and according to S. Augustine the sum and scope of all the scriptures is
charity: whosoever says he that seems to understand the scripture or any
parcel thereof, so that his understanding does not edify that knott I mean
the love of God and our neigbors, he has not as yet understood the scriptures.

4. Now all your manner of administration, and ministry, is your own
tradition and invention, without scripture or warrant of gods word, but the
traditions of the Apostles and ancients, and all the precepts of holy
church, were comau^ded to be kept, and they are not prescribed by man only,
but are made by the holy ghoast; ioyninge with our pastors in the regimente of
the faithful, Luc. 2.37. Matt. 18.
where Christ says; he that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me, they are made by our mother the church, which whosouer
obeieth not, we are warned to take him as a heathen. 2. Cor. 3.
S. Paul willed the people to keep the decrees that were decreede by the
Apostles and auncientes at Jerusalem, he commanded the people to keep the
precepts of the Apostles. You are, says he, written in our hearts, not written
with Incke, but with the finger of the holy ghost. S. Paul wrote many things
not uttered in any epistle, as some of the Apostles wrote the christian
religion in the hearts of their hearers. Wherefore Ireneus says, Iren. l. 3.4
what if the Apostles also had left noe scriptures, ought we not to follow
the order of the tradition, which was then delivered unto them, to whom they
committed the church, to the which many nations of those barbarous people that
have believed in Christ, do consent without letter or ink, having
salvation written in in their hearts, and keepinge diligently the tradition of
our elders, and so S. Hier. says cont. Here Is. 9. The creed of our faith and
hope which being delivered by tradition from the Apostles, is not written in
paper and Incke, but in the tables of the heart: and this is in the church
book also, whereby and wherein she keeps faithfully all truth in the hearts
of those to whom the Aposles did preach. And therefore S. Paul says, 2. These.
2.15.
Brethren stand and hold the tradition which you have learned, whether it be
by word or by epistle, not only the things written and set down in the
hollye scriptures, but all other truethes and points of religion uttered by
word of mouth, and delivered and given by the Apostles to their scholars.
And so S. Basil says thus. I account it Apostolic tradition to continue
firmlie even in unwritten traditions: and to prove this he alleges this
place of saint Paul ^n the same book cap. 17. and says, if we once go
about to reiecte unwritten customs, as things of no importance, we shall ere
we beware endamadge the principal parts of our faith, and bring the
preachinge of the gospel to a naked name, and so example of these necessary
traditions, he named the sign of the Cross, prayinge toward the east, the
words spoken at the elevation or shewinge of the holy Euchariste, with diverse
ceremonies used before and after baptism: with three immersions in the font:
the words of abrenunciation and exorcismes of the party that is to be
baptized; and what scripture says he taught these and such like? None truly,
all cominge by secret and silent traditions, etc. S. Hierome reckneth up
diverse, such like traditions, Hieron. in dialogo. Lucife. c. 4. and epist. com.
Luci 28.
willinge men to attribuit to the Apostles, such customs as the Church has
received by Christians of diverse Country.

5. S. August. ad Genn, says. Let us hold fast those things that are not
written, but are delivered unto us, which being generally observed in all
places of the world, we must think them to come from the Apostles, or from
the general counsels, which ought to be of great authority in the church
of God, and whosoever will dispute, hereof ought to be counted of most insolent
madness. S. Hier. ad Luc. we must observe the traditions of our Ancestors. S.
Paul commanded us to submitt our selves to our pastors and teachers. S.
Augustine says, we learn by tradition that children in their infancy
should be baptized de genesis ad liter. 101. 23. Tradition caused him to believe
that the baptized of heretics should not be rebaptized, by tradition only he
and others condemned Heluidius the heretic for denyinge the perpetual
virginity of our Lady, and without this noe Arrian, noe Macedonian, noe
Pelagian, noe Calvin will will yealde; We must use tradition says Epiph. for
the scripture has not all things, and therefore the Apostles delivered
certain things by tradition. S. Iren. lib. 3. 14. says that in all questions
we must have recourse to the traditions of the Apostles, teachinge us withal
that the way to true apostolical tradition and to bring it to the fountain,
is by the apostolical succession of Bishops, but especially of the
apostolical church of Rome, declaring in the same place that there are many
barbarous people simple for learning, but for constancy in the faith most
wise, which never had scriptures but learned only by tradition. Tert. lib de
corn. reckons up a great number of christian observations or customs (as S.
Cyprian in mannie places does) whereof in fine he concludethe of such, and
such, If thou require the rule of scriptures, thou shall find none, tradition
shall be alleged, the author, custom the confirmer, and faith of the obseruer
Orig. he mil. 5. proves the same, Dyonisius Areopag. refers the oblation
and prayinge for the death in the lyturgie or Mass, to an Apostolical
tradition. So does Tertull. Aug. Chrysostom. Damasc. allege; Also we might add
that the scriptures themselves, even all the books of the Bible, be given us
by tradition, else should we not take them as they be indeed, for the
infallible word of God, noe more then the worcks of S. Ignat. S. Aug. S. Dion.
and the like.

6. The true sense also of the scriptures which Catholics have, and
heretics have not, remains still in the Church by tradition, the Creed is
an Apostolical tradition. Ruff. in expo. simb. ad principium. Hier. Epist. 61.
cap. 9. Ambr. ser. 38. Aug. de Simb. ad Cath. lib. 3. cap. 1. Also it is by
tradition we hold, that the holy Ghost is God, and therefore Macedonius was
condemned in the 2. Naz. lib. ^. Theol.
council of Constantinople for an heretic, for that he denied the same,
because in the scripture this name is not given unto him, for in the
scriptures, manny things are said to be such by Metaphors, which are not so
indeed, as that God is a sleep, that he is angry, that he is sorrye,
although noe such thing is in God, as also manny things that are such and
yet are not mentioned in the scriptures, God to be ingenitus, with manny such
attributes, as Trinity, parson, consubstantialitie hypostasis, unto
hypostatica, homousion, and because the Arrians did not yield unto the same,
not findinge them in the scriptures they were in the council of Nyce condemned
for heretics. And although the very words be not in the scripture, yet
they be collected of the sense of the scriptures. And so S. Cyrill, Cyrill. l.
1. dialogoru^ de trinit.
of that place of scripture: Ego sum qui sum, I am the same that is, does
gather, that the son is consubstantiall with the father, although the word
consubstantiall is not found in the scriptures. So the catholic Church in
all ages, out of the sense of the scripture, does gather, that we ought to
pray unto Saints, to pray for the dead: that there is a Purgatory,
although the very words themselves be not there; And when S. Paul did
speak of the holy Eucharist, he brought noe scriptures to prove it; I have
received of our Lord, says he, that I delivered unto you, he alleged
nothing but tradition, which he had received from our Lord, that a woman
ought not teach in the Church, that a woma^n ought to be covered, that the
man ought to be bareheadded, that the Bishop ought to be husband of one
wife, he alleadginge nothing but the custom, if any man would be captious, or
contentious, he did oppose against the^ the custom of the Church, saying, we
have noe such custom, nor the Church of God, and whosoever despises these
things, he does not despise man but God. And therefore we are referred by the
holy scriptures to our ancestors, to ask knowledge of them. Interroga patres
tuos, Deuteronomy. 32. Eccles. 8.
and dicent tibi etc. ask thy Fathers, and they shall declare unto thee, and
thy ancestors, Eccles. 8.
and they will tell thee. Non te praetereat narratio seniorum, ipsi enim etc.
Omit not to hear thine elders, for they have learned of their parents, that
of them you may learn understanding: Prou. 2^.
Non transgrediaris terminos antiquos quos posuerunt parents. Do not you
transgress the old limittes which your parents have prescribed? Are not the
Rechabites praised for followinge the tradition and precepts of Ionadab? Haec
dicit Deus exercituu^, Hier. 35.18.
pro eo quod obedistis praecepto Ionadab patris vestri etc. Thus says the Lord
of hoastes, because that you have obeyed the precepte of Ionadab your father,
and have kept all his commandments, therefore the Lord of hoastes the God of
Israel says, there shall not fail one of the stirpe of Ionadab, the son of
Rechab that shall stand in my presence.

7. In the dolfull and damnable debate and discord that Martyne Luther,
Calvin and others have raised up, by which they plunged themselves and the
world into such an intricat laberinth of errors and heresies, where shall the
poor silly sheep have resolution of their doubts, but of their parents and
pastors, which God has placed in his church to govern and direct his
flock, from all errors? shall not the children believe their fathers, and the
sheep their pastors? We must not only fly unto the scriptures as S.
Vincentius Lyrinensis says, Vincent. 9. ^eres. c. 1.
but unto tradition of the catholic church, notwithstanding says he in that
place, that the scriptures are of themselves sufficient, yet says he because
all men do not conceive the loftines of the scripture a like, but according
to every man's fantastical censure and humorous passion, as so many heads,
so many minds; for men as they be divided in sects or factions, so they
divide the sense of the scriptures, Nouatianus, Photinus, Sabellius, Donatus,
Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinaris, Priscilianus, Iouianus, and
Pellagius, have each of them grounded their proper heresies upon the scripture.
Nan videas eos volare per singula quaeque sanctae legis volumina sacrae
scripturae. You may see them fly over all the books of the holy law, both
in public and private, in their sermons, in their books, in their
banquettes, in tauernes, in the streate, nothing did they ever produce which
was not shadowed by the scriptures, for they knew very well, that their
errors could never be pleasing unto the people, without the scriptures, with
which as with sweet water they sprinckle the same, even as sour drink is
te^pered with sweet honny, so as when children drink thereof, having once
felt the sweetness, they have noe loathsomnes of it though never so bitter;
But the more scripture they bring the more we ought to fear them, says S.
Vincentius, and to shun them: Magnopere curandum est in ipsa Ecclesia
Catholica, vt id teneamus quod vbique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum
est. For in the catholic church, we must always beware, that we keep that
which is believed, always, every where, and of every body: and haec est vere
and proprie Catholica, which is properly and truly catholic. And in the 9.
chapter he says. Quo quisque religiosior est, eo promptius nouellis
adinuentionibus contrariatur, the more virtuous, that a man is, the more
prompte and ready he opposes himself against new inventions: and so he
says, our master S. Stephen in his epistles to the Bishops of Affricke
touching rebaptisinge of infants that were baptized by heretics, nihil
innouandum est nisi quod traditum est, Apud Cypri. li. 2. cap. 7.
the good and religious man would have us children to inuente noe religion, but
what we have received of our fathers, and whose steps he would have us to
follow in all things.

8. This said author expoundinge, 1. Timoth. depositum custodi; keep in
depositum what I have left in your custody, the religion and the observation
thereof, that I delivered unto you, shunninge profane novelty of voices; he
does not say, shunn antiquity, or ancientie, or continuance, but novelty and
innovation of things, nam si vitanda est nouitas, tenenda est antiquitas etc.
For if we ought to avoid novelty, we should embrace antiquity: if
novelty be a profane thing, antiquity is a sacred thing, keep the
depositum says he, which is given unto thee and to the whole church, to be
kept from thieves and enemies, least they should sow cockell or darnell
amou^gest the clean wheat. The depositum which you have received, not which
you have invented. The depositu^, which is not coined by thy wit, but
delivered by my doctrine. Not any man's private usurpation, but the common, and
universal tradition: in which you are not the author, but the keeper: not the
institu^or, but the follower: not the master, but the disciple. The depositum,
says he, Catholicae fidei talentum, keep the talent of the catholic
religion, unspotted, Exodus 36.
inviolable, and undefiled by you says he, the rosarie of the spiritual
tabernacle: Pretiosas diuini dogmatis ge^mas exculpe fideliter and compte,
Vince^tius cap. 27.
ado^^a sapienter, adijce splendorem, gratiam and venustatem, do you garnish,
turn faithfully, and adorn with the precious Jewel of the divine decree, do
you add thereunto, splendour grace and beauty.

6. All this I have alleged out of Vincentius Lyrinensis word, by word; for
his whole book against heresies has noe other obiecte but the tradition of
our ancestors, by which he confuteth and conuinceth the profane novelty of
heretics, and their arrogant insolent ostentation of scriptures, upon which
they ground all their heretical cauillation, which as all our forfathers
before us, so we after them do find by experience, that the interpretation
and meaning thereof as they do produce them, is of greater difficulty, then
the controversy it self, the fathers did urge them with a shorter way by
askinge, Hill. 2. ad Constable Aug. lib. ^ de trinitate cap. 3.
quid prius and posterius? what is first and last? for that heresy is
grounded in novelty, and ever comes after the Catholic truth first
planted. And for that every heresy pretends his heresy to be ancient and
from the Apostles, the fathers do allege that this truth must not only be
eldeste, but also must have continewed from time to time, at the least with
the greatest part of Christians. Tertul. li. aduers. prax. c. 20
And therefore Tertulian says lib. De praescriptione: quod apud multos vnum
inuenitur, non est erratum sed traditum, that wherein most men do agree upon,
it is not an erroneous opinion, but a common tradition. For the Church of God
is a most lively gospel, for with the Apostles there was the Church of
Christ before the gospel was written, since none of the Evangelists did write
until 18. years after Christ's assention. With Abraham Isaacke and Jacob was a
true Church in the faith of one creator and redeemer to come, when there was
noe scripture, Moses the first that wrote Eusebius. li 9 c. 4 and li. 10 cap 3
praeparationis Euangelicae.
for Moses was the first that committed the word of God to ink and paper,
having written the same in the Hebrewe tongue, which was the first that
invented characters or letters as Eusebius does witness, etc even by the
testimony of profane writers themselves, and have taught the people being
rude and ignorante to use them; Moses being dead Cadmas in the days of Iosue
did first inuente greek characters.

10. The holy scriptures do testify, as also profane histories, Joseph. 1.
^pionem grammaticam. Iosue c. 15 Iudic. 1.
that learning and philosophy came from the Phenicians, Assirians, Chaldeans,
and Aegipte unto Greece, and the same does Josephus teach. The first
university that ever was, was Cariath Sopher in the land of Canaan in Asiria,
it was called the city of learning, near unto the city of Hebron, long
after the Gretians begann to have lettres and learning: and Origines says,
none amoungest the Grecians did register or write any thing of the acts or
monuments of the Grecians before Homer, and Hesiodus, which were 400. years
after Moses, and if there were any thing written of the Assyrians, or of the
Phenicians before Moses, they did perish, the holy scriptures by gods
divine providence being reserved safe, and before any scripture there was the
Church, for betwixt Moses and our first Father, was more then 2. thousand
years, in all which time there was noe law written, but the law of nature,
the word of God which he signified unto Adam, Noe, Abraham, or what otherwise
he did inspire into the hearts of the Patriarchs, by tradition only it came
to the posterity, and to Moses himself, so as tradition was before the
scripture more then 2000. years; the law of grace, which was by a lively
voice delivered by Christ to his Apostles, was not written by him, nor
commanded by him to be written, and therefore shall not the Christians believe
the same, because he commanded not it should be written? or should the
Christians which did believe the Apostles before the same law was written, be
reputed fools for beleeuinge the same before it was written? For our Savior
did not say: Scribite Euangelium, sed praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae,
write the ghospel, but preach the ghospel to all creatures, how many thowsandes
be there in the world that cannot write nor read the scriptures, and yet shall
they not believe them delivered unto them, by the tradition and preachinge of
the church? sicut praedicauimus, sic credidistis, 1. Cor. 15.
says the Apostle, as we have preached, so you have believed, he did not say
as we have written. 2. Tim 3.
Tu vero, etc. Do you abide in those things, that you have learned, knowinge
or whom you have learned them, Act 15. 1. Cor. 11
so it seems good to the holly ghoaste and us, if any man be contentious,
we have noe such custom. He did not object scripture but custom, and
tradition, 2. These. 2 Horm. in diacetis Cap 25. q. 1.
therefore he said, state in side, stand fast to your faith and keep the
traditions. Therefore it is inserted in the Cannons of Hormista, prima salus est
rectae fidei regulam custodire, and in constitutis patrum nullatenus deuiare;
it is the beginning of our salvation to observe and keep the rule of right
faith, and not to go one step away from the decree and ordinance of our
ancestors.

Certain objections answered against traditions, taken out of the first
Chapter of S. Paul to the Galathians. CHAPTER III.
1. ALthough says S. Paul, we, Galat. 1.
or an Angel from heaven eua^gelize beside that which we have euangelized to
you, be he anathema or accursed. This very place is cited by S. Athanasius in
the defense and confirmation of traditions, saying. If any man will cite out
of scriptures any text against the decree or determinations of the church
and counsels, let him be accursed, and although he allege all the scripture
in the world against, that which already we have received, we must not
believe him, for children, as Athanasius says ought not to judge of the decree
of their parents, unless they would have themselves to be bastardes.

2. Yet notwithstanding we must distinguishe the words of S. Paul which may
be understood two manner of ways as S. Augustine has understood the same,
saying. Aug. trac 96 super John.
Aliud est euangelizare preterquam quod accepistis, and aliud est euangelizare
plusquam accepistis, euangelizare preterquam accepistis, est transgredi regulam
fidei and recedere a via euangeliij semel per Apostolos praedicata, for it is
not all one to say to euangelize otherwise then you have received, and to
euangelize more then you have received, for to euangelize otherwise the^ you
have received, is to transgress the rule and limittes of faith, and to depart
from the decree of the Apostles, which is a detestable thing: and therefore to
euangelize more then you have received is not S. Paul's meaning, otherwise he
should be repugnante to himself, who desired to come to Thessalonica that he
might supply what was defective and lackinge of other men's faith; For when the
Apostles uttered these words from Ephesus to Galatia, the ghospells of the 4.
Evangelists were not written, and specially the gospel of S. John. For it is
not all a like the gospel, and the writtinge of the gospel, the first that
was written was the gospel of S. Mathewe, and S. Luke did supplye what was
wanting of the same, and S. John in his gospel did add in many things which
was not written in the other 3. Evangelists. And so S. Paul himself in his
Epistles did express many things, which were not so plain in any of the ^.
Evangelists.

3. Lastly according to the declaration of al^ the doctors of the church,
especially Ireneus, Tertulian, Cyprian, Hierom, Augustine, and others, many
things were delivered unto us by the tradition of the Apostles, which are not
expreslie and maninifestly in the scriptures. Basil. in homil. Sabel. and Arc.
And therefore S. Basil says: Te paratum reddat traditio, Dominus ita docuit,
Apostoli praedicauerunt, patres custodierunt, confirmauerunt martyrs etc. Let
tradition please thee, we are so taught by our Lord, the Apostles have so
preached unto us, the fathers have so kept the same, and the same was
confirmed by the Martyrs. And in another place he further says. Basil. ep. ad
Antiochenum. Ecclesiae.
Fidem nos neque ab alijs scriptam nobis recentiorem susceptimus, neque ipsi
mentis nostrae germina tradere audeamus, we neither receive a later faith
written for us by others, neither do we presume to deliver every fantasy
that springes out of our own brain, least matters of religion should be
thought to be men's fictions or inventions.

Whether we prohibit the scriptures to be translated into the vulgar tongue.
CHAPTER IV.
1. Truly the Catholic Church does not altogether forbide vulgar
translations of holly Scriptures, although she would not have every body at
his pleasure to read the same or to make glosses thereon. The council of
Trentt in the table of prohibited books, and 4. rule, permitted the use of the
vulgar translations to them, whom the Bishopp or inquisitor, with the license
of the pastoure, shall think to be such as will read them to their
edification, and not to their damadge. Malmsburie affirms out of S. Bid,
that there was sometimes permitted vulgar translations in England. The French
also had their French Bibles a long time: and so the English catholics by
permission from Rome, had the new testamente in English.

2. After the retourninge of the children of Israel from Babylon, the divine
office and the holly scriptures were read unto the people in the Hebrewe
tongue, not withstandinge the Siriac or the Chaldean language was their vulgar
tongue, for the Hebrewe was not all that time vulgar, otherwise the people
should not have had need, 2. Esd 8.13.
of an interpretor when the law was read of Esdras; as also when Moses, and
Josias did propose the same unto the people. Again the Apostles did write
their gospel in noe other languadge but in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin; for
Peter and James did write unto the Jews dispersed throughout the whole world
in the greek tongue, as S. John did write unto the Persians.

3. In Affricke as long as the Christian religion was there, the latin tongue
was in use as S. Aug. and S. Cyprian do witness, Aug. de doctrina Christiana
who also say that the psalms were sounge in that languadge, and in the Mass.
Sursum corda, habemus ad Dominum, gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro etc. Isid
lib. 2. de diuinis officijs cap. 2.

Conc. Toll. 4. Bed. lib. 1. hist. suaegent.

Wal to. 3. de sacramentalibus.

Rab 2. de instit. Cler. Rup de diuinis officiis.


That the latin tongue was used in Spain in their churches it is wittnessed by
S. Isidorus above 900. years a go, it was also decreed in the council of
Tollet that order should be observed in singinge the spalmes. In england
above, 1000. years the service was in latin as Beda, and Thomas Walde^sis do
witness. In France also the same tongue was in use in their churches, as
Alcumus de diuinis officijs, does witness, and Amallaricus Treuire^sis de
officijs ecclesiasticis, who says that in all the weast, the office of the
church was in latin. In Germany the same also was observed, as Rabanus does
witness and Rupertus.

4. The Apostles as Justinius Martyr does observe, did celebrate and singe the
psalms to the gentiles converted to the faith in the greek tongue,
notwitstandinge there were diverse tounges, as of the Parthia^s, Medes,
Elamitans and such like, neither yet in the vulgar greek, but in the Atticke
which was the more common and more learned, so that the languadge which the
greek priests do use at Mass and sacrifice, is not the same, that the vulgar
sort did use. Gregory the 7. denied the king of Bohemia license to translate
the holy. Bible into the vulgar tongue, so denied Innocentius the 3. long
requested thereunto by the Bishopp of Mentes, for these good fathers would not
have such profound mysteries of the scripture, to be in contempt and subject
to the cross sense of the vulgar sort, for some simple religious persons
readinge the holy scriptures, did read of gods eyes, arms and feet, and such
like, which indeed ought to be understood not litteraly, Cassiod. colla 10.
c. 2. 3. 4. 5.
but metaphoricallie, and thereupon thought God to be a corpulent body or
palpable subject.

5. David George the Hollander, by readinge the scripture also in the
hollandish languadge, found that the true Church should never fail, and
because he found by experience that noe other church continewed so long, as
the Church of Rome, he denied Christ to be the true Messiah: so that being
subverted and carried away by the sectaries of these days, he thought the
Church of Rome not to be the true church, unto which rather then he would
yield any belief, he denied Christ to be God, and so denied the church of
Rome to be true the church. And a certain wooman in England having heard
the 25. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus read by the minister against women, said it
was the word of the diuill, and not the word of God. Bell. to. 1. l. 2. c. 15.


6. Who can give greater evidence of the inconvenience of readinge the
scriptures more then the heretics of this time, every one groundinge their
heresies and absurdities upon scriptures, falsely applied, and ill
understood, wherefore reason it self without other authority, should persuade
the church to have the scriptures and her service in a certain languadg,
otherwise there could be noe unity or communication of churches, for none
either learned, or unlearned should frequent any churches, or hear service,
but in his own Country, where he should hear his own vulgar languadge;
neither could there be general counsels, for all the fathers that comes
thither have not every one of them the gift of tongues, and therefore this is
the cause that the Apostles for the most part did write all in greek, for
that at that time it was the commonest languadge of all, as Cicero says,
Oratione pro Archia poeta, the greek tongue is read almost amoungest all
nations, but the latin, is restayned within her small bonds and limittes, but
when the Roman Empire began to flourish, the latin also flourished,
especially amoungest the learned, as in Italy, France, Spain, Affrique and in
other nations, and therefore in respect that it is now the common language, the
scriptures and service of the Church ought to be in the same.

7. If any reason should move the church to have the scriptures in the vulgar
tongues, it is for that the simple people should understand them, but they
cannot understand the psalms nor the prophetts, nor many other books of the
scripture, neither by readinge them take much fruit thereby, but rather great
harm, for if they should read in the prophett Osee, Go and make unto
yourselues children of fornications, the adultery of David, the incest of
Thamar, the lies of Judith, and how that Joseph made his brethren druncke, and
how that Sara, Lia, and Rachell gave their hand-maides as concubines to other
men, they would either despise the Patriarchs, or imitate them in those
things, and when they should see so many contradictories according to the
litterall sense which the rude cannot resolve, they would be in a confusion,
or bring the scriptures to manifest contempt.

8. Also in respect that kingdoms and nations are subject to conquestes, and
invasion of strange nations, which always for the most part bring with them
their languadge, utterly defacinge the languadge of the country conquered; so
also in these countries, there must be alterations of tra^slations of
scriptures, which cannot be done without great danger of the corruption
thereof, either in respect of the ignorance, or malice of the tra^slators,
especially if they be heretics, which never translated the scriptures truly
being carried away by their passsionat affection of their heresy; And therefore
S. Hierom found great fault, Hier epist. ad Paulinum.
that the scripture should be so common and in contempt, for says he
talkatiue old women and doting old men, the cauelinge Sophiste, all men do
presume to speak of scripture, they rent the scriptures in pieces, they teach
it before they learn it. When S. Basil heard the chief cook of the Emperor,
in his presence to speak of scriptures, he reprehended him, saying: Tuum est
de pulmentis cogitare, non dogmata diuina decoquere, it is thy office to
think upon thy cooquerie, and not to play the Cook in divine mysteries. I
am sure if these fathers were living in this wicked age, to see the Cobbler the
Tailor, the Tapster speak and dispute of scriptures, and also to preach in
the pulpitt, they would sharply reprehend them.

Whether we forbid the ignorante to pray in a languadge which they understand.
CHAPTER V.
1. Cor 14.
1. THe heretics object unto us, the words of S. Paul saying, he that
speaks with the tongue let him pray that he may interpret, for if I pray
with the tongue, my spirit prays but my understanding is without fruit. I
answer that although it be not fruitful for his understanding yet it is
fruitful for his devotion, for here is noe mention made of any other tongues,
but of such as men did speak in the primitive church by miracle, as of
spiritual collations and exhortations which the christians were wont to make
to praise God, and not of those la^guadges which were then common to all the
world, as Hebrewe, greek and latin, in which the scriptures both old and
new were written. For it is a palpable and gross deceit and cogginge of the
heretics, to say that the virtue, and efficacy or the Sacraments and
sacrifice, oblations, prayers, and religion depends upon the peoples
understanding, hearing or knowledge, the principal operation and force
thereof, and of the whole mystery of the Church, consistinge especially in the
very virtue of the work, and the public office of the priests, who are
appointed by Christ to dispose the mysteries to our salvation. The infant,
innocente, idiott, and unlearned, taking noe less fruit by baptism, and all
other divine offices then the learnedest clearcke, yea more, if they be more
humble, charitable, devout, and obedient, and perhaps we see more often the
simple to be more devout, and the learned more rechles and more cold, for
devotion does not consiste in the understanding, unless the will be well
affected.

2. S. Augustine said of the common people, non intellgendi vluacitas, sed
credendi simplicitas tutissimum facit. It is not quicknes of understanding, but
simplicity of belief that shall save us; And in another place he says. Si
propter solos eos Christus mortuus est sui certa intelligentia possunt quae ad
fidem pertinent discernere, pene frustra in Ecclesia laboranus. If Christ had
died only for such as can understand well the mysteries of our faith, in vain
well should labor in gods church, for God does rather respect your simple
belief, then your deep understanding, the affection of the will concerning
your faith, then the hawtie knowledge of your lofty mind. Charitas aedificat,
scientia inflat, as the Apostle says: charity does fruictifie to edification,
when science serves for the most part to ostentation, so as our Savior did
speak unto the common people in parables, whose simplicity and godly
affection did proffitt more thereby, then the wordlie wisdom and proud
knowledge of the arrogant and swellinge Scribes and Pharesies.

3. Do you think that the children of the Hebrews did understand when they
cried in the Temple. Osanna filio David? Or that our Savior was displeased
thereby for that they understood it not, but the priests and scribes were much
confounded thereby, saying. Audis quid isti dicunt, truly our Savior was not
discontented at the praises of those littles ones, for then the prophecy was
fulfilled, ex ore infantium and lactentium etc. thou make an instrument of
the tender infant and suckinge babe to magnify, and praise thy name, to the
confusion and overthrow of thine enemies, saying the end of all the
scriptures, and of the law of God and man, and of the science and knowledge
thereof, is true and perfect charity, inflaminge and inkendlinge our hearts
with the fiery love, both of God and our neighbors, flowinge and flourishing
abondantlie with all fruitful exercises and worckes of mercy, piety and
religion, as the Apostle says: plenitudo legis est dilectio: the fulness of the
law is charity.

4. The experience of the catholic flock in agreeing and submittinge
themselves to the service of the church in the universal and common languadge
thereof, and of their great increase and charity, piety devotion and
religion* thereby, as their shinning resplendent virtues of their godly
conversation and their external worckes of mercy, may witness and confirm
the same, and the example of the contrary practice in few years paste of
these new evangelists or pretended reformers, as in disagreeing from the
common use and custom of the whole church and reuoltinge from the obedience
thereof avouches no less, as also the small or not fruit at all that their
vulgar and confused translations have brought both unto themselves and to their
miserable and scabbed flock, which like giddy heads and itchinge brains,
were not contented nor settled therein, but conceived great loathsomnes thereof,
like the children of Israel who having so earnestly sought unto themselves
a king, yet when he did reign over them, nothing was more toilsome unto
them; Puritants cares not for prayers.
so as nothing is more troublesome unto your carnal appetites then any set
prayers or service in your vulgar translations, which the puritantes do
protest to be collected out of the Popes portuis and Mass, Admonitio
parleamenti.
and consequently very distasteful unto them. Admonition parl. page 45. and
for this cause by the protestants of england, are censured as scismatickes.
Was ever their stinge more venomous, or their books more exasperatinge or more
vehement against the service of the church in the latin tongue, then it i^
this day against the book of common prayer, set forth in the english tongue,
and set service in your own churches? I have read the slanderous and bitinge
book of Thomas Cartwrithe oppugninge the same, against doctor White-guifte
Bishopp of Canterbury for defending it: there-you may see with what inuectiue
styles, redoublinge withal oprobrious terms, they do entertain one
another, and what a general reuolte we see now a days from this vulgar
translation of set prayers, and order set down in that book, and commanded
to be putt in continual practice, into Caluinisme and Puritanisme (yea and at
last unto plain athisme) who will have noe set prayers or common service at
all, sauinge some lascivious and wanton psalms of Geneua, rather for fashion
sake, or some carnal delight, then for any spiritual devotion. I have seen a
pamphlett in printe which was exhibited to the parliament, that it was not
lawful for christians to say our pater noster, or the creed, yea not in our
vulgar tongue.

8. God does know and we ought not to be ignorant, that your vulgar and false
translation of scriptures or set prayers, is not for edification, but rather
for cauillation though you inculcate the same so often, your selves not
restinge therein but slidinge from it again. In the kingdom of Ireland you
comaund the english Bible, and the english common prayer book, to be observed
in all the churches of that poor kingdom co^pellinge the prisoners to buy
those books which themselves could not understand, yea not one person
amoungest 40. when that comau^d was given forth, could speak or understand
the english tongue. And now in the kings reign you cause those books to be
set forth in the Irishe tongue, compellinge every parish church to pay 10. shil
for an Irishe Bible, when one amoungest a 100. cannott read them, or understand
them, and therefore an Irish protestant Bishopp, did laugh at this strange kind
of alteration, and said to some of his frindes: in Queen Elizabeth her time
we had english Bibles and Irish ministers, but now said he, we have
ministers come out of england unto us, and Irish Bibles with them.

6. Are not for the most part all the benefices and church liuinges of that
kingdom bestowed upon English and Scottish ministers, not one of them having
three words of the Irish tongue, and although in the English pale, and in port
towns, the inhabitants, especially the best sort, ca^ speak English, yet
few of the common sort, except it be betwixt Dublin and Drodach and in 3.
barronies in the country of Wexforde can speak any word of English, and
truly I think that the Irish Bibles have as many faults and errors in the^,
as the translation Martine Luther made of the Bible, in which Hieronimus Enser
found more then 1000. errors, which he set down in the translation that he
made 1522. And not only catholics have charged him with those errors, but
also Zuinglius who made another kind of translation disagreeing from that of
Luther. The same is also witnessed by your variable tra^slations of your
English Bible, the first not agreeing with the last, nor With the second. In
the conference had at Hampton court, the English Bible was censured to be ill
translated, and containing very partial, untrue, and seditious notes, and too
much sauoringe of dangerous and traitorous conceits, and so order was taken
to make a new translation. How can the true sense and meaning of the oracles
of God be embraced, if they be tossed and corrupted with every vulgar tongue,
which ought to be a sufficient cause that it should be preserved, in those
languadges in which it was first set forth by the Apostles and fathers of the
primitive church.

Cor. 14
7. S. Paul did forbid a woman to speak in the church: but now every woman
amoungest the protestants, is a mistress of scripture, are all men Apostles, all
Evangelists, all doctors says the Apostle but now? this vulgar translation,
or rather corruption or profanation, all Shoomakers, Cobblers, Tailors,
Tauernors, yea and lascivious wanton women, yea the most ignorant of all are
Apostles, prophetts, evangelists and doctors, so as they take away all order
and form of discipline from gods church, and in the place of Jerusalem which
ought to be a city well ordered withal vnformitie both of doctrine and
discipline, there is a Babylon builded, where there is nothing but a sauadge
and barbarous confusion. So as we may perceive, that this inordinate desire
of knowinge the hidden and secrett mysteries of God, which he would not have
to be abused, by these contemptuous spirittes, brought such fruit unto the
world, as that disordered greedines of our first parents touching the
knowledge of good, and evil, therefore we are warned not to know to much but
rather to fear, least we should abuse our knowledge, and therefore the holly
ghoast does advise us, Eccle c. 3.
not to be curious in searching things above our capacity, and beyond our
reach.

8. The beginning and end of Ezechiel as S. Hierom wittnesseth, was read by
noe man before he was 30. years of age, Hier. in proemi^ Ezech.
Baptism was vealed in the read sea, the Eucharist in the paschall lamb, in
manna, and in Melchisedeks, bread and wine, the trinity was not known to any,
but to the prophetts and the high priests. S. Paul calls the incarnation,
misterium absconditum a saeculis. A mystery hidden from ages, for the word
misterium is not to be made known or diuulged to every one, Dion lib Eccles.
Hier. c 1. Orig. hom. 5. in cant. Hier. ep. 81. ad Pamachum.
as Dyonisius and Origenes do counsel. Did not the Apostles forbide to write
the creed, that noe man might learn it but by word of mouth of the
Christians? S. Ambrose also says lib. de ijs qui initiantur cap. 9. lib. 6.
de Sacra. c. 4. that ineffable mysteries must be kept silent. And therefore in
the latin translation of the scripture, we retain many Hebrew words, and
not without great cause are they reserved in the very hebrew it self, which
cannot be so well translated into the latin, much less to any other
languadge as, Alleluia, Osanna, Amen, Emanuell, Rabbi, Abba, as also greek
words, Kyrie eleison, Psalmum, Christum, Baptismum, Episcopum, Diaconum,
Eucharistiam, Euangelium, which are greek voices, and when the Pope does
celebrate the Gospel and the Epistle are read in greek before the latin in
the church of Constantinople those were read first by the grecians in latin
and afterward in greek, and so the latin was interpreted, by the greek,
and this as Remigius declares, was done to show the unity of faith in those
two churches, and that greek in which the priests in Grecia do celebrate or
say Mass, is not the same which the vulga^e people do use, but far different
from it, which only the learned sort of people do understand: even as the
latin tongue is not the vulgar tongue of the latins, but the Italian tongue,
for the latin is only known to the learned. For as S. Basil says, Basil.
lib. de Spiritu sancto. Number. 5.
it is not a mystery if it be common to the vulgar sort, for in the old law
all the vessels of the tabernacle were covered least they should be subject to
the view of the people: by which Origines did signify, that the mystery of
the sacrifice, ought to be hidden from the common people and unworthy persons:
Lib Ecclesiae Hierarch.
and so Dionys. says when our holly princes did institute publicly the
holly sacrifice, they have nevertheless delivered the same in secret manner.

9. Were not the Bethsamites punished for beholding the Arcke curiously? was
not Oza also punished by death for touching it? Was not Balthazer plaged for
prophaninge the holly vessels, and for drinckinge out of them? were not the
sheapeeds cast down with a thonder bolte in the fields for singing the holly
words of consecration, as Innocentius the 3. does report, and therefore he
commanded that those words should be very secretly used in the church?
Therefore S. Basil says, Bas ibid.
that many things are delivered unto the church, which are not written, least
the custom of such things should breed contempt, and so speaking of Moses
he said, that he would not suffer every thing that was sacred to be common to
all, for he knew according to his wisdom, that the things common to every
body, are not in that request as things that are secrette, therefore of these
mystical things the Apostle S. Paul commanded Timothy, 2. Timot.
that he should comend the^ to men of faith and sanctity, which are fit for
the same. Tert. lib 1 Theologia.
So Tertulian says, non nimium est de Deo loqui neque omnibus, neque omnia
sunt propalanda, it becomes not all men to dispute or reason of God, and divine
things, for all things are not to be made public to all men, neither in all
places. Ignorare pleraque inquit ille nequum quod non debeas, noris quia quod
deberis nosti: for it better says he to be ignorante in those things which
you ought not to know, because it is sufficient to know what you are bound to
know. So Hilarious says. Habet non tam veniam qua^ praemium ignorare quod
credas, quia maximum fidei stipendium est sperare quae nescias, you shall not
only have pardon, but a reward to be ignorant of that you believe, for it is a
great meritt of faith, to hope that which you know nor. So Clemens
Alexandrinus says: not such as are wise according to the word, but such as
are wise before God have the possession of their faith, which is learned
without learning, the written book of it is true charity, which is the
divine decree pertaininge to the simple and humble of heart. Yea, seventy the
two interpreters which were chosen of the best that could be sound, as well for
their learning and virtue, as also for knowledge in the scripture, chosen by
Eleazer the high priest, at the request of Ptolomeus Philadelfus king of Egypt,
and inspired by the holy ghoast to translate the scriptures, yet in the
mystery of the blessed Trinity and the coming of the Messiah, for that they
were mysteries most profound, they placed but a little mark without any other
exposition, for that they durst not interprett them.

Whether a man ought not to pray, either by himself, or by another, but in a
languadge he understands. CHAPTER VI.
1. ORigines does answer to this point, saying. Non parum ex hoc ipso^
vtilitatis animae conferri etc. he teaches although the words of the
scriptures be obscure which we hear, yet they penetratinge and pearcinge our
hearts and minds, do receive great consolation thereby: if we may believe
that amoungest the gentiles some verses which they pronounce at their charminge
and inchauntinge, be of that force and efficacy when they be whispered into
men's ears, which those people themselves that do repeat or say them, are
ignorant of them, and at the only voice or sound of them, the serpents are
either lulled a sleep, or driven out of their hoales and caves; how much more
ought we to believe that the words of the holy scriptures, and the prayers of
the catholic church should be of greater force and virtue, though they be
pronounced in any languadge, then any charminge whatsoever? And as our Savior
says of the children of the church, that their Angels do assist the^ before
gods throne, they do offer our prayers, and whatsoever appellation or
invocation we make, they exibitte and prefer it before his divine majesty.
And although we do not understand Kyrie eleison etc. yet the Angels
understand it, and not only many virtues are about us, but they also do
lodge, and dwell in us, as the prophett said, Benedic anima mea Dominum etc.
Let my soul praise God, and also all my interior parts praise him, vid. all
that is within me, which are the angelical virtues unto whom the care of our
souls and bodies are committed: who are the more delighted, if we pray or
utter any verse of the scriptures, if we speak with our tongue though the
sense be without fruicte, yet the spirit does pray, 1. Cor. 14.
and so S. Paul says it to be a kind of mystery, that somtymes the spirit
which is within us does pray, and yet the sense has noe fruicte, and so he
said that the spirits does pray, which are the blessed Angels resident in us,
and are made joyful and refreshed by our prayers, though we do not ourselves
understand them: and not only the Angels, but God the Father, God the son,
and God the holy ghoast, according to S. John, ad eum veniemus and apud eum
mansionem faciemus: we will come unto him, and dwell with him: thus far
Origines, and much more touching this subject which were to long to repeat.

2. If a man ought not to pray or not to hear any thing in the Church which
he does not understand, you will take away from her the use of the psalms,
which none though never so learned can attain to the full understanding of
them in any known tongue whatsoever, yea our Lords prayer which we call the
Pater noster, though it be translated in to every language, how many shall you
find that cannot understand the same? For amoungest the common sort, one of
an hundred cannot comprehend the litterall meaning of it, much less the true
sense of these words; Give us this day our daily bread etc. which few
amoungest your cheyfest ministers, can expound; as also these other words. Et
ne inducas in tentationem, and lead us not into tentation. Wherein not three
amoungest you all, will agree in one and the self same exposition. So as if
you will never have any prayers in the Church, but what you understand, you
shall have but few or none at all.

3. Our devotion therefore does not consist in the understanding, but in the
will, if the will be furnished with charity, it skilleth not whether the
understanding be replenished with great science, or much knowledge. It is
charity, says S. Paul that does edify; but an heretic can never edify
though he have never so much knowledge, being the author of separation,
division and schism, since there is noe greater token of charity, then
unanimity. Quiae multitudo etc. Because the multitude of such as believe,
ought to be one heart and one soul, and so one languadge common to them all,
especially in the service of the church and administration of the sacraments:
for confusion of tounges, have hindered the work of the Tower of Babylon, and
before that confusion, there was but one languadge, and so before your heresy
and diversity of religion, the church of God was, terravnius labij sermonem
eorundem: of one lip, of one speech: and as there was but one God adored of
all, so there was but one faith embraced and professed by all, one
administration of the sacraments, and one order of ceremonies amoungest all;
There was unity of belief, without division of sects; simplicity, without
duplicitie; piety of religion, without impiety of heresy; one pastor, and
one flock the execrable and dreadful blasphemies and heresies of this wicked
age were not heard of all were called christians, and not Evangelists, nor
Apostles, nor Lutherans, nor Caluinistes, nor Hugonotts, nor Geues, nor
Adamitts, nor Anabaptists, nor Papists: children were obedient to their
Parents, the sheep did acknowledge their Pastors; the lascivious and pratlinge
woman, was not a Mistres of the scriptures; the pope was not called
antechriste: his authority was not called in question; The church was feared
and obeyed of her subjects, against which there was noe rebellion, or
insurrection of carnal, filthy, incestuous and abominable Apostates; men
were of honest and simple disposition, without contention or debate, touching
their religion, every one referringe himself to the catholic church, whose
faith and meritts was communicated and diffused to al her blessed members. They
had noe new gospel, but that which was dictated by the holy ghoaste, and
delivered by the Apostles to the Church, and which the Church proposed to the
faithful to believe. And now since they had diversity of tounges, they have
also had diversity of faith, and diversity of heresies.

4. But to answer more fully this objection, the catholic church does not
forbid any one to pray in any tongue he thinks good privately to himself,
although in the public and common service thereof, she would have the common
languadge to be practiced and observed, to prevent confusion of tounges, and
corruption both of words and sense. And as in the Church of God there is one
sacrifice, one order of ceremonies and administration of the sacraments, so
we have but one languadge common to all church men. For if you go to Spain or
America, or to any other co^try, you shall have the common languadge by which
you may understand them, and they you. Otherwise if in one church there were
forty different languadges, you must have forty portuses and forty
Masse-bookes, and so in the like case we must have infinitt books and
portuses and infinite Masse-bookes which cannot be without great inconvenience,
and I pray you which way can an Irish man say Mass or mattens, who has no
printe in his Country to printe those books in Irishe? I am sure the
protestant printer at Dublin would not printe Masse-bookes in the Irish tongue,
or if the Irishe or English had gone to Spain or other Countries, he could
never say or hear Mass and exercise the rites of his religion, if it could
not be don but in his own languadge. Therefore blessed is that order that
takes away this disordered confusion and inconvenience of these sond
heretics.

5. As for private prayers, you should not charge her, for her blessed doctors
in all ages have replenished the world with infinite books of prayers, of
devotion and piety in all languadges, which have wrought such marvelous
effects and strange conuersions of notorious sinners, such contempt of wordlie
honor, such despisinge of all wordlie vanity, such heroical resolutions in
men's hearts, such collections for releeuinge the poor and the distressed, and
such an ardent love to our Savior, Creator, and Redeemer, as the like was
never brought to pass, nor never shall be by any of Luther or Caluines
followers. Who can be ignorant of the most godly prayers of S. Augustine and
all the fathers of the church? S. Gregory, S. Bernard, S. Fulgentius, S.
Thomas S. Bona^enture S. Anselme, and in our own age those of Dionis.
Carthusianus, Laurentius, ^urius, Stella and Loartes, translated into all
vulgar tounges, with infinite others which were to long to rehearse? But I
cannot pass with silence that most famous, renowned, reverend and religious
father Lewis de Granada, whose godly works of devotion and prayers, are
translated into several tounges. I never heard of any book of devotion or
religion, set forth by any of these sectaries, any way comparable unto his,
whose works and books serve only to overthrow devotion, piety, prayer, and
religion, I have seen many godly books violated and defiled by them: It is
strange then that you will pick out a certain languadge for prayers and yet
banishe away all kind of prayers, sauinge the wanton Psalms of Geneua,
corrupted by your false translation, wherein you pray to keep us from Pope,
Turcke, and Papistrie, yea I my self have seen a supplication exhibited to
the last Queen, and to the parleament house wherein it was auerred, that it
was not lawful for christians to say our Lords prayer. To conclude therefore,
devout prayers do proceed from the ardent love of God, which is diffused into
our souls by the holy ghoaste which is given unto us, and inwardly does dwell
and lodge in us, Romans 8.
by which we say and cry out Abba pater: our father, and by which we
prostrate our selves with our sighinge hearts and doleful groans before the
throne of the almighty God, and by which we enjoy his familiar and blessed
presence.

Whether the Church universal can be charged with errors, contrary to the
first institution of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. CHAPTER I.
1. THe church of Christ did never alter the matter and form of any of her
sacraments, much less of this, being the greatest of the rest, in which
Christ has showed his wonderful great love unto the church his only spouse,
in feedinge and sanctifiinge the souls of her children with his own precious
body and blood, that being fedd by Christ, she may be purified and cleansed
by him in that fearful and dreadful Host, which does exceed the capacity of
any earthly understanding. Of this wonderful love of Christ it was said by
Isaias, Quid est and. what is it that I ought to do unto my vineard, and have
not don it? meaning thereby, that in th^^ ^^^ament he manifested the bowels of
his charity, Isa 5. Chrysostom. homil 61. ad populum Antiochenu^.
and love toward his church, which love is magnified by S. John Chrysostom,
saying. Nam parents quidem alijs saepe filios tradent alendos etc. For
parents do often deliver their children to others to be nourished, but I do
not so, for I nourishe you with the flesh of my own body, and I putt my
self before you, giuinge you the same flesh and blood by which I was made
your brother. And as you take away Christ altogether from the sacrament,
denyinge it contrary to Christ's plain, certain and manifest truth to be his
body and blood, so you diminishe and extenuate gods love toward us, and our
affection, love, reverence, and devotion toward him, and take away both the
substance, matter, form, order, ceremonies, valor, estimation, respect and
reverence from so great, so dreadful, and so incomprehensible a Sacrament.

2. But the church of Christ does not take away any valor, or form from this
Sacrament, and she being instructed by the wisdom of gods spirit, and by
the instruction of Christ and his Apostles, according to time and place, for
gods just honor and greater reverence of the Sacrament, and the christians
most profitt and fruicte, Epist. 118. ad ^anuarium.
thereby disposes not of the form or substance of the (...) and observation in
receauinge the same which himself (said S. Augustine) did not comaund, that he
might comitt that to the Apostles, by whom he was to dispose the affairs of
his church, though both he and the Apostles at Emaus, and the fathers in the
primative church received under one kind, in giuinge the blood only to little
children, Luc. 24.25. Act. 2.20.7. Lib. de lap n. 10. Tertul li. ad vxo. nu. 4.
Euse. hist. eccles lib. 6. cap 36. Basil ep. ad Cass.
and in reseruinge most commonly the body only, as Tertulian does report,
in houselinge the sick therewith as Eusebius does affirm. This is known by
the holy Ermittes that received and reserved the body, and not the blood in
the wilderness, as S. Basil does witness. You ought therefore to consider, that
there is noe living flesh without the blood, and whosoever receaueth the
body, receaues the blood also. Yea Luther himself was of this faith, after
his reuolte from the Church; and for that the Christian people be now
increased, and many receaues often, and at once, so much wine cannot be
consecrated without eminent danger of sheddinge: as also when in many
countries under the North Pole they have not wine at all, it cannot be without
great charges to give every man wine, as much as should serve for consecration:
and besides it would be offensive to the poor, if they themselves should be
excluded from the chalice more then the rich. And therefore the Church in regard
of Christian charity, to take away all murmr and occasion of offense, has
ordained that all should abstain from the challice, when as well Christ is
received under one kind, as under both kinds, neither in the mean time is
Christ's institution violated; The priests therefore to whom it was commanded to
do that which Christ has done in his last supper, they do both consecrate
and offer, receive and take, noe otherwise then Christ himself has done, who
did consecrate and offer, receive and take, and has given unto them also to be
taken under both kinds, and this when the priest says Mass, and noe
otherwise, because he must expreslie, represent the passion of Christ, and the
separation of his blood from his body in the same, and so unto the priests
is said, do this in remembrance of me.

3. And although he said. Bibite ex hoe omnes. Drink you all of this, yet it
is manifest that in the house of Simon the Leaper, there were many others where
he consecrated this blessed hoaste, and yet only the twelve Apostles satte
down, whom he instituted new priests, for to consecrate this new
Sacrament. And although the Sacrament of Christ pertaynes to all, yet unto the
priests only pertaines the chalice. But the lay people and the Clergy also,
when they do not execute their function or say Mass themselves, are to
receive under one kind, being thereby noe less partakers of Christ his whole
person and grace, then if they received under both. For our Savior received
and consecrated two distinct matters of this sacrament, vid. bread and wine,
and has used two distinct forms therein, therefore every one of those kinds
having a distinct matter, and a distinct form, is a distinct Sacramte^,
especially they being consecrated in two distinct times, vid. at supper and
after supper, therefore the consecration of the body and distributio^ which for
some time went before the Chalice was a perfect work of God, for the worckes
of God are perfect and not defectuous: for after the consecration and
distribution of each of these kindas, he said. Do this in remembrance of me.
In which he declared an eeuident distinction of both these divine actions, for
these words were not uttered after both the kinds, but a part after each of
them, therefore these two acts are a part and separated when each of them have
their proper determination. For as the Civil Lawyers say. In cunctis actibus
and dispositionibus, eos articulos, quorum quilibet habet suam propriam
determinationem and clausulam conclu^entem, pro separatis esse habendos. In all
acts of pleadinges, of which every article has a distinct and proper
limitation by distinct clauses, we must consider of them, not in general,
but a part by themselves.

4. For Christ would by his distinct institution and distribution, give power
to his church to dispense or give, either the one kind, or the other,
according to her wisdom and discretion: whereupon. Bern. ser. in caena Domini.
S. Bernard says when our Savior arose from the table, he washed all the
disciples feet, afterward returning to the table, he ordained the sacrifice
of his body and blood, the bread a part, and afterward deliueringe the
blood a part. The same is also proved by Pope Julius the first, Iul. epist. ad
Episc. Aegipt. con. Brac. a. 3. 1. Cor. 10.
whose words were afterward related in the council of Brach: with sundry
other proofs which I could produce unto this purpose.

5. But you will urge against the church, the institution of Christ who did
institute this Sacrament under both kinds. I answer that Christ's example
does not bind us, but in those things wherein he intended to bind us, for in
many things which he did in that sacrament, he did not bind us, as it is
manifest, otherwise we should always celebrate in the top of a house as he
did, and after supper, and upon thursdaie, and amoungest noe more nor less
the^ twelve, and they twelve Apostles, and also a Judas amoungest them, and noe
wooman should communicate, for noe wooman was there, we ought also to take
the body, before the bread by benediction should be consecrated, as our Savior
did at that supper, unto which the church is not bound. And as in these
things we are not bound to imitate Christ, so that the laity should receive
under both kinds, they are not bound to follow the example of Christ, for as
the lawyers say, we must not judge by examples but by laws; As for the
priests representinge the person of Christ, unto whom the precepte is given,
Do this etc. they receive Christ under both kinds, and yet the greeks do
not use the Chalice in lent, and the latins upon good fridaye do receive
Christ under one kind.

6. I answer further that many things are instituted by Christ, which do
not bind us to accomplish them, as matrimony, holy orders, vows and
votaries, to say mass, virginity, and evangelical counsels are instituted
by Christ, and yet we are not obliged thereunto, for it is in every man's own
election to marry, to receive holy orders, to vow, to be a virgin: it was
also instituted of God that wine should be used for drink, and yet we are not
commanded to drink it: it was also appointed by God, that the first fruictes
of wine should be offered unto the priests for their drink, yet they were not
commanded to drink it. Truly you should follow Christ and imitate him, had
you been obedient to his church according to the example of himself, who did
submitt himself to his mother, the Sinagoge, and her precepts. For we must
understand, that such things as our Lord has ordained by himself, cannot be
altered in his Church, nor be dispensed withal, as the moral precepts, and
the articles of our faith, which are immutable, and such as pertain to the
substance of the sacraments: but such as are positive precepts, as the rites of
the sacraments not essentiallie pertaininge to the same which Christ himself
has not instituted, by occasion of time and place and other circumstancies,
the church being directed by the spirit of God, may alter them, because
herself has instituted them: as this observation of communicatinge either
under one or both kinds, and therefore it may be changed by the church.

7. The holy doctors have divided the church into three states of times, as
Nicolaus de Lussa Cardinal, Salmeron tractatis 34.
related by Alfonso Salmeron has observed. The first state of the church was
fervent: for the Christians in that golden world, were inflamed with an ardent
love and fervent charity to shedd their blood for Christ, and in this state,
Christ was delivered unto those faithful christians under both kinds, that
drincking the blood of our Lord, they should most cheerfully shedd their blood
for him, as S. Cyprian teaches in his Epistle to Cornelius, S. Cypri. epist.
ad Cornel.
and his Epistle to the Thybaritans. Neither did he altogether wish it should
be given to every one of the laytie, but in time of persecution to shedd their
blood for Christ. In the second state, the church was zealous, though not so
feruente, and so Christ was given unto the christians under one kind, that is
to say of bread, which was dipped in blood as may be gathered out of manny
fathers and counsels. In the third state the church was cold and luke warm,
and so was Christ given unto the laytie under one kind without dipping it into
the blood. This the church has done for good cause, being taught herein by
the holly ghoaste, which ever follows the church, whose authority is of the
same force now as it was then.

8. You urge the words of Christ saying. Matt. 26.
Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this. I answer that these words were
spoken and directed to the disciples that were present, and unto the priests
their successors when they should celebrate; unto whom also was said, do
this in remembrance of me; and therefore that glorious Martyr said; Roffensii.
quotiescunque etc. whensoever ye shall drink thereof etc. because that the
precepte of drinckinge is not so absolute as the precepte of eatinge his
body, unto which noe condition is added, therefore it is a precepte delivered
unto them with condition as, when they will drink of the Chalice, they should
do it and offer it in remembrance of him: for the words of the imparatiue
mood do not always include in them an intent of bindinge as under pain of
sin, for by them we pray: Miserere mei Deus, have mercy on us. Patientiam
habe in me, have patience with me; Sell all that thou haste and give it to the
poor, yett we are not bound to perform this precepte; Even so in these
words: Drink ye all of this etc. we are not bound to perform it, but
such as are priests when they consecrate, and therefore the three Evangelists
do declare, that our Lord did sit with the twelve Apostles, and not with other
disciples, and therefore none except the Apostles, and such as lawfully do
succeed them, have power to bless or to consecrate the Euchariste, as
Clemens, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and S. Bernarde, do affirm.

9. Likewise, when he gave power to remitte sin John 20. only the Apostles
were assembled: for as it is not the charge of every one to preach, to
baptize, or to feed, so it is not the office of every one to forgive sins,
or to consecrate the Euchariste, which only belonges to lawful priests, unto
whom by those words he gave power to consecrate, offer and dispense the
Eucharist; For the laytie by those words; do this in remembrance of me, have
no other authority, then that from the priests they should receive godly and
devoutly the Euchariste, after whatsoever forme^ it should please the church
to give them, either under one kind, or two kinds. Do this whenever you
shall drink in my remembrance, by which words, it is not absolutely commanded
to drink, but whenever you drink, that it should be done in his
remembrance, as it was done in times paste. In eatinge of the lamb, it was
simply commanded that every one should eat thereof, but to drink wine,
every one was not bound it the supper of the lamb. Otherwise the abstainer
which did abstain altogether from wine should grieuouslie sin, and should
not be so highly commended of God for abstaininge from wine. And in like
manner the Nazarits, should also offend for abstaininge from wine as they did.
For although man can live without wine, yet he cannot live without bread, even
so without the chalice a man may live spiritually, Hier. 35.
but without the blessed bread he cannot live spiritually, and so we say
always in the Pater noster, panem nostrum quotidianum, give us this day our
daily bread.

10. Adrianus the 4. did dispense with those of Norwaye to consecrate under one
kind, by reason of the scarcity of wine in that country, for so they should
perform the obligation of receiving this blessed Sacrament. This is also
confirmed unto us by the three famous and general counsels and assemblies of
the flower of all the best and learned men in the world, Conc. Co^st. sess.
13. Basil ss. 30 Trid. ss. 21
videlicet the council of Constance, Basil, and Trente with in the heart of
Germany, where this article of receauinge under one kind of the laity was
defined and decreede, and the sentence of Anathema was pronounced against all
those, that should hold the contrary. And whosoever will not obey these
general counsels assembled together by the virtue of the holy ghoast, whose
asistance was promised unto the church in such occasions, does injury not
only to the church but also unto that holy spirit: of these kind of people is
said, vos durae ceruicis spiritui sancto resistitis, you stiffnecked people,
you resist the holy ghoaste. None ought to prefer his private opinion before the
general definition of a general council.
Therefore the Emperor Marcianus after the definition and ordinances of the
council of Chalcedon, said he is a wicked and sacrilegious person that would
oppose his own private opinion against the authority of the whole church in
such a general assembly, and this is the cause that S. Aug. defended S.
Cyprian from heresy, for that it was not decreede by any general council,
that such as were baptized by heretics, should be rebaptized again as the
said S. Cyprian held, and because the Donatistes did persiste in this
doctrine, after the definition of the general council, they were condemned of
the church for heretics, as S. Aug. does testify; and therefore those
dogmatistes of our time, because they defend not only this doctrine, but also
many other perverse and damnable opinions not only against the definition of
these general counsels, but also against gods ordinances, ought to be
reputed for heretics.

11. S. Thomas does say, D. Thom. in 6. John. lect. 7.
that it was the custom of the church, for danger of sheddinge, that the
priest at the alter should receive under both kinds, the laytie under one
kind, for this said he is not against Christ's institution, for whosoever
receaues the body, receaues the blood also, because that Christ is under
both kinds, as well in respect of his body, as his blood. Exodus 16. Genes.
14.
For all sacrifices did appertain unto the priests, the Manna, the paschall
lamb was eaten of the people which were figures of this Sacrament, and they
were not commanded to drink after it. And although you urge that Melchisedec
did offer bread and wine in token of this Sacrament, I answer that he was a
priest, for so the scripture says. Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi, for he
was a priest of the high God. In our Lords prayer we ask our daily bread
without wine, Tertul. in orat. Dom. Ambr. l. 5 de sacra Hier. c. 6. Matt. homil
9. Aug. l. 50.
which petition many holy doctors do interpret to be mente of the Eucharist,
and when our Lord had fedd so many thowsands, there is noe mention made,
either of water or of wine, that feedinge being a figure or token of the holy
bread of the alter, by which the faithful Christians are relieved. For our
Lord makes mention of the Chalice but thrice, of the eatinge of the bread he
makes mention fifteen times, so as we may perceive that the church may use
both the kinds severally. Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum.

Theophil. in eadem verba. Aug. li. de consensu Euangeli c. 25. and ser. in
seria 2. illius diei. Beda lib Comment in Lucam. Petr. Damianus Card lib. de
diuinis officijs.
12. Christ also goinge to Emaus, sittinge at the table, did feed only the
twoe disciples with bread alone, and being perceived in the breakinge of the
bread, did vanish away, by which fraction or breakinge, many holy fathers did
understand the Euchariste: whereby we may gather, that the Euchariste, was
given unto the laytie under one kind upon easter day, that is to say to
Cleophas and to Luck, as many say. And although they were the disciples of
Christ, yet they were not priests. For at his last supper he did not say to
others then to the twelve Apostles these words; Do this in remembrance of me,
and unto those disciples that went to Emaus, he gave only the bread without
wine, and so vanished away.

Epistola Ephesios.
13. S. Ignatius made mention but of one kind to be given to the laytie.
Eruditi a paracleto etc. You being instructed of the holly ghoast, remaininge
in true obedience to the Bishops and priests which break the bread unto you
with due respect and perfect devotion, which is the medicine of mortality,
the only preservative of life against death by Jesus Christ; The blessed
Saint did not speak any thing of the Chalice, when the Pope goes in any
pilgrimadge or journey, he carries with him the blessed Sacrament but under
one kind. Hier. in Apolog. pro libris contra Iouinianu^
S. Hierom does report, that it was the custom of the faithful at Rome, to
have our Lords body at home in their houses, because they did not presume to
go to the church being let by conjugal society, which says he, I do
not commend or discommend. S. Ambrose also does report, Ambr in orat. funebrii
de obitu fratris sui Satyr.
that his brother carried with him this dreadful hoaste to sea, and having
suffered shipwreacke, did by virtue of this blessed Sacrament escape drowninge,
the blood he did not carry, being not so conueniente for carriadge. The
Christians did in time past use to carry with them the Sacrament under one
kind, least in their greatest danger of death, they should not be releued of
their greatest lively ^oode. S. Ambrose in the hour of his death, did receive
the blessed Sacrament of the Bishopp of Vercell under one kind, Paulinus in
vita eius.
as Paulinus does report. The like is also reported of S. Patronilla, S.
Hierome, S. Martyn, S. Benedict, S. Lucia, and S. Francis of whom the
histories make mention, that in the time of their death they did communicate
under one kind Amphilogius wrote, that when S. Basil did celebrate in the
church, a Jew went to gaze and to behoulde the christians as they received the
blessed host, In vita S. Basil.
he joining himself with them, saw an infant diuidinge the host in the
hands of S. Basil, and so came to all the communicantes, as also to the said
Jew, which when he received, the blessed bread was forthwith turned into
fleash, and being astonished at this miracle, he himself with his wife and
children, were made Christians.

14. Euagrius a greek historiographer, and Nichephorus do deliver unto us,
that it was the aunciente custom in the church of Constantinople, to give unto
children such as went to school, the relickes and fragments of the blessed
hoaste, if any were left after the comunicantes, but it were great absurdity
to give the relickes of the chalice unto them, their tender age and weak
disposition being not capable thereof: so it should be a great indecencie so
keep the same, being in a short time subject to corruption. With these
children upon a certain day, went a boy the son of a glass-maker, who
being asked of his father, what he did with the children of the christians, he
toulde him that he received the christian food, his father being enraged and
enflamed with extreme fury, cast the child into a burninge furnace, where he
was accustomed to make his glasses, wherein he continued 3, days, his mother
searchinge him in all places, and at lenght she cominge toward the furnace,
and calling the child aloud by his name, the child answered, and openinge
the mouth of the oven, found him in the midst of the fire, having received
noe harm from the flame thereof: and askinge the child how he was preserved
harmless, he answered that a woman clothed with purple, came often to him,
and did often power water upon him, and did extinguish the coals, and gave
unto him meat, which being told unto Justinian the Emperor, he put the
Father of the child to death as being convinced of the murder of the child:
this history is related amoungest the latynes by Gregory Turonensis. Gregor.
in opere plurimorum mart edito de miraculis beatae Mariae. Guliel. in vita S.
Bernardi.


15. Gulielmus Abbas does relate, that a certain stubborn, and disobedient
Moncke once receiving the blessed hoaste at the hands of S. Bernard, could
never let it down, and consideringe with him self that he was wilful and
not obedient to S. Bernarde, he went unto him, and told him what had happened,
and being absolved and penitente of his contimacie, presently he swallowed
the blessed hoaste. Hallens in 4. part. summae.
Alexander Hallensis did observe how certain religious pesones demaundinge
that both kinds should be given unto them, the priest saying Mass at the
breakinge of the hoaste, he saw the patene all e^brewed with blood. None that
is acquainted with the lives and monumentes of Saints can be ignorante, but
that oftentimes this mystical Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ
has, both to resolve the doubtful, and to strenghten our love and devotion in
Christ, appeared in a visible form of a lamb, or a child, yea and in the
color of flesh and blood, that it which was invisible by mystery, should be
visible and made manifest by miracle. The sixth general council did describe
the manner of communicatinge to the laytie which with their hands did receive
the Euchariste from the priest, afterward in the time of Balsamon Archbishopp
of Antioch, which did coment upon those cannons, that were prohibited.

Sermon. 42. de tempore hom 10.
16. S. Augustine also willed the men, when they came to receive, that they
should wash their hands and that women should bring white and cleene lynnen
with them that they may receive the body of Christ, and even as men should
wash their hands, so they should wash their consciences with Almesdeedes,
and as women should prepare fine white lynnen cloth when they receive Christ's
body, so they should prepare also a chaste body, clean thoughts, and a
contrite heart, that with a good conscience they may receive the Sacraments of
Christ: thus far S. Augustine, who shows that in this time weome^ received
the blessed hoaste in fine lynnen cloathe. Again the said sixth council did
institute, that the piestes in lent only should celebrate upon Saterdaie, and
Sundaie, and the Anunciation of the blessed Virgin, on other days they should
use hoastes already consecrated, as it is don in the latin church every good
fridaie, which Rabanus affirms to have been the custom more then seven
hundred years agone, for that says he, to consecrate is more befittinge times
of solemnity, joy and gladness, then in time of sorrow and sadness as the
lent is. And when the Gretia^s did use the hoasts already consecrated, and
that wine could not be so much reserved without it were sower or corrupted,
it is a sign they did receive then under one kind, as the latin priests do
upon good fridaie without any reprehension therein: Rodolpnus the Abbott of S.
Trudon who did florishe in the time of Henry the 4. Emperor, Trith. lib. de
eccles. histor.
and a most religious Father as Trithemius wittnesseth, does yeald reason
wherefore the laytie ought not to receive under both kinds by these words. Hic
and ibi cautela fiat ne praesbiter aegris
Aut sanis tribuat laicis de sanguine Christi,
Nam fundi posset leuiter, simplexque putaret,
Quod non sub specie sit JESUS totus vtraque.
The priest ought to be wary that he give not of the blood of Christ, either
to the sick or sound laity, for it may upon light occasion be shedd, or the
simple may thinck that Christ is not under either of both kinds a part.

17. But you will ask, when was it first instituted in the Church that the
laytie should receive under one kind. I answer we can find noe beginning
thereof, nor any constitution, but the council of Constance and Basil do
condemn all such as find fault with this manner of receauinge, or should
change that custom, and do also decree that this was an old custom of the
Church: and when we can show noe beginning hereof out of Ecclesiastical
histories, Aug epist. 218. cap. 6. tom. 2.
it is a great sign (according to the rule of S. Augustine) that it was
allowed of Christ and his Apostles, and that Christ left power to his church
to dispose of this matter, according as she should think it most fit for
places and times, being induced by many sundry reasons to communicate the
laytie under one kind, as I have said already, and now I allege others.
For first if it were not so, manny truly were deprived of this benefitt, for
that many Northeren countries have noe wine, and although the rich may have it,
yet every poor cannot have it, yea many there are, that did never drink
wine, and if they should drink thereof, they should vomitte: therefore since
the yoke of our Savior is sweet, we must not think that he will compel
any to that which he cannot perform. The second reason is, for besides Christ
which is as well under one as under both, there is not in the other kind but an
accident without a subject, as is apparente by the council of Constance and
Basil. The third reason is, 6. Conc. cano. 52.
that it was lawful for the priest as well in the greek church that did
receive in lent under one kind, as the sixth council does manifest, as also
in the latin church, for the priest that receaues it under one kind upon good
fridaie. The 4. reason that Christ is as well under one kind as under both
kinds, and he that receaues it in that manner, receaueth as much fruit, as if
he had received under both.

18. You urge against this custom of the church, Unless you eat his fleash
and drink his blood we shall have noe life in you. I answer that the
conjunction, and, is taken disiunctiuely, as if Christ had said unless ye
eat my fleash or drink my blood etc. and so S. Paul says these words,
quicunque etc. 1. Cor. 11.
whosoever will eat the bread, or drink the Chalice of our Lord
unworthily, did use the words disiunctiuelie not copulatiuelie, in which
place S. Ambrose did read, aut, that is to say, or, in the Greek, H. which is
a disjunctive particle, and a disjunctive commandment is fulfilled, if one
part be performed as it is said in Exodus, Exodus 15.
he that kills his father and mother let him die the death, for the sense
is, he that kills his father or mother shall die, because the one was
sufficient. Also in the acts, Cap. 3.
S. Peter being demanded alms, answered that he had not silver and goulde,
that is not silver nor goulde, else he had not answered sufficiently, silver
only suffisinge to give alms. And although we should grant that Christ did
give a precepte to the laytie to receive Christ under both kinds, yet the
laytie do as well receive both under one kind, as under two, for he receaueth
flesh and blood in the one and in the other. For although by effect and force
of the words and sacramental form, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body,
Christ's body is there, yet his blood, soul, and divinity are also there, by
due consequence and concomitance, all these being inseparable since his
resurrection united in Christ's person; and so under the form of bread, the
laytie receive Christ's blood with the body, though not in form of drink or
drinckinge, but eatinge, Cypr. ser de caena Dom. and epist. 3.
for which cause S. Cyprian called it, eatinge of Christ's blood.

19. This is also proved a posteriori, by the marvelous effect and euente of
receauinge under one kind in the combustion and miserable troubles of the last
wars in France, procured by Calvin and Beza, and other firebrandes their
followers, that rushed out of hell for destruction of their country. Calvin
sendinge a Minister of his called North unto Rochell, who having corrupted
with his poisoned heresy the Mayor of that town, with many of the cheifest,
did surprise it, and his last attempt was to seize upon the poor catholic
clergy, which being gathered together into a church, and expectinge nothing
else then to fall into the cruel hands of this diuilish minister; the Abbott
of S. Bartholomew which was the cheifest and the learned of that clergy
being in number 24. took a loaf of bread and did use the words of
consecration applyinge it to the bread (for he durst not have the blessed
Sacrament in the pixe according to the custom of the church, least those
damned and impious crewe should cast it to their dogs, as they hade done in
other churches in France) and every one of that heavy clergy did receive.
Domini vic ticum, which before the receauinge thereof, were both frail in
faith, and fearful of death, and ready to make shippwreacke of their
profession and religion, as I was told by men of good creditt in that town,
but after the consumation thereof, they were so firm and so constante, that
every one of those 24. except one, did endure a most cruel and vilde death,
which is known to all both catholics and heretics at Rochell, to wit, that
every one of them with a stone about his neck, was cast down headlonge out
of the highest pinnacle of the high tower in the entry of the keaye of
Rochell into the sea, with men in Boats ready to knock them down into the
bottom of the sea, if perhaps any of them should swim upon the water.

20. The virtuous Queen both of France and Scotland Marie Steward the Kings
mother, had the blessed Sacrament reserved in a little pixe, which she her
self received a little before her execution, by which noe doubt she
constantly and most patiently did endure such a violente death, as is known
to the world. We know that the use of the Chalice did succeed ill unto all
those kingdoms and regions that observed the same, The woeful lot of
sectaries.
for in the east, besides that they were infected with sundry errors, and
heresies, they are plunged into the yoke of the miserablest captivity that
ever was, under that damnable tyrant the enemy both of God and man. In the
countries of the weast also, they which do and did observe that custom, are
not only now overwhelmed and ingulfed in all pernicious and blasphemous
heresies, but also intoxicated with hatred, itched with ambition, confounded
with tumultuous in surrections, and turbulent rebellious, wearied with bloody
and cruel wars and defiled with all impudicitie of beastly concupiscence,
and corrupted with all exercise of extortion and injustice: and besides, their
labors are without fruit, their souls without conscience, their lives
without honesty, and their conversation without shame, they are become plain
A^histes, worse then either Jew, Turcke, or Gentile.

21. And in all those countries of the east and weast, where now this wicked
heresy infecteth, worse then either the poison of vipers, or the corrupt air
of Basilisks, the people, especially the nobility were divided into factions
and hatred, every one employinge his best time and his greatest skill to be
revenged upon his competitors, and therefore did embrace this heresy, not for
gods sake, but for a revenge whereby he might satisfy his unlawful ambition,
and filthy desires, for as the wiseman says. Anima callida quasi ignis
ardens non extinguetur, donec aliquid deglutiat. A turbulent mind is like a
burninge flame of fire, which shall hardly be extinguished until he shall
devour and consume somewhat. And the Princes that favor these heresies, are
so miscarried, and misled with this insatiable thirst both of ambition
leacherie, and covetousness although they pretend religion herein, that they
shall never be satisfied, nor their thirst shall be extinguished, though all the
Chalices in the world had been given unto them. It was granted by the council
of Basil, the use of the chalice to the kingdom of Bohemia, and the same
permitted unto them by Paulus 3. and by his 3. Legates, that he did send to
Germany, as also by Charles the fifte, this grant did them no good, but
rather did much harm, for in a little time there grew four sects of
heresies in that kingdom, as the Thaborites, Adamites, Howelites, and Orphans,
so as Pius the 2. was feign to revoke the grant that was given them by the
council, and truly we must not expecte great fruit now if it were
granted, for our clergy men are noe better then those that went before,
neither seculer Princes more virtuous or more just then their predecessors,
neither are heretics more humble or more honest for having the use of it.

Theoph in cap. prioris ad Corinth.
22. You urge against us out of Theophilactus in cap. prioris; Tremendus hic
calix cunctis pari ratione est traditus, this dreadful chalice is given to all
after one fashion. I answer that his meaning was to tell, how it was all a
like to the twelve Apostles, yea to Judas himself, yea it may be given also to
others, but Christ did not forbidd those to whom he committed the government of
his church to deny it also to other some, as it is said in the scripture,
Genes. 9.
that God has given all cattle and beasts to the use of man, yet by that
grant or donation, he has not forbidden the superiors for disciplines sake
to forbid their subjects in certain times, the use of certain meattes, as God
in his law by special commandment did forbidd the children of Israel all
unclean beasts, and such that were strangled, which nevertheless the church
now does teach and preach, not that herein she does against Gods law or his
precepte, but that being taught by the holy ghoast, she does interpret gods
meaning in the law; For the positive law of the church, is nothing else then
a certain prescription of gods law, and a certain determination of that
which is given in common. God almighty commanded us in general to pray, to
do pennaunce to receive the Eucharist, but the church according to her wisdom
and discretion, respectinge rather the intent of the lawe-giuer, then the law
it self, did prescribe both the time and manner wherein and by which, we
ought both to receive the blessed Sacrament, and to do penance and pray, for
the vulgar sort yea, and men of great learning and science, unless they had
been endued with great charity, without these particular determinations, and
comaundements of the Church, would not keep these general comaundements.
Luther says, Luth. in lib. de formula missa lib. de Co^fessione part 3. para.
14.
that the had noe other cause or any sufficient motive to give the Chalice to
the laytie, but that the church and the fathers did comaund the contrary. And
in another place he dissuaded Christians from confession, and from the
Euchariste in time of easter, because that the Pope commanded it. I will not
obey his commandment, says he, I will do it, says he, another time,
according to mine own pleasure, but not according to his precepte. But
Luther and all his malicious and turbulent followers, ought to embrace the
counsel that the Angel gave to Agar, the woman seruante. Genes. 16.
Reuertere ad domum tuam and humiliare suv^ manu illius: return to thy house,
and humble thie self under her power. This was spoken litterallie of Agar,
that she should obey Sara and return to her house: which is allegorically
spoken of the church, understood by Sara, and of the congregation of
heretics meante by Agar, as S. Augustine does teach us.

Whether the Catholic Church does add to this Sacrament, in making it both
a sacrifice, and a Sacrament. CHAPTER II.
Cypr. epist. 66. Chrysostom. hom. 11. Damasc. sermon. de cana.
1. IN Answer, that the Catholic church does add nothing, nor inuente any
sacrifice, but that which Christ instituted for a Sacrament, which is our
spiritual food, and may be said to be our daily bread, as also the great
sacrifice of the new testamente, and so Christ is said to be offered for us
two manner of ways videlicet bloodilie, and vnbloodilie. In the first manner,
he offered himself for us in ara crucis, upon the alter of the cross, which
oblation the paschall la^be without spott, which was offered by the Jews, did
signify. In the second, Cyrill. ad Hebr. 9. Hier. cap. 9. ad Titum.
he offered himself in his last supper, and now his priests do offer him upon
the alter for the quick and for the dead, that according to S. Cyrill the
oblation of Melchisedech, who did offer bread and wine, should be accomplished,
and that he should remain a true priest according the order of Melchisedech,
and that his priest hoode which is according to his humanity, and not
according to his divinity, might endure for ever. So as the Eucharist
amongst other Sacraments of the old testamente, has this privilege, How the
Eucharist is a sacrifice and a Sacrament.
and prerogative, that it is a Sacrament, when it is received by the
faithful; and a sacrifice in as much as it is daily offered for our offenses to
the eternal father. And although every sacrifice be a Sacrament, because it
is a sacred thing religiously instituted, to sanctify our souls,
notwithsta^dinge every Sacrament is not a sacrifice, because it is not offered
unto God unto whom sacrifice is offered, and a Sacrament is ordained for men.
So as the Eucharist is of greater value and virtue as it is a sacrifice, then
as it is a Sacrament, as Ioannes Roffensis says, in his articles against
Luther, and upon this place related by Alfonso Salmeron. Salmer. tracta. 16. in
Ioanne^.
That the Eucharist is a sacrifice of the new law, it is proved most
abou^dantlie both by scriptures, fathers, and by counsels.

2. The first is by Malachias the prophett, who did prophecy of this sacrifice
after this manner. Mal. c. 1. Psalm. 112.
Non est mihi voluntas in vobis etc. I have noe likinge of you, and I will not
receive a gift from your hand, ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum etc. from the
risinge of the sun unto the goinge down thereof; magnum est nomen meum in
gentibus, and in omni loco sacrificatur and offertur nomini meo oblatio mu^da:
quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus: my name is great amoungest the
gentiles, and in all places they do sacrifice and offer unto my name; a clean
oblation. This said the Lord of hoasts, he said that his name should be great
amoungest the gentiles, of whom this oblation should be offered, for before the
gospel of Christ was preached unto them, noe oblation of theirs was lawful,
neither the oblatio^ of the Jews was clean it self, but according to the
faith and devotion of him that did offer the same: besides they could not offer
but at Jerusalem only, and consequently, it was not in all places of the
world, as it is mente here from the east to the weaste. Neither can it be
meant of a spiritual sacrifice, either of prayers, faith, mercy, or a
contrite heart, which in scriptures are called sacrifice, as the Augustane
Apology does interpret, for many reasons, because that all these be not one
sacrifice, but many sacrifices, as also because they do not scceede the old
sacrifices, for in the old testament, there was use of those kind of
sacrifices as with us, and moreover because they were not properly called
sacrifices, but metaphoricallie, neither are they offered in all places,
because they be spiritual things, which needs noe place. And much less are
they understood of the preachinge of the gospel, as Bucerus writing to
Latonius does interpret, because preachinge is not properly called a
sacrifice, neither succeeds it the old sacrifices. Neither the conversion of
the gentiles, by the preachinge of the gospel is this sacrifice, as
Aecolampadius does expound unto the Senate of Basil, for this is called an
improper sacrifice, neither one sacrifice, but many according to so many
nations converted: whereas this sacrifice o^ght to be one only sacrifice in
number and not in form. Neither shall it be always, but for a time, for when
the nations shall be converted: Omnis Israel saluus fie^. All Israel shall be
saved, as the Apostle does witness. Neither last of all was it spoken of
Christ on the Cross, a Kemnitius would have it, for that was not always, it
remaining but the space of an hour, neither in all places, but in Mount
Caluarie, neither was it offered properly of the gentiles. Psalm. 75.
Quia notus erat in judea Dominus, because God was known in Judea, and in
Israel his name was great.

3 We must therefore understand, that this prophecy is understood of the
oblatio^ of Christ in the Eucharist, and that it shall be always celebrated in
the church of Christ, from the east to the weaste, as it is (God be thancked)
in despite of the diuill and all his instruments. This is proved by the
litterall sense of the text of Malachias his prophecy, and by the tradition
of the fathers, which is the certain key of the understanding of the
scriptures. For so Clement. Clement. l. 7. Constable. Apost. D. Martial. epist. ad
^urdigalensis. Just. Martyr Dialogo in tripho. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 23. Tract. 27.
Martialis. Justinius Martyr. Ireneus. Tertul. lib. in Iudeos c. 16. Eusebius. lib.
1. de demonstratione Euangelica cap. 10. Cyrillus lib. 1. de adoratione in
spiritu and veritate. Damascenus lib. 4. c. 14. Aug. lib. 18. de Ciuitate Dei
cap. 20. and 35. Hieronymus. Theodoret. Remigius Haymon; Rupertus and Lyranus
in their Comment. upon Malach. and Council. Trid. sess. 22. interpret: We must
consider, that the word sacrifice in the Hebrewe tongue as Salmeron does set
down, is called zebeach; which is properly called a bloody sacrifice, and in
the place of an oblation is putt in the hebrewe tongue mincha, which was
properly meat, or a gift unbloody. Therefore for all the sacrifices of the old
law, whether they be bloody or unbloody, our Lord by his prophett said.
Corpus autem aptasti mihi, thou haste made my body befittinge all of them.
This unbloody hoaste is so clean and pure in itself and so acceptable unto
God, as by the wicked life of him that does administer the same, it cannot be
defiled. And although in the prophecy it is said in the present tense, yet for
the certitude and vndoubtfullnesse of the prophecy, the time present is used
for the time to come. Offeretur and sacrificabitur, it is sacrificed, for it
shall be sacrificed, ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum etc. from sun risinge unto
sun set, my name shall be great amoungest the Gentiles.

4. By this word therefore we must note and marcke, the amplitude and largnes
of the church, against the narrow straight of the Jews, and the small corners
of the heretics, which by their offenses and heresies are utterly deprived
of this host, and sacrifice. The catholic church does celebrate and
solemnize the sacred praises of God, in which this prophecy is accomplished,
by the benefitt she daily receaueth by this sacrifice, by which she is daily
fedd, and by which she offers herself withal her forces, unto this living
God, singinge praises unto him. Yealdinge and consecratinge herself in all
humility of spirit, in all perfect devotion of faith hope and charity, to
the glory of the great God, unto whom, and to none else, this great sacrifice
is offered, for which Sacrifice, Churches, Alters, Chapples and Conuents were
builded, Priests, Deacons, and Levites, and so many blessed orders of clergy
men were instituted, for which causes so many benefices, personages,
vicariadges, Cannonries, Prebendes, Tithes, profittes, stipendes, revenues,
lands and liuinges, for the honest maintenance of such as should offer this
sacrifice, were lawfully and charitably bestowed, by the godly and devout
christians.

5. But you say that the papists herein did rob both this great God of his
honor, by comittinge idolatry against his majesty, and also the christians
of their lands and goods, inuentinge this sacrifice, as you say, against
God, for to deceive the godly people of their goods. I desire you if the
Papists did deceive the people herein, why should not you make restitution to
the right owners of those lands? for if you take any thing from a thief, by
all laws both civil and cannon, you ought to restore it again to the true
owner, and as you say you restore to God his own honor by taking away this
Sacrament, why should not you restore also unto the christians their tithes and
liuinges given in times paste for priests, principally to offer this
sacrifice, by which the name of God has been most glorious amoungest the
nations? But as God is not the more glorified by your doings, so your
neighbor is not the more edified by your examples, and until you restore to
God his sacrifice, you will never restore or make any restitution to the
Christians of their goods. Plutar.
But you follow C^natho and Philoxenus who being slaves of their bellies, to
have all the bankett and feast to themselves, were wont to spitt and blow
their noses into the dishes, that others should not eat thereof: so you spit
upon the Mass for the which those church liuinges principally were given,
and therefore you charge priests with covetousness, and other enormities, that
you your selves may possess freely their spoils and goods, and abuse them as
you do with excessive riotousnes: you bark also against the fast of the Church
and the continente life of clergy men, that you may mispend those liuinges by
satisfying your filthy appetites, which cannot be satisfied. You know, or at
least you should know, that those who will not serve at the alter, ought not
to live by the alter, and if you refuse this office, in thinckinge it to be
impious and idolatrous, you should also refuse the reward and promotion of
idolatry and impiety, as those liuinges which were consecrated to the alter,
by the last testament of the testators; for Beneuolus, for that he would not
conform himself to Iustina the Empress, against S. Ambrose being defiled
with the Arrian impiety, restored unto her all the ensigns and titles of
honor he had of her, Lib. 7. cap. 13.
as Zozomenus writes.

6. The second place to prove the truth of this Sacrament, is taken out of the
Psalm. Iurauit Dominus and non penitebit eum, tu es sacerdos in aeternum
secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Our Lord has sworn, and he will not repent
himself thereof; thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of
Melchisedech; for that this priest-hoode shall never be taken from him. For not
only in his last supper did he offer himself, but also on the Cross, and
also by his priests by whom he shall be offered unto the worlds end, as
Aecumenus, Aecumen. cap. 5. Cyp. epist. ad Caeci. Damasc. in 4. lib. de fide
orthodoxa.
D. Cyprianus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, Eusebius, Epiphanius,
Arnobius, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, Theodoretus, Theophilactus,
Damascenus: and others affirm. For Christ offeringe himself unto his Father
now in heaven, and before upon the Cross, cannot be said, that he is a
priest according the order of Melchisedec, but rather according to that of
Arron. as S. Thomas teaches when he did offer himself in a bloody fashion upon
the Cross, whose oblation was but once, and not forever as S. Paul says:
for besides that Christ instituted a church, and ordained sacraments, he
offered two sacrifices, the one on the cross, the other at his last supper,
both of them but one sacrifice in substance, yet differ in form and manner: by
that of the cross, Christ was a priest, but not an eternal priest, nor
according to Melchisedech, because that was once only offered, and being
bloody, resembles not the unbloody sacrifice of Melchisedech: but by that he
offered at his last supper, for he by his priests offeringe still that
sacrifice in the Mass, is a priest according to Melchisedech, whose sacrifice
consisted of bread and wine. And therefore even as according to S. Paul,
Melchisedech was a figure of Christ according to his priest-hoode, so was he
a figure according to his sacrifice, for sacrifice and priest-hoode have a
special connection and relation one with an other, but his order can not be
said to be in a bloody manner. For we do not read that ever Melchisedech did
offer any bloody sacrifice, therefore this order must needs consist in an
oblation of an vnbloodlie sacrifice. And although we should grant that he
offered himself according to both, the oblation according the order of
Melchisedech, and the oblation of the cross, yet the sense of the oblation of
the cross, ought not to take away the sense of the oblation of the other.

7. The third place to prove that it is a sacrifice, is by the institution of
the Euchariste: for when he made an end of the supper of the lamb, that was
to be sacrificed, it is said our Lord took bread (for this was the manner that
the priest did use in sacrifice) and having lifted up his eyes, as if he
would offer up to his father that holy bread, into which as Hierem. says,
the Jews did cast their wodde: Hier. 2.
and as the Mass or Liturgy of the Greeks has. Liturg. graecor. in missa D.
Iacobi.
Accipiens panem in sanctas immaculatas manus etc. Taking the bread into his
holy, unspotted, innocente, immortal hands, liftinge up his eyes, and
shewinge unto you God the Father etc. And in the Mass, both of the Latins and
Greeks it is said. Gratias agens, giuinge thanks for the redemption of the
world, offeringe therefore unto his father a sacrifice of thanks giuinge
benedixit, he blessed, neither did he sooner offer, then he consecrated, and
consecratinge he offered himself willinge to be sacrificed. He said also,
accipite etc. Matt. 26. Luc. 22. 2. Cor. 11.
Take and eat, this is my body, whereto S. Luke does add. Quod pro vobis
datur, which is given for you, or which is broken for you, as S. Paul has.
Quod pro vobis offertur, as S. Augustine does interpret; and also it is said
of the blood in the present tense of the four Evangelists. Funditur, not
because that presently out of hand he should be offered upon the cross
taking the time present, for the time to come, but at this instante he offered
himself in that heavenly mystery unto his father, for dare, frangere,
tradere, fundere and facere, are words belonginge unto a sacrifice, for it is
said, John. 3.
that God loved the world that he should give his only begotten son, vid. in
sacrifice for us, he did not spare his only son, sed tradidit, but he
delivered him for us. Romans 8.
Moreover he was a priest according to the order of Melchisedech, therefore he
was to offer in bread and wine as he did.

8. Again he said, I desire to eat this Pasche with you, for Pasche is a
sacrifice: and as every man is a living creature, so every Pasche is a
sacrifice, which is confirmed, in the 6 of S. John: Argumentu^ a specie ad
genus affirmatiuum valet. John. 6.
the bread that I shall give, is my fleash for the life of the world, therefore
the bread given in the supper, does contain the fleash given for the life of
the world upon the cross for sacrifice, so that neither in the supper, nor
upon the cross, was it a sacrifice, or else in both it was a sacrifice, for
the word given, was repeted twice. And although it should be once repeted, yet
it has the force of a sacrifice. Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi
vita, the bread that I shall give is my fleash, for the life of the world. For
the Eucharist in as much as it is a Sacrament, profits only him that receaues
it, but forasmuch as it is a sacrifice, it is the soul of the church, and the
life of the world, therefore the bread given by Christ and containinge his
fleashe, necessarily was immolated and sacrificed, and also offered unto his
Father. Moreover our Lord said when he delivered this bread. Rupert. D. Thom.
Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
Do this in remembrance of me, by which words he showed the nature of a
sacrifice saying, as it were: hitherto you have offered the figurative, and
Paschall lamb, now I do not take away the oblation of a sacrifice, but I do
transfer and change the same unto a more worthy oblation of offeringe my body
and blood. Therefore Pope Leo says, let the shadow give place to the body,
let Images give place to the true pattern. Antiqua obseruatio nouo tollitur
Sacramento: let the old custom give place to the new sacrament, hostia in
hostiam transit, sanguis sanguinem excludit, and legalis festiuitas vt mutatur,
expletur. Let one hoaste pass unto another, one blood does expel another,
the accomplishinge of the legal festiuitie, does importe a change thereof.

9. This is the cause that Christ that night did offer thrice: first in a pure
figure: secondly he offered his body and blood under both kinds of bread and
wine, which was both the thing it self and a figure; last of all he offered
himself (being the thing it self) unto death when he went unto the place
where he was taken. This is declared in the form of the cannon of the Mass
which S. Ambr. used in the church of Milla^ vid. S. Ambr. Mass.
Qui sacrificij perennis formam instituens, primus omnium hostiam Deo obtulit,
and primus omnium illam docuit offerri, who institutinge the form of the
everlasting sacrifice, as the first of all that offered an host unto God, and
the first that taught the same to offered. The mass of Aethiopia.
The Church of Aethiopia has these words in the Canon of the Mass related
here by Salmeron which he has seen in printe. Salmeron tract. 27.
Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Nunc autem recordamur mortis tuae, and
resurrectionis tuae tibique gratias quod per hoc sacrificium dignos nos fecisti
standi in conspectu tuo. Do this in remembrance of me, now we being mindful
of thy death, and of thy resurrection, we give thee thancks for that thou
voutsafest that we stand in thie presence. Clemens. Romanus l. 8. constable. cap.
vlt. Hebr. 5.
The constitution of the Apostles has these words. Primus igitur natura
pontifex est vnigenitus Christus, qui non sibi honorem arripuit, sed
constitutus a patre etc. The first Bishopp by nature, is the only begotten
Christ, which did not arrogate unto him self honor or renown, but being
appointed of the Father, which for our sakes became man, and offeringe unto God
a spiritual sacrifice, and unto his Father, before his passion he commands
us only to do this.

10. Moreover our Lord by the word (sacite) do this, comau^ded that they
should consecrate and offer, take, receive, and dispense to others etc. Exodus
13. Leuit. 15.
For in the holy scripture, the word facere, is taken for sacrificare vid. to
sacrifice as, facietis and hircum pro peccato, you shall sacrifice a goat for
sin, also Numer. 6. facietque sacerdos vnum pro peccato, and the priest shall
offer one for sin: for not without cause did our Savior use the specificall
word of offringe, consecratinge, receauinge, or distributinge, for he did use
the general word comprehending under it self all these specificall. S. James
the Apostle in his Mass has these words. S. James his Mass.
Offerrimus tibi Domine hoc sacrificium verendum and incruentum, orantes ne
secundum peccata nostra nobiscum agas, neque secundum iniquitates nostras
retribuas nobis etc. We offer unto thee o Lord, this fearful and unbloody
sacrifice, neither deal with us according to our sins, neither give unto us
according to our iniquities. The Mass or Liturgy of S. Basil. has these
words. S. Basil his Mass.
Suscipe nos Domine appropinquantes sancto altari tuo etc. Receive us o Lord
approachinge unto thy holy alter according to the multitude of thy mercy,
that we may be worthy to offer unto thee, that reasonable sacrifice without
blood for our offenses, and the ignorance of the people, and to the intent
that this sacrifice may be acceptable unto thy holy supper celestial, and
intelligible alter in odor of sweetness, cast forth upon us the grace and
favor of the holy ghoast. The Mass of S. John Chrysostom has these words.
S. John. his Mass.
Pontifex nostrum extitisti, and misteriae huius ac incruentis hostiae
sacramentum, nobis tradidisti. Hebr. 7.
Thou being our Bishopp thou have delivered unto us the Sacrament of this
mystical and unbloody hoaste. S. Paul also does argue that priest hoode
being translated, it is necessary that a translation of the law be also
made, because that the law and priesthood were ordained together, and
whosoever will take away the one, takes away the other; for priest-hoode has
greater connection and relation to the sacrifice, then to the law, because that
priest-hoode is ordained for to offer sacrifice, and sacrifice can not be
offered but of a lawful priest.

11. Again the old priest-hoode was external and was instituted to offer
external sacrifice, neither is it properly translated into a spiritual
priest-hoode, for any thing that was either in the law of Moses, or of
nature, written or set down, was common to offer it spiritually, as to offer
spiritual hosts of praises and prayers, and such like: therefore it was
translated into the external sacrifice of the Euchariste, for the oblation for
the which priests were instituted and ordained, for to offer any spiritual
oblatio^ whatsoever, the laytie were as fit as the P^iests: and as the
priest-hoode of the old law was translated into the priest-hoode of the law of
grace, so their sensible sacrifice into the sensible sacrifice of the
Eucharist, which only does fulfill and accomplish all the prophesies and
figures of the old law, and does succeed the same. And even as the paschall
lamb being offered every year, did not take away the sacrifice of lambs
that was offered every morninge and eueninge commanded in Exodus, so neither
Christ being bloody offered upon the cross takes not away the unbloody and
quotidian sacrifice of the mass. And although that Christ is said to be
offered from the beginning of the world, yet that takes not away the
external sacrifice of the law of nature, or of Moses, but they rather have
their virtue and force from Christ his sacrifice, as they are said to smell
sweetly in gods presence. Much less takes it away the external and sensible
sacrifice of the new testament, which is a certain sensible representation of
Christ's bloody sacrifice. Otherwise the church in the new testament is in a
worse case, then the church either in the law of Moses, or in the law of
nature, in which by their external sacrifice they could represente Christ's
death and passion, which the church in the law of grace cannot do, if you
take away from her this only sacrifice left with her. Moreover she had been
deprived of that dignity and excellency of offering external sacrifice, which
the church in those two states had and consequently the priests in the law of
grace had been more obscure and of less dignity in the power of priest-hoode,
then those of Levy.

12. But you will peradventure answer, that the office of priest-hoode is to
offer sacrifice in spirit and truth. Whereto I reply, Objection Answer.
that the old fathers also in the law of nature, and Moses could so do,
and likewise every other person. If you take away this sacrifice, it is not
true that Christ upon the cross is a priest according the order of
Melchisedec, but according to the order of Aaron, whose hoasts and sacrifices
were bloody, as that of Melchisedec was unbloody in bread and wine. Again, if
you will have noe other priest, but Christ upon the cross, to be the only
priest, of the new testamente, and that there is noe other priest or
sacrifice, then Isaias is a liar, and his prophecy is false, for in the end
of his prophecy he said there should be new priests and Levites, Priests
proved.
for he did not speak of the priests of the old law, and in vain should he
speak of the new priests if they should offer noe sacrifice. Did not S. Paul
say. Ad Titum. 1.
For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should reform the things
that are wanting and should ordeine priests in the cities; Also he says
unto Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.
do not neglect the grace which is in thee, and which is given unto thee by
prophecy with the imposition of the hands of priest-hoode. Jacob. 5.
S. James wished the sick person to send for the priests, which should annoile
him and pray for him, and those that S. Paul called Priests, afterward he
called Bishops, but it is manifest that none can be a Bishopp without he were
a Priest, a Bishopp being a degree above priest-hoode, if therefore in the
new testament, there be Priests selected from the people, they ought to
sacrifice and offer. S. Hebr. 5.
Paul says, every high priest taken from among men, is appointed for men in
those things that pertain to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for
sins. Therefore besides the bloody sacrifice of Christ upon the cross,
there must be a sensible and a common sacrifice instituted of God, and that so
noble as every one cannott offer the same.

Clemens lib. 1 co^st. apost. c. 1.
13 Clemens says. Post assumptione^ Christi nos oblato secundum eius
ordinationem sacrificio puro, and incruento constituimus Episcopos,
presbiteros, and diaconos numero septem: we after the assumption of Christ,
according to his institution, have appointed Bishopps, Priests, and Deacons,
in number seven for this pure and unbloody sacrifice. S. Hierom says if it be
commanded to the lay people to abstain from their wives for prayer, Heir
resp. ad Titum.
how should we think of the Bishop which is ordained to offer this
unspotted sacrifice, as well for his own sins as for the people? S. Cyrill of
Jerusalem calls the Mass, a spiritual sacrifice, by reason of the body of
Christ which is spiritualized by the divinity, and is spiritual in deed
though not in substance, yet in quality and manner of existence. Cyrill. ca.
4. mist. Anacletus ep c. 2. Sother de consecr. did.
Anacletus commands Bishops and priests not to sacrifice, without
witness to assist them. Sother Pope commands two at least to be present,
because the Priest says. Dominus vobiscum, and orate pro m^. Euaristus
wills, that the places wherein Masses should be said, be consecrated, and that
alters should be sacred by chrisme. Pius the first, tells how that Eutropia
having given her house to the poor, he celebrated Mass with the said poor
Christians. Clemens the first Ep. 3. forbids to say Mass, but where the
Bishopp will assign. S. Gregor. l. 7. regist. epist. 63. ^oui. 2. Isid. lib.
1. de o^ijs cap. 15.
Gregory did write unto the Bishopp of Syracusa and Isidorus, that S. Peter
did institute the order of the Mass, and it seems says O^igines, to
pertain to him only to offer continual sacrifice, who devoted himself to
continual chastity orig. lib. 1. contra celsu^. And in the 8. book of the
constitutio^s of the Apostles as S. Clement does affirm, Clement. constable. 8.
E^odius was made Bishop of Antioche by S. Peter, and afterward Ignatius by
S. Paul.

14. This sacrifice, as it has many names in holy scripture, so it is
expressed of the old fathers with many significant terms; David called it,
the sacrifice of praise, Psalm. 49. Psalm. 4.
the sacrifice of justice, a way to see the salvation of God: of Daniell it is
called Judge sacrificium, Mala^h. 1. Luc. 1. Matt. 5. Iud lib. 4. cap. 34. 1.
cap. 5. 1. Cor. 10. Heb. 10. Act. 2. Cle. Constable. Apost l. 8. cap. vlt. Dionys.
Areop. cap. 3. de caelest. Hier.
the daily and continual sacrifice, a pure oblation: of Malachias, the
sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem: the bloody lamb of S. Luke: of S. Mathewe
the oblation that should be offered at the altar: of the Apostle, it is termed
our pasche, and the table of our Lord: of S. Luc, the fraction or breakinge of
the bread: and also in a liturgy of S. Andrewe it is called, a lamb saying;
I offer daily a lamb unto God which when it shall be eaten, it shall remain
whole and sound. The council of Nice calls it, the lamb that takes away
the sins of the world. S. Clement calls it the pure and unbloody sacrifice.
S. Dionysius the oblation of the lively hoaste. S. Martialis, a sacrifice and a
clean oblation. Ireneus the new oblation of the new testament. S. Cyprian a
true and perfect sacrifice. S. Athasius, an unbloody immolation: Eusebius
Caesar. and S. Chrysostom, a dreadful, terrible and everlasting sacrifice
most honnorable: others call it a singular sacrifice, excellinge all the
sacrifices that ever were. Others a true, unbloody, unspotted, perfect host,
our daily sacrifice, our Lord his lamb: S. Aug. the sacrifice of our price
and redemption, the sacrifice of our mediator: S. Gregory calls it the
healthsome hoaste, the host of oblation: others call it the sacrifice of
christians etc. with many such pithetons, and last of all S. Paul calls it:
Consummatio Sacramentorum, the accomplishinge of the Sacraments.

15. Besides traditions of the Apostles, decrees of all general counsels,
authority of all the fathers and holy doctors, and the common and universal
practice both of the greek and latin church, many irrefragable and approved
reasons there are to confirm the infallible truth of this blessed sacrifice.
For Christ is a Priest for ever, and by his death deserved to have the order
of everlasting priest-hoode, and therefore an everlasting sacrifice; for this
sacrifice cannot be everlasting, either for the oblation once offered upon the
cross, or for the oblation once offered at his last supper, but it is eternal
and everlasting by the sacrifice which daily in all the world he offers by
his Priests and ministers even unto the day of iudgmente. And so Oecumenus
says that Christ is a Priest forever, not for his passion, but in respect
of this present sacrifice, Oecum. ni Cathena. Psalm. 109.
by which that great Priest does offer sacrifice. Theophilast. Eusebius Caesar.
in lib. de demonstratione Euangelica, and Haimo in epistola ad Heb. and many
other fathers say, that Christ is the high priest, or the great priest,
according to S. Paul, or the greatest bishop according to all, and not
Metaphorically but properly, therefore he ought to have inferior Priests under
him that should also offer, otherwise he should not be called the greateste,
for a supreme order or power has a relation to an inferior. The perfect
priest-hoode of Christ ought to take away the impefect priest-hoode of the old
law, and as he instituted a new law, so he ought also to institute a new
priest-hoode, for every law ought to have his Priesthood which should
interpret the law, as it is said by Malachias, ask the law of the Priest,
Malac. 7. Deuteronomy. 9
the lips of the Priests shall keep wisdom: and as it is said in Deuteronomy. if
there be any hard or doubtful question betwixt stock and stock etc. go
your ways to the Priests and whatsoever they shall comaunde you to do, do
it; and as he took away the old law, so he took also the old Priesthood,
and as two laws cannot consist, so two priest-hoodes cannot remain. Libr. 1.
Mac. c 1
Radix peccati; the of-springe of mischief Antiochus, that he might take away
both law and Priesthood from Jerusalem, and from the children of Israel, he
took away both sacrifice and oblations from the temple.

Daniel. 12
16. Daniell prophesied that when Antechriste shall come. Ablatum fuerit judge
sacrificium, that he shall take away the daily sacrifice, as by that means
to take away both the law and memory of Christ that instituted this
sacrifice: upon this place; S. Hypolitus that noble Martyr has these words.
Ecclesiarum aedes sacrae tigurij instar erunt, Ex lib. Hypoli. qui extat.
Hiero. in Daniell. citat.
pretiosum corpus Christi and sanguis non extabit, liturgia extingetur,
psalmorum decantatio cessabit, scripturarum recitatio non audietur? In the time
of Antechriste, says he, sacred howses of the church shall be like a cottage,
the precious body and blood of Christ shall not stand, the Mass shall be
extinguished etc. If this holy Martire had been in these wicked days and
should see how these heretics bringes churches and Monasteries to ruin, and
oppose themselves against this blessed sacrifice, he vndoubtely would say they
are the harbingers of Antechriste. Eusebius says that Licinus the Tyrante,
and Competitor of Constantine the great, Eusebius. lib. 10. c. 3.
in all his dominions did forbidd the christians to exercise this Sacrament
and sacrifice. Quid insandos loquar apostatos Licinium and Iulianum etc. what
speak I of the wicked apostates, Julian and Licinius saying, that for noe
other cause Christ was put to death by the Jews, but for that he brought a
new sacrifice unto the world: for by these men's government our sacrifice was
taken away, even as we may read in the life of those Martires Iouentinus and
Maximus: with S. Chris. the holy board, says he, is defiled, the holy
vessels polluted, and taken away, in which sacrifice was offered to the son
of Marie. Heresy and sacrilege were ever so joined one to another, that the
heresy was first detected by the sacrilege; so Elias did cry out upon the
heretics for their sacrilege: 3. Reg. 19
Domine altaria tua destruxerunt. Lord they have cast down thine altars.
Basil. ep. 70. and 71 Naz. ora de Arrianis. Optat. lib 6. in Permenan.
In the heresy of the Arrians, S. Basil and S. Nazian did deplore that the
altars were destroyed, that this blessed sacrifice was polluted. Optatus
Milleuitanus in all his sixth book, speaks of this sacrilege exercised by the
Donatists. Quid tam nefarium, qua^ altaria Dei in quibus and vos aliquando
obtulistis pangere, radere, remouere, in quibus vita populi and membra Christi
portata sunt: what is more wicked, the^ to break, surprise, overthrow and
remove the altares of God, in which sometimes you have offered your selves, on
which the life of the people, and the members of Christ are laid? Leo 1. ep.
75.
S. Leo Pope spoke in like manner of the Eutichian heretics at Alexandria, per
crudelissimam etc. they (says he) cast forth their most cruel hands, and
with all raginge madness they extinguish the light of the celestial Sacraments,
the oblation of the sacrifice is interrupted, and the sanctification of the
chrisme is intercepted, and with their bloody murtheringe hands, they have
taken away all mysteries. Lib. 20. cap. 13. contra Faustum.
Finally, S. Augustine does reprove Faustus Manacheus, for accusinge the
christians of Idolatry, in saying, that in honoringe this blessed sacrifice,
they honor and reverence therein Bachus and Ceres.

17. If the Gentiles themselves were so curious and so respective in
offeringe sacrifice unto their false gods, and their laws and edictes were in
nothing so severe and so extreme, as upon such as should profane the
same, and all the persecution that they invented against the christians was
because they did not offer sacrifice unto their strange gods, and as Suetonius
relates, Sueto in oct. c. 35.
the Emperor August. Caesar did ordeine, that all the Senate of Rome before
they should sit in their rank, should every one of them first offer incense
before the altar of that God, in whose church they were, for they could not all
meet together but in churches. How much more ought we christians to be
curious, and religious in seruinge of the true living God, by our sacrifices
and oblatio^s, which are the cheifest acts by which we honor and reverence
him? S. Aug. says against Faust. aleadginge that of the prophett. Aug. co^t.
Faust. lib. 20 c 21. Aug. ibi.
Sacrificium laudis glorificabit me etc. The sacrifice of praise shall glorify
me, and this is the way by which I shall show him my savior, this is the
sacrifice of the flesh and blood of Christ which was promised before his
cominge by similitude and liknesse of oblations, which was performed in the
passion of Christ by the truth it self which was celebrated in his memory
after his ascension, and in that place he said. Sicut autem non ideo
contemnenda etc. Aug. de ciuit. lib. 4. cap 10. ante fine^.
Even as the virginity of Nuns ought not to be despised or detested, because
the vestales amoungest the Romans were Virgins, so the sacrifice of the
fathers ought not to be despised, because the gentiles have also their
sacrifice, quia diuinus honor est sacrificium, Aug. ibid.
for the divine honor must be acknowledged by a sacrifice, and this honor as
S. Aug. says is latria, which is a dew service to the divinity, and unto
this due service pertaines the oblation of a sacrifice; for to offer, or to
sacrifice unto God, is a moral precepte pertaininge to the law of nature,
which Christ in his gospel has not taken away, but confirmed the same,
which is ingraffed in every reasonable creature vid. that sacrifice ought to
be offered unto God, and that the best is to be offered unto him; so Abell did
offer unto God of the best cattle he had. Therefore in offeringe sacrifice unto
God we err not. Sacrificium significat actionem misticam aliquam rem externam
applicatione ad Dei cultum and oblatione sacrantem: for to sacrifice does
signify as S. Augustine says and S. Thomas, a certain mystical action, Aug
epist. ^6 q 3. tomo 5.
hollowinge and thing external, that is applied and offered to the worshipp
of God, and this sacrifice is not offered to any other creature but to God.

Aug cont. Faustum l. 20. c. 21.
18. And although says S. Augustine the christian people do use a religious
solemnity in remembringe the Martyrs both to kindell in themselfes a desire
to imitate them, as also to be partakers of their merit^es and to be reliued by
their prayers, yet we do not offer sacrifice unto any Martyr, but unto the
God of Martyrs, although we establish alters for their remembrance. For what
Bishop or Priest at the sepulchers of these holy bodies being at the alte^
does say these words. Offerimus tibi Pe^re and Paul aut Cipriane? sed quod
offertur, offertur Deo qui martires coronauit etc. We offer unto thee Peter,
or Paul, or Cyprian, but that which is offered is offered unto God, which
crowned the Martyrs, thus far S. Augustine. Whereunto Innocentius agrees,
saying that we must honor God with churches, alters, sacrifices, priesthood
with virtuous and with the internal worshipp of latria, and so he said that
there are two kinds of services; the one which is due to the creator; the
other which is due to the creature, neither churches, alters, priesthood are
offered unto Saints in the honor of God, but rather unto God, they are
consecrated in the honor of the Saints. Leui 26.9 10 11.12. Psalm 22.1 Escij
58. Genesis 14.
Wherefore in all laws, and in all states of the world, were offered unto God
of the fruictes of the earth, and Melchisedec did offer bread and wine, Abraham
did offer Isaacke, in the law of Moses also there was a sacrifice offered as
the bread of proposition and fine flower sprinkled with oil and franckensence
etc. with many other things. Even so in the law of grace there must be a
sacrifice which is the only sacrifice of the law both now and for ever as S.
Cyprian says. Cypr. ser. de bapt.
Nec sacerdos eius penituit Deum. God was not not displeased at that
priesthood, for the sacrifice which he offered upon the cross was so
acceptable to God, and of that perpetual virtue, that it is of no less force
and efficacy this day, then that day when the fresh blood and water issued
out of his blessed side, and the scarres yet left in his blessed body does
challenge and exact the just price of the redemption of mankind: so that it
is the self same host and oblation, which is now offered by the Priests in
the law of grace, and that which himself did offer upon the cross, which was
signified and represented by all the former sacrifices of the law of nature,
and of the law of Moises, and much more represented and exposed to the view
of the christians in the law of grace, and therefore S. John calls him. Agnus
qui occisus est ab origin mundi, the lamb that was killed from the beginning
of the world, I mean in all the sacrifices that ever was, by whom all
sacrifice had and shall have their value, force and virtue, so as it does
comprehend both the bloody and unbloody sacrifice, for in both of them that
lamb is offered which takes away the sins of the world, and that
unbloody sacrifice which the church does offer, is of the same force, with
that which Christ himself did offer at his last supper. And even as the
baptism given by Christ is not of greater force then that which is
administered by a simple priest, although, ex opere operantis, vid. by the
meritts of him that gives the baptism, he may conferr greater fruicte to those
that he himself does baptize, or for whom he offers this blessed sacrifice,
the^ the baptism or sacrifice don by a priest: and as the malice of the
Priest cannot hinder the fruicte of the sacrifice, ex opere operato in nature
of the Sacrament, so the hollines of him cannot increase the grace thereof,
although he that administers it by special prayers, may profitt him in some
sort, for whom he offers the same. And as S. Nazianzenus said, let there be
two Ringes, Naz. in oratione in sanct. Ian.
one of gold and the other of Iron, and both of them engraven with the Image
of the king, in sealinge of lettres or puttinge their impression to any wax,
both of them have equal force and value, for noe man by the impression or
sealinge of them can discern, which was the golden ringe, or the iron ringe,
because it was but one charecter, although the matter and substance were
sundry: even so it is, the same baptism, the same absolution, and the same
sacrifice, that is offered of good priests and which is offered of badd,
although the church have commanded wicked and irreguler Priests to abstain
from the alter, and from the Sacraments, and also that the christians should
refrain from them, if they perceive them entangled or detected with any
enormous public offense: for it is the same word of God whether it proceed
from the good, or from the badd.

19. As touching an ordinary objection that every sacrifice ought to be
bloody, and to be slain, and so consequently Christ being not slain at
the Mass cannot be a sacrifice. I answer with S. Thomas, that S. Paul's
meaning was, D. Tho. in Hebr. 9.
that the sacrifice which the high priest offered, when he went into Sancta
Sanctorum, which was but once a year was bloody, but the general and
universal nature of a sacrifice requires not it should be bloody; and as the
philosopher says. Non omne quod conuenit speciei, conuenit etiam generi, vid.
although man be a living reasonable creature, yet it pertaines not to the
nature of every living creature to be a reasonable creature. Was not the
sacrifice of Abell, Caine, Melchisedec who offered bread and wine in token of
this sacrifice without blood? was not the goat of the Jews without blood?
yet it was a sacrifice and did carry upon his back all the sins of the
people of Israel. Abraham also did sacrifice his son Isaacke, yet he was
reserved afterward alive, so Christ as Rupertus says: Iterum immolatur and
tamen impassibilis permanet and viuus, is a sacrificed again, yet he is
impassible and living. Luther himself says, that the true sacrifice of the
new testamente be prayers, almsdeeds, fasting and watchinge, as S. Paul
says, I beseech you brethren that you offer your bodies as a lively hoaste
which is a sacrifice, most pleasinge before God. Therefore it is not necessary
that every sacrifice should be bloody, and truly Christ does offer himself
now in heaven unto his father for us as he did when he was in this life, so
as Christ is said to be offered for us two manner of ways vid. bloodily and
vnbloodily. And as Christ died but once, nor never shall die again, so he in
that violent painful and bloody sort, can never be offered again,
nevertheless as Christ died and was offered after a sort in all the
sacrifices that ever were from the beginning of the world al of them being
figures of that one oblation upon the cross, so is he much more offered in
the Sacrament of the alter of the new testament more divinely and truly
expressinge his death, his body crucified, his blood shedd though in hidden,
sacrame^tall mystical, and unbloody manner, as all the holy doctors do say,
which did call this incruentum sacrificium, an unbloody sacrifice in respect
of the carnal sacrifice of the Jews, Aug. de fide ad Petr. c. 19.
which as S. Aug. says, was the prefiguring of the fleash of Christ which he
was to offer for sins.

Whether the Catholic Church commit any offense in leaninge to the litterall
sense of Christ's words, in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. CHAPTER III.
1. IF you believe the omnipotent power of Christ, as also if you consider his
most incomprehensible and wonderful love toward his church, Ephe. 7.
for which he yealded himself unto death for her cleansing, so he gave
himself unto her for her feedinge, and that she and he may be made one
joined together, as it were a body joined unto the head. And to show unto
you the true, plain and euidente demonstration of those words to be meant
literally, according to the tenor and significant terms of the words (for
as the philosopher says: Arist li. 1. de interp. cap. 1. and 2
voces sunt signa co^ceptuum, our words and voices do signify what inwardly
we intend) I will begin with the sixth Chapter of S. John, that you may more
plainly conceive of what force that place is to prove the real presence of
Christ's flesh and blood in the blessed Sacrament. You shall first therefore
understand, that the Jews of Capharnaum, which thereof are comonlie called
Capharnites, after they had been miraculously fedd of Christ with five Barlie
loaves, and two fishes, being themselves in number about five thousand,
returned unto Christ again for some other like banquet, and to provoke him
the more as they thought, they began to brag how their forefathers did
eat Manna in the desert; giving him to understand thereby, that if he would
get creditt amoungest them, he should in like sort feed them, whereupon our
Savior took occasion to declare unto them before hand, that miraculous and
heavenly food which he minded afterward to ordain in his last supper, and
which should not only equalize their Manna, but so far surpass the same, as
a true body surpasses a shadow, and therefore he said unto them. The bread
which I shall give is my flesh: and that he meant by those words, to leave his
true flesh indeed to be eaten it steed of their Manna, it appears by that
which follows most evidently. For whereas the Capharnite Jews, grudged
straight way saying, how can this man give up his fleash to eat? conceauinge
such a carnal and gross eatinge of Christ's fleash as of other common flesh,
yet he did not take away that scruple as our protestants do now a days, with
saying that it should be a bare figure only, or that they should eat bread
only and not flesh, and feed on him only spiritually by faith, no he said
none of all these things, but clean contrary, to confound their murmuringe
infidelity and to confirm his former words, he added thereunto other words
of more veheme^ce, saying. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you eat not
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life
in you: with many more of like perspicuitie and plainenes, for if he should,
have answered them according as the protestants expound that place, to be
figuratively meant, he should have soon appealed their anger, grudginges, and
faithless conceit of those words, by occasion whereof they quite forsook
him saying. This is a hard speech who can bear it? Whereas if he had meant of
a bare sign or figure, by tellinge the truth only, he might have kept them
continually in his company. In truth it could not stand with the intralls of
Christ's charity, being sent principally to convert the Jews from their
infidelity, and being cheeflie ordained to save the lost sheep of Israel,
that he should use those words figuratively, Matt. 15.
and not declare the same plainly unto them, being a matter of the greatest
importance, and consequence, that ever was, for taking away their repininge
misbeleeue, the truth whereof he confirmed with his accustomed oath. Verily,
verily etc. unless they should eat his flesh etc. they should not have life,
yea he used these words imediatlie after their grudging.

2. S. Chrysostom upon those stubborn words of the Jews. Chrysostom. ho. 45. in
Ioannem.
This is a hard speech who can bear it, says it is the part of a scholar,
not to inquire curiously of that his master affirms, but to hear, and
believe and to expecte in due season a resolution of his doubts: and as for
those people by the former miracle don by him in feedinge their hungry
stomachs being so many in number, they might believe, that whatsoever he
said, he could do, or whatsoever he promised he could perform. Chrysostom. ho. 61.
ad populum Antioch.
For when he declared his love toward us, he mingled himself by means of
his body together with us, that the body and the head should be united
together; and to witness his singular affection toward us, he permittted
himself not to be seen of such as are desirous, but to be touched and eaten
and their teeth to be fastened in his flesh and all men to be filled and
satisfied with the desire of him. Tanqua^ leones igitur ignem spirantes ab illa
mensa recedamus, facti diabolo terribiles etc. Homilia pradict.
Let us rise therefore from the table as it were lions breathinge out fire,
making the diuill himself a feared. This mystical blood chaseth away devils
far off from us, and draws the angels near unto us, for the diuills when
they see within us the blood of our Lord, are putt to flighte, and the Angels
make haste to assist us, thus far S. Chrysostom, whose doctrine herein is noe
less ircksome and repugnant to the sacramentarie Protestants, then to those
lumplishe Jews, because according to that holy doctor, none ought to be
curious in askinge how or by what means that which Christ affirms is
brought to pass, for as the Jews were overmuch curious in murmuringe
amoungest themselves and saying. How can he give us his flesh to eat? How
shall our stomach away with it? what a hard kind of speech is this? Is it not
against nature that one man should be nourished with an other man's fleashe? Do
not our mouths and stomachs, abhor the same? So this sacramentarie
protestants have noe other thing in their mouths, then how can Christ's
fleash, blood, and bones be contained in so little a room? how can his body
be at one time in heaven and on the alter? how can it be in a thousand places
at once? with many other such Iewis interrogatio^s which do daily proceed
out of their giddy brains void of grace, not willing, captiuare intellectum
in obsequium fidei, as S. Paul says, because they would not resign their
wilful opinions, and their blind understanding unto the true direction and
obedience of faith, for if they believed that God were able by his word to
bring all this to pass, they would never reason after such a sort, for
otherwise they may by like interrogations discreditt the whole christian faith,
and ask how God made the world of nothing? how a Virgin could bring forth
a son? how God came down into the world to be incarnate, and yet remain
still in heaven? with many such strange interrogations, which we know rather
by divine faith supernaturallie infused unto us, then by any natural reason
conceived by our gross understanding: which according to Aristotle in his
metaphisickes, is as ignorante of natural knowledge in respect of things
natural as the owl is, of the sun in the middell of the day. So as this
holy doctor, impugneth these interrogations as arguments of incredulity and
lack of faith, which are interrogations of the Jews and protestants, both
which as they agree by two sundry extremes in this infidelity of
discreditinge Gods omnipotency: so if you compare both those extreamities
together, you shall find also that these men's extreme madness, deserves more
blame and far exceeds that of the Jews.

3. But the catholic church uses a mean between both, for it uses none of
those incredulous questions which Saint Chrysostom condemns, but simply
believes that to be true which Christ affirms; she holds not with the
capharnits, who thought because he said his fleash was meat indeed, they
should eat him visibly; nor yet with the sacrame^taries, who think because
he said it is the spirit that gives life, therefore this fleash is to be eaten
by faith only. But contrary to them both, and in the right mean, and true
meaning between both, ioyninge all Christ's words together, it concludes,
that under the form of bread, Christ's true flesh is realy and substantially
received: by saying under the form of bread, it takes away the Capharnits
gross and carnal imagination: by affirming true flesh realy and
substantially to be present, it condemns the protestants spiritual and
faithless figurative intention: in all which, the Catholic church is
sufficiently grounded and instructed, by the plain authority of Christ's own
words, touching the truth of their pretended difficulty. For in the 6.
chapter of S. John are thies words. I am the lively bread which came down
from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And the
bread which I shall give is my flesh, which I shall give for the life of the
world. And where the Jews fell at variance amoungest themselves, saying. How
can this man give us his flesh to eat? Jesus said unto them. Verily, verily
I say unto you, unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood, you shall not have life in you: he that eats my flesh and drincketh my
blood, has life everlasting, and I shall raise him up at the latter day,
for my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink, he that eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him etc.

4. This comunication our Lord had with the Jews teachinge in the sinagoge at
Capharnaum, Mat. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
and a twelmoneth after at his last supper, when he instituted the same blessed
Sacrament and performed his foresaid promise as they were at supper, as the
Evangelist says. Jesus took bread gave thancks and blessed and brake it, and
gave it to his disciples saying. Take and eat this is my body which is given
for you, this do in the remembrance of me, likewise taking the challice after
he had supped, he gave thanckes and gave it them saying. Take and divide it
amounge you, and drink all of this, this is my blood of the new testamente?
S. Paul writes thus much to the Corinthians saying. For I have received of
our Lord that which I have delivered unto you, for our Lord Jesus the same
night he was betrayed, took bread and giuinge thancks brake and said, take
and eat, this is my body which shall be delivered for you, do this in
remembrance of me, likewise the chalice also after he had supped saying. This
chalice is the new testament in my blood, do this so often as ye shall
drink in the remembrance of me, for so often as you shall eat this bread and
drink this chalice, yea shall show forth our Lords death until he come,
wherefore whosoever shall eat the bread and drink of the challice of our Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. But let a man
examine himself and so let him eat of the bread and drink of the chalice,
for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
iudgmente, not discerning the body of our Lord. You see plainly the belief of
the catholic church to be noe forged belief, but most firmly builded
upon Christ's plain words as the 4. Evangelists and S. Paul do witness,
by which the undoubted doctrine of this high mystery of the blessed
Sacrament of the alter, is substancially and most certainly confirmed.

Chrysostom. in Math ho. 83.
5. But to confirm the same by the testimonies of the fathers, S. Chrysostom
says. Sicut in veteri etc. Even as in the old testamente, so likewise in the
new, Christ has for our benefitt left behind him and gathered together the
memory of his mysteries, bridlinge thereby the mouths of heretics: for when
they ask how it is proved that Christ was sacrificed and put to death,
besides many other things to musell and shutt up their mouths with all, we
show the^ these mysteries, for if Christ died not, whereof is this sacrifice a
pledge and token? Thus you see how diligente Christ was and desirous that we
should have continually his death in remembrance. For whereas these heretics,
Marcion, Valentinus, Manicheus, and their disciples did deny this dispensation
and work of God in flesh, Christ by this mystery so brings us always in
mind of his passion, that no man unless he be mad, can be seduced. By which
words of S. Chrysostom, the certeintie of Christ's body in the Sacrament is
proved, for by the truth thereof believed therein, Marcion a foresaid and
Valentinus, and other like heretics were confounded, who said Christ had noe
true body, in which he might suffer on the cross: but if the church should
have holden, in the time of S. Chrysostom that Christ was present only in
the Sacrament by a figure, nothing could have been concluded against those
heretics, for they denied not but it was figuratively also present one the
cross. We must also understand, that this Sacrament is a pleadge or token,
not as the sacramentaries would wreaste it, vid. a pleadge or token of his
passion which is lively there represented and brought to remembrance by the
true presence of that self same body that suffered. And therefore Christ at
the institution of this Sacrament after he had said, take, eat, this is my
body, adjoined thereunto those other words. Do this in the remembrance of me,
which words Saint Paul expounds very plainly, saying. So often as you
shall eat this bread and drink of this chalice, ye shall show forth our
Lords death until he come.

6. The said S. Chrysostom, in the foresaid homily upon this text, hoc est
corpus meum, says let us have noe doubt but believe, and behold with the
eyes of our understanding, for noe sensible thing was delivered us of Christ,
but under things sensible. But as for those things which he delivered, they
are all out of the reach of our senses. So in baptism is that excellent
guifte that is given by water which water is a sensible thing. But that which
therein is wroughte I mean the sprituall generation, that is to be conceived by
the understanding: for if thou hadest been without a body, he would have
delivered these guiftes simply also without bodies. But for as much as thy
soul is coupled and joined to a body, therefore they are delivered unto thee,
under bodily and sensible things, that they may be the better understood. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 24.
O quot modo dicunt vellem formam and speciem eius, vellem vestimenta ipsa,
vellem calceamenta videre: hunc ipsum vides: ipsum tangis: ipsum comedis. O how
many do say now a days, I woold feign see his form and phisiognomie, behold
thou seeste himself, thou do touch himself, thou do eat him, thou
desire to see his garments, but he delivers himself unto thee, not that
thou should see him only, but touch him, and have him within thee. Let noe
mam therefore come near, whose stomach wambleth or rises against it, nor anny
that is cold of devotion, but let all such that approach herunto, be sturred
up and feruentie inflamed, for if the Jews did eat their Paschale lamb with
haste, standinge on their feet, with their shoes on, and holding their staves
in their hands, how much more must we watch and be diligent? for they were
taking their journey from Egipte to Pallestine, and therefore they had on
wayfaringe and pilgrims apparel, but thou art goinge up from earth to
heaven, wherefore thou must watch and take good heed. If a Duke (says he in
that homily) if the counsel it self, yea if he that wereth the crown: come
herunto unworthily, forbid him, keep him back, thie authority is greater
then his. If so be that a fountain of most pure water were committed to thie
chardge to be kept clean for thie flock, when thou should see most
stinckinge and filthy swine draw nere, thou would not suffer them. And now
whereas a most holy fountain, not of water but of blood and spirit, is
committed unto thee, if thou shall see those men draw near which are most
defiled with sin, wilt thou not take indignation and forbid them? Thus far
S. Chrysostom, who most plainly declares Christ's real presence, Chrysostom.
hom 24. 1. Cor. 1.
not only in this homily, but upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians. And also most evidently in his second homily to the people of
Antioch saying. What will you say then if I show you, that so manny of us as
be partakers of the holy mysteries do receive a thing far greater then that
which Elias gave, for Elias left unto his disciple his Cloak, but the son of
God ascendinge into heaven, left with us his flesh. And again Elias went
himself without his cloak, but Christ both left his flesh with us, and
ascends having with him the self same flesh etc. By which the
sacramentaries can not possible mantaine the blessed Sacrament to be a
remembrance only of Christ's flesh, if they will admit this holy and learned
doctors testimony. For Elias left a remembrance of himself also, when he
left his cloak behind him. But herein stands the force of this comparison,
that Christ far passes Elias: and therefore says S. Chrysostom, he did not
only leave a far more excellent thing vid. his own flesh, but also took the
same with him into heaven, which he left behind him.

Cyrill. li. 4. c. 13. in John.
7. S. Cyrill that famous Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, who for his great
sanctity and science was appointed president of the general council of
Ephesus against Eutiches and Dioscorus anno Domini 434. does agree with S.
Chrysostom, who upon S. John's gospel in his 6. chapper has these words.
Then the Jews fell at variance amoungest themselves saying. Quomodo potest
hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manducandum? How can this man give us his flesh
to eat? The malicious and wicked mind whatsoever he understands not, he
rejects upon pride, as vain and false, ne^her will he give place to anny
other, or think any thing true which is above his own capacity, and such
we shall find the Jews in this place: for whereas they having now
perceived by those miraculous signs Christ's divine power, they should of right
have allowed that which he said, they cleene contrariwise say; how can this
man give us his flesh? They cry out blasphemouslie upon God, not calling to
mind that with him nothing is impossible: 1. Cor. 2.
for being as S. Paul says, sensual, and carnal, they could not understand
spiritual things, but this great mystery seems unto the^ peeuishnes and
folly. But let us I beseech you take great profitt of other men's sins, and
beleeuinge steadfastly those mysteries, let us never utter with our mouths, or
so much as think with our heart, that same (how) for it is a Jewish word,
and deserves extreme punishmente. And Nicodemus therefore when he said, how
may these things be b^ought to pass, was answered accordingly, art thou a
master in Israel, and ignorant hereof? Exodus 4. Exodus 7.
A little after in that place he says. How was Moses rodd turned into a
serpente? how was his hand stricken with a leprosy, in a momente restored
again to his former state? Exo. 14. Exo. 15. Exo. 17.
how the waters were turned into blood? how did their fore fathers escape
through the middst of the sea, as though they had walked upon the dry land?
Iosue. 3. Iosue. 6.
how were the bitter waters changed sweet by the tree? how fountains of
water did flow out of the stone? how the running river of Jordan stood
still? There are innumerable things in which if thou ask how, thou must
needs overthrow the scripture, set at naught the doctrine of the prophetts,
and Moses own writings, wherefore ye Jews should have believed Christ
rather then like dronken folk cry out, how can this man give us his flesh:
Thus far S. Cyrill, Cap. 14. in Ioh.
and more at Iardge in his 4. book, alleadginge that of Isaias, for if you
believe not says he, you shall not understand, First therefore they should have
fastened the roots of faith in their mind, and afterward ask those
questions meet for men to ask.

Cyrill. lib. 4. c. 23.
8. And the said S. Cyrill in another place says. Ye do not unwisely deny,
that the flesh has altogether power to quicken and give life, for if you ask
the fleash alone by it self, it can nothing at all quicken, as lacking that
which should quicken it. But if you will search the mystery of the Incarnation
and will know him that dwells in flesh, although flesh by it self be able
to do nothing, yet then you will believe that it is made able and powerful
to quicken, unless you will contend also that the holy ghoaste has noe power
to quicken. For whereas flesh was joined with that word which quickneth and
gives life thereby, yt was made also of power to quicken and give life; and
although therefore the nature of flesh as it is flesh, cannot quicken or give
life, yett it works that now, because it has received the whole operation
of the word: for this body is not the body of S. Peter, nor S. Paul, nor of
any such like, but the body of life it self, Coloss. 2.
and of our Savior Jesus Christ, in whom the fulness of the God head
corporally dwells and is able to do this; for if honny whereas it is
naturally sweet, makes those things sweet, with which it is mingled, shall
it not be very foolish to think that the lively and quickinge nature of the
word, did not give unto that man in whom it dwells, power also to quicken
and give life? for which causes the flesh truly of all other men does not
avail or proffit in deed any thing, but the flesh of Christ alone is able
to give life and quicken, because the only Son of God dwells in it: But he
calls himself spirit, because God is a spirit: thus far S. Cyrill.

9. 2. Cor. 3.
By this you may perceive the false interpretation of the protestants upon
these words. The spirit is that which quickneth the flesh avails nothing,
by which words they say that the real presence of Christ's flesh in the
Sacrament can nothing proffitt us, and that the spiritual eatinge thereof by
faith only, should be sufficient; for S. Cyrill teaches plainly that by this
word he meant the God head which was united in one person with that flesh of
his, and which gave unto it that power to quicken and give life, which noe
other man's flesh ever hadd. And the common School of all divines do affirm,
that when; Verbum caro factum est: when the word was become flesh, and when
flesh was united unto the word: the flesh by the word does quicken, and give
life: and as S. Nazianzenus says, that as Iron being putt to the fire does
burn, and performs the operation and action of fire: so the flesh being
united unto the word, does quicken, give life, and works by the influence
thereof; And as S. Thomas says. Quo intimius est aliquid cum principio
influente, eo magis participat de eius influxu. The more intimate and nearer a
thing is to its first influent cause, the more it receaues the influence and
operation thereof. So the blessed flesh of Christ noe doubt, being joined and
united unto the principal cause of all causes, receaueth a most lively
operation from the same.

10. S. Hillarie also that famous Bishop of Poetiers, in his 8. book of the
Trinity against the Arrians, has these words. De veritate carnis and
sanguinis non est relictus ambigendi locus, etc. There is noe place left to
doubt of the verity of Christ's flesh and blood, for by the confession of our
Lord, and by our faith, it is verily flesh, and verily blood; and being
eaten and drunk by us* it brings to pass that we are in Christ, and
Christ in us. Is not this true? it seems verily, not to be true to these
incredulous people which deny Christ to be true God. S. Hillaries argument,
was against the Arrian heretics, who held that God the son was not one with
God the father in substance, but only in will: to disprove which assertion, he
alleges a text of scripture where Christ prays that we all may be one
with him, Ioh. 17.
as he and his father are one, but we (says Saint Hillarie) by receauinge of
Christ's true body and blood in the blessed Sacrament, are not united unto him
in will only, but also to his fleash and substance: wherefore it mustes needs
follow, that Christ is united to his father by nature and substance of his God
headd, and not by will only. which argument of his does plainly declare, that
the truth of the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, was then approved
and received of all men, for otherwise he would never have convinced them by
that argument; and unless you deny Christ to be God, you can not deny him to
be truly and really in the blessed Sacrament. And he proceeds further in
that book and says, If the word was truly made flesh, and if we truly
receive the word (being made flesh) in the meat of our Lord, how shall he
be thought not to abide naturally in us, who both being borne man, took unto
him the nature of our flesh to the nature of eternity under the Sacrament of
flesh, which is to be communicated of us? for so we all are one, because both
the father is in Christ, and Christ is in us, for himself says. My flesh is
verily meat and my blood is verily drink, he that eats my flesh and
drinks (...) blood, abides in me and I in him. In another place he says
expoundinge those words of S. Paul. Sermon Cathechesi mystag. 4. 1. Cor. 11.
Accipite and bibite hic est sanguis meus etc. Take and drink, this is my
blood, this is my body, who shall dare hereafter to doubt of the truth
thereof, since he did certainly say, this is my blood? who ever will affirm the
contrary or say, it is not his blood? nam specie panis dat nobis corpus, and
in specie vini dat nobis sanguinem etc. for under the likeness of bread he
gives unto us his body, and in the likeness of wine he gives us his blood,
that when you take it you shall taste the body and blood of Christ being
made pertaker of the self same body and blood, so we bear and carry with us
Christ in our bodies when we receive his body and blood into our intralls,
and according to Saint Peter, are made pertakers of the divine nature. And a
little after he says. Quamobrem non sic haec attendas velim tanquam sit nudus
and simplex p^nis, nudu^ and simplex vinum. Corpus enim sunt and sanguis
Christi: wherefore I would not have you to think of these things as they were
naked and simple bread, naked and simple wine, for they are the body and blood
of Christ, and though your senses do tell you the contrary, your faith shall
confirm and strenghten you, do not judge by thie taste, when thie sure faith
shall guide thee from all doubt.

11. S. Augustine upon these words. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
Adoratescabellum pedum eius, adore and worshipp his footestoole, because it is
holy, quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit etc. Because he walked here on earth in
that very same flesh, and gave us the very same fleash to eat, for our
salvation: and noe man eats that flesh unless first he adore and worshipp it
it is found out how such a footestoole of our Lord should be adored and
worshipped, and that we do not only not sin in a^oringe and worshipping it,
but we sin in not adoringe and not worshippinge the sa^e. Therefore when thou
do bow down and prostrate thie self unto any such earth, do not behold
it as earth, but behold that holy one whose footestoole that is which thou
do adore and worshipp, because for his sake thou do adore and worshipp it.

Aug. cont. Iul. Pela. lib. 1. Amb. de ijs qui misteriis initiantur cap. vlt.
12. S. Ambrose that blessed Bishopp of Millane, of whom Saint Augustine
says. Veneror vt patrem in christo etc. I reverence him as a father, for he
through the gospel in Christ Jesus begott me, does plainly confirm this
truethe, saying. Ipse clamat Dominus Jesus. Hoc est corpus meum etc. Our Lord
Jesus himself cries. This is my body, before the benediction of those
heavenly words another kind of nature is named: after consecration the body
is signified or mentioned: he himself called it his blood, before
consecration, it is named an other thing after consecration, it is called
blood. And thou said thereunto Amen, that is to say it is true, let thie
inward mind confess that which thie mouth speaks, and let thie affection
think, that which thy speech sounds. And in that chapter he says. But
perchance you will say, I see an other thing with mine eyes, how then do
you tell me that I receive the body of Christ? this then remains yet by us
to be proved, how many examples therefore do we use to show that this is not
that which nature formed, but that which benediction consecrated. And that the
power of benediction is greater then the power of nature, for so much as nature
it self is changed. Moises held in his hand a rodd, he cast the same forth
and it was made a serpent. again, he took up the serpent by the tail, and
the same returned to the nature of the rod: you see then by the grace given
to that prophett, that nature both in the rodd and serpent was twice changed;
the rivers of Egypt rann with pure and clean water, blood suddenly brake out
from the springes, and fountains, there was drink to be hadd out of the
rivers, and at the prophetts prayers the blood of the rivers ceased, the nature
of the water returned. All the rest of the holy fathers and doctors that
lived before these, and such as came after, do confirm with one uniform
consent this sacred doctrine.

13. S. Andrewe the apostle, as Aloysius Lipomanes a most grave and learned
aucthor does gather out of the approved aucthors, when he was to be crucified
said these words. Ego omnipotenti Deo etc. I do daily sacrifice to the
omnipotent God the unspotted lamb, who being truly sacrificed and his fleash
also eaten of the people, remains both sound and alive. Ignat. ep. ad
Smyrnenses.
S. Ignatius which was disciple unto S. John the Euangeliste, writing against
the heretics Symonianus and Menandrianus who as they denied the Incarnation
of Christ, so they did also deny the mystery of this blessed Sacrament.
Sic, ait, Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur
Eucharistiam esse carnem saluatoris etc. So they do not admit eucharistes,
and oblations, because they do not confess the Euchariste to be the flesh of
our Savior, which flesh did suffer for our offenses, Theo dialog. 3.
which the Father according to his benignity has raised up: this place is
cited by Theodoretus. Tertull. lib. 2. ad vxorem and in libro de Idolatria.
Tertulian also reprehending wicked priests exclaymeth against them, saying.
Semel Iudei Christo manus intulerunt and vos etc. The Jews did offer violence
unto Christ, but so you do also violatt and handle his body most
irreuerentlie, such irreuerent hands should be cut of etc. And how should he
say these words, if he should think that in the Eucharist should be only
the figure of Christ's body? So Orig. homil. 13. in Exodus expoundinge the 25.
of that book, homil. 7. libr. numeri in caput Math. 26. Math. vbi sic legimus
homil. 7. Leuit. homil. 9. in Leuit. concita. in cap. 15. Matthew. So Cyp. who
suffered death Anno Domini 259. sermon de lapsis. So Athanas. who is citted of
Theodoretus, Theod. 2. Dialog.
Cyrillus, Hieroso. initio Cathechesis. 4. mistagogice, and in tota fere
Cathechesi. Greg. Nyss. in lib. de vita Moysis. So. S. Optatus Milleuitanus
which did flourish in sanctity and learning in one time with S. Ambrose. Quid
enim est tam sacrilegum? what is more detestable then to destroy and defile
the alter on which sometimes you have offered your selves, in which the desires
of the people and the members of Christ are carried? and a little after, what
is the alter but the seat of the body and blood of Christ? S. Naz. living
also in the same time, Nazianz. oratione de Pascha.
absque confusione and dubio etc. without confusion and doubt we ear his body
and drink his blood.

14. S. Ephrem the familiar frinde of S. S. Hieron. in Cathalogo scrip.
Basil and of that authority that in the church after the scriptures his
woorks were read as S. Hero. does witness, says. Quid scrutaris etc. why
should you search the inscrutable things of God? if you curiously search them,
you ought not to be accounted a faithful christian, but a curious companion,
be faithful and innocent, be pertaker of the unspotted body of our Lord, and
assured with a sound faith that you eat whole the lamb himself. S
Epiphanius which was a familier frinde of S. Athanasius, does compare the
heretics that deny Christ's body to be in the Sacrament, with Aesops dog,
who having a piece of flesh in his I^wes, passinge over a river and behoulding
the shadow thereof in the water, did let go the true flesh, striuinge by
duckinge under the water to get only the shadow, and so he had neither the
one nor the other: so the heretics letts go the true flesh of Christ,
only for a figure, and so they have neither benefitt by the one, nor by the
other. Io. Diaco. lib 2. vitae sanctit. q.
Saint Gregory, as Ioannes Diaconus does write, did prove by a miracle that
was don, that the bread was turned into Christ's flesh. Damascen which lived in
the time of Leo the Imadge breaker, in the year of our Lord God 740. says.
Panis vinumique etc. Bread wine and water by the invocation of the holy ghost,
are supernaturally turned into the body and blood of Christ, and they are not
two, but one and the self same thing; bread and wine are not the figure of
the body and blood of Christ, God forbid, but it is the self same body of
our Lord deified. Theophil. in cap. Math. 26.
Unto this agrees Theophilactus who lived in the year of our Lord 800.
saying. hoc est corpus meum etc. this is my body; he shows that the self
same body is bread which is sanctified upon the alter, and not answering a
figure, for he did not say this is a figure, but this is my body.

15. In the life of most sacred divines, I I cannot forgett the worthy and
holy Saint one of the best preachers that was in the world since the
Apostles time, I mean Saint Vincent Ferrer* who thus writes. Vincent.
sermon de institutione Sacrament. Eucharist.
Deus a principio mundi voluit adorari sub aliqua forma. God from the
beginning of the world would be adored under some form or visible figure,
because God according to his substance or essence, cannot be perceived or
beholden of any. And so the Patriarchs as Adam, Abraham, and others, did
behold him under an other form, which was not God, and so they adored not
the form, or figure, but God in the form or figure. Afterward in the time
of the prophetts amoungest whom Moses was the first unto whom God appeared
in the form of fire, in a burninge flame, and Moses did not adore neither the
fire nor the flame, but God in that figure. Exodus 29.
In Exodus God gave the law in Mont Sinai, and God descended there in the
form of fire, and Moses and the people did adore God, and not the fire, but
in the form of the fire. Exodus 20.
In another place he commanded Moses to make the Arck both within and without
gilded with gould, and so all the Jews did adore not the wood thereof or the
gould, but God which would be adored under that form: and so (says this
Father) the Jews do scorn us because we adore God in the form of bread. 3.
Reg 8.
So in the book of kings when by gods commandment Solomon made the Temple
and the Arch so secreetly kept in Sancta Sanctorum as none could behold it,
God would be adored under the form of a cloud: so Salamon and all the people
did adore not the cloud, but God under the cloud. Afterward God came under
the shape of a man, under which shape he was also adored of the faithful, and
so when he was to pass out of this world, he ordained an other shape under
which he should be adored, which is not the terrible fire, neither the Arck, or
the cloud: but the bread which is better then all these forms, or figures,
which gives life, because that the life of man principally consists in bread,
and so we do not adore the bread, neither that whiteness which represents
the divine purity, neither the roundnes thereof which represents the divine
eternity, which has neither beginning nor end, but God under the form of
bread, as he was honored of the faithful before his passion, as of the Magi,
of the Leper, of the Chananean, of the Hemorissa, of the blind borne, and of
many others, and after his passion being risen from death, he was honored of
the Apostles and of the devout women, according to Saint Mathewe. And now
being glorified in heaven we behoulde him also in the Eucharist, and although
he discendes daily therein, yett he forsakes not heaven, even as the son giving
light to all the world forsakes not his own sphere, and the voice although it
resoundeth in the ears of manny, yett it remains with us. And if the
corruptible or transitory word, or the created light, can do this, much more
the eternal word which was from the beginning, the sun of Justice which is
Christ Jesus can do more being now made flesh, and sufferinge for flesh,
Genes. 41.
and came to feed flesh. And as Joseph was adored in all Egypt because he
prevented dearth by prouidinge corn: why should not Christ be adored of the
Church in this blessed Sacrament which gave bread from heaven unto us in great
abundance? thus he.

16. Let us therefore awake out of sleep, I mean out of the drowsy and
slumbering sleep of sin and heresy, and with Elias, to eat as the prophet
David says of the bread of Angels, 3. Reg. 19.
for we have a long journey in this persecution of the church, where already
the dreadful proclamations do sound the alarm in all the corners of poor
Ireland, we ought therefore every one to awake and get up out of the
quaikmeere and pit of our former misdeamenors, and to prepare our selves with a
clean heart against the thundringe threatenings of this bloody battle. Sermon.
de Euchar.
This is the counsel of S. Cyprian in the persecution of the faithful, that
every one prepare and dispose himself to receive this blessed Sacrament. This
was done in our days by the constant priests at Rochell, in those tragical
garboiles of the Hugonit^s, the chief of them being called the Abott of S.
Bartholomew, and the town being surprised by the instigation of one North, a
minister sent thither by Calvin, for that purpose. And the poor Abbot to
fortify the poor priests did use upon the sudden the words of consecration
upon common bread, for that he durst not celebrate or reserve the holy hoasts,
in sacrario, for fear they should be cast unto the dogs, or otherwise be
irreuerentlie handled, as those Hugonotts were accustomed to do in other
places of France, and gave it unto those constant Martirs to the number of 24.
and every one of the^ being resolved rather to suffer any death, then to make
shippwracke of their faith, were cast headlonge with a great stone about their
necks from the high steeple that stands over the keye. The kings mother
also, that constant Martyr, received this blessed Sacrament before her
execution, which she reserved in a sacred pix being secreatly sent unto her.
So as every constant Martyr ought to apply to himself in his greatest
extremity, this sovereign medicine, which is of greater force to animate and
fortify weak fainted hearts, then all the amber greece in the world, and
every virtuous Christian ought to say with the Apostle. In fide viuo filij
Dei, Galat 2.
I live in the faith of the son of God, which loved me and yielded himself
for me, Ephesians. 2.
and so the same Apostle said in a^ other place, which loved his church and
yealded himself for her, and for whose cleansing and purifienge from sin,
and sa^ctifienge her with grace as the said Apostle says, 1. Cor. 1.
Factus est nobis iustitia sanctificatio and redemptio, he is sanctification
and redemption leuinge unto us continually a blessed Jewel which is his sacred
flesh, to work those wonderful effects, which noe other flesh could ever
bring to pass, for God does make an instrument of those things for our
salvation by his grace, which otherwise were most offensive and hurtful unto
us. By the tree we were made slaves, by the noble tree of the cross we are
made free. By the universal diluge of water the whole world was overthrown,
by the water of baptism, the same was restored. By a dream, Joseph was made a
slave and abused, by a dream he was set free and advanced to the highest
dignity of Egypt. By a woman the whole stock of Adam fell, by a wooman the
same was raised up again. By meat the whole world suffered death as it is
written. In quacunque die comederis ex ea etc. Whatsoever hour you shall eat
thereof you shall die the death, by meat the same obtained life, himself
pronouncinge the same, qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum, whosoever
shall eat this bread (which he plainly affirms to be his flesh) shall live
for ever: which flesh is the only remedy unto Virgins, against the frailty
and raginge concupiscence of fleshly desires, although matrimony after the fall
of Adam was secondarily ordained against the furious passions thereof being a
secondarie effect of the same, yet in the law of grace, when a sacred Virgin
brought forth a Virgin without the carnal operation of voluptuous
sensuality: this virginal, immaculate, and unspotted fleash brings forth so
many millions of Virgins, which have been and shall be in his church unto the
worlds end, and because you taste not of this fleash making it but a bare
figure, you cannot live either chaste or continent, much less Virgins, for it
is a chief paradox in your doctrine, that noe man can live chaste.

17. Lastly, this is proved by the infallible truth of Christ's promise, John 6.
who performed whatsoever he promised, but he promised plainly and evidently
to give his true flesh truly, therefore he did perform the same. The mayor is
known, unless you will charge Christ with a lie; The minor is proved in the
6. chapter of S. John. The bread that I shall give is my flesh for the life of
the world: and so he performed it when he said. Hoc est corpus meum. And in
that place he says. Caro mea vere est cibus and sanguis meus vere est potus,
and also he says unto the Jews, unless you eat of the fleash of the son of
man, you shall not have life in you. And when he said truly, he did exclude
figuratively, for the one takes away the force of the other. But here perhaps
an heretic will object, that if we adore the Euchariste for being the body
of Christ, the people adoringe the same being not consecrated, by the
iniquity of the priest should comitt idolatry? Whereto I answer, that as
Laban causinge Lia to lie with Jacob insteede of Rachell, was not any
imputation to the said Jacob, he being ignorant thereof for that he thought
her to be his proper wife: so it should not be idolatry for the people
ignorantly adoringe Christ in an hoaste not consecrated: even as it is not an
offense before God, if one should reverence a false brother, for a supposed or
pretended virtue, though otherwise he were a dissembler, for he does not honor
the impiety of hypocrisy of the said dissembler, but the religion and
sanctity that is thought to be in him. Or as if a blind man should say unto
S. Peter, Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me, thincking him to be
Christ, should not comitt Idolatry. Even so the Church should not be deceived
or be convinced of Idolatry, if a wicked priest would not consecrate through
his malicious intent, for the catholic faith holds it for an assured
belief, that Christ is not in anny hoaste, but in that which is rightly
consecrated: nor every one lawfully regenerated or with God reconsiled, that
is not lawfully baptized, and orderly and rightly reconsiled.

That there is a purgatory, which is proved as well by Scriptures, and ancient
Fathers, as also even by the testimonies of Protestant themselves. CHAPTER I.
1. THis is proved by reason, for if you grant that God is merciful and just,
as indeed he is, you must also prove purgatory. For if a man do live most
wickedlie all his life without any remorse of conscience, or any other
pennaunce, and at his death does ask for mercy, I thinck you will not say he
shall be condemned unto the everlasting pains of hell, because he sought for
gods mercy, nor yet shall he enjoy presently everlasting bliss, for that
God is just in punishinge the sins of wicked people, for as S. Gregory
says, as the shadow does follow the body, so pennaltie and pains does
follow sin: but he shall not have everlasting pains; therefore he must be
liable to a temporal which was not inflicted upon him in this life time,
therefore in some other place, which is purgatory.

2. Although God does remitt sin; quantum ad reatum culpae, which is the
guilt of sin, yet he does not remitt temporal pains, as may appear by
David, who although his sins were remitted unto him, yet he suffered temporal
punishment, as likewise Ezechias, the Ninevites, and others, who
notwithstanding their sins were forgiven them, yet they suffered temporal
pains and pennalties in this life, as the Israelits whose penance was that
they should not enter into the land of promise. S. August. tract. c. 24. in
John. says productior est p^ena quam culpa: and therefore the church imposed
pennaunce after the absolution as we may see in Conc. Nyce. cap. 12. Laodic.
c. 1. Dionys. Areop. de eccl. Hier. ca. 5. Tertull. lib. de poena qua nihil
prodest de poenitentia d. 3. Hieron. epist. ad Ocea. Amb. lib. 5. ca. 10. Orig.
homil. 15. in Leuit. August. epist. 54. Bulleng. decad. 4. sermon. 10.
Bullenger a great protestant does acknowledge the old doctors of the Church to
have prayed for the dead. I know says he that the great Doctors of the
Church S. Augustine as also S. Chrysostom, Aug. ser. 32. de verbis Apostoli.
and other great and em^nent doctors have written of this matter; I know,
says he, that the fathers do say that to pray for the dead is an apostolic
tradition, also that S. Aug. did say that to offer sacrifice for the dead, was
observed in the universal Church. And Aerius was condemed for reprouinge
prayers for the dead, thus far Bullenger. This Aerius for being refused of a
Bishopric, as S. Augustine said, Aug to. 6. de haeresibus ad quod vult. Deum
haeres. 53. Musc. cap. de orat. page 515. Zuing. to. 1. Epicheresis caminusae.
Caluinist. li. 3. ca. 2. tomo 5. Conr. in Tobia^ c. 4 Vrba in Baruch. 3. Brent.
in apol. conf. VVitte^b. cap. 5. de bapt. 1. part.
fell to Arianisme and reproved prayers for the dead. Musculus also another
Protestant, does testify the same. Zuinglius said, that the Apostles did use
the same. Calvin says, that this was used in the church above 1300. years a
go: Also Conradus Pellicanus the chief protestant at Tigur, did allege,
that Tobias did allow the ancient custom to sacrifice for the dead. Vrbanus
Regius another great protestant says, that Baruch the prophett did pray for
the dead. Brentius says, that the Christians would not have prayed for the
dead, if they had not been instructed by the precepts of Christ and his
Apostles. The said Vrbanus which was the chief instrument with Luther to sow
Lutheranisme in Sueth-land and in the Dukedom of Lumburge, a part operum in
formula caute loquendi, when the Apostle reproved the Thessalonians for
howlinge and cryinge after the manner of Gentiles for their dead, he took not
away, the care or memory for the dead, De locis communibus c. 19.
but confirmed the same. The same Vrbanus affirms that Luther was of this
opinion saying, that it belongs to Christian piety, that we should commend
unto Christ by devout prayers, our Christian brethren as it has been the
custom of the church always, withal the doctors and holy fathers thereof.
The same Vrbanus further affirms in the place above cited, that we ought not
to depart from the practice and belief of the fathers here in, unless we
will contradict the word of God.

3. This Protestant cites many fathers also to confirm his doctrine as S.
Nazianzenus in the funeral oration unto Cesarius his brother, concerning his
mother, and Gregory Nissenus, Chrysostom. homil. 69. S. Ambrose of the death of
Theodosius Emperor, the council of Affricke cap. 8. S. Aug. confess. lib. 19.
which praid for his mother, and in the book de ciuitate Dei: cap. 9. and in
libro, de cura pro mortuis agenda cap. 4. vid. in the book which he did write
for the care we should have for the dead: and in lib. de haeresibus haeresis
53. and in lib. de cura pro mortuis habenda cap. 1. he writes that a certain
heretic did give out that we ought not to pray for the dead. Idem locis
communibus cap. 18 de purgator. Idem prima part.
Damascenus in sermon de ijs, which departed this life in faith says, that
the Apostles and disciples of our savior admonished us, that in the dreadful
and living Sacrament, we should have a special remembrance of the faithful
departed this life, and says that this is the received and general decree of
the catholic church, and the observation and old custom of all christians,
for the which are cited the books of the Machabees, Dionysius Areopagita cap.
vltimo ecclesiasticae hierarchiae. S. Nazian. z S. Chrysostom S. Gregory
Nissen S. Athana: and S. Basil. The said Vrbanus also very earnestly proved
that the Apostles of Christ taught the same, out of Tertulian, S. Athanasius
and S. Ambrose. He declared also that Asia, and Muscouia do pray for the dead.

4. It is also manifest that the Greeks do pray for the dead, by the
confession of the Greeks sent to the Lutherans of Germany, by Hieremie
Patriarch of Constantinople, Purgatory.
anno Domini 1579. Did not Christ pray his father for Lazarus that was dead?
Did not the widdowe of Naim pray unto Christ for her child that was dead,
although she prayed for restoringe him unto life, yet much more, for remission
of his sins? does not S. John say. Io. 1. cap vlt.
There is a sin unto death, there is another sin also not unto death? of
these as Oecumenus says upon that place* they which die in deadly sin, for
them I say lest noe man pray. S. Augustine says, Aug. lib. de cura pro
mortuis age^da
that the soul departes from our bodies in one of these three degrees. The
first degree, is of those that depart perfect and good. The second of those
that are imperfect and impenitent, the third of those that are in a mean
betwixt both, neither altogether good, nor altogether badd. For the first we
need not to pray, of whom it is said. Cum dederit dil^ctis suis somnum ecce
haereditas Domini etc. when it shall please God to give the elect, rest and
quiettnes, behold they possess their inheritance etc. I mean such as are
hollie in deed, either holy by their death as Martyrs, or such as otherwise
in their lives show both to God and man extraordinarye holiness and compleatt
perfection, of them there are few in respect of those; Qui ducunt in bonis
dies suos, and in puncto ad infernum descendunt, that made themselves slaves
unto the apparent, but false show of worldly, and transitory goods, and in
a moment they do go down into everlasting damnation. For the joy of an
Hypocritt is measured by an instant, for which people we may not pray: for
our savior said they received their reward in this miserable life with the
richman. But for the other in the third rank we pray as S. Dionis. Areopag.
says. Diuinus sacerdos pro mortuis orans, etc. Dyonisius Areop. c. 7. eccles.
hierar.
the divine priest prayinge for the dead, he prayed for such as lived holy,
yet they having contracted some blemish by reason of their human infirmity,
are detained in purgatory, and as S. Augustine says, Aug. Euc. ca. 110. tom.
3.
our suffrages proffitts them that are in a mean betwixt good and badd, of
which kind of people S. Paul says, saluus tamen fiet, sed tamen per ignem,
he shall be saved, 1. Cor. 3.15. Cypr. Ep. 52.
but yet through fire. According to which S. Cyprian says. Aliud est missum
non exire inde etc. It is not all one being sent to prison never to depart
thence until the last fardinge be prayed, and to receive presently the reward
of faith and virtue: it is not all one to be purged and cleansed by the torments
of a long fire, and to have all his sins whatsoever already refined and
purged by suffera^ce. And because we do not know certainly the state of
every one that departs this life, S. Augustine says. Aug. lib. de curapro
mortuis habenda.
Pro mortuis sieve altaris, sieve orationum sacrificijs solemniter supplicamus,
quamuis non pro quibus fiunt omnibus prosint. For the dead we make our
supplications, as well by the sacrifice of the alter, as by our prayers,
although every one receaues not proffitt thereby, but such as when they lived
merited the same: but because we do not discern what they be for whom we
ought to offer the same, none such as are regenerated, may be omitted, unto
whom this benefit may or ought to be due: for it is better it should be
superfluous unto them, that receaues noe proffitt or harm thereby, then it
should be wanting unto the^ which may reap benefit by it.

Cyrill Cathe mist 5. 1. S Ia. coli liturgia.
5. But let us further see what other holy fathers say. S. Cyrill says, let us
pray for all that departed amoungest us. S. James says. Dominum oremus, let
us make our prayers to our Lord, that our parents and brethren which departed
before us, Clemens Romanus lib. 6. co^st. apost cap. 30
may rest in peace. Also S. Clement of Rome says, that the Deacon at Mass did
pray for the dead. S. Athanasius says. If the souls departed received noe
benefitt of the sacrifice of the body of Christ, it should not be used for the
commemoration of the dead, Tert de Corona
de varijs quaestionibus q. 39. Tertulian also says. Oblationes pro defunctis,
pro natalitijs annua die facimus. We make oblations for the dead and, do
observe their anniuersarie days. Ioh Damas de fide oratione.
S. John Damascen has these words: the disciples and divine Apostles of our
Savior have ordained, that in the pure and tremblinge mysteries which give
life, there should be memory of the faithful departed, which the Catholic
Church ever observed and will observe unto the end of the world. Paulinus.
Paulinus affirms the same epist. 31. lib. 3. cap. 34. Gregor. Nyss. oratione
Cathechesi. c. 8. Hier. Ioh. cap. vlt. in fine. Idem in Osee. cap. 14. Hier. in
Matthew. ca. 3. Amb. in Psalm. 118. ser. 3. ser. 20. in fine, id. in Luc. cap. 12.
Aug. in Enchi. cap. 67. Aug. de ciuitate lib. 21. cap. 13. and sequentibus de
Genes. against the Manichees lib. 21. cap. 20. lib. 8. quaest. q. 1. Homil. 16.
and in other places. S. Cyprian. li. 1. epist. 4. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita
Constantini cap. 91. Nicephorus lib. 8. cap. 26. Plat. in vita Sixti, S. Aug.
ser. 34. de verbis Apostol. who boldly affirmed that it is not to be doubted,
but that the dead are helped by the prayers of the holy church by the
healthful sacrifice and alms that are given for the souls of the dead. And
in another place he says, Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis.
we ought not to omit our suffrages, and prayers for the dead.

Purgatory.
6. Lastly the council of Carthage does confirm this truth whose words be
these. Poenitentes qui attente leges poenitentiae exequuntur: such as are
penitent for their sins and perform the pennaunce that was enjoined unto
them; if by chance they dye either by sea or land, when as otherwise we cannot
help them, let us remember them in our prayers, and sacrifices. S. Augustine
praid for his Mother, saying: Pro peccatis matris meae deprecor te exaudi me
etc. I beseech thee to pardon the sins of my Mother by the cure of thy
blessed wounds, which hanged upon the Cross, and sittinge at the right hand
of God that thou make intercession for us. Aug. Confess. This is proved by
Scripture, Isa. 4. Malach. 3. Math. 12. 1. Corinthians. 3. Machab. 12. Psalm. 76.
Luc. 11. Daniel. 4. Philip. 4. Eccle. 4.6. 2 Reg 28. Psalm. 118. Marc. 12. Apoc.
5. Math. 5. 1. Ioh. 5. Apoc. 5.3.13. This is also proved by so manny
apparitions of the dead, made unto those that were living in this world,
desiringe them to pray for them, Ecclesiast. hist. gentis Anglor.
of which S. Gregory makes mention in the 4. books of his Dialoges, and
venerable Bede in his 5. book cap. 13. cap. 14. and 15. also in his fourth
book. cap. 25.

Touching the Popes Authority, in releasinge of souls out of purgatory.
CHAPTER II.
1. THe learned deuines do teach, that the Pope does, and lawfully may
apply, unto the souls departed by his keys, some part of the churches
treasure which consists of Christ's satisfaction, and the sat^sfactions of
other of his saints, by which they that are departed, as they have need, may
receive benefitt: For the do understanding whereof, there are two things; The
one is, a sentence of absolution definitive, pronounced upon the person
penitent; The second is, the recompense of the dept of sin, remitted by the
said absolution, through the application of the churches measure, by the power
of the officers keys: none of these two jointly can ever be exercised upon
any person not subject, though the one may. For absolution cannot properly be
given nor be fruitfully received by any man, not subject to the geuers
regiment. But the application of the treasure, may by the keys procure mercy
for them, that be in need ( per modum suffragij) so that, Indulgence.
the Popes do not absolve any man departed absolutely, but only offeringe in
the person of Christ to God the judge of all, the death of his own son,
withal the abundant price of his passion and grace, and the satisfaction of
his saints, for to procure mercy and help for the faithful souls, that are
in that distress of the furnace of purgatory, as the like is done with great
piety in many other holy actions of religion, Rof. con. Luth.
continually practiced in the church, for the mutual help one of another.

Col. 1.
2. So S. Paul says. I rejoice in sufferinge for you, and do accomplish
those things, that want of the passions of Christ in my flesh, for his body
which is his church: not that any thing was wantinge to Christ's passion or
the merittes thereof, for he sufficiently satisfied the eternal father, de
rigore iustitiae; in the rigor of justice; but that the aflictions and torments
that the saints do suffer for the chuch, should be added and joined unto
Christ his actions, in his sufferance, and troubles, to increase, and augment
the treasures of the church, to be disposed and imparted to all the members
thereof, for allayinge and asswaginge the dreadful pains due unto our sins:
out of which treasures and riches, so many indulgences are granted by the
chief pastors thereof. For this purpose the indulgences now in the law of
grace, Genes. 25.
were figured by the iubily of the old law; unto which agrees the gloss of
S. Ambrose upon that place. Suppleo reliquias pressurarum Christi in carne
mea, pro corpore eius quod est ecclesia. I do make up the relics and
fragments that lacked of the passion, and torments of Christ in my own flesh
for the church. For as some do abound in good works and satisfactions (as S.
Paul) who reckons up his afflictions and glories in them, 2. Corinthians.
and Job who says that his pennalties far surmounted his sins, and our
blessed lady who never sinned, and yet suffered so great dolors, so other
some do want and are to be helped by the abundance of their fellow members,
which intercourse of spiritual offices and recompense of the wantes of the one
part, by the store of the other, is the ground of the indulgence which the
church daily dispenses with great justice and mercy, by their hands in
whom Christ has put the word of our reconsileme^t, to whom he has committed
the keys to keep and use, his sheep to feed, his mysteries and all his
goods to dispense, his power to bind and loose, his commission to remitt and
retain, and the stewardship of his family, to give every one their meat and
sustena^ce in due season

3. And where as heretics say, that the priests or others that give this
grace, may receive noe reward; I answer that the graces of God are not to be
sold for money, although that poor priests that serve at the Alter
according to the scripture, must live by the alter. S. Thomas says that
indulgence may proffit one two manner of ways. D. Thom. Supple. 3. p. q. 61.
artic. 10. scip. q. ar. 1. q. 16. ar. 3.
First principally and directly it proffits him that receaues the indulgence
vid. when he does that, for the which indulgences are granted: as when he
visitts the sepulcher of some Saints. Secondarilie and indirectly the
indulgences do proffitt one, when for his sake one performed that which was
the cause of grauntinge the indulgence. But if the form of the indulge^ce be
such as whosoever that will perform this or that, he that accomplisheth the
same shall have the indulgence, he cannot transfer the fruit of the indulgence
unto another, because he cannot apply the universal intention of the church
by which all common and universal suffrages are comunicated, and applied, but
if the indulgence be of that form, that whosoever does this or that, (...),
for his father, or any other that he thinckes good, that is detained in
purgatory, shall have so much indulgence, such an indulgence is not only
available for the living, but also for the dead, for the church has as much
power to conferr and bestow, the fruict of her common suffrage unto which, the
indulgence does rely, upon the dead as upon the living* thus far S. Thomas as
aforsaid And so saint Augustine says, that the suffrages do proffit those
that are in a mean betwixt good, and badd, but such as S. Thom. says are in
purgatory: for the pains of purgatory are to supply the satisfaction which
was not fully accomplished in this life, and so the work of one may satisfy
for another, whether he be dead or alive, Greg. lib. moralium c. 23.
for as S. Gregory says, God does change his sentence, but not his council
as may appear of the Ninevites, Achab, and Ezechias, against whom Gods
sentence being given, was changed and revoked by his mercy.

Whether it be against the law of God, to forbid Priests to marry: and
whether vows and votaries are rather the invention of men, then the ordinance
of God. CHAPTER III.
IOuinian above 1000. years a go, 1. Tim. 4.
alleged S. Paul, as protestants do now saying, that time should come, when
men erringe in faith, should prohibit marriadge: by which doctrine many Nuns
at Rome (as S. Hierom against Iouinian and S. Aug. Aug. lib. de haeresib.
in his book affirms) were mislead and brake their vows, and rann headlonge
unto all turpitude of sensuality. But this text of holy scripture, Tertul.
li. Praescrip. Chrysostom. 12. in 1. Tim. Irene. lib. Aug. here is. 25. 40 Hiero c. 1.
con^ra. Iouini Epha 5. Ele. 1. ep. 17. Ber. sermon. 60. in ca^t.
is expounded as well by those fathers, as by others, that he meant of such as
should say, that mariadge in his own nature should be evil as the old
heretics said, Tatian, Marcian, Manicheus, with their disciples. Eucratites,
Patricians, Eubionites, Priscilianists, and others. Yea the Church does
reverence matrimony being one of her 7. Sacraments, more then protestants,
for they make noe Sacrament thereof: and she does only forbidd breach of
profession and violatinge of a vow made once to Christ.

2. Another place they allege against the vow of Chastity, 1. Cor. 7.
which is that of S. Paul: Melius est nubere quam vri, it is better to marry
then to burn, but this is spoken of such as are free persons, and not of
professed persons, as all writers do expound. So Saint Gregory says, if
they cannot suffer the tempestuous waves of tentation without wreake of their
salvation, let them betake them to the port of marriadge, for it is written.
Melius est nubere quam vri, it is better to marry then to burn. S. Ambrose
upon this place has these words. Vri est desiderijs agi and vinci, ne
vincamur autem in nostra potestate est per Dei gratiam: to burn is to be vexed
with concupiscence, but that we may not be ouercomme, is in our own power, by
Gods grace. But this is noe new practice of maligna^t heretics, to mantaine
detestable luxury, under the collar of lawful matrimony. For as Eusebius
says of the heretic Cerinthus, because he was given to the bellye and
sensuality, he framed and coined scripture according to his vicious fancy.
The said Iouinian says. Raro ^e^unate, crebrius nubite: fast seldom, marry
often. He and Vigilantius said, that there was noe difference betwixt
virginity and marriadge. Julian the Apostate sets down by law, as our
Apostates set forth by preachinge, the rauishing of virgins, the deflouringe of
sacred Nuns, the breaking of vows made unto God, the compellinge of votaries
dedicated to his sacred service, to forsake and leave of what they have solemly
promised, and firmlie purposed.

3. But S. Mathewe says, that the Apostles forsook all and followed Christ,
yet our new ghospellers forsook Christ and took the word only upon these
words. Melius est nubere quam vri, better it is to marry then to burn. I
would they would use S. Paul his medecin against their burninge
concupiscence. 1. Cor. 9.
Castigo corpus meum etc. I chastise my body and I reduce my f^esh in the
servitude of the spirit, least that preachinge pennaunce unto others, I should
become reprobate my self. David also did use the same, when he said: Psalm. 68.
Operiam in ieiunio animam meam, and posui vestimentum meum ^ilicium. I cover
my soul with fasting and my body with a hear cloathe: do you but so, and
you shall have gods grace to resist all the occasions of the world,
temptations of the devil, and asurementes of the flesh as S. Paul had, unto
whom God said. Sufficit tibi gratia mea, 2. Cor. 12.
it suffices to have my grace, God is faithful who will not suffer us to be
tempted above our strenght, for as Christ says, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and none can get it, but by force: nemo coronabitur etc.
none shall be crowned unless he shall fight lawfully; Therefore S. Gregory
says. Fortitudo iustorum est carnem vincere etc. The fortitude of the just, is
to master his flesh, to resist the appetites of his proper will, to
extinguish and despise the delights of this life. I would they had taken
example by the serpent, who to cast off her old skin fasteth three days, and
then does wreast her body through a narrow hoale, and so does cast away the
old rugged and withered skin, and a new presently does grow, and so S.
Paul bids us to do the like when he says. Induite nouum hominem; put on the
new man which was created accodinge to Gods Image in justice and sanctity of
life; for he said in another place that our sanctification is the will of God,
that we should abstain from fornication, and that by the narrow way of
pennaunce we must enter into life. And then might you say with the said
Apostle. Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. I can do all things in him that
does strenghten me; whosoever destroieth the temple of our Lord, God will
destroy him. Moi^es spoke unto the Leuiticall priests, be you holy, because
your Lord God is holy; be you clean that carry the vessels of our Lord.

4. Now the continency of priests is plainly proved by the law of God. Cor.
7.
Qui sine oxore est sollicitus quomodo placeat Deo, he that is with a^^ a wife
is careful how to please ^er, and so he is divided. S. Paul says, It is
good for a man not to touch a woman. Our Savior says, 1. Cor. 8.
there are Eunuchs which gelde themselves for the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore
it is good to be sole and single whereby one may with greater liberty pray unto
God, administer the Sacraments, and be more liberal to the poor. 1. Cor. 7.
For S. Paul wills a Priest to keep hospitality, but his wife and children
would not suffer him that is weded to perform the same. 1. Timoth. 4.
S. Paul bids Timothy to keep himself chaste, but the wife will say.
Read debitum, render conjugal debt. Saint Paul forbids widows to
marry, 1. Cor. 7.
that have vowed chastity. Vouete and reddite, Psalm. 75.
vow unto God, and perform the same says the prophett. The priests of the
old law notwithstanding that for special causes they might marry, for that
priesthood went then by succession, and not by election, 1. Para. 24.
as ours does, yet duringe the time of their office in the temple, they were
separated both from wife and all their family. Luc. 1. Exodus 11.
It is written that it was not lawful for the Jews to eat anny part of the
Pascall lamb, unless they had their Ioynes girded vid. unless they lived
chastlye. 1. Reg. 21
Abimelech would not give the bread of proposition to David, before he told
him that both he and his company did not lately touch their wives, saying. If
they be clean from woomen let them eat: whereupon S. Hierom upon the first
Chapter of saint Paul to Titus did allege that place saying. Tantum
interest etc. There is so much difference between the loaves of proposition and
the body of Christ as betwixt the shaddowe and the body. Aug. ser. 37 ad
fratres.
5. Who knows not that S. Paul counseled even the married men of the riotous
Town of Corinthe, to abstain from the use of marriadge a certain time for
prayer sake? much more the priests should always abstain, because they are
bound always to pray for the people, as S. Ambrose says. And S. Ierom
says, if the laytie ought not to pray unless he abstain from the duty of
wedlock, the priest that must always offer sacrifice and pray must always
also abstain etc. And S. Basil says, that the chaste and sole life, is like
to God himself.

5. But the Protestant Apostates, do color the satisfaction of their carnal
lusts with S. Paul's words, saying. That a Bishopp must be the husband of one
wife. Whereto I answer, that when the Apostle would have all priests chaste,
as was S. Timotheus, Titus, Euodius, and saint Clement, and although in those
days the profession of virginity, and chastity begone, so as there were but
few Virgins, yet the Apostle would have that such as should be chosen
Bishopps, should be either of those that were but once married, or who after
his wives death, was at liberty, or by consent of both man and wife, both of
them lived chaste, as I have known many laymen to have don the like. And this
was the mind of the Apostle as the protestants themselves cannot deny. And so
S. Hierom says. Hier. ad Ioui.
Co^f^^eris non posse esse Episcopum qui episcopatu ^ili^s facit; you confess
(says he) that he cannot be a Bishopp which begettes children in his
bishopric, otherwise, he shall not be accounted a married man but an
aduouterer; so the Apostle did teach and all antiquity: thus far, S. Hierom
and S. Epiph. 17. ad perago. The said S. Hierom writes that the Apostles were
single, S. Hieron. epist. ^0.
or else used not there wives which they before married. Sanctum sacerdotium,
Hier. contra ^oui. lib. 1 c. 19 Conc. ^art. 2. cap. 2.
says saint Hierom the holy priest-hoode proceeded of Virgins, if not of
virgins, yet of such as lead a solitary life, if virgins could not be had
yet such should refrain from their wives, or else those that were widows
being never married but, once, and so it was observed in Affricke, Italy,
Fance, Spain Greece and Asia in Egypt, and in all the east as may appear by
Concilium. Eliberti: ca. 33. Epiph. in canpen. and in here is. 59. contra
Catharos Hiero. contra vigil. cap. 1. Bibliander in pref. Epistolaru^ Zuingl.
and Oecolamp. Calvin also has these words. Call. lib. 4. insti^. c. 13
Fateor ab vltima memoria hoc fuisse obseruatum, I confess that was observed
from the beginning, that they tied themselves by a vow of contine^cie, Martyr
de votis page 490.
who dedicated themselves to gods service, and this was observed in the old
time. Peter martyr, another protestant says, that in the time of S. Clement of
Alexandria, which was next unto the times of the Apostles, Magdeb. hist. Cent.
5 cap. 4.
that people professed chastity and vowed continency. Madeburgenses and Beza,
in prefatione noui testamenti principi codensi, do witness thus much.

6. Lastly, the only cause why the protestants would have priests to marry
is, because they think that it is impossible for them to live chaste, and
that wedlock should be a remedy against lust, but filthy raginge
concupiscence is not taken away or anny thing abated, by the operation and
execution thereof, but rather by his contrary virtue, as may appear, by a
certain apostate Priest, who fallinge unto Lutheranisme obtained the
encombencie of a parish church in Germany and married a wife, whom within a
little after he murdered, for that his filthy lust was not satisfied thereby,
and that so he might be more free to purchase another: Suriut.
but the murder being known and being demanded what was the reason that he
committed such a wicked act, he answered that the disordered appetites of lust
amoungest the ghospellers, are not restrained by one wooman as you may see by
experience, that one vice is not taken away or restrained by another vice, but
rather by his contrary virtue. I would these ministers had used those means
to bridle their filthy lust and overcome the furious passion of fleashly
pleasures as S. Paul and other holy Saints did saying. Castigo corpus meum
and in seruitutem redigo carnem meam; I chastise my body and I reduce my flesh
into the servitude of the spirit, or as Christ cou^selled to geilde
themselves for the kingdom of heaven, but forasmuch as they embrace the wicked
doctrine of Calvin, Call. lib. 1. instit. cap. 28.
that it is a sin for a man not to sin, and in another place, that to
restrain any desire that comes unto a man, is to resist God and to sin, for
that God is the efficient cause of all evil woorks, this mortification and
punishinge of the fleash cannot sound well in their ears, whose doctrine and
life is repugnant to mortification, religion, discipline, and all woorks of
pennaunce.

Whether we ought to confess our sins to priests, and whether that priests
cannot remitt or for give them. CHAPTER IV.
THe opinion of protestants is disproued by learned S. Augustine saying. Let
no man make doubt of the priests right in remission of sins, saying the
holy ghoast is purposely given them to do the same: it is not absurd says
S. Cyrill lib. 52. that they forgive sins which have the holy ghoaste, Cyril
lib. 52. c. 56. in Joan.
for when they remitt and retain, the holy ghoast remitteth and retains in
them: the which they do two ways: first in baptism: and afterward in
pennaunce. I do not wonder, when Satan by his members, labors to destroy
all religion, that he should go about also to abolish the cheifest pillar
thereof which is this Sacrament of confession, instituted by our Savior for the
cheifest consolation of our troubled souls. For when the Apostles were
gathered together in one place after Christ's resurrection he said unto the^.
All power in heaven and earth is given unto me, as my father did send me, so
I send you, he breathed upon them, and he said unto them, receive you the
holy ghoaste, whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them: and
whose you shall retain, they are retained. And when our Lord gave power and
authority to priests to remitt and retain sins, it is manifest that he made
them judges of our souls, as may appear when Lazarus was raised from death to
life, Ioh. 11. Cyril li 7 cap. vlt. Aug. trac. 49. in Ioannem. Luc 17. Aug. de
vera and falsa poenit c. 19. and ser. 8. de verbis Domini.
and being tied hand and foot in the grave, he said to his Apostles, loose
him and let him go. S. Cyrill and S. Augustine apply this to the Apostles and
the priests authority of absoluinge sinners, affirming Christ to receive none
into the church but by the priests ministry: and so he commanded the lepers
to show themselves to the priests, and to submitt themselves unto their
judgment.

2 This is declared also by the acts of many of them that believed and came
confessinge and declaringe their deeds: Act. 19. Marci. 1.
also by S. Marcke when all the country of Jury went unto S. John confessinge
their sins which was not don by a general confession but by a particular
confession of them. S. James also does prove the same saying. Is any man sick
amounge you, let him bring in the priests of the church, and if he be in
sins they shall be forgiven him. Your own comunion book has the plain
words of absolution, the words be these. Our Lord Jesus which has left power
to his church to absolve all sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of
his great mercy forgive thee thine offenses, and by his authority committed
unto me, I absolve thee from all thy sins In the name of the father the son
and the holy Ghost. Aug lib. 2. de visitatione infirmoru^ cap. 4. and lib. 1.
c. 2
S. Aug. says. Some thinckes that it is enough for them to confess their
sins only unto God which knows the secreattes of every ones heart, because
either for shame or for some other cause, they would not unfold their offenses
unto the priests, unto whom God have given sufficient authority to discern
betwixt leper and leper, but I would not have you be deceived or confounded,
for confessinge thy sins before the viccar of our Lord. Aug. lib 50. homil 49.
The same he confirmed further saying. Let no man say I confess before God
secreatlie, God knows my heart, who will pardone me, if that be so, says he,
in vain it is said: whose sins soever you forgive they shall be forgiven, in
vain also the keys of the kingdom of heaven are given to the church. Amb.
li. 1. de poena cap. 2.
S. Ambrose also refellinge the heresy of the Nouatians, which taught that God
never gave power to any to remit sins says. God bid us to obey his
ministers, and by doing so we honor God etc.

Chrysostom. homil ^9. ad populum.
3. This is also proved by S. Chrysostom who said that true pennaunce does
cause a poor sinner to suffer all things willingly: in his heart, perfect
contrition, in his mouth confession, in his works all humanity: for, says
he, this is a most fruictfull pennaunce, for by what means we have offended
God, by that means also we should be reconsiled unto him vid. by our heart by
contrition, by our mouth by confession, by our act through satisfaction.
Holy counsels also as the council of Florence, have determined this truth,
and all the fathers of the church as, S. Cyprian Epistola 10. Epistola 15.
Epistola 1.62. cap. 52. Hugo aduersus luciferanos Cyp. lib. de lapsis 15. Orig.
in leuit homil. 2. and psalm. 32 Aug. Epistola 54. Socrates lib. 5. cap. 19.
Zozo. lib. 7.

4. Again, by taking away from the christians the only bridle (which is this
sacramental confession) that should curb and restrain them from their
wickedness, they give occasion that they runn headlong to all dissolution and
wanton exercise; which the protestants of Germany perceauing by experience to
be true, they requested the Emperor Charles the 5. being then at Nor^mberge, in
4. d. 18. q. 1. ar. 1.
that by his imperial authority he would cause confession again to be
brought ^n: whereat Sotus a learned divine being with the Emperor, did answer
laughing, and said: if by the law of God, men are not bound to unfold their
sins to a priest, ^or by that law the priest can absolve, as they said, how
can they be compelled thereunto by the precept of man, for by human precept
noe man will reveal his secreat sins to any man?

5. Pacianus answers the heretics that say God only remitteth sins. Sed
and quod per sacerdotes suos facit, ipsius potestas est: and a little after he
says, that as not only the Apostles do baptize but also their successors, so
not only they remitt sins but also their successors. Paulinus in vita Ambro.
S. Ambrose hearing confessions, wept as the penitentes confessed their sins,
and by weepinge moved them to contrition. Tertulian tells, how the christians
in his time kneeled to the priests for remission. S. Hieronimus epist. ad
Heliodorum. God forbid that that I should speak ill of priests who succeedinge
to the Apostles, by their holy mouth, do make the body of Christ, by whom
we also are christians, who having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, do in
some sort judge us before the day of judgment. Vict. 2. pers. Vand. recounteth
how when the priests were banished by the Arria^s the catholic people cried
out most lamentably, to whom do you leave us miserable, whiles you go to
your crowns? who shall baptize these little ones, with the fountains of
everlasting water? who shall give us the gift of pennaunce and free us from
the baundes of sin by the indulgence of reconsiliation? because to you it is
said. Whatsoever you shall loose upon earth shall be loosed in heaven. Our
Savior gave to his Apostles and consequently to S. Peter power to remitte
sins, whose sins you forgive etc. and saying the Pope is the lawful
successor of S. Peter, it follows that he succeeded to him in his authority.
And although the heretics do answer that this power was given them by
baptism and preachinge, yet it suffices not, because this pouer was given
them in distinct places from the place alleged, to wit in the last place of
S. Mathewe, and S. Marcke, his gospel: and although by baptism and
preachinge the Priest in some sort remitteth sins, yet he cannot remitt the
sins committed after baptism, which cannot be reiterated, and neither by
baptism or preachinge can he be said to retain sins.

Whether fasting from one sort of meat, more then from another, or for to
use any observation therein, be superstitious according as protestants do
affirm. CHAPTER V.
AErius the heretic, Aug lib. de here is. cap. 33. Epiph. here is.
as S. Augustine and S. Epipha. say, defended this doctrine against the
catholic church, as Luther and his followers do now a days, for that, say
they, they would not submitt themselves to any thing that the church
commanded. Matt. 15. Mar. 7.
They allege scriptures for themselves, as the words of our Savior, not
that which enters into the mouth defiles a man etc. Aso they allege for
themselves for breakinge of fasts the 14 chapter of S. Paul: also S. Paul to
Timothy. In the last times men shall depart from the faith, attendinge to
spiritts of error and doctrine of devils, speakinge lies in hypocrisy,
forbiddinge to marry and abstain from meats which God created etc. Aug. lib.
de morib. Ecc. Cath. cap. 33.
To all which I answer with S. Augustine, that catholics do not abstain
from certain meats, for that they esteem any meat unclean, either by
creation, or by judicial observation, but they abstain for chastisinge of
their concupiscence. It is sin only which properly defiles man, and meats
of themselves or of their own nature do not defile, but by accident they make
a man to sin, as the disobedience of Gods comaundements, or of our superiors
who forbidd some meats for certain times and causes, is a sin: as the apple
which our first parents did eat, though of it self it did not defile them,
yet being eaten against the precepte, it did defile, for neither flesh nor
fish of it self does defile, Genes. 3. Chrysostom. homil 12. in. 1. Timoth.
but the breach of the churches precept is it which defiles. And as for S.
Paul, he speaks as S. Chrsostome said, of the Manichees, Eucratites and
Marcionistes, Epiph. here 45.26.6^. Hier. contra Iouin. cap. Aug here is. 25.
and S. Ambrose adds upon this place the Patritians: also S. Epiphanius, S.
Hierom S. Augustine and generally all antiquity affirm the same, both of
them, and also of the heretics called Apostolici, Ebiointes and the like,
whose heresy about marriadge was, that to use the act of matrimony was of
Satan.

2. Touching the prohibition of meats, or use of certain creatures, made to
be eaten, there were many opinions, the first was of Philosophers, Pithagoras,
Empedocles, Apollinaris, Porphirius and others, who condemned the use of
meats, as of beasts, for that they thought that al beasts had reasonable
souls, and that they passed from body to body. The second was of heretics
which condemned the use of these meats, for that they said they were c^eated
of the diuill, and not of God, as Marcion, Tatian, and Manichees: against whom
S. Paul his meaning is to be const^ued in the said place of Timothy, 1. Tim.
4.
as it is declared in the Canons of the Apostles, and in the counsels of
Ancira, Gangrensis, Epiph. here is. 42.47.
the f^rst of Toledo, and Braga, as also by Epipha. The third opinion touching
prohibition of meats was, of certain christians in the beginning of the
church, and after the publishinge of the gospel, who thought that christians
were bound to abstain from such meats as were prohibited by the old law, of
which opinion S. Paul speaks in the 14. chapter to the Romans, which he
disproues as well there, as in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 10.15.
So that by these places of scripture misaplied, they go about to abolish all
fasting, which our Savior and all holy people as many as ever were in this
world did observe, Matt. 4.
and begone and finished their heroical works withal: for our Savior fasted
40. days, S. John did abstain from all delicate meats and drinckes, Mat 3.11
Mar. 1. Number 6. Iere. 35.14. Iona 3. Mat. 9.14.
the Recabites and Nazaretts are commended in holy scripture for their fasting,
also the Ninevites for their fasting were pardoned, S. John's disciples fasted,
and Christ said to his disciples, that they should observe the same after his
departure from them.

3. Now the difference of the fast of the church of God, Aug. li. 5. contra
Faustum cap. 5. Theod. in Epito. diuinorum decretoru^ c. de abst.
and of heretics, Saint Augustine declares and Theodoretus, also S. Bernard,
supra Cant. ser. 66. Epipha. in lib. de compend. doctrinae catholicae, for he
says that in the church there was great difference of fasting, according
either to the vow or mortification of every one: some fasted from all kind
of fleash, some fasted from eggs and all white meats, some from any thing that
should be fodd and from all kind of fruictes, for before the flood noe wine
was droncken; noe fleash was eaten. And all the poor people either in the old
law or in the law of grace, did observe this fast. Moises and Elias fasted
40. days either of them. Samuel was commanded he should drink noe wine. All
the priests that were employed in the mysteries of the church, were forbidden
to drink any wine, or any thing else that should distemper them. Judith,
Hester, Daniell, and the Machabees, by their fasting have atcheeued and
performed those worthy exploites which are registered in holy scriptures.
Again we are bid by Ioell to turn to God by fasting. Joel. 1. Psalm. 68.
David said that he covered his soul with fasting. The justification of a
christian in this life as S. Augustine says, is fasting, Aug. in Psalm. 4.2.
prayers and almesdeedes: and therefore the catholic church, as she ordained
certain times of prayers, so she ordained certain days and certain times
of fasting, not without significant mysteries correspondent to every time.

4. Also she has made a prohibition of certain meats to tame the wantones
and exorbita^t lust of our fleashly inclinations, disposinge and impellinge
the spirit to yield unto her consent, as well by the suggestion of Satan, as
her own delectation, and so to make our poor soul which otherwise ought to
be the harbenger to intertaine the inspiration of the holy ghost, to receive
the suggestion of the diuil, and her filthy delectation, she I say has
prohibited certain meats, thereby to deliver the spirit from the stinge of
the filthy motions of concupiscence and sensuality, and to humble the same
unto the law of God and rule of reason. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. Psalm. 34.
S. Augustine says, the church does with great reason abstain from certain
meats certain times, as David, cum mihi molesti essent etc. when those
carnal motions did vex me, I did wear hair cloathe and did humble my soul
with fasting. S. Paul when he was attatched with these carnal motions, he
prayed unto God three times, 2. Cor. 6. Gal. 5.
he chastised his body, and yet he was the elected vessel of God. And in
another place he said; let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of God in
watchinges, fastinges and chasticements, for such says he as are the members
of Christ, they crucify the flesh with the vices and concupiscence thereof:
Matt. 9. Luc 5. Act. 13.
our Savior also said, that notwithstanding the Apostles should be replenished
with the holy ghoaste, yet they should fast. He said also that certain
diuills are so terrible to offend, Matt. 7.
and so dreadful to tempte us, that they cannot be overcome but by fasting
and prayer, and therefore the Angel said unto Tobias, Daniel. 9
that prayer with fasting is good, and Daniell by fasting did prophecy so
many things to come of the militant church.

5. He is a bad patie^t that does not abstain from certain meats certain
times, according to the rule and prescripte order of his corporal physician,
concerning, his bodily disease: and is not he a bad christian that does not
obey the comaundeme^t of the church and his ghostly physician touching the
spiritual sickness of the soul? and yet such is the protestant who is so
fleashlie given, that he would not abstain his carnal appetites from fleash
upon good friday. A certain Irishman being sent over by the Lord deputy of
Ireland, to a great noble man in England with grehounds, the said noble man
having asked of him what meat those grehounds were wont to eat, and the man
having told him certain distinctions of meat, the noble man said, that by
that obseruarion of diett, they were papists dogs; the Irishman said, they
were as good protestants dogs as any were in all Ingland, for said he, they
will not refrain from any flesh upon good fridaie. Amb. lib. de Helici and
iciun. Cyp. de iciun. and tentat. Hier. li. 1.
Wherein these heretics imitate Aerius, who would not have the christians to
observe any time of fasting, as S. Epiphanus said, and therefore by him and
others condemned for an heretic, as also Iouinian for that occasion, was
condemned for an heretic by S. Hierome.

6. But we ought not to transgress the the bonds and decrees of our
ancestors and elders, therefore we ought not to follow Luther, who said he
would not fast because as he said the Pope bids the same. But it is the
discipline and custom of the universal church to fast the lent, Hieron. Epip.
de consecrat. dub. 5. Can. 68.19. Mogunt. cap. 35. Tollet. 8. cap. 9.
the aduents, the eues of the Apostles, and fridaies and Saterdaies, and this
from the beginning. So the Canons of the Apostles do teach, and holy counsels
as Gangrense, Mogunt. and the council of Tollet, which excommunicated all such
as would despise the ecclesiastical constitutions touching fasting, or that
without inevitable necessity should eat flesh in lent time: the prophett
confirminge the same, Joel. 2.
solemnize and institute a fast, wherein the christians ought to obey and
believe the church according to the saying of S. Athanasius, who has thies
words. If anny will come and say unto you, S. Athan. lib ad Virgins post
initiu^.
do not fast often, least you should be more feeble and weak, do not believe
them nor harcken unto them, for the enemy of mankind does make an instrument
of them to whisper and suggest thies things, remember that which is written,
when the 3. children, Daniell and other were brought in captivity by
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, it was commanded that they should eat of the
meat that was prepared for the kings board, and that they should drink of
his wine, Daniell and the other 3. boys, would not be polluted or defiled with
the kings table: but they said unto the euenuche who had charge of them, give
unto us of the roots of the earth: unto whom the euenuch said, I fear the
king, which ordained and appointed meat for you, least that your countenance
should appear and seem more lean and pale then that of the other boys,
which are fedd at the kings board, and so should punish me, unto whom they
did say, try your servants tenn days and give unto us of the roots of the
earth, and he gave unto them pulse to eat, and water to drink, and brought
them before the king, and they seemed more beautiful then the other boys
which were nourished by that kings royal meat. Do you see what fasting
does? it heales diseases, and dries distillations of the body, it chaseth
away diuills, expels wicked thoughts, makes the mind clearer, it purifies
the heart, it sanctifies the body, it bringes a man into the throne of God; and
least that you should think that this is rashly spoken, you have testimonies
of this in the gospel pronounced by our Savior, when the disciples did ask
how unclean spiritts should be cast forth, our Lord did answer, this kind is
not cast forth but by prayers and fasting therefore fasting is the food of
Angels, and whosoever uses the same, he is thought to be of an angelical
order: thus far S. Athanasius.

Whether the Protestant assertion be true, which affirms that general
counsels can err. CHAPTER I.
1. WHen any controversy either of state or the public weal does rise in
any como^welth, the princes with all the state thereof assemble together, and
whatsoever is ennacted and decreede by them, the rest of the subjects must
observe and obey the same. So in any controversy of religion, when the chief
pastors and prelates of the church who have more power, and authority of God
then all the princes of other common wealths, being assisted by his blessed
spirit, whatsoever they have decreede for the good of the church and the
weal public of Christendom, their subjects (if they be of Christ his
flock) ought to submitt themselves to their definition and determination.
Acto. 15. Chal in epist. ad Leone^ and 6. Synodus act. 17. Celest. papa epist
ad Conc. Ephesians. Tolet. 3.
So in the acts where the first christian council was held, and afterward
in every age as occasion served, the council of Chalcedon, and the six
general counsels, and S. Celestine the Pope auerreth, that general counsels
are by manifest declaration showed by Christ in these words Math: 15.
whenever two or three shall be gathered together in my name, there I shall be in
the midst of them. The Apostles which were replenished with the holy ghoaste,
did celebrate the first council by the inspiration thereof, when they said.
Acto. 15.
It seems good unto the holy ghoaste and to us.

2. There are four sorts of counsels, some whereof be general, some
national, Aug. li. 2. de bapt.
some provincial, and some diocessiall. Of the three formest S. Augustine
makes mention, of the last the council of Tollet. The general counsels are
such as when all the Bishopps and prelates of the whole world, unless they be
lawfully let, do assemble, and the Pope or his legate ought to be
President. National, is when the Prelates of one kingdom and the Primate and
Patriarche of that kingdom does assemble together. Provincial is of one
Province. Diocesiall, is of one Diocese, General counsels approved are
reckned 18. in number. The first is of Nyce, which was celebrated from the
year of our Lord 328. unto the year of our Lord 330. which was the 15. of
Siluester the Pope, and the 20. of Constantine the Emperor, in which there were
318. Bishopps. The second council of Constantinople, which was celebrated
against Macedonius that denied the deity of the holy ghoaste. S. Damasus
being Pope and Theodosius the great Emperor. Prosper in chronico.
There were 105. Bishopps and 4. Patriarchs, Nectarius of Constantinople,
Timotheus of Alexandria, Miletius of Alexandria and Cyrillus of Jerusalem.
Anno Domini 383. The 3. of Ephesus, Celestinus being Pope and Theodosius the
younger Emperor, Bishopps 200. Patriarchs. 3. vid. S. Cyrill. of Alexandria
that was the Pope his Attorney, John of Antioche, Prosper in Chron. Socrates
lib. 7.
Iuuenall of Jerusalem, against Nestorius Bishopp of Constantinople Anno 434.
The 4. of Calcedon against Eutiches, Leo the first being Pope and Matianus
Emperor 454. according the computation of Mathewe Palmer, Bishopps there were
630. The 5. of Constantinople Vigilius being Pope and Justinian Emperor. Paulus
Diaconus in vita eiusdem.
The 6. of Constantinople Agatha being Pope, Constantine the 4. Emperor Anno
681. against those that held one nature only in Christ. The 7. of Nice. Adrian
being Pope against Imadge breakers: Ibid. lib. Romans rer.
Anno Domini 781. in which there were Bishopps 360. The 8. of Constantinople
Adrian the 2. being Pope and Basilius Emperor: Anno Domini 87. The 9. of
Lateran Celestine the 2. being Pope and Harrie the 5. Emperor, wherein there
were 900. Bishopps Anno 1123. for the recovering of the holy land. The 10.
Lotherius 2. wherein there were a thousand Bishopps Anno 1237. Innocentius
being Pope and Lotherius the Emperor. The 11. of Lateran Alexander the 3. Pope
and Frederick the first Emperor for the reformation of the church against
Waldenses Anno 1558. The 12. of Lateran against many heresies, Innocentius the
3. being Pope, and Frederick the 2. Emperor for the recoueringe of the holy
land. The 13. of Lions against the Emperor Frederick the 2 Innocentius the 4.
being Pope, and for the recoueringe of the holy land. The 14. of Lions
wherein there were a thousand fathers amoungest which there were 500. Bishopps
Anno Domini 1274. against the errors of the Greeks, Gregory 5. being Pope
and Rodolph Emperor. The 15. of Viena Clement the 5. Pope and Henry the 7.
Emperor against many heresies. Bishopps there were 300. Anno 1311. The 16. of
Florence against the errors of Greece Eugenius the 4. and Albert Emperor 1489.
The 17. of Lateran against scisme in the time of Julius 2. Leo 10. and
Maximilian Emperor. The 18. of Trentt which was begone Anno 1545. ended 1563.
against the heresies of Luther, Calvin, and others in the time of Paulinus 3.
Julius 3. and Pius the 4. Charles the 5. and Ferdinand Emperors. There were
present 6. Cardinales 4. Legates 3. Patriarchs 32. Archbishopps 208. Bishopps;
But all heretics refuse general counsels as the Protestants do, and as the
council of Trent says, noe otherwise then wicked thieves refuse the trial of
indifferent jury.

3. But we say that the holy counsels of Gods church, lawfully assembled by S.
Peter's successors not only by their personal presence, Matt. 18
but also by their legates and substitutes in the definition of faith or good
manners cannot err. For when our Savior said, whenever two or three shall be
assembled together in my name, there I will be in the midst of them, he added
afterward, of a man that is incorrigible tell the church thereof, and if he
will not hear the church, let him be as an ethincke or publican I mean
without faith and without grace. He added moreover in that chapter, whatsoever
you shall bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and if two or three being
lawfully assembled together in Christ's name, Christ be in the midst of them
(vid.) to assist them by his council and light of understanding, in those
things that are necessary for them: how much more all Bishopps and Prelates
which God has appointed to govern and rule his church shall obtain of God
knowledge and understanding for that function? This argument the council of
Calcedo^ did use in an Epistle to Leo the Pope, Council. Chalc. act. 6 con act
17. Io. 16. Io. 14.
saying. Our Savior did promise to send the holy ghoast that should teach the
Apostles all truth, and that he meant all^o the same to the successors of the
Apostles he said, that the holy spirit shall remain in his church for ever,
but the holy ghoast does not teach the Bishopps in private or disioyned,
therefore when they be gathered together: and therefore they say it pleases the
holy ghoaste and us, which holy ghoaste, is noe less necessary for the
conservation of the church now, then in the begininge for the fondation
thereof, and therefore our Savior says. Mat. vlt.
I will be with you unto the consumation of the world, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against the church, which as S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 3.
is the firmament and pillar of truethe.

4. The general council represents the universal church, 3. Reg. c 8.
Athan. in epist. de Synodis Arimin. and Seuleuciae and ep. ad Episcopos
Affricanos. Epiph. in fine Ancorat. Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constable. Aug. li. 3.
cont. Donatist. c. 18 Ephesians. 4. Act. 20. Luc. 10. Hebr. 13. 1. Tim. 3. Tit.
as the assembly that was made by Solomon in the Temple, represented the whole
church of Jerusalem, but the universal church cannot err, therefore the
general counsels cannot err. For Atha. S. Epipha; Eusebius. S. August. do call
the general counsels the congregation of the whole world, and the consent of
the universal church. All such places of scripture as do prove that the Pope
cannot err in the definition of faith, proves also that the general or
national council assembled by his authority cannot err. Also such places of
scripture as proves, and teaches that we ought to reverence Bishopps, as
Pastors, to hear them as masters, follow them as captains, he that hears
you hears me etc. obey your rulers, be subject unto them, and embrace their
doctrine, with many such places; all which do argue that they cannot deceive
us, or if they do, we may attribut the blame to our Savior that bids us to
obey them, and embrace their doctrine.

Atha. epi. Epist. Epiph here is. 77 Aug. 162. Nemo ca. de summa trinit. and fide
catho Gela ep. ad Episc Sardinia.
5. This same is proved by the fathers, that the difinition of a general
council is the last judgment of the church, from which there is noe
appellation, as Athana. and Epiphanius and others with S. Augustine do
affirm, and so Leo the Pope requested the Emperor Martianus, saying that the
definition of the general council should never be brought in question, which
the said Martianus established by law. The same also Gelasius the Pope decreed
in the council of Ephesus circa finem, and in the council of Calchedon Act 5.
Canone vlt. Moreover the fathers and all counsels do teach, that they are
excomunicated, and ought to be countted heretics, that do not rest
themselves upon general counsels, and therefore all general counsels do
pronounce Anathema, I mean the sore censure of excommunication against such as
do contradict the final decree of general counsels as Athanasius does
witness of the counsel of Nice, Athan in epist ad Episcopos Afri^ae S.
Gr^gor. Nazianz. in epistola priori ad Clidoniu^ Leo epist ad Anat^lium.
and so it is in all other counsels. Grego. Nazianz. does write when the
Apolinaristes denied that they were not heretics, and that they were received
in a catholic council, said let them show this and we will be contented. S.
Leo writing to the emperor or Leon said, they ought not to be accounted
catholic that do resist the council of Calcedon. And so he writes the
like to Anatolius: and S. Basil writes that they ought to be suspected of
heresy, Basil. ep. 78.
that do call in question the determination of the council of Nice. S.
Augustine did excuse S. Cyprian of heresy, Aug. li. 1. de bap. ca. 18.
because noe general council defined any thing to the contrary towchinge the
baptism of heretics. Also S. Gregory pronounced excommmunicatio^ against
all that would not receive the decree of general counsels. Greg. li. 1.
epist. 24.
Constantine the great in his epistle to the churches, Apud Eusebius. l. 3. de
vit. Constable. Atha. ep. ad Episc. Africanos. Cyrill. l. 1. de trinit. Leo epist.
53. ad Anatoliu^ and 54 ad Martianu^ and ep. 37. ad Leone^. Au^. Gre. lib. 1.
ep. 14 Nice. epist. ad Michaele^. Ambros. epist. 32.
called the decree of the council of Nice, celestial precepts. Athanasius
also said that the decree of the church was the divine precept which should
remain for ever. S. Cyrill calls it the divine, just, and holy oracle. S.
Leo says that the Canons thereof, were ordained by the holy ghoast, and that
the council of Calcedon was assembled by the holy spirit. S. Gregory also
says that he reuerenceth the first 4. general counsels, as the 4.
Evangelists. Nicholaus the first also says, that the decrees of general
counsels are inspired by the holy ghoast. S. Ambrose does affirm that we
should rather die, than we should depart from the definitions of general
counsels. I will, says he, follow the decree of the council of Nice from
the which neither death not sword shall separat me. S. Hillarie suffered
banishment for the faith of the council of Nice. Hilar. in fine lib de Synod.
Victor. in libris trib. de per^ec Vandalic Hier. lib. cont. Luciferanos.
Victor Africanus describes many worthy martires which suffered for the decree
and definition of the faith set down and explicated in the council of Nice.
S. Hierom also speakinge of Athanasius and S. Hillarie and other holy
confessors say. How could they do any thing against the council of Nice,
for the which they suffered banishment.

6. This is proved by reason, for first if the general cou^cells should err,
there should be noe certain or settled judgment in the church, by which
controversy should be determined and descided, and by which the unity and
concord of the church should be preserved, for which general counsels were
ordained. Secondly, if there were not an infallible judgment of these general
counsels, then the Arians had not been condemned for heretics for saying
the council of Nice did err, nor Macedonius for an heretic for saying the
council of Chalcedon did err, nor Nestorius for an heretic for saying the
council of Ephesus did err, nor Eutiches for saying the council of Chalcedon
did err. Thirdly, we should have noe certainty of many books of the holy
scriptures, as of S. Paul to the Hebrews, the 2. epistle of S. Peter, the
third of S. John S. James his epistle, S. Jude and the Apocalipes, they being
called in question until the truth of them was made known by general
counsels.

That the catolique church, in those thing she does propound to the christians
to believe, whether they be contained in the Scriptures or not, cannot err.
CHAPTER II.
THis is proved by scripture, Ad Tim. 3 Ephesians. 5. Apoca 21 Psalm. 79. Isa. 2.
Matt. 13. 1. Cor 12. Ephe. 1.
for that the church of Christ is the firmament and pillar of truethe, the
spouse of Christ, the holly city, a fruitful vineyarde, a high mountain,
a direct way, the only do^e, the kingdom of heaven, the body of Christ, and
multitude unto whom the holy ghoaste is promised, is governed of Christ
being her head, and of the holy ghoast being her soul, as it is set down
by S. Paul, saying. Ephe. 4.
He gave him as a head above every church which is his body. And in another
place he said, one head and one spirit, and he said as the husband is the head
of the wife, so also Christ is the head of his church, for if the church had
been impeached of error, that imputation should be said on Christ and the
holy ghoaste, therefore Christ did instruct her by his said holy spirit,
saying the spirit of truth shall teach you all truth. Ioh. 16.
Again we are bound under pain of excommunication to believe the church in
all things, as may appear by S. Math. If he will not hear the church, Matt.
18.
let him be unto you as an ethnic and a publican. Further more we say, that
the church is holy, both in her profession and in the assertion of her faith,
therefore christian profession ought to contain nothing but that which is
true and holy touching faith. Lastly, the fathers in all their doubts and
controversies towching faith and religion, did submitt themselves to the
arbitrament of the church which they would not do if they thought the church
did err, for S. Augustine says, Aug. epi. 118. and l. 1. contra Crescentiu^
cap. 33.
it is an insolent madness to dispute against any thing that the universal
church decreede. And in another place he says. We have the truth of holy
scriptures when we do that which pleases the universal church. And our
Savior says, Luc. 10. Matt. 23.
whosoever hears you hears me etc. whatsoever they comaund you do it etc.

Whether Catoliques are to be charged with arrogancy, for thinkinge that their
church cannot fail. CHAPTER III.
1. We ought not to be co^uinced of arrogancy to affirm that Christ did not
lie when he said, that the gates of hell should not prevail against his
church. Matt. 16.
Heaven and earth shall pass, Matt. 24. Matt. 28. Ioh. 14.
but his words shall not pass, what word but that which is universally
preached by the catholic church, when he says behold I am with you to the
worlds end. Ephesians. 5.
The spirit of truth fails not for ever, Christ prays that the faith of
Peter should never fail, 1. Tim. 1.
she is his spouse, and the kingdom of heaven, wherefore should she then fail
being the pillar of truethe? she cannot fail she being his wife, his dove,
his kingdom, his portion, his vineyarde, his inheritance, his dwellinge house,
for the which he suffered his passion, he died and shed his precious blood she
cannot fail. Contra Gent.


2. This was a chief argument by which S. Chrysostom did prove against the
Gentiles, that Christ was God, by reason of his power in settinge forth his
church by poor and simple people, and the continuance thereof in full force
and authority, notwithstanding all the power and plotts of Satan, and all
the might and strenght of earthly potentates, with the imploime^t of all their
malice and strange pollices which were combined and conioined together for her
direction. If S. Chrysostom did prove the divinity of Christ by the
continuance of his church 400. years, how much more a minori ad maius, should
we prove the divinity and power of Christ, not against gentiles as S.
Chrysostom did, but against worst infidels, as caluinistes and other
heretics, who with great malice, and more cunninge devises, seek to
overthrow the church of God, then all the enemies thereof as Jews, Goathes,
Hunnes, Gauls, Vandals, Sarasins, Longobards, Bolgares, Turcks and all other
infidels, and yet she is preserved now these 1620. years, and shall allwaies
continewe in full force and authority to the worlds end.

Psalm. 87.
3. The continewance of gods church, is set down by the prophett. Disposui
testamentum electis meis, what testament says S. Aug. in enarrat ibid. but the
new testament. I have sworn unto my servant David: what is this that God
binds with an oath, that the seed of Abraham shall continewe for ever ever?
Ad Gal. 3
And so saint Paul says. If you be of Christ, you are the seed of Abraham
inheritors of that promise, this is the church says saint Augustine not that
fleash of Christ taken of the blessed Virgin, but all we that believe in
Christ. And in another psalm he says. I will dwell in thy tabernacle:
wherefore S. Augustine says, that his church shall not be for a time, but shall
continewe for ever, unto the end of the world. And in the 14. our Lord has
been mindful of his testament and of the word that he commanded to a thousand
generations, Psalm. 14.
and given to Abraham that which he did also swear unto Isaac, and appointed
for a law. Matt. 24.
He said his word should never pass away, what word, but that which did not
only continewe duringe the Apostles time, but that word and sacrifice which
shall continewe to the worlds end, Matt. 28. S. Leo prius epi. 3^. ad Pulcher.
Aug. Leo 2. epist ad Constan.
our Savior plainly declaringe the same, I will be with you unto the worlds
end, as S. Leo the first and Leo the second writes. Also when S. Paul Ephesians.
4. makes mention of so manny dignities of ecclesiastical order in Christ his
church, as Apostles, Prophetts, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, he says
that they should continewe to the worlds end, as the Prophett says. August.
Deus fundauit eam in eternum. God founded the same for ever. Psalm. 47.
I mean his church as S. Augustine expounds, and this is proved by the 91.
chapter of Isay, Luc 4.
which chapter is understood of the church of the new testament, as our
Savior taught.

4. The same is also proved by the psalm 88. His throne shall be like the sun
in my presence, Psalm. 88.
and like a perfect Moon for ever, and I will put his seat and his throne as
the day of heaven. Daniel. 2.
Daniell also does manifest the same saying. In the days of these kingdoms
God shall raise up the kingdom of heaven, which shall never be dispersed, and
his kingdom shall not be given to another nation. And according to saint
Luke, of his kingdom there shall be noe end. Moreover that psalm does say if
her children will offend, and shall not keep my laws and comaundements etc.
yet I will visitt in a rodd their iniquity and their sins in scourges, I
will not for all that put away my mercy from the same, which place saint
Cyprian as well in this psalm as also in the 2. of Daniell does expound to be
me^t of the afflictions and tribulations of the church. In Cant. sermon. 79.
S. Bernard also, in illud tenui eum nec dimittam. I held him, and I will not
let him go etc. neither then, nor after the christian stock shall not fail,
neither faith from the world, neither charity from the church. Let all the
raginge fire, all the te^pestuous waves insult and freate against her, they
shall not cast her down because she is builded upon a firm rock, and the
rock is Christ, which neither by the pratinge of Philosophers, or the
cauillation of heretics, or by the sword of persecutors, can or shall be
separated.

Illir Glos. in Math. cap. 2.
5. Illiricus a protestant writer says, that the true church in the midst of
all persecutions, destructions of cities, common wealths and people, is
preserved miraculously by gods special protection and assistance. This is
also proved by Oecola^padius upon Isay cap. 2. by Melancthone, in locis
communibus cap. de ecclesia editione 1561. by Brentius upon S. Luc cap. 17.
homil. 19. Luth. tomo. 4. in Isa. cap. 9. by Bullenger in Apocali. Canc. 72.
For the fall and destruction of the church cannot be denied, without the
denial of all the articles of our faith, and fondation of christian religion,
the trinity of God, the incarnation of Christ, his preachinge, his death, his
passion, his eternal kingdom and priesthood, and all other mysteries of
catholic religion. For what end was his cominge to take fleash by his
incarnation, but to join unto himself in an indissoluble knott of mariadge,
his church from which he would never be divorced or separated? To what end was
his preaching, but to erect and establish the same, his passion was to
sanctify it and to leave her an everlasting remedy to blott out her sins
and offenses. And I pray you who is an everlasting king that has not an
everlasting people, Osee. 2. Ephesians. 5. Ioh. 17.
obeying him and obseruinge his laws? how can he be an everlasting priest,
whose priesthood and sacrifice for so manny years was applied to none, and
availed for none? To what purpose was the holy ghoast sent but to remain with
his church for ever, and to instruct her in all truth? wherefore to affirm
that this church has failed, is to affirm that Christ's prophetts and Apostles
are all liers, and all that is written both in the old and new testament to be
fabulous.

That this Church which shall never be hid, but remain visible, is manifest by
the parable of Christ our Lord. CHAPTER IV.
1. THe church of God is called a Barn, in which there is corn and chafe, a
nett in which there is good and badd fishes, a field in which there is cockle
and wheat, a banquett at which there are good and badd, a flock in which
there are sheep and goats, all which does signify a visible church, but the
invisible church has but only the good according to the opinion of the
protestants, which is contrary as well to the said parables, as to our Saviors
own words saying He will make clean his barn, Matt. 13.
the wheat he will gather into his garner, but he will burn the chafe, with
an inexstinguible fire, which shall not be until the day of judgment. Matt. 3.
Our Savior says, suffer both of them (I mean the wheat and the cockle) to
grow until the harvest, which will not be until the day of judgment. For a
kingdom must be meant of people that are known in the kingdom, but the
church, as before is alleged, is the kingdom of God, therefore the dwellers
thereof must be known. S. Augustine does prove the same lardglie against the
Donatistes, Aug. in Psalm 101. concio. 2.
who said the church perished. O wicked and impudent voice that the church
should perish, this they say because they be not in her etc. Our Savior did
referr us to the church when he said, Dic ecclesiae, tell the church, now which
way should we tell the church thereof, without the church be to be seen? and
therefore our Savior took away all doubt and said, it is a city placed upon
a hill, which shall give light to the world.

2. This is proved by reason, for none can be saved unless he enter into the
church, of which the arcke of Noe was a figure, and as all perished that did
not enter into the arcke, so they perish also that enter not into the church,
but none can enter into the church which he knows not, therefore all must
perish because they cannot see this church. The profession of a christian
ought to be visible not hidden, therefore the church in which this profession is
made, ought to be so, for it is said, Roman. 10. Matt. 10.
whosoever shall deny me before men, I will deny him before my father who is
in heaven.

3. The comparison brought for the forsakinge the sinagoge of the Jews, is not
a like, for she was but a figure and a shadow of the holy catholic church,
the oracles of the holy prophetts, all the mornefull cries of the blessed
Patriarchs, all the sacrifices of the Leuitts, all the oblations of the Jews,
signified or represented nothing else then the cominge of the Messiah, at
whose cominge all the other rites and oblations of the sinagoge should have an
end, as it was prophesied: Genes. 94.
Quando venerit qui mittendus est, cessabit vnctio vestra, vid. when the
Messiah shall come, your unction, and your sacrifice shall cease, which also
was prophesied and foretold by the Patriarch Jacob when he was dyinge, who
having all his children about him, said these words. Non auferetur sceptrum
de Judah, nec dux de faemore eius, donec veniat qui mittendus est, and ipse erit
expectatio gentium vid. the scepter shall not be taken from the tribe of Judah,
nor a captain from her loins, until he come which is to be sent, and he
shall be the expectation of nations. So as after the cominge of Christ, as well
the seat royal of the kingdom, as also the legal observations of the Jews,
withal their sacrifices and oblations, were accomplished in the death of
Christ when he said, consumatum est, it is accomplished, and so instituted a
new law, and founded his church, which was the seat of David, that was given
unto him, of whom it was said, he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever,
Luc. 1. Damas. ^4 57. Esa. 6.5. Os^^. 2.
and of his kingdom there shall be noe end: and that all the world should
embrace the God of Abraham, as it is said by the prophett Esaias. The Princes of
people shall be gathered together with the God of Abraham, so as we see not
only the Christians, but also Turcks and Mores to embrace the God of Abraham as
the true God, of whom it is said also. I have given you a light unto the
nations that you may be my saftie unto the utter most part of the world.

4. Wherefore he has instituted a new sacrifice by which his honor should be
vphoulden, and by which his name should be glorified, which according to the
prophecy of Malachias, Malac. 1.
should be the true oblation that should be offered unto him for ever and in
all places of the world: this was not meant of the sacrifice of the old law,
for that could not be offered but at Jerusalem as the holy scriptures
witness, and therefore it is meant of the blessed sacrifice of the Mass,
which shall be offered for ever in the church of God, for the which Christ has
instituted and ordained priests which shall offer sacrifice unto the eternal
father, according to the institution of Christ and prophecy of Malachias,
and therefore S. Augustine, lib. de unit. ecclesiae cap. 12.13. de ciuit. lib.
20. cap. 8. and Psalm. 85. ad illud tu solus Deus magnus. Psalm. 70. affirms
the^ to deny Christ and to robb him of his glory and inheritance bought with
his blood, which teach that his church may fail or perish, and S. Ierom
refuteth the same wicked heresy in the Luciferans, Dialog. ad Lucif. c. 6.
prouinge against them that they make God subject to the diuill, a poor
miserable Christ, that imagine that the church may either perish or be driven
to any corner of the world.

4. And although the Sacraments, ceremonies, Matt. 11.
and the legal observations of the Jews did fail, because it is said, the
law, and the prophetts were unto John, yet notwithstanding the church of
Christ did not fail, which was collected and composed of both the nations, I
mean Jews and Gentiles, as S. Paul does witness in many places, that the
first fruictes of the holy ghoaste, and the first christians were the Apostles
which were Jews, therefore the church of the Jews did not fail so as that
none of them did remain therein as the said Apostle proves. Romans 11.
Has God (says he) rejected his people? God forbid for I am an Israelite and
of the seed of Abraham and of the tribe Beniamine, for God did not cast of his
people. The gloss upon this place faith, that the Jews are not infidels
altogether, and so God did repel the^ in part, but not in whole, because he
has not rejected me and others that are predestined, thus far the gloss.
For he rejected the house of Saul, but not of David, unto whom in reward of
the ardent desire and fervent devotion that he had to build a temple for gods
glory, he promised that he would build for David an everlasting kingdom, and
a perpetual house from whom he should never take away his mercy, for which
he made the 88. psalm wherein he confirmed this promise.

Whether that papists do amiss, in having their churches and monasteries
so sumptuous, their alters and ornaments so rich, and ecclesiastical
possessions so great, the poor wanting the same. CHAPTER I.
1. Whatsoever is given to Christ's church, is given in his honor that suffered
for the said church, being his spouse, his portion etc. for as our Savior
says. Beatius. est dare quam accipere; It is better to give then to take, and
noe marvel that christians should give unto God some part of his own, as
the prophett says: what shall I give unto him that gives unto me all things?
I pray you tell me, whether, it be a greater offense to robb and overthrow the
kings house, and to spoil his subjects of their goods, deprive them of their
lives and to comitt all other outrageous facts upon them, then to build the
same, maintain and enriche the same, to bestow lardgl^e upon his servant,
to defend and protect them etc? Tell me I pray you whether Solomon that built
the temple of Jerusalem so sumptuously, and which by the riches thereof was
most famous through out the world, was more offensive unto God for so doing,
then Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and Antiochus Epiphanes, which were not
contented to ransacke and spoil that worthy temple, cast down the pillars,
take away the golden alter and candlesticks, and all other sacred vessels or
religious ornaments, but also defiled the same and prohibited any oblatio^ or
sacrifice to be offered therein? For this cause these two tirants do represent
the diuill, and Solomon is a figure of Christ. And if Solomon was so commended
in holy scriptures for buildinge the said Temple for the sinagoge, how much
more christian princes for buildinge churches for Jesus Christ.

2. I pray you tell me also, whether Constantine the great, merited more
before God and the world, for buildinge so many churches upon his own
charges, and for augmentinge and enrichinge the patrimony of Christ, then
king Henry the 8. that did cast and pull down so many churches, monasteries
and chapples, and did disolue so manny Religious howses, robbed them of all
their sacred ornaments, and by so doing, spoiled God of his patrimony? You
say that whatsoever king Henry the 8. did, was donn for the relief of the
poor and the ease of his subjects to be freed from subsidies and impositions,
as was related in that very parleame^t, wherein monasteries and churches were
surprised, and religion profaned. And therefore it was added in the said
parleament, that the truly poor of the kingdom perished, and that Abbey
Lubbers (for so they called religious persons) did possess their liuinges. To
this effect there was a supplication exhibited to the king against Bishops,
Abottes, Priores, Deacons, Archdeacons, suffragans and priests in form
following etc. What tyra^t ever oppressed the people like this cruel and
ve^geable generation? Before these came there were but few thieves, yea theft
was at that time so rare, that Caesar was not compelled to make penalty of
death upon felony as your grace may well perceive in his institutes: there was
also at that time but few poor people, and yet they did not beg, but there
was given them enoughe unasked. Wherefore if your grace will build a sure
hospital that never shall fail to reliue us all your poor beads men, take
from them al these things, set these sturdy boubies abroad in the world to get
the^ wives of their own, to get their living with their labor in the swette
of their brows according to Gene. 1. Tie all idle thieves to the carts to be
whipped naked about every markett town, that they by their importunat
begginge take not away the allmesse that the good christian people do give,
then shall as well the number of our foresaid mounsterous sort, as of the
baudes, hoores, thieves and idle people decrease, then shall these great yearly
exactions cease, then shall all your people increase in wealth etc. these are
set down in John Fox his Chronicles. Judas in like manner (when the devout
wooman Marie Magdale^ anointed Christ's feet with a most precious ointment)
did say, vt quid perditio haec, what destruction is this, had it not been
better, said he, that this had been sold and given unto the poor? our Savior
answered, let her alone, and added moreover, that in what place so ever of the
world his gospel should be read, her devotion should be commended. And as Judas
herin did not care for the poor, as the scripture reports, but hopinge it
should return to himself: so parleament protestants did not care for the
poor, but all their drifte was to have the liuinges and treasures of the
churches themselves, as itt fell out.

3. I pray you tell me, whether the poor were better and more reliued, or the
subjects more eased of subsidies and impositio^s before the suppression of the
church, or after? Doctor Sanders writes, that England was never troubled with
greater impositio^s and subsidies then it was in the later days of king Henry
the 8. nor any king in england had less treasure in his cofers then he at his
death. And as for the poor people it is manifest, that they have less
relief now then ever they had. I am sure there are not 300. persons reliued by
all the church liuinges of England, and Ireland being in those men's hands
which have as little charity toward God, and pity toward the poor, as
they have remorse of conscience to keep them, or moral honesty to bestow
them. And as for other ecclesiastical dignities and spiritual benefices out
of which the greatest lively hoode should be deducted, they say. Non sufficit
nobis and vobis: we have not inoughe our selves, much less will we imparte
any thing unto others, having such a diluge of chitts and children, with
which the countries of this gospel do abou^d, that S. Paul should not
brag nor glory more for begettinge children, per euangelium, by the gospel
of Christ, then they by their voluptuous gospel. And so each of them may
say. Genui vos per euangelium. I have begotten you by the gospel, but I would
to God they had gotten them spiritually as S. Paul did, and not carnally as
they do, whose voluptuous gospel is. Crescere, and multiplicare ex
sanguinibus, aut ex voluntate carnis, sed non ex Deo nati sunt. By filthy
concupiscence according to the will of the fleash, but are not borne of God,
whose unhappy and woeful of spring, did robb Christ of his patrimony, and did
not only destroy the ecclesiastical state of his church, but also have
almost brought to ruin the civil, and temporal state: having made their
inundation (with which all England and Ireland are so overwhelmed) into their
neighbors possessions and territories, that the bounds and banckes of these
countries are not able to resist their violent irruptions, neither yet a mean
contment is not able to contain the confused and disordered multitude of their
issue; so as if England either by conquest, or some other course do not
appoint their habitation, and dwellinge place in some other country, as
Virginia or Guiana, or elce where, the kingdom of great Brittanie and poor
Ireland, shall feel the smarte, and especially the nobility and cheifest,
into whom they pry daily, seekinge by all dishonest courses to intrude into
their lands and liuinges, as they have donn already by suppressinge them in
all those countries where this gospel took footing, for I dare say and boldly
affirm, that these gospellers have putt down and surprised as many howses of
noble men and gentlemen, as monasteries and churches, but it is the just
judgment of God that these potentats, and great people should feel their
greatest smarte, by whom they were solicited, defended, and protected in this
their new gospel. And that for two causes vid. liberty to live dissolutelie
without controllment of their spiritual pastors, and covetousness with greedy
desire to possess and enjoy the church liuinges, which sort of people, for
that they contemn all spiritual power or jurisdiction, which the church ought
to have over them, as the spirit over the fleash, did easily yeald to any
heretic impugninge and resistinge this spiritual power, and taking away all
ecclesiastical discipline, and spiritual correction, and so they gave them
full scope to all abominable riotousnes, and wanton dissolution.

4. But to return to my purpose, that God is not displeased nor good
Christians offended for buildinge churches and monasteries, or other religious
howses for his service, nor the poor hindered of their relief for anny
charitable oblations, or donations that the devout christians do bestow on the
church, but rather God much pleased thereby and the poor relieved. First, 2
Reg. 7. Genes.
David for having a desire to build a temple for Gods honor, was rewarded
with and everlasting house and a perpetual kingdom. Jacob but only for
consecrating a stone to gods glory, it was said unto him, I will cause thee
to increase and multiply. The englishmen upon their first cominge to Irelande
under king henry the 2. dedicated to the service of God, the first land they
took which was in the county of Wexford, and made two famous monasteries, as
Donbrody and Tentarom of the order of S. Bernard, and have endued the^ with
great and ample possessions, as also many churches in that county, and in
every place where they came, which was noe small cause, they had such good
success in their enterprise. Henry the 5. before he took the wars of
France in hand, builded two famous monasteries by Richmounde, one of the order
of Carthusians, and the other of Sion Nunes, of the order of S. Bride, each
monastery stands one against the other, and the river of Themes betwixt
them, which he dedicated to the service of God, whom they praised with
celestial alleluias as divine praises which were never omitted either by day
or by night, so that when the one would make an end, the other would beginn, the
bells giuinge them notice thereof. Therefore God did prosper him so well in
those wars, that he brought almost all France to his subjection, and his
son king Henry the 6. was crowned king of France at Paris, being but xi.
years of age. Yea I could reckon more then a thousand examples of the like
subject.

5. And, for the relief of the poor, as the precious ointment that Marie
Magdalen bought for our Saviors feet, was not a hinderance for the poor: so
whatsoever is given to further his service, does rather further then hinder
them. Is there any country in Europe more charitable to the poor, and more
liberal to gods servants, and all other ecclesiastical persons then Spain,
and yet noe country more sumptuous and costly in their churches, and more
devout and less sparing of any thing they have for the settinge forth of
gods glory, for adorninge churches and monasteries with all ornaments, and
implements pertaininge thereunto? Is there any country in the world that can
show such hospitales in all cities, towns, villadges, and hamletts for the
cure of the sick, and for the relief of pilgrims and strangers, such
colleges for poor virgins that be deprived of parents and frindes, where they
be kept and brought up in all honest and godly education, befittinge gentle
women until they be married upon the cost and chardges of the college, in
every city or great town in Spain such confraternities being erected for
all works of mercy, by which means all sorts of distressed persons are
reliued: so many hospitalities for cast children, for whom they have nurses
to give them suck upon the hospitalles charges, which also gives relief unto
them until they be able to help themselves. So manny colleges for orphans,
so manny universities for scholars, as noe country can show so manny,
having 24. universities, and so manny howses of mercy, that I dare say that
the house of mercy of Lisborne, does more works of charity, and sustaines
more poor people, and marryes more virgins for gods sake, then all the
protestante countries in Europe.

6. To conclude, England and Ireland cannot deny, but there was better
provision for the poor, before the church was destroyed then after, and that
the most part of all colleges and hospitalles were builded by church men
themselves. Did not the faithful bring all their goods unto the Apostles,
Act. c. 5.
to be disposed according to their charity? S. Paul likewise did receive the
offringes of the faithful. I require, says he, the fruit of your devotion,
for whatsoever is bestowed upon the church, the poor are again relieved
thereby. And as S. Hierom says: Quod clericorum est, totum illud pauperum est.

Of the unhappy ends and other punishments, by which God does chastise those
that presume to robb Churches, or otherwise to profane and abuse sacred
things. CHAPTER II.
Joseph an. ^iq lib. 15. cap. 8. and 12.
Josephus does register the modest behavior of Gn. Pompey, toward the church
of Jerusalem, and also the covetousness of Marcus Crassus, by which he robbed
the same, who was punished by God, he being slain, and all his great army
overthrown by the Parthians, and that most miserably. And although thorough
necessity king Herod did open the sepulcher of king David, thinking thereby
to have great treasures, the said Joseph says that he was attached with great
calamities for his presumption. Daniel c. 1
In the holy scriptures we read, that Nabuchodonosor king of the Assirians
did robb the temple of God, and afterward was transformed into a beast, and
his son Balthazar for prophaninge the holy vessels that his Father brought
from the temple of Jerusalem, was slain by his enemies, Daniel. 5.
and the kingdom taken and possessed by them. King Antiochus was eaten by
worms for doing the like. The treasure and goulden vessels brought by Titus
out of Jerusalem, and by Gensericus king of the Vandalles, brought out of
Rome unto Affrique amoungest other spoils, and being tossed to and fro through
the hands of manny kings, as well Romans as Vandalls, none that ever
possessed them escaped an ominus end, neither the wrath of God surceased,
until the kingdom of the Vandalls being utterly destroyed by Belisarius (who
took in a most bloody battle the last king of them called Gibnier) by the
commandment of the Emperor Justinian, they were sent back again to
Jerusalem, having given a sore blow to all such as polluted their hands
withal.

Act. 5.
2. In the acts of the Apostles we read, the miserable death of Ananias and
Saphira, not for robbinge the goods which others had given to the church, but
for keepinge with themselves part of that which once they offered unto God,
wherefore (said S. Peter unto them) did Satan tempt you, to lie against the
holy ghoaste, and to deceive us of part of the land you sold? was it not in
your power not to sell it, for herin you have not deceived men but God? and so
both man and wife fell down dead at his feet. To give us to understand, what
account we must give unto God of anny thing that is once consecrated unto
him. And therefore Alaricus king of the Goathes, when he took Rome, commanded
under great penalties, that none of his soldiors should rob any church,
neither touch any thing that was in them saying, that his quarrel was against
man and not against God, neither against his Saints. Also A certain gentleman
of the Goathes took a virgin that was consecrated unto God, in the church of
S. Peter, and vsinge great force and violence to get of her the golden
vessels and church stuff that was consecrated to Gods service, she said that
those were the goods of the Apostle S. Peter, and as for her part she was
not able to defend them. The said Goath being astonished at the virgins
resolute behavior, did forbear to lay violent hands, either upon the
virgin, or upon those consecrated vessels: for the said king commanded,
Paulus Orosius.
as Paulus Orosius writes, that his soldiers should carry upon their own
backs those holy vessels with all other things pertayninge to the church, and
as manny Christians as should follow them, should not be touched.

3. The ecclesiastical histories are full of the like examples, yea the very
gentiles did contain themselves from spoilinge religious people or robbinge
churches, not so much for any devotion, but for very fear of the wrath of
God, whose grievous punishments was by them experienced upon others for
attemptinge the like sacrilege. Julian the uncle of Julian Emperor the
Apostate, did committ a wicked robberye upon the church of Antioch, and did
mingle the holly vessels with the plate of his Nephews, and was therefore
chastised by God publicly for the same, for his entralles putrified his body
was tormented with such horrible ulcers, and filthy botches, out of which
there came, ugly worms which gnawed and consumed his carcass, by which he
was exhausted and eaten, and so ended most miserably. Faelix Iulians
threasurer and companion in the robbery aforesaid, died vomittinge all his
blood out of his mouth. Mauricius Cartularius did persuade Isacius, who was
the Exarcke of Italy for the Emperor Heraclius, that he should rob the
church of Rome, which he did, and not long after the said Mauricius was
emprisoned by the said Exarcke where he died most miserably: and the said
Isacius died upon the sudden within a little after, as Carolus Sigonius does
write. Lib. 2. de regno Ital Zozo. to. 3 and baptist. Aegnat. in vita Leonit.
Blond. lib. 1. deca. 2. Nicephor. hist li 18. cap. 4.2. Nice. in chronico ducis
Bauari^.
Leo the 4. Emperor of Constantinople, took away a Crown of gould very rich
which the Emperor Mauritius did offer unto the church of Saint Sophia, in
which crown there was amoungst other precious stones, a carbuncle of
inestimable valor; and puttinge the same upon his head, presently there
grew upon him an in apostume of which he died, which was called the carbuncle.

4. S. Gregory Turonensis writes in his history, that certain soldiors who
did rob the church of S. Vincent of the city of Agence, were so chastised
of God, that one of them had his hand burned: into the other the diuill did
enter, by which he was torn in pieces cryinge unto the Saint: the other did
kill himself by his own proper hands. Trithemius does declare, that it was
revealed unto him, that Dagobert king of France, for vsurpinge the goods of
the church, was accused before the throne of God, and that Charles Martell a
captain of great valor, father of king Pepine, and uncle unto Charles the
great, Paul. Aemil. l. 2
was also condemned for the same, and that S. Eucherius Bishopp of Orleans did
comaund, that his sepulcher should be opened, and that nothing was found in
it, but a most ugly serpent of strange bigness. Zurita tomo annal. cap. 39.
Peter the 4. king of Aragon, died within 4. days after he had abused the
picture of holy Tecla. Vrraca the Queen of Spain had her belly burste, and
so came to a badd end for robbinge of churches. Astialpus king of the
Longobardes, and Frederick the Emperor, came likewise to a bad end, De regib.
Hispaniae in Hono.
for robbinge of churches. Francis Ta^afa writes, that when Gundericus took
Civil and intended also to spoil the churches thereof, Ambr. de Onorales p. 1
lib. 10. cap. 23.
that the diuill did possess him, and so he died miserably. S. Isidor writes,
that Agila king of the Goathes, did profane the temple of S. Acisclo martyr,
where his body was, and that he made of the church a stable for his horses,
whereupon his army was overthrown by those of Cordima, and that he fled
himself to Merida, and was slain by his own servants. Suriu^ tomo 3.
In the life of the S. Astregisill Bishopp of Burgis in France, we read
strange punishments upon those that robbed gods church, and profaned his
monastery. Zurita annali^ l. 4. c. 69.


5. When Philipp king of France in his wars against Peter king of Aragon
took the city of Giron, and his soldiors profaned the churches thereof, and
robbed the sepulcher of S. Narciscus patron of that city: out of that
sepulcher there did issue such swarms of flees and froggs of wonderful
greatness, which so flew upon the soldiers and upon their horses, that that
there died within few days after 40000. French men and more. And the said
king Peter in a letter written to Sanchius king of Castile, did certify that
there died 40000. horses, and the king himself died shortly after in
Perpinian: so as the proverb grew in that country, 18. Mart.
of the flies of S. Narcisus as Caesar Baronius notes upon the Martirologe of
Rome.

6. In the year of our Lord 1414. when the French army took the city of
Suesson, which belonged unto John Duke of Burgundy and earl of Flanders, and
profaned the church of S. Chrispine and Chrispinian, whose bodies are
reverenced in that city, the next year after being the very day of those
Saints, the self same army which was both puisant and great, in which all
the nobility of France were, was vanquished, torn and altogether destroyed
by the english army, which was but as it were a handful in respect of the
great multitude of the French, which the day before refused to grant any
reasonable composition unto the said english, and this was the just judgment
of God, inflicted upon them by the intercession of those blessed Martyrs,
whose church they had defiled.

7. The Earl of Tirons soldiors, did rob and spoil the monastery of
Timnlage, and Kilcrea, and profaned other churches cominge to relieve the
Spaniardes, that were compassed about (they being within Kinsale) by the
english army, consistinge for the most part of Irish catholic soldiers,
the english being altogether (sauinge a very few) consumed through famine
and cold, being not able to endure the toil and labor of so unseasonable a
winter camp. Yet Tirons company exceeding the other in multitude of people,
and ever before that time terrible to the english, by reason of so many great
overthrows given unto them, were brocken and put to flight, by a few horssmen
that issued out of the english camp: being thereunto solicited and procured
by the earl of Clenricard an Irishe earl then in the english camp. Wherefore
the said earl of Tiron retourninge from that overthrow said, that it was the
vengeance of the mighty hand of God, and his most just judgment, which ought
to be executed upon such wicked and sacrilegious soldiors, that perpetrated
and committed such outrage upon sacred places.

8. Doctor Owen Hegan, that permitted or rather willed certain soldiors of the
Clencarties (being then in open hostility in the weaste part of Mounster
against Queen Elizabeth) to rob a certain Church, into which the poor
people of the counteie sent their goods, hopinge to find a safe sanctuary
therein, and within a seanight afterward, his own brother, who was one of the
Queens subjects, was slain by the very same people unto whom he gave leave
to spoil the said Church, and also within one month himself was slain, and
another priest with him, not by the English, but by Irish subjects: so as
there is noe acception of persons with God, who being an indiffrent and just
judge, does give to every one according to his works, whether they be good or
badd, let noe man therefore say he is a priest, or a catholic, to color and
cloak thereby his scandalous actions, who of all men ought to shunn scandal,
and the occasion thereof. Truly I have found by certain relation, that the
Irishmen never spared noe church, monastery, or anny sanctuary in their last
commotions and insurrections, and that therefore such as have been noted to
defile and spoil such places, did not escape a miserable end, shorthly after
the sacrilegious acts was committed.

9. We know that spiritual benefices and other ecclesiastical dignities
were not bestowed upon the worthieste for learning, or more virtuous of life,
but upon those that were vpholden and defended by the strongest faction of the
nobility there, so as few came in at the right door like true pastors, but
like thieves in at the back door, so as that kingdom was subject to this
abuse and confusion in S. Malachias his time, as S. Bernard says, who being
made Bishopp of Down and Conor in Vlster by the sea apostolic, being so
holy, and learned as the said S. Bernard was, says he was banished from
Vlster by the Neales, to have that dignity for one of their own family, and
who did entermiddle more in this business, then the Geraldines of Mounster? who
by the sword defended and usurped the ecclesiastical supremacy, noe otherwise
then king Henry the 8. did, and two of his children, although they have not
don it by parleament as the other did yet by the sword, they have done it: so
as the overthrow of that house, and of other great howses may be ascribed unto
the covetous desire they had of the liuinges of the Church, and the little
regard they had to churchmen, and churches, or any other place, though never
so sacred. Yea sometimes they would not spare their competitors at the very
alter, which in manny places they polluted with their blood.

Geneb. in Chro. Anno 988. Anno iuris.
10. The french histories do write, that this was the cause also, that took
away the crown of France from the lineage of Clodoueus, which was the first
Christian king of France, being converted unto the faith of Christ, by the
prayers and devotion of his most virtuous Queen Clothilda which was passed
over unto Charles the great, and also after the line of Charles the great, were
careless of their duty to God and his church, God took the crown from them
also, and gave it unto Hue Cape, and to those of his house.

A prosecution of the last Chapter. CHAPTER III.
1. We should never make an end if we should register so manny examples as
do daily occur in this matter. De mirabilibut 2. cap. 1.
Petrus Cluniacensis, who lived lived in the same time with S. Bernard, a most
holy man, and therefore called in his life time Peter the venerable, said that
there was a certain Earl in Macon a city in France not far from Leon, who
usurped the liuinges of the churches, and persecuted church men. This man
being feastinge one time with his frindes in his palace, there started up a
gentleman of that maiesticall contenance that he put all the guestes, in great
fear that were with him, and with a terrible voice and dreadful aspect,
commanded the earl to follow him, and that with such majesty that he could
not otherwise choose. Coming to the gate, there was a mighty horse prepared
for him, and he was compelled to mount up a horssbacke, and presently the
horse did fly up into the skies, and the miserable earl cryinge most
pitifully, vanished away with the horse. Those that were within the palace,
durst not to go forth, but shutt the gates out of which the miserable earl
was carried away by the diuill.

2. Paulus Emilius a diligent historiographer of the matters of France, does
note the like accident of a certain Earl called Willian, a great persecutor
of the church, who being also at a great feast, accompanied with other great
earls, was commanded by one that was at the gate to go forth, and so
risinge from the table went forth to know what he was, where he met with one
a horssbacke which took him away, and did never appear any more. He added
moreover, that in the very same place the Earl of Niuers, a great persecutor
of the immunities of the church, was served in the like manner. The king of
Aragon called Sanchius through extreme necessity was forced to make use of the
church liuinges of his kingdom in his wars against the Moors, and although
it was for the defense of Catholic Religion, yet he made restitution of all
that he had so tooken from the Church. Many good authors do note and observe,
that the church liuinges never profittes any, and that they do not only
succeed bad with them that take them, but also consume and destroy their
temporal possessions withal; for like as the mothes, the rust, or the canker,
consumes the wood, the cloth, the iron, and the fleashe that ingenders them,
and even as the feathers of the Eagle being joined with the feathers of any
other, consumes and spills them; so church liuinges wrongfully detayned, or
violently taken from the church, consumes and overthrows the temporal estate
unto which they are unlawfully joined and annexed.

3. This England, France, and Ireland may testify, for France enjoyed but
small quietness since Clement the 7. annexed unto the crown of France by the
procureme^t of Francis' the first (when the said Clement married his Niece
called Catherina de Medicis unto Henry the 2. Daulphine of France at Marcells)
all the promotions and donations of church liuinges under the crown of France;
And as for him that sought it, or by what means it was given, I leave that to
the French historiographers; yet we know that he and all his issue, lived and
ended most miserably, their kingdom and state was most pitifully broken with
so manny bloody garboiles, all the nobility consumed and exhausted with so
mannie cruel battles and overthrows, so many rich towns and cities
ransaked, so many countries and provinces utterly destroyed, so many churches
and monasteries dissolved, and cast down, so many religious people murdered,
and so many sacred virgins deflowred and ravished: so as France through
heresy (which by this donation crept into it) was a spectacle of all misery,
famine, pestilence, wars, vprores, and co^bustions to all other nations. And
although the said Henry the 2. had 6. sons whereof 3. of the^ were kings,
yet all died without issue, and not one of that race is left alive: and so,
the line of the house of Valois, in whom the crown of France continewed the
space of 260. years, is altogether extinguished, and the crown came to the
house of Burbon, their ancient and implacable enemies, and now suecedinge
them in the crown and kingdom. Henry the 8. not by any grant or indulgence of
the Pope, but by force and fear of violent laws, made and devised by him
(leacherie and covetousness intisinge him thereunto) took unto himself a
spiritual jurisdiction, and besides suppressed and cast down all the
monasteries; who, although he had six wives, and left behind him, one son,
and 2. daughters yet now there is none living nor any of their line or race,
man or woman now extant.

4. And as for the nobility of England, and Irelande, which were instruments
more ready to serve the kings humor, then to please God, they be all for the
most part extinguished of whose descent or race one amoungest 20. is not to be
seen this day to possess their ancestors liuinges, unto whose patrimony
others crept in and succeeded, some perhaps being their mortal enemies. The
Duke of Norfolque, and the earl of Arundell were the cheifest instruments that
Queen Elizabeth had in the first parleament she assembled, to putt down the
church, and to draw all spiritual jurisdiction unto her self, hopinge that
by this service the one should be contracted with her in marriage, the other
should be in extraordinary favor with her, I would they had taken S. Paul's
advise. Oportet obedire Deo magis quam hominibus. We ought to obey God more
then men, or the prophet his caveat, maledictus qui confidit in homine, cursed
is he that trusts in man. Scisma Angliae.
This Duke (as a certain grave matrone prophesied and told him to his face
cominge from the parleament, that he should lose his head by her, whom to
please he did displease God, and made shipwreaque of his religion) was
condemned and put to death for high treason against the Queen at Tower hill
in London, and h^s eldest son the earl of Arundell after being condemned
and arrayned, after much mourninge and long imprisonment, died in the Tower of
London. And the other Earl of Arundell died without issue male of his body,
and it is thought if he had lived any long time, he should have tasted of the
same cup with the other.

5. The Earl of Ormond, which was the only instrument for Queen Elizabeth in
Ireland to strenghten the voices of the parleament, for her spiritual
supremacy, as yet living, is deprived of his sight, and of his only son,
and the only joy and felicity he had in this world: and of his end we know
not, but we know he has church liuinges, and we are certain that who has
them unlawfully shall never thrive the better. And therefore Charles the 7.
king of France being in great want of money through the wars he had with the
English about the dukedom of Normandy, of which the quiett state of his
kingdom depended, would not make use of the tithes of his kingdom, being
thereunto moved by a great prelate, for that he knew they would not succeed
well with him. Ossorius in the history of the king of Portingall Emanuell,
writes, that the Pope dispensed with him for the tithes of his country
toward his wars in Affricke, and having perceived that he had not so good
success as before the taking of them into his hands, he determined with
himself, not to make any more use of them. God would not have things
dedicated to his honor to be transferred to any profane use, upon anny
pretense whatsoever. And for that Nicephorus Phocas Emperor, made a law, by
which he revoked and called back all laws that were made in favor of
churchme^, for that they had such ample patrimony, and that the poor, as he
alleged was not relieved, nor the soldiors had wherewith to eat. Lib. 1. in
in Constit. 69. orient.
The Emperor Basilius did repeal that statute, by another law by these
words. Understanding that the law of Nicephorus made (after that he usurped
the empire) against the church and church liuinges, was the only cause and
ofspringe of all our mischief and present callamities, for that law was not
only don in prejudice of the church, but also it was plainly against the honor
of God, and saying we find by experience to our great grief, that nothing
succeeded well with us, neither did we want continual callamities after the
making thereof, therefore we comaunde that it shall cease, and be of noe
force, nor anny other law against the church.

6. In like manner Alexis Comnenus Emperor of Constaninople, besides that he
made straight laws against those that vsu^ped anny thing consecrated unto
God, to declare his greater devotion, he in the golden bull added these words.
If ever hereafter (o Lord God) anny shall be so maliparte or so presumptuous,
as to take anny thing that is already consecrated to God, or hereafter shall be
dedicated to his holy church, let such an one never enjoy the clear light
of thy vision, neither the light of the son that gives light in the
morninge, neither thy aid or protexion, but evermore let him be despised and
forsaken of thee. The same malediction in substance, the Queen Theodolenda did
give unto all those, that would usurp the goods and lands which she did
give and bestow upon the church of S. John Baptiste in the city of Moucia,
Lib. 4. c. 7. de gest. Longobardorum.
as Paulus Diaconus does write. The like malediction other Princes have cast
forth upon those that would frustrate their godly endeavors, for that they
feared that one time or another, the greedy desire and couetuousnes of wicked
people, would break all bonds of gods laws and religion.

7. Allas how manny maledictions were cast upon the protestants, for
comittinge sacrilege and for robbinge of churches? as that of Corronell
Randale, and 500. English soldiors, withal their munition and victuals, which
were blown up into the air by their own powder by an extraordinary
accident of a Woulfe who rann with a fiery tail into the church of Derrie in
Vulster, which by the said Randall was polluted, all which in a moment did
perish with a shipp that was at ^anker by the said church Anno Domini 1565.
Also of one Sentleger being master of the mint that was at Rosse in Ireland,
in the monastery of S. Francis in king Edwardes days, who for that the
workmen told him that they were beaten by S. Francis every night, went
himself of mere presumption unto the said monastery to lodge: the very
first night he went thither, he was so assaulted, that he rann madd, and rann
headlounge that very night into the river and drowned himself, and his
carcass was found dead upon the sand that morninge. In the wars of Garret
Earl of Desmond the English garriso^ that was at Yonghull, a port town in the
province of Mounster, in their sally forth upon the enemies, went to a
certain monastery called Melanie, which is situated in an Island, and in the
river of that town called the broad water, one captain Peers, being the
leader of that garrison, caused a fire to be made, and one of his company
called Bluett an Irishman and native of Yonghull making fire of the image of
that Saint called Melanye, upon the sudden fell madd, and died within 3.
days after. And the said captain for that he commanded him so to do, was
deprived of the use of his limbs, and falling into a dead palsy, was never
found until he died, and his company were all killed by the said Earl his
Sensciall; this happened 1580.

8. Also one Poet an Englishman, breakinge down a monastery of S. Dominiques
in the North part of Yonghull, fell dead down from the top of the church,
all his limbs being broken. Anno Domini 1587. Also three soldiers of that
town, which did cast down and burn the holy roode of that monastery, died
within one seanight after they hade done it; An. 1580
The first fell madd, and died within 3. days after; The second was eaten
with life, and died within 5. days; And the third was killed by the said Earls
Sensciall within 7. days after; all which manny of that town now ^iuinge can
witness. An. 1608
The Lord Crowmell that cast down the steeple of S. Patriques Church in
Vlster, dyed within one seanight after, some said he fell madd, and died
thereof. Also an English carpenter, that went up upon the vesterie of S.
Patriques church of Dublin, fell down, his bones were broken, and died
frantique within 2. days after. An English captain that pulled down the
holy roode of Cahir, An. 1609
rann madd and cast himself from the top of the castle of the said Cahir,
headlonge into the river, and drowned himself.

9. Garrett Earl of Desmounde, after being proclaimed traitor, accompanied
with his brother Sr. John of Desmound and 800. more in their company, for their
first exploite, invaded the town of Yonghull, which they spoiled, ransacked,
burnt, and destroyed the howses, took away all the poor inhabitants goods,
stripped them most cruelly of all their clothes, and left them both man and
wooman naked, not permittinge them to hide or cover their secreat pertes which
nature it self would feign cover, rauishinge married woomen, with manny other
wicked acts which they perpetrated, not sparinge church or sanctuary, nor any
thing whatsoever that was sacred, which they polluted and defiled, and brought
every thing to utter confusion and desolation, making havoc as well of
sacred vestimentes and chalices, as of any other chattle. Certain Spaniardes
which were with them at that wicked exploite, perceauinge by the furniture and
ornaments of the churches, that the towns men were all catholics and
containinge their hands from spoiling, were reproved by some of that wicked
company, for that they took not part of the spoil as others did; but they
answered, that they ought not to rob or spoil better christians then
themselves. And one of the said Spaniardes cut his cloak as S. Martine did in
five parts, and distributed the same upon five children which were stripped of
their clothes and left naked by some of the kearnes. But very few or none of
them escaped a miserable end; For the Earl himself was beheaded by a poor
souldior, being ^ound in a wood with a very small company, and not one
slain but he: whose head was carried into england, and stands disgracefully
upon London bridge for a traitors head. His brother Sr. John was found upon
the high way by Sr. John Souch, and having notice that the englishmen were
marchinge toward him, he was not able having a principal good horse to
move hand or foot, until the english soldiers came upon him, and killed him.
This is the just judgment of God, executed upon them that made the world
believe their quarrel was for religion, and yet their first exploite and
cruelest act was putt in execution upon poor catholics churches,
sanctuaries, consecrated vessels which they polluted and profaned. Nothing
does displease God more then hypocrisy, for as a holy man says. Simulata
sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas: fained holiness is double iniquity, for noe
vice is more often reprehended of our Savior, then this vice and wickedness,
and although he pardoned all manner of sins, yet unto hipocrites he cried out
woe, Matt. 23.
and course and that many times.

10. Sr. John Norrice in his Portingall voyage with the bastard don Antony
going to take Lisbone and to make him king thereof, of his great army (which
consisted of 18. thousand able men) he brought not men enough to bring home
his ships: the first enterprice that he attempted, was upon a monastery by
the Grine, which his soldiors destroyed and cast down. The Earl of Esex that
was the only Phoenix of England, the chief fauoritt of the Queen, and the only
man that all the contrie flatterd and followed, and all the English nation
applauded, was arraigned and condemned of high treason, and beheaded in the
tower of London, who when he took Cales in Spain (an exploite both terrible
to the Spaniardes, and joyful and honnorable unto England) the churches and
sanctuaries of that city felt the greatest smarte, which he profaned,
burned, and cast down whose sacred vessels his soldiers took away and
turned them into profane and filthy uses; for the which few or none that
assisted in that exploite, escaped an ominous and fatal end, as manny do
observe and note. In the Machabees, Macha. 2. Cap. 3.
Heliodorus does testify thus much who counseled his king if he had an
enemy, that he should send him to robb the Temple of Jerusalem, and he should
find the smarte thereof, because there is in that place the power of God, which
does destroy and confound such as come to annoy that place.

11. S. Ambrose speakinge with Valentine the younger used these words; Epist.
33.
If you have ^oe right to do anny injury to any man's private house, much
less, can you take away from Gods house, which never suffered sacrilegious
persons unpunished and robbers of churches and sacred things, as by the
precedent examples appears: as also by the griuous punishment of Cardinal
Wolsy is evident, who for erectinge his new college at Oxford and at Ipswiche
(as Stow writteth) obtained license of Clement the seventh to dissolve to the
number of forty monasteries of good fame, and bountiful hospitality, wherein
the king bearinge with all his doings, none durst control him. In the
executinge of which business, five persons were his chief instruments, which
were sore punished by God, two of them fell at discord amoungest themselves, and
the one flue the other, and the surminor was hanged for his labor, the 3.
drowned himself in a well, the 4. being wealthy enoughe before, begged his
bread to his dyinge day, and the 5. was Doctor Allen. The chief instrument
amoungest them was murdered by Thomas fitz-Gerrald. The Cardinal fallinge
afterward into the kings grievous displeasure, was deposed, and died miserably,
and the colleges which he meant to have made so glorious a buildinge, came
never to good effect. For this irreligious robbery was done of noe
conscience, but to patch up pride, which private wealth could not furnishe.

Whether the king may take away church liuinges at his pleasure; And whether
as he is absolute king of the temporal goods of his subjects, he be so also
of the Church, and of Church liuinges. CHAPTER IV.
1. THe only argument Protestants use to prove this doctrine, is that of the
Prophett Samuel, who said to the children of Israel, that if they would
needs have a king, he would take away their vineyardes their lands and
liuinges, and would bestow them upon his servants etc. Testado in lib Reg.
cap. 19.
The holy doctors do expound this place to be meant of Tyrannical kings, who
followinge their passion or proper will, and not law or reason, would perform
this toward those stiffnecked people. And so to divert and dissuade them
from the vehement desire they had to get them a king he used those words,
not that of right or justice a good king ought so to do. And so S. Gregory
does expound the same saying, Lib. 4. c. 2. and in Reg. cap. 8.
that Tyrants and not good kings will do this, for (says he) in that
history of kings we read, that God was highly displeased with Achab for
taking away the vineyarde from Naboth, for which the said Achab with his
Queen Iezabell, was sore punished by God for the same, therefore S. Gregory
says this was not gods commandment; And therefore David being solicited at
the request of Orna Iebuseus to take a platt of ground for to edify an alter
for our Lord, he would never take or accept it until he made payment thereof.
So as whatsoever is set down by the prophett Samuel, is to give warninge to
good kings what they should observe, and what they should forbear to do,
thus far S. Gregory.

2. S. John Chrysostom did reprehend the empress Eudoxia the wife of Arcadius
the Emperor, for taking away from a certain widdowe her vineyarde, and saying
that he could do nothing with her by fair means, he caused the church gates
to be shutt against her. For Emperors and kings are not absolut Lords of the
lands, and goods of their subjects, neither can they take them away
according to their pleasures, unless it be for great offenses, although many
protestant courtiers, do say the contrary only to flatter their Princes: for
if Kings, and Princes had the propriety and dominion of their subjects
goods, then there should be noe need of anny parleament, or courts to treat
with the subjects for the kings necessity, but they may take from the
subjects all they have at their own pleasure. But the king for being head
and Lord of the kingdom, and for his pains taken in the government thereof
has his own patrimony, rents and services with such like: or if this be not
sufficient for the defense of the weal public and christian religion, the
subjects ought to supply his wa^ts, rather by request then by violence. But
these new gospellers say with the matchevillians, Plutar. in Apo.
that kings by their prerogatives, may take all their subjects goods to their
pleasure: as a flatterer said to the king Antigonus, that all things are
lawful for the king to do, unto whom the said Antigonus made answer. Unto
tirannicall and barbarous Princes such things are lawful, but unto us,
nothing is lawful but that which is honest.

3. This is the difference betwixt the good king and the tyrant, for the one
is subject to the laws of God and nature: the other is subject to noe law,
but to his will and his passion, having noe respect to law, conscience, faith
or justice. The one does respect chiefly the good of the weal public: the
other his own private comoditie: the one does enriche his subjects by all the
best means he can, the other does impouerish them with all extorsion and
imposition. The one does revenge the injury don unto God and the common wealth,
and pardones his own proper injury: the Tyrant does the contrary, and does
revenge his own quarrel, and forgive the injury done unto God. The one
endeavors to preserve love and amity amoungest his subjects, the other does
sow dissentions and factions amoungest them to destroy them, and by their
destruction to enriche himself with the confiscation of their goods. The one
makes great account of the love of his subjects, the other ever grounds
himself in the hatred of his subjects; The one does search the best and the
most virtuous to bestow offices and promotions on them: the other does bestow
them upon the wickeddest people he can get. The one is a pastor to feed his
subjects, the other i^ a woulfe to destroy them.

4. But to come to my purpose, that it is not lawful for kings to do what it
pleases them, the very heathens have observed the conrrarie. Zonarus tomo 2.
in Traiano.
Traian the Emperor when he gave the sword to the Praetor of Rome, said these
words. If I shall comaund anny thing that is lawful or just, use this sword
for me, if otherwise I shall bid or comaund anny thing against justice, use it
against me. The kings of Aegipt did cause their magistrates to sweat, not to
obey them, but in things lawful, the same did Phillipp the beautiful king
of France: and Antigonus the 3. who commanded his presidentes and magistrates,
that they should not execute his commandment, though it were signed with his
own hand, unless it were just, and lawful. It is an old proverb: Melius est
imperium in quo nihil licet, quam imperium in quo mihi liceat. It is better to
be under his government where the law gives noe scope, then under his where
all things are lawful without any restrainte.

5. And for their spiritual comaunde, S. Gregory Nazian. does admonish the^,
you (says he) that are sheep ask not to feed your pastors, Orat. 17. ad
Ciues timore percusso^.
neither intermidle in things that pertaines not unto your charge, do not
judge your judges, nor prescribe laws to your law giuers, if you will have me
to be plain with you, for the law of Christ has made you my subjects, and
referred you to my tribunal, and that you are sheep of my flock. Chrysostom.
de verbis Isa. Homil. 40
And therefore S. Chisostome willed kings to contain themselves within their
limittes, for the bounds of priest-hoode is distinguished from the bounds,
and limittes of kings, for that of priest-hoode is more, then that of kings,
for the kings power exceedes not temporal things, but the power of
priest-hoode came from heaven: the king has the charge of our bodies, but the
priest has to deal with our souls. L^ciferius Bishop of Caler says these
words. What power have you (speakinge of Pr^nces) of Bishopps which if you
shall not obey by the sentence of God already given, you shall be condemned? S.
John Damascen says, that Princes have nothing to do in Church matters, for
that their office is not to govern ecclesiastical state, and therefore S.
Paul says. Nescitis quod Angelos iudicabimus, multo magis secularia? Do you
not know that we shall judge Angels, much more seculer things?

6. The inconvenience of this is declared by two examples, of a politic
courtier, and a religious christian. Ecebolus Sophist, was master to Julian
the Apostate, and much esteemed of him, this politician in the government of
Constantius, did frame himself a christian, to conform himself to the
Emperors humor: and when the said Constantius became an Arian heretic, the
said Sophiste turned his coat also. Again when Julian the Apostate, was
Emperor, and denied his faith and became an infidle, the said Ecebolus became
also an infidle: afterward when Julian died and Iouinian also and that a most
devout and godly Catholic succeeded Julian, Ecebolus like the Cameleon did
conform himself to the new Emperor, and cast him self at the Church door,
craving pardon of the Christians, Lib. 3. c. 11
as Socrates says. A lively representation of the politicians of this time, of
whom Iouinian the Emperor said, Socrat. li. 3.21.
that they worshipp not God, but the Prince.

7. The other example is of Cesarius, who as his brother S. Gregory Nazianzen
says, being honored with great offices, and promotions of the said Julian,
and for that he would not forgo his religion being a Catholic, he was
disfauoured of the said Julian, and forsakinge the world and the favor of the
Emperor, did set little by all wordly promotion and credit of the Emperor, in
respect of the Catholic religion. This example of Cesarius, does represent
unto us a fine Catholic, and the other of Ecebolus a fine Politician of these
our days. Wherefore if we endeavor to follow the Princes Religion, as often
the king does change the same, so often we must also change ours, and so
we make of the Prince a God, and forsake the living God.

That the protestant religion, whose principal foundation and grounds are
these articles aforesaid, is nothing else then a denyinge of all Religion and
piety, and a renewinge of all heresies. CHAPTER I.
1. Calvin in his institutions says, Inst. li. 4.14.7.15.
that S. Augustine of all antiquity is the best and faithfullest wittnes, Aug.
to. 6. ab haeresibus 82.
but he enrolled your Patrons amoungest old heretics, as Iouinian,
Vigilantius, Aerius, Aquarios, Armenians, Nouatians, Pepusians, Pheudapostles,
Euuomians, Pelagians, and Donati^tes. Iouinian the Moncke says, that fasting
or abstinence are of noe worth. He destroyed also the virginity of the
blessed Virgin, affirming that she lost her virginity when she was delivered
of Jesus, and said that continency in Virgins and religious people, was noe
better then matrimony: and so certain Virgins being at Rome upon this
heresy did marry, by which (says S. Augustine) was committed a prodigious
thing, and was extinguished so represently that it did not get footinge
amoungest other priests.

2. S. Ierom exclaimed against Vigilantius vsinge these words. It is a
sacrilege to hear what the filthy fellow calls us, ashmoungers and
idolaters, for that we reverence dead means bones, which he meant by the
relics of the holy Saints. And the said S. Ierom writes, that he denied
the sepulchers of saints to be reverenced, and worshipped, and said moreover,
that the prayers of the holy martyrs profitts nothing after this life:
imitatinge herin wicked Porphiry and Eunomius by calling them the sorcerie of
diuills: Aug. de ecclesiasticis dogma. tibus c. 73.
therefore S. Augustine did condemn Vigila^tius. Aerius did barcke against
prayers, and suffrages of the dead: and makes noe difference betwixt priests
and Bishopps. The Peputians would have women to be priests, unto whom they
have attributed all principality August. de haeres. 27. as the Protestants
have done to Queen Elizabeth Anno 1. Parl. c. 1. Luther. tomo 2. li. de
captiuit. Baby. Aug. Homil. 50. de Socrat. hist. l. 4. Cap. 23. Ambr. de penit.
li. 1. cap. 2.
Of the same heresy also were condemned, Eunomius, as the said S. August. de
heresi here is. 54. de haeres. and ad Luther. Nouatus was condemned for an
heretic by saint Augustine and saint Ambrose, for denyinge pour of
absoluinge sins unto the priests, and confirmation to Bishopps, as saint
Cyprian does wittnes lib. 4. epist. 2. Theodoret. lib. 3. de haereticis. The
Pelagians denied original sin in infantes: and taught that baptism is not
necessary for them as saint Augustine writes. Aug. here is. 88.


3. S. Augustine and saint Optatus do putt the Donatistes in the rank of
heretics, Aug. de here is. 69. de vnitate eccle. and lib. contlitteras Petul.
Opta lib. ^. Call. inst l. 4. cap. 15. Optat l. 2. Theod. Dra. 5.
for saying that the church failed in the whole world, and that it remained
amoungest themselves in Affrique: the like Calvin says of the Catholic
church. Those Donatistes did cast the blessed Sacrament unto dogs, burn
churches, and break alters, took away all church ornaments as you do, they
abolished the sacrifice of the Mass as you do, of which kind of people
Ignatius says there has been some that would not away with sacrifices and
oblations, because they confessed not the Euchariste to be the flesh of our
Savior Jesus Christ. Arrius, Nestorius, S. Aug. lib. contr^ Maximu^. Atha. p.
488. Exemplu^ Synodale.
Dioscorus and Eutiches, as saint Augustine and saint Athanasius say, and as
it is alleged in the 7. general council, act. 1. denied all traditions and
the witnesses of the fathers, they said also they would allow nothing but
the scriptures saying; What scripture does prove that the son is
consubstantiall or coessentiall with the Father? the same also did Simon Magus
say.

4. With Simon Magus, Valentinus, Aug. here is. 4.6. Clemens, Alexandrinus li. 3
recognitionum. Tertul. de pr^script.
and Manicheus, you deny free will. With Flornius and with Simon Magus, you
affirm God to be author of all evil, as S. Augustine, Clemens Alexandrinus
and Tertulian say of the said Simon Magus. With Constantius, you say that
every Civil Prince ought to be head of the church according to Eusebius. lib.
3. Atha. epi. ad solitariam vita^ degentes. Hilar. lib. ad Consta^tium ex li.
qui incipit tempus est loquendi.
Wherefore S. Athanasius called him antechrist, and the abomination of
desolation, of whom also S. Hillarie says these words; I tell you when I
shall speak unto you, that I speak to Nero and that Decius and Maximianus
shall hear me, you fight against God, you thunder against the church, you
persecute the Saints, you take away the Religion of Christ, you are not
only the Tyrant of men, but of God, you do prevent antechrist, and work his
mysteries, you coin faith, living without faith, thou of all men the most
wicked: this he spoake to him in his life time.

5. With Marcius and Manicheus, and other heretics you condemn manny books
of the scriptures, which would not receive the scriptures: Nisi cum
adiectionibus and detractionibus factis, but with cuttinge and ma^glinge of
them. You take away Chrisme with Nouatus, who denied the holy ghoaste. With
Iouinian, as S. Augustine says of him, you take away pennaunce from the
church: who said also that all sins were equal. Also with Pelagius you take
away the Sacrament of orders and priest-hoode, with Petrus Abalardus, Wicleffe,
and Hus all vocal prayers. And with the Armenians you say that matrimony is
noe Sacrament. You take away general counsels with the Arians, that would not
obey the council of Nice. With Nestorius that would not obey the council of
Ephesus, with Eutiches and Dioscorus, that would not obey the council of
Chalcedon. Aug lib. de haeresibus.
With Iouinianus (as saint Augustine wittnesseth) you eat all meats every
day without any observation of days or difference of meat, you do the like
obseruinge noe fast. Calvin took away singinge from the church with the
heretic Hillarus, Aug. li. 11 retract. Ambr. in quadam orat. cont. Maxentiu^
de Basilicis trade^dis quae ponitur in lib 5. sententiaru^.
as saint Augustine and saint Ambrose say, when Christ is praised the Arrians
are madd. With Iouinian you say, that all which be in heaven are equal in
glory, because all just persons are equal in this life in merittes, and all
sinners are equal in sins. With the Catharies you deny all sacraments; With
the heretics called Lamprini, you take away vows and votaries. With the
Eustachians you take away churches and alters dedicated to martirs.

6. Again, Epist. 75.
with the Eutichian heretics, you take away oblations, sacrifice, and
chrisme, as Leo the Pope complained by his letters to Martianus the Emperor
epist. 75. where he says. Intercepta est sacrificij oblatio, desecit
chrismatis sanctificatio. The oblation of the sacrifice is intercepted, and
hallowinge of the chrisme fails. And as in the time of Antechriste (as that
ancient holy father and constant Martyr Hipolitus, that lived in the year of
our Lord 220. says. Ecclesiarum aedes sacrae tigurij instar erint: praet^osum
corpus and sanguis Christi in diebus illis n^n extabit etc, the church shall be
like cottadges, the blessed body and blood of Christ shall not be seen, the
Mass shall be utterly defaced, so as you seem to be the precursours of this
beast. ^.
For with the Donatists (as Optatus writes) you give the blessed Sacrament to
dogs, the chrismatorie with the sacred chrisme, you violently cast upon the
ground, with them also you break alters, with them also and with the Arrians
of Affricke (as Victor says) you overthrow churches, monasteries and
chapels, and as they made shirtes and briches of the ^estimentes and alter
clothes, burned books, spoiled churches of their ornaments, as appeared in
an epistle by the bishops of Egipte to Marcus the Pope, and as Nazianzenus
says, misteria verterunt (...) commedias, the mysteries of our religion they
turned to plays and comedies, even so do you the like.

^
7. Again, you refuse with these heretics, to come to the general counsels,
to give an account of your doings, as saint Augustine says of them; With
(...) buchodonozer the king of Babylon, and Antiochus Epiphanes, and Julian
the apostate (which represente the diuill against Christ his spouse) you
spoil his church, you rob her of her treasure, you violently invade all
sacred pattens and sanctuaries, you take away alters, plates, challices,
candlesticks, and all other ornaments dedicated to the service of God: you
defile, abuse and stain all sacred things, and as they prohibited sacrifice
and oblations, so you d^ the like. With the said Julian (which of a v^tuous
and catholic Prince, became suddenly a tirannicall persecutor of Christ
and his members) you banishe priests and religious people, ^
but exceedinge his tyranny herein, you put them to the cruelest death that the
diuill can inuente: you contemn the cross of Christ and called them wretched
men (as saint Cyrill says of him) for doing reverence to the said sacred
cross, ^
as for making the sign of the cross in their fore heads, for planting it
over their doors, for keepinge it in their howses, he did also reprove them
for visittinge their sepulchers, for worshippinge relics of Martyrs, for
prayinge unto them at their graves, and called them dead men. And as he
ouerthrewe the Image and picture of Christ* the arc and shrine wherein were
religiously kept the bones of S. John Baptiste, ^.
bra^e them open, burned them and dispersed abroad the ashes, so you do the
like. And as the Jews crucified the Image of Chri^ as S. Athanasius says, as
their fathers crucified Christ himself, so you do the (...). And as the
ethinckes brake the Image of Christ, Lib. de passione imagini Christi. Zozo.
lib. 5. c. 12. Aug. lib. de haere. cap. 33. Epiphan. haeres. 7.5.
you do the like. You follow Aerius, who refused to observe prescript and
appointed fasting days, alleadginge for himself that he should not be under
the Judicial yoke of bondage, as our Iuell and other protestants said, thereby
claiminge the liberty of their new gospel.

8. The Manichees and Eustachians, did fast upon sundays, for that they would
not seem to rejoice for the resurrection of Christ, as S. Ambrose epist. 83.
and saint Augustine epist. 86. do declare: as also saint Epiph. Here Is. 75.
Also the Priscilians did fast upon sondayes and upon the nativity of our
Lord, least they should seem to allow of the humanity of Christ, as S. Leo in
his epistles does set down. All these you follow, doing all things in
despite of the church as Luther did. Luth. de conf. part. 3. parag. 14.
Ecee (inquit) quando homo praecipit (Scil. papa) ob id ipsum non facia^, and
si non praecepisset vellem facere, when man comaundes (vid. the Pope) I will
not obey him, for that he commanded, and if he had not commanded, I would have
don it, I will do it when I shall think good; as the said Aerius said, that
he would not obey the church in his fasting, and yet did not God comau^d us
to obey his church and the rulers thereof in manny places saying, Matt. 16.
whosoever despises you despises me? etc.

9. The Donatistes taught (as S. Augustine says) that the church of God
consisted only of the good, Aug. lib. de vnitate eccles. c. 12
and that the visible church manny years ago did perish, and that it did
consiste only of their own sect and congregation, as you hold the same to be
in your own sect only. If we must become protestants, we must embrace all
these foresaid heresies condemned by all the holy doctors, general counsels
of Christendom, and the universal Catholic church in all ages: we must
also mantaine new heresies far worse then the former, and invent more of
them. As that the Trinity of God, the deity of Christ, his passion, death and
resurrection, are but papisticall inventions, and that they ought, as breers
as brambles to be cast out of the vineyard of the Lord, these be the words of
one of the family of love, An. 1579.
in the articles printed at London.

10. Did not the Protestants of Hungary putt up conclusions at Albaiulia,
that it is Idolatry to adore Christ, which also they have defended through
all Germany? VVitak. cont. Sander. page 150. Whitaker. 4. cap. page 154.
Did not Whitakers say, that the image of Christ is as very an Idol, as the
image of Venus or Jupiter? That Christ is not gotten of the substance of his
Father. That S. Peter was never at Rome. That the succession of Popes is
antechriste, that the universal church is antechriste? They say moreover that
the blood of Christ auailes nothing for our salvation, and that it did
putrify more then 1500. years a go. Conrad. in Theologia Calvin. l. 1 artic.
6. fol. 26. Curious in spongia fol. 250.
Conradus a protestant writer does charge Calvin with this doctrine and other
protestants, that we be not justified by the meritts of Christ, with manny
such blasphemies vide sup. Ex Caluino Turcismi lib. 4. cap. 22. that we cannot
observe gods laws. Buny in his christian exercise dedicated to the
Archbishopp of York did say of the blessed virgin, when she stood at the
cross in the time of Christ his death, that she violated the first
commandment, as also the 5.6. and 9. commandment.

In praef. noui testamenti. Peter Martyr dialogo corporis Christi. Calu Harmo.
Mat 2 Constant. Manasses in Analib. page 114. Hamelton. Calu. confus. de monst
l. ^. Calu. in Co. 24.
11. Moreover, Beza says, that Christ was borne as other children are borne,
and that Marie brought him forth naturally. The same also Peter martyr, and
Calvin hold. The said Calvin says, that Christ was borne as Constantinus
Copronimus was borne, which all Greek writers call the mounster of Affricke,
and the sincke of all impiety, and mischief. Which wicked doctrine is
against the catholic Faith which says in our creed, that Christ was
conceived of the blessed Virgin. So Archiball Hamelton shows, that they make
the vildest wooman in the world, equal unto the blessed Virgin. Calvin
attributed ignorance unto Christ, and says that he obtained gods favor by
faith. That Lutherans deny Christ his assension into heaven. Call. Matt. 27.
Smidl. in vita Bullenger. Calu. inst. l. 2. Carlil. impress. Londini 1582.
Luth. ^.5 in ^arration^ in Petr. c. 1.
That Calvin denies Christ his descension into hell: others of them denies
the true passion of Christ upon the cross. Luther says, that if we have
faith, we are equal in dignity with saint Peter, and saint Paul, with the
blessed Virgin and all the saints, and that God is as favorable unto such as
have his faith, as to Christ himself, and that we have noe less right unto
life everlasting, then he: and that we be noe less delivered from eternal
death then he.

12. Others said, Beza in confess fidei. Gene. c. 4. Luth. de lib. Christ.
Luth. ser. de Moyse. and lib. de Capt. Ba^. Calui. 2. inst. cap. 7. Calu. lib.
3 cap. 25.
that whosoever has this faith, God is bound to give unto him the kingdom of
heaven, and that through our faith though never so little (notwithstanding
any wickedness) we should be secure of heaven, and that there is no sin
before God, but incredulity. That the tenn comaundements pertain not to
Christians. That according to Calvin it is impossible to the Saints to
observe the comaundements; Also that there is noe pains of damnation for man,
but to think that God is adversary to him. Petrus Rycherus said, (who was it
were the Idol of Beza, and who was sent by Calvin unto the weaste Indies)
that Christ should not be prayde unto. Wherefore he took Gloria Patri and
Filio etc. out of the Psalms of David. Cart. in ^. repl. pa. 191.


13. Did not Cartwrith say. I cannot be persuaded that saint Peter and saint
Paul were so foolish, as to think, that a poo^ miserable man, which they
saw with the^ eyes, Beza in respo^. ad arg. Bre^ti^ Epist. 6. Fox. in his.
Carelesti page 1534. Calu. in Hermo. in Euange. Calu. insti. l. 1. c. 18. Peter
martyr in 1. Sam. 2. Melancthon in c. Romans 8. Calu. li. de eterna Dei praedest.
page 101. Zuin glius li. de prouidentia.
was their God. Beza also holds the same, and many others of that stamp, y^
some of them, that were burnt in Queen Mary's days, and related by Fox for
Martyrs, houlde. That Christ was in desperatio^ when he was upon the cross,
according^ to Calvin. That God is the author and cause of sin, the procurer,
and intiser, comaunder and worker, and that the adultery of David, and the
treason of Judas, was as well the work of God, as the conversion of saint
Paul. And that man has noe free will: with manny such horrible blasphemies to
tedious for me to repeat, and irksome for anny Christian to hear. So as by
these wicked paradoxes, it must follow, that God is turned to be a diuill, and
that he is most unjust to condemn men for the offenses which they cannot
shun, having noe free will to avoid them, nor noe force to resist God, the
worker, counceller, and intiser to sin.

That noe iott or syllable of Christian religion, ought to be counted a thing
indifferent or of small moment, and that whosoever does not agree with the
Catholic Church in all points of belief, cannot be saved. CHAPTER III.
1. S. Thomas says, that whosoever does err in one article, S. Thom. 2 2. q.
5.3.
he has noe faith of the rest: for as saint Vincentius Ferar. says, virtue
has noe more fondations then one, and the same is indivisible, which is the
divine truth, which cannot be deceived, nor deceive: and so whosoever
doubts in one, has noe foundation of the rest For if a rock should fall,
upon which there should be 12. chambers, all those chambers would fall also:
even so the protestants in the beginning fell from the church, which is the
rock upon which Christ builded these 12. chambers, I mean the twelve
articles of our belief, so once they fallinge from the church, they fell from
these 12. articles; and came unto us, in spiritu erroris and mendacij, in the
spirit of error and lienge. This Martin Luther said of the Zuinglians. Luth.
dialog. 6. c. 11
In vain (says he) they believe in God, the father, the son, and the holy
ghoast, and all the rest, because they deny this one article. Hoc est corpus
meum: this is my bodi^

2. For this cause Iconoclasters or Image^ breakers are ancient heretics,
because they deny that article of the catholic church of the reuerencinge of
sacred images. How many of al estates, prelates, nobles and common people,
suffered either death or banishmente in the time of the Emperors that were image
breakers? for they considered that whosoever observes all the law, and
offends in one, is guilty of all the rest. The true mother of the child
would have noe division thereof. Nonne isti (says saint Augustine) quos
v^catis haeretici, do not these which you call heretics, confess the same
trinity, believe also in Christ, and yet they were called ancient heretics,
whose heresies were known and now altogether extinguished through their
absurdities. Aug. lib. 2 de trinit. cap. 17.
Hoc qui credunt (says he) lib. 2. nectu in catholica fide, sed in schismate
aliquo aut haeresi credunt, whosoever believes all articles of the creed and
otherwise remaininge in any scisme and heresy, cannot be in the catholic
faith. The Arrians denied but one letter in the creed, Zozo. li. 3. cap. 17.
Theod. l. 2 cap. 18. and 21.
and yet saint Ierom says, that if the church had not resisted the Emperor
Valen^ which did favor the Arrians, touching that letter which was Omusion,
in steed of Omision, Christendom (says he) would have been in great danger.

3. When the prefect of the Arrian Emperor Valens, In vit. Basil. Naz. orat 20.
in laudem Basilij.
dealt with saint Basil that he should not be so obstinate or wilful in his
opinions, but that he should conform himself to the Emperor and live in his
favor, he answered; that such as are fedd with the dainty feasts of holy
scriptures, they would suffer all kind of torments rather then any iott,
syllable or letter should be changed. And as for the Emperors frindshipp, he
did esteem it well, so that it were not against piety and religion. Romans 12.
S. Chrysostom upon that place of saint Paul. Having peace with every
body. We ought not to prefer (says he) peace before gods truth, when the
same is in danger, but rather to offer our lives for the defense thereof. So
as you see that the Arrians were condemned for heretics for one letter,
being in all other points catholics, but the protestants have raised from
hell all the heresies that ever were, for noe heretics almost that ever
were, but kept ecclesiastical service and ceremonies like the catholics, but
the protestants have taken away all: therefore they should not brag that their
religion is agreeable to the word of God, or the Romish church, or that the
Romish church, or anny member thereof, should join with them therein.

That the new Religion, for that it takes away all religion, is worse then
that of the Turckes and Gentiles. CHAPTER IV.
Stur. de rat* concordiae in^und^.
1. STurmius a protestant writer says, that Lutherans and Caluinistes do
destroy and take away the cheefeste articles of Christian religion, and the
fondation of our faith. Which thus is proved to be true; That religion is
best, which thinckes of God most reverently, and of their neighbors most
charitably: but the Turcks and Gentiles do far excel the new religion in
worshippinge God and helpinge their neighbors: therefore it must needs be
better, then the new. Cicero says, Cicero lib. 2. de diuinitate.
that God is a certain excellent and eternal nature, and that the order of
ecclesiastical things, is the beawtie of the world: who although they did
speak of manny gods, Instit. de monarchia Dei lib. 3. cap. 1.
yet they affirm Jupiter to be the father of all the rest, and say that they
did worshipp but one God, and the rest of the gods as the ministers of one
God, as Justinius martyr said, and Plato says. Plato de repub. dialogo 2. in
fine.
Deus qui bonus est, malorum causa nonest; God which is good, is not the cause
of evils: and in another place he says, God is not unjust, but most just. But
the new religion does say (in the chapter above recited) that God is the cause
of all mischief and wickedness: by which wicked assertion they make him a
devil.

2. All philosophers did refer all the inferior motions, to a certain
supreme motive, by the consideration whereof, they found a certain supreme
mouer, and a certain everlasting cause, which is the center of begininge, and
principle of all things, unto whom all things are subordinated. The Turcks
say, that God is immutable, merciful, pitiful, one only, who gives every
man according to his worckes, reward to the good, and torments to the badde,
and so they call God, la, Ila, Mahomet resula^ God, God above, and Mahomet his
prophet. But the new religion does say he gives noe reward to the good, nor
torments to the badd, so that he has any iott of faith with him, and the
more wicked a man is, Lutherus.
the nearer he is to Gods favor. The Turcks do believe that it is possible to
keep gods laws, but the new religion does say it is impossible, and that
heaven is given to those that have any faith, without anny respect to works or
man's endeavor. The Turcks also affirm, that Christ ascended unto heaven in
his fleashe, and sits in the presence of God. The Turckes Alcoran says,
that Jesus Christ was the son of the Virgin Marie, was inspired by God, that
he was the word, the spiritte, the wisdom, and the mind of God the father,
and that he was the Messiah, and the Prince that was promised unto the Jews.
Thene. l. 6. cap. 4. Alcoran. Azoar. 2.20. Azoar. 31.
Also they say, that the spirit of God did enter into Marie, and that Jesus
was begotten of her, she being a most pure Virgin. That God did indue her
soul, with greater grace and virtue, then the soul of anny that was, and that
of all men and women she was the best, the purest, and the godliest, and that
of all the children of Adam, none was unspotted and undefiled by Satan but
Marie and her child. Azoar. 3.76. The new religion believes of her noe such
matter, and compares her with their own mothers and some of them call her, a
saffron bagg.

3. Under the dominion of the Turcks, the christians are permitted without anny
restraint, to exercise all the rites and exercises of christian religion: not
so under princes of the new religion, who are greater persecutors of the
catholic christian religion, then anny Turcks, Jews, Gentiles or pagans that
ever were. In Constantinople there are many monasteries standing, and
replenished with religious people, in Grecia and other of the Turcks Dominions,
are at this day many degrees, orders, and ecclesiastical dignities of the
church, and christian pastors, as Patriarchs, Metropilitans, Archbishoppes,
Bishopps, and Priests, unto all which it is lawful to consecrate, to say
Mass, and Mouncks, Deacons and Subdeacons, do minister at the Alter. There
are all also other officers which they call Agnests, which do read upon
sondayes the epistles. There are also Archimancritae, that is to say, the
Fathers of Moncks. These Patriarchs are chosen by Metropolitans, Archbishopps
and Bishopps, and are confirmed by the chief Bassa the kings ^iccar: the next
unto these, are the Metropolitans, the cheifest of them, is the Metropolitan of
Thessalonica, which has under him 10. Bishopps, the Metropolitan of Athens,
has under him 6. Bishopps. In that city of Athens, were seen in a public
profession together 250. priests, there is a Metropolitan of Mitelin, but he
has no Bishopps under him. The Metropolitan of Chalcedon has under him 60.
priests. There is a Metropolitan of Nyce, but he has noe Bishop; The
Metropolitan of Ephesus, has hnder him 50. churches. The Metropolitan of
Philipen, has 150. Antioch 40. Churches, Smyrnensis 150. and Corinth, with
other Metropolitans 6.

4. All do agree with the Catholic religion in every point, exceptinge 3.
or 4. errors of the Greeks. This is known by the censure that Jeremy the
Patriarche has given of the protestant religion, which was sent by him the^
into Germany, who sought an union betwixt them and the Greek church, seeinge
they forsook the Latin church, or rather God, and the Latin have forsaken
them; but the said Patriarche did abhor, and refuse an union with them, and
said there was as much difference betwixt them, as betwixt heaven and hell. You
may read more of this matter in Michell ab Iselt Anno 1580. Surius hist. ibid.
Also the Patriarch of Philadelpha called Gabriell, did write unto Martinus
Crusius a Lutheran of this matter, requestinge him never to trouble him,
touching either, union or confirmation of his doctrine.

5. To co^clud this matter, if Turks, Jews, and Gentiles, think more
reverently of God the Father, D. Tho. 2.2. q. 10. art. 6. Tit. 4.
of Christ Jesus his son, and of his blessed mother, yea and do show more
favor to christians, then those of the new religion do, I must think and
conceive a better opinion of Turckes then of these new vpstarts, for S. Thomas
says, that heresy is a greater sin, the^ paganism and Iudaisme: for
although infidels deny more articles of faith then heretics, yet because
heretics do persecute the church with greater malice then the other, and the
greater malice argues the greater sin, therefore heretics are the greater
sinners. For as saint Paul says, an heretical man is damned by his own
proper judgment: therefore I leave the conclusion to the consideration of the
reader.

An answer unto Protestants, barkinge against the religious institutions of
holy Orders, saying that religious vocations were not instituted by our
Savior. CHAPTER I.
1. IF humane nature had continued in that blessed perfection of original
integrity, in which it was created, there would not be required (that grace
excepted which in the beginning was infused and superadded unto it) so many
other graces and helps, preuenie^t and subsequent, exciting her slacknes and
brackwardnes, and expelling her corrupt inclination and propension to
sensuality, to corruptible, base, and vile creatures. Wherefore the creator and
protector of man whose nature is goodness, whose proper work is mercy (as S.
Leo says) does never cease or desiste from giuinge of all helps and means to
repair and redress this humane imbecillitie, by proposing and intimating all
such sufficient motives to work our salvation withal, conuincing our
negligence and improvident carelesnes, if we will embrace and put the same in
due execution: so as for curing and healing the contagious maladies and restles
diseases contracted and engendered by original and capital sin, he
instituted the Sacrament of Baptism, and also for cleansinge and purginge us
from actual and personal committed after Baptism, he has ordained and
devised other Sacraments, either to be supported by them that we should not
fall, or to be raised up again and releiued, if we were fallen.

2. Amongst all convenient means ordained, either for reforming our said
vicious inclination, or increasing our perfection, none are so certain, or so
secure as the religious state, the assured sanctuary and common support of all
Christians, and specially of such as are plunged and perplexed, with the
continual flux and reflux of humane frailty, and Adams agony; For besides so
many evident testimonies of Gods particular favor and spiritual consolation
that he does bestow on it, to take away the occasion of sin, who ever lived
more virtuously or more religiously then those that were retired and sequestered
from the dangerous occasions thereof, and the alluring inducementes of the
vanities of this world? Elongaui fugiens and mansi in solitudine, I fled
retiring my self, and remained alone vid. from such as by their importunate
and alluring conversation of filthy concupiscence, sought to bring me to
confusion.

3. It is said in the person of a religious man exempted and freed from all
seculer designementes. Audiuimus eum in Euphrata, I have heard him at the
pleasant river of Euphrata, that springs out of paradise, I have found him
in the fertile feildes amids the woods. Not in the palace of King Pharao, but
in the wilderness, the Angels appeared unto Moises, wherefore in the desert he
received the divine laws with many other spiritual consolations. S. John
Baptist, least his blessed conversation should be defiled and profaned, with
the idle and loose communication of his kinsmen, fled into the wilderness. When
God through special favor appeared unto Abraham, and would recapitulate
certain great and hidden mysteries unto him, he said these words. Depart
from your native country, and your carnal freindes, and go a far off. It is
said unto the spouse of Christ. Obliuiscere populum tuum, and domum patris
tui. Genesis 12.
Take no care of thine own kindred, and remember not thy fathers house. The
Apostle after he became the servant of Christ. Non acquieuit carni and
sanguini, did bid adieu to flesh and blood. Elias and Mary Magdalen in the
wilderness, were dreadful unto the devils, grateful unto the Angels,
acceptable unto God, and famous to the world.

4. Did not Elias resemble the state of a religious person, who was without
wife, without children, without family, allwaies living chaste and continente,
being in that poverty, as he is described with hairy skins, and as it were
begging his bread of a poor widow, 4. Reg. 1.
sometimes receiving it from a crow? 3. King. 17 3. Reg. 19
Did not Elizeus, giving over his lands and chattells, and forsaking parents,
house and home, give good example of a religious state, follow that
perfection, and accomplish that votary life. Wherefore S. Hierom calls them
monckes of the old testament; Hier. ep. 4 Epist. 15.
in which number he reckons himself, saying. Our prince Elias, or leader
Elizeus, our captains, the children of the prophets also in the said old law
were the Nazarites, Number. 6.
dedicated to the service of God, so as saint Basil, calls the religious
people of the old testament Nazarites, Nazianz. oratione in laudem Basilij.
which by solemn vow consecrated themselves wholly to this religious
profession: they refrained from wine, and from any thing that might distemper
their minds, that so we likewise should not only abstain from sin, but
also from all the prouocations and inducementes of the same; neither from man,
or by man did it come, but from the son of God, VValde^s. de sacrament. tit.
9 cap. 33. Clito. l. 3. cap. 9. Greg. 2. di^l. cap. 8
in which are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, as all holy fathers
do witness, and especially Thomas Waldensis against John Wickliffe, Clitoueus
against Luther and other heretics of his time. S. Gregory against Florineus,
which most sharply persecuted S. Benedict and his holy order.

5. What more evident proof or conuincing reasons can we have, then our
saviors own words? for the religious state consists of three vows, I
mean perpetual chastity, voluntary, poverty, and constant and perfect
obedience, which Christ ordained against the three maladies of our soul, which
is concupisce^ce of the eye, concupiscence of the flesh and pride of life;
Matt. 29.
touching the first, he says, there are Eunuchs which have gelded themselves
from the beginning from the kingdom of heaven, meaning thereby that such people
by their solemn vow of religious chastity, and of invincible and vowed
continency, did cut away all liberty and occasion of wedlock, and unchaste
desires of fleshly allurementes. Of poverty he said in plain terms; Luc. 14.
unless one will renounce all that he possesses, he cannot be my disciple.
Luc. 10.
In another place he forbids the Apostles to carry either goulde or silver,
scrippe or purse. Luc. 9.
Of obedience he says. He that lists to come to follow after me, let him
deny himself, take up his cross and follow me. By this abnegation and denial
of himself, the holy doctors have ever understood the vow of obedience, as may
appear plainly by the counsel of Zenon; Conc. zen. decre.
all which three vows our Savior counseled, which are called evangelical
counsels, and so they are recorded by the Evangelists, Matt. 19. Mar. 10.
Luc. 18.
as may appear by the young man that sought our Saviors counsel for the
purchasing of life everlasting, who nevertheless from his childehood kept the
commandments, yet he counseled him, if he would be perfect, to go and
sell all that he had, to give the same to the poor, and to follow him, and he
should have great treasure in heaven. For by selling all his goods, Matt. 19.
he should make himself incapable to demand them again: and by following of
him does plainly signify other evangelical counsels, especially that of
obedience, which counsel, being unadvisedly rejected of the young man, was
embraced of the Apostles, for S. Peter in the name of them all says, we
forsook all things; by which words saint Hierome proved against Iouinian,
Iere. lib. 1. in Iouin. S. Tho. 2.^ opus. 88. ar. 4. ad 3. Aug. 17. de ciuit. 4.
that the Apostles being after admitted to the Apostolic dignity, were
continente and chaste without exercising conjugal society; so saint Thomas and
saint Augustine say, that the Apostles obliged themselves by vow, to follow
this estate of perfection, when by forsakinge all things they followed Christ.

That the Apostles and their followers in the primative church, followed this
estate of perfection. CHAPTER II.
1. We read in the acts, Act. 5. Act. 2. v. 44.
that all things amongst the Christians were common, and whatsoever lands,
houses, chattels, or mooveables they had, all was sold and the price thereof
brought before the Apostles. And this they did as they were obliged by ^owe,
and as votaries they accomplished the same as saint Hierome expounds (related
by Platus, de bono statu religiosi) upon that place of the Acts, where Ananias
with Saphira was stricken dead by S. Peter for reserving to himself part of
his goods which he had gotten for the land he sold. Act. 5.
For you (said he) did not lie to man but to God: but had not he promised the
same, he should not have bin taxed with that impu^ation of a ly against the
holy ghost, nor so sore a punishment would have bin inflicted upon him, had it
not bin in his free choice to bring the value and price of all his goods unto
the Apostles; And S. Hierom says, Act. 2.
that the state of the Christians in the beginning, was like unto that of the
Monks in his own time, in such sor^e that none had any propriety of goods,
none rich or poor amoungst them, In descriptione Ecclesiae apud Philonem. Act.
2.
their patrimony was equally distributed, every man receiuinge an equal
portion: they employed their study and their time in prayers, psalms, reading
and other religious exercises, as S. Luke and Phylo do report.

Cass. 2. lib. cap. 5. and col. 18. c. 5
2. Cassianus testifies that this religious discipline of monasteries and
conuentes, was not only begun by the Apostles, but also was much increased
and augmented by them, and much more by their immediate and next successors,
men and weomen were disioined and sequestered one from another, absteining from
wedlock, communication of flesh and blood, and from all idle and frivolous
conversation of worldly vanities. And therefore for solitarines they were
called Monks; and for community of all things amongst themselves, they were
called Cenobit^. Hier. in vita Mar.
This religiouse discipline and strict profession, was first practiced by saint
Mark the Euangeliste, as S. Hierom and Cassianus do avouch, for not only at
Jerusalem and Alexandria this order was established, but in other parts of
the world, as in Ethiopia the daughter of the King there, was consecrated unto
God by saint Matthew the Apostle, holy Thecla by saint Paul in Grecia, Domitilla
by saint Clement at Rome, in France saint Martha the good hostess of our
Savior erected a monastery by Marcells in a place very remote, where she with
other religious weomen lived most virtuously.

3. Dionys. de Eccles. Hier. c. 10 in descrip. Eccles. in vita Mar.
Dionysius Areopagita saint Paul's disciple, declares at large, not only their
increase in his own time, but also of their profession, ceremonies, and honor
they ha^ in the world. Philo the Jew, which spoke with saint Peter at Rome, did
write a book in the commendacion of the professors of this religious
profession, thereby to extol his own nation for that they were so virtuously
addicted: Eusebius. 1. Eccl. hist. cap. 17. Tert. de veland. virg. ^0. q. 1. ca.
virginis.
Eusebius also alleges Philo, and largely sets down his words to this
purpose. Tertullian wrote a book of the vailing or mourninge of Virgins. So
we read a decree of Pius the first Pope of that name, being set forth Anno
147. of the order in consecrating of virgins, which order or ceremonies, saint
Ambrose and saint Eusebius set down. Lib. de inst virg c. 17. Euse. c. 4.
Also Justinius martyr Apologetico 2. pro christianis, Clemens Alexandrinus ad
stromatum 2. Ignatius disciple to saint John the Evangelist ad Tar^enses. S.
Cipr. lib. 1. epist. 11. and Origenes Homil. 17. S. in Luke, do write of the
order and consecration of Virgins. Ruff. l. 10. hist. Theod. l. 1 cap. 18.
Ruffinus and Theodoretus do write when S. Helena went to Jerusalem to find
out the cross of Christ, that then she found virgins there dedicated to God;
and all ancient writers that ever wrote were not forgettfull of virgins,
vows, and votaries, with which the Church of Christ flourished in all ages.

Of the increase of religious orders, and how the same continued from time to
time until our days. CHAPTER III.
1. THe church of Christ having no intermission or time of breathinge from the
cruel and terrible storms of bloody persecuting tirantes for the space of
300. years, when all the princes of this world complotted, all devised
policies, extended their force, exercised their bloody imbruementes to
destroy her, no prince or monarche being a christian until Constantine the
great, about the year of our Lord 305. became a christian, at which time the
church flourished in great peace and prosperity. This religiouse institution of
Virgins, increased also by the great saint Antony the Moncke of Egypt, commonly
so called for his great sanctity, austerity of life, contempt of the world,
mortification of his carcass, hatred of himself, and inflamed charity toward
God; and although we read there were religious places wherein this
religiouse profession was exercised, Athan in vita Anthonij.
yet as saint Athanasius writes, he was the first that reduced and trained
them to the order of monastical rules and discipline, instructing them with
the rudimentes of this spiritual warfare, and that under the government and
leading of others, from whom like the industrious Be, he collected certain
spiritual honey, as well for his own education, as for the instruction of
others, his resplendent sanctity being a shining light in the whole world: by
his blessed examples all the deserts of Armenia, Scithia, Nitia, and both
Thebaidas were replenished with monasteries, all which were directed by the
provident care and wisdom of the said S. Antony, being as it were their father
general, whom others imitated and followed, as S. Hillarion who was another
S. Antony, who founded first monasteries in Palestine as S. Hierom says. Our
Lord Jesus has old S. Antony in Egypt, he has young Hilarion in Palestine,
and so others followed his steps, and many monasteries learned from his, the
precepts of a celestial life.

2. In the same time also S. Basil the great (so called also for his great
learning and sanctity) instituted in Greece monastical order and discipline,
who in a certain epistle writes thus; We are accused (says he) that we
cause men to exercise piety, to forsake the world and all temporal cares,
which our Lord compared to thorns which hinder the fertility of Gods word,
for such people do carry the mortification of Jesus in their bodies, and
carringe their cross, they follow Christ. I hear (says he) that in Egypt
there be some that do embrace this virtue, and perhaps in Pales^ine there be
some that follow this evangelical life. I hear also that in Mesopotania there
are blessed and perfect people, but we are boys in comparison of such as be
perfect: so that S. Basil both augmented and directed this reguler life,
according to order and rules; for first of all he established most holy laws,
that should confirm this holy institution, he also determined a time of
trial, which being expired, every one was bound to accomplish his vow. Of
whom Naziaze^ says, he was the first, not only for his own good, but for the
good and spiritual consolation of other that founded monasteries, and reduced
the old observation and ceremonies of the old monks, into a certain form and
order more agreeable to religion.

3. S. Augustine writes, that he saw at Millan a monastery maintained by S.
Ambrose; August 8. conf. cap. 6
and saint Augustine himself as Possidonius declares, founded monasteries for
men and weomen in Afric: the same also writes S. Antoninus, Antonin. 3. tit.
24. c. 14.
that before saint Augustine was anointed Bishop, he erected a monastery in a
wood near Hippo, which as well in his life time, as also after his death was
much increased, by whose blessed propagation and budding ofspringe out of the
con^erminat cities, others retired themselves unto that devout and safe
sanctuary, but certain years after saint Augustines death, by the irruption
of the Barbarians, they were cast down and dispersed, some came to Italy, some
to other places, which before lived in the wilderness as Ermits, and were
reduced afterward to live in monasteries and conuentes in cities by
Innocentius the 4. Pope of that name 1243. that by their religious examples
their neighbors might be edified and instructed.

4. S. Benedict who flying the world and living in the wilderness instituted his
order in Mount Cassin anno 520. in ashort time made 12. monasteries, and
brought colonies into France by Maurus, into Cicilia by Placidus, into other
places by others: more of him is related by saint Gregory the great. Greg. 2.
dia. cap. 3. and 36.
From this religious order many other families spro^ge, the first was that of
Cluny, which about anno 923. took his name of Odo^ Abot of Clunie, who being a
most learned and religious man, reformed this order, and being through
antiquity and other causes slackned, was by him reduced to his former sanctity,
whose religiouse example, was embraced and followed by other Abotes in Italy,
Spain, Germany, and England, every one casting and laying down a certain
project for this reformation, and using all possible means, craving herein the
authority of the Popes, which they obtained for the renuinge and obseruinge the
said ancient discipline.

5. Next him followed Romualdus, who labored and accomplished this reformation
in the year of our Lord God 1000. whose family are called those of
Camulduensis, which flourished in all examples of sanctity and perfection of
life, and so moved all places of the world where they were to follow their
blessed and rare institution.

6. Next him succeeded those of Valle Vmbrosia by one Gualbertus, this man was
so infestuous and offensive to a certain person for murdering his brother,
that he never omitted the pursuit of him, until he took him, who nevertheless
for that he prostrated himself at his feet, and asked pardon and mercy of him
for the passion of Christ (whose feast at that very season was solemnized by
the christians) did remitt unto him that trespass, and did him no harm, in so
much that former malice and rancor was turned to love and charity. Whereupon
the said Gualbertus, went to the next church and prayed before the Image of the
crucifixe, which bowed its head unto him, as if the said Image would embrace
him; after which time he was so inflamed and enkindled with the love of that
religious and contemplative life, that in that very place of the Vale of
Vmbrosia, he determined to put ^is religious purpose in due execution, which
afterward increased by many that followed him.

7. And What family in the world more famous for the like sanctity, then those
of Cister? which in the year of our Lord 1098 ^ad their beginning and
ofspringe, in the time of Henry the 4. Emperor, and Philip the first king of
France, by one Robert which was prefect of the abbie of Mollissme^, who for
that he saw the Monckes through great riches, and other worldly allurementes
degenerate from their first rule and institution, departed witht wentie one of
such as were more perfect then the rest into Burgundy, where in a certain
desert called Cister he fixed his abode, and so sequestered, ^e lived most
religiously; but the Monks being moved with pennaunce, requested his
returning again unto them, and promised unto him to be reformed, and
reclaimed; he therefore having placed in his rome one Stephen, returned to his
former monastery. But Cisters was 15. years afterward confirmed in sanctity
and increased with monasteries by saint Bernard, who entered into the same with
30. fellows and 3. of his brethren, who increased in estimation, and credit
both with God and men, whereupon in a short time was builded for him 160.
monasteries, and all this family sprunge out of the institution of S. Benedict.

8. About that time also, being 16. years before the institution of saint
Bernard, began the order of the Carthusia^s through the strange and doleful
example of a great doctor of Parris, who being by the common opinion of all
men, counted a very good and honest man, yet after his death at his exequie
and funeral, in the open assembly he said the first time, that he was
accused; the second time he said, he was judged; and last of all that he was
condemned: at which dreadful voice one Bruno, an eminent and learned Doctor of
Parris being present, was so amazed and terrified, that turning himself to
some that were with him, he said, who can be saved unless he do forsake the
whole world? Wherefore he fled presently into the deserts near to the city
of Gratianople in France, and there lived solitary. And that his said purpose
was acceptable unto God, it was revealed in sleep to one Hugo Bishop of that
diocese, that God descended into those deserts, that he made a worthy palace
to himself, that 7. stars lifted up themselves being of wonderful splendour
like a crown above the earth, the one different from the other.

9. After this the order of Carmelites was revived by Albert Patriarche of
Jerusalem, VVald de sacrament. tit. 9. c. 84
which as Thomas Waldensis writes began in Mount Carmele, in the first
church that was dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary in the Apostles time, but
discontinued by the invasion of the Sarazins into Palestine, where before their
coming, this order flourished with multitude of saints and holy people. After
this time followed the holy orders of saint Frauncis, saint Dominique, and
saint Celestine, the former, I mean saint Frauncis, was confirmed by
Innocentius the 3. 1202. S. Dominique who was first a cannon regular in the
church of Oxman in Biscaia, having employed his learning and his trauelles for
the space of 20. years at Tolosa in France against the heretics, by the
consent of certain of his fellow laborers instituted his order, styled the
order of preachers, which was approved and allowed by the said Innocentius the
3. in the time of the general council of Lateran, and afterward confirmed
by Honorius the 3. 1206.

10. The order of saint Celestine, began by one Petrus Moromus, who lived in
the wilderness with great example of holiness of life and multitude of miracles,
which was approved by saint Gregory the 10. in the general counsel of Lions
1274. And it is called the order of Celestine, for that the said Peter beng the
author thereof, was made Pope afterward, and called by the name of Celestine
the 5.

11. The order of Obseruants began in the time of Frederick the 2. Emperor,
who was a great enemy to the Pope and church, and spoiled all the territories
thereof, they dedicated themselves to the service of the blessed Virgin, and
being in number 7. very noble and welthy men, went into the wilderness, and
there lived removed from all the enticementes and inducementes of mischeife,
which was the occasion that others also forsook the vanities of the world.
Many o^ godly people in all ages and countries* have been by a special favor
of God, raised up to knock the hammers of penance at our slumbring and
lumpish hearts, oppressed with dead sleep and Lethargy, to sound the trumpet
of Gods wrath in his church, to awake rechles and forgettfull souls out of the
slumbring dreams of fleshly concupiscence, crying and repeating to the
careless children of Adam our saviors heavy and dreadful voice, unless ye
repent, you shall every one perish.

That priests in the primative church, even from the Apostles time, were
religiouse and observed religious order of life. CHAPTER IV.
1. Seeing that religion consists of the foresaid three vows, obedience,
chastity and poverty, and that the Apostles and their successors have
accomplished and performed them, they were religious and observed a religious
life: for when the preistes received holy orders, they promised perpetual
chastity, and if any of them had wives, by the example of the Apostles, they
willingly of their own accord refrained from the use of wedlock. They
obliged themselves also to cannonicall obedience, as S^lpitius writes of saint
Martin, whom saint Hillary solicited that he should be made preiste by
himself, and whom for his great virtue he loved, for that in receiving holy
orders of him, he would be obliged to stay with him and render to him
obedience. S. Gregory also declares, 4. Epi. 74
that it was the custom of Rome, that no priest could deaparte from thence
that received there holy orders. Concerning poverty, which is the third, the
preistes in old time embraced the same, in so much as when they were made
priests they made a resignation of all they had, whether it was patrimony, or
anny other worldly substance, which S. Hierome declared saying, that this was
the cause why the preistes were shaven, that it should signify a cuting off
and forsaking of all temporal wealth. Lib. de vita conte^platiua cap. 9.
Prosper confirms the same, saying it is expedient and meet for the
acquiring of perfection, to despise his proper goods, and to be contented with
the goods of the church, for the goods thereof are not proper but common; and
so he brought examples of saint Paulinus and S. Hilarious, who when they were
made preistes and Bishops, they sold their patrimony, and gave the price
thereof to the poor, and were diligent administrators of the patrimony of the
church, Epist. ad clerum Hierosolimitanum.
distributing to each one proportionably according to his degree and necessity.
S. Clement writes that the common life was requisite and to be followed of
those that addicted and yielded themselves wholly to the service of God and to
the imitation of the Apostles: the like observation of life saint Gregory the
great wished saint Augustine to institute, amongst the clergy of england. The
same is also confirmed by the decree of Eugenius the 2. and Urban Pope, in his
epistle to all the clergy.

2. Of this grew the Canons regulars, which life began in the Apostles days,
and afterward was renewed and restored by by saint Augustine, as Possidonius
writes, Possid. in vita ^. Aug.
that he had a monastery within the church, in the which nothing was propre,
but all was common; But after that saint Augustine was dead, and Hippo of
which he was Bishop being destroyed and ransacked by the Vandales, Gelasius a
holy man of that institution, with some others came into Italy, and being made
Pope, the rest that were with him lived most regulary in a monestary that was
founded by them nere to the church of Lateran, which continued 800. years,
until afterward things that were common were made proper, every one having
a portion assigned unto him. Of this order of Canon regulars, was saint
Patricke the Apostle of Ireland, and also saint Dominicke, before he instituted
his order. In the primative church all preistes observed this religious
community, and especially such as dwelling in cities and great towns had any
charge in them, as we may read in saint Augustine, but such as were ordained
to be incumbentes in the country, Aug. ser. 1 resertur. 12. q. 2.
in respect of several parish churches, and several distinct incumbencies,
were permitted to have several provisions and distinct benefices, and as the
christians increased, so their pastors and preistes increased also: the
spiritual want of the christians, the majesty of God, and the dignity of the
church requiring and exacting many servants to serve the one, and many pastors
and preistes to serve the other, in the multitude whereof, it were very hard to
preserve and continue the splendour and sincerity of the former feruor and
charity of that heroical age, which had as it were the florishinge spring,
and the first fruictes of the holy Ghost, and therefore the prime and the
cheifest season of holiness and religion: Of whose blessed vigor of piety, the
less we savor by tract of time, the more our own proper love increases, and
the love of God decreaseth.

3. But in all ages God sends some to reform the ancient discipline, and to
revive the languished vigor thereof, not only in themselves but in others,
especially in this so general a corruption, not only of nature, but also of
manners, of religion and laws, of civil honesty and religious piety, as
Ignatius Loiola 1540. began his reformation of the clergy, and by the
institution of his order confirmed by Paul the 3. Pope, renewed the old
discipline by reducing his order and institution thereunto. It is also a matter
of no less consideration then the former, The founder of the order of the
Society of Jesus.
that in one night he was borne in the house of Loyola nere the town of
Bergara in Ipulcha a province betwixt Biscaie, and the kingdom of Navarre, and
Luther was borne in Saxony in a town nere Wittenberge called Ilesby 1483.
Surius.
upon S. Martins day. Both of them employed their wits at one time, the one
to bring all religion and ecclesiastical order to utter confusion and
miserable desolation: the other to restore the same to the ancient perfection
thereof; the one of a religious man became an Apostate, of a continent became
lecherous, of a saint became a devil: the other of a seculer became religious,
of a soldier became a saint, of a man became an Angel. And as at one time and
in one night, S Augustine was borne in Afric, and Pelagius the heretic was
borne in England, and as Pelagius intended to overthrow the church with his
perverse heresy, and S. Augustine labored to restore the same by his found
doctrine; so the blessed Ignatius with his religious and blessed family,
labored to destroy the darnell and cockell of heresy, which Luther, Calvin and
all their most wicked and blasphemous sectaries, have sown in the field of our
Lord which is the Catholic Church.

4. Others after him were made instruments to reform the slacknes and
desolation of the clergy, as Phillip Nereias, and other godly people at Rome
and else where in our own days, and have also cast their beams into other
kingdoms, especially Italy, France and Spain. Seeing that God can never be
glorified in this world but by his church, nor his church can never be
manteyned but by sacrifice and sacraments, nor sacraments can be offered or
done but by pristes, for the which they are ordained and instituted chiefly and
principally. And whosoever goes about to take away preisthood, takes away
both sacrifice, sacraments, religion, church, and consequently robs God of his
honor, spoils him of his glory, and depriues Christians of their knowledge
and love of him.

5. This preist-hoode is divided into two orders, the one speculatiue, and the
other practical; and as Christ was interteyned by two devout sisters, Mary
and Martha, so he is also continually served in his church by two religious
orders, which Mary represented. I mean the speculatiue, and the order of the
clergy which Martha signified; Ambros. epist. 25.
This saint Ambrose declares saying. Who can be ignorant that in the church of
God there are two excellencies, the one is the office of the Clergy, the other
the institution of Monks, the one to be exercised and practiced amongst men,
the other to be trained up and accustomed to abstinence and patience, the one
to be represented on the theater, the other to be hidden in a corner, the one
to be a spectacle to the world, the other to be kept in secret. And therefore
that worthy champion of our Lord says, spectaculum facti sumus Deo, angelis
and hominibus. We are become a spectacle to God, to Angels, and to men: the
one fights against the confusion of the world, the other against the
allurementes of the flesh, the one more profitable for his neighbor, the other
more perfect for himself, both of them deny themselves, that they may serve
Christ perfectly, because to men of perfection it is said, whosoever will come
after me, let him deny himself and follow me; the one does strugle with the
world, the other wrestleth with the devil: the one ouercometh the baits of
the world, the other flies from them, unto whom the world is crucified, and he
unto the world: the one has greater tentation and greater victory, the other
less danger and greater secury: thus far saint Ambrose, by which you may
perceive the state of those that live in Cloisters and Monasteries and Monks
Friars, and such as live abroad in the world, in continual fear and manifest
dangers, in which many are, fallen, and many others are vpholden.

Of the multitude of religious persons. CHAPTER V.
1. NOthing is so ircksome unto our corrupt nature and carnal disposition,
altogether corrupted with the too much alluring humors of sensuality,
intoxicated with the blind affection thereof, as to cast the yoke thereof
away from us, by taking up Christ's cross, by denyinge our selves to follow
Christ, whereof in so doing we may apply to our selves that verse of the
prophett. Deripuisti Domine vincula mea, tibi sacrificabo hostiam laudis. O
Lord thou have broken my fetters, I will sacrifice unto thee a sacrifice of
praise. Which ever was observed in all ages of the gospel, by utterly
renouncinge the world with all the pompes thereof, which was put in execution
by the perfection of religious vocation.

2. How many thousands, or rather millions, by the examples of saint Paul the
Hermitt and saint Antony, have cast off this yoke, abandoned or rather
abiured the world; retired themselves to the deserts, there with greater
liberty of spirit, better security for their salvation, and les danger of
tentation, to serve God all the days of their lives? Athan. in vita eius.
Of the said saint Antony it is written by a most holy saint, that in the
mountain there were monasteries as if they were tabenacles full of divine
quires, of such as song psalms and prayed, which seemed to inhabit a
certain infinite region separated from all conversation: amongst whom (says
he) there was peace and concord, there none hated another, either by word or
frowninge: wherefore that of the scripture may be verified thereof, Number. 23.
quam bon^ domus tuae Jacob, how good are the house; of Jacob, the tabernacle
of Israel, they are like woods that do shaddowe, like a paradise upon
rivers, like tabernacles which are pitched of our Lord, and like Cedars of
Libannus about the waters.

3. Hieron in vita* Hillarion.
The like testimony saint Hierom gives of saint Hilarion, who about that time
founded many monasteries in Palestine, wherein also Macharius the disciple of
saint Anthony and Ca^iton, founded many monasteries, in one of which as ^odorus
records, were a thousand Monks. It is said also that one Apollonius, had
5000. Monks under his government. In the mountain of Mitria which is 40.
miles, from Alexandria, were 5000. monks in 50. monasteries which were all
governed and directed by one Superior. Syria and Aegipt did also a^ound with
such swarms of holy monks, that the wicked Emperor, Julian the Apostate and
Valens, compelled them by force and violence to go as soldiers to the wars,
but quickly afterward God punished both the one and the other for their
labor; saint Hierome wrote the life of those Monks.

4. Palladius Bishop of Cappadocia, went* in pilgrimage barefooted, being
accompanied with 7. to visit the Monks of Aegipt, they came unto a certain
city by Thebes called Oxirnicum, in which they found such religion and
sanctity, as they by word could not express, in which there was no heretic
nor gentile, and we saw more monasteries and religious houses there (said he)
then profane houses, so that every street and corner thereof were replenished
with divine praises and celestial Alleluias, the whole city being as it were
but one only church, inhabited and possessed of the servants of God, the
Bishopp of that city told them, there were 20. thousand Virgins, and 10.
thousand Monks: we are not able (says he) to express with what entire
affection, honor, and fervor of charity, they enterteined us. He saw also at
Babylon and Memphis, an inumerable multitude of Monks, which were endewed and
adorned with sundry gifts of the holy ghost, this is the place where the
Patriarche Iosephe kept in store provision of wheat for seven years scarcity.
He makes mention of Amonius the father of 3000. Monks, dwellinge near
Thebes, and Paconius which lived 400. years after Christ which had 7000.
Monckes disioined the one from the other in diverse houses. Also Serapion which
had 10000. under his gouermente, whose lives were so famous for their sanctity,
and eminent virtues, that many went in pilgramage to the desert to see them,
amongst whom was that holy woman Paula, Epitaph. epist. 27.
as saint Hierom reports. Who being astonished with their admirable virtues,
and forgettinge her own sex, wished to dwell amongst so many thousand Monks,
who never went to any of their cells, but she prostrated her self upon her
knees, before each of them, believing she saw Christ in every one of them.

5. Many thousand virgins embraced this religious perfection as the
ecclesiastical histories record, especially Theodorus who writes, that
there were an infinite number of Monasteries and conuents of Virgins in most
parts of the east, as in Palestine, Aegipt, Asia, Pontus, Siluia, Siria and
Europe, from the time that Christ was borne of a Virgin, the swarms of Virgins
were multiplied, in all which multitude both of men and weomen, no irreguler or
disordered confusion was practiced, none was impeached with any imputation of
shameless or irreligious misdeameanour, the cheifest consideration of their
rules and institutions (as saint Hierom says) was to obey their superiors in
all things, Religiosa histor.
except (says he) the time of public exercise of prayers, and meditations.
The Monks of Aegipt lived altogether by their own labors, and what every
one could get by his toil, and industrious acquisition, saving a small
portion, which he reserved for his own sustentation and liuelie-hood, they
brought it to their father general to be distributed upon the poor, and so
they were wont to send ships laden with corn and provision unto Alexandria
for the releife of the poor prisoners, and other needy distressed persons; for
in Egypt were not such number of poor people which could consume the Alms and
bountifullnes of these saints.

6. But let no man carpe or take occasion of detractinge of the religiouse
persons of this time, for that they do not so labour^ for those Monks of
Egypt and Palestine had no other purpose or employment, but to serve God and to
labor for their own proper perfection, not respecting their neighbors, and
so for the most part they lived in remote places, and it was also provided by
their institution to labor with their bodies: but the Monks and religious
orders of our times, they are bound by the institution of their order, not only
to help themselves spiritually, but also their neighbors, and so they are
bound to preach and teach and hear confessions. For the accomplishing of
which work, to do it well, they must needs study, and labor very much,
which cannot be accomplished or well done, if they should bestow their times in
any servile work.

7. Europe also is bewtified and famous with these religious orders and
observations of Italy, as saint Gregory the great, makes mention in his 4.
dialogues, which he composed for the most part of the lives and miracles of
many religious saints of that country. Trithemius does write; that in his
own time which was about anno 1470. there were of the order of S. Benedict in
the province of Moguntia 124. abies besides 10. that were separated from the
rest, and added that there were in other places 5000. complete abies, besides
many small monasteries. Other authors do write as Caesararius, Bruto, and the
author of the beginning of the order of Cisters Montaluo, and Arnoldus Abion in
ligno vitae, that there were 37000. monasteries of the order of S. Benedict in
the world, 14000. Priories, Nunries 15000. that there were canonized of that
order 55000. that there were popes 46. Cardinals, 300. Parriarches and
Archbishops 1600. Bishops 4000. Emperors 25. Empresses 29. Kings 54. Queens
53. sons and daughters of Emperors 54. sons of Kings 49. daughters of
Kings 72. doctors that wrote books 15000. Martirs 5270. For the space of 300.
years, all the Popes were of that order: for the space of 600, years all the
universities were governed and directed by that order: and 33. kingdoms were
converted by that order unto the christian religion. Tertullus father to
Placido the Monk, bestowed upon saint Benedict 28. provinces, 98, cities and
villages, all the kings of these parts of the world for the most part were
buried in the monasteries of the said order: the Kings of France in the
monastery of saints Denis, the kings of England at Westminster, the kings
of Naples at S. Seuerine, the kings of Cicily at Palermo, the kings of
Arragon at Poblete, the kings of Navarre at S. Saluador, the kings of
Portugal at Alcobaco, the Emperors in the Monastery of Fuldense. The Abbay of
Floriacense with the monasteries thereunto belonginge, is worth a million by the
year.

Bernard. in vita 8. Malachiae
8. S. Bernard writes that in Ireland there was a monastery that brought forth
many thousand Monks, and was the head of many monasteries, a place (says he)
truly holy, fertile of saints, and most abundantly fructifyinge unto God,
so as one of the children of that most holy place called Luanus, was the
founder of an hundred monasteries. Plati. de bono statu religiosi lib. 2. c. 24
Ireland (says the same saint Bernard) being so enriched by these blessed
people, may ioifully singe the verse of David. Visitasti terram and inebriasti
eam, multiplicasti locupletare eius. Thou have visited the earth, and thou have
overflowed and abundantly enriched the same with the swarms of these holy
people, who made their excursions and cast forth their beams into other
places, out of which came holy Columbauns into France, and builded the famous
monastery of Luxouia, where heavenly and divine Alleluias, surceased not any
instant or moment by night or by day, whose blessed quire is incessantly
supplied by religious Monks: thus far Saint Bernard.

Of many great and eminent men, who forsook and contemned the world, to become
religious. CHAPTER VI.
1. BEing to speak of many great and eminent persons who contemned the world
to become religious, and were the flower and ornament of the catholic church
(the number whereof, are almost inumerable) I will endeavor to exe^plifie them,
first in the grecians, and next in the latins. Of these in the first rank I
may put Serapion, who in the year 193. being a young man, embraced a
monastical life, and was made the 8. Patriarche of Antioch after saint Peter,
none in his time being so learned, or so eloquent as he, who wrote manny
learned books. After him succeeded Pamphilus anno 240. being the learnedest of
his time, of whose great library saint Hierome made mention: Hier. de script.
Eccles.
he was put to death by Maximianus. About that time also was Lucianus which as
Suidus says, kept school at Antioch, who also was famished to death by the
said Maximianus. After him flourished saint John Climachus, Hier. ibid.
the ornament of his time, who lived in the monastery of Mount Sinay; Not
inferior unto him was holy Ephrem, whose writings next after the scriptures,
were read in many churches of the East, as S. Hierom records.

2. Others were most famous both for their incomparable learning and
sanctity, as saint Basil and saint Gregory Nazianzen, both of which professed
monastical life. For the said Nazianzen, travailing by sea unto Athens and
being affrithed with great tempest, made a vow to serve God in monastical
profession, if he did ariue safe, which vow when he had ended his studies he
accomplished. S. Epiphanius also a man very memorable, being the light of his
age, by the help of one Lucius Mounke, retired himself to religious
sanctuary. What shall I say of S. John Chrysostom Archbis^oppe of
Constantinople, who lived anno 400? and of saint John Damascen, who lived anno
730. have they not also applied themselves to serve God in this evangelical
discipline? I ought not to forgett Nilus, Isacius, Euthimius, Anastasius, and
Besarion, the last whereof was the anchor in the general council of Florence
for the reconsiliation and vnio^, of the Greeks, unto the latin, church, who
for his great learning and hollines, was created Cardinal by Eugenius the 4.
thus far of the Greeks, besides others thowsandes which were to tedious to
recite.

3. Amoungest the Latins we will put it the first rank, the two pillars of
the church, saint Hierome and saint Augustine, both which consecrated
themselves to the service of God in monastical profession. As for saint
Hierom, from his childhoode he was trained up therein, and so addicted
thereunto, that he refused to take holy orders at the hands of Paulinus
Bishop, of whom he was so earnestly solicited, thereunto, yet he would
never take it upon him but conditionally, that he should never leave off
monastical profession, Epist. 61.
of which writing to Pamacius, he said he would not leave of, that for the
which he forsook the world: and when he was stricken in years, he returned
unto Jerusalem, and at the tribe of our Lord he by ioyninge his help with
saint Paul, erected two monasteries, one for men, another for women, and
amplified, and enlardged them at his own proper charges, and as he himself
witnesses, did send Paulinus to sell all his patrimony for the entertaininge,
and reliuing of all such Mounks, as out of all places of the world came to see
him.

4. As for saint Augustine, although it be manifest by other authors, and
specially by Possidonius, that he observed this institution, yet his own,
words can best declare the same. I (says he) the writer hereof have most
intierlie loved the perfection of which our Savior speaks saying; Go, and
sell all that thou have, Aug ep. 4.
and give it to the poor, and come and follow me: neither by my own force
have I don so, but by his grace helpinge me, and none knows how much I
proffited by this way of perfection but my self, and to this purpose I
exhorted others as much as I could, and in the name of our Lord I have many
consorts, who are persuaded by my means. In another place he says. Contra
Petil. c. 4.
Petilianus with his cursed tongue did not forbear to slander, and find fault
with Monasteries, and Mounckes, reproving me that this kind of life was
instituted by me, which order being spread through the whole world, he says he
knows not, or at least he faineth ignorance therein: thus far saint
Augustine.

Hier epist. 13.
5. In their times was that charitable Prelate, Paulinus, Bishopp of Nola, who
was a Mouncke as saint Hierome records, his books do testify his great
learning his works of mercy do witness his great charity: for when Nola was
ransaked of the Va^dals in Afric, he would needs put himself into
captivity for the redemption of a poor Widows only son. I ought not here
to neglect the worthy Prelate S. Martin Bishopp of Toures, who builded 3.
monasteries; the first at Millain, out of which he was driven violently by
Auxentius the Arrian. The second at Poiters. The third at Toures, where though
he was a Bishopp, he observed reguler discipline with 8. Mounckes until he
died, as Sulpitius writes. About that time also flourished John Cassianus, a
Scythian by nation, being first disciple to saint John Chrysostom, who erected
a monastery at Marsells. Next unto him was Eucherius Bishopp of Lions, and
monck, brought up in the convent of Lyrinensis, and Prosper Bishopp of Rhege^,
who was a mouncke, and secretary to Leo the great.

6. How famous was Fulgentius in Affrique and in all parts of the world for
his great learning, in writing so much against heretics, who being a
Bishopp, observed monastical life? Immediately after him, followed that worthy
man Cassiodotus, who being Senator of the city Dane^an, and chauncelor to
Theodoricus king of the Romans, whom (for that the said king killed Boethius)
he forsook together with the world, and became a mouncke of the order of S.
Bennet Anno 550. After him succeeded Gregory the great, so called for his
great learning, and sanctity, who of a mouncke of the said order, was made
Pope. What shall I say of S. Gregory of Toures, who was taken out of the
monastery to govern that Sea? of saint Eutropius Bishopp of Valentia, he
being also a mo^cke? Of Isidorus who was taken out of his monastery to be
Bishopp of Civil? Of Alfonsus who from the convent was assumpted to be
Archbishopp of Tolledo in Spain, whose learned books do edify the world;
How glorious is France by so learned mounckes, and religious people as S.
Bernard. S. Cesarius Bishopp of Orlians, and Anselmus with many others? Italy
by S. Benedict, saint Bonauentura, saint Thomas of Aquinus, saint Frauncis etc.
England by saint Beda, saint Bonifacius etc. Irland by saint Patrick, saint
Malachias, saint Columbanus, saint Columba, saint Brandan with infinitt others.

Of Emperors Kings and Princes who forsook the world to become religious.
CHAPTER VII.
1. ALthough our souls in the sight of God who made them, are equal by
nature, yet he makes choice rather of the poor, then of the powerful and
rich: of the humbliest and basest, then of the proud and loftiest; 1. Cor. 1.
For as the Apostle says, there are not many noble nor wise according to the
flesh, for God makes of the poor his scelected people to confound the rich,
the foolish of this world he prefers before the wise thereof, he deposes the
might from their throane, and exalts the humble and meek: the more that a
man is entangled with the world, and allured by the uncertain and deceitful
promises, and promotions thereof, the greater difficulty has he to forgo
it, and the less feelinge, has he to preuenent the dangerous ruin, and
dismal lot of the same, and a man once being ingulfed in the filthy puddle
of beastly concupiscence, which ever does insult over the spirit, the less
feeling has he of gods inspiration, and the less swaie bears the interior
man, which in carnal and beastly people is altogether restrained from his
operation, by their insatiable and inextingible appetites of their fleshly
inclination, and disposition, to these vilde and corruptible things.

2. When the greatest and mightiest Monarchs and Potentates of this world are
in this case, especially if they be wantonlie trained up in voluptuousnes, and
enticed with lasciuous and wanton exercises, they forgett and forgo all
spiritual motions, to make themselves as it were dull and insensible to all
celestial influence and illustrations, forgetful of God, obliuious of his
comaundementes, negligent of their charge, carlesse and improvident of the end,
and mark for the which they are exalted, and advanced to the regal scepter,
which is the peace and tranquillity of the common wealth. But they not
respectinge either common good, or the peaceable estate of their kingdoms,
abusing their powerful force, and dignity with wanton lusts, and other
execrable vices, and wickedness, of whom it is spoken by the holy ghoast. Psalm.
134.
Gaudium hipocritae instar puncti, their joy, and allacritie shall quickly be
ended, and they likewise either themselves or their posterity shall be plunged
an perplexed with the usual troubles, continual calamities, and fatal
reuolutions, which commonly are incident unto such princes, of whom it is
said; Virum iniustum mala capient in interitu. The evils and mischief of an
unjust and wicked man shall intrappe and compass him, even unto his
destruction and utter decay; They may for a small time reign over wicked
nations, for whose dreadful and abominable trespasses and wickedness, God
suffers or rather stirs up Tyrants, to vex, punish and ouercharg their
miserable subjects with grievous and intolerable oppressions, tyrannical
extortions, impositions and irreparable callamities, who ever makes choice of
wicked officers and ministers, which frame and conform themselves to please
their wicked humors, and are skilful architects to putt in execution their
detestable plottes and purposes, staves of their bellies, enemies of Christ's
cross, captives, and servants of the diuill, whose chiefest reward and
promotion for performing their dreadful and bloody tragedies, is the
government of such provinces and cities, to whom they have committed them.

3. And although Ferdinande King of Castile and Arragon, father to the good
Queen Katherin of England, was as virtuous and just a prince as lived in all
Europe in his days, yet when he was dienge, he gave a mournful sigh, and
said, he had rather there all the kingdoms in the world, that he were a poor
lay brother in some religious order, serving in a monastery, then (said he) my
conscience should be disburdened of the heavy, and dreadful terror of my
dangerous accomptes, for the heavy burden, of so manny kingdoms, states, and
Provinces for the which I miserable wretch must answer, being scarce able to
satisfy or yield account for my own secrett and peculiar offenses, much less
for the gouernmente of all those regions committed by God, to my charge and
oversight. Zonarus tomo 3.
After that the Empire Anno 800. was translated by Leo the 3. Pope into the
West, and Charles the great King of France being made Emperor some of the
Emperors that succeeded him, forsaking the Empire, became religious, as
Lotharius, who being fifteen years Emperor, and lived a most virtuous
Christian, remembringe the speech that his father Lodouicke used in the time of
his death of the vanity of the world, and of the miserable estate of such as
are the slaves thereof, became a Mounck anno 865.

4. Hugo. the Emperor, after many victories that he had against his enemies,
became a Mouncke. Rachisius king of Italy resigninge his kingdom to his
Brother Astulpus became religious in the Monastery of Mount Cassius, of the
which he was as it is thought, Abott anno 741. Pipine king also of the Romans
and eldest son of Charles the great, followed that blessed example, who
became a mouncke in a monastery that he builded himself at Verona anno 805.
In Spain Bamba very prosperous, and fortunate both at home and a broad,
amoungest his other victorious exploites, defeated and discomfited 200. ships
of Moors that were Pyratts, took also Paul king of France prisoner that
came to invade Spain, at lenght being moved by divine inspiration became a
mouncke anno 674. whose blessed example, Verenundus king of Castile followed.
Ramiris king of Arragon first became a mouncke in his fathers life time, who
being dead without issue of other Children, was compelled to return to the
world and marry, and having issue which was a daughter, returned to his
monastery again.

5. But of all kingdoms of the world, England was most famous for the number
and sanctity of their religous kings, as Sigibertus king of Nothumberland,
who forsakinge the world, took a religious habitt upon him Anno 640. Ethelred
king of the Merceans anno 704. who governing his kingdom with great piety
and religion, resigned the same over to his son being but a child, and
erected a monastery of which he was made Abott. But when the child came to
riper years, he followed his fathers steps, went to Rome, and received the
habitt of Constantine the first then Pope, and spent there the remainder of his
days, with great sanctity and hollines, his name was Chenredus, in whose
company went Offa king of the East Saxons, who in the prime of his youth,
settinge at naught the vanities of all worldly prosperity, contemninge his
opulent, and rich kingdom, took upon him a voluntary death, which was, to
betake himself to a perpetual silence, banishing from his vowed and invincible
chastity, all fleshly enticementes and prouocations; Not long after him Inas
kings of the said Saxons, a man of of an incomparable piety and devotion, made
his whole kingdom tributaire to the sea Apostolic went to Rome forsakinge
his kingdom, and became religious; The same Geolfus did, unto whom Venerable
Beda dedicated his history, who being king of Northumberland and considering
the dangerous estate of kings, fled unto a monastery, there to serve God,
with greater security of his salvation, and resigned his kingdom to Egebert
his Uncle, who after that he had reigned 20. years, followed also his Nephewe
to the monastery, and died therein in that religious vocation.

6. In Germany the example of Charlemaine was famous being son to Charles
Martell, and being king of Austria and and Suethland came to Rome in a poor
man's attire and unknown to any, where he received holy orders of Zacharias
the Pope, and afterward entered the monastery in mount Zoracte which he
himself builded, but being disturbed by the frequent visitation of those of
his frindes, retired himself to Mount Cassen, a place more remote, was there
received with great joy of Petrocias Abbott thereof, where he increased very
well in virtue and religion, and especially in humility. For being by the
Abbott appointed to keep sheep (which office he more willingly accepted,
then the scepter when he was crowned) at a certain time, when one of the
sheep was lame, he brought her upon his own shouldiers unto the field: he
lived Anno 750. What shall I say of Trebellus king of the Bulgars, who through
the blessed endeavors of Pope Nicholas the first, became a christian and bore
such zeal to christian religion, that he expelled presently Photinus the
heretic, and leauinge the kingdom to his son, became a mouncke. But
understanding afterward that his said son cast off the yoke of Christ,
and returned to his former impiety, he went out of the monastery, and took
his son prisoner, whom he seuerlie punished by putting out his eyes,
perpetual emprisonment, and deprivation of his kingdom, which he gave to
Albert his younger son, and instructinge him with sound counsels and blessed
admonitions of Christian observations, returned to his monastery.

7. Another memorable example is of John Brena king of Jerusalem, and Emperor
of Constantinople, who in his fervent prayers saw saint Fraunces offering unto
him his habitt, and forthwith called his confessor and received the said
habitt, in which he lived but few days: and though he came to the vieneyarde
the 11. hour, yet he received nevertheless his wages. What king more famous
for his great virtue and miracles, then king Henry of Cyprus, who followed
the same blessed course of life? In this blessed rank we may enroll John,
king of Armenia, who resigninge his kingdom to Leo his nephew, which was so
large and so great that he had under him 24. kings, chose rather to be abject
and base in the house of God, then to command in the tabernacles of sinners.
But when the Turcks invaded those kingdoms, and Leo being not able to resist
them, and saying it was the quarrel of God, he girded himself with the
sword, levied an army, resisted the enemies of Christ, giuinge them a very
great overthrow, but persecutinge the course of his victorious battle he was
slain, and made a blessed end; What shall I say of the sons of Emperors
and kings, the 3. sons of Charles the great Emperor, as Vgon, Dagon and
Pipine, two of them became religious of their own accord: the last was
compelled to enter for that he aspired to the kingdom in his fathers life
time, but when he tasted the sweetness of Christ his yoke, he embraced the
same willingly, they lived Anno 83.

8. Vbian king of Ireland, had 3. sons, all were Mouncks and great Saints
vid. Furseus, Follianus, and Vltanus, who leauinge their country, came into
France in the time of Clodoneus king of that country, and builded the
monastery of Pontimacum, which euersince was very famous. The emulation of
the two sons of Britain should not be omitted, for when Iudaellus who was
next to succeed in that kingdom, told his brother Iodocus of his purpose in
taking upon him a religious observation, and that he should prepare himself
for the government thereof, he craved 8. days to deliberate upon the matter,
but when he entered in deep discourse with himself, what a heavy and
dangerous burden he should take upon him, he prevented his brothers purpose,
and fled into the monastery, before he took any order to hinder his
determination. The king of England called Richard, had two sons that were
religious anno 802. the one was called Willebald, in Mount Cassin, the other
Wi^ebad at Mardeburge in Saxony. The king of France called Charles, had also
two sons that were religious, Clotarius, and Charles the great, who professed
the same institution anno 841. In whose register we ought to enroll Frederique
the son of Lodouicke anno 962. Henry the son of another Lodouicke Anno
1150. Lodouicke also the son of Charles the second King of France, and
heir apparen^ of the crown thereof: who being hostage in Spain, became a
Franciscan Friar. The like profession also James the son of the king of
Maiorca embraced, which was the first of the royal blood that ever entered that
order, whose happy example Peter the son of the king of Arragon followed:
who did not only proffit himself, but was also by his devout sermons, a
light to manny that walked in darcknes and in the shadow of death.

9. If I should register all the kings, Princes and Dukes which entered into
religion, it should require an infinitt labor, although I ought not to omit
al, as Algorius Duke of Aquitane with his son Amandus, Anno 429. Also
Anselmus Duke of Mantua anno 740. Dicla^dus and Arcigiadus, Duks of Suethlande
anno 815. Vigestus of Spoleta 820. Willian Duke of Guyne, and Aquitane 411.
another William also Duke of that place anno 912. who was so humble that upon
a certain time when the Abbott of Claima (in which Abbey the said Duke served
God) bid him to bake some bread, he went most willingly to the hot furnace,
and having not at that time wherewith to cleanse it, he did sweep the hoate
furnace with his habit, and received noe harm. Not inferior unto him in this
religious zeal, was another William Duke of Burgundy, who entered into saint
Frauncis his order. Was there any man found in the world these manny a
hundredth years, more triumphant and victorious in war, more prosperous and
happy in peace, then Charles the fifte Emperor, who having triumphed and
overcome all his mighty and potent enemies, chased and drove away the great
Turcke with his army of three hundred thousand soldiors from the dreadful
siege of the city of Vienna, the capital city of Austria, and from the
destruction of Christendom, and supplantation of the catholic religion,
took the rebellious and seditious princes of Germany prisoners in the oxen
field, having but a handful in respect of the great and mighty army which
he overcame in in a set battle, which they pitched by the instigation of that
fatal and ominous Apostate Luther, being the only cause of all the miseries
and callamities of the Christian world. He took also Frauncis the first by his
captain general before Pauia in Lumbardie, who with 6000. soldiors came to
besiege the said city, where all his army being overthrown, was brought
prisoner in his own galleys to Madrill. He tamed also all Affrique with his
victorious and invincible Armies, Wyone, Tuins, and Goleta, ouerthrewe
Barbarosa being a Pyratt, and most infestuous to the Christians. Extinguished
that raginge and furious flame of the Spanish rebellion, and all the cities
and commons of the two kingdoms of Castile, the kingdom of Arragon and
Valentia, all which revolted from him, for that he placed in his own absence,
a Viceroye which was not native of their own country, all the rebels,
although he overcame them, yet he pardoned them both in lands and goods, he
took manny cities and fortresses in Affrique, as Oran, Tanges Zeita, with
many other places of great importance, and after atchieuing many other great
victories, being weary of the world, resigned his Empire unto his brother
Ferdinando, and his kingdoms and other states to his son Philipp the second,
and retired himself to a monastery of saint Hieromes order in Stremadura in
Spain, and ended the remainder of his days there most happily, by whose
blessed examples many noble men were converted unto God, by taking upon them
this religious vocation, as Charles de Borgia, Duke of Gandia, who enjoyed
great and honorable offices under the said Emperor, became a Iesuitt, and was
general of that blessed order of the society of Jesus: and Anthony de Corduba
the son of the Duke of Feria in Spain, a near coussin to the Duke of
Gandia. Rodulphus of Aquauiua in Italy a Iesuitt, who being also sent to the
east Indies according to the institution of that order, there with other
fathers of his religion, suffered Martyrdom by the Barbarians.

10. Amoungest these I may not omit that worthy and blessed Duke Ioys of
France, who first taking upon him the habitt and most austere profession of a
poor Capuchine friar, was commanded by the last troubles and garboiles of that
kingdom, to defend his country against the invasion, and excursio^s of the
hugonotts of Languedoc^e, which he performed most worthily: but the wars
being ended, he returned to his own profession, and religion again, who by
his holy life, and incessant preaching, edified and converted many dissolute
persons, persuaded them to despise the world, and the occasions of their woo,
and died three years past, whose happy memory, will live eternally. I might
allege many other worthy examples, but because they are as yet living I
will omit them, for that we are bid to praise men, but not before their
death, and that according to their merits. Thus in our holy religion, great
personages have humbled themselves to Christ his yoke, as it is prophesied by
Esaias; Omnis mons and collis humiliabitur, every mountain and hilliocke shall be
humbled: which prophecy is performed in great Monarques that submitted their
scepter to the cross of him that was crucified, and represented in their lives
the lively image of his bitter passion.

Of Empresses, Queens and Princes, who likewise forsook the world to become
religious. CHAPTER VIII.
IN the first Rank we must place that worthy and blessed Emperesse
Theodora, who notwithstanding she was married unto Theophilus the Emperor
Anno 470. an heretic, yet remained still a firm Catholic, and he being
dead, she restored sacred images, and recalled back again holy people, that
were exiled and banished for their religion. Then sequestered herself from the
inco^berances of the government of the Empire into a monastery, where her
mother Trurina had served God for many years, whose blessed example the
Empress Augusta followed: and being importuned by the state of the Empire,
came for a time out of the monastery to appease some rebellion against her
son, which was raised by his tutors, unto whose custody she committed him,
which being appeased, she returned to her monastery again: this was in the
East anno 190.

2. In the Weast also Ricarda, the wife of Carolus Crasus Emperor of the
weast, did the like; who buildinge a monastery in Alsa^ia, bestowed the
residue of her life therein* Cunegundus Anno 1139. who being married to Henry
king of England, and afterward chosen Emperor, and being separated from him
for suspicion of adultery, contracted a better marriadge with Jesus Christ.
Thrice happy was the other Cunegundus that was married to Henry the first
Emperor, who ever kept her virginity, after whose death she spente the rest of
her yeates in the Convent of confugients: and is of the church registered
amoungest the Saints. Agnes also the wife of the 3. Emperor, who being dead,
she resigned not only the Empire being at her disposition until her son
should come to years, but also the Duchy of Bauaria, she being inheritrix
thereof, and went to Rome Anno 1157. where she took upon her a reguler
profession; whose example Elizabeth the wife of Albert Emperor, and Archduke of
Austria imitated: who being miserably slain, contemned the world, and lived
religiously in a monastery, builded by her self, all the days of her life
Anno 1290. whom her two daughters followed, the one was married to the king of
Hungary, the other to the Earl of Ottigense, and also her two Neeces, the
Queen of Poland, with her daughter.

3. Of Queens also the number of them is not small. The first Queen was
Thesia Queen of Italy, the wife of Rachisines above mentioned: for as her
husband entered into a monastery in Mount Cassine, so she entered and went into
another monastery with her daughter Petruda. In France Radegundus being
married to king Clotarius against her will, she obtained license of him to
consecrate her self to God in a monastery at Poiters, whose steeppes another
Queen of France Adoera the wife of Chilper followed, with her daughter
Childerada Anno 650. Batilda which was married to Clodoueus king of France,
being free from the yoke of weldocke by the death of her husband, went to
Callice; where enrichinge the monastery that was there with ample and opulent
possessions, she enjoyed the familiar presence of a better spouse. In Spain
we have examples of sundry Queens which were to long to relate, but I
cannot omit that worthy queen Nugnes, who first became religious herself,
and then her husband, Veremundus. Neither must queen Tarasia, pass
unmentioned, who being espoused by her Brother Alphonsus king of Leon unto
Abdala king of Tolledo, could never be persuaded to go to bed with him, and
the barborous king being taken away by an ugly disease, she married herself
afterward to Christ in the monastery of saint Pelagius Anno 1005.

4. England has not been inferior to any of her conterminat kingdoms, in the
fervent zeal that many Queens had to this religious discipline. As Alfreda,
which was fianced in marriage to the king of Northumberland, who being slain
before the matrimony was consumated, together with her husband Iuas, became
religious. I cannot let pass that worthy example of Etheldrade, who being
married to two kings, kept her virgnitie undefiled, and afterward became
religious. What shall I say of her sister Seburga queen of Kente, and of
Alfreda queen of Northumberland, who also became religious? I may not also
ouerslipp with silence, Margarett the daughter of Bela king of Hungary, who
being consecrated to God by the vow of her pare^tes, embraced the blessed
order of saint Dominique, and employed her life in all religious exercise,
especially in serving the sick and diseased persons, and refused the marriage
of three kings, of Polonia, Bohemia, and Cicilia, although the dispensatio^ of
the Pope in respect of her vow, was labored for.

5. Zanchia Queen of Jerusalem and Cicilia, after that her husband Robert was
dead, entered the order of saint Frauncis at Naples, who earnestly requested
that none should call her queen. Agnes daughter to Ore^h king of Bohemia, who
was married unto Frederique the second, never gave any consent to matrimony,
and kept her self perpetually continent until she went into a monastery,
which her self builded at Prage. Chunegundus also the daughter of the king of
Hungary, who was married unto that chaste Boleslaus king of Polande, together
with him, kept hirselfe a Virgin, and lived most religiously in a monastery
that she her self has builded. Ioane the daughter of the king of Hungary,
Isabella the king of France his daughter, and sister unto S. Lewis, and
Blanch daughter of Philipp king of France, all observed the religious vow of
virginity and continence.

6. In our days God forgets not also, to bless his Curch with the like
example of despisinge the world, and imbracinge the cross of Jesus Christ,
with his evangelical counselles, yea in great personages, as in that most
virtuous virgin Margarita de Austria, daughter of Maximilian the Emperor, and
king Philipp the second of Spain his sister, who professes at this day this
blessed institution in S. Clara at Madrill in Spain. Also the two daughters
of Charles ArchDuke of Austria and Stiria, and sisters unto the Queens of
Spain and Polande, and unto the great Duchess of Florence, who descended from
the greatest Potentates of the world, settinge at naught all the vain
promotions of the same, consecrated themselves to serve God in religious
profession.

7. But was it ever seen from the beginning of the world, that any King,
Queen, Prince or noble man became a minister, or forsook lands, or living
to embrace perfection in protestante religion? was it ever seen that anny
protestant followed the council of Christ, to give all that he had to the
poor, to deny himself, to take up his cross and to follow him? No truly
the contrary is known, too well, for they never give anny thing to the
poor, but take from them, all that the Catholic church purchased for them,
who turn all sacred things to profane uses, who rob both God, the church
and the poor of all their patrimony; For they extorte from the poor
inhabitants 20. shillinges, some 30. some 40. both for marriadge and
christininge, and every one must pay so much; Yea every Gossopp is compelled
to pay the like, and this they take up fron the Catholics of Irelande,
whose inhabitants in all places are of that profession, except the English,
so that one English minister of that miserable country, in a village called
Inischortie in the county of Wexford called Husse (an Englishman) took from
one little hamlett near that village, 14. crowns for marriage and christninge
in one fortnight; By which you may perceive what he took in every other place
of jurisdiction, he being in those parts the Bishopps official; By this
cruel, and irreligious religion, manny of the poor inhabitants of that
country are disabled to keep house, and are feign to beg, being not able to
mantaine house through so great an extortion, and yet this minister cannot
understand his parrishoners, nor they him, excepting a very few of the
English that are resident, at Inischortie. Are there any laymen in the world
more worldly or more covetous to purchase lands for their childrenn, or are
there any more greedy to hourde up wealth then they?

To conclude, it was never seen that anny man or wooman who embraced
protestancie, lived chaste and continent, for by that profession none can be
such, the means being taken away by which chastity and continency are to be
obtained, as fasting, prayers, discipline, hair clothe, almesdeedes, contempt
of his own excellency, and despising of the world.

How greatly religious people fructify unto God and to his Church: and that
they are the best laborers which are therein. CHAPTER IX.
1. S. Bernard says, that they are appointed by God to pray for the body of
the church, both for the quick and for the dead; And as Nazianzen witnesses,
their prayers be the only diluge that wash away our sins, and purge the
world; And as Eusebius affirms, they are consecrated unto God for the whole
stock of mankind. None knows what mischeefes and callamities they drive
from the world, what singular benef^ttes they obtain of God, by whose prayers
and works of incomparable charity, gods wrath is appeased and made
placable. Beside what blessed example give they unto the world? for had it not
been for them, the evangelical virtues and counsels would have been quite
extinguished, which they do not only teach, but also practice. For their
modesty, humility, piety, devotion and contempt of all temporal honnors and
allurementes, are forcible motives, and infallible inducementes to all kind of
virtues, and therefore saint John Chisostome calls them, the lanternes and
spectacles of the world, for of them the people do learn how God is to be
reverenced, with what fear, love and devotion he is to be adored in the
Sacraments, with what reverence and respect he is to be prayed unto, how
patient we ought to be in aduesitie, how stout and invincible we should
behave our selves in adversity, how charible we ought to show our selves to
our neighbors, yea their whole lives is nothing else, then a continual bearinge
of Christ's cross, a secreat exhortation to all good examples of virtue and
piety, and a silent obiurgation and distastfullnes of all vice and wickdenes.
Chrisost. de despi. rerum. and hom. ad popul. 59.
And therefore S. John Chrysostom, wished the people to visitte and frequent
monasteries and conuentes, for they are (says he) without any allurementes and
void of all disquietnessesse and distractions, besides (said he) they are most
secure and quiett havens to fix our ancker in. Moreover, they oppose
themselves against all the enemies of the church, with whom they have
continual and cruel skirmishes, and do sustain the heavy burden of their
bloody persecutions, against whom they vphoulde and defend Christ's religion
in all places where the same is oppressed. And by their blessed labors, yea
loss of life with violent effusion of their blood, they plant and restore it
again in those countries where it was supplanted.

2. Omitting most of the examples which you may read in the Chronicles of
their holy orders, I will here set down some few only as a pattern and
example of the rest. Remigius being a mouncke, converted king Clodoneus
withal the Realm of France from Idolatry unto Christ Anno 530. Afterward
he was made Archbishopp of Rehmes; S. Martin being a mouncke converted all
Suethland from the Arrian heresy Anno 540. S. Augustine being sent by saint
Gregory into England converted that kingdom with their king Ethelbert anno
622. Lambertus the Mouncke converted Feslandria a province in Germany. About
that time Kilian an Irish mounck converted the Fraunckes in the managing of
which buisinesse, he suffered martyrdom. Wilfrid an English mouncke, and
afterward Archbishopp of Yorck Anno 673. goinge from Rome, was by a tempest
driven into Holland, were he preached the gospel of Christ and returned unto
the East Saxons, who being blinded with the darcknesse of infidelity, were by
him reduced unto the faith of Jesus Christ: What should I say of all other
nations, were not they all converted by the Apostles and religious people, was
not Irelande converted by saint Patricke a reguler cannon of S. Augustins order
Bishopp of Hippo? Thuringian, Frisland and Huss converted by Bonifacius an
English Mouncke, who afterward being Archbishopp of Moguntia, was martyred?
The rest were to prolix to set down; I referr you to the Chronicles of holly
orders, only I will content my self with the conversion of America, and of the
east and weast Indies, which was brought to pass by religious people.

3. The first that ever went thither for that purpose, were the fathers of S.
Frauncis order, for when Christopher Columba, was suitor to Ferdinando king of
Castile and Arragon, to send unto him some ships to discover that land, and
he making great difficulty to be at anny chardges in so uncertain an
exploite, two Franciscan fathers entreated the king to further that project,
and when the said Columba returned again into Spain, some of the Fathers of
that order accompanied him in the iourny Anno 1303. A little afterward when
other parts of the weast Indies were discovered by Vasta Gama anno 1500. there
went with him by the procurement and entreaty of Emanuell king of Portingall
8. fathers of that family, both learned and holy. Not long afterward other
fathers of saint Dominique and saint Augustines order followed them. Last of
al, by the request of John king of Portugal F. Francis Zauier of the society
of Jesus, went into the East Indies, by whose blessed industry those spacious
kingdoms, and barbarous nations; Domino cooperante and sermonem confirmante
sequentibus signis. Our Lord concurringe withal, confirminge their words with
signs that followed, were converted.

4. This religious institution, is at this day to be seen in those countries
of the east yea amoungest the Barbarians themselves, which thorough Gods
special assistance, was never extinguished in those places where it once
began. For when the king of Portingalls fleet arrived at the gulf of Arabia,
an old mounke the Father of 3000. mounckes, who saw the sign of the cross in
the upper part of the mast of their ships, presently thought them to be
Christians, and made signs unto them that they would speak with them; who
when they spoke one with another, they did weep for joy, to see the
Christians, and they delivered a book of prayers as a token, which was sent
unto the Pope by the hands of Michaell de Silua, their ambassador for the
kingdom of Portingall, which book Lewis de Granada handled and saw, Granad^
Symb. fid. l 4. c. 12.
who relates thus much as I have set down.

5. By this you may perceive that protestants are greater enemies to religion
and Christian piety, then all the Heathens, Barbarous nations and Turques, and
all the reprobates in the world are, who do permit religious persons and
monasteries amoungest them, as the Arrabians, Turckes, and Jews do: yea many
monasteries are permitted in Grecia, Constantinople, Jerusalem, Argell, and
amoungest the Tartarians themselves. But when protestancie began first to start
up, it made havoc of all religion, and like a most raginge swifte stream,
destroyed, ransaked, and spoiled all churches, monasteries, and sacred howles,
cast down Alters, and profaned Sanctuaries, hanged Christ's picture upon the
gallones, defloured sacred virgins, cast the blessed Eucharist unto dogs,
and imbreued their murtheringe hands, with the blood of innocent and religious
persons, against whom they practiced their vildest and bloodiest factes, and
extended their greatest fury and rage: against whom also they make new, and
never hard* of laws and decrees, with most rigorous execution to punish them
to death as traitors, and to execute all torments upon them, as the vildest
malefactors of the world.

6. Was there ever seen anny heathen contrie, city, town or villadge
converted unto Christ by them? Was there any part of the east or weast,
restored unto their former sanctity and religion by them? Nay was there ever
seen anny man sanctified in his life, or reformed in his manners by them?
Manny countries of the north, have bin subverted by them, manny florishinge
provinces and wealthy cities, ransaked and brought to utter desolation, and
turned into ashes by them. Such as were religiously given, honestly disposed,
temperatt in their diett, mortified in then members, humors, and passions,
chaste and continent in their bodies and minds (when they were catholics) as
soon as once they came to be protestants, they let the reins loose to all
irreligious misdeamenor, intemperate behauior, and wanton dissolution, and to
all kind of riotousnes. Seeing therefore that all Catholic religion, and
religious discipline came from Christ, it must follow that Luthers doctrine
and his sects came from the devil: and as it impossible that two repugnant
contraieties, can proceed from one principle, as extreme heat, and extreme
cold cannot come from one subject, so neither can Catholic religion, and
Luthers opinion both flow from one fountain.

7. This will plainly appear by what ensweth; Lib. de Missa. Aug. to. 6.
For Luther himself confesses he had a long disputation with the diuill at
midnight, who fiersly impugned catholic priesthood, orders and private
mass. In another place he affirms, that the diuill passed through his mouth,
tom. 5. Genesis ep. ^delect. far. Kellyson ibid.
Reply of Kellison 91. When I am in company says he, he hurts me not, when
he finds me alone, then he teaches me manners. Kellyson ibid.
I have (says he) one or two diuills of the greatest sort, which I take
(says he) to be doctors of divinity amoungest diuills. He confessed also,
that he had eaten a bushel of salt with him. Frequentus and proprius mihi
condormit, quam mea Catherina, and that he slept oftener and nearer unto him
then did his Catherine. Zuing. in subs. Euchar.
Unto Zuinglius also appeared a goblin or spirit white or black, when he was
intoxicated touching his opinion against Christ's reale presence, and suggested
unto him the 12. of Exodus, Phase, hoc est transitus Domini, against the reale
presence.

8. Contrariwise, the catholic religion was founded in all countries, with
many glorious miracles, and the preachers thereof, were most holy men, not
detected with any notorious vice, yea were lanternes and lights of all virtue
and sanctity: but the founders of the protestant religion and the pillars
thereof, of all men were most abominable in their lives and conversation, and
never wrought miracles. The founders of catholic religion were most
charitable and humble: but the other most proud and cruel. The one were the
Architects and plotters of all treasons, ouer-throwes, bloody imbruments, and
detestable tragedies, in all countries where they begunn: but it was never
known nor read, that either S. Patricke that brought the Catholic religion to
Irland, or Paladius that brought it for Scotland, or Damianus or S. Augustine
that brought the same to England, or any other taught the same in any other
country, did ever conspire in treason or murder, or devised anny mischief
against king, potentate, or country: or that ever anny man lost his life,
lands, or goods for not receauinge either themselves or their doctrine: or
that ever any king was expelled out of his kingdom, for not receauinge the
catholic religion into his country: or was forced to embrace the same, as
the founders of protestancie have done. But it is well known that Luther and
Zuinglius were the first that ever preached the protestant religion, as it is
proved in the Apology of the protestant Church of England, and that they were
the causes of all the mischief, wars and troubles, insurrection of subjects
against their princes, and ouerthrowinge and banishment of Princes by their
own subjects, out of all their kingdoms and states.

9. Lastly it is known also, that our first founders and apostles came in
simplicity of spirit, without troops of horsemen, or bands of soldiors,
having noe other standert but the cross of Christ, nor noe other poulder, but
the dust of their feet: but the protestant founders came with wilde-fire,
g^n-poulder, and cannot-shott, with their cruel armies in all places, to
bring all to confusion an desolation that would not embrace their sect; yea
many holy martyrs have suffered death, for not forsakinge their old religion,
to accept these new devised opinions of these sectaries, whereof I have thought
good to set down the names, whereby you may perceive the constancy of
Catholics, and the cruelties of protestants. Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis
eos. For you shall know them by their fruicte. I will first speak of
Flanders, then of France, afterward of England, and last of all, of Irelande.

The name of those that suffered death by the Gewses of Flanders, where the
protestants are so called. CHAPTER I.
1. THe Reverend Father Nicholaus Picus guardian of a monastery of S. Francis
in Holland, together with ten of his brethren, Ierom Werdan viccar, Will.
Hadne, Nicase Hez, Theodorique Emden, Anthony Hornarien, Anthony Werden,
Godfrey Meruellan, Frauncis Rod of Bruxells, Peter Astun a lay brother, Cornell
Wican a lay man, who after much torment and affliction, were sent to the town
of Bill, where they were beaten with clubbes, hanged on the topp of the common
stoare house of the town in the night time, the 14. of August 1575. they cut
of their ears and their noses, they ripped up their bellies, and pulled ou^
all the fatt they could get, and sold the same in all places of the province.
They also put to cruel death Leonard Veichle pastor of Barcomia, Nicholas
Poppell another pastor of that place, Godfrey Dimens sometime rector of the
university of Parris, but then Pastor Gorcomiensis, John Oster, W^canus,
cannon regular of saint Augustines order, and ouerseer of the Nuns, Adrian
Becan of the order of Premonstrensis, James Lacopins a monk of the same order,
Johannes Ons of the order of saint Dominique, Andrewe Walter Pastor
Hairn^tensis, besides many other related by doctor Estius chauncelor of Douaie.
In this city of Brill were put to cruel death 180. religious persons at
several times. And the Crucifix which stood in the church of Gorcomend for the
consolation of the Christians, they pulled down and hanged the same upon the
gallows: they snatched also the Eucharist out of a Priests hands, and nailed
it unto a gibbet.

2. When the Prince of Orange took the city of Ruremunde in Gerderlande, his
soldiors, rushinge into the monastery of the Carthusians, murdered three lay
brethren vid. Albert Winda, John Sittart, and Stewart Ru^emund. And entringe
into the church of that monastery, they found the Prior thereof called
Ioachinus, with the rest of the religious people prayinge unto God, all which
they murdered: in which city 29. priests and religious persons were
martired. When the Gewes had got by deceit Adernard in Flaunders, after
spoilinge and robbinge all the churches and monasteries thereof, they
apprehended all the priests and religious persons, and brought them bound with
the gentlemen of that city unto the castle there, amoungest whom master
Peter, licentiate of divinity and pastor of that city, a worshippfull aged
man, was put to great torments, and at the last being tied hand and foot,
was cast from the top of the tower headlonge into the river of Scaldis. After
him also they cast headlonge down into the river Paulus Couis, pastor of that
city, John Brackett Batcheler of divinity, James Deckerie, John Opstall and
John Anuanne a noble man, al priests. They took also that virtuous man, John
Machusius of saint Frauncis order, sometimes Bishopp of Dauentrie, who being
sore wounded of them, they left his poor carcass like a dead carrion upon the
streets; other priests they took by the city of Ipris, and buried them
quick in the earth, with their face above the ground, which instead of a
marck they shot at with bulletts.

3. When Delps, a city of Holland, was taken by the Prince of Aurenge, who
seemed to show great favor, unto a most reverend and learned man called,
Cornellius Musius confessor to the Nuns of saint Agatha of that city, yet
was he with unusual and exquisitt torments put to the cruelest death that
could be invented the 10. of December, 1575. The same cruelty they showed
upon Egelbert of Burges a Franciscan friar in the city of Alcmaria, for they
did ripp his belly, and cut off his intralles with their knives. With noe
less cruelty did they putt to death two Mouncks of the order of saint Hierome
at Ganda a city in Holland, their names were John Rixtell, and Adrian Textor,
whom the General of the Gewses caused to be stripe of their clothes, and
with their swords, forced them to runn upon thick hedges of quicksett, and
to die thereon. The like cruelty he executed upon William Gandan a
Franciscan, Friar, James Gandan, Theodorick Gandan Cornelius Sconhewe, and
Jasper, cannone regular, Mr. John Jerome native of Edome in Holland, who being
taken with other Catholics by Hornan, were brought unto S^age in the north
part of that province, where after many horrible and abominable
interrogatorious, some of them died in that miserable captivity, such as were
left a live, were bound hand and feet upon their backs with their naked
bellies vpwardes, and upon every man's belly, was set a pan, or caldron
whelmed downwards, full of dormise and frogs in great quantity: and upon the
said pannes or caldrons were put fiery coals, which burning heat of the fire
when those frogs felt, and had noe other place to get out, they turned all
upon the poor peoples Bellies, and did gnaw and tear there, until they made
hoales through their backs, or at least some place to defend themselves from
the rage of the fire.

4. Vrsula Tales a religious Nun of the Begginage, after that her father (an
old man and magistrate of that place) with other catholics were hanged by
these rebels, she also was brought unto a gibbett, and being asked whether
she would forgo her faith and religion, and marry with a soldior, she most
constantly denied, and was cast into the river, and there was drowned. This
religious Nun, had a sister that was married, and because she lamented the
death of her father and kinsmen, her head was brocken by one of the soldiors,
and that so sorelie, that the brains came forth. Other and far more
detestable wickednesses were committed by these tyrannical reprobates, in other
provinces of Flanders, Holland, Zeland, Brabant, Gelderland and Frisland, which
you may read in the histories of Flaunders: but this I ought not to omit, that
they were so tormented with such an insatiable thirst to shedd innocent blood
that in their detestable conuenticle at the town of saint Trudan in a vaulte
under the ground, they purposed and decreed to make a massacre of
ecclesiastical persons in all places of the 17. Provinces in one night, which
God prevented afterward: unto whom all honor and glory, Mense Iulij 1566.
for his provident mercy showed therein.

5. And although the hugonottes of France, sought diverse times to practice
their tragical plottes in that country, as in the times of Frauncis the first
(in whose reign they nailed a libell at the court gate of Parris, of their
damnable doctrine printed in the year 1534. which being brought unto his
majesty, and perusinge part of the conten^es thereof he said; Did I know my
right hand to be infected with that venomous doctrine, I would presently cut
it off from my body) Henry the second, and Frauncis the second, yet they
could never perform their desigmentes until the beginning of Charles the 9.
his reign, who being but a child of 12. years of age (and so abusinge his
minority) they watched their time and opportunity in the year of our Lord
1562. when every one that was wickedly disposed and irreligiouslie addicted,
and as it were forsaken of God, began openly to show himself upon the
theater, whereon this woeful tragedy was played. For first they crowned their
captain general Prince of Condie, king of France, and called him by the
name of Lodouicke the 13. and the first Christian king of France. The
cheifest rage of all their malice, was practiced upon those things which were
most sacred and holy, as upon the blessed Euchariste, by treadinge the same
under their feet, and castinge it unto their dogs, and used that sacred and
dreadful host, together with the holy chrisme to cleanse their tails
withal, and called Christ under the veil of bread, John le Blanch, White
John. The like outrage they extended upon Churches, Monasteries, Alters,
Chapples, Oratories, Images, Relics, and Sepulchers, which they spoiled,
ransacked destroyed and burned. Upon Priests Mounckes and religious persons
which they put to the vildest and cruelest death that they could imagine: upon
sacred virgins and consecrated Nuns, which they ravished and defloured: upon
challices and sanctified vessels and hallowed ornaments, which they profaned
and defiled.

6. Of 12. that showed themselves the ringleaders upon this bloody theater,
there were 9. of them Apostate Mounckes, which Christ vomitted out of his
sacred mouth: the captain and leader of them all, was Beza, who sold his
benefice for 700. crowns, and then cast forth his venime amongst the
licentious courtiers, whom he persuaded with his doctrine (vid.) that it was
noe offense before God to commit sacrilege, to spoil churches, to cogge,
deceive, lie, swear and forswear: whose doctrine herein being the religion of
these new sectaries, was most plausible and pleasinge to all miscreantes and
malefactors, who abundantly resorted unto him, from all parts of France,
and by which he determined to robb and spoil all the churches and monafteries
of that kingdom in one night in the month of January, and appointed people
for that purpose in all places of the kingdom which was first put in execution
in the Province of Aquitaine, and had not the Duke of Gays come the sooner to
Parris, they had not only surprised the churches and monasteries there, but
also the city, court, and king; Thus frustrated of their expectation, they
fled unto Orlians, where before they were let in by the Citizens, Vide Sur.
they did solemnlie swear that they came thither by the commandment of the
king to keep that city, and that they would offer violence to none, either
in his person, conscience, or goods, and that every one should have the
benefitt of the edict diuulged the last of January (wherein it was decreede
that the hugonotts should not spoil churches or monasteries) but they noe
sooner entered the city, but they spoiled the churches and monasteries, burned
Images, cast down alters, yea cast down the very walls of the churches, and
showed more execrable wickedness toward all sacred things, then the very
Turckes, for they in taking any city or town from the Christians, do only
use to cast down the Images and Alters, and not destroy the churches also.

7. All the holy Relics which those hugonotts could get, they burned them;
they burned the relics of S. Damianus, religiously reserved in that place,
as they also did S. Hillaries relics at Poytiers. S. Ireneus at Lions. S.
Iustus and S. Bonauentur, and the relics of S. Martyn. At towers they burned
the image of Christ; in another place they trayled the same through the dirte.
They spared the image of the diuill, and burned the Corpse of S. Frauncis the
second, which was buried in the Chapple of the holly cross, as they did burn
the bones of Lodouick the 11. The churches which they broake not down, they
turned into stables and storehowses. Moreover Beza commanded all the Priests to
be murdered, of whom receiving monny for their redemption, yet violated the
faith and promise which he had formerly sworn, and broake the oath and peace,
which he had before vowed most religiously to observe. So as it is manifest
there were cruelly put to death, five thousand priests, of whom some were
flayed alive, others were rackte till they were dead. Above six hundredth
monasteries razed to the very earth, manny others were burned: they burned
also the holy ancient Bybles, which were kept in France for rare monuments,
many cities were exhausted with continual siege, their citizens were
murdered, all the country was spoiled and ruinated, so as these civil
wars of the hugonotts, so often renewed, did more consume and oppress
France with greater miseries and calamities, then all former wars it ever had
abroad; For there was no truth respected, or oath performed, if any garrison
did yield themselves unto the^ upon hope of their oaths (which they never
accomplished) to save their lives, (as in steed of many examples, that of
Petraforte alone will serve) nevertheless contrary to the laws of arms, to
the number of two hunderth, were cast down head long from the top of a
mighty high Rock: all which perished with that headlong and violent fall.
Such cruelty as this, more then Turkish, they exercised upon every other
place where they did carry anny sway: but ecclesiastical persons and
religious people, of all others, felt the greatest smarte, some whereof I will
particularize in the next Chapter.

Certain cruel and bloody factes committed in France against the Catholics,
by those that the vulgar sorry do call Hugonottes, from the time that they
stirred rebellion against the king, Anno 1562. CHAPTER II.
1. WHen the city of Engolisme in France was besiedged of the hugonottes, it
was yielded into their hands upon condition, ratified with promises and oaths,
that it should be lawful for the catholics, as well ecclesiastical as
others, to continue there without anny molestations or inquisition. The
heretics nevertheless, not respectinge the religious observation of a
solemn oath, entering the city, gathered together all the selected
catholics, and cast them in to prison, amoungest whom was Michaell Grellett
of saint Francis order, and guardian of the monastery of saint Frauncis in
that city, who the next day, after the city was yealded, was hanged upon a
tree by the city wall in presence of Iaspar Calligne then Admiral of France
and general of those rebels, which death he suffered most constantly and
prophesied of the said Admiralls ruin, and who when he was cast from the rope,
all that wicked crew cried out, God prosper our Gospel.

2. John Virolea of that order, and reader to that monastery, after that his
preuie members were cut off, was also murdered by them. John Aurell also of
that order, a man 80. years of age, his head being cut with a twibill, was
cast into a privy. Peter Bonnen doctor of divinity, after eight mounthes
imprisonment was hanged at the wall of the city. In the house of one of the
Citizens of that city of Engolisme, they shutt up 30. catholics which
they cruelly put to death by diverse kinds of torments; They divided them by
couples, whom they so chained and lincked together, that sufferinge noe food
to be given unto them, they were compelled to eat one another, and so with
extreme languor they perished with hunger. Some of them were divided and out
asu^der in two parts by mighty ropes, which were thruste through their bodies:
Some of them also were tied unto posts, and fire put to their backs, by which
they were tormented more by the torment of a prolix death, then by the agony
of a violent flame.

3. The hugonitt garrison that kept the city of Vnstorne, though they were
diverse times courteously entertained of a most noble woman called the lady of
Marendatt, yet they took her within her own house and tied her to hott
glowinge gaddes of Iron, and leauinge her in that torment, they departed
withal the spoil of the house with them. The chief Judge of the city of
Engolisme, after they had cut away his privy members, was hanged at his own
house. They took a virtuous priest also called Lodouicke Fiard, of a village
near Engolisme, a very virtuous man and of an exemplar life by the testimony
of all men, whom they compelled to hold his hands in a cauldron full of hot
scaulinge oil, until the flesh was consumed and nothing left but the bare
bones, and cast the burninge oil into his mouth, and so shot him with
bullets and killed him. They took also another priest called Colinus
Ginlebantius the vicare of S. Auzann, and when they had cut off his privy
members, they cast him afterward into a sisterne full of burninge hot oil,
where he ended his life. They killed also two other priests, the one was of
the parrish of Riniers, who after they had cut out his tongue, then they
murdered him: the other master John Bachelon, his foot being burned by a
hot burninge Iron, they strangled him.

4. Master Simon Sicott viccar of saint Hillarie of Montierind, being a man
of 60. years of age, and replenished withal virtues, was betrayed by a
hugonot whom he ^upposed to be very faithful unto him, and was brought
captive into Engolisme, but his life and liberty was restored unto him for a
great some of monny, that his fri^des did procure for his ransom, yet
departinge from the city he was pursued, and his tongue was cut off, and his
eyes were pulled out of his head. Two other priests were hanged by one of
their heels, with the other heel free, and their heads downwardes: one of
them was left in that miserable torment and the other was killed outright.
Another priest called master Peter, of the parrish of Reuline^d was burried
quick. Master Arnold Durande, and viccar of Fleacen was cast in the river
being of 80. years of age. A Franciscan Friar of that age also, was cast
headlonge from the walls of the city. Master Octauianus Ronier viccar of S.
Cybard, after sundry torments, was fastened to a tree, and so shot to
death. Master Frauncis Robaleon in the parrish of Foncobrune viccar, was tied
unto a yoke of Oxen that drew a cart, and after manny str^pes and terrible
torments, gave up the ghoast: so that in the diocese or Engolisme, in less
then in two years space, 120. did there suffer martyrdom; priests, noblemen,
gentlemen and others.

5. In the village called Floran, a little distant from S. Monehond, they took
a priest, whose privy members being cut off by the Surgean of Bethan, he
bragged that he was the 17 priest that he had murdered after that manner, and
was afterward scourged unto death. In the city of Hand, in the diocese of
Carnutensis, they caused a poor priest to say mass, only to scorn that
blessed sacrifice, which Christ instituted for the quick and the dead, and at
the elevation, they snatched away the sacred host which they stabbed with
their daggers, and then murdered the poor priest. In a certain Hamlett 7.
miles distant from Orlia^s, called Patt, they took 25. catholics who fled
unto the church, which they burned by puttinge fire to the doors thereof; they
carried with them many priests bound at their horse railes. After spoiling of
the church of Clerins they burned the relics and bones of the king of
France called Lodouick the 11. as also the bones of the king of Nauar,
sometimes their own general.

6. At saint Mucarie in Gasconie, they cut open the bellies of many priests,
and made a devise to draw out their bowels: in rhis city they buried many
priests quick. In the city of Ancina, they took an old priest, whose
preuie members after they had cut off, they roasted them, and caused him to
eat them. In the city of Vasett in Gasconie, when Frauncis Cassius was
Lewetenant under the king of Nauare, two soldiers of that garrison, ravished a
widdowe, and the^ put gun ponder into her privy parts and gave fire to the
powlder, and so her belly burst and her bowels came forth. The Lord of
saint Columba, the governor Go has and a great number of nobility being
bes^edged by the Earl Mount Gomerie, yielded themselves unto him upon certain
conditions, yet nevertheless they were kept in prison 9. mounthes, and paid
their ransom: and being invited to supper by the said Earl, of whom they
suspected noe such guyle, he having promised them their liberty, yet he sent
soldiers in their absence to their chambers, and as they returned from supper,
were entertained with the bloody edge of their swords: and so against faith
and promise and after paying their ra^some, they were inhumanly murdered. In
the city of Montbris, the Barron of Adrett caused many catholics to be cast
headlong from the topp of a high Turett, and caused also soldiers to attend
their miserable fall, and to entertain them with the points of their pikes.

7. Such was the impudency and barbarousnes of a certain hugonott, that he
did wear a chain about his neck of the ears of priests, and showed the same
to the chiefest captains of the hugonittes. They did ripp the belly of a
certain priest, and took out his bowels, in steed whereof they putt oats
to serve their horse for a maunger. The heretics of the city of Neemes in
Languedoc, did cast a great number of catholics into a mighty deep and
large well of that city, and have filled the same twice with men's bodies
half dead. James Socius a wicked pirate, who obtaininge letters patentes of
Joan Alberte Queen of Nauare, which they call letters of mart, sailing
toward the Isles of Madera, and Canaria, met with a shipp of Portingall,
goinge toward America, which he pursued and took. In which there were 40. of
the fathers of the society of Jesus, who were sent to the Province of Brazill
to instruct them in Christian religion, but the wicked and cruel Tyrant, like
a devouring woolfe, seized upon these poor religious people, whom he
massacred and after dismembring of them, of some he cut a leg, of othersome
an arm, and so he cast them all into the sea.

8. Lastly Anno 1567. in the Carthusian monastery which they call Burfowtaine
in the diocese of Suesse 5. mounks of that blessed order were murdered by the
heretics that came to robb that monastery, John Motto, proctor thereof a
most virtuous priest, John Megne^ priest, John Aurill priest, Benedict Lenes
lay brother, and Theobald priest. All these that I speak of never took
weapons against them, but most patiently endured martyrdom at their hands:
But if I should speak of so manny as were put to most cruel death and were
killed in all the Provinces of France, cities, and towns thereof, and such that
were betrayed by the^, I should make an infinitt volume, but I cannot omit
that worthy and invincible. Prince Frauncis of Lorraine Duke of Gwise, whose
murder was plotted by Beza and executed by Poltrott. These and the like
examples ought to move good christians to beware of these people.

9. Before the fiery, and furious concupiscence of king Henry the 8. (who
caused that unfortunate deuorce betwixt him, and h^s virtuous Queen Katherine)
there was no realm in Europe more opulent and more abundant in all things,
then the kingdom of England: no kingdom more peaceable at home and more
glorious and prosperous abroad: no king so victorious and t^iumphant over his
enemies, as he: no court so magnificent or so plawsible, being full of
cheerful shows, and replenished with an universal triumph, joy and
exaltation, the king lived in security without fear of foreign princes
abroad, or treason or conspiracy of his subjects at home: betwixt the one and
the other there was interchangeable good offices, as well of a princely
bountifulness toward the subjects, as of a dutiful subjection toward the
prince: the king possessed the hearts of his subjects, and they again enjoy
the love of their Prince. But when he violated and dissolved the in dissoluble
knott and bond of matrimony, which no power in earth was able to disioyne (as
our Savior says) by this separation and divorce, Matt. 19.
he separated himself also from Gods church: all things were subverted and
turned topsy turuie, all was filled which fears and suspicions at home, with
wars and divisions a broad, and with continual frights and stranges allarmes
of attempts and garboyles, as well in the court, as in the country. The
treasures were exhausted, the subjects impourished, religion suppressed,
religious howses dissolved, the virtuous oppressed, the wicked advanced and
exalted, the nobility condemned and beheaded, and their goods confiscated, and
all virtuous people, were fedd and sustained, Pane lachrymarum and aqua
augustiae: with the bread of mourning and tears, and with the water of anguish
and pain, so as whatsoever the prophett Hieremy spoke of Jerusalem, may be
applied to England after its apostasy; The flourishing nation (says he) is
like a poor widow, Hier. c. 1.
that wailes at night and her tears rune down by her checkes, her priests do
wail, her virgins do complain, and she is every where oppressed, her
nobility are suppressed, and many of her people ouerpressed with insufferable
miseries and callamities. Facti sunt hosts eius in capite eius, and inimici
eius locupletati sunt. Her enemies are promoted into her highest promotions,
and her adversaries made rich by her spoils. Know ye and behold, how
distasteful it is to forsake God, and not to have his fear before your eyes.
A seculo consregisti iugum Domini, thou have bracken and cast off gods yoke
even from the beginning, thy sword devoured the prophets, quasi leo ^ astator
generatio vestra, a destroieng lion is your generation. And as King Henry the
8. himself said in this book against Luther. Eos qui pelluntur gremio matris
Ecclesiae, stat in furijs corripi, atque agitari demonibus. Such as are
expulsed and thrust out of the bosom of our mother the Church, are forthwith
ouercharged with the furious and raginge flames of hellish spirits, and
vanquished which diuills: which assertion I would to God, it had not been
verified of him that said it, nor suitable to the purpose whereunto the same is
applied. But England to their great cost by experience knows this to be true,
howsoever otherwise they dissemble it.

6. But to return to him that applied the same against Luther, the stroke
did rebo^nd and reflect upon his own neck, Anno Domini 1533 Regni eius 24.
for being excommunicated by Clemens 7. for putting away his married wife, and
for marrieng Anne Bullen, tradidit se (as the Apostle says) impudicitiae,
Ephesians. 4.
in operem immunditia omnis in auaritiam, he yielded himself over to
impudicitie, to the exercise of all uncleanness, and couetuousnes: he caused
himself to be decreed by perleame^t head of the church, made it high treason
in him that would not swear precisely in his conscience this to be true, where
many worthy personages, both ecclesiastical and lay people for refusing this
oath or otherwise resisting it, some were burned alive, as father Foster of the
order of saint Frauncis, Queen Cathrins confessor, other some were beheaded,
as doctor Fisher-Bishopp of Rochester, and Sr. Thomas Moore L. Chancler of
England, and may others were hanged drawn and quartered. Yea he condemned the
whole clergy in a praemunire, which afterward they redeemed with a
submission and paime^t of a hundredth thousand pounds, for that they
acknowledged Cardinal Campeignes and Cardinal Wolsey as legates from Rome,
notwitstanding that the king himself by his Ambassadors procured their coming.
In the 24. years of his reign, also he prohibited all appeals in causes
ecclesiastical, reducing all spiritual authority of determining the same to
the English Clergy. He forbid all license or dispensations, and faculties
from the church of Rome, and seemed to establish them in Thomas Cranmer
Archbishopp of Canterbury, that he should grant the same to the king again
the 26. of his reign. Other his bloody factes and furious behavior, you may
well perceive by the Catalogue following.

A Catalogue of those that suffered death, as well under king Henry, as Queen
Ellzabeth, and king James, from the year of our Lord 1535. and 27. of king
Henryes reign unto the year 1618.
IN the first rank of these blessed martyrs, I ought not to forgett that
blessed martyr S. Thomas of Canterbury, alias, Becket, who for defending the
immunities of the Church, was murdered in king Henry the 2. his reign, now
again was by king Henry the 8. by act of parleament attainted of high
treason, his ashes and holy bones and relics were burned, and of all churches
dedicated to God in his honor, it was decreed by parleament that they should
not be named after him any more: to which purpose comissioners were appointed
in all places of England and Ireland, and in the town of Rathode in Mead, the
church whereof is dedicated to God in S. Thomas his honor, the parishioners
being commanded to name their church after saint Peter, they answered, that
the king may as well by parleament proclaim saint Peter a traitor as saint
Thomas, and to prevent that, they nominated their church after the blessed
Trinity.

Under King Henry the VIII.
Anno Christi 1535. Henrici 8. anno 27.
These were put to death at Tyburne the 29. of April, for denying the Kings
Supremacy. John Houghton Prior of the Carthusianus at London. Nic. Sa^d. lib.
1. de Schism. Ang. page 128. 129. 130.
Augustine Webster Prior of the Carthusians at Exham. Robert Laurence Prior of
the Carthusians at Beuall. Richard Reynolds Mounke of S. Brigitts order of
Syon. John Hayle Priest, Vicar of Thistleworth.
Charter house Monks of London, suffered at Tyburne 18. June. Humfrey
Mildemore William Exmew Sebastian Newdigate
Carthusians, at York 11. May. John Rochester James Warnet
Charter house Mounkes died in prison in June and July. Richard Bear Thomas
Green John Dauis Thomas Iohson William Greenwod Thomas Scriuan Robert Salt
Walter Persons Thomas Reading
William Horn Carterhouse Monk 4. Aug. John Fisher Card. of S. Vitalis, Ric.
Hal. in eius vita. Staples. de tribus Thom.
and Bishopp of Rochester, at Tower Hill 22. June. Sir Thomas More Knight, at
the Tower Hill 6. July.
Anno Christi 1536. Henr. 8. 28.
John Pasley Abbot of Whalley at Lancaster 10. March. Sand. ibi. l 1. page 176.
177.
John Castegate Monk at Lancaster 10. March. William Haddocke Monk, at Whaley
13. March. N. N. Abbot of Sauley at Lancaster in March. N. Ast be Monk of
Geruaux at Lancaster in March. Robert Hobbes Abbot of Woborne, together with
the Prior of the same Monastery and a. Priest, suffered at Woborne in
Bedfordshire, in March. Doctor Maccarell with 4. other Priests, at Tyburne 29.
March. William Thrust Abbot of Fontaines at Tyburne in June. Adam Sodbury Abbot
of Geruaux at Tyburne in June. William Would Prior of Birlington at Tyburne in
June. N. N. Abbot of Rivers at Tyburne in June.
Anno 1537. Henr. 29.
Antony Brorby of the Order of S. Francis, Sand. ibi. page 183. Boucher. de
pass. Fratr. Fransc. page 8. 13. and 17.
strangled with his own girdle, at London 19. July. Thomas Cort Franciscan,
famished to death in prison 27. July. Thomas Belcham of the same Order, died in
Newgate 3. August
Anno 1538. Henr. 30.
John Forest Friar obseruant, Boucher. ibid. and page 26. Sand. ibid.
Confessor to queen Katherine, in Smithfield 23. May. John Stone an Augustine
friar, at Canterbury this year. Two and thirty Religious men of the Order of
S. Francis being cast into prison for denying the K. Supremacy, died there
through cold, ste^ch, and famine, in Aug. Sept. and October. Sand. l. 1. page
973.
N. Croft Priest at Tyburne. N. Collins Priest at Tyburne. N. Holland Layman at
Tyburne.
Anno 1539. Henr. 31.
Knights of S. John's of Jerusalem, at Towerhill 8. Iul. Sand. pa. 181. 194. 197.
Adrian Fortescue Thomas Dingley
Griffith Clarke Priest At S. Thomas Wateringes 8. N. Mayre Monk At S. Thomas
Wateringes 8. John Tauers Doctor of diunity 30. Iulij. John Harris Priest 30.
Iulij. Priests, at Reading, 14. Nouemb. John Rugge William Onion
Hugh Faringdon Abbot of Rehding, at Rehding 22. Nouem. Richard Whiting Abbot
of Glaste^bury at Glastend 22. Nouem. Monks of Glaste^bury at Glastend John
Thorn 22. Nouem. Roger James Monks of Glaste^bury 22. Nouem.
John Beck Abbot of Colchester, at Colchester 1. December.
Anno 1540. Henr. 32.
Priests, at Galais 10. April. Sand. ibi. page 216. 217.
William Peterson Wiliam Richardson
Priests, in Smithfield 30. July. Thomas Abell Edward Powell Rich. Fetherstone
Laure^c^ Cock Prior of Dancaster At Tyburne 4. August. Williame Horn Monk
At Tyburne 4. August. Edmund Bromelie Priest At Tyburne 4. August. Giles Horn
Gentleman At Tyburne 4. August. Clement Philpot Gentleman At Tyburne 4. August.
Darby Genninges Layman At Tyburne 4. August. Robert Bird Layman At Tyburne 4.
August.
Anno 1541. Henr. 33.
David Genson Knight of the Rhodes 1. July. Sand. page 180.

Anno 1543. Henr. 35.
German Gardener Priest at Tyburne 7. March. Sand. page 227.
John L^arke Priest at Tyburne 7. March. John Ireland Priest at Tyburne 7.
March. Thomas Ashbey Layman at Tyburne 7. March. John Risby. at Tyburne 7.
March. Thomas Rike. at Tyburne 7. March.
Under Queen Elizabeth.
Anno 1570. Elizabethae 12.
John Felton Gentleman, Nicol. Sander. l. 7. de visib. Monarc. page 734. and
736.
in S. Paul's Churchyard 8. August.
Anno 1571. Elizabeth 13.
John Story Doctor of the Canon Law, at Tyburne 1. June.
Anno 1573. Elizabeth 15.
Thomas Woodhouse Priest, Concert. Eccles. Aug.
at Tyburne 19. June.
Anno 1577. Elizabeth. 19.
Concert. Eccles. Aug.
Cuthbert Main the first Priest of the Seminaries, at Launston in Cornwall 29.
Nou.
Anno 1578. Elizab. 20.
Concert ibid.
John Nelson Priest, at Tyburne 3. February. Thomas Sherwood Gentleman 7. Febr.
Anno 1581. Elizab. 23.
Concert. Eccles. Aug. Sand. l. 3. de schism Angl.
Euerard Hanse Priest, at Tyburne 31. July. Edmund Campian Priest of the
Society of Jesus at Tyburne 1. Dec. Alexander Briant Priest of the same
Society of Jesus at Tyburne 1. Dec. Raphe Sherwyn Priest at Tyburne 1. Dec.
Anno 1582. Elizab. 24.
John Pain Priest, at Chelemsford in Essex 2. April. Concert. Eccles. Angl.
and Sand. vbi supra.
Thomas Ford Priest at Tyburne 28. May. John Shert Priest at Tyburne 28. May.
Robert Johnson Priest at Tyburne 28. May. Thomas Cottam Priest of the Society
of Jesus at Tiburne 30. May. William Filby Priest at Tiburne 30. May. Luke
Kirby Priest at Tiburne 30. May. Laurence Johnson Priest at Tiburne 30. May.
William Lacy Priest at York 22. August. 27. Richard Kirkman Priest at York
22. August. 27. James Tompson Priest, at york in Nouemb. 26.
Anno 1583. Elizab. 25.
Concert. Eccles. Angl. and Sand. pa 465. 466.
William Heart Priest, at york 16. March. Richard Tirkill Priest, at york 29.
May. John Slade Layman, at Winchest 30. October. John Body Layman, at Andouer 2.
Nouemb. James Laburne Gentleman, at Lancaster.
Anno 1584. Elizab. 26.
William Carter Layman, Concert. Eccles. Angl. page 127. 134. 140. 143. 156.
cum Sand. vbi supra.
at Tyburne 11. Ian. George Haddocke Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb. John Mundme
Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb. James Fen Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb. Thomas Emersord
Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb. John Nutter Priest at Tyburne 12. Feb. James Bele
Priest at Lancaster 20. April. John Finch Layman at Lancaster 20. April.
Richard White Layman, at Wrixam in Walls 8. October. John Finlye Priest, at
york 8. August.
Anno 1585. Elizab. 27.
Thomas Aufield Priest at Tyburne 6. July. Thomas Webley Layman at Tyburne 6.
July. Concert. Eccles. Angl. page 203. Sand. page 485.499.
Hugl Taylour Priest at york 26. Nouemb. Marmaduke Bows Layman at york 26.
Nouemb. N. Hamelton Priest, at york.
Anno 1586. Elizab. 28.
Margret Cletherow pressed at york 25. March. Edward Transam Priest at Tyburne
21. January. Concert. Eccles. Angl. page 204. 410. Sand pa. 499.
Nicol. Woodfine Priest at Tyburne 21. January. Richard Sergeant Priest at
Tyburne 20. April. William Tompson Priest at Tyburne 20. April. John Addams
Priest at Tyburne 8. October. John Low Priest at Tyburne 8. October. Robert Debdale
Priest at Tyburne 8. October. Robert Anderton Priest at Tyburne. William Marsden
at Tyburne. Francis Ingleby Priest, at york 3. June. John Sands Priest, at
Gloucester. John Finglow Priest. Robert Bickerdicke Gentl. at york 23. July.
Alexander Crow Priest, at york 30. Nouem. Rich. Langly Gentleman, at york 1.
December.
Anno 1587. Elizab. 29.
Concert. Eccles. Ang. page 207.
Mary Queen of Scotland, at Foderinghay-Castle 8. Febr. Thomas Pilchard Priest,
at Dorcester in March. Stephen Rousam Priest, at Gloucester. John Hamley Priest,
at Chard. Robert Sutton Priest, at Stafford. Gabriell Thimbleby Priest George
Douglas Priest, a Scotshman at yorcke 9. Sept.
Anno 1588. Elizab. 30.
Edmund Sikes Priest, at york 23. March. Didacus de Yepes Episcop. Taracon. de
persec. Angl. Hispanice^.
William Deane Priest at Mile^d-greene by London 28. Aug. Henry VVebly Priest at
Mile^d-greene by London 28. Aug. William Gunter Priest, at the Theater by
London 28. August. Robert Morton Priest in Lincolnes Inn fields by London 28.
Aug. Hugh More Gentleman in Lincolnes Inn fields by London 28. Aug. Thomas
Acton alias Holford Priest, at Clarkenwell in London 28. Aug. Richard Clarkeson
Priest at Hunslow 28. Aug. Thomas Felton laybrother of the order of the Minimes
at Hunslow 28. Aug. Richard Liegh Priest at Tyburne 30. Aug. Hugh Morgan Gent.
at Tyburne 30. Aug. Edward Shelly Gent. at Tyburne 30. Aug. Richard Flower
Layman at Tyburne 30. Aug. Robert Martin Layman at Tyburne 30. Aug. John ^ocke
Layman at Tyburne 30. Aug. Marg^ret Ward Gent. at Tyburne 30. Aug. Edward James
Priest at Cichester 1. October. Raph Crochet Priest at Cichester 1. October. Robert
Wilcokes Priest at Cichester 1. October. Edward Campian Priest at Canterbury 1.
October. Christopher Buxton Priest at Canterbury 1. October. Robert Widmerpoole
Layman at Canterbury 1. October. William Wigges Priest, at Kingston 1. October.
John Robinson Priest, at Ipswich 1. October. John Weldon Priest, at Milend-greene
by London 5. October. William Hariley Priest at Haliwell by London 5. October.
Richard Williams Priest at Haliwell by London 5. October. Robert Suttan Layman at
Clarkenwell 5. Octo. Edward Burden Priest, at york 29. Nou. John Hewit Priest.
Robert Ludlam Priest at Darby. Richard Sympson Priest at Darby. Nicolas
Garlic Priest at Darby. William Lampley Layman at Gloucester.
Anno 1589. Elizab. 31.
George Nicols Priest at Oxford 5. July. Didacus de Yepes Episcop. de persec.
Angl. Hispan.
Richard Yaxley Priest at Oxford 5. July. Thomas Belson Gentleman at Oxford 5.
July. John Annas Priest at york 16. March. Robert Dalby Priest at york 16.
March. William Spenser Priest, at york 24. Sept. Robert Hardeslye Layman, at
york 24. Sept.
Anno 1590. Elizabeth. 32.
Christopher Bales Priest, in Fleetstreet in London 4. March. Alexander Blake
Layman in Grayes Inn lane in London 4. March. Nicolas Horner Layman in
Smithfield in London 4. March. Miles Gerard Priest at Rochester 30. April.
Francis Dickinson Priest at Rochester 30. April. Antony Middleton Priest at
Clarkenwell in London 6. May. Edward Jones Priest in Fleetstreet in London 6.
May.
Anno 1591. Elizab. 33.
Edmund Geninges Priest in Grayes June fields 10. Dec. Swithin Wells Gent. in
Grayes June fields 10. Dec. Eustach White Priest at Tyburne 10. Dec. Andr.
Philop. cont. Edic. Reginae Angl. page 482.
Polidor Plasden Priest at Tyburne 10. Dec. Brian Lacy Gentleman at Tyburne 10.
Dec. John Mason Layman at Tyburne 10. Dec. Sydney Hodgson Layman at Tyburne 10.
Dec. Momsort Scot Priest in Fleestreet 2. July. George Bisley Priest in
Fleestreet 2. July. William Dikinson Priest at Winchester 7. July. Raph Milner
Layman at Winchester 7. July. Edmund Duke Priest at Durham. Richard Holiday
Priest at Durham. John Hog Priest at Durham. Richard Hill Priest at Durham.
William Pikes Layman at Dorcester. Robert Thorpe Priest, at york 31. May.
Thomas Watkinson Layman, at york 31. May.
Anno 1592. Elizab. 34.
William Patteson Priest, at Tyburne 22. Ian. Thomas Portmore Priest in S.
Paul's Churchyard in London 21. Febr. Roger Ashton Gentleman, at Tyburne 23.
June.
Anno 1593. Elizab. 35
James Burden Layman, Did yepes ibi. page 651.
at Winchest. 25. Mar. Antony Page Priest, at york 30. April. Joseph Lampton
Priest, at Newcastle 23. June. William Dauis Priest, at Beumaris in Wales, in
September. Edward Waterson Priest.
Anno 1594. Elizab. 36.
William Harington Priest, Yepes vbi supr. page 633. 640. 641.
at Tyburne 18. Febr. John Cornelius Mohun Priest of the Society of Jesus at
Dorcester 4. July. Thomas Bosgraue Gentleman at Dorcester 4. July. Patricke
Samon Layman at Dorcester 4. July. John Carey Layman at Dorcester 4. July. John
Ingram Priest, at Newcastle. John Boast Priest, at Doram 29. July. James
Oldbaston Priest, at york 26. Nouemb.
Anno 1595. Elizab 37.
Robert Southwell Priest of the Society of Jesus, Did yepes in hist. persecut
Angl. page 64^.
at Tyburne 3. March. Henry Walpole Priest of the Society of Jesus at york 7.
Apr. Alexander Raulins Priest at york 7. Apr. William Freeman Priest. John
Watkinson, alias Warcoppe Layman, at york.
Anno 1596. Elizab. 38.
George Errington Layman at york 29. No. William Knight Layman at york 29.
No. William Gibson Layman at york 29. No.
Anno 1597. Elizab. 39.
Yepes vbi supra. page 710. ^. ^.
William Anlaby Priest, at york 4. July. John Buckley, alias Jones Priest of
the Order of S. Francis, at S. Thomas waterings 12. July. Thomas Warcop. Henry
Abbot and Edward Fulthorpe Laymen, at york 4. July.
Anno 1598. Elizab 40.
Christopher Robinson Priest, at Carlisle. Peter Snow Priest at york. Richard
Horner Priest at york. Ralfe Grimston Layman at york. John Britton Layman at
york.
Anno 1599.
Matthew Hayes Priest, at york.
Anno 1600. Elizab. 42.
Christopher Wharton Priest, at york 18. May. Relatio 16 Mart. a Th. VV. edit.
John Rigby Gentleman, at S. Thomas Wateringes 21. July. Robert Nutter Priest
at Lancaster in June. Edward Thwinge Priest at Lancaster in June. Thomas Sprot
Priest at Lincoln in July. Thomas Hunt Priest at Lincoln in July. Thomas
Palaser Priest at Durham in July. John Norton Gentleman at Durham in July. N.
Talbot Gentleman at Durham in July.
Anno 1601. Elizab. 43.
John Pibush Priest, at S. Thomas Wateringes 10. February. Roger Filcocke
Priest of the Society of Jesus at Tybur. 27. Feb. Relat. 16. Mart. page 93. and
94.
Mark Barkworth Priest of the Order of S. Benedict at Tybur. 27. Feb. Anne
Heygham Gentlewoman widow, to master Line. at Tybur. 27. Feb. Robert Middleton
Priest at Lancaster. Thrustan Hunt Priest at Lancaster.
Anno 1602. Elizab. 44.
Francis Page Priest of the Society of Jesus at Tyburne 29. Apr. Thomas
Tichborne Priest at Tyburne 29. Apr. Robert Watkinson Priest at Tyburne 29.
Apr. James Ducket Layman at Tyburne 29. Apr. Matthew Harrison Priest at york in
April. Antony Battie Layman at york in April.
Anno 1603. Elizab. 45. and vltimo.
William Richardson Priest, at Tyburne 27. February.
Under King James. Anno 1614. Jacob. Reg. 2.
Laurence Bailey Layman, as Lancaster in March. John Suker Priest at Warwick in
August. Robert Grissold Layman at Warwick in August.
Anno 1605. Iacobi. 3.
Thomas Wilborne Layman, at york 1. August. John Putchering Layman, at Rippon.
5. September. William Brown Layman, at Rippon.
Anno 1606. Iacobi 4.
Edward Oldcorne Priest of the Society of Jesus at Worcester 7. Apr. Raph
Ashley Layman at Worcester 7. Apr. Henry Garnet priest, Superior of the Society
of Jesus in England, in S. Paul's Churchyard 3. May.
Anno 1607. Jacob. 5.
Robert Drury priest, at Tyburne 26. January.
Anno 1608. Jacob. 6.
Matthew Flathers priest, at york 21. March. George Geruis priest of the order
of S. Benedict, at Tyburne 11. April. Thomas Garnet priest of the Society of
Jesus, at Tyburne 23. June.
Anno 1610.
George Napper priest, at Oxforde 10. of November. Cadwalladar priest in Wales.
N. Roberts priest of the order of S. Benedict, at Tyburne. Thomas Summers
priest, at Tyburne 10. of December.
Anno 1612.
N. Scot priest, of the order of S. Benedict, at Tyburne. Richard Newport
priest, together with him.
A Compendium of the martyrs and confessors or Ireland under Queen Elizabeth.
CHAPTER III.
1. WIlliam Walsh native of Donbuinein the diocese of Mead first deprived of
his bushoprick and spoiled of all his goods, for not conforming himself, to
the Queens iniunctious about the oath of her ecclesiastical supremacy, and
other laws made against the holy Camons of the catholic church, was put into
a deep dungeo^, wherein he was many years afflicted with gives and fetters,
until by the favor of his keeper he made an escape and fled into Spaigne, and
so ended the remainder of his blessed days at Alcala 1578.

2. Thomas Leorus Bishopp of Kildare willingly resigned his bishopric in king
Edwards days, for that he could not with a safe conscience possess the same,
and being to the great consolation of his heart restored again unto the same in
Queen Mary's days, was again in Queen Elizabeth's dispossessed thereof, and
of all other his liuelyhood, well contented rather, abiectus esse in domo
Deimagis quam habitare in tabernaculis peccatorum, he applied himself being
banished to Munster in Ireland, in teaching young children to read their books
and instructing them in the christian doctrine: lightly he never came to any
man's house butt he exhorted therein, nor ever supped or dined, but in the later
end thereof he took occasion to edify the people with one exhortation or
another. Once being at the Earl of Desmounds house at supper, a gentle woman
being there, retourning home told to her friends as a great wounder, that
Bishopp Leorus preached not at the later end of his meat as he was accustomed:
he never did forbear to reprove and reprehend vice and wickedness in any man
whatsoever who was reproueable, and persisting still in all hollinesse and
zeal of gods everlasting truth, until the last gasp of his breath, he died
of the age of 80. years at the Nasse in the province of Leinster in Ireland
1577.

3. Morris fitz Gibbon Archbishopp of Cashall, for the like cause was spoiled
of all his goods and suffered much labor and travail, and at lenght fled out
of the kingdom of Ireland and died in the port of Portingall 1578. Edmond
Taner Bishopp of Clone and Corcke doctor of divinity, who first being of the
society of Jesus, out of which through great sickness not without license of
his superiors and advise of the physicians was enforced to come forth, and
through the importunat suit of his frinds, was persuaded to take upon him the
dignity, or rather the heavy bourden of a Bishopp, especially in dangerous
seasons of turbulent heresies, by whicn he suffered great penury and want as well
in prison, as out of it, he died about the year of our Lord 1578.

4. Hugh Lacy Bishopp of Limericke, did suffer great callamitie, as well under
king Henry the 8. as king Edward his son, in whose times he was thrust from
his place and function, and also compelled to fly the Real me for not yelding
to the supremacy of the young king in the spiritually regiment of the church:
but being restored to his former dignity in Queen Mary's days by Cardinal
Poole, his hollinesse legate in England and Ireland, was in Queen Elizabeth's
time enforced to suffer the like revolution, as well of his bishippricke, as of
all other things, and so to carry the burden of Christ's cross, he lived in
woe, and ended the same in joy, Anno Domini 1577.

5. Nicholas Skerret Archbishopp of Thomound a man of an innocent life, and
most zealous in the profession of the christian faith, after suffering many
difficulties and hard vsuadg in prison, out of which he made an escape, fled
into Portingall, and ended his holy life at Lisborne 1583.

6. Thomas O Hierly Bishopp of Rosse, a man of great fame for good life and
blessed conversation, after long imprisonnent in the Tower of London, out of
which he was enlarged by the entreatie of Sr. Cormocke Ma-Teighe Lord of
Munstre, who then was at the Court in England, and after much affliction and
tribulation living in woods and montaines, ended his holy life Anno 1581.

7. Patricke Ohealy of the order of saint Frauncis Bishopp of Maio, coming out
of Spain into Ireland, no sooner landed, then by the sherif and officers of
that place, (which was at Dingell in the weast part of all Irland) but he was
apprehended, together with a religious man of that order nobly descended, call
Con Ornorcke, and were sent to the Contesse of Desmo^d, who either to currie
favor which the state of the kingdom, or for fear to be ill thought of if he
had dismissed them, or to be impeached of any imputation or suspision of any
conspiracy with Sr. James fitz Morris then on foot, reddy at that time to
pass out of Gallicia in Spain into Ireland with a supply of Spaniardes, did
remitt them over to Limerick to be presented before Mr. James Gould, then the
Queens Attorney in the Province: as about that time also she yielded her
eldest son to Sr. William Drury Lord Justice of Ireland as an hostage that he
should rest himself secure without fear of the Earls Ioialtie and fidelity
to her majesty for yelding her son and heir apparent of Desmond as a pleadg,
and the holy Bishopp as a prisoner: but as she was carfull to continue the
Earldome in her Ioynes, so the other was as warrie to preserve his own
reputation and creditt in his new promotion of Lord justice, who was no les
suspected to favor the catholic religion (for he was in heart and will of
that profession) then the other was to further rebellion. Sed quis vnquam
tetigit Christum Domini and innocens fuit? both the justice and the contesse,
were frustrated of their hope and deceacea^ed of their expectation. Maledictus
qui conf^dit in homine, and thincking to possess the favor of the world, they
respected not the favor and justice of God, whose wisdom surpasses the
providence of man. timidae and inepta prouidentiae nostrae.

8. The Earl therefore of Desmond, within one month after the good Bishopp
suffered, was proclaimed traitor, and most part of the Geraldines with their
followers in a serious conflict betwixt themselves and the English (of whom
Sr. Nicholas Malby was Cheeftaine) were overthrown and putt to flight at the
Abbay of Bertiff, in Irish called Eanighbegg, within 7. miles of L^mericke
weastward, and that most noble ancient house which was the only strenght and
Bulwarcke for the Crown of England it dangerous seasons of that kingdom
heertofore, is now altogether extinguished. And the Lord Justice continewed no
longer in his new dignity then one month after the Bishopps execution, which
was the space of time that he challenged the Lord Justice to answer before the
dreadful throne of God for their innocent blood, I mean of him and his
follow, and for their unjust judgment, which was that they should be executed
by Marshall law: wherefore they were delivered to a band of soldiors, their
hands being tide behind their backs, and their feet with roppes upon
garrans, of whom they were cruelly entertained all the way until they came to
Kilmalocke, a town distant 12. miles from Limericke, where they were hanged
upon trees; the foolish and cruel soldiors a whole senight after their death
(for they were not permitted all that time to be buried) made butts of their
carcases, to shutt and leuill at them with their bullets, calllng them by the
name of papists, traitors, idolators. Immediately after their execution, the
said L. justice sickned in the camp, and ended his life at Waterfoord, crieng
out upon those blessed martirs, whom he had putt to death, but one month
before.

9. Derby Ohurley Archbishopp of Cashall, doctor of both laws, and professor
of that faculty in the university of Rheames in France, under Cardinal
Guise Archbishopp of the same, was taken in Ireland, and cast into a darck
Dungeon in the Castle of Dublin: and being sore vexed with this ugly prison and
pensive restrainct, was more vexed and tormented by an usual and exquis^^t
torment of boots full of boylling oil and talloe, into which he was compelled
to putt his legs already wearied with heavy bolts, and to stand by a great
fire, with which his flesh was consumed unto the bare bones; all which he
endured with great patience and constancy. And afterward, when by that
torment he could not be won^e, nor by fear and alluring promises of
uncertain and deceitful promotion, could not be inueigled, to relent or to
faint in the profession of the catholic religion, or to embrace the
protestant negative religion, was upon fridaie morning in the dawning,
stra^gled with a with, in the month of May 1584. and so suffered a blessed
martyrdom, and enioieth a blessed crown.

10. Redmond Ma-Goran primat of Ardmagh, was slain in Conaght by Sr. Richard
Bingham Anno 1598. Redmond Ogulloglior Bishopp of Derry, being almost 100.
years of age, and 50. years a Bishopp, was with 3. prie^ts about midnight,
slain in his own house near Derry, by the garrison of Log hefoile, thorough
the craft and drift of one Sr. Neyle Garrath Odonel, who afterward falling
into disgrace with the English, was impeached and arraigned for taking part
with Odohirtyes conspiracy, and was committed together with his son, prisoner
in the owner of london anno 1600. Morihirtagh Obrien Bishopp of Emly, being
apprehended, was cast into the castle of Dublin where through penury and
straightness of his restraint, he died in the year 1586.

11. Peers Power Bishop of Fearnes, being taken and apprehended, was cast
into the castle of Dublin, who either through the frailty of the flesh, or
through the extremity of his restraint, or else through the deceitful promises
of temporal promotions, yielded to the supremacy of the Queen in the
spiritual jurisdiction of the church: which being once granted, he destroyed
all articles of our catholic belief, and therefore he was set at liberty.
But being afterward sore amassed and strocken with an inward sorrow for being
so weak and so inconstant, in a point so highly importing the increase and
honor of christian religion, and consequently our salvation, returned like
another Marcellinus unto the place where he fell, and where he gave so vild a
scandal, deplored his fall, and grievously lamented his errors: and so he was
hardlier dealt with all, then ever before: but after long imprisonment and much
affliction through gods providence, he made an escape and fled into Spain
(the common support and sanctuary of al distressed catholics) where he died
with great probation of a blessed and constant catholic Bishopp.

12. Richard Creogh, native of the city of Limericke in the province of
Munster in Ireland, descended of welthie and honest parents, of an ancient
family in that city, who notwithstanding he employed the prime of his
youthful days in the trade of marchandice, yet he profitted more in the
spiritual exercise of devotion and piety then he did in the acquiring of
riches and wordly designementes. And after some worldly loss, went beyond the
seas, where he gave himself to the studdy of virtue and learning, and made
therein great and admirable increase, and so became a priest, and not without
expectation of such a one, as he lived and died afterward. For his rare
virtues he was made Archbishopp of Ardmagh and primat of all Ireland, and
coming for his Country (where he performed the office of a diligent pastor
and a zealous prelate) was betrayed by one of the country, and committed to
close and ghastly prison in the Castle of Dublin. And after suffering much
trouble in prison, was brought to his trial in the kings bench before Sr. John
Plunkett, then cheef justice of that court, and being there endited and
arraigned of high treason and enforced to abide a Jury of gentlemen of the
pale, he was found guilties, but they for acquiting of him were all committed to
the said castle, and put to great fines. When they could get no way by law to
make him away, or that his constancy could not be infringed, he was remitted
over to the Tower of London, out of which he made an escape. But after arriving
in Ireland to help his flock, the best he could, was again apprehended, and
sent over again to the Tower, where he ended his life.

13. Cnohor O Duanna Bishopp of Down Patricke and Connor, was apprehended the
month of July 1612. and committed to the Castle of Dublin, wherein he lived in
continual restrainct many years before, by the apprehension of one master
Smith secretary to Sr. Nicholas Bagnall, but being taken the 2. time, was
hanged, drawn, and quartered, the first of February 1612. One Patricke a
virtuous priest suffered also with him.

Of Priests.
1. John Traners doctor of divinity, being accused that he wrott against the
suppremacy of the king, was hanged drawn and quartered at Tiburne Anno 1535.
which being at the place of execution, he confessed, plainly, showing the 3.
fingers with which the wrott that matter: and his hand being strooken of and
cast into the fire, every whitt was burned, but those 3. fingers could not be
burned, as Surius writes.

2. Lawrence Moore (whom doctor Sa^ders in his letres. 1580. to the Cardinal
Commen of the wars of Ireland, called a holly priest) being with the
Spaniardes at the Forte called Dowy Nore, was betrayed and delivered over to
the Lord Gray, then Lord deputy of Ireland (with two proper gentlemen, the one
called Oliver Plunker an Irish gentleman, the other called William Welsh an
English gent.) by the Corronell of the Forte, called Sebastian de saint Joseph,
for that they refused upon any composition to yield over the said Forte, which
they could well defend having no want of any thing neither victuals, nor
munu^io^ were commanded by the said L. deputy to be brought to a smiths forge,
and al their bones and Iointes to be beaten and crushed with a hammer, and this
for the space of a day, and night, the priests fingers being cut off with a
knife: but in that extreme pain they suffered, yett their lives were promised
unto them, if they would turn protesta^tes. All the Spaniards to the number of
900. except the said Corronell and 10. more, were stripped of their weapons, and
were all slain, and cas^ over the cliffs into the sea, for that Forte stood
upon a mighty rock over the sea, notwithstanding the L. deputies word and
faith unto al them for their life, liberty, goods, and for safe conduct into
Spain. Of this event the good priest told the said Corronell, and the rest of
the Spaniards: this hapened upon saint Martins eve 1580.

3. Morris Kent native of Kilmalock, and bachelor of divinity, was apprehended
and accused for having been Chaplain to the Earl of Desmond. And for as much
as a good and worshippfull Alderman, named Victor White, had of a pious zeal,
and for the comfort of his own soul, kept the said. Morris in his house, was
for that cause apprehended and putt in prison for his guest: but the good
priest to save his host harmeles, appeared before the said L. president of his
own accord, who was hanged drawn and quartered. He was a holy and a virtuous
man, of few words and very zealous: he suffered the 30. of Apprill 1585.

4. Edmond Odonel native of Limerick of the society of Jesus, was apprehended
for being suspected to carry letters from Rome to Sr. James fitz Morris, and
therefore was hanged drawn and quartered at Corck by Sr. John Perrot L.
president of Munster, about the year of our Lord 1575. He was sent over as a
fellow with father Goad an English Jesuit, who in company with F. David Woulf
priest of that society, were sent in a mission into that country by the
procurement of primat Creogh to teach grammar about the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's time.

5. Daniell Okeilan was apprehended at Yonghull by Sr. William Morgan and
captain Peers which then kept garrison in that town. He was hanged with his
legs vpwardes, and his head downwards: and then all the soldiers were
commanded to level at him with their bulletts; Commandment was also given
that none should level at his heart, thereby to increase his pain by his
lingering death: he was a priest of the order of S. Frauncis: this happened the
28. of march 1580.

6. Daniell Hinnichan, Phillipp O See, Morris O scanlan of the order of S
Frauncis, being old, impotent, and blind as other friars were, were all three
slain at the high alter of their monastery called Lislaghtine 1580.

7. Teigh Odulan of the order of saint Frauncis, was apprehended at the
monastery of Askettin and brought to Limericke, and there was hanged drawn and
quartered. After his head was cut of, he was heard to speak these words.
Vias tuas demonstra mih^ 1579.

8. Richard French native of the country of Wexford a virtuous priest, after
long imprisonment in the castle of Dublin and, in the castle of Wexford, ended
his life 1581. Thomas Coursey viccar of Kensale, a most virtuous priest, was
hanged by Marshall law, by Sr. John Perrot L. president of Munster, for
entreating James fitz Morris to restore the pray which he took from his
parishioners of Beasale. 1577.

9. Glasuy O Boyll Abbot of Boyll of the diocese of Elfyne in Connaght, and
Oven O Mulkeran Abbot of the monastery of the holly Trinity of that diocese,
were hanged and quartered by the L. Gray Anno 1580. John Stephen priest, for
that he said Mass to Feigh Ma-Hugh was hanged and quartered by the L. Burrowes
1597. Thady O Boyll guarden of the monastery of Downigall, was slain by the
English in his own monastery. 6. Freers were slain in the monastery of
Moynighan in Shaane O Neals wars. John O Onan, was hanged by Marshall law at
Dublin 1618. Patricke O Dyry was hanged and quartered at Derry 1618. Brien O
Carulan was hanged by Marshall law 1606.

10. John O Calyhor, Brien O Trower moncks of the order of S. Bernard, were
slain in their own monastery de Sa^cta Maria in Vlster. Felymy O Harra, a lay
brother of the order of S. Fr. in his monastery: so was Eneas Penny parish
priest of Killagh, slain at the alter in the parish church thereof. Donoshew Ma
Recdy priest was hanged at Colrahan. Cahall Ma-Goran, Rony O Donillan, Peter O
Quillan, patricke O Kenna a Franciscan Freer, Georg Power viccar general of
the diocese of Ossory, Andrew Strich of Limericke, Brien O Murihirtagh viccar
general of the diocese of Clonefart, Donoghow Omulony priest of Thomond, John
Kelly of Louth, Sr Patrick of the Anally, John Pillin P. of the order of saint
Frauncis, Rory Ma-Henlea, Tirrelagh Ma-Inisky a lay man of the order of S.
Francis, al these were catholic and died in the Castle of Dublin through hard
vsadg and restrainct. Walter Fernan priest died in that castle through too much
tortur of the rack. John Walsh a virtuous priest died through famine and cold
in the Castle of Weastchester. Two Welsh gentlemen, the one called Richard
Waghan, that other Richard Downs, died through hard vsadg in in the Castle of
Dublin.

11. Morris Vstace of Castle Martin in the diocese of Kildare esquier, master
of Art and a Nouice of the society of Jesus, being sent for by his father
into Brugis in Flanders, came into Ireland (not without his superiors
direction) to satisfy his Fathers will, who was apprehended hanged and
quartered: who being so well descended, and religious withal, was much feared
he would work much amongst the people. In the mean time the L. viscont of
Balinglas and L. Barron of Bilquillin was in open hostility, which agrauated
the jealousy and suspicion that he was accessory thereunto.

12. For the like suspicion these that follow were hanged drawn and
quartered. Ma. Nicholas Nugent esquier cheef Justice of the Common pleas Ma.
David Sutten esquier together with his bother Mr. John Sutton Gentleman. Mr.
Thomas Vstace Gentleman, together with his son and heir, who said the
letanies together with his father going up the ladder. Master William Ougan
of Ruth-Coffy esquier. Master Robert Scurlock gentleman, master Clench of the
Scrine gentleman, master Netherfild gentleman, master Robert fitz Gerrad
Bacheller of divinity, all these suffered for suspicion of Baltinglas his
wars 1581.

12. Matthew Lamport priest, a very godly and a devout man, for that upon a
certain night he entertained father Richford priest of the society of Jesus,
was hanged drawn and quartered. Robert Miller, Edward Cheeuers, John O Lahy,
for bringing over the said Richfoord with the L. of Baltinglas was hanged
drawn and quartered Anno 1581. Peter Miller after having stustied in Spain,
for that he could not have his health, came into his country which is the
county of Wexfoord, and being examined touching points of religion, and not
finding him conformable to the protestancie, many suspicions being laid to his
charge, was hanged drawn and quartered Anno 1588. Christopher Roche native of
Wexfoord, for that he could not enjoy his health in Flanders where he was a
student, passing by Bristoe to come for Ireland, was there apprehended, and was
putt to the oath of the supremacy; which when he refused, he was carried up to
London where he was sore whipped about the streets, and was putt into a most
filthy prison in gyues and fetters, and died there through extreamitie Anno
1590.

14. James Dudall of Drodart merchant, coming out of France was by contrary
winds driven to the South coast of England, unto whom the oath of the Queens
supremacy was tendered: and for that he refused the same, he was sent to Exceter
Gayle, and there was hnaged drawn and quartered anno 1600. Patricke Hea of
Wexfoord and honest man and zealous Catholic, being accusedsed unto the Lord
Gray then deputy of the kingdom, that he did not only relieve Bishops and
priests in his house, but also transported them over into Spain and France,
was committed to the castle of Dublin, where through hard restraint he fell
sore sick; and by entreaty of his frinds was remitted to his house, where the
died of the sickness he took in the prison.

15. 20. Laymen, old, blind and impotent, retired themselves unto their parish
church of Mohono (dedicated to S. Nicholas in the diocese of Limericke) for a
sanctuary wherein they lived many days until such time as the English Army
passing by that way and finding them there, they set fire in the church and
burned them all anno Domini 1581. these poor old people, amoungest whom there
wear some old women, who could not long have lived, although they had been
let alone, for they were some of the age of 100 and of 80. years, very sick
and even already languished for want of food, which they could not get by
reason the country was altogether spoiled and left wast by the soldiors, and
the people of the country, fled into the montaines: yet needs these people
must add sorrow upon sorrow, and cruelty upon cruelty, to show their
rancore and the fruict of their gospel. All these fornamed persons, except
the good and most virtuous Bishopp of Duanna with his chappleine, Brien of
Carrulan, and John O Onan, and Donoghowe Ma-Reddy, and John Luneus priest who
suffered under king James, all the rest suffered under Queen Elizabeth.

Every sect of heresies Challenging unto themselves the true and Catholic
Church, there is here set down, the true notes and marcks, by which the same
may be discerned. CHAPTER I.
1. We must know, that the catholic church is as it were the son of the
world, which does cast forth her lights, and shininge beams by certain
notes, by which she may be discerned and known from the false religion of
Pagans, Jews, and heretics. The first note is, Aug. lib. contra epistolam
fundamenti cap. 4.
the name Catholic, which as saint Augustine says, if a pagan would ask of
an heretic* where the catholic church is, he will not dare to show unto
him his own family. S. Cirill also says. Cyrill. Cathechesi 18.
Si iueris in aliquam vrbem etc. If you go into anny city, you will not ask
where is the church or house of God, for then every heretic will say, he
has the house and church of God, but you will ask where is the catholic
church, for that is the proper name of this holly church, the mother of all
faithful christians, which if you ask after, not heretic will show unto
you his own church.

2. The 2. note is Antiquity, for that the true religion is more ancient then
the false, and the catholic Roman church, was before anny heretical sect:
for that all heretics departed from the same, as S. John says. Ex nobis
prodierunt etc. they went forth from us, as is set down in the chapter of
the first book.

Daniel. 9.3. Note. Act. 2. Timoth. 3. Cypr. l. 4. Epist. 2.
3. The 3. note ie perpetuity or duration, which never was nor ever shall be
interrupted. Regnum quod in aeternum non dissipabitur: a kingdom which shall
never be overthrown, nor ever be dissolved, because it is of God. Of
heretics, it is said, they shall not prevail further, and although as S.
Ciprian says, heretics and scismatiques in the beginning like a raginge and
furious tempest, do swallowe and consume all things, yet they can not have
great increase, for by their own emulation they will fail. And S. Augustine
(upon the psalm, Psalm. 57.
Ad nihilum deuenient, they shall be brought to nothing, like a swifte stream)
says. Non vos terreant fratres etc. Let not certain violent streams terrify
you, which for a time with violent irruptions do thunder, for presently they
shall vanish, and shall not endure long; many heresies are dead although they
ran over the banckes, yet now scarce is there any memory of them.

4. Theodoretus does write, that there were 76. sort of heresies sprounge up
unto his time, Theodoretus lib. de haereticis sabulis.
and in his 3. book of that work he says, that all were extinguished saying
a few S. Augustine does reckon 88. heresies of which he writing upon the 57.
psalm says, that most of them were perished. Unto Luthers time there were
100. sects of heresies, and all of them are now extinguished, except a few
Nestorians in the east, and some other few Hussits in Bohemia. Was there ever
any heresy in the world so great, as well for the multitude of Bishopps and
doctors, Kings, Princes and Emperors as that of the Arrians, as also for the
continuance of time remaining for the space of 200. years and upward, and now
what is become of it? About 200. years agone the heresy of Albigens had more
people to defend it in France, then the Caluinistes have at this day, as may
be gathered by Paulus Emilius, Emilius li. 5. de rebus Gallor.
and now there is noe memory thereof. The heresy of Luther, began in the
year of our Lord 1525. Then Zuinglius got up, and within two years after
the Anabaptists disturbed Lutheranisme, and allured the most part of that
sect, to embrace theirs. After the Zuinglians, came Calvin, which besides
few towns in Suiserlande, caused all the Zuinglians to follow and embrace
his own doctrine. Caluinistes themselves being dissolved into Libertines in
France, into Puritantes in England, into Trinitaries in Pollande, into
Samosettes in Transiluania. But the Catholic Church continued always
notwithstanding all the world, (first the Jews, afterward the Pagans, and
last of all heretics) resisted and persecuted her, by whose persecution she
did ever flourish and increase.

4. Note.
5. The 4. note is, the largnes and amplitude of the catholic church by the
conversion of the gentiles, for the catholic church ought not only to
comprehend all times, but also all places, nations, and all kind of people,
and so saint Vincentius Lyrinensis in his comentarie says, that they be
catholics which houlde that doctrine which has been allwaies, in all places,
and which was embraced of all: and so the prophett said in the person of
Christ. Dabo tibigentes etc. In Psalm. 2 Psalm. 7^. Aug. lib. de vnitate Ecel.
c. 6. Bedac. 6. Canticorum.
I will give nations unto thee for thine inheritance, and the limittes of the
earth for they possession: he shall rule from sea to sea. For the
understanding of which marcke, we must consider out of saint Angustine, and
saint Beade, that the church was to be catholic, and not to exclude any time
or any kind of people, by which it is distinguished from the sinagoge, which
was a particular church and not Catholic, and was limited unto a certain
time, that is to say, to the cominge of the Messiah: as also unto a certain
place which was the temple of Jerusalem, out of which there could not be
offered any sacrifice, and unto a certain family which were the children of
Jacob. Also we must consider out of the same saint Augustine, Aug. Epi. 80. ad
Hessichiu^.
that for the church to be catholic, it is not expedient, that it should be
in all men of the world, but it is sufficient it should be made known in all
Provinces, and that it should fructify in them, so that there be in all
kingdoms some Catholics, which shall be brought to pass before the second
coming of Christ: neither is it requisitt, Matt. 24.
that this be done at one time, for it is sufficient it be done successively.

6. It is likewise known, that the Catholic Roman church has gained the
whole world, for it did fructify in every place thereof in the time of the
Apostles, Coloss. 1. Iren. li. 1. c. 3. Tertull. lib. cont. Iudeos c. 3. Cypr.
li. de vnitate eccl. Atha. lib. ac humanitate Christi. Chriso. and Hier. in c.
Matt. 24. Aug. epi. 80. ad Hesichium.
as saint Paul says. In the time of S. Ireneus it was also spread throughout
every known province. The same do Tertulian, saint Cyprian, and Athanasius
witness, that this church was made known in their own time in every place.
Also saint Chrysostom, saint Aug. saint Hierom, Theodoretus, Leo the great
do declare the same. In the time of saint Gregory the great, the catholic
Roman church was embraced in all the world. Grego. epistola ad episcopos
Orientis, Affricae, Hispaniae, Galliae, Angliae and Ciciliae. The same Beda
does declare in cap. 6. Cantic. and saint Bernard disputinge before Roger king
of Cicilia, Theod. li. de legib. Leo magnus ser 1. de Sanctis Petro and Paulo.
Prosper. lib. de ingratis.
said that the east and the weaste obeyed the Bishopp of Rome at this very
day. And saint Prosper says. Seeds Romana Petri etc. Rome the seat of Peter,
in respect of pastoral honor, is become the head of the world, whatsoever it
possesses not by the sword, it houldeth by religion. The sects of Mahomett,
with the heresies of Nestorians and Ethiches, which as yet be in the east,
never came unto the weaste; The sect of Luther or Calvin, never infected
Asia, Affricke, Aegipte or Greece: noe country was ever converted by them, for
they labor not to convert Ethnickes, but to corrupt and subuerte
catholics, and as Tertulian said of the heretics in his time; Cum hoc sit
negotium illis, non Ethnicos conuertendi, sed nostros euertendi. Their drifte
is not to convert Ethnicks, Tertul. li. de praescriptionib.
but to peruerte ours, for heresy is nothing else then a manifest corruption
of the Catholic doctrine, and a reuolte or defection from the former religion
of Christians.

7. The 5. note is the succession of Bishops, in the Roman church derived
from the Apostles, unto our times, and so all ancient doctors have reckoned
up this succession, as an irrefragable argument to show the true church.
Irene. li. 3. cap. 3.
Ireneus did reckon the Roman Bishops from saint Peter unto Eleutherius,
who was Pope in his time. He said by this succession all heretics were
confounded. Irene li. 3. cap. 3. Tertul. de praescript. Aug. epi. 67. Optat. l.
2. cont. Parmen. cap. 4
S. Ambrose did reckon his Apostolic succession from saint Peter to saint
Damalus, saint Cyprian from saint Peter to Cornelius, saint Bernard from saint
Peter to Eugenius; saint August. from saint Peter unto Anastatius who was Pope
in his time, and lib. contra epistolam fundamenti cap. ^. Tenet me in Ecclesia
etc. The succession of priests from saint Peter the Apostle unto whom Christ
commended the feedinge of his sheep unto this present Bishop, holds me in the
church, the same also does saint Hierom prove. For we must note, that such
are true Bishopps, in the church, who descend from the Apostles, as well by
succession as by ordination: but the sects of Lutherans and Caluinistes have
neither succession from any lawful Bishopps or lawful ordination, therefore
they have not succeeded in any Apostolic order or succession. And for this
cause as saint Cyprian said, Nouatianus is not in the church, Cyp. lib. ^
epist. 6. ad magnum.
nor ought to be called a Bishop, who despisinge apostolic tradition,
succeeded noe Bishop, and himself took that order upon himself.

8. The 6. 6. Note
note is the universal consent of the Catholic church in every point of
doctrine of faith, as it is said in the Acts. Mu^titudo credentium erat cor
vnum, and anima ^na and contrariwise the errors, alterations and dissentions of
these sects in every article of their faith, as you may see in the first
Chapters and 9. Lib. 9. c. 1. Lib. 2 c. 1.
booke^ also in the 2. book cap. 1.

7. Note.
9. The 7. note is the, sanctify of this Catholic doctrine, for the
Catholic church is holy in her doctrine and profession, as the council of
Constantinople says: which profession contains noe falshoode touching faith,
nor any injustice touching good manners: but these sectaries hold so many
absurdities against faith and good manners, The 9. book ca^ Aug. lib. 2. de
ciuitate Dei.
as in the 1. li. Chapter 9. you may read; But the Catholic church contains
noe error, absurdity, or turpitude, nor does it teach any thing against reason
although it teaches many things above reason: and therefore saint Augustine
says: Nihil in Christianis ecclesijs turpe and flagitiosum: there is nothing
in Christian churches, that is either filthy or obhominable, either when gods
precepts be insinuated, or miracles declared, or gifts praised, or benefitts
asked.

8. Note.
10. The 8. note is, the efficacy of the catholic doctrine in conuertinge the
whole world unto the standert of Christ, and that by poor weak and sillle
persons without armor or munition, without fear of tormente or punishment,
only by prayers, fasting charitable woorks, miracles and all good examples of
hollines of life. By these means all nations were converted to the catholic
church; from impiety and all wickedness, unto piety and religion, from
beastly pleasures, unto angelical co^tinency, from the flesh to the spirit,
from being lo^ers of the world, to despise, contemn and forsake the same,
and to follow Christ their spouse. But these sectaries subverted, many
nations, not by sound doctrine or good examples of life, but by terror and
fear, they caused many to forsake Christ and follow the world, I am sure
these holy Saints that converted the world, never drew forth any sword,
when they preached. I am sure when Saint Vincent converted so many, when
saint Aug. converted England to the faith, being sent by saint Greg. or when
saint Killian an Irishe saint, converted the Francks being sent from Conon
Pope, or when saint Patricke converted Ireland being sent by saint Celestine
Pope, they never killed or murdered, burned or spoiled, nor made the subjects
to reuolte against their princes, or the princes to make tirannicall laws
against, their subjects. But Calvin and Luther did sow their pestilent
heresy by burninge and spoilinge kingdoms, robbinge and ransakinge citt^es,
killinge and murtheringe manny millions of people, castinge down and razinge
to the earth, manny churches and monasteries, rauishinge and deflouringe many
Nuns and Virgins and by bringinge every kingdom where the same was
nourished, to a pitiful confusion.

9. Note.
11. The 9. note is, the hollines and sanctity of life of such as founded our
religion, for the holy Patriarchs, Apostles, Doctors, Pastors and such as
converted any country to the faith of Christ, were mirrours and spectacles of
all sanctity and religion as saint August* wittnesseth of the Mouncks of his
time. Isti sunt Episcopi and pastores docti, graves, sancti, Aug. lib. demorib.
Eccl. c. 31. lib. 2. in Julian.
etc. these were learned Bishopps and grave, wise and holly pastors, most
earnest defenders of the truth, by whose planting, settinge, wateringe, and
buildinge, the holy catholic church did increase, but the sectaries of these
times, as in their doctrine they were most irreligious, so in their lives and
manners most wicked and abominable, In responsione ad libr. quem inscrips^rat
Lutherus contra Zuing disputatione habita lipsie contra Eck. Luther. in
postilla super eua^. super eua^ Dominic. Aduentus.
as the protestant authors themselves do auerre. The ministers of Tigur do
write, that Luther sought nothing but his own private gain, that he was
insolent and stubborn, and Luther himself confessed that his pretense was not
for the love of God. In an other place he said, that such as followed this new
gospel, were far worse then when they were Papists, more covetous, and more
given to revenge. Smidelinus in Coment. 4. super caput 21. lucae, said,
Lutherans do peruerte all things, that they turned fasting into feastinge
and surfe^inge, prayers into swearinge and blasphemies, adding that Christ is
not so much blasphemed of the very Turcks. Erasmus also says, tha^ this
gospel never reformed any vice in these new gospellers, none that was an
epi^ure, became sober by it, nor^ none that was cruel, became meek or gentle
by it.

12. The like censure the ministers of Madel^urge do give of them saying.
Madebur. Centuria 11. cap. 11 and Cen. 10.
When these people were Papists, they were religiously addicted, they were
given to much pra^ers, devotion, and sanctifienge the sabo^th day, they showed
great reverence toward churchmen, parents were careful in the education of
their childrenn, they were liberal and merciful toward the poor, and there
was great obedience in the subjects. The same Calvin wittnesseth, Calu. inst.
lib. 4. cap. 10. scan^ page 118.
and in bis book of scandalls he says, when so many thousands do pretend
the gos^pell, few of them ever were reformed of their wicked lives, and
having let the raynes loose to all wickedness, Musc. in cap. de decalogo and
de ministris verbis. Luth. t^. 5. Erasm. ad fratres inferiores Germanicae.
they are not worthy they should become Papists, Musculus does confirm the
same. Luther the first founder of this unfortunate gospel said, that such as
followed the same, were odibile genus hominum. A hateful kind of people, and,
although they speak of the gospel, in their woorcks they are very diuills.
Erasmus said that such as he knew to be vertuous^ innocent, without deceit or
craft, when they were papists, becoming gospellers, were most wicked, crafty
and deceitful, and of viperous behavior. If all these gospellers delivered
this censure of protestant religion (God almighty so disposinge the enemies
of truth to declare the truth) how much ought Catholics to confirm the
same? for as all the heretics that ever were at anny time, are by them in
heresy: so all the wickedness and vices of all the wicked and damnable people
that ever were dispersed throughoute all the world at any, time, are also by
them and in them linked and united together. And Calvin himself declared the
same, when he said, that these gospellers which had made shippwracke of their
conscience, Calu. de scanda. page 128
have also made shippwrack of their faith.

10. Note.
13. The 10. note or marcke is, the glory of miracles, miracles are very
necessary, for the confirmation of anny new faith, Exodus 4.
or for to make any extraordinary mission allowable, for it is written in
Exodus when Moises was sent from God unto the people, he said they will not
believe me, nor hear my advice, and God did not answer him that whether they
will or nill they should believe him, but to the intent they should believe him,
he gave him power to woorcke miracles, Matt. 10.
vt credant quod apparuerit tibi Deus: that they may believe that God appeared
unto thee. In the new testament also it was said unto the Apostles, heal the
sick, reui^e the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast forth diuills; and in saint
John, Christ said, John. 15.
if he had not wrought greater woorks, then anny other, the Jews had not
sinned in not beleeuinge in him. This is also declared in the last of saint
Marcke, where our Lord is said to confirm the preachinge of the Apostles by
signs and tokens, that did follow. S. Augustine, yea Melancton himself said,
Hebr. 2. Aug. lib. 22. de ciuitate Dei cap. 8. Melancth. cap. 3. Matthew.
that miracles were necessary for the confirmation of the faith of any new
doctors, or new doctrine, for true miracles cannot be wrought but by the
power of God, for miracles do exceed the power and force of all creatures.

14. For this cause Luther sought to delude the people by false miracles, for
goinge about to dispossess a maid that was possessed of a devil, he could
not do it, but was in danger to be slain himself of the devil, as Staphilus
says, Staphilus absoluta responsione. Cochleus in actis Lutheri.
who was present at that that time. Also the said Luther, as John Cochleus
writes, went about to restore to life one that was drowned, but could not do
it; and being frustrated of his purpose, none could abide to be present
through the filthy stinche that was in the place. An. 1523. copus l 6.
dialogor.
Also Allanus Cope sets down the history of one Mathewe in the borders of
Hungary, who being persuaded by a certain minister to feign himself dead,
and that as it were he should be raised up by him, in conclusion was found
dead in deed. The like fiction Calvin used, who perswadinge one to feign
himself dead, to the intent he might make the people believe, that he could
work a miracle upon him, but when he thought to bring his fiction to pass,
the party was found dead indeed.

5. But here protestants say, that S. John Baptiste wrought noe miracles.
Hieron. Bolse. in vita Caluini^ 13.
Whereto I answer, that God wroughte wonderful things above the capacity of
our natural understanding, by which his missio^ should not be suspected, the
austeritie and sanctity of his behavior and conversation was a sufficient
token that he was sent from God, but the Catholic church did florishe with
miracles in all ages; First in the time of the Apostles; Secondarillie in the
time of M. Aurelius by the Christian soldiers that were in his army, vide
Tertull. Thirdly we have the miracles, Tertul. in lib. ad Scapulum and in
apolo. cap. 5 Eusebius. l 5. hist. Oros l. 7. hist.
of Gregory, Thaumaturgus an S. Basil setts down lib. de Spiritu Sancto cap.
29. and saint Gregory Nissenus in his life. Fourthlie we have the miracles of
saint Anthony, saint Hillarie, saint Martine, saint Nicholas, and others
written by saint Athanasius, saint Hierom and Sulpitius: so that in all ages
of the church we have miracles, Bernardus in vita cius.
saint Bernard wrote manny miracles of saint Malachias, and this age we have
miracles of Francis Zauier priest of the Society of Jesus, the Apostle of the
east Indies and of many others.

16. The 11. mark is, 11. Note.
the perfection of life that Catholic religion does teach, and the
dissolution and wanton behavior that protestant religion tendes unto. The true
Christian religion ought to withdraw and remove our love and affection from
these vil^e, base, and transitory things, and to ele^ate and lift up our
hearts minds and thoughts to the consideration and contemplation of
celestial and heavenly things, to abstain from the filthy exercise of
wanton delights and raginge concupiscence, to set at naught all such baits,
as prouokes the flesh to rebel against the spirit, to despise and contemn
all worldly honors, promotions and riches of this frail life. Also it ^oth
teach and persuade, fastinges, prayers, almesdeeds, wearinge of hear cloth,
austeritie of life, and other afflictions of the corruptible and rebellious
flesh, by which the damnable allurements thereof should be restrained, and
extinguished. Also it does teach voluntary poverty, perpetual chastisie, and
perfect obedience. But the doctrine of the protestant says, that these
exerci^es are but mere follies, and that they be but humane traditions, by
which God is not pleased: that all abstinence from flesh is but superstition,
that vows and votaries are but fained hollines, that it is impossible to live
chaste or continente, that every one ought to have a wife, and that it is as
necessary for a man to have a woman, Lutherus de vita coniugali.
as meat or drink.

17. The true catholic religion teaches, that good woorcks are necessary
for our salvation, the protestant says that man deserves nothing by any good
woorcke he does before God, and the more badd woorcks you do, the more you are
in gods favor; so as it makes the professors of this doctrine to runn
headlounge to all kind of mischief, taking away all the means, by which he
should be reclaimed, as the sacrament of penance, contrition, and
satisfaction, which they say were not instituted of Christ but fained of the
people, with such like; so also they take away free will from man, affirming
god to be the only cause of the sins that we comitt. That none can keep
gods comaundeme^ts, and that we are not bound to keep them. Calvin. 2.
instit. c. 7.
Also the protestant religion takes from us all fear of God or of hell, and
so gives a scope to all mischief; That the comaundements pertaines not to
the christians. That there is noe sin but incredulity: and that all are
deceived if they think to be saved by good woorcks, with many such vild and
absurd doctrines, which make a man careless of his salvation, rechles of his
behauior, and nothing willinge to do anny good, when neither he that does
them is not recompensed or rewarded, or God offended or displeased by the said
doings. For as by the catholic religion Christ reformed the wicked
inclination of man, gave hoalsome precepts and counsels to amend his desolute
misdeamenor, instituted also Sacraments to cure all diseases of our souls, and
to purge our conscience from all filth of sin, now by these carnal and
wicked doctrine all ragged conversation and discomposed misbehauiour is
revived, and as Ovid says.

I^ quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique; Metamorphose.

Insidiaeque and vis and a^^^ sceleratus habendi.
In place of simple dealinges and honesty,
Were brought into the world by heresy
^eceite, covetousness, and leacherie.
18. The 12. note is, the perfect rule that the Catholic church, Io. 20.
Luc. 10. Matt. 23. Matt. 19. Jacob. 4.
and Catholique^ have to direct them in their faith, for the church of Christ
has the holy ghoaste to instruct her in all truth, and to guide her from all
errors John 14.16. and we Catholics beleeuinge the church as we are taught
in the Creed, when we say, I believe in the holy Catholic church, obeyinge
her in all things as we be commanded by our Savior, we cannot be deceived
by her, nor is it possible we can offend God in submittinge our selves to her
doctrine, Matt. 18.3 Reg. 4. Actor. 15
being commanded by God to hearcken to her, and as Rebeca, under, took for
Jacob to rid him of his fathers malediction, if he should follow her advise:
so the Catholic church which Rebecca figured, shall deliver us from the
enormitie of gods malediction, if we shall obey her. But the protestants have
noe rule of their faith, for they do not believe the church neither the
traditions and general counsels thereof, neither the ancient holy doctors
of the same. The only rule they (as themselves say) is the scripture. But
this is noe certain rule, for that we are bound to believe manny things
which be not in the scripture, Matt. 13. Hebr. 13.
yea that which the scripture does teach the contrary, as the observation of
the saboath day, and things strangled; Again in many places the holy
scripture does want explication of manny things, 2. Petr. 3.
for saint Peter says that the epistles of saint Paul are very hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of
the scriptures to their own perdition. Also all heretics do allege the
scriptures for themselves as saint Augustine says, Aug. li. 1. de Trin. Hier.
aduersus Lucifer.
for as saint Hierom says, the scripture does not consiste in readinge, but in
the sense and understanding thereof, and as for the understanding and sense
of the same, there may be a thousand controversies: as for the true sense of
these words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, I am sure Luther and
Calvin are against one another touching the sense a and meaning of those
words. Therefore S. Augustine says he would not believe the gospel, had he
not been moved thereunto by the authority of the church.

19. So as these protestants forsakinge the church, they have noe rule of
their faith, as may appear by the deadly contention and debate which is daily
betwixt them, as betwixt Lutherans, Caluinists, and Anabaptists, for they
charge on an other with heresies, so as each of these sects is divided into
manny sects, for there are 13. sects of Lutherans differinge in opinions one
from the other. Also amoungest the Caluinists, there are many, as the world can
tell, for some of them would have the king to be supreme head of the church:
others do repine against it, as the puritans do. The Anabaptists are divided
unto 14. sects, and each of them have several and contrary opinions touching
the principal points of their faith; how can two lawiers pleadinge one
against the other, and each of them alleadginge law for himself, determine the
right of the cause and the sincere meaning of the law, without there were
some judge unto whom they should, referr the controversy to be decided and
debated? And because these sectaries will have noe other judge but the
scripture, each one alleadginge, and interpretinge the sense thereof according
to his private opinion, and corrupt affection, their controversy can never be
decided, nor their faith can never be settled or made certain.

20. The 13. note is, the lawful authority and mission of catholic pastors
and preachers, whereof the Protestants are wholly destitute, no heretic being
ever able to show his next predecessor. For as the holy doctors affirm. There
is no access to God, but by Jesus Christ. No access to Jesus Christ, but by
the church. No access to the church, but by the Sacraments. No access to the
Sacraments, but by a Priest. None can be a Priest, unless he be ordained by a
Bishopp. Never was there lawful Bishopp ordained out of the catholic roman
church. Wherefore (as saint Ierom said unto his adversary) you are out of the
communion of the church of Jesus Christ, because you have not a priest of the
order of the Mediator. This mark of the vocation and perpetual succession of
pastors in the church of Christ, has ever ben most terrible unto all
heretics: for even as Baptism, is the only door to enter into all other
Sacraments, a Sacrament not reiterable, and whose character is indellible: even
so this Sacrament of holy Orders, and of entering into steward-ship, over the
flock of Jesus Christ, was ordained by our Savior, as necessary, for
distinguishing and discerning, such as be usurpers, and robbers, from true and
lawful pastors, then the other of Baptism, to know and discern sheep from
Wolves, and Christ's flock, from the troops of infidels.

21. This argument does so gaul and pinche the Protestants, that they are
forced to fetch all the authority they have for their vocation, only from the
temporal prince, alleging the words of saint Paul, that all authority is
from God: then saint Matthew. that we must give unto Caesar that which is Cesars:
then saint Peter, that we should be subject to every human creature for
gods sake: all which places as well the puritantes as the Catholics, do
interpret and understand of temporal authority only for governing the common
wea^th, and not of spiritual direction and instruction of our souls in
articles of our faith and salvation, for that all Princes and kings were then,
and 300. years after Christ's passion, infidels and especially the Roman
Emperor of whom this was principally intended. Otherwise saint Peter and the
Apostles who were put to death by them for their religion, were damned in not
obeying and conforming themselves unto those Princes in matters of faith and in
the doctrine of salvation. The puritanes, which are called the reformed and
severe Caluinistes do ground themselves upon the election of the people, and
that the common and vulgar sort should make, appointe, and elect clergy or
pastors to feed and govern them; and allege the first and 6. chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, Act. 1. and 6.
where it is said that it pleased the people to make choice of saint Mathias
insteede of Judas, and saint Stephen Philipp Procherus and 4. others to supply
the offices of Deacons, and afterward in the primitive church we find that
the people did choose, or nominate their Bishops. But to this puritanticall
foundations, both the Catholics and protestants do answer, that those
elections, or nominations were permitted to the people, by the Apostles for
their comfort, and that the parties so chosen, received authority and
spiritual jurisdiction from the Apostles, and not from the people: as we see
this day that in manny places, the people are permitted to make choice of
their encombents, but are invested and consecrated of the Bishops of every
diocese where the parishioners are permitted to have this privilege.

That there are many excellencies and effects which should allure every one,
to follow and embrace the Catholic religion; And contrariwise, many
enconueniences and blasphemies which the new religion houldeth and teaches.
The first excellency. CHAPTER II.
1. THe first and cheifest excellency, is, to believe that God is the first
truth and first cause, from whom proceeds all truth, and by whom all
causes have their operation and their influence. The first goodness and
sanctity of whom all goodness and sanctity does depend; And as it is the
propriety of the sun to give light, of the fire to give heat, of the water
to make cold: so it is the nature, essence and propriety of God with far
greater excellency, to do good and to communicate and impart the same unto his
creatures. And so saint Augustine says. O God thou art perfect without
deformity, great without quantity, good without quality, eternal without
time, strong without infirmity, true without fastshood, thou art present
every where with out ocupieng any place, and thou art inward and intimat to
every thing, being tied or fastened to nothing.

2. Butt the new religion makes God, crwell without mercy, in that he does
encomber his people with laws and precepts, which they cannott keep: wicked
without goodness, in that they make him the cause of all the evil and
wickedness which the wicked do comitt, and for the which they are so severely
punished.

The 2. excellencye, is the pure and holly doctrine which it professes.
CHAPTER III.
1.SVch is the perfection of catholic doctrine, that it nether admits nor
allows any thing against the light of reason, gods glory, or the good of our
neghbors: it teatcheth the law, it comandeth under pain of damnation the
perfourmance thereof, and the moral precepts of the tenn commands, which are
certain conclusions derived from the same. But Luther says, they pertain
not to them, and all the school of protestants do teach, that we cannott
keep or observe them: that God respects them not, and that the good woorckes
of a christian do prejudice and derrogat from the merits of Christ's passion.
And so they take away all the meritorious woorckes of the just, and all the
force and industry of ma^s proper merits, and consequently al graces and
inherent justice of a sanctified soul by the extrinsicall and imputative
justice of Christ, and says, that so they have faith, God regards not their
works: which is a wide gappe and dangerous gulf to all wickedness,
dishonestie, loosnesse of life, and dissolute behavior, and a quite defacing,
dissanulling and abrogating, not only of the law of nature, butt of all other
laws whatsoever, and therefore most pernicious and dangerous doctrine.

2. Besides these holy precepts, it persuades, though not commands, the
Evangelical counselles of our Savior, the cheifest whereof is perpetual
chastity which is a celestial virtue, by which a man forgoeth many
encombrances of worldly cares, troubles and perturbations of mind, 1. Cor.
and affliction of his spirit, as saint Paul says. The 2. counsel which our
Savior gave, was to a certain young man, saying unto him if thou will be
perfect, go and sell all that thou have, give the same to the poor and thou
shall have treasure in heaven and follow me. By this counsel a christian does
eschew many tentations and snarres of the diuill, into which such as be rich do
fall hedlong: and ar delivered from troubles, vexations, and anxietis of mind,
and of many contentious and litigious strifes and debates with his negboures,
which for the most part is incident to worldly people which blessed counsel
was observed of the christians at Jerusalem, Acto. 2.
at Alexandria in Aegipt, and at the lake Marian as Philo the Jew reports.
Matt. 5.
The 3. counsel is, to render good for evil, and to pray for our persecutors.
The 4. counsel is, to give alms, and to pity the poor, to be merciful,
to relieve the distressed: no virtue is so often inculcated as this, no vice so
often discommended, or with greater punishments threatened, the^ inhumanitie
and crweltie. The 5. counsel is, to exercise our selves in continual prayers,
Matt. 25. 1. Tim 2 Luc. 18. Luc 11.
and so the Apostle wishes us alwaise to pray: and our Savior also
counsels the same by 3. examples. The first, of a carnal father in respect
of his son, which yeldeth to his sons demand; The 2. of a frind that was
urged at the earnest inintreatie of another frind to rise out of his bed at
night, to give unto him what so earnestly he sought for; The 3. of an
inflexible judge that never yielded to any man's desire, yett at the earnest and
importunat suite of a poor woman, he was perswadeed to take comisseration of
her.

3. The religion of protestants not only barketh all the observations of the
precepts of the law, but also forbids and rejects all evangelical
counselles, saying that no man ought to accomplish them. As for virginity,
they say it is impossible. As for the poor they may starve for them, for any
relefe or comfort they receive of them. For they pull from them all that they
have. As for mercy, of all people none are so blouddy or so crwell, yea the
very first preachers of this new religion as you may read. As for prayers, they
cannot abide any order of time or devotion for performing them: for they do
not only barcke, as another Vigilantius against euensongs, Mass and mattens,
and against any observation of times, as at midnight, morning and evening, but
also against the English common prayer book as you see.

The 3. Excellency, most divine Sacraments, which confer grace. CHAPTER IV.
1. THe 3. Excellency be the sacraments. For although the written law
lightneth our understanding with many instructions and fownd doctrine,
directing our understanding to follow and embrace virtue and to discern the
good from the evil, yet it disposes nor prepares not our hearts with the
love of the one, nor our affection with the hatred of the other: it gives
light to the understanding, but it heals not the infirmity and disease of
our appetites. The law teatcheth the way to heaven, but gives no force to our
weak souls to travail thither, which saint John auerreth. The law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth was given by Christ, which is conferred by the
sacraments, and which are instruments to convey the same unto us.

2. As there are many maladies, disseases and necessities: so there are also
many sacraments which are as it were conduits that do derive manny remedies
and receipts to each of them. And as the Humane body is first borne and so
increases, is fedd and receaueth diverse alterations, Ephe. 5. Mar. 16. in
Clemen. ex summa trinitate and fidei Cath. ca. 1 Ezech. 36 Clemens epist. 4.
Vrba. ep. ad omnes fideles. Melch ad epis. Hisp Ioh. 6. 1. Cor. 11. John 2.
so there are many such variety of alterations of the soul, which is borne
and regenerated by water and the holy ghoast, which is baptism and the grace
and virtues which are given in baptism are again confirmed by the Sacrament
of confirmation: which makes the soul stout and constant in the profession
of his faith, which faith and grace has neeede to be nourished, and augmented,
which is don by the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist which is the body of
Christ, which is the food of our languished soul; which through many
infirmities and diseases incident thereunto, has great need of a spiritual
physician to heal the same, by contrition confession and satisfaction. And for
that after long and prolix sickness and disseases, there are many dregs of
the old sickness still left, Ia. 5. cont. Flore.
for the healing and curing whereof the Sacrament of extreme unction is
ordained: as also that a christian in his cheifest agony of his spiritual
extremit^e should be releued and refreshed.

3. The other 2. Sacraments are enjoined for the 2. states of people, Matt.
19. Ephesians. 5.
the one for such as be married: the other for such as be ecclesiastical and
serving in gods church. But the new religion has no Sacrament, although for
some show of little devotion they do not reject the Sacraments of Baptism and
Eucharist, yett they handle them without any devotion or reverence at all, as
for Baptism some or most of them do hold, that it is not necessary to our
salvation, for they think that the child is saved by the faith of his
parents. As for the Eucharist, with they call the Lords supper, they make no
more account of it then of anny common bread, whose effect is nothing else ten
to remember Christ his death, which may be don as well by the one as by the
other.

The 4. Excellency is to favor the good and to punish the wicked CHAPTER V.
1. WHen the end of every law is, to take away vice and wickedness and the
occasions thereof, and to make me^ sober, honest and virtuous, it is meet that
the good should have many privileges, favors, and rewards, and the wicked
should be punished, Deuteronomy. 28. Ezech. 5. and 6.
as we may read in Deutrono. where god almighty threatens death and
destruction against the transgressors of his laws and comandementes. The like
also we may read in Ezech. But the new religion, takes away both merits and
rewards from the just, and pain and punishments from the wicked: saying the
more wicked you are, the nearer you are to Gods favor and grace, as Luther
affirms.

The 5. Excellency is the conversion of all nations unto Christ, and driving
Idolatry out of the world. CHAPTER VI.
THe more that princes persecuted christian religion, the more the same
increased, as Pliny the 2. being a Pagan withnesseth. For when he saw such a
multitude of christians to be put to death he wrott to the emperor Traian
aduertizing him that there were thowsands of christians executed by exquisitt
torments for no kind of offense but for being Christians, and the more they
were tormented and afflicted, the more they increased and flourished, and the
more the reverence of the Idols decreased. But the new religion never converted
the gentles from Idolatry to Christian religion: whose only employment and
drift is to corrupt and confound the faithful, and never to reform
themselves, charging the church with Idolatry, as old heretics have done,
Athanasius witnessing the same.

The 6. Excellency of the Catholic Religion is, that the same is proved and
auerred by so many good witnesses, as sacred and learned doctors, blessed
saints, martyrs, and general counsels. CAPTER VII.
1. ARistotle says, that a man is believed for three causes, and ought to be
presupposed that he tells the truth, 1. If he be wise. 2. If he be virtuous
3. If he be our frind. For we think that a wise man should not be deceived,
a good man should not lie, a frind should not deceive his frind. Such therefore
as did bear witness of our catholic religion, were wisemen, eminent and
exquisitt in all sciences and faculties, most holy and religious in their
lives, as Dionisius Areopagita disciple to S. Paul, saint Ignatius,
Policarpus, Origines, saint Basil the great, and his brother saint Gregory
Nissenus, saint John Chrisostom, Theodoretus, saint Nazianzenus, saint
Gregory, saint Aug. saint Hierom, saint Ambrosse, saint Hilarious, saint
Cyprian, Lactantius Firmianus, S. Vincentius Lirinensis, Arnobius, saint
Bernard, saint Bonauenture, Scotus, Alexander de Halles, with diverse others,
for they had no cause but to tell the truth being honest and virtuous, and
free from all inordinat affection, that should otherwise restrain the^ to
declare the truth thereof: being people that were altogether addicted to the
service of God, and most zealous of his glory and honor, which they preferred
before all worldly designements and promotions.

2. Unto these are annexed for confirmation of the truth, all general
counsels of the world which were. 20. with the aprobation of Christ's viccar
general in earth, together with all the blessed martyrs that ever were in all
the persecutions and tempestuous storms, and agonies of the church, which she
suffered under 14. King and Emperors according to S. Aug. account. lib. 18. de
ciuitate Dei. The first was of Nero, who was so infestuous to the Christians
that he caused Rome to be set on fire in diverse places, and laid the
imputation of that infamy upon them, whereby the Romans should insult upon
them, and should destroy and massacre them every one, the Tirant himself
commanding the same. The 2. was of Domitian, who caused S. John the Evangelist
to be cast into a Tunn of hot burn^nge oil, which caused also by his edict
published, that all the books, of Christians should be burned. The 3. was of
Traian in whose time. 3. holly Bishops suffered vid. Saint Clement the
disciple of saint Peter, saint Ignatius disciple to saint John the Evangelist,
and saint Polycarpe. The 4. was of Antoninus Verus. The 5. of Seuerus. The 6.
of Maximinus. The 7. of Decius who did put saint Laurence to death. The 8. of
Valerian. The 9. of Aurelian. The 10. was the crwelest of Dioclesian of
Maximinus. These persecutions were before Constantius the great, who was a
Christian.

3. Unto these saint August. added the persecution of Julian the Apostata,
which was most pernicious, for he deprived the Christians of offices and places
in the common wealth, as also of all their goods and studies of learning.
Another was of Valens: all these were Roman Emperors. Another was of Sapor
king of Persia who caused his people to adore the sun wherein 16000. thousand
suffered: amoungest whom were many Bishops, priests and many holly virgins
dedicated to Christ. Before all these saint August. sets down the first
persecution of all, which was of Judea under Herod, wherein the Apostle Saint
James the greater suffered. We do not speak here of the persecutions of the
Vandals in Affricke, or of other heretics or infidels, but only of the Roman
Emperors, whose persecution was not only in one kingdom or province, but in
all places, especially at Rome, at Alexandria, where S. Cathrin suffered, at
Antioch, Nicomedia, Cesarea of Capadocia, and Cesarea of Palestin, in Ponto, in
Helesponto, in Africa, in Aegipt, at Saragosa, at Parris where saint Denis of
Areopagita with his followers were putt to death: at Syracusa where. S. Lucia:
at Catanea where saint Agatha in Bithinia, in Achaia, at Smirna, at Thebes, and
in all other places subject to the Romans.

4. Were all these persecuting princes lawful heads of Christ's church, or
some of them? If some, all should be, for the one ought to have as much
authority in that head-shipp as the other, if that style or dignity should
rightly belong to the Imperial scepter, or should be annexed to the Royal
authority, as a power or jurisdiction comprised and comprehended within the
majesty of a regal dignity, as some protestants do hold. If this be true,
all these blessed martyrs, whereof some of them were the blessed Apostles, as
saint Peter and saint Paul who suffered under Nero, were damned is arrogant and
dissobedient subjects, for not conforming themselves to their princes wills and
humors in causes ecclesiastical, and consequently none that was put to death
by them, was a holy martyr but an obstinat and wilful subject, which is most
foolish and absurd. If you say that a king to be head of the church, ought to
be a Christian, as some other English protestants do say. I ask of them, who
was head of the church the space of the first 300 years after Christ, when all
kings were infidels and persecutors thereof, as I have declared? For either the
church all that while was without a head, or else some other that was not a king
must be a judge and have this authority and supreme jurisdiction of the king
therein, and such ought to have no les jurisdiction over the Christians in
causes of their consciences and ecclesiastical matters now, then at that time.

5. Now the Christians are no les nor no better, then they were in that golden
age of the primitive church, Epiph. heresi. Optat. lib. 2. contra Parmen. S.
Aug. Epist. ad generosum quae est 105. Hiero. and Prosper in continuatione
chronici Eusebij.
and consequently the same ecclesiastical jurisdiction ought to continue
still in the church of Christ, which he builded, settled and founded upon saint
Peter and his successors, as upon a firm Rock, whose foundation shall never
fail, against whom the gats of hell, with all the plottes and policies of
Satan, and the cunninge devises and attempts of Matche-villian protestants,
shall not prevail. And so in vain they strive to build the same upon any
other fundation, then that which was alreddy laid down by Christ himself
(being the Corner and head stone of this foundation) upon saint Peter, the
Apostles, and prophetts and their successors for ever, I mean the Bishopps and
priests, unto whom he committed the authority and regiment over his flock,
to feed and defend them from the woulues, to save them from the violent
excursions of infidels and heretics, unto whom it is sad in the Acts or the
Apostles. Attendite vobis and vniuerso greg^ in quo etc. Loocke well to your
selves, Act. 20. Matt. 10. Matt. vlt. Mar. vlt. John 20. John 21.
and to the universal flock, in which the holy ghost placed you Bishops and
pastoures to govern and rule the church of God. And as this church is the
mystical body of Christ, and a spiritual Common wealth, so it should be
governed and managed by spiritual parsons, and pastors that should have
spiritual orders, and consequently ought to have spiritual authority and
jurisdiction over her rebellious and obstinat children, to chastise their
rebellions disobedience, to correct their offenses, and to extend the rodd of
discipline upon them when they will not obey her: otherwise it should be a
poor distressed common wealth, when none has power or jurisdiction therein to
chastise the transgressor of her laws, and so all her subjects may with
liberty and impunitie keep or break them.

6. But no article or inunction of the protestant religion is of greater force
amongst the protestants, specially of England, then that the king is supreme
head of the church, and that every one whether he be a catholic or
protestant, must not only encur the imputation of high treason, but also the
pennalties and disgrace of traitoures, that will not swear solemly and
publicly, that he thinckes in his conscience, this to be true, which is
nothing else then to enthrall and enforce a catholic, and perhapps some
pro^estants, to a damnable and wilful preiury against his own conscience that
knows or at least thincketh the contrary. Was not this new fundation and
grownd of the English protestant church newly coined the 26. year of king Henry
8. when the oath of supremacy was invented, by the instigation of his fatal
and filthy passion of lust and concupiscence, and by the industry and
suggestion of certain cogging mates, as Thomas Cromwell, and Robert Barnes an
apostat friar, the one beheaded, the other I mean the friar burned, rather of
malice, then of any conscience or honesty, without which there can be no good
religion; not warranted by scripture but devised in the court, not by the best,
but by the worst, quorum Deus venture est and quorum finis interitus, and gloria
in confusione etc. not persuaded by reason, but violently constrained, not
ordained for the edification of the church, but for the destruction and
confusion of innocent christians, not resolved of by the schools and learned
divines, but first determined by the king and enforced in the parleament:
against the definition of all former parleaments, not only of England, but of
all the world, against the decree of all the general counsels thereof: against
all sacred doctors; against common sense, and honesty: against all laws both
civil and cannon, not only against catholics, but against protestants in all
other countries, yea against the puritans of England, against these constant
confessors and blessed martyrs above recited, which acknowledged no such
supremacy in spiritual or ecclesiastical matters to any king or prince
whatsoever that did putt them to death whose blessed blood was patiently shed
for the defense of Catholic religion: and lastly against the practice of all
former ages and antiquity; For from Donaldus the first Christian king of the
Scots, according to saint Victor Anno 197. there were 84. Christian kings:
from Ethelbert being made Christian according to saint Aug. an. 600. unto
Edward the confessor 1006. there were 80. kings Christian in England: after the
conquest there were 20. unto king Henry the 8. so as none were ever called head
of the church before king Henry, after him Edward, Elizabeth, and king James.
What shall I say of other holy and valiant martyrs, that suffered in these
later persecutions raised up by Luther and Caluins heresy, and by the Princes
that embraced the same? How many thousands suffered confiscation of their
goods and lands, effusion of their blood, confusion of the world, desolation
and destruction of their wives and children, woe and wreake and dissolution of
all things, such a mass of misery and callamitie, wherein their miserable and
forlorn life was plunged withal, as no man can rehearse without grief, nor
none can see without tears. How many thousand did rot^ in ugly prisons, die in
banishments, suffered patiently the crewelest torments and yrc^somest death
that could be imagined rather, then they would prefer the vain favor of man,
before the favor of God, antiquity before novelty, to forgo, their ancient
Catholic religion, to become of the new, to forgo the firm Rock of Christ's
church, to build their faith upon them, that have neither grownd or foundation
of any supernatural or theological faith at al, no certitude in their
doctrine, no devotion in their religion, no honesty in the profession thereof,
no virtue in their lives, no piety in their schools or synagoges, no charity
in their woorckes, no mortification in their members or passions, and
consequently no conscience in their doings.

THE CONCLUSION.
1. I Have gentle reader exposed to thy view, the Theater of catholic and
protestant religion, where thou may plainly behold, and see the offspring,
beginning, growndes, foundation, practice, mischief, and inconvenience of the
one: and the excellency of the other, Liu. 13. Math. 13.
by which thou may perceive that the catholic religion ought to be compared
to the wise husbandman, which did sow the good side in his grownd or farm: the
protestant to resemble the enemy, which sowed the badd cockle and darnell; the
one ought to be called positive: the other negative: the one ecclesia
malignantium: the other militantium: the one plantation of religion and
devotion: the other supplantation or rooting up of the same.

2. The first subject of corruptible and material things which the
philosophers do call; Materia prima which never holds her self settled or
contented in any certain course of any form or composition, but is eue^ more
mutable and changeable by a certain natural revolution from one form, and
fashion to another (for that she being disgusted with the one, ever more
seeks another) is not so uncertain and unconstant, as protestancy, which by
a certain fatal revolution and babilonicall confusion grows from one error
to another, from one mischief to another, from one sect to another, as
appears by so many sects forged and coined by this new religion within these
80. years; which are 240. in number, all in differrence and variance amongst
themseluees, not in ceremonies or things indifferent, but in the cheifest
articles and substance of their religion, as many of themselves do auerre: the
one detesting, condemning, and pronouncing their cursed sentence of Anathema
against the other, as you may read above in the ^^ book cap. 1. The same may
be confirmed by a certain Prince of Germany, who being demanded of what
religion his bordering neighbors were, he answered he could describe of what
religion they were the last year, but this year he could not well tell their
religion, in respect of the mutabilitie and in constancy thereof, see the
preface, and cap 1. lib 2.

3. But the catholic religion is always one and the self same, alwaise
retains and holds the same continwance and vigor of truth, not in
diversity of sects, but in simplicity and unity of belief and profession,
without duplicitie or disparitie, or contradiction of doctrine, or without
absurdity or dishonestie in her manners and customs: because she has the holy
ghoast to assist and direct her in all truth, and to protect and to defend her
from all errors, misbeleefe, and infidelity. For not only this new religion is
changeable and variable in profession and doctrine, but also in condition,
custom and behavior, for alteration in faith and religion, procures also a
great alteration and inconstancy in minds, and affections, in life and manners,
as we may know by such nations, who when they were catholics, were
merciful, chaste, sober, liberal and temperat: children were obedient to their
parents, and people faithful of their promise. But when they were turned
protestants, as they selves do affirm, they became most crwell, bloody,
insolent, lecherous, riotuous, couetuous, barbarous, luxurious, and intemperat.

4. For when protestancy laboreth to stoop and intercept all the channells and
fountains of Gods grace, the enfluence of Christ's passion, all the inspiration
of the holy ghoast from the souls of christians, by which they should be
inwardly and formally justified (to whom ought to be applied that which was
spoken of the Jews, that they resisted the holy ghoast) when it an ^ulleth all
the excellencies, virtues, operations, and effects of the blessed Sacraments,
all the applications of the merits of Christ's passion and the valor and
virtue of his blood, which the eternal and everlasting father would have to be
religiously and devoutly applied by religious means, and our own proper
endeavors to our own sanctification: when it destroieth and rejects all the
works and merits of the just, as proceeding and having their force, worth
and valloure, from that blessed passion and death of Christ, and all the
blessed rewards correspondent and proportionable unto those merits, by virtue
of the foresaid passion and blood, which they deny to be of that force to
abolish and blot out our sins, wickedness and punishments due unto the
same, and so rejecting the force and virtue of Christ's passion, and
transferring and building the same upon another fundation which they call
imputative justice of Christ, saying that Christ imputes not unto us our
offenses, and as it were couers them, by that justice by which he is just
himself, not by which he makes* us just: when upon a kind of an arrogant
faith and presumptuous predestination, without any relation or referrence to
his own endeuoures, so as he believe that Christ suffered for him, or that he is
predestined to be saved, he must be such. When I say, protestancy is blinded
and nusled in this perverse doctrine, it being the only and chief article of
their belief, which is against scripture, good life, common reason, sense, the
definition of the catholic church, honesty of a christian, and the piety of
a catholic yea against operation of grace or instinct of nature, it must run
headlong unto all desperate blasphemies and damnable mischief, their unbridled
concupiscence and crwell dispositions impelling them thereunto. For when the
transgression of no law, or the attempt and consummation of no act, though
never so exorbitant or so abominable, is punished; nor the good works or
merits or any execution, or exercise of virtue, or mortification of any their
passions is not regarded, for that (as they say) the merits of Christ his
passion do abrogat them, nay such worckes or mortifications are injurious to
the same and do (as they say) derogat from them. We must think them to be
no otherwise then they are, taxe^ with the imputation of all those cruel and
unchristian like Epithethes by their own gospellers, and when their religion
is nothing else then a path way to all dissolute liberty and licentiousness,
their lives and manners must be such, for the corruption of the one, engenders
the dissolution of the other.

5. Finally this is the cause that we see many laws, decrees, and dishonest
plottes daily devised with their rigorous and cruel executions, not against
transgressors of gods laws and the law of nature, but against honest and
virtuous people, so as the reputation of an honest, conscionable, and well
disposed person, cannot be without the imputation of a dangerous traitor,
whose life, goods and lands must wait and lie open as a pray and booty for
every miscreant, who as he exceeds others in villainy and wickedness, must
excel them also in promotion and authority, cuius maledictione os plenum est
and amaritudine and dolo, sub lingua eius labor and dolor, Psalm. 9.
whose tongue is full of malediction, bitterness and deceit, Idem
so as the decay and downfall of the good, must be the raising up and
advancement of the badde. Exurge Domine non confortetur homo: Psalm. 9.
iudicentur gentes in conspectu tuo. Constitue Domine legislatorem super eos,
vt sciant gentes quoniam homines sunt. Arise Lord, let not man be strengthened,
let the Gentiles be judged in thy sight. Appoint Lord, a lawgiver over them,
that the Gentiles may know that they be men.

FINIS.

