A most excellent History, Of the Institution and first beginning of
Christian Princes, and the Original of Kingdoms: Whereunto is annexed a
treatise of Peace and War, and another of the dignity of Marriage.

Very necessary to be red, not only of all Nobility and Gentlemen, but also
of every public person.

First written in Latin by Chelidonius Tigurinus, after translated into French
by Peter Boua^steau of Naunts in Britain, and now englished by James
Chillester, Londoner.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. Bynneman dwelling in Knightrider streat, at the
sign of the Marmayd. ANNO. 1571.

^ HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PENCE.

E. R.



Whom God defendes and keeps, must flourishe still and stand,
He saues the Queen, maintains her cause, these arms, and eke her land,
His name be blist therefore, that mightily has don,
And in his mercy still so does, as he has well begone.
To the most high and most excellent Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of
God, Queen of England, France, and Irelande, defender of the Faith, and in
earth under God of the Church of England and Jreland chief governor.
THE aunciente Philosophers (most excellent Princess and sovereign Lady) have been of opinion, that the natural body of Man with the offices and duties of
the parts thereof joined and united togythers to a common function, do represent
the lively image and very figure of a good and perfect common wealth: in the
which their judgment they seemed to be men of a marvelous vvisdome, and of
great understanding and knowledge in the contemplation of divine and humain
things. For they did perceive and see, that in the body of man (representing
the parts and members of the common wealth (as I have said) there be diverse
parts of diverse and sundry actions and motions, differing much in form and
number, which being knit togethers, and consenting in one uniformity to the
common benefit of the whole, do show a marvelous form of a common
wealth, and there can not be imagined a greater concord than is proportioned
by the freendly unity of these diverse and contrary members. For there is such
a mutual compassion in the said parts and members one with an other (as it
were by one common feeling and being in them all) that no one part can taste of
pleasure or pain, (if they be lively members, which else are to be cut of, for
infecting the rest) but the others must of necessity be partakers of the
same. And as in the body of man also (which Plato figureth to be the less
world) the immortal soul, is the chief and most excellent part, which
never ceasseth but is continually moving, and ever occupied in imagination of
great and high things, prouidently forseeing and diligently devising what is
to be eschued and what is to be followed, and is always prompt and ready to
move and stir up the faculties and members of the said body to execute those
things which shall be most metest for the same: Even so in the great world,
by the wisdom of god and the universal consent of men, is elected and chosen
one principal man (in nobleness and virtue surpassing the rest) to bear the
like rule and authority in the body of every common wealth, as the
intellectiue soul does in the members of the natural body of man: to vvho^ is
given the name of a king or prince, and to him as to the worthiest part of the
society of men, God and nature have given the preemine^ce and authority to
rule and command al, as by whose providence and wisdom the common wealth
should universally prosper and flourish: and therefore as he is for his virtues
and nobleness set and co^stituted in the chief place of rule and government,
so he ought to excel in the same, and to be a folovver of that, for the which
he is chiefly elected and chosen and that his well doing may be an example to
the meaner members to follovv the same: the true portraict and very image of
which princely estate, and what has bin the cause of such choice and
election, this present author (entitled Chelidonius Tigurinus, Of the
institution of christian Princes. etc.) amo^gs other matters does marvelous
lively set forth and describe, with all the ornaments and attire of virtue mete
for the same, as any pen ca^ declare, or any heart ca^ vvish or desire, which
state being in all points in full perfection, he extolleth to be so noble and so
high a degree of being, as none other in the terrestrial world, is or may be
comparable to it. In the discourse vvherof (most noble Princess) is vouched a
great nu^bre of famous authors, as well sacred as profane, beautified and
enriched with many worthy sayings and notable lessons, in the which (over
and besides the fitness and aptness of the phrases, and the majesty of the
sentences therein contained) is hidden under the bark of the words thereof, a
divine preeminence and authority mixed with a certain quickenesse of speech
to reprove vice (yea ready to apply the cauterie, and to pull up the same by
the roots) where the offenses appear to be inueterate and incurable,
alvvayes observing such a modesty and reverence toward Princes and
Magistrates, as it should seem rather to be much comfort to their hearts, tha^
any vvays offensive or grievous. And because the well doings of the good and
virtuous, and the disorder of the evil and wicked might appear to al
posterity, that they may learn thereby to follow the one, and to leave the
other, this author in this his said discourse (most gracious princess) has
set forth as it were to the eye, how that many being descended of base and
vnknovvn blood, through their virtue, great valiantness and vvorthie acts,
have of a very small beginning, ben advanced to this noble estate of kings and
princes, who after they had achieved the place of rule and government, by
continuing their nobleness and worthiness, in ordering and using their
authority well and prudently, have merited immortal fame and praise: and how
that some others doing the contrary, were (by the just judgment of God)
shamefully ouerthrovvn and cast down from high estate and degree, to great
vvretchednesse and misery, to their great reproach and ignomie for ever: by
which examples the good may learn to increase in virtue and nobleness, and
the vicious and insolent see the fruits of their wickedness, and perceive
how that naughty doings have alvvayes naughty ends. And in the treatise of
Peace and War, (most noble Princess) added to this said Author by the
translater thereof out of the Latin into the french tongue, there is at large set
forth the benefits and commodities of the one, and the discommodities and
enormities of the other: whereby all Kings and Princes may rather be moved to
embrace and maynteyne peace and quietness (as things most necessary for all
common vvealths) than any vvays be inclined to war and cruelty (most
pernicious and hurtful) which brings nothing else but murdering of
innocents, rauishing of honest vviues and maidens, burning, spoiling and
destroying of countries, even the very fruits of war, and yet commonly that
which is gotten with much pains, great expenses, and unmercifully effusion
of christian blood, is oftentimes in one moment lost again. And therefore more
praise shall those princes deserve, that leave their kingdoms to their
successors quiet and vvelthy, than those that for the conquest of others have
impouerished and disturbed their own. And because this said treatise of
Peace and war does declare both the extremities as well what number of
beautiful cities have been edified, and what great countries have been
enriched by peace and quietness, as also what goodly regions and provinces
have been destroyed and overthrown by strife and war, it is very necessary
for all Princes and Magistrates to spend some little time to read the same,
to the end they may thereby take occasion so honorably to lead their lives,
as after their deaths they may shine to their posterity, and win thereby
everlasting fame and renoume. And in the other treatise of the danger and hurt
that does grow to a common wealth by incontinencie, and of the commendation of
Marriage (added also to this Author by the said translater out of the latin into
the French tongue) is shevved and manifested (most worthy Princess,) by many
fearful and horrible examples, how that the Lord God above all other
sins, has most grievously plagued the world in all estates from age to age,
for that abominable and filthy sin of incontinencie, yea even to the utter
subversion of many noble regions and kingdoms, with the rooting out of the
posterity of their kings and princes for ever. For the avoiding vvherof, he
has appointed and ordained that holy and honorable state of matrimony, into
the which he wills that all estates shall enter (when they feel
themselves unapt to live sole) as well for the procreation of children, as
for the comfort and relief of their vveak and imperfect nature, and that we
should keep the bonds thereof with all pureness and innocence of mind,
that it be not laid in condemnation against us in the day when all men's
doings shall be made open and manifest. And this kind of life is so greatly
advanced and honored, that it is not only had in estimation amongs
Christians, but also among the Heathen: yea and Nature vvoorketh such
effect in all creatures, that even amongs the brute and saluage beasts, and
also amongs insensible things there appears a mutual affection between the
male and female, as shall euidentlye appear in readyng this said Discourse.

And now (most noble and redoubted Princess) that I have signified unto your
excellency, the whole effect of this said author (which I have turned out
of the french into our English tongue) though not so eloquently as others
could have done, yet (I trust) truly and according to the meaning of the
said Author, I do with all submission, present the same unto your
highness, not as a matter needful to put your Majesty in remembrance of any
thing that should be vvanting in your noble personage, appertaining to the
duty of the majesty royal of a prince (being most manifest and apara^t to the
whole world, your majesty does daily fight and combat against those
enormities that are most chiefly reprehended in this work) but rather to be as
it were a glass for your highness, to see and behold (to your graces great
comfort) the manyfolde benefits that God has bestovved at all times, and in
all ages on those that have loved and feared him, and how that with his
mighty hand he has and daily does, keep and defend all such Princes and
Magistrates, as do justly and truly execute their offices in maynteynyng of
Justice, and seeking the aduauncemente of his glory, by setting forth true
Relygion according to his holy word and commandment, which with what
great study and care of mind your highness trauayleth to do continually,
both GOD and the world are vvitnesses: notvvithstanding that diverse and
many great conspiracies, have been and daily are practiced in these perilous
and dangerous days against your majesty for the same, which (thanks be to
God) have alvvayes ben reveled before they were ripe, vvherin of his great
goodness and mercy he has miraculously defended your noble and royal person
from time to time, as it were in despite of your enemies, and against all
their devises and policies, even to some of their confusion, and to the great
admiration and vvonder of the rest: which is a strong and infallible
argument that he is pleased in these your doings, in the which if your
Majesty do persevere, it shall be (no doubt) not only a great rejoicing to
all your true and faithful subjects, and terror to your said enemies: but
also a mighty defense and strong bulvvarke against all such as any vvays seek
to trouble and anoy your highness most quiet estate. Ceassing now any longer
to vvearie your Majesty with over many vain and superfluous words, there
rests nothing for the perfect accomplishement of the same, but a safecundite
to serve as a guide to make it pass the more surely amongs such captious
persons as are more ready to find fault than any vvayes to put to their hands
to amend the same. Wherefore I do most humbly beseech your highness not to
take it in evil part, that I do presume to call upon your divine name, and
dedicate the same to your excellency, for a defense and safegarde, being
most assured, that it can not be but well received, and favored of all
men, if it may have so good hap to be defended with the beams and
brightenesse of the excellent virtues that do most abundantly flow in your
most noble and royal person, most humbly beseeching the same to accept this
at the hands of your faithful, true and obedient subject, as the first
fruits of his labor, and as the gift of him that vvoulde give better, if it
were any vvayes in his power: praying GOD to grant your most excellent
highness vvithall, long and prosperous reygne over us, perfect health, much
tranquillity, and against all your enemies most happy and triu^phant victory.

Your most humble and obedient subject JAMES Chillester.

A Table containing all the Chapters of this present Book.
THe definition of a King, and what a kingdom is, and how that in many
insensible things and also in brute beasts, we shall find certain similitudes
and figures of Kingdoms and common wealths. Chapter. 1. Folio. 15. How that
the first beginning of Kings and princes is very ancient, and that immediately
after the creation of the World, the people began too choose and elect
Kings and Princes. Chapter. 2. Fol. 24. What the Dignity Royal is, and how
the same cannot be supplied without great trouble and danger: with a
declaration what kind of government is best for the people to live happily
and quietly. Chapter. 3. Folio. 32. How that those which shall command others,
ought first to master them selves, and so suppress and moderate their
affections and passions, that by their good lives, they may induce those that
be subject to them, to virtue and godliness Chapter. 4. Fol. 41. How that if
the Prince desire to have his Commonwealth to be well governed, it is most
meetest and necessary, that he him self obey and observe the laws, that by
his good examples he may teach the vulgar and common people to do the like,
and live in fear and obedience toward him. Chapter. 5. Folio. 48. How that
a Prince for his better perfection in the ordering and directing of his life,
ought specially above all other things to be learned and also to have
continual conference and Counsel with sage and wise men, which shall be as the
sinnewes and life whereby his Realm shall be sustained and maintained: wherein
also is made diverse and many discourses, of the honor nd reverence that
Princes in the old time have borne toward learning and knowledge. Chapter. 6.
Fol. 57. How that Kings and Princes ought chiefly and most principally to have
the state of christian Religion in great reverence and estimation, and to
show themselves lovers of the same: and that they ought also to be very
diligent and careful to punish the blasphemers and co^temners thereof, and
withal to purge their dominions and realms of all heretics and Sectaries: for
the which there is showed many examples of erroneous sects, together with the
false doctrine of Mahomet, his life and death, and by what means and suttletie
he has suborned and seduced so many people, and how many Emperors, kings and
princes, after they had persecuted the faithful of the Church of God, did not
escape the sharp vengeance of his wrath, but dyed in the end of some shameful
and horrible death, Chapter. 7. Fol. 82. How that Princes ought to eschew and
put away all furiousness and pride, and that they ought not to trust to
much in their force and mightiness: with a declaration of the human
miseries, and to how many accidents of misfortune our lives are subject, with
also diverse examples how many descended of a mean and unknown blood, have been advanced to the estate of Kings, Princes, and Emperoures: and how
contrariwise, many taking their original of noble blood and progeny, when
they were in the full complement of all prosperity, have been through their
wicked and abominable doings (by the divine permission) shamefully overthrown
and driven out of their kingdoms and dominions. Chapter. 8. Folio. 106. How
that clemency and gentleness, are virtues most meet and conuenable for Kings
and Princes, with many examples alleged, confirming the same. Chapter. 9.
Folio. 128. What Justice is, and what profit and commodity the same brings
to government, and how that without the use thereof, Kingdoms can not be
called kingdoms, but dens and receptacles for thieves and robbers. Chapter.
10. Folio. 142. How that cruelty and tyranny are chief enemies to Justice,
where also is showed wherein the good Prince differs from the tyrannous
Prince, with sundry examples confirming the same, gathered as well out of the
Greek as Latin Authors: which will bring great pleasure and contentation too
the Reader. Chapter. 11. Folio. 147. A Treatise of Peace and War, and the
difference of the one from the other, things necessary to be red by Princes
and magistrates that have the government of Realms and Common wealths.
Chapter. 12. Fol. 155. How hurtful incontinencie is to Princes, and how that
the same has been the cause of the ruin and destruction of many realms and
kingdoms, with also a Treatise of the dignity and excellency of the
honorable state of Matrimony. Chapter. 13. Fol. 179.
The end of the Table.
Peter Bouaisteau to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, thou shalt understand that this present Auctoure whose
translation I prefer here unto thee, does not follow others of the Greeks and
Latins, that have entreted of the like matter, because they always (writing any
instructions for their Princes) were accustomed to aduertize them, how they
ought to govern themselves in marriage, and also to admonish them that they
should flee from the company of evil and wicked women, and to be vigilant
and careful to cleanse their dominions of all such infections, as the only
things that tended to the utter decay and ruin of them. Neither does he make
any mention here how Princes ought to eschew wars and embrace peace, a thing
so necessary, as without the which, Government is altogether imperfect and
maimed. He has likewise omitted to exhort Princes to bannish out of their
Courts al Flatterers and other such kind of vermin that do nothing else but
fyl their ears with unnecessary pleasures and delights, whose exercise is
only to watch apt hours and times to feed them with toys and fantasies,
wherein they do so well play their parts, that in the end they corrupt them,
although they be very good of nature and well inclined. And if thou be curious
to know the occasyon, why the Author has suppressed and kept in silence, in
the discourse of this Book, things so necessary for Regimente (seeing he has
so well entreated of the rest) I can not tell any reason therefore, other than (as
I suppose) that he was prevented by death, being in purpose if he had lived
longer, to have performed those points. And the cause that does lead me thus
to be persuaded, is, for that there was found of his doing (after his decease)
one Book of Geographie, and another of Greek Epigrams, that were imperfect
and uncorrected, which are at this present in the Kings Library to be seen.
And in place thereof I am enboldned (trusting upon the good interpretation thou will make of these my labors) to join unto it these three treatises
beforenamed, of mine own invention, for the better and more perfect adourning
of this work: assuring thee, that I have not so well trusted in mine own
ability, nor presumed of my self so much, but that I have used therein the
aid of certain famous Latin Authors, and specially in the Treatise of Peace
and War, as thou may perceive by the reading thereof. And as touching the
other two, I have performed them rather by mine own labor and travail, than
by any other means, which nevertheless are not to be condemned, although (as
the Comicall Poet says) there is nothing presently there spoken, that has
not been said long before. The first Treatise, which is against Parasites and
Flatterers, thou may read in my Prologue: and that of the excellency of
Marriage, and the other of Peace and War, be the last two Chapters of this
present Book. Besides these things before named, I have gathered out of many
good Authoures (by the persuasion of a friend of mine) the life, manners,
religion and death of that monster Mahomet, and showed by what means and
subtlety he did seduce and carry away with him so many people. Al which things
I pray thee first read with good deliberation before thou do judge, and then
I doubt not but thou shall find matter in them, that shall be to thy
contentation and comfort.

Farewell.
The Prologue.
PLutarch the renoumed Philosopher, has left unto us in writing, that
Demetrius Phalerius an excellent Orator and Philosopher (upon whom the
Athenians as upon a firm and strong pillar reposed them, for the government of
their Seigniories and Dominions) did accustom, amongst his private
exhortations, to persuade Ptholome king of Aegipt, to erect a Library, and to
furnishe the same with all manner of Books, and namely with such as did
entreat of the Government of Realms and Kingdoms: and withal, did specially
exhort him to employ certain hours of the day in reading of them, that he
might thereby the better he instructed how to rule and govern such a puissant
Realm as Aegipt was: because Books do always franckly and with all liberty
admonish us of those things which our Friends (commonly giving place to time)
do suppress and keep in silence. And in Books also, if we will diligently
and with judgment consider well such exhortations and councels as we may
read in them, we shall find much comfort and commodity: Books be Judges
without fear or affection.
for Books are as Judges without fear, which never are ashamed to show the
truth, nor never stay themselves for the dyspleasure or indignation of any
King, Prince, or Magistrate, but following their free nature and condition, with
sharp and nypping words do disclose men's corrupt manners, rebuking them so
sharply, that there is no sword more to be feared than the Learned pen, which
touches evil and wicked men even to the inward parts of the soul, and never
gives any stroke, but it pierces to the end and memory of man's life: for
if upon purpose she will describe the outrages and dysorders of any vicious
Prince, she makes his doings appear so odious (by her eloquence) that those
that read the same, shall be in great dread and fear to hear such things
named: and such as have committed any crime shall be greatly ashamed that
ever they did offend. And again, if she do employ her force to commend
their virtues and well doings, she will blaze and set them out so
maruellously, that such as shall read it, shall so honor and reverence those
(whose Heroical virtues they hear so exalted) that even as men ravished, and
moved with the fame and glory thereof, will enforce themselves by all means
possible to resemble their doings so lively represented unto them. But
contrariwise, these flattering and mealy mouthed Friends of the pleasant
Court, thinking to lose the pray that they seek for, Fearful friends.
or to run into the dysgrace and dyspleasure of their Lords and Masters,
oftentimes do stop their ears, become mute and dumb, and pass under
consent the enormities and abuses they see at the eye, and touch even as it
were with their fingers notwithstanding they know and see very well, their
Princes and Lords want greatly admonition and council. There is yet an other
kind of vermin, but much woorsse and more contagious by a thousand parts
than the others, and be such as put the oil to the match, Those that do
flatter Princes and lead them to wickedness.
that be the trumpettes to provoke and stir them to wickedness, the torches
that inflame them to vice, and that with plesaunt commendations oil and
annoint their heads until they be grown fat with their own filthynesse: and
these be they that the Prophet speaks of, that do put the pillowes under
their heads and the cushions under their elbowes, and with pleasant and sweet
flattering words bring them asleep til they be drouned and buried in their
own abominations And these kind of monsters among men be of the nature of
Caterpillars, which never cleave but unto the good fruits, or of the nature of
Moatthes, that always follow good clothes: for ye shall never see them at any
poor man's gate, but as the shadow follows the body, so shall you find
them in the Palaces of Princes, Kings and great Lords, whose hearts they do
so well know how to win (by a certain sweet and harmonious manner of
flattering and vain co^mendations which they ring unto their ears) that in
the end they snare and catch them by one mean or other. The entry of this
kind of people is very gentle, they be like unto wax, they melte and
transform themselves into al fashions, but their end is woorsse than the
biting of a Scorpion: The des^ription of the art and industry of the
flatterers of the court.
their words be washed with sweetness and perfumed with pleasant smelles, but
in their hands they carry poison, and do ruinate al such as give ear unto them.
The dissimulation and subtlety of such persons did amaze and dyscomfort the
Sicilians, when the tyranny of Dennis and Phalaris was by these flatterers
called punishment and due justice for their wickedness: such pestilent Vipers
did infect and defile Egypt, when the effeminate doings of Ptholome with other
his fond and foolish vanities, were called by them good devotion and divine
service: and such corruption deceived also the Romans, when the
deliciousness and wantonness of Anthony such flatterers made so small account
of, Many commonweals have been made ruinat by adultery.
that they called it humanity and courtesy: Of which pestilent Serpents and
such like, ought those that are Lords and possessioners of al, to have good
regard unto, who want nothing but frank and discrete mouths that should tell
them the truth. And therefore to avoid such domestical enormities (as writes
Philostratus) Titus the son of Vaspasianus, in the beginning of his Empire,
departing out of Judea, prayed Appolonius that excellent Philosopher, that he
would give him some politic instructions for the better government of his
Empire and defense of his enemies. To whom Appolonius answered, that he
would give him a scholar of his own, which should always be with him, a
liberal, frank and just man in all his words, who for the fear of any man
would not forbear to say the truth. Philosophers are rebukers of wickedness
I will (said he) give you (at this your request) a dog, that shall be capable
of reason, and shall bark against all men, yea even against your own self if
ye shall do any thing worthy reprehensio^, and shall use with all wisdom and
discretion, and have regard to the time and season when and how he ought to do
his office. I will receive him with a good heart (said the Emperor, and not
only suffer him to bark but also to scratch and bite if he see me commit any
injustice, or any other act unseemly for the majesty of mine estate and
empire. And Alexander that great Monarch, Alexander for his perfection desires
to be like Diogenes.
did not disdain the severe answer of that miserable and abject man Diogenes,
but had him in so great admiration, that he cried out with loud voice, saying,
that if he were not Alexander he would not desire any other thing (for his
perfection) but to be Diogenes. Likewise Dennis, although he was a tyran and
King of Sycilia by force, could never be persuaded by such flattering
Courtiers, to put from him that great number of wise and learned men that he
had about him, who (although he was a man himself clean gone astray, wrapped
and folded in all kind of evil and wickedness) answered to those shameless
flatterers and said: I do not maintain these learned men about me that ye tell
me off, for any love I bear to them, The tyrans themselves do honor learning.
or for any account that I make of their knowledge and wisdom, but I do it
(said he) for that I would be praised and commended rather of them than any
others. So you may see and understand hereby, that although he neither loved
virtue nor justice, yet always he would eschew slander and reproach as well in
his life time as after his death. For the like cause Lacydes Syreneus was
commanded of King Attalus by his letters, and also by his messangers to
repair to his Court, and promised him great promotions with much favor and
good will in all his requests, whereunto he would not consent, but answered him
that Philosophers were as pictures or images which did show better far off than
at hand. Craterus the Emperor also did oftentimes entreat Diogenes to remain
with him to be an aid and helper unto him to govern his Empire in good
order, to whom he answered, Nero a murderer of his dear friends.
he loved better to be fed with salt at Athens, than to be with him in all
pleasure and delicateness, fearing least he would do with him, as Nero did,
with his, who put to death al his friends because they should not admonish
him of his wickedness, nor that they should be witnesses of his
myssedemeanours: and to avoid this, he gave great gifts and rewards to
Aurelius Cotta* and to Atherius Anthonius, and retained them still with him in all delicateness and pleasure: but that holy and virtuous man Seneca his
master, in satisfaction of al his good exhortations and holy documentes which
he from time to time had given him, The cruel death of Seneca.
he caused to be put into a baine of luke warm water, and all the veins, of
his body to be opened, that he might with bleeding die, and so he entreated
that poor old man. And it was not without good cause that Darius did so much
commend his friend Zopyrus, Zopyrus a dear friend to Darius.
who on a time holding in his hand a Pomegranade, desired among other things,
to have so many such like friends as Zopyrus was, as there were kernelles
contained in the same: and of good reason he said it, for he showed him self
so affectioned to him being his Prince and Master, that he spared not to cut
his own nose and ears, and to mangle and disgrace all his face to bring
Babylon into his subjection. And Xerxes his son following therein his fathers
good inclination, was not in that respect much inferior to him: for in that
great and huge army which he led into Grecia, he had with him one Damarathus,
who franckly and boldly did admonish and reprove him always of his
disorders. Philosophers gouerners of Princes.
Creses used the council of Solon, Calisthenes the scholar of Aristotle showed
the way to Alexander, Dyon and Plato to Dionise of Syracusa. And therefore S.
Hierome exhorts al Princes, that when they find a wise and faithful man, they
should keep him as their own hearts, For the comfort of this our miserable
life (says he) is to have one to whom we may commit our selves to open our
minds and to communicate our affairs in secret, and upon whom we may
repose and assure our selves in adversity, and to be unto us as a firm rock
in all troubles, and a relief among so many miseries and calamities with the
which this our careful life is continually besieged. I have been the more
willing to bring forth these examples, because there be some, whose ears be
so deintie that they cannot abide that any man (though it be with modesty)
shall reprove the euilles wherewith they are infected: but how would they then
suffer the liberty of the scoffs, the bitter tauntes and sharp dealings even
to the quick, of the aunciente Comedies, as well in Greek as in Latin, that
were made for the better destroying and pulling up by the roots the
wickedness that did reign in those days there. Jeremy. 1. Esaie. 58.
And the Lord God did not command the Prophet that he should only plant
and build, but that he should first pull up by the roots and make all
ruin, that he might the better plant and build afterward: and that he
should cry out with a loud voice like a Trumpet to the people, not to
pronounce or set forth their glory, but their iniquities, and tell the house of
Jacob their offenses. In like manner the Lord our Savior Jesus Christ said
unto his Disciples, speak openly that which I tell you in secret, and preach
upon the tops of the houses that I have said in your ears. The truth ought
freely with all liberty to be pronounced openly.
And the Lord said also to Ezechiell that he had given his servants a
foreheade of Brass and of hard stone, that they should no more fear to tell
the people their offenses, than they have been ashamed to offend, therefore
said he, go and speak to them, and say those things which I command thee:
(who I know will not regard thy words) yet I will nevertheless thou shall
speak to them. Ezechiel.
And to such manner of men as will not be rebuked of their wickedness openly,
there is no medicine more meet for their dyseases, A medicine for such as do
offend, and will not be reprehended openly.
than the continual reading of Books, which do the office of Judges and
refourmers, and give them knoweledge of their offenses. And further if we mark
well, there are many other things that do sufficientely reprove and correct us
of our offenses, for all our works and actions serve as witnesses of the same
in our own consciences: for there is no man so fond or so far out of his
common sense, but always knows whether he do well or evil: For as
Chrysostom says wisely, Tom. 6. Ho. 15 upon.5. Luke.
that when a man has committed any notable crime it is most certain that he
tastes his condemnation in his own conscience, and immediately after the
offense done he has his conscience for an accuser, for witness, for judge,
and for an executer, A marvelous puissaunce of the remorse of conscience
which does strike such remorse into his heart and bite him so rigorously, that
she surmounteth the presence of a thousand witnesses: she touches him so
near, she vexes and tormenteth him so cruelly, that if all the Angels in
heaven and all the men in the world should persuade him of any thing he does
wickedly, to be good and just, yet he could not satisfy himself, nor put
from him the judgment of his own conscience: which is well proved by that which
is written in Deuteronomie, Deuterono. 28.
that evil men do tremble and quake at the fall of the leaf of a tree, and
that they are always even as though their lives hung upon a thread. Wherefore
the Prophet Esaias did not write without cause, Wicked men be vexte and troubled
as the waves of the Seas.
how that evil men be as the boiling of the seas, which can not be
pacified: as we have many examples thereof in sundry places of the scriptures,
and specially by Judas and Caine, who feeling such anguish and troubles in
their sprites, thought that their offenses were greater than the mercy of God.
We have the like examples in our profane hystories of that cruel Nero, who
after he had killed his own moother, Nero and Caligula tormented in the night
with passions.
was reproved and reprehended for his offenses in his sleep (as he confessed
himself) for he said he had a vision of his moother, which did so trouble
him, that often times he was vexed and tormented with extreme furies, as
though he had been burning with flaming Toarches. Caius Caesar, surnamed
Caligula, was troubled in the night in his sleep, and never could take his
rest quietly, but with terror and fear, was vexed and troubled with many
passions and visions in his dreams (even the very giltinesse of conscience for
the life passed) the which would not suffer him to take rest. God causes even
the very reprobate too taste of ^y^ Judgments
And this violence of man's conscience proceeds from God, which makes his
enemies so to feel his wrath and judgment, that they can not bear it
quietly, but are constrained to condemn themselves. And this is it that S.
John does manifest unto us, saying, John. 3.
if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts: yea, and if there
should want sufficient examples for these matters in the sacred Scriptures
and profane Authors, yet we have witness thereof by nature so well graven
and printed in our hearts, The worm of the conscience of the wicked never
cease gnawing and biting. Esaias. 66.
that even the same did constrayne the ancient Poets to invent certain
torments and furies that should be as reuengements and punnishments for our
sins and wickedness: which in deed is nothing else but even the torments
and vexations of evil consciences This is the worm whereof Esaias the Prophet
speaks, which never dies, but gnaweth and eats without al mesure. And the
remembrance of these mischeuous and wicked doings (as Cicero writes) be as
flames and toarches which burn and terrify continually our hearts, Epicurus
patriarch of the Athiests.
as is testified by Epicurus that great Patriarch of the Epicurians (with whom
all the world is infected) who although he never thought that there was
either God, Devil, Paradise, or Hell, yet always he does confess (as Seneca
says) that the greatest pain of them that do sin, is, that they have
sinned: Epicurus constrained too confess the remorse of conscience.
for the pain of sin is the very sin it self.

But now to return to our first purpose, it is necessary (Isay) following
the council of Demetrius, for all Kings, Princes, and other great Rulers, to
have refuge to Books which do contain as well instructions for their manners,
as the order and dyscourse of their lives. The conclusion of the work
Let no man therefore be grieved if he feel him self a little touched or
condemned in them, in some things, for that kind of aduertisemente is not
particular, but general, as that is when any man does preach the word of God
in any public place, who searches and examineth gently all men's manners, and
makes plain their offenses in general, as Jesus Christ himself in many
places of the Scriptures does rebuke the people, and condemn their offenses
without touching any man particularly: and yet for all this there can be
nothing so well and orderly set forth, whereof there will not be made a
perverse and naughty interpretation (if the Judge be wicked) nor any thing
so commendable or praise worthy, which shall not be brought into suspicion or
doubt by the malicious and corrupt judgment of man. And thus much I say,
because I would meet with certain backbyters and slaunderers, that think I
have brought this work into light to deface or stayne the honor of those
that are living, which is far from my intent, being for a long time conversant
in reading as well the holy Scriptures, as other profane Authoures, wherein I
have learned in what regard and reverence we ought to have our Superiors and
Governors, The reverence due too Superiors.
and how that the kingdom of Heaven is shut from those that speak evil, and
that there ought not to be any backebyters or curssed speakers among the
people, Leuit. 19. Ecclesiast. 18.
for both be accursed of God, because they trouble those that be in peace. To
the end therefore, I say, too shut up the mouths of such foolish babblers,
and to take away the occasion of evil judgment from those that follow the
malice of Spiders, converting into poison all that ever they do touch, and as
the Vipers infect al those with poison that they may come unto: I most
certainly assure them I do not by this treatise intend to hurt any living,
no more than to reprove the dead that repose themselves in the earth,
following therein the precepte that Moses has given us in Exodus, Exodus. 22.
not to backebite the Judges, nor to speak evil of the Prince that governs
the people. 1. Pet. 2.
Which also S. Peter does confirm when he says we ought to give them honor
and reverence. But if any man be curious too know why I do make mention here
in this book of Nero, Roboam, Sardanapalus, and other such like (the memory
of whom a man can not once name without note of infamy, because their lives
have been so far out of order, bloody and cruel, that the virtuous ears of
those that shall hear them named can not but be offended) I answer them that
I will not, nor I do not intend by this my discourse to make any comparison
with ours and them, nor do not think neither that there is any co^formitie
between them: but this is the end, that reading the Heroical virtues and
excellent commendations of an infinite number of Kings, Princes and Lords which
have been before them, they shall be pricked and stirred up by the brightness
of their glory, to make immortal and everlasting their own renoumes, in
following such good acts and doings as they have done: and likewise to the
contrary, Jn reading the acts of the wicked, men are called from doing
wickedness.
when they shall road the discommendations and evil reports of many Tyrants
that have infected the earth, and have given occasion of much labor too those
that write Hystories (to describe their evil and wicked lives) it shall serve
them as a glass and a perpetual example to guide their actions, and refourme
the state of their lives, to the end that in the world to come, their
posterity do not the like to them. And to let you know that these are not
my words only, hearken to the Lords sayings (written by the hands of the
great Secretary Saint Luke) who when he will induce us too humility, Luke
10.
he sets before us an example, how Satan fell from heaven as fire and
thunder, and all to the end we should humble our selves, and that we
should not think to be exalted by those ways and means whereby others are
thruste down. And when he will exhort us to flee from evil and wickedness,
and to persevere in good works and well doings, he recommendeth to our
remembrance the wife of Lot. And further, if thou do mark well the order
of the holy Hystories, thou shall find that after they have rehearsed the
virtuous acts of many good and holy men, they mingle and join with the same
the doings of the evil and wicked men, to the intent the one may provoke and
carry us away by their good examples too all well doings, and the others by
their evil acts and wicked demeaners might make us forbear to follow their
mischief and wickedness.

And now to make an end of this my Prologue, I beseech thee gentle Reader to
construe well and faithfully of this my labor and travail, according to my
meaning: and so doing thou shall give me occasion hereafter to set forth one
other work of mine own invention, entreating of the Original and beginning
of Nobleness: which, for that I have consumed the most part of my life in the
study as well of the Greek as Latin tongues, I will set forth the same in
Latin, to the end I may in something gratify those that profess good
Letters.

Farewell.
The History of Chelidonius Tigurinus, of the Institution and first beginning
of Christian Princes, and the Original of Kingdoms.
The first Chapter.
The definition of a King, and what a Kingdom is, and how that in many
insensible things and also in brute beasts, we shall find certain
similitudes and figures of Kingdoms and Common wealths.

ARISTOTLE in the third book of his Politiques, The d^finitio^ of a King.
has defined a King or a Prince to be the puissance of one that governs and
rules any Region or Commonwealth, not serching therein his own particular
profit, but the commodity and common wealth of his subjects: and that Prince
which does so govern, follows not only Nature for his guide, but even the
Aucthour of Nature himself and maker thereof, who commands universally all
the world and sytteth as a King, providing for all, and dysperseth to each one
his gifts, according to his will and pleasure, without looking for any profit
again, or having need of any thing, but only has regard to the utility and
profit of those which he has created and made. Kings and Princes have then a
marvelous pre-eminence and an excellent degree of life amongs men, in that
they resemble so much their Lord and Savior, having people under their rule
and government: and therefore they ought to be the more curious and
circumspecte to do those works which seem worthy in the sight of God: and
seeing also that their profession is so noble and so excellent, Kings and
Princes are the ^^nely Jmages of god
that they do express and represent in them (as in a lively Image) the example
of their Lord and master, they ought so too indeuer and show themselves
toward their subjects, as he has done himself toward his. This is the
true Mirror and purtraicte whereby they should frame their actions and order
their lives, without declining this way or that way as the Psalmist does
exhort them, Psalm. 2.
where it is said: Be wise oh ye Kings, be learned you that are Judges of
the Earth. Enforce your selves therefore ye Princes, Kings and Princes are
Gods Lieutenantes upon the earth.
too be like him whose Lieutetenants you are, and whose place ye keep, and
be garnished with these goodly titles of justice, gentleness, clemency,
wisdom, and truth: and strain your selves to follow the same, and then you
shall be worthy these names of Kings and Princes. And the Lords and Savior
has not only expressed and represented this dignity royal in himself,
Similitudes of kingdoms and common wealths appear in all things.
but also he has graven and imprinted the same in an infinite number of the
works of Nature, in the which as it were in a book written with his own
hand, men may read and be instructed of those things which are meet and
agreeable for the majesty of a Prince. For let us behold with judgment the
universal order of Nature, and we shall find that in the creation of al
things he has used a marvelous and great wisdom, not making therein all
things to be equal, but has made a separation and difference among them, and
given a certain pre-eminence and notable mark, by the which they may be
discerned the one from the other, and that in such sort, that if we consider
al things universally, and their parts, beginning even at the heavens, and
run through all the other elements, we shall find a spark of Royalty, and
a certain pre-eminence to appear in all things: for amongs so great a number
of heavens rehearsed by the Philosophers and approved by the holy Scriptures,
The imperial Heaven is chief of all the others.
the imperial Heaven is the cheifest and Prince of the others, and is without
comparison most excellent, because it is the Seat of God, of the Angels,
Martyrs, and Prophets, in the which they behold continually that same great
brightness which they desired to see when they were invested with this flesh
of ours. And let us behold the Sun, The Sun is the cheifest and Prince of
all the lights in heaven.
which is as it were a lamp burning in heaven, and lightneth all the world
with his brightness, and does distribute his force and puissance to the
Stars and planettes (which the Physicians have called the heart of heaven,
Heraclites, the fountain of the celestial light) has it not a representation
of the cheef and King, seeing that the Moon her self borrows her light of
him, and that by his course all things that be under the globe and circle of
the same be made clear and bright, have life and be quickened, and being as
it were dead and buried, be brought again to their first being, state, and
strength? Yea, and that in such sort, that Saint Dennis in his Book Of the
Divine names, woondring at his greatness and excellency, was so bold to call
it a clear Image, and next to the divine power, King without life, of heaven
and earth, The Fire is more excellent than all the other Elements, although
some be of contrary opinion.
which being without reason and understanding by nature, woorketh and
exercises his offices upon the earth. Let us look a little lower and consider
the four Elements whereof all things are composed, and we shall find (as all
the Philosophers do say) that the fire is more excellent and noble than the
others, and we shall see in it a certain similitude of Royalitie. Among the
four parts of the world, that is too say the East, Weast, North and South,
the East takes the first place of honor and Royalty, The East part is more
noble than the others. The temperat zone best Asia better and more noble tha^
other parts of the earth.
because that the Lord there has created his Paradise terrestrial, and
wylled his Gospel there first to be preached, and would also there be
borne and suffer his blessed passion. Amongs the five Zones, with the which the
earth is environed, the temperate is more wholesome than the others. Among the
parts of the World, as Asia, Europa, and Afrike, the Geographers give first
place to Asia, as well for the gretnesse thereof, as for the fertility,
temperature and influence of all good things. Among so many diverse kinds of
metals Gold is the Prince, King and Chief: and amongs birds, the Eagle:
amongs fyshes, the Dolphin: amongs beasts, the Lion: Gold is the Prince of
all metals.
to be short, if we will mark and search diligently through the whole frame
of the world, we shall find nothing in the same, either above or beneath,
wherein we shall not acknowledge some show or similitude of Royalty. But what
shall we say of these little silly following beasts, which we call Bees, Bees
have their King.
that have their King, and seem to keep a certain form of a Kingdom, in
the administration of their little Common wealth, of whom, because their manner
of life shall be to us the better known, we will declare that which Pliny
has written in the eleauenth book of his Natural history, Plin. lib 11.
where he says as follows: The King of the Bees is always of a fair
form, The king of the Bees exceeds the other in gretnesse and in beauty.
and is bigger than any of the other two times. He has wings less than the
others, and at the bowing of the knee, is straighte, he flies more gravely,
and has a more cleernesse and brightness than the others. He has a little
spotte or mark in his forehead like unto a Diamonde. Afterward he adds
that the Authors be of sundry opinions, whither he has any sting or not:
if he has (says he) it serves him only for armor and defense, The king
of the Bees has a Sting, not to hurt, but for defense.
and if Nature have given him any sting, she has denayed him the use thereof:
but they do all agree in this point, that if he has any he hurts no
person withal. And it is a marvelous thing, to behold and mark what
obedience the others bear to him, for when he flies abroad, he is only
alone, all the others be about him, and compass him in such sort, that they
will scarcely suffer him to be seen, and whiles they are laboring he
visits their works, and beholds the same, and seems to give his advise
therein, and he only amongst the others is exempted from labor. You shall
see round about him his watch men and guard, who serve him by their presence,
for a defense. He never goes abroad without his guard: and it is easily
known when he will go, by a certain buzzing and noise which he makes a few
days before his departure, even as it were for a warning to watch the hour
and time of his going: and being abroad, A marvelous obedience of Bees to
their King.
if it happen that he faint in his flying, they lift him up again and support
him on their feeble shoulders: and if he be utterly overcome with labor in
his trauail, they bear him: and if it fortune he stray and go out of his way,
they wander this way and that way, flying about to meet him again, and
wheresoever he does stay himself, all the rest camp about him: if he be
prisoner or captive, they do also abide captive with him, as though it were a
thing impossible for them to live one hour without their King. Afterward he
adds a thing more strange and marvelous, how that they observe the rites and
customs of the funerals in such manner, that if one of them die, they draw him
out of his place in their hiues, Funerals be observed amongs Bees.
and follow and accompany him, as we commonly do at the funeral of the dead:
and if it happen any of their Kings to die of any contagion or infection, these
little worms sorrow and lament, and have no more care or thought to search for
their livings or nourishment, but remain still in their hiues round about the
corpse, making their heavy complaints and miserable lamentatio^s, and that with
such extremity, that if no man bring them aught to feed upon, they will
rather famishe themselves than seek their meat. S. Ambrose that grave Author
and worthy of credit, confirming the authority of Pliny in the fifth book of
his Hexameron, speaks in this manner: The Bees do choose and ordiane them a
King, and when they are under his authority and government they seek not at
any time to live at liberty, but have a regard to the prorogatiue and
pre-eminence of their Prince and Judge, and to the marvelous faith, fear and
affection that they bear toward him, whom they have elected and chosen. As
touching his body (says he) he has an excellent beauty and worthiness of
shape, in the which he does exceed al others, with also a marvelous
gentleness and humbleness in manners: for if he have any sting (as some
write he has) he never uses it for any revenge: for the laws of Nature are
not written in letters, but are imprinted in man's heart and expressed in
manners: for the more nobly any man is descended of blood, and the higher in
degree of honor he is placed, the more mercy and clemency he will use
toward those that do offend him. Bees if they any way offend the king they
kill them selves.

The Persia^s kill themselves after they have offended


Afterward, continuing his discourse of the Bees, he adds thereunto a
matter most myraculous, which is: If they do at any time (says he) violate or
transgress the laws of their Prince, they think they are condemned, and slay
themselves presently with their own stings. The like thing at this day is used
among the Persians, who of their own mere will and without constraint of any
other, do sacrifise themselves by death, if by chance they have offended, or
declined from their duties in any thing toward their Prince or otherwise. For
there is no nation this day under the Sun, that observes their laws so
straightly and so severely as they do. And yet I dare assure you, that neither
the Indians, nor the Samaites, nor the Persians, have not in greater estimation
their Kings and Princes, than the little silly Bees have their Captain and
Chief, who dare not presume once to go out of their little cabinettes to
search for their meat, A marvelous affection of beasts that they will die
for their Kings.
except their King go before them. And finally they do put themselves always
in defense for him, and think it a commendable thing to adventure their lives
and to die in the defense of their Prince: and they be so confirmed and
resolved in good will and amity toward him, that as long as he lives, they
will not render them selves subject to any other, but after that he is dead
to whom they did bear their first faith, even as altogether desperate do
presently abandon their hiues, in token that he who was their head and Chief
has taken his end. Behold lo the discourse of S. Ambrose upon this matter.
I could like wise bring forth the testimony of Vergilius, Columellus,
Constantinus, and a great number of others. But I will stay and make an end in
rehearsing this one matter which Mapheus Vegeus Mapheus Vegeus.
(a man of singular learning, and one that has searched far into the
antiquities of the works of Nature) writes in one dysputation wherein he
does introduce the Sun, the Earth and Gold, in a controversy for their
dignities and worthiness, where the Earth in defense of her cause, does set
forth very well the manners, nature and conditions of these Fees even after
the opinion of Pliny, Aristotle, and other Authors. Afterward the said
Saint Ambrose joins to it this that follows, which is much to the purpose
of our matter. It is a marvelous thing (says he) how Nature shows her
puissance, namely in things so small as these little beasts: by whose examples
she does not only instruct and teach Kings and Princes how to indeuer
themselves in their offices toward their Subjects, but also their Subjects
with what fidelity and reverence they ought to honor and obey them. And it is
no strange thing therefore, if the wise man do send these lither and
unprofitable persons to the little Antes, that they may learn of them and by
their industry, Men may receive instruct^^^^ of Beas^es.
how to be careful, where he says, go your ways you slothful and idle
persons to the little Antes, and mark well their doings and take good heed
thereto, for they, although they have no Prince, Governor, or Ruler, yet
always they do prepare in the Summer time their meat, and do during their
harvest lay up great stoare for their livings in the Winter. And in like manner
we are secretly taught by a hidden exhortation of Nature to behold the
conditions of these brute beasts, and to take good heed to their order and
manner of living, to the end that we endued with reason, may learn of them
(that are without reason) how we ought to lead this our humain society: and
by what providence Kings and Princes ought to govern their subjects: and
contrariwise what obeisance and reverence is due to them. For all men by nature
and reason (although they sometimes fail therein) are bound to love and obey
him that rules and governs them: a puissance so great of nature, that she
extends her force likewise to brute and savage beasts. And Zenophon
introduces Socrates his master, that he had in great admiration why man was
found more ingrate to his gouerner and ruler than the brute beast, for it is
not seen commonly (says he) that any other beast, how brutish so ever he
be, to abuse them that nourishe him, nor does refuse to obey to his pastor
and feeder, Man more ingrate unto his Ruler than brute beasts.
as man does. For the Sheep follow the voice of their shepherd, the Swine
follow their swineherde, the Birds love them that feed them (although they be
insensible and fearful) and there cannot be showed any other reason why the
dominion of the Persians endured so long (as Socrates says) but because they
above all people did always honor the Majesty Royal, and had it in a most
singular estimation and reverence: and thus he does conclude, that sometimes
it is most meet for us to endure and bear the imperfections of Princes, and
that for a little enormitie we may not lose so great a benefit. We will now
make an end of those things, because that we do speak more amply of them in
our next Chapter. And it is not without great cause that I have joined these
little Antes and Bees together, because amongs all other kind of beasts they
be the most industrious and most diligent, as Aristotle witnesses.
Furthermore, Cranes have their captens and leaders.
the Cranes be fowls that flock and company together (as S. Jerome writes)
when he says that insensible beasts follow their Captains, as amongs the
Bees there is an head, the Cranes follow their companions in good order.
Whereby he seems to prove that it is meet that there be one chief and
head among al creatures, as in a Ship, one gouerner. And Rome could not suffer
two brethren to reign together, but by the effusion of the blood of the one the
other took place. Likewise in the womb of Rebecca, the two brethren Jacob and
Esau could not accord, but fought together. Genesis. 25.
And S. Ambrose in his Hexameron, sets out more at large this which S.
Jerome has said briefly. The Cranes (says he) choose themselves one head
or Captain, and follow after him in the rearewarde: they do appoint certain
which by their crying shall stay the whole troup: they watch by course, The
watch of the Cranes
and they that watch do hold stones in their feet, to the end that when they
be overcome with sleep, the stones falling from them, they might awake by the
noise thereof: the others having their heads under their wings, do sleep and
take their rest, standing one while on one leg, and other whiles upon the
other: and their chief and Captain being awaked, does foresee all danger,
and gives warning to the rest. Thus it is now sufficiently made plain and
manifest unto you, as well by the testimony of the Ecclesiastical as the
Profane hystories, that Nature a most excellent woorker (whoo has made
nothing in vain) has given a certain mark, caracter, and token of
pre-eminence and Royalty, even among brute beasts, to the end that being
moved and provoked with the marvelous contemplation of these things, we
should be the more apt to receive instructions how to yield obedience to our
Princes, Superiors and Governors.

The second Chapter.
How that the first beginning of Kings and Princes is very ancient, and that
immediately after the creation of the World, the people began to choose and
elect Kings and Princes.

MEN being guided by nature, instructed by reason, and lead by divine
inspiratio^, did elect and choose Kings and Princes shortly after the creation
of the World, to the end to lead and continue the state of their lives
together with the greater felicity, peace and tranquillity. The first murder
committed in the world. The first city that was builded. Genesis. 1.
For we read that Caine after the murdering of his brother builded a City
and called it Enoch, after the name of his son, in the which as it is like to
be true, he ordained one chief and Prince, who had the whole government of
the Empire, yet it may be that he was not called, a King, for that such name
was not then in use. But for as much as we have no certain testimony by the
Scriptures, that Caine did institute any King in his City, it shall be
necessary for us to examine and search out more diligently, The beginning of
kingdoms.
things that passed after that time, by the discourse whereof, the Beginning
and Original of Kings and Kingdoms shall be more manifest unto us. A while
after the Deluge, and that the great abundance of water was by God poured
down to wash and purify the earth, Narration.
defiled and polluted by the wickedness and abominable sins of mankind,
Belus the first king of the Assirians (in the time of Thares, the father of
Abraham) did govern the earth (as Eusebius does recount in his Chronicles) and
during this age the force of Arms and mightiness of Kingdoms (whereof the
hystories make mention) did begin to appear, as the Assirians, S^^^heans,
What time the f^^ce of armor was first known
Egiptian^ and Bracteans, which does give us certain testimony of the
Original and beginning of Kings and Kingdoms, that did increase after the
flood: afterward without any intermission, were dispersed upon the face of the
earth here and there, and have so well continued and prospered hitherto, that
the memory of them is eternal. The holy hystories make mention, that in the
time of Abraham there was a King of Salem, called Melchisedech, after it makes
mention of four Kings, whoo having vanquished five other Kings and dyspoiled
them of their victualles and booties, were afterward again vanquished and
destroyed by Abraham, who did set upon them with a great number of his
servant. And so this which we do allege here concerning all these Kings
tends to none other point, but to prove and declare unto you the antiquity
of Kings, which did appear shortly after the creation of the world. Kings and
Prince^ were ordained immediately after the begi^ning of the world.
It now rests for us to show the causes why they were created and chosen to
this dignity royal, and although the histories do affirm and produce diverse
causes and many in number, yet it shall be sufficient, to declare unto you
four principal causes only. The first and principal cause of the first
creation, did proceed upon the marvelous wisdom (in the ordring and
disposing of things) which the people did perceive to begin to shine and
appear in some one Citizen, at whose excellency greatly maruelling, being
carried away with the same, judged him most worthy the administration and
government of their commonwealth. The first cause why Kings and Princes were
chosen and instituted.
Behold lo, one of the cheifest reasons of the institution of Kings, was (as
I say) because that some one by his civil prudence and integrity of life,
begoon first to exhort and induce the people being yet rude and barbarous) to
the observation of certain laws and human policies, by which means they
did see he did the more happily establishe their common wealth, Kings and
Princes t^k^ not the^^ first beginning of glori^ and ambition, as some judge
The second cause.
and the better rule and order the estate of their lives. Which Justinius that
grave hystorian did well understand when he writ that the first institution of
Kings and Princes did not take his beginning of a glory or popular ambition
(as some have written) but of a marvelous excellent wisdom, gentleness and
virtue, appearing in some one man. The second cause which did move the people
to create their Kings and Princes, was a free and loving affection which they
had to acknoweledge the good acts that any one had done to their Commonwealth:
as if any man by his magnanimity, worthiness and puissance of Arms had
delivered them from the servitude and bondage of any Tyranne, or had any ways
amplified their limits, or brought any other provinces subject or
contributorie unto theirs, or by the institution of any good laws, had made
their lives more happy and quiet, they not willing to show themselves
unthankful for the same, but rather to gratify such deserts, always
advanced and called these to the Dignity Royal, and by a common consent and
accord, made them chief governors and ministers of their provinces. As it
chanced to Scipio Affricanus, Scipio Afrianus.
who after that he had destroyed and overthrown new Carthage, and vanquished
their captain Hasdrubal in Spain, was called King (as Plutarch writes)
although he with a marvelous modesty refused it, knowing that that title
among the R^maines was most odible. Rome delivered from ^he conspiracy of
Cateline by Cicero.
And in like manner Cicero having delivered Rome from the conspiracy of
Cateline, was called Father and Patron of the Commonwealth. And this has not
been practiced only among Painims and Ethniks, but also among the people of
God, who when they perceived that same divine miracle of Christ, John. 6.
of the multiplication of five loves and two fishes, would have created and
made him a king: but he, which was not come to that end, that any should
minister to him, but that he would minister to others, refused such honor as
they would have given him. The third cause.
The third reason wherefore Kings and Princes were first created and received
upon the Earth, grew upon necessity which did enforce the common people to
search out a way and mean by the which they might correct the furious, and
oppress the violence of the wicked, because that of nature we are prompt and
inclined to do euel: and always some there are found so far out of order, that
by their wickedness they confound and trouble al human devise and policy,
and spoil (contrary to al equity) their neighbors of their goods: and
therefore to restrain such rashness, and to bridle such outragiousnesse (to
the end to maintain and conserve the estate public, in tranquillity and
peace) they were constrained to make one chief and head which should command
them all, maintain the good in their well doing, and likewise chastise the
insolency of the wicked. And this self reason has caused us to believe that
kings were first ordained even fro the beginning of the world, and even as it
were incontinent after our first father was cast out of Paradise terrestial:
Nothing is auncienter than Sin.
for such authority and prehemine^ce was more requisite at that than any other
time, because violence, opression and covetousness began then to reign among
men. Testimony of Scripture for obedience of kings and Princes.
And S. Paul that faithful trumpet and minister of the glory of Jesus Christ,
in his Epistle to the Romans has taught us what obedience we owe to Princes
and Kings, and to al our Superiors, where among other matters he gives a
reason for the same, that is, because they correct and punish the wicked. Let
al persons (says he) be subject to the higher powers, Have a good regard to
the meaning of Paul for he is very obscure in th^se words: I have trans^ated
this ^c^^^in^ to the Gr ke word.
for there is no power but of god, and those that be appointed of God: wherefore
he that resists authority, resists Gods ordinance, and those that withstand
the same, procure damnation to the^sel^es, for Princes are not to be feared for
well doing, but for evil doing, and therefore if thou will not fear
authority, do well and thou shall receive praise of him: for the Prince is the
servant of God for thy commodity: but if thou do euel, fear him, for he
carries not the Sword in vain, but is the minister of God to do justice, to
the terror of those that do euel. And therefore we ought of duty to be
obedient to them, not only for fear, but for conscience sake. Behold lo, a
marvelous doctrine of Saint Paul touching the obedience we ought to have
toward Kings and Princes and other Superiors. Let us also mark the testimony
of Saint Peter, touching the said matter, who does wholly confirm the same
that Saint Paul has said before: 1. Pet. ca. 8.
Be you subject to all manner of ordinances of man (says he) for the Lords
sake, whither it be unto the King, as unto the chief head, or to the Rulers,
as to them who are sent of him, as well for the punishment of evil doers, as
for the laud and praise of that do well. And Cicero the Ethnike in his second
book of Offices has showed the same manner of Institution of Kings, where he
says: It is not very like that Kings and Princes have only been chosen and
instituted out of the meanest sort as Herodotus has written) but of others
the most wise and aunciente, Herodotus reproved.
to the end they might have justice the better exercised. For the mean people
being vexed and oppressed by the rych and wealthiest, were constrained to have
their refuge to some one that excelled the others in virtue, to this end, that
he should not only defend them, the poorer and weaker sort, from the injury
and violence of the wicked, but also conserve the one and the other in equity
and justice. The fourth cause that has moved the people to the Election of
Princes and Kings, was for the great magnanimity and worthiness of Arms,
they saw to appear in some one that did deliver them from their enemies,
Reward promised and given for virtue
or else it did proceed of some public proclamation or edict, by the which it
was ordained that he who could deliver them out of some servitude or tyranny,
should for recompense thereof be made King, which was the cause and mean to
provoke every one to show themselves famous and worthy, The fourth cause.
to the end that being stirred up with the hope of such a name, as a King,
they might travail to atchieue to the same, by some commendable acts or
virtuous exploites. And of such Edictes and Proclamations we have examples and
sufficient testimony in the holy Scriptures. Caies in the book of Joshua made
Proclamation, Joshua. 13.
that he whoo would beseege the City of Cariathstopher, and take it, he
would give him his daughter Axam to his wife, which he did accomplish in
Othoniel, who having taken the same City, Histories of the old Testament.
did receive his promise. We have an other like example in the fifth book of
the Kings, where it is written that the same lump of flesh Goliath the
Philistine (who was of so monstrous a bigness, that all the army of the
Israelites did greatly fear) little David did triumph over him and returned
victor, having understanding before, that he which could vanquishe him
should be honored of King Saul, and receive great riches, and should have
his daughter to his wife, 1. Reg. 17.
and also his fathers house should be made free in Jsrael. We have likewise
such an other example of the same David in the second book of the Kings. 2.
Reg. 5.
where he promises a great advancement to him that should overthrow the
Jebusites, that he should in consideration thereof be made chief and
Captain of the army. And because Jacob put to flight his enemies, and
possessed Jerusalem, he gave him the cheifest place in his army. Now it
rests for us too prove that the Lord has been the author of this royal
dignity, God the first author of Kings.
and that he himself has confirmed the same, as it is manifestly showed unto
us in Deuteronomie, when he instructed the people of Israel by what means
they ought to institute their Kings (where it is written) When thou come
intoo the land that the Lord thy God has given thee, and that thou do
possess it, and remain there, The Lord himself did choose a king. 1. Regum.
9.
thou shall say: I will have a King over me as all the people have that is
about me, then thou shalt choose over thee that King, which the Lord thy
God shall choose out amongs the midst of thy brethren, and thou shall not
set over thee a strange man, which is not thy brother. Furthermore when the
time of the Judges was expired and that the people of Israel with great
pertinacitie and stubbornness did demand of the Lord to have a King over them,
he himself did choose and ordeine Saul, whom he found a man according too
his hearts desire, which should not have been thus auctorized and appointed, if
Royal puissaunce had mysliked him. But why do we bring forth any further
matter to prove the authority of Princes, seeing Jesus Christ himself was
appointed King by his father upon the holy hill of Sion, according to the
Psalmist. And S. John in the Apocalips confirms the same, saying: He has
written on his thigh and in his garment, Apoc. 19.
his name thus: King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Ruler of Rulers, and whose
kingdom is eternal: Dani. 7.
as it was likewise showed too Daniel in his visions. And all those that are
appointed and chosen into the dignity Royal, be Lieutenants of the great
Monarch Jesus Christ, whose will was to be known at that time, when the
universal computation of the world was made by Augustus, to the end that his
parents should pay tribute, and that they should acknowledge the earthly
Princes for their superiors. S. Matthew does write the like of Jesus Christ,
Math. 2.
that when he and his disciples came into Capernaum, these that did receive the
^ol came to Peter and demanded of him, does thy master pay tribute? Christ
paid toll.
and he answered and said yea: and when he was in the house Jesus Christ came
to Peter and said: Simon, the Kings of the earth, of whom do they take tribute
or tol? is it of their children or of strangers? Mat. 17.
and Peter said to him, of strangers, the children then be free (said Jesus
Christ) yet because we will not offend them (said he) go to the Seas side and
cast in thy book, and the first fish that comes, take him and open his
mouth, and thou shall find a grote therein, take that and pay it for thee and
me. Mat. 22.
As likewise in an other matter he commanded to pay to Caesar that which was
due to Caesar. And note Paul to the Romans: Al persons (says he) are subject
to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: after he concludes,
pay to Princes their tributes, for they be the Ministers of God, employing
themselves therein: therefore give them all that which is due unto them. To
whom tribute belongs give tribute, to whom toll give toll, to whom fear
give fear, and to whom honor give honor. And Paul thought it not
sufficient only to make mention of this in diverse and sundry places, but to
the end he would the better beat it into our heads, and that he would not
have Princes defrauded of that which is due to them, Paul commands to make
prayer and supplications for kings and princes.
he chieefely recommendeth the same unto Timothe, where he layth: I do
acmonish you above all things that there be common prayers, supplication and
thanksgiving made, for all those that be put in authority, that they may
lead a peaceable and quiet life in all holiness and godliness, which shall
be pleasing and acceptable before God. And further Baruch the Prophet
recites that the Jews (being in captivity under the Babilonians) did write
too their brethren that were at Jerusalem, Baruch. 1.
that they should pray for Nabuchodonezer king of Babylon, and for the life of
his son, Paul pleads his cause before Nero.
although they were both Idolaters. And S. Paul did know that Festus Provost
of Judea, did favor the Jews, in that he brought his cause before Caesar, when
he appealed before too him, and being brought before Nero, (then Emperor of
the Romans) Paul did so well defend his just cause, that he was delivered
and set at liberty. And now therefore if the Jews have prayed for an
Idolatrous Prince, and S. Paul has been delivered from this mischeuous enemy
of our Religion by means of Festus principality, who will doubt then, but
th^^ our Lord is author of principality, and would not have instituted
the same, but only for the comfort and profit of man. But to make an end of
this my long process, if you will behold and mark well the order of the
Scriptures, as well in the old as in the new Testamentes, you shall find an
infinite number of authorities, as well of the Prophets as Apostles, which do
plainly witness how Kings and Princes are instituted by the mouth of the
Lord our God, and by him self approved, confirmed and auctorized.

The third Chapter.
What the Dignity Royal is, and how the same cannot be supplied without
great trouble and danger: with a declaration what kind of government is
best for the people to live happily and quietly.

BY these things before rehearsed, we have declared and proved, that the
pre-eminence and Dignity Royal is marvelous ancient, and that it was
received of the people even at the begi^ning of the world, and afterward
approved, authorized and confirmed by the testimony of the old and new
Testamentes: and that the same also does agree and accord in many things with
the Celestial Kingdom, The earthly kingdoms in many things do accord with
the heavenly kingdom.
in such sort, that there is left unto us certain marks and caractes of the
mightiness and worthiness thereof, as well in heaven as in earth, and
generally in all beasts. We have in like manner showed four reasons which
have seemed unto us to be the most principal and chief, concerning the
Beginning of Realms and kingdoms: yet there is one fifth reason, which we
find to be of no less strength and force than the other to confirm that we
have beforesayde. A notable question.
Amongs the most ancient and renoumed Philosophers that the Earth has brought
forth, there has been great controversy and argument which was most meet
and profitable for the people (to live happily and in most felicity) either
too be ruled and governed by the prudence, authority and wisdom of one
Prince, and him too obey in all things just and virtuous (which the Greeks
call Monarchia) or by the Democratian commonwealth, Monarchia, is the
government executed by one. Democratia^ co^monwelth. Aristocratia^ co^monwelth.
which is the government that the people had among themselves with out having
any other superior or Governor, but only the Officers established amongst
them: or else after the Aristocratian Common wealth, which is the government
by the most noble, most rich, and sagest sort of people: which controversy
and disputation, is no new thing, for it is more than three thousand years
since it first troubled and vexed the heads of the most excellent and finest
wits upon the earth. The Aristocratian common wealth preferred by some
opinions.
Some have thought it best to prefer the Aristocratian Common wealth,
persuading that there is no government better (well to maintain a common
wealth) that too be ruled by the advice and counsel of many wise and sage
personages, who with wisdom and discretion, for the ease and commodity of
the people, may resolve all the differences and controversies that happen and
come in question amongst them. And this kind of government of a common
wealth, is authorized by many wise and great Clarks, as by Solon, Solon.
Lycurgus, Licurgus.
Demostenes, Demostenes
and Cicero: Cicero.
and yet they have not so well confirmed their arguments by any such probable
reasons, that their posterity have received and allowed the same. For it is
seen and found by experience, that there has always been amongst such
Governors, malice, sects, ambitions, gathering of riches, seditions, with
secret envy and hatred, whoo should best be esteemed, and who should have
the highest place of honor: which often times has caused many affections and
parcialities to be showed amongst the people, in such sort that many Common
wealths have been thereby utterly made ruinate and overthrown, Many common
wealths have been overthrown by the Aristocratian Government.
as it is manifest in a number of hystories as well of the Greeks as the
Latins: and we have in our days experience thereof by many excellent and
famous Cities in Italy, that are made desolate, and be now buried in
everlasting forgetfulness. Other some have preferred the Democratian
government, which is the government of the people, where all their councels
and advise is had together in one, wherein every man with all liberty, and
without fear of tyranny or other displesure may utter their reasons without
exception of persons: but yet they do exercise their offices and dignities by
course and mutual order: and by such manner of administration the Athenians
Common wealth, and the Romans have been happily ruled and governed before they
received the authority of Kings and Emperoures. And at this day ye see the
most part of the Germans continue this antiquity of Government, and so do
maintain the same. The excellency of the commonwealth of Venice. 1200. years
since the Venetians began their first government.
And amongst all other the Venetians, which is one of the most famous and most
flourishing common wealths upon the earth (which has continued thus twelve
hundred years sithence the first foundation thereof) is not, nor has not been
otherwise governed but after the Democratian government: and for this cause
Dionisius Siracusianus, Eufrates, Othanes, Herminius, Polidonius, and many
other have given place to this manner of Government, and judged it the most
profitablest way for the conservation of human society. But although this
opinion has outwardely some goodly appearance, The council of Appolonius to
Vespasianus. The council of the common people is like to a brushe that is
unbound and thrown abroad, or to a River that is run out of the chanel.
yet it is rejected and contemned amongst the most part of good authors. For
Appolonius did dyssuade Vespasianus from it, as pernicious and dangerous.
Cicero likewise says, that the common people have neither council, reason,
discretion, nor judgment. And an ancient Poet affirms that the counseil of
the people is to be resembled to a brushe unbound, which without any care
thereof, is cast and strewed abroad, or to a stream of water, running out of
his Channel that spreads and runs every way. Demonsthenes being asked what
manner a thing the people was, answered, a cruel and a dangerous beast.
Plato likewise named the people to be a monster with many heads: and Phalaris
writing to Egisippus, did accuse the people to be a cruel monster, furious,
flattering, mutable, incerteine, fraudulent, prompt to wrath, and ready to
dispraise, without consideration or discretion. Aristotle in like manner in his
Ethikes says, that the people are the original of errors and fantasies,
author of al euel customs, and the very gulf of all mischief, and iniquity:
they be nothing inclinable to reason (as Plutarche says) because the most part
of them do understand nothing, for they are void of al knowledge, they be
intractable and obstinate, they covet and desire greatly innouations and
chaunges, and have in hatred the ancient things, they are not moved neither by
the discipline of their fathers, nor by the authority of Maiestrates, nor yet
by the Doctrine of the sagest and wisest sort: and such they be, that if many
of those who are now departed and repose themselves in the bowels of the
earth, were raised again, they would have many marvelous quarrels against
the ingratitude of them, because that in satisfaction of their deserts, and
the good services they had done their countries, were by them exiled, banished,
and cruelly killed: Such as have been evil enintreated in their own Countries.
Demostenes the prince of eloquence (amongs the Grecians) and the very defender
of their Country of Athens, he could tell what to say, who was unjustly
banished by the Athenians, as though he had committed some notable offense.
Socrates Socrates.
the most woorthyest of all the Ethnike Philosophers, after he had consumed
the better part of his age, for the service and commodity of the Common
wealth, was condemned in the end to die by poison. Metellus Metellus.
named Numidicus, for a recompense of the victory that he had against
Iugurth, was banished Rome because he would not consents to a Law, which
they would then have established. The renowned Hanybal, Hanibal.
who did (in the service of his Country) employ himself even to the effusion
of his blood, was chased in the end by the Carthagieus out of the same, and
constrained miserably to stray and wander through out the world. The Roman:
did the like to that virtuous and Noble Captain Camillus Camillus.
And if ever the commonwealth of the Lacedemonia^s were beholding or bound to
any man, it was to Licurgus, Licurgus.
and the Athenuns to Solon, Valerius. Solon.
who although they were men of a most commendable and virtuous life, yet the
one of them was with blows of stones chased out of his City, and pulling out
one of his eyes was banished as a murderer: and the other after he had so well
put in order the co^monwelth by his good council and providence, that it was
made eternal, was nevertheless by them in his old days banished into the I Will
of Cipres. And we might (without borowing any testimony of the profane
histories) bring forth many examples of our own as of Eustacius Pamphilius
cheef Prelat of Antioch, that was bannished because he would not consent to
the heresy of the Arrians. Pope Benedict the fifth was by the Emperor
Anthonius bannished out of Rome for the like matter. Moses did oftentimes
escape the danger of stoning by his own people. And to be short, we have many
examples that give us sufficient witness and testimony, how perilous the
fury of the people is when they be out of order: by the which things it is
most manifest unto us that the Commonwelth which is governed by such monsters
be no more assured of themselves than the poor sheep be amongst the wolves.
Having now very sufficiently declared that these first two kinds of
administrations of a Common wealth, are not meet nor convenient to rule and
well to govern any people in peace and tranquillity: Monarchia preferred
before any other common wealth.
It rests now to conclude with Aristotle, Apolonius, S. Jerome, S. Cyprian
and many others, that the Monarchia which is the government that is absolute,
that is to say, by one only King or Prince, is the most excellent, the best
approved and most received of all: for as Homere Homere.
has written in his Rapside, nothing is well done where many do command. And
likewise Aristotle Aristotle.
in his Politikes has judged this form of a common wealth (where one rules
only) to be more noble than the others: which thing we see and perceive by
ordinary experience, in God our Lord, who is the cause and mouer of al
things, by whose only will and pleasure all the world is ruled and governed.
And unity in all things has such a puissaunce and virtue, that it does
conioyne, conserve and knit altogethers: for all things in the world
universally have taken their beginning and original of one, be maintained and
defended by one: All things ruled by one.
Al numbers infinite that we have daily in use, take their beginning of one:
All the number of Stars, which pass the capacity of man's understanding, are
ruled and governed by one Sun: among beasts there is one that rules and
governs: and for the government and ordring of an Army, it is meet to have
one to command, and upon whose authority the rest should depend. And now to
make an end and conclude our purpose, like as all the parts that are contained
in the frame of our human bodies, be maintained, quickened and made to live
and bear life by one soul: The Prince is the soul of the City.
even so one Prince gives life and governs all the City, whereof he is the
soul. Aristotle in the.xij. Book of his Metaphisickes, does reprove the
plurality of governors in one City, and wills that it be governed, ruled
and ordered by the authority of one only Prince. And Nature the better to set
forth the same to our eyes, has ordained that there be one pre-eminence in all
kind of things, as we have before said: as amongst the Stars the Sun,
amongst the Elements the Fire, amongst Mettalles Gold, amongst Grain Wheat,
amongst Liquide things Wine, amongst four footed Beasts the Lion, amongst
Birds the Eagle: and to be short, if we will contemplate the whole order and
course of Nature, A testimony of Nature.
we shall find one excellency of dignity and pre-eminence in each kind: and
therefore of these things abouesayd we may gather that the government of any
Common wealth that is exercised by one only King or Prince, is more worthy and
more commendable than the other kinds of administrations which are ruled and
governed by many: but for a counterpoize of his mightiness and dignity, The
scepter and crown accompanied with many thorns.
he has many thorns that do enuiron his Scepter and Crown: for the
abundance of honors, the diversity of delights, and the number of pleasures
that he does daily enjoy, be unto him (as Aristotle wisely writes) great
enticements and baytes to lead him to all evil, and ready means to cast him
down hedlonges into the bottom of all vice and wickedness (if he set not God
most cheefely before his eyes) and a King is like to a Lamp, A King is a
lamp which shines and gives light unto all the world.
that shines light to all the world: therefore if he be blemished or blotted
with any vice or crime, it is more Notable and reproueable in him, than in any
other Private person: and therefore because he has more occasion of temptation
to slide and fall than others have, in that he is highest in place, without
Bridel, set among so many pleasures and delights, (which be Flames to stir
and provoke wickedness,) so much the rather he ought to travail and labor to
eschew the same: for commonly, things lifted up, and exalted on high, are
subject to fall and ruin, and these things may be to us sufficiently known
and manifest, by the recounting of many Kings and Princes, whose beginnings
have been commendable: but their ends have been most abominable and wicked.
Saul a good man in the beginning of his kingdom
For the worthiness of Saul has been renoumed by the holy scriptures, who
was chosen King, by the Lord our God: but by a little and little, he began to
decline from the right way, and becam a wicked man. The beginning of the
reign^ of King Solomon, was meruellous, but after that he gave him self in
pray to Women, The reign of Solomon.
he was deprived of the grace of God. Ioab King of Judah, was a good man for a
time, but in the end being seduced by his men, he fell to Idolatry. Caligula,
Caligula.
Nero, Nero.
and Methridates, Methridates
did in the beginning give a meruellous hope of their wisdoms: but the issue
was such, that all the world was infected with their tyranny and cruelty,
and if thou will have rehearsed by order, all the whole administration of the
Common wealth of the Romans, thou shall find that the number of the wicked
Kings, have always surmounted very much the good Kings. But because we shall
not need much testimony of profane Princes, let us now come to our own.
Of.22. kings of Judah, there were but six good.
Of twenty and two Princes of Judah, there is not found but only six, that is
to say, Asa, Iosaphat, Ioacan, Ezechias, and Josias, which have continued in
virtue and goodness. As touching of Kings of Israel, if thou will well
search out their lives, The Kings of Israel were wicked men:
from Jeroboam the Son of Naboth, unto the last King, which was the
nyneteenthe in number, thou shalt find that all they in general were evil
Ministers of the Common wealth. And the Roman gouernmente likewise which has
been commended for one of the best and most flourishing common wealths upon
the Earth. For a few in number amongst them, as Augustus, Vespasianus, Tytus,
Good Emperors of Rome
Anthonius Pius, Anthonius Verus, and Alexander Seuerus, whoo have very well
showed them selves in their gouernementes, thou shalt find a number of others
all imbrued with vices, and tyrannies, and that so many, that the evil Princes
have much surpassed the virtuous and good. And if thou be desirous to read
the gestes of the Assyrians, The Assiria^s.
the Persians, Persians.
Greeks, Greeks.
and Egyptians, Egiptians.
there will appear more of such as were evil and wicked Princes, than of those
that were good and virtuous. I hope now that no man is of the opinion, that I
do pretend by these examples any thing to abase or diminishe the Royal
dignity of a Prince (unto whose obedience I do wholly yield my body and
life, for the worthiness and excellency thereof) but I desire most cheefely
thereby to admonish Kings and Princes in God of their duetes and office, and
that principally in respect of so many souls (so dearly boughte) of whom
they be protectoures and defenders: And I trust no man will no more blame me
or think my good will stranger herein, than they will do his which does
admonish any man (who is to travail through strange Countries) that he
should take heed of the perilous and dangerous places which be in his way,
and of thieves that lie by the ways to rob and spoil him: or to warn those
which do commit them selves to hasarde of the Seas, that they should eschew
and shun certain Rocks, upon the which if by chance they should fall they
might be in danger of ship wrack. The intent of the au^or.
And so I have none other meaning herein, but only to exhort Kings and
Princes and all others that be called to any dignity and Government, The
doings of the public members of the common wealth, are more notable and
perilous than of the common sort.
to have their salvation in remembrance, and to be vigilant and careful to
order and direct all their actions and doings in the fear of God, because
their dysorders are more notable and more perilous than the common sort of
people. And that by these examples of the wicked sort which we have rehearsed
here in this book, they should have good regard not to follow, even as he
that sees another fall before him, ought to take good heed with all diligence
to eschew the like danger and peril. And contrary, the examples of the good and
virtuous which we have also spoken of here, may so induce them to virtue,
that they may leave an eternal memory after them of their good and virtuous
lives: Which we ought to leave to our heirs, rather than to leave them great
numbers of treasure and riches (as the wise man says) the good renoume is
more to be praised than precious ointment. And likewise he says in the book
of wisdom, that the memory of the good is immortal before God and man: But
when he makes mention of the judgment that the posterity shall have of the
wicked sort (he says) they shall be cut of from al good report and fame, and
shall be always in opprobrie amongst the dead, where they shall lamente and
wayle, and the memory of them and their seed shall be forgotten, as though
they had never been: but the good and virtuous (says he) shall live from
generation to generation, their glory shall be for evermore, and the same
shall be declared and manifest in their children.

The fourth Chapter.
How that those which shall command others, ought first to master them
selves, and so suppress and moderate their affections and passions, that by
their good lives, they may induce those that be subject to them, to virtue and
godliness.

WE have sufficiently proved by the reasons aforesaid, that virtue was the
chief and principal cause, Princes instituted chiefly for virtue.
why Kings and Princes were in the beginning elected and established: and
therefore seeing it is so, that they be called to such dignity for the
nobleness and virtue which is found in them, more than in others, they ought
to labor and enforce themselves to excel in that which is the cause of their
honor and dignity: for it is written of Saul in the book of the Kings, 1.
Kings. 9.
yt he was in the beginning of his reign both noble and virtuous, and there
was not a better man to be found among the children of Israel: although in the
end by his insolency and ambition he lost the grace of the Lord his God.
And Cyrus King of the Persians, upon a certain time having conference with his
wise and learned Philosophers, touching the virtues meet and requisite for a
King, said unto the^, that he was unworthy to be an Emperor or King, whose
virtues did not excel his subjects. Plutarch in his Aposth.
Certain men being envious of the honor that was given to Lyuie King of the
Sparthians had him in disdain, and said he was made of the matter and
substance that they were, and was no better than others, and that he deserved
not to have any estimation in this world otherwise than in respect of his
Royal dignity. The Gouerner ought always to be better than his subjects.
To whom he answered with a marvelous discretion and comely modesty: If I
had not been better than any of you (said he) I should not have been chosen
unto this dignity Royal. And Solon one of the most renoumed for wisdom in all Greece, being demanded what manner of person ought to have the Government
of the people, such a one (said he) as knows how to govern and subdue
himself, before he take upon him to rule over others. He that shall command
others, ought first to know how to command and rule himself: for as the
wise man says, how can he be good to others, that is evil to himself? And
Philip King of Macedon does give us very well to understand what a Prince
ought to be, in the answer that he made to his son Alexander (when he
found himself grieved with his father for having the company of so many
women, and that he had by every of them issue: fearing least by the number of
so many children he might be defrauded of the kingdom) seeing that thou
know (said he) that there be so many that desire to succeed me in my
Empire, frame thy self to that good order in all thy doings, Kingdoms ought to
be gotte^ly wis^^m, and not by savor and affe^tion.
and use such wisdom and prudence therein, that by thy virtue and good
deserts, and not by my favor and grace, thou may be found meetest to
be Lord and King: which Alexander (who afterward not only succeeded his
kingdom, but also in his wisdom) did keep well in remembrance this his
fatherly doctrine: for being demanded even at the very time (when he felt in
his body the most furious and bitter anguish of death, by one of those whom
he best loved and favored) whom he would after his life to succeed him and
inherit his kingdom, the same (said he) that shall be most woorthiest,
Alexanders judgment at his death.
judging by this answer, that he is unworthy to rule and govern, whose
virtues are obscure and unknown: Al Princes therefore that desire to rule and
command others, ought to have this lesson specially in remembrance, which
shall serve them as a true mirror or glass to look in, and to bring them to
virtue: for the first battle and triumph that they should make entering into
their kingdoms, ought to be against their own proper lusts and
concupiscences, utterly to repress and beat down the same, and wholly to cut
off the causes whereof they grow, which if they leave undone, their stay and
bridle shall be of so little force, that they will be carried away and suddenly
(unless they be very vigilant and have good regard to themselves) they will be
thrown down headlong into a perpetual Laberinth of vice and wickedness. But
to ye contrary, if in the beginning they strive and manfully fight against the
same, no doubt without any difficulty they shall become victors of their
affections and passions, and having thus vanquished them, they shall greatly
triumph that they have so subdued and overcome themselves, and with great
felicity and honor shall from time to time rejoice in that most excellent and
glorious title and name of a King. The great king Solomon does likewise teach
them in his Proverbs, Proverb 26.
where he says that the pacient man is better than the strong, and he that
can rule himself is more worthy than he that wins cities. Agesilaus king of
the Lacede^^ man's.
Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia (as ye may read in the Greek histories) says
oftentimes, that he which commands his own affections, and does know how to
subdue them under the use of reason, is worthier co^mendatio^, tha^ if by force
of arms he had brought under his obeysaunce most famous cities. Afterward he
adds thereunto this reason: that it is more praise worthy for a man to
maintain himself in liberty, than to take it from others, because (says he)
that the man which does master his own affections, and command his desires,
is the very defender of his own liberty, He that sinneth^ (...) a^ bon^^ (...)
and keeps himself that he fall not into the servitude and bondage of sin. And
he that spoyleth people and overthrows cities, does nothing else but trouble
the quiet and take fro them their liberty, gotten long before by common right
and course of nature. And therefore what is he, that understanding the bloody
life of Nero Nero.
(under whose government the Romans have been unnaturally entreated) will
not by and by have him in horror, and judge him unworthy of the empire, whose
life has been so far out of order and so infamous, that in stead to have
made the Royal dignity famous, it has been by him darkened and polluted. Who
is he that dare be so hardy by any reason to give commendations to that great
Alexander (who by an infamous and an insatiable desire had subdued and brought
under subjection the whole world) and yet could not refrain from wrath and
drunkenness? Alexander a drunkarde.
What shall we say further of the invincible Hercules, Hercules ouercom with
envy and h^ordome.
that having overcome the dreadfullest and most monstrous things of the earth,
was in the end vanquished with malice and hooredome: behold lo these our
domestical enemies which daily do make war with us, they hold us besieged
round about, and be encamped in the inner part of our souls. They be those
which the Prophet Micheas speaks of when he says our chief enemies be the
domestical enemies, Micheas 7.
and they be those which we ought first wholly to destroy before we enter into
the camp to assail our foreign enemies: they be those things also (whereof
Xenophon speaks) which will take from us our most desired liberty, In his
Economiques.
and bring us into perpetual servitude and bondage. Let us hearken therefore a
little unto the instructions of that divine Philosopher S. Augustine, Our sins
be our ch^efe enemies.
in the fourth book De Ciuitate Dei, who after he has made a long dyscourse
of that matter, he concludes in the end as follows: if thou art a good
man (says he) although thou art bound in body, yet thou do enjoy all
liberty: but if thou be a wicked man, although thou were Lord over all the
world, thou art bond not only to one man only, but to as many masters as
thou have vices: Pet. cap. 2.
and S. Peter gives us good testimony thereof, when he says that he which
suffers himself to be vanquished of any thing is bond to it. S. John
likewise says, he that commits sin is bond to sin. That Ethnike Cicero
did well understand the same, although he was not illuminated with the light
of the gospel: but only guided by a certain instinction of nature, when he
said in his Paradoxes, How shall it be possible for any man to command
others, that can not rule and govern himself, and that can not first bridle
his own desires, concupiscences, pleasures, frowardness, covetousness, and
such other like infections of the mind: therefore (says he) he that will
take upon him the government and rule over others, let him first abandon
himself of such passions, whereunto he is most subject, and then he may the
better afterward frankly and boldly command others. Isiodorus that grave
author says, that the name of Kings has taken his first denomination of
this world to rule, and govern, but when they do forget them selves, and omit
to do their endeavor, or that they do defile this dignity royal with
wickedness, they be unworthy the name of such honor. And Boethius Boethius.
in his consolation of Philosophy, by these verses which follow, (doothe
teach us very well the same) which I do set forth in Miter, to the end I
would the better confirm the grace of the Author, who has a better appearance
thus, than in prose.

He that desires to be esteemed
and had in great renown,
His carnal mind must still subdewe,
and wanton lusts beat down:
For though his power extend so far,
as unto INDIA land,
And of his laws, (as they are bound)
They still in awe do stand,
And that the farthest i will, by sea,
which THILE has to name,
Should under his subjection be,
and he to rule the same,
Jf he can not his vice repress,
and wicked thoughts restrain,
He has no power on himself,
nor might in him does reign.
Horace in his Odes.
Horace likewise that great learned Poet says in his Odes, that the regiment
of him who does command and subdue his own affections, is more triumphant
than his that has the monarchy of the whole earth.

Thou shall of thy self a greater conquest make,
To subdue thy flesh, and lusts thereof forsake,
Than if by all thy mighty force and power,
Thou should of the whole world become Emperor.
And Claudius that excellent Poet, writes to the Emperor Theodosius as
follows.

If thou will mighty be, flee from the rage
Of cruel will, and so then keep thee free
From the foul yoke of sensual bondage:
For though thine Empire stretch to Indian sea,
And for thy fear trembles MEDE and ARABIE,
If thy desire have over thee the power,
Subject then art thou, and no Governor.
Jf to be noble and high thy mind be moved,
Consider well the ground and beginning:
For he that has in heaven each Star fixed,
And gives the Moon her horns and eclipsing,
Has also made thee most noble in his working,
So that wretched no way may thou be,
Except foul lust and vice do conquer thee.
Thy rebellious heart therefore subdue,
Suppress the vain passions of thy mind,
Pull up vice by the root, thy heart renew,
So shall thou great rest and quietness find,
And let not that evil thought possess thy mind,
Because thou art a Prince and Governor,
That the Law of thee should have no power.
Plutarch the most excellent Philosopher, Plutarch master to Traiane the
Emperor.
being Scholemaster to the Emperor of Rome Traianus (borne in Spain) in whose
time the Roman Empire was of greater possession than it had been ever before,
or has been since: fearing that the Emperor should fall into some vice, and
might thereby something stain and blemishe the excellency of his Empire, upon
a time sent him a letter, wherein was contained that which follows. Forasmuch
(says he) as Rome can not endure, a wicked and cruel Emperor, Plutarch^
epistle.
and that the people are accustomed to attribute the offenses of the Scholars
to the Masters (as we have in example of Seneca, against who^ they did murmr
for the iniquity of Nero: and of Quintilian that was reproved for the disorder
and boldness of his Scholars) I will frankely exhort thee, that the first
thing that thou ought to do, for the conservation of thy Empire, is to
refourme thy self, and to enter into the inner parts of thy soul, and to
pull out by the roots the vices that are there remaining besieged, and them by
violence to euerthrowe and beat down. For if thou do not foresee the same in
time, in stead of commanding thou shall become a bond man all the days of
thy life: for the victory which we have of our selves (without all comparison)
is more worthy than that which is gotten of others: and then after thou have
subdued and beaten down thine own affections and desires, thou may freely
take upon thee to command others. By which saying and others before, are
manifestly declared that it is not the chief point that belongs to a Prince
(only to rule or command men) but it is requisite that if he will be obeyed
of others, first to master him self, and overcome and vanquishe his own
desires and affections, otherwise of he give him self over as a pray unto
wickedness, he shall be thought as far unworthy the Scepter and Crown, as he
in no point does merit to be called a man.

The fifth Chapter.
How that if the Prince desire to have his Common wealth to be well governed,
it is most meetest and necessary, that he him self obey and observe the
laws, that by his good examples he may teach the vulgar and common people
to do the like, and live in fear and obedience toward him.

IF the Prince do desire to have the common wealth well ruled and governed, it
is necessary that he render himself obedient and subject, as well to his own
propre laws, The Prince ought to obey the laws.
as to others ordained and established by his ancestors, and namely to such as
do concern the reformation of manners, which shall no ways derogate his
dignity Royal: For there is nothing that does further so much, or better
induce the people to make themselves obedient to the laws, as when they see
their Prince first of all endeavor himself to observation of those things
which he has straightly commanded. And therefore Solon that great lawmaker of
the Athenians, being demanded what was best for the government of a city, he
answered redily, That the Prince should observe and keep his own laws. Jesus
Christ perceiving the Scribes and Pharisees to burden the pore people with
rigorous commandments (of the which they them selves did not obey one) did
reprove them grievously, and said to them: You bind heuie and unsupportable
burdens upon other men's shoulders, but you your selves will not once put to
your finger. And for as much (as Cicero says) that the heart, that mind, the
oracle and answer of the commonwealth is placed in the laws and ordinances
which are made for the public administration, and do contain as it were the
seat and mansion house of the same, it is most necessary that the Prince do
render himself obedient to the law: for the authority and force of a Prince
does depend upon the conservation of Justice: and there is nothing that does
more set forth the majesty of a Prince, than that he do submit himself to
the reason of the law written. Augustus Caesar Emperor of Rome, Augustus Caesar
an ernest obseruer of Law^.
had the laws in such estimation and reverence, that having on a time broken
the same (being overcome with choler for a just cause) was so sorrowful for
the same, that he thought he should have died. The same Augustus on a time made
a very strait and rigorous law for the punishment of adultery, after which
law made, he had a daughter named Iulia, whose chastity was in suspicion, and
in the end for her incontinencie exiled: but before her offense might be well
verified, there was a Gentleman suspected to have had the company of her in
dishonor: which thing the emperor understanding, as well by the common brute
as by other conjectures that he had gathered, was constrained to dissemble the
matter for avoiding the slander of his said daughter: but as fortune gave
occasion, the gentleman by chance encountered the Emperor, and having no way to
escape but must needs meet him, Caesar being pricked by just indignation to see
before him the violator of his daughters honor, took him by the hair of his
head, saying: A just cause of anger of in Caesar.
thou vile traitor have dishonored me and my daughter: but this bold
villain knowing the honor and bounty of this good Prince, said unto him with
a stout countenance: Caesar, wherefore do thou condemn me, and thus execute
Sentence without any manner of process served upon me, as though I were
condemned of the offense? thou do contrary to the laws and ordinances made
by thy self. Then this good Emperor being amazed in himself and ashamed of
this light fault that he had committed against his laws, went home to his
Palace, and continued two days without eating of any thing, so that he was
near dead for sorrow. We have also an other marvelous example (which may
seem hard of disgestion to those who have not knowledge to understand what
person he represents that sits in the chief place of dignity, nor
knows not what discretion and duty ought to be observed toward the
superiors) of Fabius that young man, who exercysing the Consulship, seeing one
day his father coming on horsback approaching nere the Consistory, commanded
suddenly one of his officers, that he should go and will him to light of his
horse and go on foot, which this good old man did with much pain (for he
was so old and crooked that he could scarcely hold himself vpryght) whereat
all the rest of the Council were ashamed for the insolenly of this young man,
that seemed to bear so small reverence and honor to his aged father: but the
good old man made so good an interpretation of this his Sons doings
(knowing that he which kept that place ought straightly to regard the laws
and ceremonies observed of old custom to the Senate) that incontinently after
he was out of that place, with a joyful countenance in the presence of the
Senate went unto him, A great love of the Father toward the Son.
being as it were half dead, and embraced him in his arms, saying unto him:
My son, I do accept thee for my dear child, for I know and see thou art
worthy to exercise the Consulship of Rome, because thou have so good knowledge
to defend the majesty of an Emperor (which thou do represent,) and also
the ancient statutes of our predecessors, which will that the Emperor himself
shall obey the laws made and ordained by his forefathers. The memory of
Zeleucus Zeleucus.
King of the Locresians, shall also be had in eternal memory among al men: who
after he had made and instituted many good and virtuous laws for the
government of his common wealth, among others he ordained one, that he who
should be be taken in Aduoutrie, should lose both his eyes: His own son
by evil Fortune within certain days after, was taken offending in the same,
and being condemned for it (according unto the Law and ordinance made by his
father) was adjudged to lose both his eyes: but the people having a regard
unto the deserts of his good Father the King, would have dyspensed with the
Son, and made humble request unto him, that it would please him to remitte
his offense. This good old man did all that he could by extremity to resist
their request, showing them that according to his laws he ought to have both
his eyes pulled out: but in the end being overcome with the importunate
desires of the people, minding to satisfy them in some part, (and yet to keep
his law inuiolate) he caused a Theater to be erected in all their presence,
and him self and his son being mounted upon it, with an invincible
constancy, Valerius Maximus
first pulled out one of his own eyes, and after incontinently pulled out one
of his sons. So in using this marvelous kind of equity, he was merciful
to his son, and very severe to himself, and all to the end he would give
a testimony to those that should succeed him, how Princes ought first to
put to their own hands to the work, and to observe their laws, as thou may
see in these verses following.

Zeleucus gave law to his Subjects all,
That taken in aduoutrie who should be,
Should loose his eyes: but lo, such hap did fall,
The Kings own son, into that snare came he:
Zelencus bids that law be done straight way,
Without regard: The people pardon pray:
The King that would his law in force to run,
One eye from him, another from his son,
He takes, deserving thus the rather,
Name of just Judge, and pitiful Father.
And Licurgus the lawmaker to the Lacedaemonians (so much commended in the
hystories) never made any law, whereunto he did not first render himself
obedient. And Agesilaus king of the Lacedaemonians likewise, among his most
commendable Sentences, was accustomed to say that he desired no other
commodity of his kingdom, but wholly the advancement of his co^mmon wealth,
and that it seemed (to his judgment) more profitable for the same to be ruled
and governed by good and wholesome laws, than by good Princes: because Kings
being overcome by their affections, may err and go astray as well as others,
of whose doings the laws will take small place: And it is most certain (as the
divine Plato says) that as the Prince is, such is the people: Such Prince
such Subiect^^.
And also Ecclesiasticus says, as the Judge of the people is, such are the
Ministers: And in the book where Cicero does interprets those Laws which
the.xij. tables do contain, there is one laws written that does straightly
command all Magistrates to live discretely without offense, to the end they
may be examples to guide and show the ways to others, where afterward he
adds to these words: Even as (says he) by the viciousness and
covetousness of Princes the city is infected, so likewise by their continency
it is reformed and amended: after he concludes: If thou would search
(says he) the doing of the old world past, thou shall find that as the
princes did always change their manners, so did also the inhabitants of their
provinces. Antigonus writes to Zeno.
Antigonus King of the Macedonians. writing to Zeno (as Laertius teaches)
after many purposes alleged of doctrine and felicity, he brought in for his
conclusion, that like as the Pastor shall be brought up and enriched with
virtues, even so shall his flock be. And it is even very so, Herodianus
for Herodianus writes that the citizens be but as the fignets of the Prince,
for they do nothing but as they see them do. Agesilaus aforenamed (the very
mirror and pattern of virtue) although he was King of the Lacedaemonians. yet
nevertheless he would be seen oftentimes in the mids of winter (being old and
crooked) go round about the town without having any apparel upon him, and
many one maruelling that he could endure it, did demand courteously of him,
wherefore he did so: to this end, said he, that youth should learn by mine
example to harden themselves to labor, and patiently abide all adversities that
shall happen unto them. We read also in ancient histories, that the same
ambicious Monarch Alexander being in the farthest part of Afrike, was
constrained to be three days together himself and his whole army without
any thing to eat or drink: afterward having gotten vittuailes, A marvelous
abstenence of Alexander.
he would see that all his soldiers should first be satisfied before him self
would once touch any meat: His great friend Parmenio being astoonned at this
his great patience in forbearing to eat, demanded of him the occasion why he
did so, to this end (said he) that my people seeing a proof of my patience in
so dangerous a place. should be sharpened hereafter the more pacientely to
bear and endure the rigoures and extremities of the Wars. But why do we
consume so much time to rehearse the examples of the Ethnikes, Act. cap 1.
seeing that Jesus Christ himself (a witness irreproueable) did first begin to
put the ordinance of the law in exercise, before he took upon him to teach
others, as he said he came not to break the law but to fulfill it. Hearken a
little to that which that zealous man of Justice S. Paul has written, Math.
cap. ^.
speaking to those that were the brekers of the laws which they themselves had
made and established: thou (says he) that teach others, do not thou
therein teach thy self, and yet thou do preach that a man shall not rob and
thou thy self do rob: thou say that a man ought not to commit adultry,
Roma. 2.
and thou thy self do break wedlock: thou hate Idols, and yet thou
committest sacrelege: and glorifying thy self in observing the law, thou do
dishonor God in breking the same. Aristotle Aristotle.
makes none other d^fference between a King and a Tyrant, but that a King
obeys the laws, and leads the course of his life after the ordinance
thereof, The Tyrant governs none otherwise but by his unbridled desire.
Aristotle in his politiques
and a Tyrant following the frailenesse of his own will, breketh and violateth
the Law, and is not governed by any other puissance, than by his unbridled
desire and apetite, by the which being provoked he peruerteth and corrupts al
order of Justice. After he joins that which follows, worthy certainly of
perpetual memory. And if thou will (says he) consider Man in his dignity
and perfection, he is the most meruellous, most excellent, and most noble of
all other creatures: but if thou will consider him being at liberty and
without the use of the law, thou shall find him the most monstrous and
abominable of al others. And Cleobolus one of the wisest men of al Greece,
says, he ought to use least liberty that has more than another. A
Philosopher of Persia by a brief answer that he made to King Cambises, gives
a worthy example of the difference between a King and a Tirant, King Cambises
asked him if it were lawefull for him to join in marriage with his Sister,
there is (said he) no Law that does permit it, nevertheless Kings and
Princes do what pleases them. An other Mynion of the Court, desirous to
flatter and please King Antigonus, (said unto him) that all things were
lawefull and honest for Kings, yea (said the King) very well, to the
barbarous and ignorant people, A virtuous answer of A exander in a Flatterer.
but to us that have pollytike knowledge, apt understanding, capable of
Prudence and Justice, and that are instructed and nourished in good letters,
there is nothing lawefull to us which shall not be both good, honest and
virtuous. I will tell you one notable thing more of this King, seeing it is in
purpose to speak of him: being a puissant Ruler in Asia and the successor of
Alexander, on a time he fell sick and was so evil handled by the rygour of his
disease, that there was thought no hope of his life, but after that he was
amended of his sickness, his friends began to rejoice of his health, to whom
he said: well my friends, let no man lament the evil luck of my sickness,
for amongst other incommodities which it brought me, it did me one special
good turn, in making me to know that I am a mortal man, and so farther it has
made me to understand that for that great prosperity and puissance that I
have had, Sickness is the cause often times that me^ do knew themselves.
I ought not to look so high, nor to exalte my self as I have begone, because
that this prosperity is no permament thing. But to return again to our
purpose, Kings ought to be the first to put to their hands unto the work, and
give us example by their good lives in what reverence and estimation we ought
to have their Laws and statutes: for in so doing, they shall be honored and
feared of their subjects, and they will have them in such great admiration
for their good works, that they will not be so hardy to offend or commit any
notable crime: for there is nothing that does more provoke and styr the common
people to virtue, than when they do see their chief and Prince the first that
puts himself in exercise of well doing, There is noth^ng that do the more
stir and provoke the common people to virtue tha^ to s^e the Prince the first
to put it in execution. Eccle. ^0.
who is as it were a Theater and glass that all the world should behold, or as
common fountain whereat all the world should draw water: or as a lamp that
should give light to al men. But to thend that we should not seem to speak
these things without authority, mark the sayings of the wise man in the
Ecclesiastiques, who says: as the Governor of the city is, such are the
inhabitants thereof, the foolish King shall loose his people, and the City
shall be well inhabited when it is governed by the wise, and if we will enter
into the secrets of the Scriptures, we shall find that there have been many
wicked Kings which have been cause of the ruin and destruction of their
people. And that this shall be found true, you may read that Jeroboam, king of
Israel setting up calves of gold, did call his people from the honoring of God,
and caused them to commit Idolatry, by means whereof these poor people
became wicked, and for the same his wickedness his own house was pulled up by
the roots, and utterly made ruinate upon the face of the earth, 1. Kings. cap.
13.
and so the people of Israel walked in all those ways of wickedness that
Jeroboam did set forth. Let us go a little farther, we shall find that many
Kings of Judah, Evil and wicked Princes have always overthrown their people. 4
Kings cap 25.
as Achas, Manasses and Amon, by their evil example caused the people to
commit Idolatry, and for their execrable offenses the Lord promised them to
divert and overthrow Jerusalem, and to send grievous persecutions upon the
people of Israel, which he did afterward. Behold lo how evil guides be as
the trumpets that do stir al strife, and the torches that do set on fire the
poor people to all vice and wickedness. And if by chance there be any found
amongs the people which are not so far gone astray as others be, and that will
not be induced to wickedness by the evil conversation and example of their
Prince, yet nevertheless perceiving their King and Prince to be a vicious and
wicked person, they will not give him the obeisance and honor that is due to
him: for wickedness and sin carries ordinarily with it this commodity, it
will cause him that does commit the same to be counted an abiecte, and to be
contemned of all men. But to the contrary, there is neither Scepter, Diadem,
Purple, or other work of Nobility that shall make the Prince to be more
esteemed, and his subjects to be more prompt and apt to obey him, than the
integrity of life, temperature of manners, and brightness of virtue.

The sixth Chapter.
How that a Prince for his better perfection in the ordring and directing of
his life, ought specially above all other things to be learned and also to have
continual conference and Counsel with sage and wise me^, which shall be as
the sinnevves and life vvherby his Realm shall be sustained and maintained:
vvherin also is made diverse and many discourses, of the honor and reverence
that Princes in the old time have borne toward learning and knowledge.

EVen as we for our part desire and wish that the Prince for his better
perfection should be endued with virtue and godliness, always embracing the
same as a daily companion: So is it expediente for him that he be enriched and
beutified with Lerning and science, that by the aid thereof he may be made more
apt and meet to rule and govern his Subjects. Vegesius in his book of the
Art of war, (among other things) wills that a Prince should have singular
knowledge and understanding in all Sciences and learning: VVised. 6
and the same is confirmed by the wise man where he says that the sage and
learned Prince is the stay and supporter of the people: Knoweledge requisite
for Princes.
and likewise he writes in the proverbs that the wise and learned man shall
enjoy the government. It is then very needful for a Prince to be furnished
with all such knoweledge as shall be convenient for the well ordering of his
affairs: as with prudence wisely to rule, discretion orderly to command those
things that are meet and conuenable for his honor and dignity: continual
vigilance over his commonwealth: tempred liberality differing from
covetousness: prodygalitie: Nobleness and majesty in his doings, with
equity: good aduisement and sober deliberation in all his enterprises and
attempts, as well in peace as war. Solomon Solomon.
in his Proverbs says, that the obteinyng of wisdom is much better than any
other profit or commodity that a man may receive, be it either in merchandise
or in any other trade, and the benefit that grows thereof is much more
precious than the pure gold, and is of more greater price than any worldly
goods or riches: and says also there is nothing in this world that a man can
wish or desire which either may or ought to be compared to it. For by this
wisdom a man may wyn to himself immortal renoume in repressing and beating
down, and as it were bringing within certain limittes, the unbridled and
greedy desire of insacyate covetousness (wherewith not only Princes and great
Monarchs in the old time were infected in coveting to enlarge their kingdoms
and dominions, but also al other men in their acts and humain devises and
inue^tions, (and al to make their names to be famous and everlasting) and the
true and very mean to attain thereunto is this wisdom which is most meetest
to be in a Prince: The Prince is the eye of the common wealth.
for a Prince in a commonwealth represents that which the eye does in the
frame of man's body, for the eye directs and rules all the parts thereof,
and does preserve the same that it shall be without all danger and peril, and
therefore if it chance the virtue thereof to be debilitated, that it can not
do his office and endeavor, the rest of the body is like to peryshe and be
destroyed. So may we justly speak of a Prince that is blinded with his own
concupiscences and lusts, for both he himself and those whom he governs,
shall be in danger of peril and ruin. Let us note a little the counsel of
this great King Solomon, Solomon.
one who did taste as well the pleasures as the thorns and troubles that do
always accompany a crown and royal Scepter, when he says, Hearken ye
Princes of the people, (if ye do delyghte in Kingdoms and Scepters,) embrace
wisdom to the end ye may Raygne for ever: VVised. 6.
Love the light of wisdom you that be rulers over the people: the multitude
of the wise, is the health and comfort of the Earth, and a wise and sage King
is the strength of the people: and not content to speak this once, but he
rehearses the same in his Ecclesiasticus, saying: the welfare of the people,
The stay of the common wealth does consiste in the wisdom of the Prince
Proverb. 8. Cursed be that Realm whose prince is a Child. Deutre. 17.
consists in the wisdom of the King: as contrary the ruin of them in his
folly. After he says, cursed is that land whereof the Prince is a child:
furthermore wisdom speaking herself, cries out with a loud voice and
says: by me Kings do raygne, and the Counselors make just laws, by me
Princes bear rule and gouernmente, and all the Judges judge the earth. And the
Lord amongst other things will that the King shall be fortified, and made
strong with the doctrine in Deuteronomie, where it is said: when the King is
set upon the seat of his Kingdom, he shall write himself out a copy of this
Law in a book before the Priests and Levites, and he shall have it with him,
and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his GOD, and to keep all the words of that law, and the
ordinances therein, so to do that his heart arise not above his brethren, and
that he turn not from the commandments, neither to the right hand, nor
to the left hand, but that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and
his children in Israel.

Plato Plato.
that divine philosopher, knowing very well that no human government could
be establshed without the use and knowledge of sciences (said,) Common
wealths shall be well and happily governed, when they are governed by wise and
learned men, or by those that shall employ their studies to wisdom.

And if ye will well consider the ordering of the ancient common welthes in the
old time, ye shall find that they have been in more happy estate when they
were governed by the Philosophers themselves, and did receive their laws and
ordinances, The lawmakers.
than by any other means: as ye M^telemans by Pitachus, the Cretenians by
Pithagoras, the ^giptians by Mercury or Olyris, the Bractiens by Zoroastes,
the Persians by Oramasus, the Carthagenis by Caremundus, the Atheniens by
Solon, the Sitheans by Zamolxis, the Cretensiens by Minos, the Lacedemoniens by
Lycurgus, the Romans by Numia Po^pilius the Greeks by Orpheus, and the Hebrews
by Moses and Aron. Among al other, that floruishing common wealth of the
Romans has ever been stored with many sage and wise gouerners, and has been
ruled by diverse Princes exellently well enriched and beutified with all kind of
learning, knowledge and virtue: and it is a meruellous thing to read (which
seems in these our days rydiculous) how that many Kings and Emperors in
times past have them selves ministered justice to every man, and did exercise
the estate of Judgment in their own proper persons, among which that noble
Emperor Augustus Caesar, Augustus Emperor and Judge.
Emperor of Rome is worthy perpetual memory, for he was continually busied,
in heering the debates and controversies of his subjects, and to do them
right and Justice, according to the equity of the cause, so as we read in
many historyes he continued ordinarily, in that travel all the day long until
night, and that with such zeal as that if he ch^u^ced at any time to be
diseased or sick, yet he would have his bed to be set near to the common
place of Justice, or else in his own house in such a place that all men might
have access unto him (as Suetonius the great Greek author witnesses in
rehearsing his life. Sueto. ca. 33 The Emperor ought to die with travel.
) And when his dear friends did at any time reprove him for his great travel:
he answered yt an Emperor ought to die standing on foot with travel, and not
in his bed at his ease. Vespasianus also exercised himself in the like things,
whereunto he was so affectionated, that he was not only content to employ the
same good will and diligence to the Romans only, but also did impart this his
labor and industry to other provinces his neighbors. Philostra^es li. 7.
And (as Philostrates writes in the life of Apolonius) Domitianus his son
was also paynefull and diligent in those matters, Suetonu^ upon his life. Dion
Cassius. Emperors and Judges. Va^pas^anus, Domitianus Traianus, Adrianus,
Aurelius, Anthonius, Maximius, Commodus Pertinax, Seuerus, Saracula,
Iustinianus, Fredericus, and Charles the great have al exer^^sed the s ate of
Judgment.
for he employed the better part of his life, to hear and determine the
controversies between party and party. Aurelius Victor, Emperor, was also a
just Judge and a vigelant. Traianus, one of the most virtuous emperors that
ever has been, took great pleasure in the like exercise, to qualify by
Justice the strifes and discentions of the people (as Dion Cassius does
witness in his writing of him.) I could with these few in number rehearse
many others, as Iustinianus, Anthonius, Commedus, Saracula, Frederick, and
Marcus Aurelius, of whom the memory is eternal amongst men. Plutarchus
reherseth in his Apothegms, that Alexander was so singularly affected to the
seat of judgment, as that on a time amongst others, when a Promotor (accused a
certain man of an heinous offense) he began redely to stop one of his ears,
and being demanded why he did so, he answered and said, I will reserve the
other ear to hear the party accused. Phillip his father being in the seat of
Judgment, there came a certain man before him which had a plee against one
called Machetas, and he not giving good ear to the matter did very lightly
condemn Machetas without having any good consideration of his cause: this
Machetas thinking that his cause deserved not such a Sentence, and saw withal
himself deceived in the Judgment thereof, (knowing also the great wisdom of
Phillip) was greatly astonished and said: I do appeal from this your Sentence
(noble Emperor) wherewith the Emperor entering into choler, Machetas did
apeale to the sentence ^f the Empe^or be^^^e hims lfe.
demanded of him: before whom thynkest thou to appeal from this my Sentence?
(for it was an odyous thing to appeal from the sentence of the Emperor) I do
appeal said Machetas, before thy self: that it would please thee to consider
better the truth of my cause. This good Emperor being moved with his
persuasion, began attentively to consider and understand better the effect of
his process, and finding that he had failed in the judgment thereof, he
would not revoke his sentence, Reformation of Sentence.
but paid Machetas (out of his own Coffers,) the sum of money that he
condemned him to pay. Behold lo, the virtuous exercise of these ancient
Emperors and Kings. B^oke. 17. of his Eneidos.
And Virgilius also the first latin Poet, does speak of Priamus, how he
himself did sit in place of judgment, and showed justice to al men that came
before him. And Agesilaus that was King of the Lacedaemonians, did accustom to
do the like. And this virtue in rendering Right and Justice thus to al men,
Plutarque upon his life. The Kings of the Persians did always judge the
causes of the people. Excellent me^.
did win such glory to those aunciente Emperors and Kings, and did so
beautyfie them, that the Persians would not receive any King to reign over
them, that did disdain to sit in Judgment, as Philarcus has written in
Theneus. And Hesiodus an ancient Greek Poet writing of those things, says,
that there is three manner of people in this world, of the which one sort of
them are endued with good wit and understanding, and are able of themselves to
embrace the good and lawefull things, dispose the present, and foresee things
to come, without any instruction of others: and these sort of people do keep
the first place in perfection, and are counted most excellent amongst men. The
second kind of men are of a more weaker and debile nature, and not of so
subtle a spryte as the others, nor are not able to give judgment of any thing
of themselves, but the metal of them is very good and pliable, and they have
discretion to obey the good counsel of others, The mean s^^^^.
and to follow the opynion of the wise and sage personages, and will moderate
and rule themselves after their advise and counsel: and though they be not of
so excellent a degree of wit as the first, yet nature has framed them to do
some thing that is good: and they keep the second place of honor and
praise. The last k^nde be those which are altogether careless, and will not
learn any thing, no, nor have pacyence that any man shall instruct or
admonysh them of their profit, nor will not have access to any books or other
knowledge, Men of a p^r^^rs^ na^^^^.
whereby they may learn to be more wise and discrete: And these last kind
of monsters be unprofitable, and unnecessary for the use of the works of
nature, and so he concludes, they are the very worst of all people: (...).
and thus Hesiodus by this his doctrine means none other thing, but to
condemn those which pass their lives as it were in a shadow, and feed them
selves with Idleness (nourse of all vice, and wickedness) where otherwise
they might employ their time to study to atchiue to learning and knowledge, in
the which being well instructed, they might bring some singular profit in
their Country and common wealth. But to return again to our purpose, it is a
marvelous thing to read in what estymation and honor, she ancient
Emperors, Kings and Monarchs, have had learning and knowledge, and in what
honor and reverence, they always had the learned and wise men. It is found
in writing in the life of the Emperor Anthonius (of whom we have spoken
heretofore) that he gave to Apianus so many Duccats of gold, Amarpelous
liberality of an Emperor. Jn what e^^^mat^^n l^^rning was ^mo^gst the
ancients,
as a great book which he made of the properties and natures of Fyshes, did
contain lines. The Emperor Traianus did so greatly honor Dyon the
Philosopher, that whenever he went into the camp, he always had him with
him in his own charyot, and so would bring him home again with that
estimation, even into Rome, entering there with all his triumph. The Emperor
Gracianus readyng certain Verses of Ausonius, preferred him to the
Consulshipppe, which was the greatest dignity next unto the Emperor.
Octauianus the Emperor in that great wars that he had against Marcus
Anthonius, in Egypt, would not destroy Alexandria, one of the most famous
cities in the world, and when his friends demanded of him, wherefore he forbear
to destroy the same, for two causes (said he) the one because Alexander did
build it, and the other for the love of the Philosopher Arrie which was there:
this Emperor was so affected toward good letters, that he made Cornelius
Gallus Trybune of ye people, only for that he was an eloquent Poet. Arianus for
a certain history which he wrote of the gestes of Alexander, was created
Consul by the Emperor Adrian. A marvelous liberality of a covetous man.
And Anthonius Suetonus writes a thing almost incredible in the life of
Vespasianus, that although he was a man all overcome with Covetousness, yet he
favored Arts and Sciences so much, that he gave to the master of every schole
yearly a thousand and five hundred Crounes. Atheneus writes in his book
Synosophistes, that Aristotle for his book that he wrote of the nature of
beasts had of Alexander viij. hundred Tallents of gold which were worth (after
the computatio^ of Bid in the book of Ass) four hundred and fourscore
thousand Crounes, which Pliny does confirm, in saying, that Alexander upon a
fervent desire he had to see the same book ended, sent many thousands of men
through out al Greece, Asia and Affrike, with express commandment that al
men should obey them in all those things that they desired touching fouling, 480.
thousand Crounes given for one book.
fishing, hunting, hanking, and other such like exercises, and all to the end
the properties and natures of al beasts might be the better searched out. And
if Homer the only Phoenix of all the Greek Poets, had lived in the time of
Alexander, I pray you in what honor and estimation had he been, Alexander m^de
(...) pill^we of the Jliad (...) ^f Ho^e^e.
seeing he was so jealous of his Iliades, that he made a Pillow thereof, and
did sleep upon it in the night? and when upon a day a certain man brought
unto him (for a present) a Coffer wherein Darius did put his sweet and most
precious oyntmentes, having received it, he said: this Coffer I will make the
treasurer of a more excellent Treasure: and presently he caused the same works
of Homere to be laid in it, in the which he took so great pleasure, that
even amongst his weyghtie affairs, he employed himself certain hours in the
day to read the same: and one time reading therein (amongst other things)
the commendations and virtuous exploytes of Achilles, he lamented his evil
fortune that he had not been borne in the time of Homere, that he might have
had such a Trumpet to set forth his acts and commendations, as he was.
Pompeius an excellent captain among the Romans after the victory which he
had against Methridates, had never quietness in his mind, tilhe had visited
Possidonius the Philosopher in his sickness, whereof he was advertised, A
singular honor that Pompeius gave to Possidonius.
and not contented only to visit him in person, but the more to honor him,
commanded that the standerds and imperial ensigns that he had, should be
brought thither with him, because he thought that Kingdoms and Empires ought
to obey to Virtue and Knowledge: Lo, a marvelous devotion that he had to
learning, for he never did use the like order, neither to King, Captain, or any
other that he used to visit in such case.

We find further that the ancient Princes have not ben contented only to
honor them living, but also after their death: For Ptholomeus king of Egypt
builded a Church and a Pillar in the honor of Homer, as if it had been to the
Gods. And also we read in the Greek histories, Seven Cities were in
controversy for the bones of Homer.
that.vij great Cities were of long time in controversy who should have his
bones. This is a strange thing and very true that always the Tyrants them
selves, enemies to all humanity, did give honor to learning. For Denis the
Tyrant, king of Cicylia, by usurpation, did not spare by all the means and
inventions that he could use, The very Tirants did favor learning.
to win that divine Plato to come and visit him in Cicylia, and being
advertised that he came, he went to meet him himself, and prepared his
Chariot with.iiij. white horses, wherein he received him with as great triumph
and solemnity as he possible could, for the great reputation and renoume that
he had in that time amongst the wise and sage persons. The Atheniens had
Demostenes Demostenes.
in such estimation that they made a great Pillar to be erected for him, upon
the which they caused to be written in Greek letters these words. If his
body had been equal to his spirit and knowledge, the king of the Macedonians
had not been victorious over the Greeks Josephus also the Jew, Josephus
captive.
being of the number of the captains of Jerusalem, and lead prisoner to Rome,
yet because of the books which he had made of the antiquitye of the Jews,
they did honor him with a pillar which was set in the rank amongst the
others. Plutarchus and Aulus Gelius write, that Alexander in his conquest in
Asia being advertised that Aristotle had published and put forth certain
books of Natural Philosophy (that he had learned under the said Aristotle)
wrote a letter unto him full of checkes, Alexander not contented that Aristotle
had published his books.
wherein he rebuked him and said he had done very evil, so lightly to publish
his books without aduertising him self thereof, seeing he desired to excel
al others in this Science which he had learned of him: but now being thus made
familiar to all men by means of these his books being brought to light, his
hope was cut of for ever hereafter to attain thereto: for he did as much
desire to pass all others in learning and knowledge, as he did to excel in
all other things. But Aristotle knowing that this disease proceeded but of
noblenes and virtue, he knew very well how to prepare a medicine for the
same, and sent him an answer, that he would not leave of nevertheless, from
proceeding in his former purpose, and said that his books were obscure, that
there were very few or none that could understand them, if they had not his
interpretation. Diogenes Laertius writes, that Antigonus King of Macedonia,
knowing the commodity of learning, and how much it was requisite for the
government of a kingdom, and knowing also Zeno to be of great renown amongst
the Philosophers of the sect of the Stoikes, Letters of king Antigonus to Zeno
the Philosopher.
being moved with his sagenesse and wisdom sent unto him letters and express
Ambassadors, whereof the content is thus written in Diogenes Laertius:
Antigonus king to Zeno the Philosopher sends greeting. I know that I am more
rich in worldly goods given by Fortune, than thou art, yet always thou do
excede me in other things, in Sciences and learning, in the which consists
the true felicity of this human life: wherefore I do pray thee that thou
wylt permit that I may see thy conversation, and enjoy thy presence, and if
thou do agree thereunto, thou shall be assured that the goodness and
learning that I shall receive at thy hands shall not be for the profit and
commodity of one man only, but generally to all the Macedonians, for that he
which gives instruction and learning to a King, does teach also al his
Subjects. For always as the King is, such be his Vassalles, and as the
Captain is, such are his Soldiers.

This good old man as soon as he had read his letters, for that he could not go
to him him self (for his great age) sent him two of his Scollers well learned,
which did assist him and gave him instructions for the space of five whole
years, to whom the King did yield him self so tractable and obedient, that he
dyed one of the most renoumed kings upon the earth. And shall we pass under
silence Julius Caesar, one of the most famous Captains upon the earth, who had
books as familiar with him, as armor, and would as sone give him self to
read as to arms: who always as soon as he had satisfied his acts in arms,
he would disarme him self, and go talk with the Poets and Philosophers, and
always in his iourneyes he either wryt, or else did read some book. The
Historians write of him one noble thing worthy of perpetual memory: Julius
Caesar passing over a certain flood swymming, held his works in his hand that
they should not be lost.
That being one day in Alexandria a Town in Egypt, (flying the furye of his
enimyes that did pursue him) he did save him self with swymming, and carried in
one of his hands certain books which he had composed, declaring that he had
in as great estimation the monumentes of his mind, as his life. They which
have at any time read his Commentaries, and considered the things therein
contained, and specially the phrase of his Latin words, they may easelye judge
he was no less an Orator, than an Emperor.

Themistocles Themistocles.
a noble captain amongst the Greeks was as much commended for his learning
and knowledge as for his valiantness, although he was one of the most renoumed
of all the Greeks. Epamynondas likewise which was an other of the most
excellent captains of the said Greeks was ever studious and given to
learning. And Methridates, Methridates.
who by the space of.xl. All the most famous captains of Greece were lovers of
learning. Paulus Emilius.
years warred against the Romans did not at any time abandon learning, but had
always with him certain Philosophers and Orators, with whom he did always
communicate his studies. Paulus Emilius also conqueror of the king of the
Persians was a man much given to study, and was so zealous toward the
Athenians that he gave unto them Metrodorus for to instruct their Children,
and he himself not contented to spend all his whole life in learning, but to
the end he would give a testimonye to his posterity, how he had spent his
life, did write many profitable books for the world to come: A great number
of Emperors that did compose books.
as Quintus Fabius the great, Marcus Brutus, Traianus, Adrianus, Marcus
Antonius, Marcus Aurelius, Alcybiades, Scipio, Affricanus, Lucius Brutus, and
many other Romans and Greeks very noble in arms, and great lovers of
learning did the like. And Haniball likewise a most excellent captain,
although he was of nature fierce, savage, and greatly estraunged from al
humanity, unfaithful, and hated of God and man, yet he had always the
Greek and the Latin tongue in such estimation that he left unto us a book in
the Greek tongue written with his own hand. And Alphonsus king of Castle, a most
noble and learned Prince, was so well exercised in the science of Astronomy,
that even at this day we do taste of the excellency of his knowledge. And
surely all these noble men left these monumentes as examples to their
posterity to follow.

Therefore I think there is no heart so faint of feable, that shall read the
famous deeds, acts and prowess of so many valiant and noble men, but will
be kyndled and styrred up with an ardent desire to follow and resemble them,
and set at naught this caducall life (which is but a moment) to acquire and get
this famous as it were everlasting life, By knowledge and learning men shall
procure to them selves immortality. 1 Kings. 3.
whose acts after their death have made them more glorious and shining than
they were before in their life time. Solomon that celestial Orator, declares
very well that all things to him was nothing worth in comparison of wisdom
and knowledge: For when he had his choice of the Lord to demand what he
would, he asked of him wisdom to judge his people, and to discern the good
from the evil, which he obtained in such abundance, that he passed all the
Kings upon the earth, as well in wisdom, as in discretion to judge and
govern his Subjects, and in such sort, Salomo^ surpassed al men in wisdom.
that by the fame and renoume of his wisdom he drew unto him those which were
in the extreme parts of the world (as the Queen of Saba) to visit him, to
behold his Majesty, to learn instructions and wisdom of him, The Queen of
Saba.
in which thing he has attained to the glory of his father David who was so
well endued with his celestial wisdom, that he persed and entered into the
most highest mysteries of heaven.

But now if we cannot persuade our Princes and Kings by these so many examples
of such a number of Emperors, Kings and Monarchs, Counsel of wise and grave
men is good for Princes.
to employ them selves to learning and knowledge: yet for default and for a
supply thereof, we wish they would at the least have about them men of
knowledge, wisdom, and virtue, that may assist them, by whose wisdom and
counsel they may the better decide all accidents: Proverb. 3.
for there is nothing more pernicious to a kingdom than when the head and
chief thereof will not permit the council of the wise, or that he will
prefer his own head before any others, leaving therein the doctrine that the
wise man gives, when he does admonish us that we should not trust to much in
our own wisdom: which is also confirmed by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 5.
when he says, Woe be unto them that are wise in their own sight, and think
them selves to have understanding: as S. Paul also to the Romans writes,
that we must take good heed we think not our selves wise in our own
conceits. Roma. 22.
For many Kings and Princes have mayntayned their Realms in great honor and
prosperity by the wisdom and council of sage and dyscrete persons that
governed them. Many kingdoms maintained in great honor by council of the wise.
As Phillip King of M^cedonia had a Lieutenant called Antipater, by whose
wisdom and council he obtained many victories. And when upon a time as he
was at his rest, there came one who showed him that his enimyes did approach,
and that he should take heed, and stand upon his defense, least he were
surprised: He answered and said to him, let me take my rest and repose my
self (I pray thee) for I know certainly that my Lieutenant Antipater watches
for me. A marvelous affiance in a friend.
Declaring hereby the special affiance and great trust that he had in the
conduction and great vigilancie of Antipater, having often times approved his
diligence in more perilous places. Antipater fri nde to king Philip.
Thus if the Father was happily ruled by the council of Antipater his son,
Alexander was no less by his Ephestion, who loved better the virtue and the
nobleness of his Master, and also his own reputation, than he did all his
riches.

Alexander upon a time received letters (being in Asia) from his Mother, whom
he had left as Regent in his kingdom, wherein she did signify unto him
certain treasons that one had devised against him. As Soon as he had read
them, he gave them to Ephesteon, and when he had perused them over, Alexander
took of a Ryng from his finger wherein was his Seal, and incontinentlye
sealed up the mouth of Ephesteon, declaring thereby that he should keep
secret the contents thereof, A great affiance that Alexander had in
Ephesteon.
such affiance had he in his fidelity. And it is a thing almost incredible to
hear of the good will that Alexander bare toward Ephesteon, for when he
heard of his death, (he loved him so dearly) that all the pompes, magnifices,
and ceremonies that he could any ways invent and devise, were employed at the
Obsequies of his Ephestion: for he bestowed all the ointments, Alexander
bestowed upon the funerals of Ephestion his dear friend ten thousand talents of
gold, which is after the account of Bude six millions of gold. Plutarque
Armanus and Theodorus affirm the same.
sweet odours, and baulmes that he could by any means procure, and caused
him to be covered with purple and other curious clothes, as if he had been some
Prince or King. He caused also a Sepulcher to be erected over him, so
curiously wrought with all excellencye of architecture decked and enriched with
so many Images of gold and other precious things, that (as Plutarque and
Theodorus write in the history of Alexander) his funerals cost him above ten
thousand talentes of gold. And be not amassed if Alexander (magnifique in all
his doings) bestowed so great charges on him, for he did so much esteem the
faithfulness of this his friend, that he thought there was none worthy to
supply his place, and accounted his friendship more dear to him, than all the
riches of his Realm. And it is true as Aristotle says in his Politikes, that
friends and councellers be Orgaines and members of a kingdom, who are no
less necessary than the very body.

We have also a notable and strange example of amity in Zopirus (most
affectionated friend of Darius king of the Persians) who perceiving that the
said Darius his Master had a long time besieged Babylon, without preuailyng
any thing therein, and that there was little hope of victory: and seeing his
said Master withal greatly tormented and afflicted for the destruction of
his people, The incredible amity of Zopirus to Darius his Master.
which he had lost in the pursuit thereof: to the end he would comfort him
again, he determined quickly either to make an end of his own life, or else
to recover the town again. And presently the better to perform the same, he
cut his own ears and nostrels, and fled into Babylon. Afterward being there,
fayning him self desperate and mad, he began to speak evil of Darius, and
promised the Babilonians the victory, and that he would not cease to spend the
rest of his life to invent all the means possible to be revenged of Darius
cruelty toward him.

The Babilonians seeing him thus bemangled and cut, they were the easier
persuaded that he had received this great injury at Darius hands, and thought
that being thus confirmed in enmity toward Darius, A subtle invention to
deceive the enemy.
he would the rather seek means to overthrow him and his kingdom, because he
knew all the whole secrets of his Realm. And thus the Babilonians being
deceived by the subtlety and finenesse of Zopirus, did determine amongst them
selves, to commit the government of Babylon into his hands, and to make him
chief and captain of their army. But he that knew very well how to play his
part (when he was in full possession of all their liberty) he gave Darius
entry into their town, and afterward put al his army into his hands. Darius
being informed of this act, and by what means he was made Lord of Babylon, he
could not be stayed from weeping for the great joy he had conceived of the
friendship of Zopirus. Afterward being greatly sorry for the hurt and
defacing of Zopirus, did swear by the immortal Gods, he loved better to have
a perfect Zopirus, than to be Lord and Master of ten Babilons.

The Romans have in their histories the like example of frienship, The like
histories for the Romans
but yet not so much to be marvelled at as this, because it is the friendship
of the Child toward the Father (wherein there is a more duty than is
required of one friend to another.) Sextus Tarquinus faining him self to be
evil entreated at his fathers hands, Sextus Tarquinius did beat himself
with rods to dec^iue the Gabinets. Light credence is noisome.
did scourge him self with rods, and fled to the Gabiens that were besieged,
amongst who^ he got such credit, by means of his subtle and crafty
inventions, that he persuaded them to believe he had conceived great hatred
against his father, and that he should never be satisfied in his mind, until
he were revenged of his cruelty toward him: and if they would therefore
repose them selves upon him to direct and appoint their affairs, he would
handle him with such rigor, that he should never in his life hereafter have
will to make wars again with any people. The Gabiens (allured by his
flattering and sweet persuasions) made him chief and Captain of their Town,
but within a little time after they understood how that by their ouerlyght
credit they were deceived, and in satisfaction of their folly, their Town was
delivered into the hands of his Father Alexander, a man that was never
satisfied in exaltyng those that did give them selves to be ruled by the
council of their friends, declaryng thereby in what estimation he had those
that in wayghtye matters did use council. Alexander gelous of the glory of
Achilles.
As he sailed one day over the Sea Helesphont,) to go to conquer Asia) passing
by Troge, he would needs see the Portracte of Achilles, that was set upon
his Sepulcher: And after that he had considered it well and beheld it at his
pleasure, even as a man envious at his glory and fame, with a great sigh
(said,) certaynlye Achilles thou haste been one of the most happiest men in
all the world in two things, in the one that in thy life time thou had so
faithful a friend and companion in arms as Patroclus was, which accompanied
thee even unto thy Sepulcher: in the other thou wast more happy, that after
thy death thou had such a Trumpet to set forth thy acts and deeds, as
that great learned Poet Homerus was, who has so hyghlye sounded them abroad,
that the whole earth does hear thereof.

This invincible Monarche had this Greek Poet in so great a reverence, that he
called his Iliades, Viaticum, a necessary thing for those that will exercise
and follow the wars, and serve as an instrument to inflame and stir them
up to magnanimity, because that the ruin of Troy, and the prowess of
Achilles, with the commendations of a great number of excellent Captains be
so well discribed and painted out therein so to the life, that it will provoke
such as shall read the same to follow their doings, whereby they shall
consecrate their names to immortality, as these other have done.

And further he had so well printed this magnanimity and nobleness in his
spirit, that he commanded straightly all those that had the oversight of his
Provinces, that they should not suffer any man that professed learning, to
enterprise to write or set forth his gestes and praises in their works:
doubting that some one would take the matter in hand that was not sufficiently
learned, This which is here attributed to Alexander, by others is referred to
Augustus Caesar as Suetonus does wytnes in the life of 12. emperors
to discribe his acts, nor give him the honor and praise worthy his deserts:
and said, that his renoume might be obscured and darkened, if it should be set
out by such as were unlearned and little exercised in those affairs, as a
precious stone would be that passes through the hands of many workmen, which
in ouermuche handling would in the end become so slubbered, that it would lose
his clearness. And he had not this opinion only of those which professed
liberal sciences and disciplines, but also of others more baser, and of an
inferior degree. For he defended also upon great penalties throughout all his
Empire, that no Painter, Engrauer or Caruer should make any. Image, Portrature
or Table of him, were it either in copper, or in any other matter (except
only Appelles, Pliny and Horace.
one of the most excellent and renoumed Painters upon the earth.)

But to the end we will not go far from our first matter, which was to
entreat how requisite council is to those that do command others, Homer
(the worthiest man among the Greeks) did very well confirm, when he said
that Agamemnon the King and chief Captain against the Trojans, The desire of
Agamemno^
making his prayers to the Gods, that they would grant him ten such
Councellers as Nestor was, the better to bring to pass his enterprises (having
with him at that time Ajax and Diomedes Captains very well exercised and
approved in Martial affairs) did never desire either ten Aiaxes, Homerus
lib 2.
or ten Diomedes, knowing very well how greatly the good council of Nestor did
serve him to purpose, and how much profit and commodity it always brought
unto him in all his affairs, to prevent any thing present or to come, when he
did receive the same, and followed it.

Phillip of Macedonia, father to Alexander, did so much bewail the death of a
dear friend of his called Hipparcus, that he was almost dead with care. And
when his friends did seek to comfort him, and to put him out of his mind,
alleging that it was time for him to dye, considering his many years, and
that death was more necessary for him than life (if he had good regard of his
old age) it is true said he, but certainly it is great grief to me that I have
not recompensed his wholesome councels and the long and paynfull services which
I have received of him in times past: wherefore perceiving very well I cannot
now acquit the same, this my unthankfulness shall be a burden to me and my
honor for ever. An Epilogue of the things before said.
And now having brought forth by the testimonye of many profane histories, as
well Greeks as Latins, how necessary it is for a Prince (that will govern
his people well) to have some wise and sage men about him, by whose council
his Realm shall be better ruled and governed: it now rests to confirm the
same by the testimony of the holy and sacred Scriptures.

Moses the great law geuer to the Hebrews, Testimonies of the holy and
sacred scriptures.
when he complained to the Lord his God, that he could not govern such a
multitude of people (as he had) considering the murmures and seditions that
they continually raised against him, he was commanded by the Lord that he
should choose out.lx. men which he knew to be most ancient, wise, and of the
greatest estimation and credit amongst the people, Number. 11.
and he should lead the same to the gate of the Tabernacle of wytnes, to the
end they might assist and aid him. And after the Lord said unto him, that he
would take of the spirit which he had given him, and put upon them, that they
should bear mutually togethers the charge of the people. Hester. 1.
Likewise king Assuerus being contemned of the Queen Vasti his wife, would not
punish her of his own authority, but he gathered together the wisest and
sagest of his Province, after whose advise he did determine of her fact.

Romulus the first founder of Rome, knowing how difficult a thing it was to
rule the common wealth, he ordained an hundred Senators, of the most wise and
ancient men of Rome, to help him in the administration of his common wealth.
Let therefore Kings and Princes take it for a certain truth, that for the
conservation of their mightynesse, and the preservation of their Realms, they
must above all things deliberate and moderate all their doings and
enterprises with counsel and good advise, not runnyng headlong thereunto
without all order and reason. For there is nothing more enemy to Veritye,
Justice, and Equity, than ouermuche rashness.

Quintus Curtius in the life of Alexander does recount, that as he upon a time
was sorrowing with him self that he had rashly passed certain affairs,
Virtues of the said Alexander.
whereof he did repent him afterward, he took in hand to entreat of Virtue,
amongst certain of his se^ ^untes that he was most affectionated unto, to
whom af^^r many exhortations and other documentes he declared that a King ought
to premeditate three times upon every thing that he shall do, before he put it
in execution. For when the Prince (said he) commits any offense, he must
think he does it in a Theater, where all the whole world shall see him and
mark him, and that more is, his offense and fault is almost incorrigible,
because it flows and spreads it self amongst all the people. The wise man
likewise desiring to repress those first and sudden motions that are in men,
Prouer. 19.
does say in his Proverbs, that he which moves his feet to fast, often times
stumbleth, and does with his ouermuche haste bring with him repentance.
Afterward he adds in his said Proverbs, My son, do nothing without
council, and then thou shall not have cause afierwardes to repent. Behold lo
how by the lessons and instructions before said, Kings and Princes may
gather, that learning and knowledge are things very profitable and commodious
for the dignity royal, and does maruellously deck and adorn the same. And
likewise they may learn in them not rashly and without aduisement to pass
over their affairs: but always call unto them wise and sage council to
decide all their actions and doings.

And now for conclusion, The council of young men perilous to Princes.
for as much as we have entreated of council, it is necessary that we do
somewhat exhort them that they do very rare or seldom accept the council of
young men: and specially of such as have been delicately brought up, and that do
rather follow most willinglye the swinge of their unbridled wyls, tha^ the way
of virtue. And this is most chiefly recounted unto us by Aristotle, Aristotle.
Prince of the Philosophers, who forbids expresselye, that they shall be
made the chief or head of any Province or Council, for their counsel is to
be suspected. But to the contrary, that the Prince shall always have about him
such as be stayed in age, and sober in council, and that have great
experience in all things, conjoined with integritye of life, and virtuous
manners, such as commonly is found in old men, which (as S. Jerome writes)
are feeble in all the powers of their bodies, S. Jerome. Plato in his Sympose.
but increased in wisdom and council. Which thing is wyselye taught also by
Plato in his Simpose, where he says, that although the corporal eyes begin to
be weakened and leese their puissance and strength yet the eyes of the mind do
see more clearer, and be made more subtiller and sharper.

Aristotle in a certain place demanding a reason wherefore old men be
commonly more fearful, Wherefore old men be more fearful tha^ young men.
than young men: answers and says (amongst other things) that the great
experience that they have of the mischiefs past, does make them to be in such
fear. But such consideration cannot enter into the minds of young men, being
lustye and whote in all their actions and doings, because they have not yet
proved the rigor of Time, nor force of Fortune.

Plutarche
Plutarche that worthy Philosopher does teach us, how that a City is more
happily governed by the council of old men, than by the force and strength of
young men: and antiquity also has attributed so much to number of years,
that if there rise question to put any thing in execution of importance,
always old men (by common usage allowed by Nature) are preferred thereunto.
Titus Linius Prince of the Latin Historians does write, that when the Romans
had determined their punike wars, Ambassadors ought to be ancient and wise
men Macha. 5.
they chose the most ancient of the people to make their Legates and
Ambassadors into Affrique. And it is written in the book of the Machabees that
King Antiochus sent an ancient man of Antioche to convert them to their law.
And this thing was had in use and observed immediately after the beginning of
the world by Abraham, who did send into Mesopotamia the most ancient of his
Servants, to entreat of the marriage of his son Isaac, Cap. 24. Nume. 22.
as it is written in Genesis. Balaac also King of Moab, sent the most sagest
and eldest for Ambassadors to seek Balaam to curse the people of Jsrael, as
it is written in the book of Numbers. Denis Halicar.
And as Dennis Halicarnaseus writes likewise, that Ethuriens willing to
entreat of peace with Tarquine, chose out of every town one ancient man,
for the accomplishment of their Legation. Abraham that good Patriarche, knowing
very well that wisdom and sagenesse did for the most part accompany white
hears, Genesis. 29 Solon. The Romans. Atheniens. Lacedemoniens. Stobeus
sermon 122. The praise of aged and ancient me^.
ordained for chief of his house the eldest and auncientes of his servants.
The ancient Romans in the election of their Magistrates, did always
prefer the most eldest. Solon the lawmaker of the Atheniens did forbid them
to receive any young men to the rule of their common wealth. And Cicero in his
book De Senectute writes, that they did use the like in Macedonia and in the
I Will of Ta^rabanum they do not choose their kings of the ofspringes of Nobility
(as we do accustom) but they choose him for their Prince that is most
ancient, wise, and sage. The Arrabians likewise, as soon as their King is
dead, they choose the most ancient men to rule and govern their Province, as
writes Diodorus Siculus. Julius Frontinus writes also that L. Paulus did
wish for the public profit and co^modite that Emperors and the chief of
armies should be ancient men. Philostrates in the life of Pelonius writes
that Vespasianus being of the age of.lvj. years, did excuse himself (when he
was chosen to receive the government of the Empire) and said he was ever young,
thinking that his years were not sufficient to execute so great a charge. And
is it not written in the Ecclesi^stes that cursed is that la^d that has a
Child to their king? and amongst other threatenings that the Lord sends by
Esaias to his people, he promises to give them young kings, as though he would
say, I will send you destruction and ruin. Fulconius Nicomachus made a
continual prayer to his Gods, wherein he prayed them that they would defend the
land from a young king. And it is a marvelous and strange thing to behold that
brute beasts, even by the providence of Nature, will rather obey to the old,
Pliny lib. 8. cap. 5. Age honored among brute beasts.
than to the young, as Pliny a great searcher of the properties of Beasts, does
witness to us when he says, that amongst the Elelephantes that most ancient
do guide and lead the troop, and the other go after, and acknowledge them
for their heads and chief. Aelianus the Greek Historian writes likewise
that the little Antes going into the fields to make their provisions for the
winter, suffer the most ancient to go before, and are contented to be guided
by their order and advise.

Now the Prince being thus instructed by such a number of histories (here
before rehearsed) in what reverence and estimation the ancients had always
old age, and that they have happily been aided by their councels: it is
necessary then that they do not determine of any weighty matter with out their
advise, council, and assistance, following therein the council of the Prophet
Job which says, that wisdom and sagenesse does remayn in the old and
ancient men, Cap. 12.
and in the plurality of years consists experience and sapience: as
contrary in youth, lyghtnesse and inconstancy ever prompt and enclyned to
all evil, who when they once go astraye into wantonness and insolency, they
do not only animate themselves, but likewise they do infecte those that follow
their advice and counsel. What happened to Roboam, in rejecting over lightly
the council and advice of the old and aged men, Kings. 3.
and admitting yongmen? but even the loss of the better part of his Realm
and Kingdom: we have also an other example of two Kings of Juda, ye one
Ieconias Iechonias.
being counseled by Ierimie, obeyed thereunto and found it very profitable for
him: and the other Sedecheas, Sedechias.
very obstinate, would not believe him but being hardened in his malice was
cause of the ruin of his City: and generally of all the people. Kings 12.
We could more easily allege an infinite nu^bre of examples by the which ye
understand of many subuertions and strange accidents yt might have fallen upon
many Kingdoms and Empires, because they did lightly and without good
consideration, commit themselves to be governed and ruled by the advice and
council of youth. But forasmuch as it is not our principal intent so highly to
magnify old age, that we should thereby seem to deface and cut off all hope
from young men, to be called into Princes services, and to cause them to loose
thereby the celestial gifts that the Lord our God has imparted to them, I
will aleage an infinte number of young men, as well out of the sacred scriptures
as other profane authors, that have painefully traveled in the administration
of the common wealth, and which by their worthy and famous acts have merited
to be preferred before the aged: Jeremy a young man. Daniell a young man.
Jeremy. 1. Daniel 3. Sc pio Affricanus a young man.
is that young Prophet Jeremy who was ordained by the Lord, over people and
kingdoms, to pull up by the roots, destroy, make waste, to build, and plant:
and that young infant Daniel, which was in his young years made a Judge: and
Scipio Affricanus, was not afraid in his young years to demand the dignity
of the Aedilicial, to whom it was said his capacity was not sufficient, nor
his years agreeable for the same, who answered he had years sufficient if the
Senate would dispense therewith, as he made it very well to be known
afterward: for where virtue is lively imprinted and rooted, the few number of
years can not darken it. Likewise Caesar made it to be understood, Young
menns preferred before old men.
that prudence was not to be measured by years, who was sodeinly cut off by
death before he could perform al his devises and purposes. And Rullius
Decius, Coruinus, Sulinus, Flaccus Manlius, Torquatus Germanicus, and an
infinite number of other rulers of common wealths even as obortiues and maugre
their years were chosen and set up in dignity, but with such a testimony
and ornature of their virtues, that they have left good cause to their
posterity, to judge that the aduauncements of the common wealths has not
consisted only in the white hairs of old and ancient men.

The Atheniens bear good witness thereof: who were delivered from the
cruelty and servitude of the Lacedaemonians by the worthiness and nobleness
of Iphicrates, Jphicrates being of the age. of xxv. years, was chosen captain
of the Atheniens against the Boetians.
being but of the age of.xxv. years, who (above ye hope that was looked for of
one of his years) did restore them to that state that many aged and valiant
captains, (loosing their travail and labor) could not by any means
accomplish. And we leave to speak of Alexander, being but only at the age
of.xxxiij. years (the very periode of his age) was Monarche of the whole
world: and not contented with such victory as he had gotten, but caused the
earth to be dug, thinking that he should find an other world to
conquer. Oh a great nobleness of a Prince, that thinks he has done
nothing, if there remain yet any thing to be done. It is not therefore now
my purpose as you perceive, to exclude and banish young men from the presence of
Princes, no more than I covet to speak evil of them: but because I do desire
(for the perfection of the Prince) he should be without all fault and
blemishe: even so for that the counsel of old and ancient men is more assured
and less suspect than the counsel of young men, I do wish in ye respect that
they would more frequent the one than the others.

The seventh Chapter.
How that Kings and Princes ought chiefly and most principally to have the
estate of christian Religion in great reverence and estimation, and to shevve
themselves lovers of the same: and that they ought also to be very diligent and
careful to punish the blasphemers and contemners thereof, and vvithal to purge
their dominions and realms of al heretics and Sectaries: for the which there
is shevved many examples of erroneous sects, together with the false doctrine
of Mahomet, his life and death, and by what means and suttletie he has
suborned and seduced so many people, and how many Emperors, kings and princes,
after they had persecuted the faithefull of the Church of God, did not escape
the sharp vengeance of his wrath, but dyed in the end of some shameful and
horrible death.

WE have here in this last Chapter entreated generally of such virtues as are
meet and co^uenable for Princes, for the worthy governments of their realms
and dominions: and now we will speak of one special virtue, Holiness and
pyetie toward god and religion is required of kings and Princes.
without the use and practice whereof all the others are but vain and of no
value, and that is holiness and piety toward God with an ardente affection
and zele to his true religion which with Princes ought to be had in more
greater recommendacion and estimation than their own proper lives. Josias one
of the most worthy Princes that ever bare scepter.
Josias one of the most virtuous princes that ever did bear scepter, after that
the book of the law was found in the temple, and that he had heard it red, he
assembled all the most ancients of the people, and being accompained with all
the Prophets and priests, went into the Church, Paralipo. ca. ^.
and there sitting in his seat royal, made an allyaunce before God, to obey
to his commandments, statutes, and ordinances, Divine instructions of Prince^.
and made all his subjects to promise that they should accomplish all the words
of the same allyaunce according to the covenant of the God of their fathers,
which they did observe and keep during all the time of the life of this king
Josias. There is one notable lesson written in Deuteronomie for kings and
princes, where it is said: Deuteron. 2.7. solue. ca. 1.
You Princes and kings which are set upon the throne of your kingdoms,
receive the law and have it always with you, and read it all the days of
your life, to the end you may learn to fear the Lord your God, and to keep
his laws, and commandments, Wisdom. 7.
and see that it do not depart your mouths, but think of it day and night,
that you may accomplish all that is written therein, The prosperity of princes
lies in the ^^lf^^ling the law. Daniel. ca. 2. A profitable exhortation of
Daniell give to prince^. The threa^nings of G^d to wicked P^in^^^ Was ^ia^
and then your realms and kingdoms shall prosper with all joy and felicity:
open your ears you that judge the costs of the earth and rule the multitude,
and take pleasure in numbers of people: authority and power is given you of
the Lord and strength from the highest, who (as Daniell says) changes
times and ages, puts down Princes and sets them up, and choseth them
amongst the most humbliest sort of men. Receive discipline and be learned, you
that judge the earth, serve the Lord in fear, least he be wroth, for he will
look upon your doings, and will search your thoughts, because that you
(being ministers of his kingdom) have not judged rightly and justly, nor have
not regarded the law of righteousenesse, nor have not walked in the paths of
the Lord. He shall therefore appear to you in his rigorous judgment when he
will judge severely them that have sitten in the seat of judgment: and the
mighty ones shall be mightily tormented and punished. Enter into your selves
therefore you Princes, and dispoyle your selves of these humain affections that
hold your eyes blind, 1. Kings 2. Kingdoms do always prosper when they are
governed by good and virtuous princes 3 Kings. 3. Idolatrous kings and
contemners of religion. Hospitalles ought to be had in remembrance amongst
kings and princes.
acknowledge the graces that the Lord has bestowed upon you which are
comprised in the secret mysteries of this heavenly philosophy. The kingdoms
of Israel did always prosper very well as long as they were governed by good
and virtuous Princes, as David, Iosaphat, Ezechiel, and Josias, who had
always the fear of God before their eyes: but to the contrary, under Achab,
Manasses, Ammon and other such wicked idolaters, and co^temners of true
religion, they were always tormented and afflicted, and in the end utterly
overthrown. For during the time that Solomon walked in the ways of the Lord,
he possessed his kingdom in tranquillity: but after yt he had builded temples
to Idols, all the world was against him. It is man's duty, and most chiefly
required at the hands of Princes, to have the house of the pure and sacred
places in remembrance: And specially those that are without relief, decayed
and become almost ruinate by continuance of time, according to the example of
that good prince David, who spdeeily and with all diligence reedified the
tabernacle, and his son Solomon (with a marvelous magnificence) the Temple
of the Lord. Zorobabel was greatly commended because that (after from the
captivity of Babylon by the aid of Esdras) he reedified the temple of the
Lord. 1. Macha. 4. 1. Esdras. 3. The church shall suck of the breasts of
princes. Kings nurses of the church Esaias. 6.
As likewise Judas Machabeus did restore the temple polluted and profaned by
Antiochus. But what a gracious testimony have we in Esaias, of the alliance that
kings have made with the Church? Where he says, The kings and princes shall
give thee milk, and shall be thy nursses, they shall do honor and reverence
unto thee with their faces flat upon the earth: kings shall walk in thy
light, and shall build thy walls, they shall bring unto thee gold and
silver, and shall serve thee, thou shalt suck the milk of nations, and thou
shalt be nourished of the breasts and teates of princes. The christian
church is figured by I^rusalem.
Oh Jerusalem, thou holy City of God, all the countries upon the earth shall
woorshippe thee: strange nations shall bring thee presents, and shall worship
the Lord in thee, and shall account the earth holy where thou stand: they
that shall contemn thee, shall be accursed: and they that shall blaspheme
thee, shall be condemned. Job. 14.
But those that shall build thee shall be blissed. By the pattern of this
church is figured the Christian Church: And when Kings and Princes have
established and set in order all things that is necessary concerning true
religion, they ought with great discretion and policy, to devise and
establish laws to chastise and correct the infinite numbres of periuries and
blasphemies, which do reign amongs the people, and that with such severity
as they may taste of their justice. The second thing required at christian
princes hands is to punish the bla^phemies and periuries amongs the people.
And forasmuch as the majesty of God is thereby contemned (if by their
negligence the same do remain unpunished,) they shall be accomptable for it
before God, who will shoot the arrows of his wrath upon them, and upon the
earth. For if we be ready and diligent to chastise them that be condemned of
treason, or that do backbite and speak evil of Kings and Princes, and that
presently for the offense committed, we hang them, burn them, quarter them,
and confiscate their goods: Why should we not be much more zealous to pursue
them that do contemn the Majesty of God: before whom and to whom all shall
obey and bow their knees, specially being straightly commanded thereunto by
the Lord, where he wylleth, that blasphemers shall be chased out of the
City, Blasphemers must be stoned to death.
and that the people shall stone them to death?

King Nabuchodonosor who of an abominable tyraunte was becomme the disciple of
Danyell, did ordeyne that if any Nation or people did blaspheme the name of the
God of Danyell, that he should be cut in pieces. Daniel. 3.
King Darius likewise wrote unto all his subjects, that they should fear the
God of Daniel. And we have many examples of a great number of Kings, Prophets,
apostles and bishops, as Samuel, Iosaphat, Moses, Artaxerxes, and Darius, who
did stone to death the blasphemers: and amongst all others that good king Loys,
Blasphemers by t^^ law of good king Loys was made thrusting through the tung.
did make a law, that such blasphemers should have their tungs thruste
through with an hot iron. (But this vice is so common at this day, that if all
that do offend therein should be thus punished, all the Smithes upon the earth
would not suffice to heat the yrons:) seeing then it is so, that Kings and
Princes be patrons, proctours and the children of the Church, they ought to
girde their swords about their loins for the honor and glory of God (as the
Psalmist doothe teach them) that is to say, they should employ all their chief
study and care therein, 5. Ambro 54.
and to travel by all means possible to cleanse their realms and dominions of
these ravening wolves, Heresies must be punished by Princes.
false Prophets, seducers of the people, erroneous teachers, and hipocrites,
that would seem to be discreet and sage before the eyes of the world, and to
be wise in their own conceits, and yet in deed are but asses and fools,
replenished with all ignorance and blindness, The persecution against the
faithful has endured from the ^^^e that Je^^^ Christ ascended into Heaven
until Con^^^^tine the Emperor which is 300 years or there abouts
blind, and leaders of the blind, resisters of the holy Ghost, and the truth,
and given up into a reprobate sense. For Satan the prince of this world as S.
Paul writes does so bleare their eyes, and so shut up their minds, that
having their eyes open, they see not, and in hearing they hear not. And this
proceeds of the furiouse rage of the Devil who stirs them up against God
and the ministers of his word. And such troublers and persecuters of the
Church have begone and endured even from the time that Jesus Christ (our
redemer) ascended into Heaven, until the time of the emperor Constantine the
great, which continued nere. 300. years, during which time ye poor church was
maruelously afflicted and troubled: as under the government of Nero,
Domitianus, Traianus, Adrianus, Anthonius Seuerus, and Diocletianus. For
always when it was thought the Church to be in most best peace and
tra^quilitie, Great persecution of the Church.
whereby men's hearts waxed careless with overmuch idleness and want of zele,
and such as ought to have bin the chief conseruers and mainteiners of true and
sincere doctrine were negligent and had no regard thereof: then by and by the
Devil stirred up sturdy and furiouse sprites, flattering and ambicious minds,
to sow false doctrine, Idleness nur^e of all here^ie.
to deface the truth, and did engender great confusion in the Church: as when
by the means of Constantine the great, the Church had gotten some
tranquillity and rest, behold incontinentlye the fury of the Arrians,
Pelagians, Manichees, Eunomyens, Macedoniens, Nestorians, Eutychiens, and many
others beeganne to spring up to so great a hinderaunce and decay of the
Christian commonwealth, that the wounds thereof has well appeared too all
the posterity following: and not staying at all these persecutions, but even
then that false Prophet Mahomet (most wicked of all others,) beeganne to exalte
himself, who by his cruel malice has infected the most part of the earth.

And for as much as his beginning is recounted sundry ways by many Aucthours,
(too the end I would give some pleasure too the Reader, and to satysfie the
request of a Gentlemanne, a freende of mine, and for as much also as just
occasyon is now offered,) I will faithfully and truly rehearse that which I
have red as well in his Alk^ron as in other ancient authors, and some
others that of late have written any thing of his life.

And because that no man shall think that I do write here upon the report or
credyte of others, or that I have hereunto added or diminished any thing,
after mine own fantasye or deuyse, I will give the Reader to understand, what
Aucthours I have chiefly followed in this treatise, to the end, that if he be
desirous to have a more full or ample Discourse hereof, I will send him to
Aeneas Syluius, otherwise called Pope I^^us, Pomponius Latus in the abridgement
of the Romain history. Platina in the life of the popes, Blondus in his book
of the fall of the Empire of Rome, Nauclerus, Baptist Egnatius, in his
abridgement of the emperors, Paulus Iouius, Lodouicus Viues, in a certain
treatise of his, the Alcoran it self of Mahomet, and also Alcimadus his
interpreter, upon Caalay, which he commended upon A. Berosus, upon Cyar of
the acts of Mahomet, Hayn, Moymu, Mustlin. And if he be not satisfied with all
these ancient authors, I have hereunto adjoined the testimony of those, which
have bin of late days in Turkey, and have had the experience and proof of al
these matters, as Petrus Belon, who diligently has written all things which he
observed in that his journey. And Bartholomeus, Georgieniso, who continued there
the space of nine or ten years, and was sold and boughte there five or six
times, has written unto us all his whole vyage: whose testimonies I will here
remember chiefly for two causes: the one is, for that I might assure the
reader, that in this little discourse which I do here present unto him, he
shall find the perfect summarie of all that any others have written before. The
other cause is, wholly to extinguish and take away the great desire that many
have to read the said Alcoran, in which they suppose to find some great,
strange, and marvelous matter: but assuredly they are far deceived of their
account, for in reading thereof, they shall find no kind of pleasure at all,
nor no phrase, or property of words well used, but rather a disordered style,
without sap or sauoure, or any sentence or other matter else therein that
might delight or content the readers, but is filled with an infinite number of
lies, contradictions, and blasphemies, and that so horrible that amongst all
the things that ever have bin red or heard, The majesty of God is d^praued in
this Al^g^on
there cannot be found matter more ridiculous and more manifest against the
majesty of God our Lord, than is written in this Alcaron: so that in it, there
is no more taste or show of any troth, or verity, than is in the tales or
fables of Esope: and yet notwithstanding the Devil has so maruelously bleared
the eyes of many, that even now at this day the greater part of the world do
repose themselves on him, as on one that has bin most religious and holy: but
forasmuch as the truth shall be the better discovered by recital of each thing
in his place and order, I will first begin with the nativity of this false and
wicked Prophet Mahomet. The Turks have one book which is called Asear, in the
which is contained all the life of Mahomet, and likewise all his acts from his
nativity unto his death, his fathers name was Abdola, Abdola and Imina the
parents of Mahomet.
and his mothers Imina, his father died before his mother was delivered of him,
and his mother died.ij. years after he was borne, so he was left without father
and mother (who if she had auerted her burden, she had thereby delivered the
christian commonwealth from much mischief and affliction. A naughty life
argues an ob^^^^ race and family.
Some do write that he was descended of a noble race: others do not accord
thereunto (because his mischeuouse life was sufficient to infect and obscure all the nobleness in a whole region:) he was borne in Arabia his father was
neither Jew nor christian, but was a gentile and an Idolater, as the most part
of the histories do write: his mother was descended of Ismael, the son of
Abraham, which he begat of his maiden Agar, Imina the mother of Maho^^t
d^scended of Jsmael son of Abraham
and so he was a Jew borne: he had in his youth a maruellouse lyuelinesse of
spirit, and such a memory that he did redily comprehend any thing that was said
or showed unto him: he did by his great diligence and by the quickness of his
wit learn both the old and new testaments at the age of xv. years: he made
iorneyes often times into Persia, Syria, Palestine and to Cayre, and into many
other countries with a certain merchant (who being dead) he took in marriage
his wife, and had.iiij. children by her: after, when he was at the age of xxx.
years he used every day to go into a cave, and there kept such a maruelouse
abstinence, that he became therewithal, even almost mad, with overmuch
fasting: and (as some men write) being in this cave, he commoned with certain
wicked spirits. And one day being as a man desperate, Mahomet had co^fere^ce
with wicked spirits.
would have cast him self down headlongs from the top of a Mountain, by
reason of certain visions that he saw, whereby he was greatly troubled and
vexed.

The Turks also write in the abouesayde Asear, that Mahomet being then four
years old, would daily go a Fishing with little children: and once being
alone in a field by himself, the angel Gabriel apparelled all in white
appeered unto him in the form of a man, who taking him by the hand, withdrewe
him aside, and with a sharp and fine edged rasour opened his breast, and took
out his heart, out of the which he also took a certain black spotte of
blood, A turkish dream.
which is the cause (as the Turks affirm) that devils, and ill spirits,
assault or attempt men, for it is common to all men by nature to have the
aforesaid spotte or stayne: which done, incontinently the Angel cloased up
again his heart, and put it into his woonted place, clensing and spurging
thereby his heart, to the end that never after, he might be subject to any
suggestion or temptation of the devil. Behold now the first fond devise and
fable, written in the foresaid Asear, concerning the beginning of this our
Prophet Mahomet. Again he adds when this Turk Mahomet, began to write his
Alkaron, that the said angel appeared to him again, saying: Mahomet, God from
above saluteth thee, letting thee to know that thou must be his Prophet, for
thou art the most perfectest of all his creatures: and that the angel further
showed him certain letters, willing him forthwith to read them, to whom he
answered, that he could not read: Read (said the angel) in the name of thy
creator: With which words he vanished away, and departed from him. So then
Mahomet returning glad and joyful to his house, Mahomet saluted of stones
beasts and trees.
in passing thitherwards, he reported, that all the trees, stones, and beasts
by the way, did unto him both honor and reverence, saying: Mahomet thou shall
be the messenger of the highest. He writes also in his Alkaron, in a tretise
which he intituleth Alphata, a matter more strange and prodigious than the
rest, where he affirms, that God has forgiven him al his offenses, both
present and to come. Mahomets pardon.
And yet not contented with his aforsayd fictions, the better to seduce and
abuse ye people, he fained that he had bin in Paradise, and said yt on a night
being aslepe in his bed, with one of his eleue^ co^cubins, who had to name Axa,
Axa Mahomet his chief darling
which was amo^gs the rest, his best beloved darling, herd one knock as a
stranger at his door, and rising to open it, ye angel Gabriel (al covered with
white wings, bringing with him a beast whiter tha^ milk, greater also something
tha^ an ass, which he called by name Alborach) said unto him: god saluteth
thee, Mahomet his beast called Alborach.
and has given me in co^ma^deme^t this night to conduct and bring thee to
Paradise, there to co^te^plate his most high and divine mysteries: and the
angel said unto him, Mount up quickly on this beast, but ye beast drew
backwards, and would not come near him: to whom the angel said, why will thou
not ye Mahomet ride on thee? I assure thee, yt a man more perfect neither has,
nor shall come upon thy back: to whom ye beast answered yt he would not come nigh
him, unless he first would promise, yt he might enter also with him into
Paradise, whom Mahomet in that behalf did consent to gratify, and said yt he
was ye first beast yt ever should come into Paradise. So Mahomet being then
mounted, The angel Gabriel foot man to Mahomet
the angel took in hand the bridle, traveling all the night toward
Jerusalem, and being arrived in ye temple there, they found all the messa^gers
and prophets of our savior, who honored him, and besought him to be unto god an
intercessor for them: and departing out of the temple, they found a ladder al
framed of certain bright and blasing light stars, which from the earth
stretched eue^ unto heaven it self: and the angel taking then hold thereof, they
shortly ascended into the first heaven, which was all of perfect silver,
beautified with some stars hangyng in chains of gold, as big to the view as
hills or mountayns: so knocking at the gate of this first heaven, had it
incontinently opened to them, where they found Adam, Adam.
which embraced Mahomet. Thence past they unto the second heaven, which was
altogether of pure and good gold, where having knocked, they entered and found
there Noe, Noe.
where they did behold the name also of God and Mahomet written together in
every place. From whence they past ageyn into the third heaven, which was of
rich and precious stones, where they found Abraham. Abraham.
And thence ageyn into the fourth heaven, which was all made of perfect
Emeraudes, where they found presently Joseph. Joseph.
From thence they passed further into the fyft heaven which was all of
diamondes, where they found Moses. Moses.
And from thence into the sixth heaven which was all of shyning carbuncles, S
John Baptist.
where they found S. John the Baptiste, who did unto him humble honor and
reverence. From thence they past into the seventh heaven, which shined all
with the bryghtnesse of the divine majesty, Ies^^ Christ.
where they found Christ Jesus, with an infinite number of holy angels, whom
Mahomet saluted in most reverent manner: and then the angel Gabriell took his
leave of Mahomet, and Mahomet mounted yet again higher, where he found great
store of waters, and of snow, and there of his travel he waxed so weery that
he was scantly able to go any further, and there he herd a voice that said unto
him in this manner: Oh Mahomet, honor thou thy God, thy creator, for thou
approchest very nyghe unto him, and incontinently he seemed to be environed
with such brightenesse that his eyes were dazeled and began to fail him: and
he said that his majesty had six hundredth thousand curtains or vayles
hanging before his face, and that he was nygh unto him, within the space of two
shootes of a Crosbowe: he said again that God spoke unto him, and gave him
many commmaundements of his law, reueling also unto him infinite of his
secrets. After all this, he yet also gave him five great prerogatives.

Five prerogatives given to Mahomet
The first, that he should be most honored of all creatures living, in heaven
above, or in earth beneath.

The second, that he should be the most famous Gentleman of all others the
children of Adam.

The third, yt he should have authority to pardon all sins.

The fourth that he should be skillful in all languages.

The fifth, that all spoils in wars should be given to him. This done, he
returned to the angel Gabriell in the place where he before had left him, who
led him further to behold, in what sort the feendes tormented the damned
souls in Hell. What trash Mahomet had gathered in his Alkaron.
All which things and such like trashe and lies, he has in a long discourse
written in his Alkaron, which for breuities sake I omit and pass over:
neither had I written so much of him, as I have done, if it had not been to
dissuade and dehort those, that do earnestly desire to peruse and read his
fond and foolish works: and they may well judge by that which is above
alleged, the frantike and disordered humor of this unhappy Prophet, which
did spewe and spitte out like a man senseless, all that did fall into his idle
brain, or fantasye, without any art, skill or order at all.

It rests now that I let you understand by what means he inchaunted and
bewitched so many, to give credit to his prodigious trumperies. Some there are
that have reported of him, that knowing certainly by often reading the Old
Testament, that when the law was given to Moses in the mount Sinay, there
were seen many signs, as thunders, lightnings, and such like, as it is
written in Leuiticus the.xix. Even so he desiring with some apishe devise to
counterfeat his doings, caused to be hyd certain pots full of Mil^e in the
earth, The subtle policy of Mahomet.
upon the top of an high or great mountain, and had so well tamed a savage or
wyld bull, that he would come to him as oftentimes as he pleased to call him,
and having fastened certain chapiters of his Alkaron, upon the horns of the
said bull, he assembled the greateste part of the barbarous people of Ara^ia
upon the foresaid mountain: where after he had used some kind of talk to
them, he immediately called his bull, who redily came to him, from which bull he
took these papers, which he before had fastened on his horns, affirming to
them that it was the law that God had sent them, which he there red and
interpreted openly. And remaining there two days and two nights upon this
mountain, the people being pinched with hunger, began to cry out, in a strange
manner: and then fayning as though he had prayed to God for them, immediately
said to them, that God by inspiration had reveled unto him certain places of
the earth, which they should dig, wherein they should find present remedy
for their hunger: and immediately digging certain places in the ground, where
it pleased him to command them, they found many vessels full of milk,
which he had caused to be hidden there not long before. Which thing in
marvelous wise amazed the rude and simple people.

And some other say (which is like to be more true) that Mahomet did never
miracle either true or false: A more true opinion of Mahomet than the first.
for (as he writes of himself, in his Alkaron) he was not sent to do any
miracles, because the people did use to press to death and kill such as God
had sent them before time to call them to repentance: but he was sent, only
with the sword, to do rigorouse justice on those that made no accoumpt of his
prophesies, Mahomet sent in the virtue of the sword.
for their incredulity, or that paid not tribute to him. And that he had no
power to do any kind of miracle, it appears evident in the book entitled
Ciart, when diverse Arabiens of sundry nations, sent to him (even then when he
called himself a Prophet) in most intier manner, requiring him, to confirm his
law and doctrine by some kind of miracle, giving him to understand that their
country was very barein, sterile, hilly, void both of water and victuals, that
it might please him therefore to desire of God, that he would make their
country even and plain, abating the mountains, and send them springs
plentiful in places of need, and that he farther would stir up and move
certain of the elders fully to instruct them if he taught the truth. But this
accursed Prophet having small affiaunce, or rather none at all in the right of
this cause, answered, that he had communicated with God, and had received of
him for answer, that which follows. Thy people demand miracles, but tell
them that heretofore I sent them Martirs, Prophets, and Apostles, with
infinite miracles, The law of Mahomet mainte^^^d by the sword and blood.
but they with blouddy hands most cruelly murdered them, and I will therefore,
that the law be mainteyned by the swoorde, and by the effusion of blood, upon
all such as shall refuse to accept or receive the same. Behold here, how
this traiterouse, and blouddy spirit, would frame and make of a most mylde
and merciful GOD, an unkind tiraunt, The greatest miracle that ever Mahomet
did
and cruel tormenter. And surely I believe, the greatest miracle that ever he
did, was that he transfourmed so many creatures reasonable into beasts brute
and insensible.

And now let us return agein to his Alkaron, (which is the book wherein is
contained al his false doctrine) and let us see what inventions and policies he
devised to aucthorise the same. First to bring it into some estimation, he
said to his wife, that he did ordynaryly common with the angel Gabriell, who
did show him that God had chosen him for his Prophet. He was subject to a
sickness called Epilepsy, in the common tung the falling sickness, he was
very subtle in devising to cover his infirmity: A policy to cover his lot^some
infirmity.
for when he sell by the extremity of his sickness, he said that then the
angel of God did common with him, and that he could not abide so great a
brightness, therefore he was compelled to fall upon the earth. He had by
continuance of time taught a Pigeon to come ordinaryly to feed in his ear,
and feigned that it was the angel of God that did communicate certain secrets
with him. And therefore at this day (in the city of Meque where they say he is
buried) it is an heinous offense to kill a pigeon, M^que. It is at this day an
h^ynous offense to kill a p^geon.
for the ancient reverence they bear to that pigeon that was fed in his ear,
and there is so great a number in the said city of Meque, that no province in
the world has so many, because that those that kill them (as we have said) or
eat any of them, are punished with the pains of death. These doings being in
this state, the Devil did aid him with a new mean, the better to bring to
pass his enterprise to his desired purpose. For there came to him a certain
Monk an Apostata, Sergius an Apostata.
called Sergius, which was a christian (being then fled from Constantinople for
heresy) who did greatly aid him to frame the dreams contained in his Alcaron
which is composed of diverse pieces of heresies gathered togethers, Sundry kind
of heresies of which Mahomet framed his Alkaron.
for all that which the Devil himself could not bring to pass by the
Arians, Eunomyens, Sabolliens, Cardome^s, Manichiens, Donatistes, Origenistes,
Anthropomorphites, he found an instrument of Mahomet, apt and well disposed to
serve him as a trumpet, to spread abroad most affectuosly their poison
throughoute the world. For he denies the Trinity with the Sabellians, the
holy Ghost to be God with the Macedomens, he proves the plurarity of wives
with the Nicholaits, with the Cardoniens he says, that it was not possible
for God to have a son, because he had no wife: with the Manichees he denies
that Jesus Christ was crucified, with the Donatistes that the sacraments of the
Church (after the passion of Jesus Christ) had any force, with the Origenistes
he says the Devil shall be saved, with the Anthropomorphites, he puts the
chief felicity in pleasure. This word Alcaron, Alkaron a col^ectio^ of
chapters.
signifies none other thing but a collection of chapters, or a number of
Psalms: it is written in miter, and it is so straightly looked unto, that if
any man do change one syllable thereof, or alter one accent, their law
provides that he that does it, shall lose his life by stoning to death. They
have it in so great reverence and honor that they kiss it, Am true^^^e
reverence come to their Alkaron.
embrace it, and swear by it, as we do by our God. This Alkaron, contains
four books, and does co^tain wholly all their ceremonies, and all things that
they must observe and do: And likewise what they shall hope of in the world to
come, and also those things that are lawful for them to do, as well in eating
as drinking: He has taken for the framing of this his book certain fragments
as well of the Old as new Testaments: He reherseth the offense of Adam and
Eve, the bondage of the children of Israel, he puts in the said Alcaron
three notable things of Jesus Christ. The first is in the first Book and
second Chapter, he says that Jesus Christ ascended into heaven both body and
soul: the second, that he is the son of God: the third that he is called
the spirit of God. He does also affirm, that Jesus Christ knows the
secrets of men's hearts, that he raised the dead, gave sight to the blind,
and made the dumme to speak, he describes a Paradise and a Hell. As touching
his Hell, he says that those that be dampened, A fantastical hell of Mahomet.
be put upon broches of iron, and that those men that be there, be always
dry and thirsty, and they drink boiled Lead, and eat filthy and corrupt
meats, and Apples of a tree, whereof the fruit is the seed and beginning of
Devils. And as touching his Heaven, A ridiculous Paradise.
he makes it to be full of all pleasures and delights, and says that there
is nothing but precious stones, and that a man shall drink and eat there the
most delicate meats and drinks that can be wished, and shall be served in
nothing but in gold and silver: And shall not wish for any thing, but it
shall be present by and by. And those that be in their Paradise (after they
have well eaten and drunk) there shall appear certain Pages which shall hold
each of them a dishe of Gold in his hand, carrying a great Citron within it,
the which each Turk shall take to smell unto, and suddenly as they smell unto
it, there shall spring out of each Citron a virgin, well appointed in
apparel, which shall embrace these Turks that be in this Paradise, and they
shall continue so fifty years, never restrained to take their pleasure
togithers, but even as though they were man and wife: and at the end of fifty
years, God shall call them, and taking away a cloth wherewith he covers his
face, they shall fall down incontinently through his great brightness.
Afterward he shall say unto them, rise you my friends, and enjoy this
brightness, you shall never hereafter die, nor take any care or thought. And
having thus seen their God face to face, Of this matter read the four books
of his Alkaron translated out of the Araby tongue into the latin.
they shall begin to banquet again. And he says, that those Virgins be
strongly enclosed within a wall, and kept close, for they be of such a rare
and excellent beauty, that if one of them shall (even at midnight) issue out
of this Paradise, she will by her brightness lighten the whole world as if it
were the sun: and he joins further thereunto, that if any of them shall spit
into the sea, the water would be made as sweet as Honey. And to be short, he
faineth in his Alkaron, that Paradise is all of gold decked with Pearls,
watered with the most beautiful and clearest waters in the world: and he
says, that they have there, Horses garnished and trimmed as they be upon the
earth: and does describe also to be there, a magnificall and noble palace. He
writes that women go not to Paradise, neither do they go to the Church,
because they are not circumcised.

Now after having thus described this fantastical Paradise, and this Hell of
Mahomet, which is so ridiculous, that in reading of it thou shall find less
to approach the truth, than one of the said Esopes Fables. It now rests for
us to show by what means he could bewitche so many people, and persuade them
so well, that they received his false Doctrine for truth, the means whereto was
this. In the beginning he did not communicate his false doctrine, but to those
of his own household, next to his neighbors, afterward to to the common
people, and specially to such as were the most gross witted, and to carnal
men: for he does permit in his law all the vices of the flesh, with all
liberty (of the which kind there was at that time a great number thorowoute
the world,) and perceiving him self rich and greatly favored of Fortune, he
gathered togithers a great company of his own sect and religion. And when he
saw him self well appointed and strong, he assailed his neighbors, The
aucthors that i^ treat of this matter. Platina, P. Laetus, Sabellicus, P.
Iouius, Pope Pius, Be^on, P. Messia, Arnoldus, Romianus, Crispus, Flore^tinus,
Franciscus, Barnardus in his camologe of heretics.

Mahomet died being. 34 years of age. The priest that was a traveler shows
it in his geographie.


and so made him self Lord of many Nations and Provinces. These things were a
doing about the year of our Lord six hundredth ( Eracleus being then Emperor
of Rome, and holding his seat at Constantinople, and Bonifatius the fifthe
then also Pope.) Mahomet seeing his affairs prosper so well, yet somewhat
dispairing his success, did forbid, that any man should dispute upon the
manner of his Law, and so by this means he made it to be observed by force.
Afterward he went to assail the Countries of Roman Empire: he entered into
Syria, conquered the Noble City of Damasco, and all Egypt and Judah,
persuading the Sarazens, (people of Arabic,) that the land of permission
appertained to them of good right, as the lawful heirs and successoures of
Abraham. After he had Conquered diverse Provinces and Regions, he was poisoned,
and dyed about the age of four and thirty years, and in the year of our
Lord six hundred thirty and two (after the account of Sabellicus.) And
because he always vaunted him self that after his Death he should ascend
into Heaven, his Disciples kept his body (stinking upon the earth) certain
days after he dyed, until it was corrupted as his soul was.

Afterward he was entombed with a Tomb of iron, and carried to Meque
aforesaid, a town in Persia, where he is at this day honored of all the
people of the East, yea even of the greatest part of the world, and this is
for our sins and wickedness, and we may therefore easily be persuaded and
believe that he was sent as a scourge (even by the permission of God,) to
chasten the Christians, as he did send long since an Antiochus, a Cyrus, and
a Nabuchodonozor to oppress his peculiar people the Jews This is therefore no
new thing that the Lord does execute his justice against his own, The good
chastened for the evil.
by such tirants and wicked men as Mahomet was, the Lord has given us to
understand the same by the Prophet Esaias where he says: I have called my
mighty and strong men in my wrath, I have called them my holy ones, to the
end they shall glory in my name: the Prophet pronouncing these words, spoke
of King Darius and Cirus. Mark lo how he calls the Medes and Persians his
holy ones, Peter Mess^e in his forest.
who were neither good nor holy, but only the executers of his will and
pleasure to chastise Babylon: he speaks the like in Ezechiel, where he says,
I will guide and lead my servant Nabuchodonosar, because he did serve me
faithfully at Tire, and I will give him also Egypt. yet he was not for all that
the servant of God. Totilla King of the Goathes being demanded wherefore he
was so cruel and extreme against the people, A meruellous persuasion of a
tira^t that he said he was sent of God upon the earth to punish his people.
answered with a marvelous faith therein, what think thou that I am other
than the very wrath and scourge of God, sent upon the earth as an instrument
to chasten the offenses and wickedness of the people? We may evidently
therefore know by these things that God does for the most part correct and
chasten us by the wicked, (who nevertheless do not cease to be wicked still,
and deserve them selves plagues:) for according to the word of the Lord and
savior, it is necessary there come slander, but curssed be he by whom
slander shall come. Behold lo the attempts and furious assaults that Satan
and his accomplices have framed, Mahomet the most greatest enemy of the church
of God that ever was.
against the Church of Jesus Christ and his Doctrine: for there is no religion
that he has persecuted so cruelly from the beginning of the world as he has
done ours, and although he has uttered all his suttleties, crafts, malices
and inventions to ouerrun it, and suppress it, yet it remains still perfect
by the goodness and aid of our savior Jesus Christ, who does repress and
bridle the malicious and poisoned rage of his enemy: The church of God shall
endure for ever.
and although he has procured the death of some members of the Church, and
that of ye most ancients and greatest clarks, as Abel, Esaias, Zachary,
Jeremy, Jesus Christ, the Apostles, and many holy Bishops, as Polycarpus,
Ignatius, and many.1000. of Martyrs and others, yet he could not overthrow the
same. Martyrs for the word of God.
For it is written that the gates of Hell shall not preuail, nor stand against
it: and although by continuance and revolution of time it has been and shall be
put in great danger and peril, and that it has been and is turmoiled and
tossed as a ship by the rage and violence of the tempests, Jesus Christ's keeper,
spouse, and head of this Church.
yet Jesus Christ will never abandon or leave his espouse, but he will always
assiste her, as the head does the body, he watches for her, he keeps,
preserves, and maintains her, as ye promise by him made does witness,
where it is said, I will not leave you as Orphans, The infants of god be not
orpha^s, Jesus Christ will assist them at all times. Esaias. ca. 50.
I will be with you even unto the consumption of the world. And in Esaias it is
said, I will put my words into thy mouth, and I will defend thee with the
shadow of my hand, and in the.59. chapter, he says, this is my alliance that
I have made with thee (says the Lord) my sprite which is in thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth, they shall not depart nor go out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed from hence forth for ever. Seeing
then our religion only to be true and pure, I say witnessed by J say.
and that it has been sealed with the blood of so many Prophets, Apostles,
and Martyrs, and specially sealed with the seal of the blud of Jesus Christ
our savior, whereof he has left unto us the very mark, Carrecte, and witness
in his death, and that all the other be unlawful and bastardes, invented and
devised by the devil (or men his instruments) to the confusion of ours, I would
wish that Princes, who are Gods lieuetenants upon the earth) for as much as
they be called the children and nursses of the Church (by the Prophet Esaias, An
exhortation to princes gathered of the things before rehearsed.
) and that they be the pillars and strength that it ought to be stayed by, I
would wish (I say) they should employ themselves to maintain it, defend it,
conserve it, confirm it, and amplify it, that they might at the latter day
when they shall appear before the majesty of God, say that which that good
King David said, Lord I have hated those that thou haste hated, and have been
angry with them that have lifted themselves against thee, I have hated them
withal my heart, and accomted them as mine enemies, Psalm. 138.
I have destroyed every day all those curssed and wicked people, to the end I
might put out of the city of the Lord, all such as give themselves to
wickedness. Psalm. 100.
And now let us harken what testimony the holy scripture does give us of the
zele that kings in the old time did bear unto their religion (which was but a
figure and shadow to ours,) what was it that has made Ezechias King of Judah so
greatly to be praised and honored amo^gs men, Ezechias a chief enemy to
Jdolaters. 4 Kings. 8.
but because he took away those hault Gods, bet down the pillars, quashed and
brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, that the people of Jsrael did make
sacrifices unto? What has made the memory of Josias to endure unto these our
days, but because he amongste other his commendable virtues burnt the Idolles,
Josias burnt the Idolles. 4. Kings. 23. Anger proceeding of virtue. Two murders
committed by Mathathias for Jdolatrie. 2. Macha 3.
Churches, images and altares that was made to the dishonor and contempt of
God? The time nor the puissance thereof shall never extinguishe the memory of
Mathathias, father to Machabeus, who being moved with zealous choler, and
inflamed with a divine furor, killed a Jew upon the altar that did sacrifise
to Idolles, and that in the presence of all the people: and in like manner being
moved with the same zeal, he put to death an other that Antiochus had sent to
do sacrifise. And above all things let Princes have good regard, that in
stead of defending the church, they do not persecute the same: for if they do,
they cannot eschew the just vengeance of the wrath of God, as we have example
by Helidorus, who robbing and spoiling the Church of Jerusalem of the money and
goods that was appointed for the relief of Widows and Orphans, was so
punished by the Angels that ruled and governed in the temple, The angels do
chaste^ Jdolatrie.
as he remains as an example for ever to others. Pompeius after that he had
cruelly polluted and profaned the same Temple, could not escape the scourge
of God, Pompeius was plaged for his offense
but even by the victory that Caesar had of him in the civil wars it did
appear he was justly corrected for his offense. Marcus Crassus passing by
Jerusalem with his army against the Parthians, Marcus Crassus.
could not forbear to rob and spoil the temple: but as Josephus writes,
the pain of the Sacrilege was not long after the offense: for even at the
same assaute his army was destroyed, and him self miserably slain. And if we
will search the Histories well, we shall find marvelous plagues of God laid
upon Pharao Pharao. Exodus ca. 14.
for the oppressions that he made to the sinagoge (which was but as a figure of
our Church) who after that he had been afflicted with.x. marvelous plages, was
in the end swalowed up and drowned by the violence of the seas. Senacherib. 4.
Kings. 16. The father killed by his own children in the temple. Antiochus
eaten with l^ce being alive. 2. Macha. ca. 19.
Senacherib king of ye Assirians likewise persecuting the Church, saw before
his own eyes (even by the hands of the Angels of god) al his army
overthrown, and afterward he himself had his head cut of by his own children
in ye temple of his gods. But how was that great monarch Antiochus plaged, who
seeking all the means he could to extinguishe the memory of the sinagoge of
God, and to bring in the honoring of Idolles, had he not (in satisfaction of
his cruelty) his body eaten with vermin, and became so odious and filthy
withal, that the stink that came out of the corruption of his body did
infecte his whole army? Thus he, who by his pride thought to commau^d the
waves of the sea to stay, and to weigh in the balance the high mountains, and
that was so puffed up with ambition, that he thought to reach the stars in
heaven, was so brought down by the fearful judgment of God, that no man
could abide his stinking and corruption, and for that he did cruelly handle
the servants of God, he died as a stranger in the mountains, of a death
worthy his wicked life. Herodotus likewise for persecuting the Church, died of
the like death. The death of Herod. Act ca 12.
Nero that infamous butcher, who has left none other memory to his
posterity, but his murders, and tirannies, after that he had raised many
persecutions against the Church, being noted chief enemy of the Common
wealth, in the end executed Justice him self upon his miserable body.
Domitianus did succeed him in the like cruelty: After this Dioclesianus,
Maximilianus, Constantius and other like vermin, of whom we have heretofore
made mention, that have sought the decay and ruin of the church, and murdered
the ministers of the word of God, did receive an end agreeable to the
wickedness of their lives. Constantine the younger Cassiodore.
Constantinus the younger son of the great Emperor Constantinus, who
degenerated from the religion of his Father, favoring the sect of the Arrians,
was suddenly suffocated and choked with the Apoplexy. Cherinthus likewise
choked in bathing him self. Olimpus bishop, destroid with thu^der.
Arius died upon a privy. Olimpus Bishop of Carthage after he had pronounced
and uttered many blasphemies against the Trinity, was presently stricken with
three claps of Thunder, and died therewithal, and his body when he was found
dead all together brent. Iulianus the Apostata was thrust through with a
halberte by a soldier, Julianus killed with an halbard.
and so ended his days. Valentius the Emperor was vanquished with the Goths,
whom he had infected with heresy, Darius likewise as he was persecuting the
Christians, was consumed with fire in a little house: The emperor Valerianus
burnt in a house. Theodore Attillus Totillus Frederik and other emperors evil
handled and plaged.
what need is there after all these to make any remembrance of Theodorike King
of the Goths, Attillus, Totillus, Frederick the second, Leon the third,
Emperors, with an infinite number of other Princes and Monarchs, who for
persecuting the Christian church, have tasted the right hand of God so
sharply, that the memory of them shall never be buried nor extincte? The good
Princes and true servant of God (according to the example given by
Constantinus the Great aforenamed) ought to be defenders, tutoures,
conseruaters, and members of the Church, and not to spare or restrain their
mighty hands, or any other force that God has given them for the furtherance
thereof: For they have received the administration of the Kingdoms, and the
dignity of their Crowns and scepters with such charge. And now for a full
conclusion of all our examples, we will add one other notable testimony of the
obedience of one Emperor written at large in the Tripartite history, as it
was done. Theodosius the great, being aduertized of a certain emotion that was
sprung up amongs the Magistrates and common people of Thessalonye, and of the
controversy, that it grew to the destruction of some of the Judges: The
Emperor being aduertized thereof, and being withal surpryzed with so great
anger, that he could not stay himself, without any further inquisition of
the matter, or order of law, did command that all the Inhabitauntes there,
should be put to the swoorde, which was done with all diligence by his
men of arms. And by this execution, there dyed very near seven thousand
persons, as well the innocente as the guilty. Saint Ambrose having
understanding of this cruel slaughter too be done by the commandment of
the Emperor Theodosius, was marvelous sorrowful, and upon a time as the
said Emperor would have entered into the Church, he came before him, and forbad
him to enter, and using his Episcopal authority, said unto him: Theodosius
dooest not thou remember the butcherie that thou haste caused too be done?
art thou so blinded with this Imperial dignity, that thou haste forgotten
thine offense? How dare thou come too beeholde these sacred Mysteries of the
Temple with thine eyes polluted by the blood of innocents? Do penance for
thine offense, and sequester thy self from the Communion of the Faithful,
take heed how thou entrest intoo the Church, and do then condemn thy
self, and think thy self unworthy to enter amongs them: and when thou have
with tears of the compunction of thy heart, acknowledged thine offense, the
Church shall open her bosom, and receive thee as one of hers. The good
Emperor having perceived the intent of this holy Bishop, was greatly
moved in his spyrite: Afterward with tremblyng and bewaylyng, returned to
his palace, where as he remained eyghte whole Months in sorrow and
heaviness, and in continual lamentation, doing penance, cladding himself
with hair, and taking Ashes: Afterward one day in Christmasse, he presented
himself before Saint Ambrose, desyring to be incorporated ageyn with the
other members of the Church, from the which he was cut off as a corrupt
membre: Which was done to him, having first protested, never hereafter to
enterprise to do any thing until by reason he do put off heat and choler,
enemitie to truth and equity. Beehold lo, a marvelous testimony of
humility in an Emperor, which may serve as an example to all Princes, too
do the like where there is at any time any matter in question touching their
common wealth, and the health of their souls.

The eight Chapter.
How that Princes ought to eschew and put away all furiousness and pride,
and that they ought not to trust too much in their force and myghtynesse:
with a declaration of the humayne myseries, and to how many accidents of
mysfortune our lives are subject, with also diverse examples how many
descended of a mean and unknown blood, have been advanced to the estate of
Kings, Princes, and Emperoures: and how contraryvvyse, many taking their
original of noble blood and progeny, when they were in the full complement
of all prosperity, have been through their wicked and abominable doings (by
the divine permission) shamefully overthrown and driven out of their
kingdoms and dominions.

Having in this last Chapter entreated of Religion, and that breefly (in
respect of the worthiness thereof) it seems unto us now most necessary
(before we enter any further) some thing to speak of modesty (a virtue most
requisite for Princes, and all others that sit in the place of honor and
dignity) because that those which have the gouernemente and ouersighte of the
people are for the most part haughty, Great dignities and authority
engenders ambition, pride, vain glory and love of them selves.
and bear themselves very much of their might and power, which ingendreth in
them great ambition and much vaynglorie, for a certain opinion that they do
conceive of them selves, springing of the great degree and state of honor yt
they feel themselves to be placed and set in. We do therefore greatly wish, yt
those princes and gouerners which be subject to such infirmities should subdue
that imperfection by reason, and frame themselves to modesty, gentleness and
humanity, which shall serve them always as brydles and stays to moderate their
pride and insolency (a disease surely easily to be cured) if they will enter
into themselves, The consideration of our own natures is a good medi^m against
ambition. Wisdom. ca. 9.
and have good consideration of their own proper natures, and withal
continually remember that they are but men, formed and made of the slyme of the
earth as others be, which that good king Solomon did acknowledge in himself,
when he said: My body is passable and mortal as others be, and shall resolve
again into ashes and dust, as the bodies of them, whom I govern and rule.

And to the end we may the better pull this malady up by the roots,
(which is a woorme that doothe contynually gnawe and byte) it is first
necessary for us too consider what man is, and to how many miseries and
calamities this our transitory life is subject unto: An excellent
description of the human calamities after the testimony of sundry authors
as well sacred as profane.
which we will first declare by the testimony of the ancient Philosophers:
and afterward (following our accustomed manner) we will have our last
refuge to the sacred Scriptures. Many ancient Philosophers having considered
man in all his parts, and comparing him with other beasts, did as it were
quarrel with Nature, that she had created him so imperfect and vile, to be
subject to so many myseries and infirmities: in so much that they began to
blaspheme her, and call her (instead of a natural mother,) a cruel
stepmother. Let us note a little that great searcher of nature Pliny in the
seventh book of his natural history how he has painted out (in his right
colors) this ambitious man, where he says, Man does cover his body with
things growing of other beasts, to whom Nature has given to some feathers, to
some hair, to some skins, to some scales, and to other some wool: and in
like manner has disposed her favor to herbs and trees, which she has covered
with barks for a defense against the injury of the cold and the violence of
the heat: but as for man (says he) even as a thing borne before the time, and
as it were in disdayn and despite, Weping and crying is man's inheritance.
she has brought him forth naked intoo the earth, and in the day of his
nativity, has given him Tears for his inheritance, which does
prognosticate his calamities and miseries to come. Mark lo the chief of the
works of nature, who if he were abandoned the aid and help of others, is so
weak and feeble of himself, that he would be eaten and devoured by other
wild and cruel beasts. Behold well the acts and triumphs of him which ought
universally to command all, and for whose use all things are created and
made: mark him I say, when he passes out of the entrayles of his moother, and
thou shalt see him laid bound upon the earth, Man only is borne to be furious
and proud.
even immouable as a stock or stone: and behold him who is only borne to be
furious and proud, begins his life with pain and trouble, whose birth is
only the cause thereof. And I pray you, when begins he to go, or when has
he the use of his speech? to how may incommodities and infirmities is he
subject? all other beasts do know even of their own nature (as soon as
they are brought forth upon the earth) to help themselves, some with their
swiftenesse, some with their strength and force, other some with their voice:
but man knows nothing except he be taught, no not so much as to speak or
eat: and to be short, he can do nothing of his own nature but weep: He
is only (amongs all other beasts) subject to pains, to passions, to
pleasures, Man only borne to ambition avarice and to marvelous desire to live.
to ambition, to covetousness, and without all measure desirous too live,
only given to superstition, only to care for things that shall come after
him: and in conclusion he is only subject to envy and malice: and other
beasts live in peace and quietness with those of their own kind: the Lions
use no cruelty against the Lions, the Serpents do not pursue one an other:
The opinion of Heraclitus of the life of man.
but Man is only enemy to man his own kind. Wherefore some Philosophers (as
Heraclitus, and such others) did during all their life time, bewail the
calamities and miseries of mankind: For he always when he passed thorough the
streets, accompanied his steps with tears, for he did well consider and
see, that all our life did consiste in nothing but misery and wretchedness, A
Philosopher that did continually bewail the human miseries.
and all things wherein men were exercysed, did seem unto him worthy
compassion, as well for their pain and travel as for the offenses and sin
that they did daily commit: And the better to consider (at his pleasure) of
the misery of this our humain life, he sequestered himself from out al
company, and strayed about in the deserts, living upon fruit and roots. He
did upon a time write a letter to king Darius, (as Diogenes Laertius says)
wherein he did advertise him, that all the inhabitants of the earth were
corrupted and wicked, and that they had Justice in contempt and hatred, and
gave them selves to vain glory and avarice, and that they were flatterers and
covetous men: and seeing them thus out of order (said he) I determine with my
self to eschew their company, and to search out solitarye places, the
better to enter into contemplation and miserable lamentation, least I should
be partaker of their wickedness.

There was an other Philosopher called Democritus, much like unto him, that
did as much lament the miseries and wretchedness of our life as he, Democritus
d^d laugh continually at the human miseries.
but after a more strange manner: for he always passing through the streets,
did nothing else but laugh continually with open mouth: and being demanded of
him the occasion of his disordinate laughter, he answered, that the doings of
mankind deserved nothing else but perpetual mockery, and that all our
human life was but vanity and foolishness: and all the desires and
appetites of men were but fondness, grounded upon ambition, avarice, hatred,
malice, and such other like vices. And he being thus plunged into the
contemplation of these things, went up and down the streets laughing, as the
other did weeping. Other Philosophers write, that it had been good for man never
to have be^ borne, or else as soon as he was born, presently to have died.
Theodorus a Greek Poet by these verses following does confirm the same.

Happy is he, most happy is that man,
Whose hap so good as never borne to be:
Or if he be, twice happy is he than,
Quickly to dye, for so at ease is he,
Assured well, when earth has him in store,
That none afflict shall touch him any more.
And Possidippus, Ciniciensis in his first book of his Greek Epigrams has very
well described the incertitude of ma^s life and the miseries wherewith he is
continually afflicted.

Tell me friend I pray thee, what sure way to find,
To live in the world without carke and care of mind.
What way shall J tread, what travel shall J assay?
The Courts of plea by brall and hate, drive peace away.
Jn house with wife and child, much joy is very rare:
With travail and toil enough in fields we use to ^are.
Upon the sea lies dread, the rich in forreyne land
Do fear the loss, and the poor like mysers poorly stand.
Wife without strife is very rare and hard to see,
Young brats a trouble, and with great care brought up they be
Youth fond, age has no heart, and pincheth all too nigh,
Choose then one of these two, no life, or soon to dye.
It is not then without good cause, that the great and heavenly Philosopher Job
(the very example of patience) did lament the hour of his nativity, and
wished yt he had been carried from his mothers womb to his grave, in so much yt
he cursed the day that he was brought forth into this miserable world, and the
night in which he was conceived. And that good and holy prophet Hieremie
(sanctified in ye womb of his mother) did lament ye day of his birth, desiring
that ye time yt his mother did conceive him might not be blissed, adding to it
afterward: Wherefore (said he) am I come out of my mothers womb to see all this
misery and troubles? As likewise ye marvelous oracle of wisdom Solomon says
in Ecclesiast. that the day of his death should be better to him tha^ the day of
his nativity, The miseri^ of man's life described in the Ecclesiastes. S.
Jerome. Origin. Leuitic. ca 12. It is not red in any history that ever
Christians did reioys^ at the day of the birth of any child.
knowing very well that our life is but a sea of misery and tribulation.
Whervppon that notable doctor S. Hierom explicating upon the passage of this
our life proves by many reasons, yt those yt fight against the assaults of sin
in this caducall life be in a miserable case, in respect of the felicity of
the dead, which are discharged thereof. And that famous Greek doctor Origene
upon the exposition of these words: The woman that has conceived sede, and
has engendered a man child, shall be unclean, exaggerating the calamities of
our life, writes that he never red in any author, that ever the Saints or any
other, that have made any profession of our religion, did celebrate the day of
the nativity with banquet or feast, or the day of the birthe of their children:
but the wicked (only) did rejoice at the day of their nativity, as it is
written in the old Testament, that Pharao king of Egypt did: and in the new
Testament Herod, who celebrating their natiuities with great triumph did
pollute and and defyle the same with the effusion of innocent blood. For the
one did upon the same day, murder his chief baker: the other caused the head
of S. John the Prophet to be cut off: but (said he) it was far from the
thoughts of the holy and virtuous men to solemnize such days with any token of
rejoicing or gladness. For they rather had the same in horror and hatred, and
did blaspheme the same, as did Job and Jeremy, with many others: which they
would never have done if they had not known some thing therein worthy of
malediction. And truly if we will well wey and consider ye wickedness that is in
this miserable and frail life, The Thracians lamented always at the birth of
any child, and did rejoice at the hour of their death. Herodotus. Valerius
Maximus. Pomponius Mela. Solon.
and will have a sure faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and a firm and
steadfast hope in the resurrection, and of eternal life, we shall have just
occasion to follow the manner of doings that the Thracians did use, and other
Paynims (who had no hope that there was any other life:) they would go always to
ye burying of their friends with much joy and gladness, assuring themselves
that they were most happy which were delivered from the calamities and
troubles of this life: as to the contrary at the birth of their children, they
did lament for the troubles and sorrows that was prepared for the^ in this
miserable world. We read ye like of the Indiens, Cesiens, Cautiens,
Gymnosophists, Brokmans, and Thracians, who did praise yt day of the death of
those that have lived virtuously, and not the day of their nativity: as the
Greek Poet does show unto us in his Book of Epigrams as follows.

Above all laws and orders of old days,
Whereof the mind to this day is not worn,
The Thracian world J most commend and praise,
That bad men weep, when children there were borne,
As token true, of woe in life to come:
But on that child whom once the grave had won,
They bad men joy, when such a one was ded,
As witness just that all his woe was fled.
Plato the most worthyest of all the Ethnike Philosophers, understanding the
little affinity that the body has with the soul, The body is the s^pulchre
of the soul by Plato his opinion.
does call it the Sepulcher wherein the soul is buried, and says, that death
is nothing else but the very port of immortality: who did so well dispute of
the miseries of this transitory life, and of the felicities that are prepared
for us in the other, that many reading his Books of the immortality of the
soul, S. Austine de ciuitate dei. Lactantius Firmianus.
did marvelous willingly seek their own destructions, some casting them
selves down headlong from a high rock into the sea, to the end they might
taste and enjoy the celestial riches which are promised for them in the
second life, as it is confirmed by a Greek Epigram of Cleombrotus.

Cleombrotus that from a high Mountain
Threw him self down, to break his neck thereby,
What was the cause? but that he thought it plain
Myserie to live, and happy life to dye,
Grounding him self on Platos mind and skill.
That says the soul abides immortal still:
Adding hereto, that Socrates had taught,
How that this life is to be set at naught.
But these matters would not see no unto us any thing strange nor marvelous,
if we would consider how that S. Paul being stirred up with a Spiritual
affection, S. Paul desired death.
desired to be dissolved from this terrestrial prison to triumph in heaven
with Jesus Christ his Captain and redeemer: And that great prophet Jonas, who
prayed the Lord that he would separate his soul from the body, (because says
he) that death seems better to me than life. Marcus Aurelius Emperor of the
Romans, no less to be accounted a Philosopher, than he was a worthy Emperor,
having proved all the passions, rigours, and calamities, whereunto the whole
life of man is subject, did confess frankely of him self, that in 50. years
which he had lived, he never found any thing in this world wherewith he was
satisfied or content (says thus) I will confess this one thing (although it
shall be some infamy unto me, but peradventure hereafter profitable to some
others) that in 50. years of my life I have tasted all the wickedness and vice
of this world, Man a beast insatiable.
to see if there had been any thing that could satisfy the humane malice and
affection: And after that I had proved al, I found that the more I did eat,
the more I did hunger: the more I slept, the more desirous I was to sleep: the
more I drunk, the thirstier I was: the more I rested, the more I brake: the
more I had, the more I desired: the more I searched, the less I found: and in
conclusion I never desired any thing, but having it once in my possession, I
found my self maruelously anoyed withal, and incontinently wished some other
thing, so that this our life seemed unto me so piteous and miserable, An
excellent description of human misery.
that as I think if any old man that does leave this transitore life, would
make unto us a whole discourse and rehearsal of his life past from the time that
he passed out of his mothers womb, until the hour of his death, and the body
should recount all the sorrows that it has suffered, and the soul discover
all the assaults of fortune that it did abide, both the Gods and men would
marvel at the body that had endured so much, and at the heart that did
dissemble the same. This doctrine upon the misery of man's life thus alleged
by us, The miseries and calamities whereunto we are subject b^ the very m^rrors
of the proud.
is not unprofitable, for it may serve as a myrrour or example to beat down
the hautinesse and high mind of Princes and great Lords when they feel them
selves stirred or provoked to vain glory: for if they would consider the
common beginning of all, the first matter whereof we are made, and how we be
all continued of like Elements, bought all with one blood, having one common
enemy (I mean Satan) nourished and fed all with like Sacraments, al
incorporated in one Church, fighting all under one Captain, As Well kings as
their subjects are all subject to vice and wickedn^sse, and all equal to
death. Os^as
(which is Jesus Christ) trusting in one only reward, all subject to vices
and passions, and all indifferent to death, they would then think there is no
difference between the most vilest creatures of the earth, and them selves,
but only in a little dignity caducall and transitory, which shall vanish away
as the smoke. And let us now mark how the prophet Ozeas does condemn the
insolency and pride of them that do magnify and exalte themselves of their
mightiness and great birth: Their glory (says he) is all upon their mothers
womb, of their conception and birth. And the prophet Malachie says, have we
not al one father, Malachie. ca. 2.
are we not created of one Lord and God: wherefore is it then that each one
contemns his brother? willing to let us understand by this their doctrine,
that this name of nobleness is a vain title given to men, the desert whereof
is of none account in the sight of god. Wisdom ca. 7. Solomon acknowlegeth his
infirmities.
The wise man writes in the book of wisdom in this sort: Being borne into
this world (says he) I received the like air that other men did, I was cast
upon the earth, having the same voice and cry that others had, and I was
nourished and brought up in the like pains and sorrows, and there was never
king or prince upon the earth that had ever any other beginning in his
nativity: we have then one beginning and one end. An exhortation of S. John
Chrysostom to al^ proud and ambitious princes in his homily upon the 20 ^f
Matthew.
S. John Chrysostom one of the most renoumed Doctors among the Greeks, (upon
thexplication of these words Our father which art in heaven) traveling to pull
up by the roots these small sparks of glory which reign amongs these great
lords and princes by means of the glory that they have in their nobleness and
birthe, exhorts them in this manner: Hearken (says he) you ambitious men, how
the Lord does name him self our Father, not father in particular of this man
or that man, but willing to introduce one common charity amongs all men, and
to conioyne us all in a celestial nobleness, had no regard herein either to
rich or poor, master or servant, judge or minister, king or man at arms,
Philosopher or unlearned, wise man or fool, but called him self father of us
all. And S. Augustine upon the Sermon made of the Mountain, An other
e^ho^^^tio^ of S Austine.
confirming this authority (says) that we are admonished by this our common
prayer that begins (Our father) that we are all brethren, and that for any
worldly or transitory dignity, we ought not to contemn the common sort of
people. Socrates one of the most wisest Philosophers that ever Greece did bring
forth (says) that amongst other familiar vices that are in Nobility, they
have one in especial, which does greatly blemish their nobleness and
dignity, Love of themselves amongst ^^bilitie is a great ^^^e.
it is (says he) a certain vain opinion and love that they have of them
selves, and of the glory borrowed of their auncesters, with the which being
blinded and forgetful of them selves, they despise and hate the common people,
by whom the most part of the famous Cities upon the earth were made and
builded, The common people aucthor and b^^^der of the ^^ste of the greatest
Cities upon the earth. Matthew ca 3
and by their labor and diligence maynteyned and conserved, and none but the
Nobility only does triumph in the glory thereof. And Jesus Christ the
Savior and Redeemer of all men, does very well declare in S. Matthew, in what
contempt he has those that do so much usurp the glory and fame of their
auncesters, or such as will seem to challenge to them selves the worthiness
and praise of their foreelders. When the Jews did glory them selves to be the
children of Abraham, he said unto them: do not call your selves the children
of Abraham, Against such a^ ^o^ glory in the noblene^^e of their aunceters.
John. ca. 9.
do you not know that I have power to raise up children to Abraham of these
stones? if ye be the children of Abraham do the works of Abraham. Afterward
he adds to this, ye are of the Devil your father, and you do the works of
him. S. Paul the true dispenser of the doctrine of his master, in his Epistle
to the Romans, upon the same matter (says) all those that be called
Jsraelites, be not Israelites, They that be descended of noble blood, if they
do degenerate they do lose the title of noblenes which cannot be without virtue,

The testimony of a^^ra^t that nobleness is nothing else but virtue.


nor all those that be of the seed of Abraham be not Abraham's children:
inferring by this saying, that all those that be descended of a noble blood,
be not therefore noble, except they be the folowers of the virtues of them,
of whom they take their Original. Phalaris the first Tyrant of the
Agrygentinos, a wicked man, (and yet always a great lover of learning) being
on a time demanded of one of his most familiars, what his opinion was of the
worthiness of this nobleness which is so common amongs men, answered: I see
it is no strange thing (said he) that all men do glory of their Nobility and
birthe, but I say to you, there is no true Nobleness but only virtue, for all
other things are given of Fortune: for (says he) the most abiecte in all the
world (being a virtuous man) is as noble as the most puissaunt and mighty
Monarche upon the whole earth. Diogenes that Ethnike Philosopher, being urged
by his friends, to tell them faithfully who they were that he thought to be
most noble amongs men, answered and said: those that contemn richesse,
eschew glory, The answer of Diogenes when he was demanded who was ^ost n^ble.
The op^^ion of Chry^ostome what noblen^sse is. A medici^e against ambition.
refuse pleasure, despise this worldly life: and those that do embrace
poverty, eschew shame, refuse no travel and labor, and desire death, be
most noble. S. Chrysostom upon the Homily of S. Matthew, by many testimonies
of the Scriptures proves, that this which they call nobleness, is none other
thing but a vain name received amongs men of antiquity, and a sound void of
power, whose strength and puissance shall appear to be of no value in the day
of Judgment. But forasmuch (says he) as the term and end of all things is
not yet come, let all noble men in the mean while take this wholesome Medicine
for a remedy and help, the better to kill and suppress this vain glory and
ambition, that does thus vex the^ continually, that when God sends us from
heaven any furious wars, any execrable famine, or contagiou^ ^^^^^ile^ce,
this nobleness does vanishe away, for then w^^s i^^iff^rently taste all alike
of these visitations, Nobility in the time of sickness and other persecutors do
taste indifferently thereof with the common sort. The noble and rich me^ first
afflicted Alexander not content with the victory of one world. Xerxes.
Hanniball. Paul. Emili. Julius Caesar Pompeius. An excellent discourse of the
vanity and glory of this world. The true heirs of the glory of men.
for the sickness does as soon take the one as the other, the poor is not
then known from the noble, for afflictions be common to all, according to the
course of nature, and the rich, noble, and most welthiest, be for the most
part the first that be assaulted. And let them mark well and contemplate
these things following, and they shall find that all the glory of their
auncesters is vanished away as the smoke. For where is now that great Tyrant
Alexander, whose ambition was so great, that he thought the victory of one
world was not sufficient for him? Where is that great king Xerxes, who
ouerflowed the seas with so great a number of his ships? where is that
invincible Hanniball, who by art did cut the mountayns, and by marvelous
travel made them passable? and where is Paulus Emilius, Julius Caesar,
Pompeius, and an infinite number of others, Greeks and Romans? what remains
now to them of their ancient fame and dignity, but only a common talk
amongs men? notwithstanding their acts are reduced to histories, and left to
their posterity, without the which the memory of them should have remained
buried with their body, as though they had never ben. And I pray you what is
become of these their preciouse bodies (so adorned and decked with purple,
possessed with sweet smelling Diademes, enriched with preciouse stones and
gold work, and such other kind of vanities) but even bones and duste, and
worms made the inheritors of their glory, whose lives and states were so
subject to mutabilitie, that when they thought themselves past al dangers in
good security of them selves, settled in all quietness and felicity, even
then was the very hour and time that they did ariue into the coast of all
myscheefe and accidents of fortune (as for example) Hercules, after he had
passed so many dangers and perils of the Seas, The death of Hercules.
was in the end found dead between the arms of his lover Laomedon, and dyed
not in the great wars of Troy, but was murdered in his own house. And
Alexander the great died not in conquering the whole world, but a little
poison made an end of his life. The death of Alexander. The death of Caius
Cesa^ The death of Ascelpius
The coragiouse Caius Caesar did escape two and fifty notable battles, and
when he thought him self at most rest and quietness, he was killed in the
Senate. Asclepius brother to Pompeius, perished not in sailing as a Pyrate upon
the Seas the space of two and twenty years togithers, The death of Drusius.
but was drouned drawing water out of a little ponde. And Drusius in all the
time that he was in vanquishing the Parthians, was not slain, but in receiving
his tryumphe for the same, sitting in a Charyote, a Tyle fell upon his head
and killed him. The ten valyaunte Captains which Scipio led with him into
Aphrica, that were so happy and fortunate in all battelles, were not slain in
the wars, but after their return (making their pastime upon a bridge, and
dallying one with an other) were all drowned in the water. And with these few
examples I could bring forth an infinite number of others. The death of the
x. valiant captens of Scipio. An unhappy end does often times brings in
doubt the ^ood life. The Lord does e^alt the hu^rble and ouerth^^we the ^^^ud.
Oh unhappy and curssed chance, after so good fortune, oh ignominious fame
after so much glory and renoume. I assure you, says that good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, that when I was an old man I did wish in my heart my life to have
been less glorious, so that my death might be more honored: for a wicked
death causes greatly the life to be suspected, and the happy end and
death does commonly excuse the wickedness of the life. Now we have
sufficiently manyfested and proved by many reasons and arguments, and by
sundry Profane Hystories, how that Kings and Princes are subject to all
infirmities of nature, and other accidents of fortune, as heat, cold, hunger,
sickness, sudden death, and such^ like chances, as well as the most vilest
and simplest of any of their Subjects, and that also they are all under one
GOD, one Lord and Creator, (who will exalte the humble and meek, and bring
low the fearce and proud) and before whom we shall appear at the latter day
to be countable for our lives, to receive equally the reward of our offenses
and deserts. It rests now for us (following the accustomed manner) to confirm
the same by the examples of the holy and sacred Scripture, in the which we have
many marvelous testimonies, how the Lord did overthrow the arrogancy and
presumption of proud and hauty Princes. Saul overthrown for pride. Kings.
ca. 5.
Saul who was by the election of God the first king of the Israelites, for
his great pride was overthrown. Ozias was in the beginning of his reign a
good and virtuous man, and walked in the ways and commandments of the
Lord, but when he was in prosperity, and had al things that he could wish and
desire, became suddenly so infected with pride, and blinded with ambition, that
he took upon him the office of the High Priest, Ozias beca^e a leper for his
pride.
but for a recompense of his offense he was cast into a Leprosy, and taken
away as well from the fellowship of his people as the administration of his
kingdom. Holofernes the proud, trusting to much to the strength of his men
at Arms and soldiers, The pride of Olophernes abated by a woman. Parah. 2.
ca. 16
would strive against God, who (showing by his mightiness, that with the
twinkeling of an eye, he could overthrow him) suffered Judith to execute his
vengeance, and to cut off his head. Amon that was so well beloved of king
Assuerus, that he had the chief office of honor under him in his Realm,
through his pride and cruelty, going about by all the means he could to
exterminate and destroy the people of Israel, was by the permission of God in
the end hanged upon the same gallows that he had prepared for the innocent
Mardocheus: Am^n han^^^ (...) his p^ide.
such are the judgments of God, that when he beholds out of his celestial
Throne our humayne state, and sees our great pride and insolency, he does so
chasten us, and pull us down to the ground, that he makes us to be contemned
even of the most basest sort. ^^^siastes ca. (...).
That wise king Solomon, being one of the richest Princes upon the earth,
knowing the hurt and damage that presumption and Pride brings to them that
are infected with all, does exhort us to eschew it, and says: The Lord
will pull down proud Princes out of their seats, and will set the humble in
their places, which thing also his father king David did always acknowledge
amongs other things (saying, Psalm 36.
) I have seen the wicked exalted and lifted up as the Ceder of Libanus, but
when I passed by again, they appeared not, I searched for them, but I could
not find the place where they were. If the Kings and mighty Princes of the
earth would mark well this variety of Fortune, and how she is appliable to
mutation, The description of the inconstancy of fortune.
who at an instant does exalte and lift up one even unto the heavens, and at a
sodein pulls down an other from Scepter and crown even into a stinking and
pestilent prison, they would not be moved to look so high as they do.
Ecclesiasticus doothe witness unto us that the wise and poor infant is more
woorthe than the ancient and foolish king that knows not how to foresee
things to come. Zedechias the King, Two examples contrary where one is exalted
the other put down. Kings. 4 ca. 25.
and his son, being besieged in Jerusalem by Nabuchodonozar, were taken
prisoner, the town and the temple burned, and had his eyes pulled out of his
head, his son killed in his presence: And in the end him self died prisoner
in Babylon. Now to the contrary that holy Patriarch Joseph being prisoner,
loking for none other thing, (for a comfort to all his miseries) but a
shameful death, was at a sudden made and ordained Prince and governor of all
Egypt: but to the end our discourse shall be well beautified with Examples, we
will set forth before your eyes many Emperors, Kings, and Princes, that were
unknown both of lineage, Many of a base blood exalted to kingdoms and empires.
arms, force and beginning, that have been by the favor of fortune exalted
to the rule of Realms, Kingdoms and Empires. And for that, the Romans
amongs all other nations have left unto their posterity most ample testimony
of their nobleness and virtue, we will begin with Tarquinius Priscus, a man of
a servile estate (his Father being a poor marchante of Corinthe banished and
exiled out of his Country, Seruus Tullius king of the Romans son of a
servant whereby he bears his name. Antipater king of Macedonia the son of a
Iugler.

Ca^byses king of the Persians was descended of poor parentage.

Darius the son of a Carter.

Midas of a laborer was made king. Softenes king of Macedonia of a base stock
Sibaris king of the Perseans was servant to an Inn kepat. Thelophanes king of
I^dia was a Carter. Tamberlen the great emperor of our time was son of a
Swyneberde.

Mahomet king of Araby was a dryuer of Camels.


and his mother a servant, was elected king of the Romans, did ordain them
new laws, greatly augmented their puissance, and showed him self so worthy
a man in his doings, that the people thought themselves very happy they had
chosen such a personage, to be their king. Seruus Tullius, king also of ye
Romans, who did triumph.iij. times for his good success, and obtained
marvelous victories, was the son of a poor servant, in respect whereof he
did always bear the name of a servant. Arsarces, king of the Par^hians, was
of so base a condition and mean birth, that his beginning was never known at
any time to his posterity, who being retired from the subjection of Alexander,
was the first that began any kingdom amongs the Parthians, (a people much
feared of the Romans) who for a perpetual testimony of their king, would
needs be called Arsarcidias. Antipater that succeeded in the realm of
Macedome after Alexander, was the son of a Iugler, as Seneca does witness
unto us. Cambises that great king of the Persians, was descended of a poor
parentage. And Darius the first king of the Persians, was the son of a
Carter. Midas laboring and ^illing the earth, was by the Greeks called from
his husbandry, and made king. Sostenes was made king of Macedonia, although he
was descended out of the most basest house of his province (and notwithstanding
many great Princes did covet the dominion thereof) yet nevertheless he was
preferred before al others for his virtues. Sibaris, that was servant to an
Inn keeper, had in marriage the sister of Cyrus, and was made king of the
Persians. Thelophanes a Carter, was chosen king of Lydia. Tamberlen that great
king of the Scyth^ans, in our time (who named himself the scourge and wrath
of God, by whom he would execute his vengeance) was the son of a swineheard.

Mahomet that first did drive Camels for his living, became in the end king
of Arabic. All which things and others being well weighed and considered by that
divine Plato, said: there were few Kings or Princes, but that they were first
descended of bond men, nor few bond men that were not first descended of
Princes. Saul and David the first kings of the Jews were shepherds. Saul and
David were shepherds.

Abdolin king of Sydonic was a great gardner.


Abdolin that was a digger of gardens, was by Alexander instituted king of
Sydonic for his worthiness, and so to all others, who he did cause to aspire
to any dignity, he said he never had regard to their birthe, or of what race
they were extracte, but only to their virtues. Agathocles king of Cicilia, was
the son of a Potter, who for a remembrance of his beginning, would al his life
time be served in none other vessels, but of earth. Agathecles the son of a
potter.
But amongs all other Empires of the world, the Roman Empire was the most
passing, and yet we find many Emperors, as well Romans as others, that were
descended of a base parentage, who by valiantness obtained the Imperial
dignity, as Maximianus the son of a lock Smithe. Maximianus emperor king
was the son of a lock Smith.

Martius emperor was a Smyth himself.


Martius also the Emperor was a Smithe himself, who as soon as he was chosen
Emperor, spoke before the people, as follows. I know right well my friends (said
he) that you may reprehend me and cast me in the teethe with my old
occupation whereof you are all witnesses, but let all men say what they
list: By my will I would always be handling Iron, and not lead my life
idelly in banketting and dallying with women, An oration of Martius in the
commendacio^ of iron.
and in such other voluptuousness and pleasures, (as Galline my predecessoure
did) who was unworthy the glory and fame of his predecessors: and let they
say further of my Fathers craft what they will, so that strangers as the
Germans, Almaines, and other nations my neighbors may perceive and taste,
that I love iron, and that they have to do with an Iron nation, so much to
their danger, that they do fear in us cheefely the Iron, I am content they
say their pleasures. And as for your parts, I will well you know that ye have
chosen an Emperor to govern you, that will never handle any other thing but
iron all the days of his life to your great commodities and comfortes.
Galerius Emperor, was a neatheard. Elius Pertinax, Emperor, was a merchant
of Wode. Aurelius Victor does witness the same, and Julius Capitolinus,
Eutropius. Dioclesianus Emperor, was the son of a Book binder. Bonosus
Emperor, son of a Scholem^ster. Aurelianus emperor of an unknown stock.
Valentianus emperor son of a shomaker. And many others of an unknown blood.
Popes issued out of obscure houses. Pope John. 22. the son of a showmaker.
Sextus the iiij, son of a mariner. Pope Nicholas the iiij. son of a Poulter.
Galerius also surnamed Neatherde (because both he and his parents were
always rural men) was likewise chosen Emperor. Elius Pertinax in like manner
Emperor of Rome, was a Merchant of Wode, which estate he exercised with such
travail and pain, that he was in that respect Pertinax. And Dioclesianus the
Emperor, who did make Rome to wonder at his triu^phal victories was but a
servant, and the son of a Book binder. Bonosus likewise Emperor was the
son of a Scholemaster. Aurelianus (whose renoume is immortal) was borne of
so base a stock, that in the Histories can not be found the place of his
birth. And Valentianus was the son of a Shomaker. And thus with these numbres
that I have brought forth, I could allege many others: as Augustus, Vitellus,
Traianus, Opilus, Machroneus, Posthumous, Carausius, Iustinius, Balbinus, and a
great number more, of which Suetonuis and other Aucthors make mention that were
sprung out but of base, unknown, and obscure houses. We could also bring
forth many Bishops of Rome, who being issued out of pore parentages, and of
small reputation, came to the like dignity. As Bishop John the.22. was the
son of a Shomaker, borne in France. Bishop Sextus the fourth, was a graie
Friar, and the son of a mariner. Bishop Nicholas the fifth was the son of a
Poulter. S. Peter was a Fisher, and of many others of whom we will make no
mention at this present, for such dignities are not gotten by nobleness of
birth, but by virtue and holiness of life. We have by other Examples going
before, very amply declared, that they were very wicked and miserable persons,
that would suffer themselves to be carried away by inordinate ambition (that
vanishes away as smoke) seeing Fortune does imparte her favors to whom she
pleases, raising sometimes up the poor, unto the rule and government of
realms and kingdoms. And now the better to perform our sayings, it is
expedient for us to declare how she does also abase and put down, when it
pleases her, those that be set in the most high degree of all felicity,
and make them to become so miserable, that often times they give occasion of
pity, even to their very enemies. The rich Cressus king of Lidia, Cress^ king
of Lidia burnt.
has good proof thereof, who even when he thought he had been the most
happiest Prince upon the earth, saw by lively experience, that all the
riches and gifts which he had of fortune, was not suffitient, nor could not
deliver him from the fury of Cyrus, who being vanquished and overcome by him,
did feel and taste as well the burning flames of his ire, as he did of the
fire wherein he was burned. Darius king of the Persians was vanquished and hurt.
Darius that great king of Persians, vanquished by Alexander, bound by his
own household servant, bereft of his wife and children, banished his realm,
and hurt in many places of his body, perceived very well that there was not so
high a degree of honor, but that it might be sometime overthrown, and bette
down to the ground. Perseus king of Macedonia, Perseus king of Macedonia died
in prison.
feeling the most furious stripes of fortune, could well judge how uncertain
and caducall the hope of worldly dignities was, when that Paulus Emilius, a
captain of Rome did triumph over his goods, and caused him to die in a most
vile and dolorous prison, and his son the very inheritor of his kingdom,
Denis Syracusan banished out of his realm, and driven by poverty to teach
children.
by evil entreaty brought to such poverty, that he was forced to get his
living by the exercise of handie craft. Denis Syracusanus likewise banished out
of his realm, shall be a faithful witness of the inconstancy of fortune,
who being pressed with an extreme poverty, was in the end constrained to
teach children for his living, at Corinthe, (a piteous metamorphosis of a
Prince so rich, to become a master of children. Polycarpus, king of the
Samyens, who as Valerianus doothe witness, that had never in all his life
tasted of the rigor of fortune was at the last vanquished by Darius, king of
the Perseans, The king Policarpus was crucified by his own servants.
and after by his own provost crucified upon the top of a mountain.
Valerianus, emperor of the Romans, being overthrown by Saport king of the
Persians, Valerianus emperor overthrown by Saport and made his footstool.
Caligula emperor died having xxx. wounds. Dioclesian emperor poisoned.
Domitianus emperor dyed being banished out of Rome. Falarius dyed upon the
Tortures. Silia was eaten with lice. Tiberius emperor stifled with a pillow.
Search their deaths in Pliny, Sueton and P^u archus. Nero did require the
help of his friends to kill him.
ended the rest of his life in such servitude, that he served for a
footestoole to Saport, when he mounted on horsbacke, and bowed his shoulders
thereunto, in steed of a foot stool. Caligula likewise, after he had
received.xxx. wounds of Cornelius Sabinus and his confederates, lost most
miserably in the end his life. Dioclesian having lost his Empire, died of
poison that was prepared for him. Domitian Emperor being banished out of Rome
died poor and miserable. Falarius king of Licyla, died wretchedly upon the
tortures, where he had caused other to die. Marius being fallen into a
marvelous desperatio^, presented his head to Pontius Tolesinus, to the end he
should cut it of. Scilla his chief enemy was eaten with lice, and could
never find means to help him self thereof. The Emperor Tiberius was
stifeled with a pillowe, and died amongs his own servant. Nero that butcher
and mortal enemy to human nature, hiding himself in a ditche to eschew the
just ire and vengeance of the Romans that did pursue him, would have killed
him self, but God did permit he should find him self so unable that his
strength did fail him to execute his sacrifice, and was constrained therefore
to require aid of others to advance his death. And thus with these small
number, I could produce many other Princes, Kings, Emperors, Monarchs, and
other great Lords, who having had as it were the wind in the poope, and using
with full sail the flatterings of Fortune, that afterward turning her wheel
upon them, fell into such misery and wretchedness, that the memory thereof
is pitiful to rehearse. For this cause Ephyston, (that was so well beloved of
Alexander) willing upon a time (of his great liberality) to have given to
certain of his friends, the kingdom of Sydon, they knowing it was an easy
matter to received a kingdom, A kingdom given was refused.
but hard to rule the same, did with a marvelous constancy of mind refuse
it. Whereat Ephyston being greatly astonished, to see them refuse willingly that
which others did seek fiersly by fire and sword, was moved to say: Oh most
happy nation which art the first that has learned that it is no less
commendable to refuse a kingdom, than to receive it. Quintus Curtius book 4.
For if the ambitious man will measure with a just yard, and weighe with even
Balances, the pleasures and honors, with the cares and troubles of the
mind, that doothe accompany a Crown, and an infinite number of perilles
bisides, as well domestical as foraine, Many perils do accompany a Crown.
he should find for one ounce of Honey, ten pound of Wormewoorde:
wherefore the great king Antiochus, is greatly commended in the Histories
amongs the Romans, for when they had taken away from him the better part of
his Realm, he said unto them with an invincible constancy: O ye Romans, in
leaving me so small a part of my Realm, A commendable sentence of Antiochus
and usurping the most greatest part thereof (as you do) you cause me to
occupy my mind on other matters: and you do so much the more disburthen me
of the cares which did ordinarily enuiron my soul, and held it besieged.
Valerius Maximus in his histories does rehearse that the first time the
Crown was presented to the same king Antiochus, before he would put it upon his
head, he did for a good space fall into contemplation, afterward he cried out
with a loud voice, and said: O Diadem more happy than noble: If the most
part of the Princes of the earth would consider diligently the miseries and
cares that do accompany them, they would not be greatly willing to covet
them, but would rather disdain to lift them from the earth. We have as it
were the like Example in the Histories of a Tirannous king, who being on a time
more pensive and sad than he was accustomed, one of his Courtiers would
gladly have made him merry, and said unto him: Wherefore art thou so sorry
and pensive O king, and see thy Realm prosper and flourishe in all things?
But this Tirante feeling the anguishe of his sins in his heart, answered
nothing to him.

But afterward caused a feast to be prepared of all sorts of delicate and
delitious meats, wiih such ornaments as were requisite for the celebration of
such a great feast. A flatterer punished.
This done, he caused a naked sweard to be hanged and tied with a thread, over
the place where he should sit, and called for this Courtier, and commanded him
very straightly, to sit him self in that place, which was prepared for him.
This miserable man being thus set, had no will either to eat or drink, but
was always afraid of death, and that the sweard should fall and kill him. This
tirant deliting to see him put in such fear, said unto him: Behold lo ye very
true purtraict of my royal dignity: behold the prosperities and plesures that
my estate is subject unto: behold also the just occasion of my continual
heaviness and sorrow. In all which examples before rehearsed, we say for a full
resolution, that although all things be subject to mutation after the common
law, and course of nature, yet there is not one thing more mutable and subject
to change, tha^ Princes and kings are, because that fortune does most willingly
take hold of such as be of an high estate, and touch, to triumph over their
spoils. Wherefore those that be called to such honor and dignity, ought so to
direct their acts and doings, that they may be always found ready, when the
Lord and God shall call for them.

The ninthe Chapter.
How that clemency and gentelnesse, are virtues most meet and conuenable
for Kings and Princes, with many examples alleged, confirming the same.

FOr the better garnishing the Prince with such things as are most meetest
for his Majesty and dignity, How greatly clemency and gentleness is
commended in ^^inces.
we desire (as is said in the Chapter before) he should be endued with modesty
and tempera^cie to serve him as means to season all his actions and doings.
Least that being at any time overcome with extremity of choler, he should be
over rash and quick in his judgments, in the execution whereof it is to be
wished he should rather be more prompt to remit the crime, that without
discretion (before the matter be well considered and wayed) to punish the
offender: for commonly sudden determinations do bring with them such boiling
and sorrowful repentance, that it makes us to desire that same death to our
selves that we oftentimes procure to others. As we read of Alexander the
great, Alexander would have killed him self for committing an offense rashly.
being on a time in a marvelous fury caused Cletus one of his best beloved to
be slain, the death of whom did heap such grief and anguish in his heart,
that (after reason had overcome his fury) he would have murdered him self
with his own hands for a satisfaction of his offense. But for as much as we
will refer these matters to the Chapter, where shall be entreated how much
cruelty is enemy to Princes, we will cease to proceed any further therein,
and entreat of clemency, gentleness, and mildness, which are requisite for
Princes, and be things of so marvelous an efficacy to win the hearts of
their subjects, that there is nothing that does more provoke the people to love
them and honor them than meekness and gentleness, nor by which means they
may more frankly make request to them of any thing without repulse or denial
to be made therein. Cicero in his Academicall questions does persuade all
Princes rather to communicate with the poor than the rich: Princes in the
old time were wont to be famil^ar with the poor.
for (says he) they can not learn any thing of the rich, but to be covetous,
to augment their estates and dignities, and to maynteyne them selves in all
pleasure and delicateness: but with the poor (says he) they shall learn to
be pityfull and merciful. For poverty is none other thing but a Schole of
clemency and pity. The Emperor Traianus is greatly commended among the
Hystorians, because upon a time he stayed his whole army, and him self did
descend off his horse to understand the complaynts of a poor wretched and
miserable woman. The Parthians would have their princes familiar as well to the
poor as the rich. The custom of the Persians reproved
The Parthians (a people very curious in observing the customs of antiquity)
did so much desire this gentleness and meekness to be in their Princes (as
Homer writes) that they did upon a time deprive one of their Princes from the
administration of the Realm, because that he went to the marriage of a noble
man and a great Ruler, and within certain days after, being required to the
marriage of a poor man, he refused to do the like. The manner of living of the
kings of the Persians is reproved and condemned of many, for that they use to
keep them selves close and secret within their Palaces, not showing them
selves to the people but once or twice in the year, and all to the end that
not yielding them selves to talk, or to be familiar with the people, they
should have the^ in the more greater admiration and honor. The Emperor
Antonius was called Pius because he was pitiful and gracious to all sorts of
people, and namely for that he did use a marvelous charity in the behalf of
widows and Orphans, for he commanded the porter of his gates (and that with
great charge) that he should know the poor before the rich, A marvelous
gentleness of the emperor Antonius toward the poor.
that they might be first brought to him to have audience of their suits.
And this good Emperor pronounced openly before all people, that they that do
contemn the poor and needy, let them not think to be obeyed of the rich.
The Historians write in the life of Claudianus the Emperor, that he was so
treatable and gentle, and did so much incline him self toward the suits of
the poor, that he thought it did not suffice him only to give them audience,
and to restore them again to their right (if they were injured by any man,)
but farther he would give them also counsel in their adversities and troubles:
which thing he did practice in the behalf of a poor afflicted widow, who as
she did upon a time present her self before him to require justice, being
altogether ouercomee with carfulness and weeping, this gentle Emperor after
he had accorded her request, being moved with a marvelous natural
compassion, did wipe her face with his own handkercher, whereas many of his
gentlemen did marvel, amongs which one of them said to him, that he did too
much abase him self, and he had done a thing that was far unmeet for the
majesty of an Emperor. But he answered wisely, that it was not sufficient for
a Prince only to do right and justice to his Subjects, but also to exercise
the office of humanity toward the^ when the cause so requires, for
oftentimes (said he) the Subjects, when they depart from the Prince with his
good countenance and gentle words, it contenteth their minds better than the
benefit of the cause that they have received at his hands by equity and
Justice. And this is it that that great king Solomon does teach and exhort
us unto, where he says, Proverb ca. 15.
that gentle and pleasant words does assuage the ire, as rygorous and cruel
words do stir up fury: and as he says in another place, Ecclesiast 6.
that gentle speech gets many friends, and appeaseth the enemy. The ten
Tribes of Jsraell made them selves strangers, and refused the subjection of
Roboam the son of Solomon, that was their king, 3 Kings. ca ^.
for the rigorous answer he made to them (at such time as they required him
that the tribute should be diminished) when he said to them: the least of my
fingers is more heauyer than the greatest of my fathers: if he have made your
yoke heavy to you, I will make it heavier, and if he scourged you with small
rods, I will chasten you with whippes. And for such a like barbarous and
rough speech chanced the division between Juda and Jsraell, when David made
his force against them, for that Naball through his chorlish answer stirred
him to anger: but to the contrary Abygail his wife by means of her courteous
and gentle words did appease him. 1 Kings. ca. 25
We find also in the Greek Histories, that a Philosopher very liberal and
free in words, wrote an Epistle to Phalaris the Tyrante, in the which he
accused him of his dissolute life, and amongs other things that he most
touched, he reproved him bitterly for that he was disobedient to the Gods, in
that he killed the priests, and ruinated the temples, and because he was so
unwilling to be moved or sued unto for the poor men's causes, and did refuse
their petitions and requests. The good Tyrant having red this accusation,
without any further deliberation made this answer as it follows: They that
say that I do not obey the Gods, say truly, for if I should observe all those
things that the Gods do command me to do, I should do few of those things
that man requires me to do. Secondly where you say I bear no reverence nor
honor to the Churches, that is because I know the gods make more account of a
good and pure heart, than of many Churches al to bedecked with gold and silver.
As touching the Priests, you say I put them to death: in deed I have done it,
thinking to make a good sacrifice of them to the Gods, for they were so
dissolute, and so far out of order in all their actions and doings, that in
steed of honoring the Gods they were rather a slander unto them. And as
touching the last, whereof thou do accuse me, that is, to have stopped my
mouth and ears from the petitions and requests of the poor, those that have
said that unto thee have greatly lied upon me, for I have always showed my
self frank and open to widows and Orphans, and to such kind of afflicted
people, and have always had my ears open to such requests as they have made
to me. Here you may see this wretched Tyrant, enemy both to God and man,
loved better to be charged with these other vices, than to grant to the last,
the which he esteemed to be more grievous and notable than the others. The
Lord our God willing to instruct all Princes and other pastors, by what
means they ought to govern their flock, does reprove (by the Prophet
Ezechiell) the ouermuche straytnesse that they do use toward their Subjects,
Ezechiell ca. 3 4.
when he said unto them: Ye do command them by force and power. Likewise
S. Peter, a man that commends greatly humility, 1. Peter ca 5.
does admonish all Pastors, not to be over feuere toward their people, but
that they should rule them as the true shepherd does his flock. Alexander
the great used such kind of facility and gentleness of speech to those
that had to do with him, that even to such as did reprove him of his vices,
he would hearken and give ear: for when he departed out of Asia, to conquer
the Indians, he understood that there was one other Nation which was never yet
conquered, neither of the Persians, the Meedes, the Greeks, nor of the Romans,
who were called the Garramants, and he being very ambitious of such matters,
minded to visit them in his journey, and when he arrived in their Province, he
commanded that the wysest and sagest amongs them should come and speak with
him, that he might understand the manners, customs, and order of living of
those people, who seemed unto him to be men far estraunged from the fashions
and doings of the common usage of other men: whereof when the Garramants were
advertised, without any more deliberation sent unto him presently an old man,
free and frank in words, and stout in his countenance, and one that had
never ben feared for the presence of any Prince, Emperor or Monarche: who
being arrived before him, after that he had made his due reverence, began to
behold him with a Philosophers eye, and knowing very well Alexanders humor, A
marvelous stoutnes of a Philosopher of the Garamants.
that he was not come into their country for any other intent, but to make
him self Lord and Prince thereof, firing his countenance immovable upon
his face like a man that had been half in an ecstasy, said to him: Tell me I
pray thee O thou Alexander, what would thou have? what is thy meaning? what
is thy will and purpose? do not thou sufficiently give knowledge to the face
of the whole world, that thou art possessed with an insatiate greedynesse and
an inordinate covetousness, which for a transitory ambition that vanishes
away as the smoke) art not afearde to pouerishe many to make thy self only
rich, nor art not ashamed of the complayntes and lamentations of the poor
widows, and of an infinite number of wretched and miserable people, which thou
have dispossessed of their lands to make thy self universal Monarche of the
whole earth, nor have thou no regard of the effusion of the blood of so many
poor Innocents, but thus with infamy to make thy name everlasting and
immortalize thy self for ever: yet if thou could by thy cruel battles and
bloody victories enjoy the lives of them which thou do kill, to increase
and prolong thine own life, as thou do inherit their goods to augment thy
renown (although it were wicked) yet it were tolerable. But to what purpose
serves it thee to take away their lives, when thou thy self look every
hour that the Gods shall take thine? Oh Alexander, yet if thy desire had any
end, and that it were bordered and limited as the kingdoms be which thou
do conquer, thou would then give some hope to the people of thy
amendment to come: but know thou, oh Alexander, to what end this will come
unto, the Gods shall give for a penance unto thee, and to all such ambitious
hearts as thine is, which are never satisfied nor contented, that as soon as
death is ready to close up your mouths, A maruello^s grief of co^^cience at
the point of death to such as hau^ set their ^^nds upon their goods in their
life time.
and when you are at the last point of life, you shall have so great an
unquietness of conscience for those things which you have so unjustly heaped
and gathered togithers, that it shall be more grievous and harder for you to
digest than if ye should suffer a thousand deaths togithers. And so this old
man having ended al his discourse, stood still immovable for a space before
Alexander, aspecting some answer of him: but Alexander feeling him self
touched inwardly, was tossed with many imaginations at the reasons of that wise
and sage philosopher, and in such sort that this spirits were overcome and
vanquished, not able to utter the effect of his mind to make him any answer,
by reason whereof, being confounded and condemned in him self for his
enterprises, he returned from thence immediately without hurting, or any ways
annoying the Garramants. The Emperor Tiberius a cruel man in all his doings,
was not moved when it was told him that many did murmr and speak evil of
his cruelties and tyrannies: but answered to them that persuaded him to be
revenged upon those that so murmured against him, that he could very well
occupy him self otherwise, and said, that men's tongues ought to be free in a
free City. Moses that great law giver of the Lord, has left us also
marvelous testimonies of patience and modesty: who although he was many times
tormented and vexed with his people, yea even that they were ready to stone him
to death, yet whatsoever assaults these sturdy people did make against him,
they could never drive him from his humility, nor put him out of patience: but
to the contrary, Numbr. ^2.
he did by his continual prayers (which he made to the Lord) appease the
malice and fury which they had unjustly conceived against him. The Historiens
do write, that two old women did address them selves to a king and an
Emperor, the one to king Demetrius, the other to the Emperor Adrianus, praying
the^ insta^tly that they might have justice ministered for a certain violence
which one had don to them. But these Princes being occupied with other affairs
did answer them, that they must for a time defer the matter, for that they
could not intend it at that present, whereat the women being grieved, said
unto the^, that then they ought to give up their Empires to others: for princes
must (said they) be at all times of the day ready to protect and defend the
afflicted, and ever willing to render justice and right to each one, A king
and an emperor gave audience to two poor women.
and with that charge ye do receive your dignities and kingdoms. And yet
notwithstanding al these words, neither of these Princes were moved or angry,
and they perceiving the earnestness of these matrons, began to smile, and
presently gave them audience, Gene 25.
and did them justice. And Joseph that great Patriarch, being so cruelly
handled at his brothers hands, in steed of revenging him self, he delivered
them from famine, which did oppress them so much, that they knew not where to
have any succor or help. Denis the Tyrant king of Si^ilia by force, who has
borne a great name of cruelty amongs others, and a man hated almost of all
persons, used never the less courtesy toward an old woman, such as follows:
As he was upon a time advertised that she prayed unto the Gods daily for his
long life and health, where to the contrary he knew that all the rest of the
people wished his death and overthrow, (as the very pestilence of their common
wealth) did command her to be called before him, and he did earnestly require
her to tell him for what cause she prayed so often to the Gods for his life,
seeing that he knew very well that all the rest of the people desired his
death. This old woman who knew not how to counterfeyte, did discover unto him
her meaning therein, and said: My sovereign Lord, when I was a young woman
this Province was governed with a cruel Tyrant, whose life was so noisome to
me, that I did continually wish his death, and to the end my desire might
take place, I prayed heartily to the Gods in the Temple, that they would deliver
the people from the bondage of that Tyrant, and that they would send him a
sudden death, which they did, for he dyed in very deed suddenly: but the time
was so unhappy, that there succeeded in his place a worse, and a man more
dissolute a thousand times than the first, which is the cause that moves me
to flee from my first prayer, A great constancy of a woman in p^ace of peril.
least the Gods should do as they did before, which they will do, and now thou
art come, who is worse than both the others: and for that I fear, that if I
make my request to the Gods for thy death, as I did for the others, there shall
come an other after more wicked and abominable than thou art: therefore I go
daily to the temple, and pray to the Gods, An incredible pacions of a Tirant.
that they will maynteyne and conserve thee with long life as thou art. Then
this tyrant maruelling at the frank and liberal speech of this woman, and
specially to him who was feared of al men (as he was) without being angry at
all, fell to laughing, and let her depart without any kind of punishment.

The patience of Pirrhus king of the Epyrotes, is greatly commended in the
histories: who (when he was in his wars against the Romans in Italy) had
certain of his soldiers in his ca^pe, that as they did sit at their meat,
with open mouth spoke uncomely and vndece^t words of him, using therein words of
defamation, whereof he being advertised by certain spies who did apprehend them
upon the matter, he commanded they should immediately be brought before him,
and he asked of them if it were true they were so outrageous of their language,
that they durst blaspheme the majesty of a Prince: Which thing one of them
that was more stout and careless than the other, did confess unto him to be
true, and did acknowledge they were greatly forgetful of themselves in this
cause: adding thereunto further, Wine is the aucthor of mischief.
that if the wine had not failed them at the table, that they were in good way
to have passed further into more unseemly words, putting wholly the fault in
the wine, which was the very instrument that did force them to speak such
things. The rehearsal of which matter did cause their color to come and go,
even as it does when any man feels the Surgion put an instrument into his
sore wound, The modesty of Pyrrhus king of the Epirots being abused by his
own Soldiers.
and as though they should have lost their lives presently. Whereat the King
made no semblance that he was moved or angry any thing at all, but said to
them with a cheerful countenance: My friends, at another time when you speak
of your superiors, speak more softly, for such communication (said he) even
the very walls will understand.

Plato the chief of all the Philosophers amongs the Greeks, when he took his
leave of Dionyse the tyrant to return to Athens, Dionyse, demanded what
report he would make of him to other, Philosophers his companyons, when he
came to Athens whereunto Plato answered with a boldness conformable to his
wisdom, that the Philosophers of Athens had not so much leisure as that they
would lose any time to speak of him or his doings, giving him to understand
by this frank answer, that his life was so out of order as the Philosophers
(who did occupy them selves commonly in grave and weighty matters) would not
vouchsafe to consume their time to make any rehersall of the acts of a wicked
man, and said they rather merited to be buried in the perpetual darkness of
forgetfulness, than to be brought in rehersall before men. Which answer
although it were very sharp and nipping, and scantely to be borne, even by a
man very pacient, yet notwithstanding he dissimuled the matter, and did not
once make any show by countenance that he was any thing angry or moved
thereat.

Thus we have brought forth a great number of ancient examples of meekness
and gentleness, which to some peradventure at the first show will seem
ridiculous, and to be but fables, but because they be written by so many
notable and famous authors both Greeks and Latins, we ought to give them
credit, and we should do them great iniurye and also greatly discredyte
our auncesters, who have always to this present day, had them in great
estimation and reverence, now to bring their great wisdom and granitie in
question.

Examples of ge^tlenes and clemencye which have passed in this our time.
And now we will show you some example of the same matter which has passed in
these our days, to the end that such princes and great lords (as stand so
much upon their honors, may when they feel themselves touched as it were
upon the finger, frame themselves somewhat to bear with the folly and boldness
of their subjects.

The Jtalians write in their histories and Annalles, that upon a time when the
Pope went out of the castle Angel, in Rome in his accustomed magnificence, an
old manne a stranger and unknown, newly come to the city (and not having
seen any such things before) began to laughe aloude, that the Pope and all
the Cardinals heard him, who maruelling at the matter, demanded of him by
and by the cause of his disordinate laughing. This old man that was so aged
that there was nothing left unto him of all his members to stand him in any
stead (but only his tung) answered redyly with a high voice never staying
thereat: A great moske of an old man.
the occasion of my laughing (said he) is, why Saint Peter was so poor being
in this world, and so simply apparelled, and left his successors so rich and
pompous. Which answer when al they that stood by herd, there was not one that
was offended any thing thereat, but began al to laugh at the matter, as he
himself did. Pope Sextus the.iiij. who was a religious man of the order of S.
Francis, was exalted to the dignity Papal: A while after, a Friar of his own
coue^t, that had been one of his most familiars, came to Rome to visit him, the
Pope having received him cry courteously (to show him his great secrets) led
him into his treasorie where he had great plenty of precious stones, riches
and other tresures, where he said unto him smiling, Brother, you see I can not
say that which S. Peter my predecessor said, that I have neither gold nor
silver: I do confess that said the Friar, holy Father, A secret nippe by a
gray Friar to pope Sextus the iiij. Riche^ enemy to holiness.
neither can you say as he said to the impotent, lame, and leaprous, rise and
go your ways, giving him secretly to understand thereby, that riches be
enemies to holiness: And the Pope knowing that he spoke nothing but that which
was true, was not displeased thereat, but of himself did afterward tell the
same to a great number of Bishops and Cardinals that were not then present.
Raphaell one of the most excellentest Paynters that ever Italy bredde, was
upon a time invited to dinner too a Cardinal in Rome, where as the Pope and
many other Prelates were present. This Cardinal when dinner was done, showed
to them that were present (as a marvelous thing) a table of the said Raphaels
making, in the which was painted the figure and portraiture of S. Peter and
Paul, to the end that they might judge of the excellency thereof, and after
they had well beheld the same in all parts, it was commended of them all as an
excellent and marvelous thing (except of two Cardinals) who said that the
table was very excellent, but that they had their faces made somewhat too read
and to much colored. Raphael being a free man of speech, Two cardinals
taunted by Raphael the excellent painter.
saw that his workmanship was condemned, and that by such as had no knowledge
to judge thereof, said unto them openly: My lords, be not abashed though they
be a little too red, and too much colored in the face, for I did it of
purpose to declare unto you, that in heaven they be as red as you see them here
in this table, even for shame that they have to see the church governed by so
wicked and evil pastors as ye be: with the which answer they were nothing
offended.

The modesty of an earl of Jtaly being taunted by one that was whipped
An Earl, a great lord in Jtaly did bear very gently the like answer of a
poor offender, that was condemned to be scourged, who moved with pity to see
him whipped through the town, seeing him go very softly said to him: why go
thou no faster, that thou may be the sooner delivered from thy pain? But
this miserable fellow being unworthy the counsel of so noble a man, said
to him: Count, when thou shall be whipped or led to any kind of punishment as
I am, go thou at thy own pleasure, and seeing that I sustain the pain,
suffer me to go as it pleases me.

We have brought forth so many examples for meekness and gentleness, How
princes ought to use the virtue of modesty.
that we fear it does offend the ears of the readers: it remains for us
now therefore somewhat to instruct Princes how they ought to temper this
their clemency, least by using ouermuche familiarity, they fall into an other
evil, which will be as pernicious to them as the virtues of true modesty and
gentleness shall be profitable: for all extremities be odious: and there is
nothing that does more darken the majesty of a Prince, nor that makes him
more ridiculous, than too much to imbase him self, as that instead of
showing the majesty of his place, and to give examples of his nobleness and
greatness, he do not bring himself that state, that he be made a pray to
all the world, and fashion himself to be scorned and deryded as a mocking
stock to his people and subjects, as that gamster Nero, Nero pleasant before
the people.
who was so shameless and dissolute in all his doings, that in the presence of
all men, he would sing and dance, and sometime dress and disguyse himself
into the fashion of a Woman (thinking that by these his wanton and foolish
behauiours, he should please his people:) which things princes ought not only
to beware of in their ordinary conuersations and talks, but also in their
garments and other gestures and public goings, which oftentimes be the very
and true testimonies of the inward harmony of man: The externe actions of man
do give sufficient testimony what he is inwardly.
as the wise man very well does declare unto us in Ecclesiastious, that the
garments of the body, the countenance and the gesture, do give sufficient
understanding what the man is. For which disorders Gregory Nazianzen a man of a
singular learning, beholding one day in Athens, Iulianus the Apostata emperor
of Rome (being but a young man,) by the insolency of his gestures, and by the
moving of his members did suddenly prognosticate his evil hap to come, as it
is written in the Tripartite history: for after that he had seen and perceived
his immouable neck, the continual moving of his shoulders, his furious and
staring countenance, his impacient and unmeasurable marching, with a great
number of other unhappy lykelyhodes that did appear in him, (the rehersall
whereof, would bring no edifying or profit to the hearers, but only
laughter) and further a certain lyghtnesse in him suddenly to condemn those
things one day which he had allowed the day before, without having any
certitude or concordaunce in his questions and aunsweres. This holy man I say,
even as wrapt^ with the spirit of Prophecy, A prophecy upon Iulianus the
Apostata by Gregory Naziazen.
cried out with a loud voice, and said: Oh what a monster does the common
wealth of the Romans nourishe and bring up?

The tenth Chapter.
What Justice is, and what profit and commodity the same brings to
gouernemente, and how that without the use thereof, Kingdoms can not be
called kingdoms, but dens and receptacles for thieves and robbers.

The description of Justice according to the mind of S. Augustine
Justice has such affinity with the virtue of Clemency (whereof we have
entreated before) that if ye separate the one from the other, they shall be as
nothing, and without any force or effect. Saint Augustine (a grave author in
the Church of GOD) doothe write, that if we take away Justice from
gouernemente, Kingdoms shall be nothing else but very nestes and dens for
thieves: For (says he) suppress Justice in any Domynion or Kingdom, P.
(...) oug^ (...) the mo^ (...)
what be they then but harboures and places for thieves? and where be places
for thieves but in Kingdoms that be without Justice? Furthermore (as Cicero
doothe write,) the puissaunce of Justice is so great, that even those that do
repose them selves in wickedness and myschiefe can not maynteyne their
iniquities without some part of Justice: For if the captains of thieves and
robbers do not divide egally their prays, either they shall be killed by the
rest, or else utterly left of them. Justice is a virtue (says Aristotle)
that doothe contain and comprehend all the rest, she is only the guide and
conseruatrix of all human society, and yields to each man that
apperteyneth to him: no common wealth or human policy can be governed or
mainteyned without her aid and succor. Which Plato that divine Philosopher
doothe acknowledge in the fourth book of his Common wealth, where he writes
that the most chief and most excellent gift that GOD has given to men
(consydering the myseries whereunto they be subject, A notable sentence i^
Plato in his books of a common wealth.
) is that they are governed by Justice, which brydeleth and restrayneth the
boldness of the furyous, conserueth and maynteyneth the innocents in their
simplicity, and renders to every one egally that belongs to him according
to his deserts.

The Emperor Seuerus was such a lover of Justice, The emperor Seuerus a great
lover of Justice.
that he never made law or pronounced any sentence, but first he would have
the same allowed and approved by the advice of.xx. wise and learned men in
the laws. And as touching such matters as concerned the wars, and other
martial affairs he always took the advice and opinion of the most ancient
soldiers and best experimented Captains that he could find. Domitianus
empe^our e^^nte to the poor and a great fauorer of the rich.
Suetonius upon the life of Domitianus the Emperor, does recite many vices
whereunto he was subject, but one of the most cruel and notable that he
was infected wythall, was, that he punished the poor, and pardoned the rich,
and so either for money or affection did peruerte Justice.

But for as much as the Princes of our time do not exercise the place of
judgment themselves (as the Princes did in the old time) yet they ought at
the least to be very vigilant and curious to know and understand well ye manners,
the virtue, the integrity of life, and the sufficiency of such as they do
depute: for else they shall one day be called too account for the wrongs and
injuries of their ministers. Plutarke writes in his politikes, and Plato in
his common wealth that there is no mischief more pernicious in any commonwealth than the buying and selling that is made of offices. For they which be
rich, Such as buy their offices in great, sell afterward by retaile.
buy for money that which ought to be obtained by wisdom and virtue: and so
it comes to pass, that those that buy their offices in great, do
afterward sell justice by retayle: and upon this mischief does rise the
briberie and corruptions of these mercenarie Judges, who do make themselves
fat by the calamities and miseries of the poor people, bring themselves to
great possessions, and make their houses mighty even by the pilling and
polling of good men. The Emperor Seuerus was so great an enemy to corrupt
Judges, that he said he had always one finger ready to pull out the eyes of
those that he knew to be such. The emperor Seuerus a great enemy to corrupt
judges.


The Egiptians had always mercenarie Judges in such suspicion and contempt,
that they did always swear such as they chose into the place of judgment,
and therein did charge them upon pain of death they should not violate their
oaths, nor give any judgment contrary to right and equity, although they
were straightly commanded to the contrary by their Princes. And to the end
they should have always their oaths printed in their remembrance, they caused
to be set upon the judgment seat, the image of a Judge, having his eyes put
out, and his hands cut off, signifying thereby, that they ought not to be
parciall to any man, nor to receive money or other brybes to defeat Justice.

Alexander Seuerus did punish his secretory for abusing Justice.
Alexander Seuerus, Emperor of the Romans, is very much commended of the
Historiens, because that he did punyshe his own Secretarye, being
infourmed that he caused the estate through bryberie to violate justice, in
disquieting thereby the poor, and maynteyning the rich in their naughtiness
and wickedness. Herodotus the Greek writer did greatly commend Cambyses King
of the Persians for his careful diligence in punishing the wicked judges that
did peruerte justice: Cambises king of the Persians caused a Judge to bo fleyne
because he did pervert iutice.
for as he was upon a time advertised by the testimony of many, that a Judge
called Sysamnes, was corrupted by money to pronounce false judgment, (even at
the same instant that his offense was discovered) he caused him presently to
be flayne (being alive) and commanded that his skin should be nailed
over the seat where the Judges were accustomed to sit to pronounce judgment,
and that it should remain there for ever, to the end that other Judges taking
an example thereat, should beware from thencefoorth that they do not defile
them selves with the like offenses: and ordained further, that the son of the
same Judge should supply first the same seat, to the end he should be
admonished by the example of his father, faithfully to minister justice. Plato
a man that thought he could never commend justice too much, has left unto us
in writing, that this excellent virtue of Justice is commonly defiled in two
things, the one is, that when the punishment of the offense requires
expedition, the Judge by fynenesse and of purpose does defer the Judgment of
the matter, to the end that by prolonging of time there should be some means
found for to save the offendour: the other is, that when the offense is
notable, and that it deserves pains of death, or some other corporal
punishment, it is stayed and turned into a certain sum of money, and by
means hereof, men that are offenders get much liberty, and have great hope
(by force of their riches) to have their offenses remitted, and to escape the
danger of death.

If these Ethnikes, who had not such knowledge of god as we have, have
detested the violaters and infringers of justice, how much more ought we to
do the like, considering the threatenings that are made unto us for the same by
the mouth of the Lord. Let us hearken therefore to the exhortation in this
behalf, that Solomon (one of the most sagest and wysest Princes that ever
bare Scepter) makes unto all Kings and Judges, An exhortacion of Salomo^ to
Judges.
and other that do sit in place of ministration of judgment: Give ear
(says he) you Kings and Princes, and mark well you that judge the coasts of
the earth, learn and open your ears to hear, you that govern the multitude,
and that delighte in much people, for the power is given to you of the Lord:
who will mark diligently your doings, and will search your thoughts,
because that when ye were ministers of his kingdom ye have not Judged
justly, nor have not regarded the Law of Justice, ye have not walked
according to the will of GOD, wherefore he shall appear fearfully unto you,
and that very soon, and he shall give a hard judgment to such as be in
the places of judgment, to the simple shall be granted mercy, but those that
be in Authority, shall suffer great torments, for the Lord that is Ruler
over all, shall except no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any
man's greatenesse, for he has made the small and the great, and cares for
all alyke. Wisdom ca. 6.
To you therefore (Oh Kings) do I speak, that ye may learn wisdom, for
they shall be justly judged that have kept justice.

Behold lo, a marvelous instruction for earthly Judges, that have no mind
but upon the world, and be a sleep in the darkness of ambition and
worldely honor, and set all their felicity to make them selves great and
marvelous to the people, and after their deaths to leave their children
inheriters of their glory. Let them hencefoorthe therefore, I say, go to the
Schole of the wise, to refourme their lives, and to know how that this life is
caducall and transitorye, and that further they shall be judged, even as they
have judged others, and of such a Judge, to whom also al our thoughts be known.

The.xj. Chapter.
How that cruelty and tyranny are chief enemies to Justice, where also is
shevved wherein the good Prince differs from the tyrannous Prince, with
sundry examples confirming the same, gathered as well out of the Greek as
Latin Authors: which will bring great pleasure and contentation to the
Reader.

Justice has not a more greater enemy than cruelty and tyranny: Tyranny
chief enemy to Justice.
which be things very monstruouse and abominable in man, who is a noble and
excellent creature, made to the image and similitude of God, borne to be meek
and gentle: but if he be once defiled and infected with this wicked Tyranny,
he is (as Aristotle says) like a thing transformed into a brute beast, and
become enemy both to God and man. But to the end we may know the good Prince
from the tirannous Prince, I will set forth unto you here certain differences
of the good princes and the tyraunts (which I have collected out of a great
number of good authors. Wherein the good prince differs from the Tyrant.
) The Tyrant vexes his people with Subsidies and unreasonable Exactions, and
lays heavy burdens upon them: the good Prince does not exact upon his
subjects, but for things that are necessary and behouefull. The tyrant
conuerteth all his exactions into pomp, pleasures and braueries superfluous
and unprofitable. The good Prince to the contrary imployeth all for the
sauegarde, defense, and conservation of his Subjects, the strengthening of his
Realm, and to resist the incursions of such as would trouble the quietness
of his people: the Tyrant would be feared and redoubted of his Subjects,
without rendering any love of his behalf again. The good Prince would be
faithfully loved of his Subjects with a true and sincere heart, and loves them
again with a paternall zeal and amity. Aristotle in his pollitikes.
The tyrant does rule and govern his common wealth by dissembling, deceit
and covetousness: the good Prince does govern by prudence, integrity of
life, and well doing. The tyrant is governed by flatterers, clawbackes, and
other such kind of vermin that do bewitche and enchaunt his senses with
pleasant things, as fantasies, collusions, and news: the good Prince does
not take in hand or execute any thing, but by the advice and counsel of the
wise and sage. The tyrant fears nothing more, than that the people should
agree togithers and be of one mind, fearing thereby that they should conspire
against him: the good Prince desires nothing more than to nourish and
maintain peace amongs his people: and if there rise any debate or strife
amongs them, trauelleth by all the means and ways he can to reduce them
again to good will, mutual love and amity. The tyrant being styrred and
moved (as writes the Prophet Ezechiel) is as a ravening wolf ready to shed
blood: or as Plato says, a consumer and deuourer of the people. And the Wise
manne knowing very well his property, names him a fierce and greedy Lion, or
a Bear that is hungry and thirsty for the flesh and blood of the poor people:
which saying is confirmed by S. Paul, when he said (being escaped from the
cruelty of Nero) he was delivered from the throat of the Lion: but to the
contrary the good Prince has such care over his Subjects, Qualities required
of good princes.
as a good Father has over his children and family, or as a good Shepherd
has over his flock: who (as writes Julius Pollux to Commodus Caesar) to the
end he would have him garnished with those things that are required at his
hands, ought also to be meek, just, gentle, magnanimious, liberal, master
of his own will, careful, industrious, vigilant, puissant in counsel, sober,
stable and firm in words, prompt to forgive, and flow to revenge. And having
thus now made an end of the difference between good princes and tyrannous
princes, I will now (following our accustomed manner) produce some examples of
those that have been most infamously renoumed in tyranny and cruelty, to the
end that Princes seeing their disorders and insolences (by the testimonies of
the most faithful and most credible authors that have written) should be
admonished to eschew such vices, least that their posterity have not cause to
write of them, as we do now of others. And because Heliogabalus a Romayne
Emperor, has borne the first name of wickedness in his time, we will put
him first in the rank, The monsterous life of Heliogabalus according to the
testimony of many aucthor^
and to the end that his monstruouse life shall be the better authorized, we
will recounte it according to Lampridius, Eutropius, Julius Capitolinus, and
many others. The first beginning of his Tragedies was, he caused his brother
to be slain, afterward he married his stepmother, the mother of his brother
whom he had thus killed, and immediately after he was chosen Emperor: in
steed of well providing for his Empire, and giving good orders, that his
common welthe should be well governed and ruled (the rather to come to his
enterprises) he banished all the wise and sage personages of his dominions,
afterward he ordained a worshipful college of bawdes, of both kinds, who
did openly (in the presence of all people) cause youth of both sexes to be
defiled: the service of these people was so agreble to his mind, that he used
them as pages to serve him as other great Lords are served of their household
servants. Behold lo, the first zeal of this beastly Emperor to his common
wealth. Now when he had ended and finished this his notable work, he would
then take upon him the office of an Orator, and made a long Oration to them, in
the which he did persuade them by wanton and slender reasons to invent all the
new and unaccustomed means that they could of baudry and filthynesse, and that
with all liberty. And the better to bring them to his lore, he exhorted them
to put away all shamefastness, and that they should become bold and
shameless, because that shamefastness and bashfulnesse were chief enemies to
all pleasures: and not contenting him self with these abominations, he gave
himself wholly to be carried away with his wanton and impudent desires and
lusts, that he caused four naked women of the fairest in all his province to
be tied to a charyot, and so led through the streets: and also when he was at
his meat he would be served with four other women naked as the others were, to
the end that by such means his people with all liberty should be provoked to
wantonness and whordome: and because nature had given him an excellent beauty
in all his lineaments, as well in his face, as in the proportion of his members,
he was so effeminated that he would fashion him self like a woman, and the
better to follow them, he would trim him self in their habites, and
counterfayte their behauiours and countenaunces, and did desire further, An
abominable desire of an emperor.
amongs his other filthynesse, to be transformed into a woman, to the intent
that he might prove the pleasures of the feminine Sex. And therefore not stayed
nor contented with all these aforesaid beastliness and lasciviousness, this
devil incarnate did persuade him self thereunto (that no wicked spirit or
devil could deuyse the like,) but as one sin draws another, so he did
fantasy in his mind, that by art he might be transformed into a woman. And
the better to put in execution this his Diabolical lust, he caused all the
chief and excellent Surgions and Physicians of his time to be gathered
togythers to work this feat, and they being assembled togithers promised him
that he should have al such ouertures and cuts as he would desire, and that he
should be made apt to have the company of a man, as a woman has: By which
persuasion they gelded and cut him in all places necessary for the same, but
in the end he was made (by the just judgment of God) unprofitable in both the
sexes. And now to the intent the virtuous ears of those that shall hear the
manner of this his losenesse and slipperinesse of life, shall abhor and
detests the same, and frame them selves to eschew the like, we think it
expedient to declare also after what sort, and to what purposes he employed
the revenue of his realm (for it was one of the most opulent Monarchs that
ever was) and as he passed all others in all kind of impudency, so did he
exceed all men in his dispenses: for you shall not read in the History of
any Author (what so ever he be) that there has benne found either
Emperor, King, or Prince so prodigal in foolish and exceedyng expenses, as
he was, who, as they say that have written of his life, An incredible expens^^
of Heliogabal^s.
made never any banquette (after he was Emperor) that cost him not above
threescore Marks of gold, which after our account is two thousand and five
hundred Duccates: and all the delicious and most delicate meats that he
could find, he would have, as the Tongues of Pecockes and Nightingales, the
Combs of the Cokes, the genitories of all the most rarest kind of Byrds that
could be had, and would cause his Table to be furnyshed withal, and would
eat of them, saying: that there was no sause so good as costlynesse.

And he thought it not sufficient for to feed him self with such delicates,
but he would cause his household servant also to be fed with such rare
kind of meats, as the Lyuers of Pecocks, eggs of Partriches and Phesants,
and such other kind of viands, which were good for none other purpose but to
provoke the stomach, and to ouercharge the same: and in the end he was so
blinded in his voluptuousness, that he caused his Bears and Lions to be fed
with such kind of meat: he was also so pompous and costely in his garments,
that as you may read, he never ware commonly one garment but one day, and he
was ordinarily clothed with gold or purple, enriched and beautified with all
kind of precious stones. And as touching the rest, as the vtensiles of his
house, they were all either of gold, silver, Jasper, Brouze, or Porphire, yea
even too the pottes which he used for the excrets of his body: and he was in
the end given up to such a reprobate mind, that when he went to horseback
he would cause the ground to be covered with the limal of gold or silver,
thinking the earth to be unworthy to serve him as a footestoole, or to touch
his feet. Behold lo, in sum, the principal points of the lascivious life
of this miserable Emperor, who in the end by the divine judgment of God was
paid with an hyre worthy his tragical life, for he was killed by his own
servant, and carried throughoute all the streets and market places of Rome:
afterward, having a great stone hanged about his neck, was cast into Tiber
by the consent and agreement of all the people, having his body (for an
honorable funeral) buried in the bellies of Fishes. Now having declared unto
you very exactly the manners and doings of Heliogabalus Emperor of Rome, it
shall not be strange, following our purpose, to rehearse in this behalf the
cruelty and tyranny of Astyages king of Medes, little or nothing inferior to
the other aforesaid, who dreaming one night a certain dream concerning his
daughters child (which dream he thought he might not well disgeste, fearing
that hereafter it would take effect) determined to prevent the childs
fortune. And to the end he might the better bring the same to to pass, The
child that is here mentioned was so much favored of fortune afterward that he
was surnamed the great Cirus king of the Persians as it is amply declared in
Herodotus.
he caused Harpagus (one that he loved best of any in all the Realm) to be
called and delivered to him the same child in secret, and commanded that he
should kill him by one means or other out of hand for certain causes which
he would not disclose to him at that present, and not to make any man privy
thereunto. Harpagus having received this charge, began to have a marvelous
combat in his mind, for as the pity he had of the young infant, did draw
him on the one side, so the cruelty and fear of his master, did threaten him
on the other side, but reason did take so much place with him in the end,
that he was persuaded, not only to save the life of the child, but also to
cause it to be brought up in some secret place from the knowledge of his
master: yet he could not handle the matter so finely nor so secretly, but
that in the end Ast^ages had understanding that Harpagus (contrary to his
duty as he thought) had saved the life of this child. Which thing he did
dissemble for a time, with so good a countenance toward Harpagus, that he
thought him self without all suspicion. Afterward upon a day he made Harpagus
to dine with him, having before caused one of his children to be slain, which
he had made one of his Cooks to dress, as though it had been some other
meat, and caused it to be served at the table, without any knowledge to
Harpagus, whereof he ate very willingly. The cruelty of Astiages king of the
Medes.
But Astiages insatiable in his cruelties, was not satisfied, that he had made
him only eat the body and flesh of his own child, but further he caused his
feet and head to be put into a dishe and served likewise to the Table, to the
entente he might know what he had eaten, and thus sitting at the boorde, he
demanded of him in mockery, if he thought his meat were good: To whom
Harpagus fearing to have a worse mischief at his hands, answered modestly:
that all things were good at a kings table. Having ended these cruelties of
Astiages, we shall not do Maximilian another Emperor of Rome, any wrong to put
him in the Theater amongs the others, who bisides an infinite number of
cruelties wherein he was delighted, The cruelty of Maximianus Emperor of the
Romans.
ordinarily he had one in common that passed all the others, for he caused the
bodies of men being alive, to be tied with the bodies of dead men, face to
face, and mouth to mouth, and so left them togithers, till the dead body by
his putrefaction had killed the living body. The Emperor Tiberius (who shall
make an end of our examples of cruelty,) seems to me to have passed all the
others in cruelty, that the Historians at any time have ever made mention of:
For he commanded upon pains of death (that thing which I read not of any
other, but of him only) that no man should lament, weep, nor sighe, or make
any semblance of sorrow for those which he put to death innocently. And he had
those that were purposely deputed in all such cruelties as he did execute,
that had none other charge but only to mark and behold all aboutes, if there
fell any tears from any bodies face, or if there passed any sighs from any, or
whether they gave any manner of signification of heaviness or grief for the
same, which if they did, they should suddenly be carried to the place of
execution, and to be punished with the same pain that he was, whose innocence
they did lament. After, when he was well satisfied of such kind of
Martirdomes, he would then deli^e to devise some others, as far from all
humanity as the others. For he would make those that should be executed, to
drink without al measure before they were led to the place of execution, and
after they had well drunk, he would cause all the conduites of their bodies to
be bound and tied, that they should not make their water, and so would leave
them languishing until they should die with extreme rage and pain: And all
Virgins that were condemned (before they came to the place of execution to
suffer) he would always cause them to be defloured with his varlets, that
with their lives they might also loose their virginity. I could likewise
rehearse the cruelty of Phalaris, king of Cicilia, and of many others that did
murder an infinite number of innocents, The cruelty of Phalaris king of
Cicilia.
causing them to be put into a Bull made of brass, with fire round about it,
to the intent that the pacients within, being in their torments, might make a
noise like the roaring of a Bull, least that using their accustomed voices, they
should move the assistantes to pity. But it shall suffice amongst so great a
number of such kind of tirannies, that might be gathered out of the
Histories, to have rehearsed only these few, to the end that Princes and all
others that shall understand these abominations, should take heed that they do
not headlongs, cast themselves into the ditch where others are fallen before
them.

The twelfthe Chapter.
A Treatise of Peace and War, and the difference of the one from the other,
things necessary to be red by Princes and Magistrates that have the government
of Realms and Common wealths.

PEace is most chiefly to be desired of all Princes for the good gouernemente
of their realms and dominions, and there is no one thing that does more
continue the same, and conserve the dignity royal of the Prince, than to
keep the subjects in union, amity and concord: and the prince to show
himself loving toward them, as he desires to be beeloued and honored of
them again. For there is no defense, force, or policy, that makes the
Prince more strong and more redoubted than the love, quietness, and good will
of his people and subjects, The force of the prince consists in the vnio^
and concord of the subjects.
with the which being fortified and armed, he shall be without all such
suspicion and fear, as commonly Princes are subject unto. And now for as
much as many Historians both Greeks and Latins have very aptly taught the
manner how to make wars, I will not entreat thereof at this present: but
rather exhort all Princes to fly from it as a thing most dangerous and
pernicious to all common welthes. The aucthor persuades princes to fly from
warr^s.
But to the end they may the better learn to abhor the one, and to embrace
the other, I will manifest to them by sundry Examples as well the damages and
inconveniences of the wars, as also the contrary how requisite and necessary
a thing peace is, and the commodities thereof: Peace, the spring and fountain
of all human felicity.
Being as it were the spring and fountain of all human felicity, gouerner
and nursse of all that the universal world contains. Peace I say gives
being and strength to all things: she keeps and conserueth them in such
sort, as without her aid and help in one instante they would be
overthrown, destroyed and spoiled: for by her aid the land is tilled, the
fields made flourishing and green, the beasts feed quietly, Cities be
edified, things ruinate be repaired, antiquities be augmented, laws be in
their force, the common wealth flourishes, religion is maintained, equity is
regarded, humanity is embraced, handie crafts men be set a work, the poor
live at ease, the rich men prosper, learning and sciences be taught, with all
liberty, youth learn virtue, old men take their rest, virgins be happily
married, Cities and Towns be peopled, and the world is multiplied. But I pray
you O mortal men, that have any spark of human nature, enter into your
selves, and judge if it be not a mo^struous and prodigious thing that nature
has bred and brought forth a living creature, Man only borne to love and
concord.
only capable of reason, having certain similitude of the Godhead, only borne
to love and concord, and yet always peace is better received amongs other
brute beasts than with him, Brute beasts do live more quietly togethers than
men. The description of the concord of beasts
and beasts although they be deprived of the use of reason, yet they live
quietly in peace and concord one with an other. And that it shall be found
true, mark, the Elephant seeks the company of the other Elephantes. The
Cranes and Storkes have a certain confederacy and aliance together: by the
which the one does aid and comfort the others. The Antes and Bees have one
common wealth and policy amongs them: yea and the most fierce and cruel
beasts of the earth, what brutishness so ever they be of, do not so much
degenerate from kind, that they pursue one an other. Peace amo^gs wolves and
other furious beasts of the earth.
For one wild Bore does not by violence take an other. One Lion does not
dismembre an other. One Dragon doothe not exercise his rage against an other.
One Viper does not hurt an other And the concord of the Wolves is such, that
it is received in a Common proverb. And further, if we will be indifferent
judges, and well consider the universal order of nature, we shall not find in
any part thereof but very Harmony, peace, and mutual concord. Let us mark
well the spheeres and celestial bodies, that although their motions be sundry,
and in like manner their properties and forces contrary: yet it is so, that
they do regard mutual uniformity amongs them, and do perform and end
their courses and reuolutions by times appointed and determined for them by
nature, and what are more contrary amongst them selves than the four Elements:
yet always they have such a Simpathia and accord amongs them, Peace amo^gs
Elements.
that they do keep themselves in one certainty, compass, and course,
without hurting or anoying the one the other. The fire does not consume the
air, but does nourishe and keep it in his bosom. The air enuironeth the
water, and by a mutual embracing, does enclose it and keep it within
certain limits, as likewise the water doothe the earth. And can there be
found in all the order of nature, any thing more unlike than the body and
soul? The description of the coniunctio^ of the body and soul.
and yet always they be so well conjoined and tied togithers, that they cannot
be separated by any other means than by death. And these things in like manner
do not only appear in sensible and lively things, but also inuegitable
things, as Plants and Trees in the which we must acknowledge certain
similitudes of great concord and amity. For amongs many plants and trees, if
ye take away the males, and keep them from their females, they will corrupt and
wither, and so continue in perpetual sterilitie: as we see at the eye, The
Vine amorous of the H^^e. Take the males from the females ^^o a many plants and
they will be come barren The Adam^nt lo^eth iron. The amity between gold and
Mercu^^.
the Vine does embrace the Elm, and does rejoice and delight of her
presence. Likewise the Iuie is so amorous of certain trees, that it keeps
them company after they are dead and withered. And what things are so far^e
from feeling as the stones be? And yet those that are the great searchers of
Nature, have acknowledged some spark of secret amity in them: for the
Adamante loves Iron, and draws it unto him, and retains it in such sort,
that when a man shall take it away, it seems to suffer some passion. This
marvelous puissance of amity, seems to extend likewise to Metalles, which
we see manifestly, that Mercury is so affected to Gold, that if he be near
it, he plungeth incontinently into it, as if he were rapt and carried away with
some extreme love. I dare well add unto this a thing more marvelous (but to
the everlasting confusion and slander of man) that even the very Devils and
wicked spirits themselves (by whose malice the first aliance and concord
between God and man was broken) have a certain amity and confederacy
together, The wicked (...) have (...) ac^^^^ (...).
in such manner that they do exercise their rages and tyrannies against us by
a mutual consent and accord: But Oh immortal God man, (to whom peace is more
necessary than to all other creatures) only doothe despise and contemn the
same. And yet, if you will compare man with other beasts, and behold and note
him well from the head even to the foot, you shall not find any mark or
token in him that does not promise peace. And as for brute beasts, nature has
provided to the contrary, apt armor to defend the^ in their kind, as to Bulls
he has given horns, to Lions nails, to wild Bores furious teethe, to
Elephants long snoutes, to Dolphins sharp pricks poynted like spurs, to
Crocodiles hard skins impenitrable, with great and strong nails, to
Serpents venime, which does supply the want of other defenses. Bisides all
this, Nature has given to some beasts a hideous form, to some flaming eyes,
to others some a fearful cry, and terrible manner of lowing: but to man she
has not given nor provided other armor but weeping and wailing: and therefore
it is far unmeet that he should be borne for war who as soon as he is
brought forth upon the earth, knows none other means to demand any succor
or aid but by weeping and crying. Let us mark his figure (in whom the very
Caracter of God is Imprinted) and we shall not perceive it hideous or fearful
as other Beasts be, but meek, gentle, pleasant, and amiable, even very marks
and tokens of perpetual amity and concord. Mark his eyes, A marvelous
effi^acy of the eyes, to concyl^at amysse among men.
and you shall see them to be two fair lights, and messangers of the soul,
which show not so furious or burning as other beasts do, but pleasant and
delectable, always lifted up toward heaven, from whence he took his
beginning, the beams whereof have such puissance in all creatures, that it
seems it should be some charm that Nature has given to man, to pierce into
the very depthe and profound parts of our hearts: she has given man also
arms to embrace one an other, and to him only is given the delight of kissing,
for a more ample testimony and seal of amity. Only man does ki^se laugh and
weep.
To man only is given laughing, the very token of mirthe and pleasantness. To
man only is given tears, which be faithful messengers of (clemency and
mercy) and does sometimes stand us in stead of spunges to dry up little
fumes of choler that do now and then rise amongs us.

Likewise she has given man a voice, not sharp and shirle as shaee has
done to other beasts, but sweet, pleasant, and harmonious. And yet nature not
thinking it sufficient to garnishe him with all these gifts: but she has
given him the usage of reason and speech, a thing of an incredible force and
puissance to nourishe amity and good will amongs men. Man is given to
fellowship and enemy to carfulness and solitariness.
Further she has ordained to man a companable fellowship to drive away all
carfulness and sorrow, and to make him the better esteemed, she has
induced him also with knowledge and learning, whereby he shall be able to bridel
the most hautiest and barbarous Tirant upon the whole earth. And further, to
bring him to his full and entier perfection: she has graven in him certain
sparks of godliness and virtue, that (even without any precepts or teaching
(only guided by Nature) he can discern the good from evil. And bisides all
these gifts and favors of Nature for the more increase of amity, she has
so appointed and ordered all things, that one has need and help of an
other, even from the greastest to the least. And she has not so ordained
and appointed that any one province shall bring forth all things that are
necessary for the use of man: but she has disposed all things in such
order, that one shall borowe, and as it were desire some one thing of an other,
the better to tie and confederate us firmly togithers. And thus lo you see
how Nature a gracious mother to mankind, has left unto us many means and
ways whereby we may increase amity and concord. And further if we will
search diligently through all the state of our life, The amity conjugal is
more excellent than any other love is.
we shall perceive that without a mutual peace and love which does maintain
and conserve us togithers, the memory of mankind should remain wholly buried
and extincte for ever. For first of all, if it were not for the love that is
in Matrimony, amity (which is most noble, most excellent, and most holy)
and for desire of procreation, mankind should perish immediately after he is
brought forth into this world. And if it were not also for the love and
diligence of Nurses and Midwiues, Man is so fible of himself at his birth that
without the help of others he should be devoured of brute beasts. A
description of the incredib^e amity of fathers toward their children.
by whose succor and aid we are defended and nourished (our feebleness and
imperfection is such) as we should be devoured of wild beasts, and serve as
meat for them. And let us note the great love of the fathers and mothers
toward their children, which is of such force, that they love them before
they see them (being yet in their entrails) a love certain that returns
again from the children to their parents, whom they do likewise nourish and
sustain in their ages, even until death call for them, and after death
render them again to the earth, from whence they came: and they make them also
live again being dead, for as of a tree being cut, ther^ grows and
springs forth other branches, that continues the kind from time to time:
so these children whom they have procreated, do make their names everlasting,
and as it were to live for ever from age to age. And to be short, nature
does stir and prick us forward by so many means, and with so many
instruments of her infinite providence, The aucthor does show by order, the
co^tentions and debates that is at this day in the estates of this our life.
to make us love togithers, that we ought to be ashamed so to shed the blood
one of an other of us. But oh unhappy and miserable wretches that we are, I am
ashamed to confess that I must needs, that although peace was sent from
above for the only use of man, and that he should embrace the same, yet it is
so, we may see at this present day, that the Palaces and public places
sound of nothing else, but of dissentions and debates, yea and such, as the
Ethnik^s have not had the like: for although the most part of Europe be not
replenished with Proctors, Procurators, and Advocates, yet in no place there
wants great number of Pleaders and Suitors without all measure, who in these
days do consume the most part of their age to devour the blood and
substance one of an other. Now do you mark this pityfull spectacle, search
further, and visit the most notablest Cities in the world, where the Citizens
be environed with one wall, ruled and governed with one law, and as it were
sailing in one ship, and be likewise in common peril of life and death: yet
always amongs many thousands of families, whereof the common wealth is formed,
ye shall with much pain find one that is without some discord or
dissension. Discord in marriage.
Will you search further, and see what is done in Marriage where fortune is
common, the house common, the bed common, the children common: and that more
is, where there is so great a co^munitie of the bodies, that there seems two
to be transformed into one, yet wickedness does so prevail, that scarce
amongs an infinite number, ye shall hardely find one that does not offend in
some one thing or an other: for commonly either the husband complains of the
wife, the wife is grieved with the husband, or the children with the father
and mother, and can not agree one with an other. Dissension and discord even
amongs them that profess learning. The author does condemn the contentions
and strifes that one schole has against an other, and specially those that
write apologies, inuectiues or Satyrs.
Let us leave marriage, and speak of learned men, because that learning and
science should take away from man al affection, and should so well reform evil
manners, that such as do profess the same, and give their minds wholly unto
it, should become heavenly, godly, and marvelous before the eyes of the
world. But oh insupportable grief, if ye will mark with an attentive mind,
you shall find that war is open amongs them, not bloody wars, but
certainly ungentle and cruel wars: for one Schole strives against an other,
the Vltramontanes with the Citramontanes, the Rethoritians with the Logitians,
the Perypatetians with the Ptoniens: and for the most part all the
controversies and tragedies are not grounded but on tryfles and things of small
value, and yet of such ridiculous contentions their color does so rise and
inflame them, that although they fight not with Lances and other Engines of
war, yet they spare not to pursue one an other with such fierceness, and to
give such blows with the stroke of a pen, that the marks thereof shall
appear to their posterity, and leaves their renoumes so well painted and set
out, that the ages following shall bear witness thereof. And yet this is not
all that I have said unto you, for if ye will search further, The inward and
domestical enemy of men.
even into the inward part of man (who is a living Creature composed of many
pieces and parts,) you shall find that he has no greater enemy than his
own self, for he combateth continually with him self, reason fights
against the affections, the affections against concupiscence, charity draws
him one way, and sensuality an other way, so that covetousness, ambition, the
devil, the world, and the flesh be all camped within his body, and make open
wars upon him. Ought not we now to blush for shame (being such as we are)
to presume to name our selves Christians, when we differ so far from Jesus
Christ our Captain and Chieftayne: for mark the order of his coming, and ye
shall find when he descended from heaven out of the bosom of his father, to
take our humanity upon him, to reconcile us to our god, he chose his quiet time
when al Realms and Empires were at peace, to accomplish his legation upon the
earth. Esaias. 5.
Which thing the prophet Esaias seeing it long before, did prophecy of his
coming, saying: one people shall not lift them selves against an other: nor
battayles shall not be exercised. psalm. 17.
And David in the Psalmist does confirm the like, speaking of the coming of
Jesus Christ, and said: Justice shall be exalted in these days, and peace
shall be plenty. Behold lo, how David and Esaias (stirred by the spirit of
God, showing us the coming of Christ into the earth) did not promise us a
governor or conqueror of common wealths, as a warrior or a triumpher, but a
prince of peace: Psalm. 75.
which he does also confirm in an other place, when he said, yt his place was
made in peace, he said not in fortresses, tents or pauillions, but in peace.
And mark S. Paul (who of a man of much unquietness and cruel life, was
made quiet and gentle, Corin. 1. ca. 13.
how he prefers charity (which is none other thing but peace and
tranquillity) above all other Celestial gifts: as in many places he names
charity the God of peace. But let us note well how the Lord God abhorred and
had in hatred Warriors, and such as make ready Marchaundise of human blood,
when that he would not have David to buyld his Temple, although he said he had
found a man according to his hearts desire, and that because only he was
polluted with those that he had killed in the wars: but he would that it
should be Solomon his son, which is as much to say in the Hebrew tongue, as
peace: and yet it was by the commandment of God always, that David did take
in hand all his battles. But now if the wars enterprised by the
commandment of God, does pollute and defile man, how shall we render
accounte of those wars which we enterprise to make of malice, envy, and
ambition. If a good king has been accounted to be polluted for shedding the
blood of Infidels and Ethenik^^, shall not we be countable for shedding of so
much christian blood as is daily upon the earth, which has been bought so
dear by so great and excellent price, as by the blood of the son of God? Oh
you Christian Princes, consider well the beginning of the reign of Jesus
Christ (who is the very true purtracte and figure of yours) the continuation
and the issue thereof, At the birth of Jesus Christ the A^gells did pronounce
peace.
and ye shall perceive, that at his birth the Angels sounded not the wars,
nor they did not publishe triumphs, victories, and braueries: but only the
peace exalted by the Prophets, desired by the Apostles, and commended unto us
of the Lord. Further, Jesus Christ being grown into man's years, what did he
teach, exhort, and express to his Disciples, by so many his Parables and
Documents, but only peace? saying unto them: peace be to you: Math ca. 10.
and did command them also to do the like, when he said: if ye enter into
any house, ye shall say, peace be upon this horse: who tasting very well of
his holy doctrine, in the prefaces of their Epistles wish always peace unto
them to whom they write, as S. Paul does to the Romans, Corinthians,
Ephesians and Hebrews And Christ for a further confirmation thereof, said unto
his Apostles: John. ca. 13.
do you understand how ye shall be known to be my disciples? if ye have
peace and love among you, ye shall be known to be mine. Behold lo, the armor
of Jesus Christ, and of his, behold I say his Egles, his Lions, his signs and
marks, by the which he would have his known and discerned from others. Thus
if the children of God were known by peace, the^ truly by the contrary things
we may judge who be the children of the Devil. And further his zeal was so
much toward peace, that he thought it not sufficient only that he preached,
published, and pronounced peace in all the time of his being here before his
passion, John ca. 20.
but being near the anguish of death, willing to recommende the same to his
Apostles after his death (as a thing that he most chiefly delighted in) did
admonish them to love one an other, as he had loved them. After he joined to
it: John. ca. 14.
I give you my peace, I leave you my peace. Harken therefore O ye covetous men,
he left them not Castles, towns, fortresses, nor other such vanities, but
only peace. What did he after the celebration of his holy Supper (feeling then
the most furious assaults of death) did he not pray his father to keep his
disciples in his name, that they might be one with him? Behold lo, the
testimony of amity and love of Jesus Christ, which did not only pray his
father they should be in amity and love togithers, but that they should be
also knit to him, to show unto us thereby the way of the everlasting union and
peace to come. And yet not satisfied with this, but he showed him self to his
Disciples after his tryumphant resurrection, saluting them with the gracious
salutation of peace, when he said (manifesting himself) peace be amongs you.
And our Lord names him self father of us all, he calls us his children, he
wills us to call one an other brethren. Seeing then we have the place of
fraternity togithers, wherefore do we so much search the death one of us of
an other? he names him self also the Shepherd, and calls us his sheep,
and who did ever see sheep fight one with an other, what shall ravening wolves
do the^, when that the sheep shall pull in pieces and dismember one an other?
what meant he by this saying, when he called him self the stock of the vine,
and named us the stalks and branches of the same, but only to show us a very
example of love and concord? If therefore in one vine the branches shall
combat one against an other, what monster shall that be in the order of
Nature? and yet ye see it daily practiced amongs men, who be so hungry of the
blood the one of the other, that they seem as though they would draw it out,
eue^ to the last drop. What meant S. Paul when he said, that the Church is
none other thing but a body framed and composed of many members to cleave to
one head Jesus Christ? In the frame of man's body composed of contrary things
there is peace, harmony, and concord.
And who did ever see one eye fight against another, one hand against an
other, one foot against an other? for in all the frame of man's body, although
the parts thereof be unlike one to an other, yet we see in it a very harmony,
concord and peace. And it is a thing far from all reason, that the members
should have contention or strife togithers, that are so ready to help and
defend the one other, by certain mutual actions, and that so diligently, that
if the eye be in any danger of hurt, the liddes are ready to shet and close
them incontinently to stand them in steed as a help or defense. And if the
head be in danger of hurting, the hand presents it self incontinently to
serve as a buckler and a defender. And further, if the law of Jesus Christ does
command us that we shall do good to the^ that have deserved evil toward us,
and that we should pray for them that persecute us, what shall become of them
that for a light offense, or for a money matter do stir up so many
controversies and variances? Our Lord Jesus Christ does teach us to live as the
birds and fowls of the air, not to care for to morrow, and al to the intent
he would drive us from the vain trust and confidence of this incertayne
riches, and pull out of our hearts the inordinate affection and desire thereof,
which is commonly the cause for the most part of all wars that is
enterprised: and for this cause Christ says, they that lament and sorrow, and
be put out of their possessions, Math. 5.
and suffer persecution for my sake, be happy and blessed, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. And I pray you good Christians, what great testimony of
love is it, when he exhorts us that we should lay down our oblation that we
bring to the temple, and call to our remembrance if we have any hatred or
malice against our neighbors, to seek first to be reconciled to them before
we offer it up? What token of love is it when he would gather us togythers to
him, as the Hen does her chickens under her wings? Those men that be so
thirsty of the blood of their neighbors, be not they the very Kytes that
murder the chickens of Jesus Christ? And note well with what sharpness he
reproves. S. Peter, when he would have unjustly defended him, being in
hazard of death. But ungrateful wretches that we are, how dare we
communicate the holy Supper of the Lord togythers (which is a true Bankette of
amytie and love) having yet our hands embrued with the blood of our
neighbors? An exclamatio^ gathered upon the gentleness amongs brute beasts,
the better to bring men to love and concord. Beasts do defend themselves none
other way but by the armor that nature has given them when they fight.
and how dare we destroy them, for whose health and conservation the Lord
did suffer death? how dare we be so lyberall of their lives and blood,
seeing that Jesus Christ has shed his own blood to save and redeem them?
Oh abominable thing before God? Oh stony hearts, that ye have not at the
least so much compassion of your christian brethren, as the most cruel and
fierce beasts have one of an other? who as we have said before, do not
exercise their rage and cruelty one against an others, and if by chance they
do, they use none other armor the^ that nature has given the^: And they have
also a modesty in their fightings, for after one of them is hurt, they
depart the one from the other: but amongs men they never cease commonly in
their combats, till the soul be departed from the body. And also if brute
beasts do fight, they fight but one against one, so that you shall never see
ten bulls assail other ten, or twen^ie lions fight with other twenty lions,
Beasts do-not combat for light caus^s as men do: but when hunger does enforce
them, or if any man go about to hurt their young ones.
as we see commonly fifty thousand men overthrow other fifty thousand in the
field: and that more is (which is a thing greatly to our reprofes) if brute
beasts do combat or fight, it is not for light causes and trifles, but when
hunger and famine does enforce them, or if that any body goes about to hurt
their young ones: but men oftentimes for a very small cause, either for a
certain vain title, or upon the lustiness or couragiousnesse of their hearts,
will put them selves into the field, and that done, they are not ashamed in
their prayers to call the Lord their father, even when they go to the
slaughter of their brethren. They desire his name may be sanctified, but what
can more dishonor the name of the Lord, An allusion of the prayer of our Lord.
than the hatred thou have against thy neighbors? That his kingdom should
come, how are we so bold to pray for the coming of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, when that David the wise Prince feared in such causes to present him
self before God? we rather ought to desire that the mountains should fall
upon us to cover us, than to appear before the justice of God, being so
polluted with the effusion of the blood of our neighbors. That his will
should be done in earth as in heaven, he did drive the Angels out of heaven for
their disobedience against him, and being upon the earth he preached none
other thing but peace, and yet thou art enemy to thy neighbor: thou do
pray that he would give thee this day thy daily bread: How dare thou
demand bread of the father of heaven, when thou burnest the Wheat and
Houses of thy brethren? Thou eatest his travel, and yet thou destroyest his
substance: but oh good Lord, why do we not tremble when we desire him he
would pardon us our offenses, as he would we should forgive others, when we be
so far from forgiving, that we go to murder our brethren. We pray to him
also that he would deliver us from temptation, and yet we our selves tempte
our brethren, and put them in great peril. And likewise we pray to him to
deliver us from evil, and go daily about nothing else but wickedness and
mischief. Having now showed certain principal points of such things as
appertained to the declaration of the commodity and profit that peace does
bring, An exhortacio^ to princes to fly from war with a description of
infinite euels and mischiefs that grow ne^^^.
I will now declare what war is, and what glory and fame they carry away
that do exercise it, to the end that comparing the one with the other, you may
judge how damageable and pernicious it is to mankind. Will ye understand what
war is? think that you see before your eyes a great company of men assembled
togithers with pale and drousy faces, hydeous and horrible, with barbarous cry,
eyes al burning and flaming, provoking wrath and anger, the noise and rattling
of armor, with an horrible thundering of cannons, then a furious assault all
full of rage and fierceness, a slaughter of the dead, some dismembered, other
some lying upon their fellows half dead, the fleldes all covered with dead
carkases, the floods and rivers all stained with human blood, one brother
oftentimes fighting against an other, kinsman against kinsman, freende against
friend, all set on fire one to slay the other, A comparison of the wars of
beasts and men.
and yet scarsly have any cause of enmity between them. Will thou
understand further the very spectacle of the wars how pitiful it is? Haste
thou seen the conflict between the Bear and the Lion, or any other beasts of
contrary kind? what fretting and foming? what cruelty is it to see them
dismember and pull in pieces the one the other? how much more strange is it
to see man ageynste man, so furious one against an other, and as it were
transformed into a brute beast, and all to exercise his rage and cruelty upon
his neighbor, besides an infinite number of other evils and mischefes, that
depend thereupon? and those poor simple people, who have builded made and
garnished so many fair and beautiful Cities, have governed and ruled them,
and by their travel and labor, have enriched, fortified and maynteyned them:
Even by reason of these outrageous wars and controversies they see them
sometimes in their own presence made ruinate, defaced, and thrown down,
their cattall taken from them, their corn and fruit of the earth (before it
is ripe) cut down, The calamities and miseries that follow war are here
described.
their towns and villages burnt, and that which is more cruel and
inhumaine, oftentimes they be killed and slain. And when there is preparation
made for the wars, every manne is afraid, and in continual danger, and
when the same is in execution, there is no famylie that doothe not lament and
weep, and taste the misery thereof. For then the handycrafts wax cold, the
poor be constrained to fast and die of hunger, or else to have refuge to
unlawful exercises to help and sustein their lives, the virgins be violated,
the chaste matrons remayn bareyn in their houses, the laws be still, humanity
is extinct, equity is suppressed, religion is contemned, the sacred places are
profaned, the people pilled, the poor old men be captive, and see their
children slain before their eyes: the young men are out of order, given to al
kind of wickedness: ye shall find an infinite number of Widows and as many
fatherless children, the Prince is enuyed, and the common people being
oppressed with taxes, and subsidies, conceive hatred against him, and all is
full of murmures and curses. And I pray you mark with what difficulty they
entertain so many strangers men of war? what prodigality is used in expenses
for the preparation to the wars, as well upon the sea, as on the land? what
labor and toil is there used in making of Fortes, bulwarks, and rampires,
clensing of dyches, preparing tents, carrying munitions, charyots, cannons,
armoures, and other such diuellishe devises for the war, continual making
of watches, and setting forth of scoutes, and such other like exercises of
war, not without continual fear and peril wheresoever they be, and yet
speaking nothing of the infinite travel of the poor soldiers, and their
manner of living which is so austere and cruel, that even the very beasts are
not so much troubled as they are. These last be the reasons of S. Augustine in
his book de ciuitate dei where they be amply described.
For the sely beasts hyde themselves the night time in the caves of the earth,
but the poor soldier watches almost continually: and if by chance he
takes his rest, it is either at the sign of the Moon, or the sign of the
rain, frost, snow, or wind, and he must always have his ear at the ground to
harken and watch (as the aspis does (least he be surprysed: he endures
hunger, heat and cold, and when he understands the heavy token of the
battle, he does think to himself that he must either receive sodein death,
or else kill and murder his neighbor: and thus for vj. Crowns in the month
he binds himself to the hazard of the blow of the Cannon: so that amongs
all the seruitudes and slavery of the world, there is none like or to be
compared to the miserable life of a soldier.

Alas, Gentle reader have good regard to this that does follow for thou shall
find a marvelous doctrine therein touching the miseries of our human life.
was it not sufficient that nature had created man poor and miserable, subject
to many calamities and miseries, but further we our selves must add wars for
a more burden or mischief, so strange and pernicious, that it passes all
others? a mischief so plentiful and fertile that it comprehends in it self
all kind of evil? a mischief so pestilent and contagious, that it does not
only afflict the evil and wicked men, but also lays his most cruel blows
upon the poor innocents. Pliny that grave aucthor and many other have lest
unto us in writing, that notwithstanding two thousand years past, the
physicians had discovered three hundred kinds of diseases or more: whereunto
man's body is subject, and therewith continually afflicted, besides other new
diseases that did appear daily not accompting amongs any of them the
insupportable burden of old age (a disease incurable) nor making mention of
any towns in Asia, Europe and A^rike, which are soonke with their inhabitants,
some ruinated by tempests, some swallowed up into the intrayles of the earth by
emotions and sudden quakings of the same, some oppressed by the falling of the
mountains, and other some drowned and eaten away by the violent incursions of
the seas, nor naming an infinite number of venims, poisons, and pestilences,
wherewith our lives are beseeged and continually threatened: yet for all these
afflictions and miseries, which have and do daily fall upon us, we spare not to
pull in pieces, to dismembre, mangle, and search the death one of other, and
that with such vehemency, that our cruelty is abhorred amongst the very
Ethnikes. And yet if our rage were exercised upon the barbarous and heathen
people, it might be the better borne withal, and the victory thereof might
bring some contentation to the conqueror. But Oh good Lord, will we know what
be the glories and triumphs of them that are victorious amongs us? Their
safeguard and conservation is the ruin of their neighbors, their riches are the
poverty and dispoyling of others, The victories that christians have one of an
other are most lamentable.
their joy is the sorrow and lamentations of others, their triumphs are
infelicitie of others: And yet oftentimes it is the victory of Cadmus where as
well the victors as those that are vanquished, in the end do weep and
lament: For there was never war so happy that in the end even the conqueror
himself did not repent if he had any spark of humanity in him, which has
appeared even amongs the very Ethnikes themselves, who have acknowledged the
same by their own testimonies, as that good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who
upon a day receiving his triumph for a great victory that he had gotten
against the enemies of the Empire, feeling in his conscience the wrong that he
had done to his neyghbor, when he was carried in his Charyot to receive his
triumph, began too say to himself: what more greater folly or vanity may
happen to a Romain Emperor, A marvelous worthy and noble saying of an
Ethnicke Emperor.
than when he has conquered many towns, disturbed the quiet, destroyed
Cities, razed fortresses, robbed the poor, enriched tyrants, shed much
blood, made an infinite number of widows and orphans, then in recompense of
all these injuries, to be received with triumph and glory? Many are slain,
many have traveled, and one only has carried away the glory. After he adds
these words: By the living gods (said he) when I was led into Rome in
such tryumphe, and saw the poor caytiues captives in yrons, and understood
the lamentations of widows, beheld carried before me an infinite treasure
evil gotten, and remembered the poor innocents slain, if I did rejoice
outwardly, I did weep with great drops of blood in my heart, and began to
exclaim against Rome to my self, and said, Come hither Rome come hither O thou
Rome, wherefore dooest thou rejoice at the Unfortunate chance of others? art
thou more aunciente than Babylon? more beautiful than Hely^ more richer than
Carthage? more stronger than Troy? more peopled than Thebes? more environed
with ships than Corinth? more pleasant than Tire? more happy than Numance? that
were decked with so many notable things, A marvelous p^^ssance of sin which
does cause them that have neither God nor law fail the scourges the of.
and kept with so many good and virtuous men, and are now all perished and
destroyed: think thou to remain forever, flowing with so many vices, and
inhabited with so many vicious men? Take this one thing for certain, that the
glory that is at this hour upon thee, has been upon them, and the destruction
that is fallen at this present upon them, shall afterward happen to thee.
Mark O Christians what virtues, what oracles, be under the bark of the
words of an Emperor: who not being any ways lightened with the light of the
gospel, yet he had never rest in his conscience, but felt those bitter
gnawings of the worm (that Esaias speaks of) that never dies, but terrifieth
and crucifieth the soul incessantly with such strength and force, that even
the Paynims themselves that have no knowledge of God do taste thereof.

And let us search a little further, and we shall find, that this War
over and besides the euyls and mischieues beforesayd, engenders and carries
with it two other mortal enemies to mankind, which are famine, and
pestilence, the very scourges of the just indignation of the wrath of God, as
it is amply wytnessed in the Book of Kings. 2. Kings. 24.
For the fields being abandoned of their ordinary husbandry through the
incursions of the wars, they bring no more ye fruits of the earth, but remain
desolate, which is the cause that the poor people have not wherewith to be
norished, and being oppressed with famine eat of al sorts of pease, roots,
and other unwholesome things for man's body, which do so putrify, that instead
to turn to nutriment they do engender in the^ corrupt and venomous humors, Of
wars come pestilence and famine. Math. 24.
whereof the pestilence and other contagious diseases take their root and
beginning. And for this cause the Lord showing to his disciples the evils that
should happen after that he had fortolde to them that one nation should rise
against an other, kingdom against kingdom, he added incontinently, how that
one should be infected of an other, and that there should be pestilence and great
famine throughout al provinces of the earth. Behold lo the triumphs, behold the
commodities and the disco^modities of the wars, which are so familiar at this
day amongs young Princes, that they will war one upon an other even upon
report, and without any reason probable that they can yield for their hatred,
but that the English man hates the Scotte, because he is Scotte: the Spaniarde
the French, because he is a French man: the Almane is no enemy to the
French man, but for his name. But oh miserable men that we are, wherefore have
not we rather regard to the marks of Jesus christ, with the which we are al
alike marked? the river of Ren^ does somewhat separate France from Almane, but
it can not separate one christian from an other: the hills of Pyrenees do
separate Spayn from Italy but they are not of puissance to separate the
communion of the church. The sea separateth the english men from the french,
but it can not divide the union of religion: 1. Cor. 1.
the apostles were grieved to hear such contention amongs christians, to say I
hold of Apollo, I of Cephas, and I of Paul, least yt such parcialities should
seperat ye union of Jesus Christ. But al things well considered there is no
affinity, province, or other thing that ought to be more dear to us, or that
touches us nearer, nor that does more straightly bind and knit us togethers,
than the societe and union of Jesus Christ, being all bought with one blood,
Notable sentences wherein is declared that which ought to make christians to
live in love and concord togethers.
all brethren, come out of one like stock, all regenerate by one only baptism,
nourished with like sacraments, judged by one Judge, trusting to one hyre, and
one pain, having one enemy which is Satan, all subject to passions, and
equal to receive death. Now that I have sufficiently entreated of peace and
wars, and the commodities of the one, and the incoueniences of the other, I
will show you also how and by what means ye may win and enjoy peace. There is
no medicine more mete to eschew wars and discord, then to flee from insatiate
ambition, love of ourselves, and desire to revenge, and rule, which is the
very spring and fountain from whence flows al occasions of strife and
debate, as the Prophet Esaias says. Esaias 5.
Cursed be you that join house with house, land with land, think you to dwell
upon the earth alone? This is also verifyed by Moyse^ (gods minister) when he
shows to ye people yt their sins are ye cause of the wars, where he says,
If, ye do not obey my commandments but do contemn my judgments and
precepts. I will set my face against you, and you shall fall before your
enemies, and they that hate you, shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when
no man shall follow you, I will send a swoorde upon you, which shall be a
revenger of my Testamentes that ye have broken and violated, and ye shall be
given in pray to your enemies. As the holy Prophet doothe confyrme in an
other place, where he says, If my people had hearkened unto me, and that
Jsrael had walked in my ways, Psalm. 80.
I would have humbled their enemies before them, and I would have laid my hand
upon them that they should have been overthrown. Note a little how the Lord
has afflicted his people by wars to chasten them for their sins and
wickedness, specially for the vice of idolatry. Sometimes by the Madianites,
somtims by the Chananites, Iudic. 3.
sometime by the Philistians, other sometime by the Ammon^^^s, and other people
their neighbors. Which thing Joshua did pronosticate to them: 4. Kings 17.
but how cruelly were they plagued by the king of Assyrians, and brought into
servitude, and al because they did forsake the Lord their God, and worshipped
the calves of Jeroboam? how were the people of Judah plaged by Nabuchodonosor,
4 Kings. 24.
because they committed idolatry, as Jeremy the Prophet did prophecy to
them? Ye must not therefore marvel as the Prophet Oseas says, Ozee. 4.
if blood seek blood, seeing that fraud, hatred, covetousness, and
fornication reigns upon the earth.

We see at the eye how the hand of God is not abbreuiated, we see how that he
shoots off the arrows of his wrath against us, he stretches forth his
hand as the Prophet says and stryketh us in his fury, Esaias. 5.
because our great offenses do stir and provoke him daily theretoo.

Let us therefore change our lives, and turn to goodness. Let us draw
our feet from crooked ways, and he will appease his wrath: For he is
gentle even in his anger, Joel. 2.
as the Prophet Ioell doothe write, Turn you too the Lord of Hosts (says
Zachary) and he will turn too you. ^acharie 3. Jeremy. 3.
Hearken how Jeremy the holy Prophet doothe exalte and magnifye the mercy
of the Lord: Thou haste (says he) committed whooredome with many naughty
women, yet turn to me, and I will receive thee: we have all committed
fylthynesse with the flesh, the Devil, and the World, and yet always the
Lord is ready to stretche out his hand too us: this is the father of mercy
and consolation. The people of Israel (as the scriptures testify) have been
very prompt to commit al evil: and for punishment the Lord did always render
the^ into the hands and servitude of others to punish them. But always when
they repented, he sent them one to deliver the^ out of the yoke and servitude,
and to restore them to the first state and liberty. The people of Judah after
that they had remained a long time (for their abominable sins) in the
servitude and bondage of Babylon, Esdras. 1.
the Lord in the end moved with pity, restored them to their former
felicity. David being driven to fight by his son Absolon, 2. Kings. 15.
fled bare footed and bare headed, all discomforted with sorrow through the
deserts: yet was he through his humility restored to his kingdom again. The
hearts of Kings and Princes be in the hands of the Lord, Proverb 21.
and he will turn them what way it pleases him, says the wise man. And all
these examples which we have produced here before, tend to none other end,
but to declare to the people, that all the wars and persecutions that come
upon them, happen not by chance but they proceed from the secret judgments
of God, who does permit them, to the intent he would punish their offenses,
in the which they are greatly buried. He suffers yt they shall be wakened from
their delites and pleasures by the scourge of war, which he stirs up
against them by their neighbors as S. Austen says in Ciuitate Dei. And as for
you Ministers of the Church, He persuades the ministers of the Church to
preach peace to princes
and such as make profession to preach the word of God, I would wish you
should bend your selves altogether to speak against wars and bark and cry
out all with one open voice against the same: and let your pulpets, and all
other your public places sound of none other thing but of peace, and exhort
all Princes continually to concord and union. Esaias. 52.
Oh how beautiful (says the Prophet) be the feet of them that preach Peace.
And S. Paul also exhorts us to pray for Kings and Princes, 1. Timoth. 2
that the Lord will suffer them to end the course of their lives in peace. As
likewise the Jews being in Babylon with Ieconias king of Judah, Baruch. 1.
did write to their brethren that were at Jerusalem, that they should pray for
Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, and for his son Balthazar, that they might
live in peace with them, and find grace before them. And further Jeremy
enspired with the holy ghost, did instruct the Jews that were in bondage at
Babylon, that they should pray for the City that they were in, to the end that
it being in peace, Jeremy. 29.
they also might enjoy the same. You see lo how the Lord would that his people
should pray for the Ethnikes that were without God and without law. How much
more are we bound of duty to pray for Christian Princes? And above all things
we must take good heed that we put not the oil into the fire to make it
flame, 2. Kings. 17 3. Kings. 52.
as did that miserable Achitophel that stirred Absolon against his father, who
in the end received a shameful death in satisfaction of his offense. As
likewise the priest Abiather, because he consented to such wicked counsel, was
put out of his sacerdotal dignity.

Now I will convert my speech to you Monarchs, Emperoures, Kings, and
Princes, and others being in authority, of whom the pore people do depend. You
I say that are their souls and their heads, enter into your selves, and be not
carried away with your own affections: be such toward your subjects, as the
faithful fathers of the household are toward their children, following the
Counsel of that great Emperor Caesar, who said, that the good shephearde doothe
never pull the skins of the sheep, but takes only the fleece. And call to
your remembrance, Oh ye Princes, that they are men as ye are, free as ye are,
Christians as ye are, boughte with the same blood, and shall be judged by the
same judge that ye are: issued all out of one stock and root, and that you
differ in nothing but in a little transitory dignity which shall vanishe away
as the smoke, and you shall have no pre-eminence before God. Remember the
voice of your great king Jesus Christ, who does exhort you to embrace peace.
Behold with your pitiful eyes the poor widows with a great number of
Orphans, whose lamentations does pierce even to the throne of God. Remember
also how that we all shall be accomptable of our lives, and shall all appear
before one judge, who will not lose one hair of our heads, but has said
unto us, that from the blood of Abell, the first that was slain, even unto
the last man, Ecclesiast. 3 5
he will not lose one drop of blood that shall not be accounted for, before
him, by those that have cruelly shed the same.

The thirtenth Chapter.
How hurtful incontinencie is to Princes, and how that the same has been
the cause of the ruin and destruction of many realms and kingdoms, with also
a Treatise of the dignity and excellency of the honorable state of
Matrimony.

THe observation of all the things before written, are not sufficient to make
a Prince apt and meet to govern any Empire or kingdom, if further he be
not deliteful and careful to cleanse his court of one kind of vice which has
been in time past so familiar among Kings, princes and Emperors yt it has been
wholly the cause of the ruin of the^ selves and their subjects. Which vice
because it is a matter that proceeds of nature, and that it does something
please and bewitch our senses, the cure thereof is the more difficile and
dangerous to be practiced, and specially upon young princes, who as yet have
not experimented the rigoures and assaults of Fortune. Wherefore there must be
used great pain and diligence in the beginning, Vice must be resisted in the
beginning
to resist and fight against the same: for after it is once in full possession
of us, even those that be most best armed for it, shall sometimes find
themselves impeached and troubled. The vice which I do intend to speak of,
is the incontine^cie that is used with women, to which if the Prince, or any
other governor, does once give himself in pray, he can not choose in this
world a more redier way to destroy both him self and his people. And because
the doctrine heerof may be better learned how to eschew the same, we will lay
before your eyes by examples, the grievous punishments that the Lord our God
has sent to such Princes and Provinces as have been defiled with this wicked
vice. And we will begin our discourse by ye afflictions, specially wherewith he
has plaged and tormented his own people for this abominable sin of
incontinencie. First of all whoredom and other horrible filthiness used
amongs the people, Gene. 6.
was the cause of the universal floude, and that God did pour down his wrath
upon earth. Five famous Cities, as it is written in the Books of Moses, in
the old Testament, were destroyed for their wantonness and dissolute life. In
the Book of Numbres, is showed, for the like offenses twelve Princes were
hanged, Number. 25
and four and twenty thousand men died. In Leuiticus ye may see how that
the Chananians were overthrown for their incest and filthiness. In the Book
of the Judges you shall read that all the tribe of Benjamin were destroyed for
the adultery committed with the wife of a Leuite. Judges. 20.
In the book of kings also you shall perceive grievous plages were sent to
David for his adoultrie. Solomon likewise for the same cause did commit
Idolatry, 3. King. 11.
and was given up to a reprobate mind. The Prophet Jeremy does say that the
chief cause of the ruin and destruction of Jerusalem was for adultrie. And
many realms and kingdoms have suffered change and alteration of their
government, and have been transferred to others, for the causes above named.
Troy the proud, for the rauishment of Helen, was destroyed. Thebes the
populous for the rape of Chrisippus, and for the incest of Oedippus was
punished. The government of kings were banished out of Rome, for the
rauishment of Lucretia. And Aristotle in his Pollitikes does say that whoredom
and adultrie be the principal causes of the ruin and destruction of realms
and kingdoms. Pausanias that great renoumed Prince, for that he did defloure
and afterward kill, the daughter of Bizance was advertised by a spirit out
of a pillar of his end and death at hand, (a thing very prodigious, that
wicked spirits shall give acknowledge of the confusion and pain that is
prepared for wicked men) which thing was found to be true afterward in him,
for he died as the pillar had foresaid to him. These small number of examples by
us thus manifested, I do think should be sufficient to pull back and
withdraw young Princes and all other that have given them selves to
incontinencie, from the inordinate affection thereof. And as touching Old man,
S Augustine a zealous rebuker of vices in his Ciuitate Dei, does teach them
how they should tame this slipperie desire and lust of the flesh, where he
says, although lechery be detestable and horrible in all ages, yet it is
most abominable and monstrous in old age. Afterward following his discourse,
he writes this that follows to the utter confusion and ignomie of all old
leachers. Think (says he) how much it displeases God to see an old man
that has a graie head, his feet full of gout, An old man to be lecherous
is detestable before God.
his mouth without teethe, his raines charged with the stone, his face
writhled, his eyes holowe, his hands shaking, his head seeming none other,
than the head of a dry Anatomy, and that which is worse, one that looks
every hour, that death, the earth, and the woormes should sommon him to
appear before the dreadful judgment seat of God. And yet nevertheless in
despite of all these, and his years, will leave the briole to his incontinent
mind and filthy lust, and will kindle his icie heart maugre this age: which
things truly are a testimony of reprobation and a certain argument that the
most grievous part of hell are reserved for them. For he has neither nature
nor other provocation of the flesh, that does lead or induce him to such
incontinencie, but a very disordinate custom that he is fallen in, in the which
without any fear of the judgment of God, he will continue even unto his
grave. And it was truly spoken of S. Paul the (true lover and aduauncer of
chastity) writing to the Ephesians, Ephesians 4.
when he said, that there can be no greater punishmente for an adulterer, than
to be blinded in his filthiness, that he cannot see the judgments and
Counsels of God, and also he describes in like manner in an other place, the
pains and punishments that are prepared for such as make the temple of God and
the members of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 6.
the me^bres of an harlot, where he says that fornicators and adulterers shall
not possess the kingdom of God. Having now brought forth these Examples
before said, as it were to set before your eyes the plagues and punishments
ye God has laid upon the wicked from time to time for their abominations,
(wishing ye same may be a terroure and fear for all Princes and others to
beware they fall not into the like.) It shall not be much impertinent to the
matter (as me thinks) to entreat of the obedience of the wife to the
husband, and of the duty of the husband to the wife, because that we
entende afterward to enter into the commendations of the dignity and
excellency of marriage, which is the very remedy that God the Lord has
ordained against this vice before named. Afterward we will go forwards, and
declare how that Princes and all other that feel them selves over prone of
Nature, ought to marry as well for the continuance of their race, as also for
the comfort of the imperfection of man's nature, and to avoid the
displeasure and indignation of God. Man having that divine Image of God, and
smelling something of the celestial Carrecter of whom he took his beginning,
is not only dreadful to the most furious and proudest beasts upon the
earth, but further he has a pre-eminence and authority over the woman (a
creature most noble next to him self of all others, to whom the Lord has
given a straighte commandment to obey her husband, as Moses the great
Lawyer does witness in the third Chapter of Genesis, where the Lord said
speaking to the woman, thou shall be under the government of man, and he shall
rule thee: which thing is also confirmed by S. Peter, the faithful minister of
the secrets of his master in his first Epistle and third Chapter, The
obedyen^e that women owe to their husbands. 1. Peter. 3.
where he exhorts women to be obedient to their husbands. As likewise S.
Paul the clear Trumpet of Jesus Christ has confirmed the same in many
places of his Epistles, where after that he has amply disputed of the
subjection of the woman and of her obedience, he adds thereunto because
(says he) man is the chief and head.

Which thing also Plato the Ethnicke, and Aristotle his scholar, void of the
knowledge of the Gospel, guided only by the goodness and bounty of Nature,
do full well recognize the same, when the one in the fifth book of his common
wealth says that man does rule and govern over the woman, as the shepherd
over the sheep: And the other in his Politikes says that man by kind does
know the authority and power that he has over the woman; and nature her
self (a witness irreprouable) does manifest unto us sufficiently in her works
the very true portraict and image of this subjection and obeisance. For do we
not see that amongs al beasts as well the airie and watrie, as also those that
live upon the earth, the males do always command the females? A thing not only
common amongs lively creatures, but also amongs precious stones and vegitable
plants: for amongs them such as have any force, strength and power, we call
always the males, and the other more weak and inferiors, we call females.
For further confirmation of which things, we may read in many Histories as
well Greek as Latin sacred as profane, that the virtuous women did always
in acknowledging their obeisance, call their husbands their Lords and Masters.
As Ignatius the disciple of John the Evangelist (a great obseruer of
antiquities) does witness in his Epistle to the Citizens of Antioche. as also
did Sar^ the wife of the holy Patriarch Abraham, who speaking of her husband
(said) my Lord is an old man. And S. Peter also a great commender of
humanity, did not forget it in his first Canonical Epistle in the third
Chapter, where he says that in old time the holy women that put their trust
and confidence in the Lord, 1. Peter 3.
did tire them selves after this manner, that was to be obedient to their
husbands, as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord and master as I said
before. And further if we will be curious to search into the secrets of the
ancient histories, we shall find more stranger things (and yet true also) that
is, that in the old time the husbands had power over their wives and children,
as well for death as life (as Caesar a great aucthor has left unto us in
writing) but such unnatural power was afterward stayed and ended by the
mighty hand of God, Caesar in his comme^taries.
that it should be no more lawful for man to abuse them in that sort, or to
use them as drudges. For as his pleasure was to make the woman of man's own
flesh, and draw her out of his side, so he would that he should entreat her
as his faithful friend and everlasting companion. And if you find in any
place of the holy scriptures, that our Lord God does any thing abase the
woman, or make her inferior to her husband, ye shall find in a great number of
other places, that he does magnify her, exalte her, and favor her before
man, and specially at the beginning of the universal creation, where he
honored the first woman with this title or name Eve, which is to say, life, and
as for man, he called him Adam, which is to say, earth, and not thinking that
sufficient, Women favored of God.
but did create her in a noble place, that is to say, Paradise terrestre, but
man was made in the open fields, and afterward carried into Paradise: and the
woman also was created of a most noble substance, that is to say, of the
flesh and side of man (a matter made pure, lively and quick) but he created man
of an element gross and heavy, that is to say, of the slyme and excrements of
the earth. And Nature a sovereign framer of all things, willing to signify
unto us what remembrance and estimation we ought to have of the woman, has
given her a certain privilege above man (after the opinion of the
Philosophers) and that is, if the man and the woman shall happen to be drouned
at one instant, the man is first under the water, and the woman by the very
providence of Nature, does remain long above the water. And further, for a
certain reverence (as an especial grace and favor of Nature) when she
flows she turns upon the water, her back upward toward heaven, and his
face, and the rest of her body toward the water: but man after he is drouned
turns his face upward. Also Pliny and Helyen the Greek Philosophers, do
write, that for a very reverence toward women, the very brute beasts do
favor and honor them: for being in any fury, or otherwise oppressed for
hunger, they will never touch any woman, where to the contrary we see
commonly they do devour men. Further they add to it, Cato severe in all
things does defend that any man should hurt a woman.
that if we would tame and make familiar any brute beast, as Bears and
Lions, and such like, they will sooner yield them selves to be handled and
tamed by women than men. Cato being of Nature very severe in all things, did
so much honor and bear reverence toward women, that he made a law, that if
any man should lay hands violently on any woman, he should be punished with
the like punishment, as if he had violated the Images of the Gods. And is there
any man so barbarous or so far estraunged from humanity, that knows not
that this our life can not taste any contentation without the company and
felowshyppe of a woman? who does put away through her comfortablenesse, the
troubles and vexations that come only to vex our heats, and that in such
sort as it seems she was sent unto us from heaven for the comforting of our
infirmities. And Solomon in his Cantike, as it were acknowledging (a thing I
can not tell what) of the blessedness in the woman, willing to describe
thereby a mystery of Divine and hautie things, would have covered the same
under the pleasant veil of love, fayning a marvelous love of a young married
man toward his Espouse. I would allege here many other in the advancement
and praise of woman, as how Jesus Christ, after he was risen from death, his
will was, that women should have this pre-eminence before men, in that he would
be first seen to them, Women did never bring any error in to the church as
men have done.
and that they should be the first trumpet of his Resurrection, and that
also they should never be the occasion that any error should be brought to
the Church of God, as many men have been: and man also betrayed, sold, bought,
condemned, and crucified Christ, and women clean contrary to them did what
they could to save and preserve his life, as it is manifest to us by the wife
of Pilate. But I am determined now in this Treatise here, not to speak any
more of their worthynesse and dignities, whereof if thou be desirous to
understand further, thou may read Plutarche in his particular treatise that
he has made in their commendations, and Boccas, S. John Chrysostom upon the
homily of the headding of S. John Baptist, S. Hierome upon the explication of
the.xviij. Psalm: in the Books of the Nuptial laws of Mounsier Tiraquean,
counselor in the Court of Parliament, and in many other Latin authors, which I
do omit at this present for prolixitie, and also in ye book of Cristian de
Pise, a young gentlewoman, one that was very well learned both in the Greek and
Latin, who has most lively searched out those things that tend to the
commendation of the feminine sex, and answered to all such objections as any
man could say against them, as any other author that I have red that entreated
of the like matter, as thou may see in one great tome that she has written
of the same. And as for my part, the reasons that has moved me to rehearse
these few things of their co^mendations mentioned before, does not tend to any
other end, but to induce men which have given them selves up to their wanton
lusts to marry, seeing that it is the chief remedy that our Lord God has
given to man for a consolation and ease of his infirmity: and besides marriage
is a thing so necessary for man, that it is the only conseruator and
preserver of our beginning, The first miracle that ever Christ did was at a
marriage.
which Jesus Christ in token that he would have it highly honored, being bidden
to a marriage did enriche it and beautify it with the first miracle that ever
he did upon the earth. Therefore what thing is more holy than marriage, which the
soueraygne Author of all things has ordained, sanctified and hallowed? What is
more just and reasonable, than to render to our posterity that we have
received of our anceters? This Lord is not a Solon, or a Licurgus, but he is
the only Monarche of heaven and earth, by whose mouth the same has been
sanctified, and who after that he had created man of the slyme of the earth,
foreseeing his myserie if he should dwell alone, wylling to comfort him in
some thing, gave unto him an ayder and companion, which he drew out of his own
proper flesh and side, giving him to understand thereby that there was nothing
upon the earth that ought to be more dear to him, nor that he should be more
bound unto than to the woman: and not leaving him with this his first benefit
and grace, but also when he had washed ye earth that was defiled with the
wickedness of man with that great abundaunce of water: the first law that he
established, was, he should increase and multiply to replenish the earth: a
thing which could not be well accomplished but by the benefit of marriage,
which afterward he did confirm more firmly, when he said, that a man shall
leave both father and mother, and cleave to his wife and companion. But what
makes the dignity and excellency of marriage more commendable than the
conjunction of the divine Nature with the humanity (a thing dreadful not
only to the Angels, but also to the wicked spirits) which surely is to us a
testimony most certain and true of the love that the Lord God does bear
toward his church, of the which he calls him self husband, and her the
spouse: wherefore S. Paul says, it is a great Sacrament, the marriage of Jesus
Christ, and his Church: and if in all the order of Nature there had been any
conjunction more holy, or if there had been any amity more religious than
marriage, truly the Apostle would have produced the fame thereof in the behalf
of Jesus Christ and his church. The ancient Hebrews had marriage in such honor
and reverence that the new married men were always the first year exempted
from the wars, The privilege of married folks.
although the City and common wealth wherein they dwelte were in great danger.
The Roman laws had in such hatred the contemners of Marriage, that they did
exempt those that would not marry from all public honor and gouernements: as
to the contrary, they did honor and gratify with some liberality those that
with any children did increase the common wealth. Licurgus the law giver to the
Athenians, and a great friend to humanity, did make laws wherein it was
ordained, that all those that did disdain to marry (in the summer time) should
be banished from all public plays and pastimes, and for a perpetual infamy
should be constrained (in the winter) to go all naked through the market. Will
you know in what reverence antiquity has had marriage? the Greeks did always
banish for ten years the violators of the Matrimonial honor: the Hebrews and
the Barbarians did punish it with the pains of death: the ancient law of
Moses did stone the offenders therein to death. The Romans great preferrers of
chastity, by their first laws, This ought only to be understood of the
husbands.
did permit the husband without any kind of process, to kill him that
should be apprehended in adultery with his wife, wherein they did consider the
just grief of the husband, to see his wife defiled: Truly a law very severe
and strayte, for we are not permitted to use such violence to them that would
kill our own persons: as if a man would say, the offense were more greater to
violate the wife of any man, than to take away from him his own proper life,
which is a certain testimony and true argument to let us understand how
excellent and precious a thing marriage is, which being polluted and violated
is pourged by the effusion of man's blood, and aucthorised thereunto by Justice.
But why do we repose our selves so much upon the testimony of the laws
written, seeing that we have the very proper law of nature to confyrme the
same, which is not written in any Table of Brass or metal, but in graven and
printed in the inward parts of our hearts, whereunto if we do not obey and
give place, we shall seem so much unworthy the name of good Citizens, as we
thereby deserve not to be called men. For if it be as the Stoikes do say
very subtly in disputation, that to live well, is none other thing but to
follow the course of Nature: what is more agreeable to Nature than marriage? what
is more conformable to the nature, not only of man, but also of al other
beasts, tha^ to co^serue their kind in their being? it is then a thing very
ignomious to man, and deserves great infamy to see beasts that are without
reason to obey to the laws of Nature, and he only break it, and strive
against it, and we (if we will mark well with Judgment) shall find in all
the works of Nature a certain printe, Image, and purtracte of marriage. And
Pliny the great searcher of the secrets of Nature, does write in his natural
History, that there are many trees and Plants, whereof there is both the
Male and the Female, which of a very instinction of nature, and a secret and
mutual love that is amongs them, do love one an other, and take strength and
increase of the one with the other, in such sort, A certain similitude of
marriage in insensible things without life
that if the male should not always spread the bows and branches of the
female, as it were by a natural embracing, the females should become barren,
and would bear no fruit. The Philosophers write also the like of many
precious stones, which are so well tied and confederate togithers by the
strayte bond of nature, that if ye separate the male from the female, they can
not exercise nor work their natural operations. And do we not see how that
the heaven in his continual motion has the earth in subjection as a wife and
companion? which he makes fruitful and fertile in all things by his strenght
and influence, doing therein the office of a faithful spouse and husband. And
thus if we should follow an infinite number of such like examples which nature
does represent in her works, we might make a great volume thereof: but we have
brought forth these few to show you as it were at the eye, that by the aid,
solace, comfort and favor of this matrimonial society, all things are
maintained, conserved, and continued, as to ye contrary, if men were restrained
from the same, al things should be destroyed, made ruinate, and decayed: and
there is not at this day any nation (under the face of the heavens) so cruel,
barbarous, or so far estraunged from humanity, that does not reverence and
honor marriage. The Thracians, Sarmates, Indians, Greek and Latinis, yea even
those that dwell in the extreme parts of the world do receive it, honor it, and
commend it, and that only because that nature (the father and mother of all
things) knowing our necessity therein has determined it, and engraven it in
our hearts, yea and it is of such force, that it takes place, not only amongs
the Turtles and Doves (who are of nature amorous) but further it urges and
constrayneth the most furious and cruel beasts upon the earth to obey thereunto.
The Lions be loving and gentle to their females, The brute beasts that are
without reason have a marvelous affection to their fawnes.
the Bears and Elephants do not only love them, but are subject withal to
that extremity which we call gelousie. The Tigers fight and combat for the
defense of their young Faunes: The Asses which be of nature melancholy, be so
earnest defenders of their young ones, that the philosophers write, they will
pass through the fire to defend and succor them, and as that man therefore is
not to be esteemed a good laborer that does only content him self to continue
and preserve the tees which he has found planted by his aunceters, except he
also endeuer him self to plant others to serve his posterity: So in like
manner he is not to be judged a good and profitable Citizen, that does think
the people that are in the common wealth where he inhabiteth to be a number
sufficient, except he do enforce him self to augment and increase the same
for the time to come, and to yield to his posterity by Nature, that which he
has received of his Aunceters. And also if we will enter into our selves, and
judge indifferently of things, what shall we find in this caducall and
transitory world more meeter for man than a woman? what is there more
pleasant and profitable to man's contentation (being subject to many myseries
and calamities) than to communicate daily at his own liberty and pleasure,
and that with mutual good will, with his faithful wife, the keeper of all his
secrets, and faithful treasourer of all his passions and sorrows? and as
touching other humayne frendeshippes, for the most part they be full of
guyles, dyssimulations and periuries: and oftentimes when Fortunes does frown
upon us, such friends become like unto Swallows, which take their flight in
the winter, and if it happen a man to find a faithful friend, oftetimes the
friendship does not continue between them till death, for men's natures are so
diverse, that commonly they embrace a new friend, and leave the old: but the
friendship and love of Matrimony is not broken or infected by any Hypocrisy or
dissimulation, nor is never taken away nor extincte by the furious assaults of
adverse fortune, but it continues even unto the grave, yea oftentimes it
endures for ever. But what more greater testimony of fervent amity can there
be, than to leave the father and mother, brother and sister, and generally all
the race she is descended off, yea and even to become enemy to her self to
follow his husband, whom she honoreth and loves, and have all other things in
misliking, and depend wholly of him. If we be rich she keeps our goods,
if we be poor she employeth all her force and endeavor that Nature has given
her to enriche us: The love in marriage surpasses all the love in the world.
if we be in prosperity, our felicities are doubled in her, to see her
partaker of our wealths: if we be in adversity, she comfort, assisteth,
and serves us: if we will remain solitary in our houses, she then does
continue with us to comfort us, and makes us to disgeste the more easily the
incommoditie of our carfulness: if we go to the wars, she always
beholds us with the eyes of her mind, and does honor us, and desire us
being absent, and seems as though she were transformed into our selves: if
we be upon our return, she receives us, and entertayneth us with all the
delicates and daynties she can devise, in such manner that if we should say
the truth, it seems certainly that the woman should be a gift and comfort
sent from heaven, as well to assuage the heat and lustiness of our youth, as
for a comfort and last refuge of our age. And where Nature can not give us
but one father and one mother, marriage does present unto us many children, who
do reverence and honor us, and we hold them as dear unto us, as our own
flesh, who when they are young and little ones do with their pratlings, in
learning to speak, and others their toys and fantasies, give us such pleasure
and contentation of mind, that it seems nature has given them to us as
things to deceive the time, and to pass over part of this our miserable
lives. If we be asseeged with old age (a thing that is common to all men) they
do comfort and relieve us therein until death come, and then they render us
to the earth from whence we came, they be our bones, our flesh, and our
blood, and seeing them, we behold and see our own selves, who do make the
memory of us never to die, and do as it were make us immortal. And further,
they do procreate and engender others after us, as do twigges that are cut off
from any tree, and grafted upon an other, bring forth the like. Some nice
persons will allow very well of marriage, that it is holy, commendable, and
profitable for the conservation of our lives, so far forth as it be well
accomplished in all points, and that nothing go a wrie: but if it chance the
woman to be dishonest, the children unhappy and out of order, with such other
incommodities, which oftentimes accompany the marriage, what rage? what fury?
what Roses among thorns? what Worm wood with Honey? what pleasantness mixed
with bitterness is there then say they: But I do fully answer such nice
Gentlemen that be so curious in their affections, so delicate in their
pleasures, and that think nothing well except it be seasoned with the sauce
of their own appetites, that such Eclipses and infirmities that continually
follow in marriage, do not proceed of the cause of marriage it self, but often
times of man's naughtiness, The virtuous husbands give occasion to their
wives to be discrete and wise
according to the old Proverb, which says: an evil man makes an evil
woman, which Cato (a very severe man in all his doings, but yet just and right
in this) does confirm, saying: that it is a more harder thing to find a good
husband, than a good Senator: Because that the most part of women that are
become vicious, are commonly infected and made naught by the wanton lives and
evil examples of their husbands, who ought to be as lamps that should shine
unto them by the well ordring their manners. For if they be spotted or defiled
with any manner of vice or crime, it is very contagious and dangerous for their
wives. Behold lo, how often times we do accuse matrimony (that is pure and
neat in it self) which if it had a tung and could speak, would complain of
us. Petrark (a great reuerencer of chastity) in his Dialogue of the remedy of
adverse fortune, writes, that it is very seldom seen, a wanton husband to
have a chaste wife: as contrary a wise and chaste husband, an unchaste wife,
which thing Plutarch confirms in his connubial precepts: when he says that
the husbands that is given to be common, and that gives himself in pray to
other women, he sets an ensign and mark at his gates to convey others to
do the like to his own wife. S. Augustine that great Father of the Church in
his Book De ciuitate Dei, exhorts men to be the same to their wives that
they would have their wives to be to them, if you desire says he, to have
your wives modest, chaste, and sobre, you, which are the heads and chief,
must give the first testimony and example in your selves: (and yet he
concludes that very hardely any chaste man shall bridle a vicious and an
impudente woman, or a wise and discrete man a foolish woman: because
oftentimes God does punish the one of them by the other:) which lesson Seneca
(the most virtuous of the Ethnicke Philosophers) did not forgette to have in
remembrance when he wrote to Lucillus, who prayed him he would teach him to
make a drink, and the certain receipte thereof, without any poison therein,
which should have virtue to cause him to be beloved of his wife, A loving drink
to cause a man to be beloved of his wife.
without using any sorcerie or enchantment. Will thou be beloved and honored of
thy wife (said he) love her and entreat her courteously and gently, for I do
assure thee there is neither charm, sorcerie, nor any other medicine more
meet or apt to win her, than to use such measure of love toward her, as thou
do couette to receive of her again. Notwithstanding al these aucthorities
before rehearsed, yet I am well assured that many will not be satisfied nor
answered in those things: for there are some yt stand so much in their own
foolishness, yt think they shall win themselves great fame to inuey against
marriage, who for ye better proof of their matter, will allege many wicked
marriage and unlucky matches greatly displeasing God, wherein there has been
found some women so dissolute and so far out of order in their lives, yt they
have not thought it enough to violate and break the matrimonial honor, but
also (as women rooted in all mischief) have poisoned, killed and murdered
their own husbands, yea and embrued their hands in the blood of their
natural children, a thing so detestable, that the Historiographers have had in
horror, and greatly feared to put the same in writing. But I will desire such
curious gentlemen that follow the nature of Serpents, turning all that they
touch into venime, that they will put in balance against these monstrous
marriages (which they speak of) an infinite number of other marriages so well
matched and accomplished in all things, that it seemed that heaven and nature
did take great pain to frame them, for a testimony of their worthiness, and
that in such sort, that neither death, nor time it self (that puts all
things in forgetfulness) cannot take away the memory of them amongs me^. As
for example, the love of Alcestes with her companion, the love of Iules with
his Pompey, Parcia with Cato, Artemisia with her spouse, Hipsicrates with the
great king Mithridates and many others rehearsed in the holy Scriptures, which
have been so joyful to them, that they have not only triumphed and rejoiced
in the sorrow and torments happening unto them for the same, but even in death
it self, so that for one which ye shall find condemned in the Histories,
ye shall find a Million of others commendable and virtuous.

But if we will try all estates that do live or be dead with such a touch
stone, and wey all our actions in so just a balance, where has there been
any found so holy in this mortal life that has not haulted or offended in
some thing? And that the same shall not be found untrue, note the first estate
of this world was made of two persons, that is the man and woman, who both two
did offend. The second estate which was their two children, the one was a
murderer of the other his brother. The third estate which was Noe, was derided
of his children, wherewith the Lord our God was offended. Let us go further
to the kings, ye shall find that David was a good man, and Saul an evil man,
amongs the Prophets, Daniel a good man, and Balaam wicked: amongs the estate of
widowhead Judith a good woman, and Iesabell an evil woman: amongs rich men Job
was good, and Nabal curssed: in the estate of Apostles. S. Peter was a godly
man, and Judas a Traitor, so that even amongs those that followed Christ, there
were some found wicked. Behold now then how to be either good or badde, it
comes not of the estate of marriage, but of our naughtiness and corrupt
inclination: As ye see of the sweet flower the Be gathers Honey, and the
Spider poison. There is yet one third kind of people, which be the most
fondest and most scrupulous of all others, for they be such, that what so ever
thing is offered to them, if it be not confirmable to their own sensual
appetite, they can not digest it. And if they feel the least annoyance in the
world in marriage, it is to them a hot iron which burns and tormenteth them,
so that they disdain and refuse it, and wish that the memory thereof were
utterly extincte and forgotten. Such manner of people complain of marriage,
because say they, it is an heavy burden, a very sea of mischief, and an
extreme servitude: specially for the unquietness of the women who are always
complaining, if they lack any thing at any time, they never cease to torment
and vex their husbands.

I would demand of such Nicets, how they can endure any grievous injury of
their enemies, An answer to them that do complain of marriage.
when they can not abide any light offense of their wives, (their companio^s
and continual friends) or the exclamation of their children which they have
bred and brought up into this world? For as much as such troubles be common,
and as it were annexed to marriage, and that many there be for that respect do
contemn marriage, I will study to satisfy their delicate desires and
appetites at more leisure. But for this present it shall suffice me to
advertise them when they feel them selves tempted with impacience, and that
they can not endure any small offense of their wives and children, let them
remember what offenses they do daily commit to our Lord God, and they shall
always bear things patiently, and in a moment God will turn it to dust. And
he will not only do this for them, but further he will aid them with the
clearenesse of the Sun, the lightness of the Moon, with the virtue of the
elements, with the fruits of the earth, and with other infinite necessaries of
his goodness and mercy. And not withal the patience of Jesus Christ, The
patience of Jesus Christ toward his creatures.
and what he suffered for us, he was made naked to clothe us, he was prysonner,
and bound to deliver us from the bands of the Devil, he made Sacrifise to
purify us from all inward spots, he had his side opened to shut us out of
hell, he had his hands (which made heaven and earth) for the love of us, to
be pierced with many nails of iron, he had his head crouned with sharp
thorns, to crown us with a crown of glory. Let us mark withal (impaciente
and ungrateful men that we are,) that of his sorrow came our joy, of his
infirmity grew our health, and that of his death, was derived our life, and we
shall be ashamed and blushe that we do not bear the infirmities and weakness
of our household, or any small offense of our wives, who sometimes forced even
upon just cause or choler, is constrained for the infirmity that is in her to
say unto us with anger, that which she can not with patience well bear. And I
am sure there is none of us more greater than Caesar, Ethnickes patie^t in
injuries don to them.
either in Council, hardiness or power: yet he never revenged him self upon
Catullus, which wrote so ignomious verses against him. And who was ever more
greater than Cato, whose roabe Lentulus did rent, and scratched him by the face
in defending one that was accused? And always he bore it patiently. A disciple
of Zeno the Philosopher, being demanded of his Father what profit he got by
the study of Philosophy, answered he learned to suffer and bear injuries.

If therefore the superstitious Philosophers have taught those things, what
ought they to do that make their whole and faithful profession of
Christianity? Learn then you Christians that do so burn with choler and
impacience in your houses, learn (I say) of the Ethnickes to moderate your
anger, and refrain your passions hereafter, by their examples. But now to
return again to our first matter, seeing that marriage is so noble, so
excellent and holy, and that it is the only conseruer of our humanity, let us
commend it, esteem it, and honor it as a heavenly and special gift of God,
which he has sent out of his throne above to us beneath, for the comfort of
our lives. For if it be banished and estraunged from us, it shall happen to us,
as Xerxes that great king of Persia said of an infinite number of people that
he did behold upon the top of a hill, when he said (weeping bitterly:) Oh
miserable and unfortunate creature man that thou art, behold, that of so many
Millions that do now at this present day live upon the earth, an hundredth
years from hence there shall not be one living. Who can not then frame
himself to marriage, and learn to live in the pleasant bonds thereof, as a
thing most necessary and wholesome for mankind, which being taken away from us,
al flourishing common wealths and triumphante Cities shall remain desolate,
and be only peopled with trees, rotten stocks, rocks, and savage beasts.
But contrary by the aid and benefit thereof, they shall be quickened, co^serued,
and maintained in their essence and eternity. Seeing then that the Lord our
God will have marriage, the laws command it, honesty calls us to it,
reason exhorts us, nature leads us, necessity constrains us, and the very
bones and ashes of our ancestors and parents (that repose in their
sepulchers) do crave and require it, let us receive it, honor it, and maintain
it, with such innocence, purity, and sincerity of mind, as that it be not
brought in condemnation at the last day against us, before God the just judge
and searcher of all secrets.

FINIS.
quod James Chillester.


