INSTITVTIONS OF CHRISTIAN REligion, framed out of Gods word, and the writings
of the best Divines, methodically handled by Questions and Answers, fit for all
such as desire to know, or practice the will of God.

Written in Latin by WILLIAM BVCANVS Professor of Divinity in the University
of LAVSANNA.

And published in English by ROBERT HILL, Bachelor in Divinity, and Fellow of
Saint John's College in Cambridge, for the benefit of our English Nation, to
which is added in the end the practice of Papists against Protestant Princes.

PROVE. 16.16. How much better is it to get wisdom than gold? and to get
understanding, is more to be desired than silver.

Printed at London, by George Snowdon, and Leonell Snowdon. 1606.

King David's Testament to his son Solomon.
ANd thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches al hearts, and
understands all imaginations of thoughts: If thou seek him, he will be found
of thee: but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 1. Chron.
28.9. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND hopeful young Lords, Robert Deuoreux, Earl
of Essex, son in Law to the most Honorable, Thomas, Earl of Suffolk, and
to Sir William Cecill, Knight of the Bathe, Lord of Cranborne, son and heir
to the most worthy Lord, Robert Earl of Salisbury: grace, and Peace.
RIght Honorable: It has pleased God to give us in this Church, very many
remarkable testimonies of his mercy, whether we look to the heavens above
us, the earth beneath us, our Princes who rule us, our Pastors who teach us,
our laws which command us, or the singular mercies which we have received, or
the fearful judgments which we have escaped. Our heaven is not brass, as it
was in Achabs time 1 K. 17, 1, ^
, our earth is not barren, as it was in Pharaohs time Genesis 41, 55
: our Princes are not Lions, as the princes of Judah Zeph, 3.3
: our Pastors are not wolves, as were the shepherds of Israel Math, 7, 15
: our Laws which command us, are not as the Laws of Draco: and our mercies
received, are Gods mercies: our judgments escaped, are men's cruelties. Yet, of
all the testimonies of Gods love unto us, this is, and ought, to be esteemed
the greatest, that we are come out of Babylon, know God in Christ, may read the
scriptures, hear Gods word, be partakers of the sacraments, pray in a known
tongue, worship the true God, and that of mortal and sinful men, we are made
the immortal, and righteous children of God.

But, because we are so blinded with the love of this world, that we see not,
or perceive not this note of Gods love: therefore the Apostle John sets an
Ecce upon it, and says, behold, what love the father has given us, that we
should be called the sons of God 1 Ioh. 3.^
. Behold we therefore, not the love of Sampson to Delila Judge. 14.3
, for that was a wanton love, nor the love of Iaakob to Rahel Gen, 29.17
, for that was a carnal love, nor the love of David to Jonathan 1 Samuel, 18.3
, for that was an humane love, but the love of God to man, the Creator to his
Creature, and a good father, to a multitude of prodigal and rebellious
children.

He loved us in our creation, for he made us men, but more in our redemption,
for he mad us saints: he created us with a word of his mouth, he redeemed us by
the blood of his son: he created us when we were nothing, he redeemed us
when we were worse then nothing: he created us to live before him on earth, he
redeemed us to live with him in heaven. He created us, and so did he others, he
redeemed us, but did not redeem others. He has not dealt so with every
nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws Psalm. 147 ^^
. If there were in us, either Nobility of birth, or comelines of beauty, or
correspondence of virtue, or abundance of riches, our God might love and like
us for these, as men do affect and follow us for these. But since, by descent
we are Cananites, EZ. 16.3:
by deformity polluted in our own blood, v. 6
by sin, there is none that does good, no not one Romans 3, 12
, and that our poverty is such, that we are poor, naked, and miserable
creatures Revel. 3.1^
, it is not our old birth, but the new birth, not our own beauty, but Gods
bounty, not our virtue, but Gods grace, not our goods, but Gods goodness, by
which we become Gods children.

If I were (Right honorable) as profound as Paul, as eloquent as Apollos, as
devout as David, and as zealous as the Prophet Elias was, I could neither
express the quantity of this love, it is so great, nor the quality of this
love, it is of such efficacy. By this favor of God, we of servants, become sons
Gal. 4.4
, of enemies frinds Romans 5.10
, of divorced, espoused Hos. 2, 20
, of prophan, priests Revel. 1.6
, of captives kings Revel. 5.8
of Cananites, Israelites Acts. 11.26,
, of heathens, christians, of inheritors of hell, heirs, nay fellow heirs,
with Jesus Christ Romans 8, 17.
. By this favor we enjoy, the forgiveness of sins, peace of conscience, joy in
the holy ghost, protection of angels, the communion of saints, audience in
praying, acceptance in obeying, security in life, comfort in death, and eternal
glory after we be dead. By this favor we are written in Gods book, receive a
new name, incorporated into Christ's body, clothed with Christ's righteousness,
endued with Christ's spirit, and one day shall be partakers of his glory.

But as Augustine was swallowed up, by the admiration of Gods Majesty: so am I
with the consideration of this mercy; I say of this mercy, which is given us by
the father, purchased by the son, assured by the holy ghost, offered in the
word, sealed in the sacraments, apprehended by faith, tried by tribulation,
and, though not deserved by us, yet reserved for us in the highest heavens. Is
God our father? behold our dignity, are we his children? learn we our duty.
The consideration of this dignity, made Theodosius to thank God more, that he
was a christian then a King, Moses to refuse the crown of Egypt Heb. 11.24
, David to desire the place of gods doorekeeper Psalm. 84.10.
, and Paul to make a base account of all things in this world Philip. 3.9.
. The consideration of this duty made Abell to sacrifice his sheep Genesis 4.4
, Gen, 26.
Abraham to sacrifice his son, and the Romans to sacrifice themselves Rom, 12.1
, Joseph to fly adultery Gen, 39.9
, the three children to fly idolatry Dan, 3, 16
, Nehemiah to fly tyranny Neh* 5, 15
, and all Gods children to abandon impiety 1 Ioh. 3, 4,
. Now then, If we call him father, which without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work, let us pass the time of our dwelling here in
fear, knowing that we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
gold, from our vain conversation, received by the tradition of the fathers,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as af a Lamb undefiled, and without spot
1 Pet. 1:17
.

And surely, God is our father though Abraham be ignorant of us, says the
Prophet Isa. 63.16
. For, he begets us by the seed of the word James, 1, 18:
, gives us a new name Revel. 2, 17
, nourceth us with the milk of the gospel Hebr, 5, 12
, instructs us in true religion Ier. 31, 33
, teaches us even civil conversation Coloss, 4, 5
, and provides instructors to teach us more M^t, 28, 20
yea he places us in our callings Gen, 2, 15
, is an example of holiness 1 Pet. 1, 16
, corrects us when we sin Prove. 3, 11
, tries our obedience Genesis 22.2
, exercises our patience Job. 1, 16
, deferreth our petitions Math 15, 23
, and pitieth us us when we be in misery Psalm. 103.13
. He, as a good father, provides for us in this life 1, Pet, 5.7,
, protecteth us against wrongs 2 K. 6.16.17
, is sorry when we sin Psalm, 81.13
, glad when we do well Prove, 10, 1,
, admonishes us of dangers Revel. 18.4
, bears with our wants Psalm. 103, 9, 10
, hears our cries Ioh, 15, 16
, and for our sakes is good unto others Genesis 39.3
. To conclude this, he loves us all, but most of all such as fear him most
Gen, 6.8
, he is not ashamed of us in our poorest estates Hebr, 15, 19,
, he blesses us as Iaakob did his children Gen, 49, 2
, and, like good father Abraham, all that he has belongs unto us Gen, 25, 5
. God is your father, you see your dignity: men think it a great dignity to be
borne of the blood royal, to descend of ancient families, to be blazoned by
gentry, to stand before princes, to be honored and enriched in this world, to
command many, to obey few, and to be called the sons of nobles: and so it is
indeed. But say that we could draw our pedegrees, not from the conquest, but
from the flood, yet we might as well descend of cursed Cham, as of blessed Sem.
But if we can draw our pedigree from the line of Christ, it is better then to
derive it from the line of princes. To this end Iuuenall said well.

Tota licet veteres exornent vndique cerae,
Atria, nobilitas sola est atque vnica, virtus.
Though all thine house about, with ancient arms be set,
As sole and sure Nobility, see that thou virtue get.
And better another.

In relligione, vera virtus,
In virtute, vera nobilitas.
True virtue, is in piety,
In virtue, true nobility.
But Prudentius best of all, as I once writ to an honorable family To the
Honorable House of the Mon^ag^^^.
.

Generosa Christi secta nobilitat vir^t,
Cui quisquis seruit, ille vere est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race,
Who serves this Lord, he surely is not base.
Wherefore as Ambrose said to Auxentius, so give me leave to say to you; says
he, Quid honorificentius quam vt imperator Ecclesiae filius dicatur? What honor
can be greater, then that the Emperor should be called the son of the Church?
Of the Church? nay, say I, that noble men should be called the sons of God?

I have spoken of our dignity, but what is our duty? by this we must learn to
admire this mercy of God the father, to adore this love in God the son, to
keep this assurance in god the holy ghost: and that the more favors he has
showed to us, the more we are indebted to him. By this, we must learn, to have
this adoption written in our hearts, sealed in our consciences, and to esteem
it the greatest blessing in the world. By this we must learn, to love him who
thus loved us: for amante non amato, nihil est miserius: and to love all such
as belong unto God, for, he that loves him which begat, loves also him who
is begotten 1* John. 5.
. In a word, are we Gods children, we must love his house, not sell our
inheritance, desire to be with him, pray only unto him, depend upon his
providence, be patient with his corrections, content with his allowance, and as
glad to see his great name honored, as we would be sorry to see the Kings name
abused. And to conclude this point, as Menedemus, tutor to a kings son, said
unto him, Remember that thou art the kings son; so say I, Remember that you are
the King of Kings sons, so that you must neither think, speak, nor do any
thing but that which becomes the sons of God. I had almost forgotten the
greatest duty; we live at this day among pseudocatholick professors, who love
an Idol more the^ God, the Pope, more then the King, Italy more then England,
and who use all equiuocatory means to draw disciples after them: are we sons?
therefore depart from amongst the^, 2 Cor, 6.17 18
says the Apostle, and separate your selves, and touch none unclean thing,
and I will receive you, yea I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my
sons, and daughters says the Lord God almighty. Let us therefore separate light
from darkness God from an Idol, the Israelites from the Cananites, the precious
from the vile Ier. 15.15
, the believer from infidels, and Protestants from Papists. Let them return
unto us, but let not us return unto them: who in superstition are heathenish,
in tradition Jewish, and in treason devilish. I am the bolder right honorable
to write of this argument, because I do write unto the sons of nobles, that
thereby I may stir up your pure minds, to use all diligence to become as great
by grace, as you are by nature, and as Honorable in the Church, as you are in
the common wealth, that as you are the children of mighty men on earth, so you
may be the children of the Almighty God in heaven. If I did present this book
to some great Counselor of State, I would have used the art of Brachyography,
sh^rt vvriting: ^l^ng speech
but since I am bold to make choice of you (who as yet live under the counsel
of others) I hope it will not be offe^siue to use this Polylogye Habet hoc
proprium generosus animus (says Seneca) vt excitetur ad honesta. It is proper
to a noble mind to be excited to honest actions. When Luke did so, it was well
liked of noble Theophilus Acts ^1, ^
, when Paul did so, it was well aproued of the noble me^ of Berea Act. 17.11 ^
, and when Daniel did so, it was well taken of that great Nebucadnetzar, though
it were to the breaking off, of his sins Dan. 4.24.
. How necessary it is for young noble men to be stirred up to true nobility,
Isocrates shows by his Oration to Demonicus, Agapetus by his precepts to
Justinian, Tully by his Offices to his son, Plutarch by his institution of
children, Pythagoras by his golden verses, Phocylides by his pithy sentences,
Sir Walter Mildmay by his cou^selto his son, Solomon by the proverbs taught by
his Parents, and our noble King James by his book to Prince Henry. Remember
therefore (my Lords) that you are called Nobiles, as it were noscibiles, because
others must see wherein you excel: and that the^ you shall be noble indeed, if as
Chrysostom says, you do disdain to be servants to sins: and, as says
Apuleius, When to the nobility of birth, you adioyne also the nobility of life.
The nobility of virtue it is your own, the nobility of birth it is your
ancestors. If you be honored for the one, thank your predecessors, if for the
other, ascribe it to your selves. If you consider your Honor, many bad persons
are partakers of as great, if you look unto virtue it is appropriate only to
the good* your Honor without virtue is a Jewel of it self, your Honor with
virtue will be as a Jewel set in gold* your Honor it makes you esteemed of men,
your virtue it will cause you to be respected of God. By your Honor you may
glory in your parents, by your virtue your parents shall glory in you. By your
honor you shall command many, by your virtue you shall command your selves. Summa
apud Deum nobilitas est (says Jerome) claru^ esse virtutibus: Before God the
sovereign nobility is to be famous for virtue. To stir you up to this, I need
not to commend unto you the examples of kings before Christ, Emperors in the
primitive Church, and many heathen governors who excelled in virtue: look upon
that king under whom you do live, upon that admirable prince before whom you do
stand, and you shall see that the table of the one is a school of Divinity,
the family of the other a court of piety. Besides consider, I beseech you, that
most noble Earl Salisbury, who though by nature he be father but to one, yet
in affection and tuition he is a father to you both: does not he build his
religion upon the sacred grounds of faith and hope, His answer to certain
scandalous papers.
in the precious blood of his Redeemer, without presuming upon any particular
merits? does he not promise, Nec Deo, nec patriae, nec patri patriae deesse?
is he not an Hushay to our David against rebellious Absolon 2 Samuel 15, 37,
? a Mordecai to our Ahashuerosh againg Bightana and Teresh Hester. 6, 2
? an Antipater to our Alexander to watch when he sleeps Antipater vigilat,
? a Zopyrus to our Darius for the subduing of Babylon Herod. L: 3
? and a Zabud to our Solomon, even the Kings friend 1 King. 4, 5.
? Is he not a star in our heaven, to enlighten many? a tree in our ortyard, to
shadow many? and such an eysore to our evil sighted and blindfolded
adversaries, that next to the extinguishing the light of our Israel, they
foolishly forewarne him that they seek his life? But, the soul of that worthy
Earl shall be bounden in the bu^dle of life with the Lord his God: when the
soul of his enemies, shall be cast out, as out of the middle of a sling 1 Samuel:
25:29
. Remember him O Lord according to all the goodness which he has done for
this people Neh, 5, 19
. As therefore Alexander was moved by the virtues of Philip, Scipio the lesser
by Scipio Africanus, Octauian by Caesar, and Pyrrus by Achilles, so let the
examples of Princes in times past, of governors in this present age, and
especially of your noble progenitors, be glasses for you to behold your selves
in, that whatsoever they have gotten, it may be retained by you, and if any
thing has bin lost, by you it may be recovered. And if it please god, that the
fruit of your age be like to the sap of your youth, Si non sit viti^m in
radice, non erit in fructu: si fons pur^^s etiam ri^^ls.
the streams of your manhood be answerablie current to the fountain of your
minority, I doubt not, but the generation to come, shall as greatly rejoice at
the possession of your honors, as they are much cheered in the hope of your
virtues.

I do observe my Lords (though what can a man of my parts, and poverty observe)
that many great men in our kingdom have bin for a while like unto the great
tree which Nebucadnetzar saw in the Prophecy of Daniel Dan, 4.6
, but either by undermining Jesuits, or discontented followers, or Parasititall
servants, or enuiing of superiors, or desire of greatness, or seeking of
revenge, or excess of life, the roots of these trees have been so stubbed up,
that the place of their abode is no where to be found. The Lord grant that you
may take heed of these things (especially in your youth) that we who see you
now as Joseph and Benjamin, may see you hereafter as David and Jonathan: so
this twofold cable shall never be broken.

Quo vosfata vocant, seu quo vos fata vocabunt,
Sint semper vobis prospera fata precor.
What Destinies you present have, or have you after may,
That these to you be prosperous, my Lords, I humbly pray.
Now albeit you have many living libraries to take counsel of, yet since books
are, as one says, muti magistri, and trusty cou^selors, it is good for you to
take advise from them. By them you may confer with the prophets, speak with the
Apostles, and though Christ himself left nothing in writing, yet by them you
may read the Sermons of Christ. By these you may call a council of holy Fathers,
wise Philosophers, eloquent Orators, acute Logitians, learned Historians, and
great Mathematitians, to resolve any even the greatest doubt. In the first
place I commend unto you the word of god: which is not a dumb doctor, a nose of
wax, a Shipmans hose, a dead letter, an Inky Gospel, as our adversaries would
have it, but it is a directer of our ways, a comfort in calamity, a searcher
of the heart, mighty in operation, a lanthorn to our life, and a counselor to
the Christian statesmen of the world. Habetis oracula Dei? says Chrysostom,
ne moremini alia^ doctore^: nemo docebit vos quemadmodu^ illa. Have you the
Oracles of God? care not for other teachers, none will instruct you better then
they.

But amongst many divines which are worthy your reading, give me leave to
commend unto you this Christian Institution: The order of this author is
methodical, and manifest, setting down divinity in questions and answers, which
order of instruction is ancient in the Church, as may appear by the practice
of Augustine, and Iunilius, and many worthy writers since and before them. The
matter of this book is very profitable, being the su^me and substance, or a
body of Theology. For what point of piety may not be learned out of this book?
do you desire to know the Doctrine of one God, the trinity of persons, Christ
crucified, the holy Ghost? and the Scriptures of God? Here you have that
doctrine set down? would you be acquainted with the creation of the world, the
natures either of Angels, or mankind, or marriage, or divorce? Behold in this
book you may see them all. Is it the government of the world, the doctrine of
sin, the power of freewil, the law and the gospel, the agreement or
disagreement of the old and new Testament, which you are willing to learn?
here is a teacher fit to instruct you. Here you have a Synopsis of Faith and
repentance, justification and sanctification, of a Christians works, and
christian liberty, of prayer and predestination, of the Resurrection and last
judgment, of eternal life and eternal death. Here you may read of the true
Church, of the nature of Vows, of the Sacrametns of the old and new Testament:
and the office both of Magistrates and subjects. And concerning these
questions, whatsoever is material, in Luther, Melancton, Calvin, Peter Martyr,
Zanchius, Hipperius, Hemingius, Vrsinus, and the rest, it is here set before
you in one view. How necessary it is for young men, especially young noble men
to read such books, the seasoning of their tender years with piety, and the
future good which may come by this to posterity, does easily prove. If young
Alexander will be studious of philosophy, why shall not young Theodosius be
studious in divinity? if he said to his master, mallem singulari disciplina
quam potentia praestare, why should not you say, mallemus Christiana disciplina
quam potentia praestare? But as Alexander was offended with his tutor Aristotle
in making common those acroamatical books in which he alone desired to excel:
so many, I fear me, will be offended with me, in making this book familiar
to all, which many would have to be reserved for Divines. If any be scandalized
at this labor of mine, it is an offense taken not given, I desire with Moses,
that all people might prophecy: and since the Jesuits by their late invented
Catechismes, have made thousands skillful in errors, why should not we who
are Christians, labor by institutions, to make ten thousands skillful in the
truth? We commend them who bring us either commodities, or drugs, or delites,
or fashions, or fruits, or trees from foreign countries: and shall we
discommend them who to the building of our Church, do bring from other
countries even the gold of Ophir?

Now, right Honorable, having finished this book, I am bold to present it to
your most Honorable patronage: and as that most Reverend father, the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, commended to us students of our University,
Caluins Institutions, so do I commend unto you Bucanus Institutions. You have,
both of you, bin two worthy members of our two Universities, and the one The
Lord of Cranborne
is now in, and of that famous College of Saint John the Evangelist, where I
have bin fellow, now near eighteen years. If it please your Honors to pardon
my boldness, to peruse diligently mine Epistle, and to be as willing to read
this excellent book, as Alphonsus did Tully, Erasmus did Terence, Bishop
Jewel did Horace, the Lady Jane did Plato, and Antoninus the Emperor did read
all good books, I have all that I desire or expect. The God of Heaven so
bless you, that, whether you travail abroad, or stay in this Kingdom, you
may so, by your Christian Tutors, be seasoned with piety in your youth, that,
learning with those young children, to sing an Hosanna Math. 21, 9.
, to Christ in your life, you may after this life ended, with the blessed
Saints, sing Halleluiah Revel. 19.10
to him in the Highest Heavens. London, Saint Martins in the fields. March. 3.
1606.

Your Honors to command, Robert Hill.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, as the writings of God do testify that Antichrist shall be
consumed by a breath: so the writings of men do also testify, that the same
Antichrist shall be weakened by rags. The breath which shall consume him, is the
preaching of the Gospel: the rags which shall weaken him are printed papers.
If he be burned by the one, bless God for good preachers, if decayed by the
other, thank painful writers. That these two are the means which must
ruinate Antichrist, we may see by the practice of our Antichristian
adversaries. For though they have many who declame against us, yet will they
suffer none to preach Jesus Christ: and though they have many to write against
us, Read the inhibition of preaching and Printing, by Queen Mary in the book
of martyrs
yet few will they suffer to read their own controversies. That they want
Christ preached, behold their misery: that we have him preached, see our
felicity: that their people dare not read books, mark the tyranny of the
pope: that we have liberty to read so many worthy books, note the goodness
of God, and care of our governors. To this end authority permits many
excellent books daily to be published: and though much reading be a weariness
to the flesh, and many books bring confusion to students, yet as the stomach
must be preserved by variety of meats, so the mind must be cherished with
variety of writers. That thou may be moved to read old divinity in a new
fashion I have published in English this excellent discourse: which, because it
is the quintessence of the best writers of our age, I doubt not but it will be
welcome unto thee. If thou look for order, few books more methodicall: if
for matter few more Judicial, if for brevity few more compendious, if for
plainnes few more perspicuous, if for use few more precious. And if either
emulation amongst Stationers hinder not the sale, as it does the sale of many
excellent books, or the delight of vain books do not hinder thee from reading
it, as it does many from the best things, I doubt not but thou shall have cause
to say of this worthy man, as Solomon says of a worthy woman, many Doctors
have done learnedly, but thou surmountest them all. Buy this truth but sell it
not: read this book, but forget it not. Thou shall buy much for little cost,
and read much to thy great gain. Thus I commend thee to the grace of God, and
my self to the grace of thy prayers.

Thine and the Churches in the Lord. Robert Hill.

A Table of all the Common Places, and their several heads, handled in this
excellent Book, in which are answered, one thousand five hundred and seauenty
Questions.
The 1. Place. OF God, and page. 1. The blessed Trinity, page. 7. Place. 2. Of
Christ. page. 13 Of his person. page. 14 Of Phrases. page. 20 Of his office.
page. 24
Place. 3. Of the Holy Ghost. page. 28 Of personal properties. page. 33
Place. 4. Of the Scriptures. page. 37 Place. 5. Of the worlds creation, page.
48 And the parts thereof. page. 54
Place. 6. Of Angels in General. page. 64 Of good Angels. page. 67
Place. 7. Of evil Angels or Devils. page. 77 Place. 8. Of Man. page. 88 Of
the soul of man. page. 90
Place. 9. Of Gods Image in man. page. 99 Place. 10. Of Original
Righteousness. page. 104 Place. 11. Of man's free will before the fall page.
106 Of man's state before his fall, page. 110
Place. 12. Of Marriage ordained by God before the fall, and after confirmed
again by God. page. 112 Of the degrees of consanguinitie, and affinity. page.
120
Place. 13. Of Divorce. page. 129 Place. 14. Of the Government of the world or
of Gods providence. page. 139 Place. 15. Of sin in General, especially of
Original sin. page. 154 Place. 16. Of Actual sin. page. 170 Place. 17. Of
sin against the holy Ghost. page. 175 Place. 18. Of freewill after the fall.
page. 181 of the causes of conversion. page. 185
Place. 19. Of the Law. page. 189 Place. 20. Of the Gospel. page. 202 Place.
21. Of the agreement and disagreeme^t of the Law and the Gospel. page. 209
Place. 22. Of the agreement, and discrepancie of the Old and New Testament.
page. 213 Place. 23. Of the Passion and death of Christ. page. 224 Place. 24.
Of the Burial of Christ. page. 238 Place. 25. Of Christ's descending into Hell.
page. 245 Of Limbus. page. 247
Place. 26. Of the Resurrection of Christ. page. 253 Place. 27. Of the
ascension of Christ. page. 265 Of Heaven. page. 270
Place. 28. Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of his father. page. 276
Place. 29. Of Faith. page. 287 Place. 30. Of Repentance. page. 309 Of
confession. page. 322 Of satisfaction. page. 323
Place. 31. Of man's Justification before God page. 328 How Justification and
Regeneration differ. page. 344
Place. 32. Of Good works. page. 359 Of merits. page. 367
Place. 33. Of Christian liberty. page. 379 Of things indifferent page. 386 Of
Traditions. page. 388
Place. 34. Of Offenses. page. 392 Place. 35. Of prayers. page. 401 Of
Invocation of Saints. page. 407
Place. 36. Of Predestination. page. 421 Of Election page. 430 Of Reprobation
page. 439
Place. 37. Of the last Resurrection. page. 451 Place. 38. Of the last
Judgment. page. 466 Place. 39. Of eternal life. page. 482 Place. 40. Of
eternal death. page. 494 Of Hell. page. 498
Place. 41. Of the Church. page. 501 Place. 42. Of the Ministry, and
Ministers of the Church. page. 530 Of their calling. page. 548 Of imposition of
hands. page. 553
Place. 43. Of the power and authority of the Church. page. 570 Of Synods
page. 581
Place. 44. Of the government of the church page. 586 Of Excommunication. page.
593 Of Anathematizing page. 597 Of Fasting. page. 600
Place. 45. Of Vows. page. 609 (615 Place. 46. Of the Sacraments in general.
page. 615 Of circumcision page. 631 Of the Passover. page. 640 Of the
sacrifices of the old and New Testament. page. 648. and 675.
Place. 47. Of Baptism. page. 695 Of John's Baptism. page. 699 Of Baptizing of
Infants page. 715 Of Exorcisme. page. 729 Of imposition of names. page. 731
Place. 48. Of the Lords Supper. page. 741 Of the Mass. page. 743 Of taking
away the Cup. page. 750 Of the Sacrifice in the Supper. page. 764 Of
miracles. page. 789 Of Gods Omnipotency. page. 793 Of the circumscription of
Christ's body. page. 798 Of our Communion with Christ. page. 908
Place. 49. Of Magistrates. page. 854 Of revenge. page. 865 Of Judgments.
page. 875 Of war. page. 881 Of Equity. page. 891 Of Laws. page. 892 Of
Subjects. page. 893 That papists make it lawful to murder princes. page. 902

Page 611. Line, 16. for consent read constraint. Page, 860. lin. 26, men's
minds for man's mind, The rest pardon: as also that, one or two short questions
are omitted.

WHAT IS THE MAINE AND MOST principal point in sacred Divinity?
COncerning God: For this is life eternal (says Christ, Ioh. 17.3.) that they
acknowledge thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

How do you prove that there is a God?
1. Out of the book of Nature, or the works of God.

2. Out of the book of the Scripture, or the word of God.

The book of Nature, is this universal world, which is so called because of
the beauty, furniture, order and use thereof. All which do proclaim the
chief-builder thereof to be most wise, most mighty, and most bountiful: but
of all the rest man, being (...)
a little world, whether you respect his soul and the faculties thereof, or the
frame of his body, and the manifold and worthy use of the parts of this
frame, does prove and commend the workman: as Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows the work of his hands. Day unto
day utters the same, and night unto night shows knowledge Psalm. 104.2. Romans
1.19.20. and 2.15. Act. 14.15.16.17. and 17.23.27.
. Yea every herb declares that there is a God Mat. 6.26.26.28. Gal. 4.8.
. Yet this knowledge is very imperfect, and very weak, and no ways
auailable to salvation 1. Cor. 1.21.
: which notwithstanding makes men without excuse Romans 1.20.
. Whereupon Tertullian said: First God sent Nature to be our schoole-dame,
purposing afterward to send the word; that so having learned in the school of
Nature, we might the more easily believe the word of God. So then as when I see
an house, I say there has bin a Carpenter though I see him not: so when I
look upon the frame of this world, I must say, it had a builder, though I
behold him not.

Show me the principal reasons to prove that there is a God.
First, because there is motion in the world. Now nothing can be moved but by
some being, which actually is. 2. Because there must be a primarie cause, on
which all the rest depend. 3. Because all things are directed to an end. Whence
it must needs be, that there is some one supreme Spirit, which does order all
things, not only to their special ends, but also to some one sovereign end.
Prou. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself. 4. Because it
necessarily follows, that there must be some Summum Bonum, and first Being,
which may be the cause of goodness, existence, and perfection in the rest. 5.
Because no cause is worse then his effect: now there are creatures which use
reason, and a wise order, therefore the cause of these creatures must needs be
most wise. 6. Because man's conscience after sin committed, does naturally stand
in fear of a supreme Judge. 7. Because upon grievous sins (even in this
life) there are inflicted grievous punishments. Psa. 37.36.38.11.8. Because al
nations, be they never so barbarous, are persuaded that there is a God.

Which is the book of Scripture?
That which by way of excellency is called the Bible, namely, the writings of
the old and new Testament, whereof the holy Ghost is the immediate author. Of
which book the Psalmist speaks in the 19. Psalm. 8. 2. Sam. 22.2. 2. Pet. 1.21.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of
Jehovah is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple.

How many ways has the Lord revealed himself in the books of the Scripture?
1. By the word, or by certain oracles.

2. By sundry testimonies added unto the word.

By what oracles?
Genesis 1.31. God said, God created, God saw that all which he had cr^ated was
very good.

By what testimonies?
1* By that admirable work of Creating the whole world of nothing Genesis 1.1.
.

2. By famous miracles, as namely, by delivering the children of Israel out of
Egypt. Exodus 20.2. By leading them through the red sea without wetting of their
feet Exodus 14.21.22.
. By feeding them without any ordinary bread, for the space of forty years
in the wilderness Exodus 16.4.13.14 15. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
. By causing the Sun to stand still, Joshua. 10.13. And by causing the Sun
to go backward at the prayers of king Hezechiah. 2. King. 20 11. By raising of
the dead 2. King. 4.33. and 11.21. Mat. 9.25. Luke 7 15. Ioh. 11.43.3.44.
. 1. Kin. 17.22. And by many other wonderful works and miracles.

3. By diverse visions, whereby the Lord did offer himself to be seen of men
in visible forms and likenesses. In which manner he appeared unto Adam, both
before and after his fall; to Noah before and after the flood, to Abraham ten
times, to Isaac twice, to Jacob seven times, to Moses often, and so to diverse
others.

4. By foretelling of things to come, by the Prophets, and by the event of the
same.

5. By promising and exhibiting of Christ the Messiah, Ioh. 1.18. No man has
seen God at anytime, the Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
revealed him. And therefore Christ says to Philip, Ioh. 14.9. He that sees me
sees the Father.

6. By the inward, lively, and effectual revelation of the holy Ghost, which
is only bestowed upon the Elect.

What then is that is reported Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart,
There is no God?
This is answered Psalm. 10.11. That such deny not so much the being of God, as
the providence of God. Again, they that take from God his judgment, deny in
truth that there is a God. And howsoever some have in word denied that there is
a God, yet in deed they have witnessed that they thought the contrary, which
is plain out of Suetonius in the life of Caligula.

But no man has seen God at any time.
Why, we see not our soul, yet we have a soul; we see not the fountains of
waters, yet there are fountains; we see not the wind, yet there is a wind; and
we see not God, yet there is a God, invisible in himself, but in his works,
though obscurely and imperfectly, visible to us.

What things are we to know concerning God?
1. What God is.

2. What a God he is, or how he is affected toward us.

What is God?
For the word (...) it is either derived of a verb that signifies to run,
because God runs through all things: (...) currere, vel (...) cernere, or
(...) timor. God is Jehovah Elohim.
or else of a word that signifies to behold, because he beholds all things,
or else of a word that signifies to fear, because men are moved for fear to
worship him. And God is an Essence, spiritual, incomprehensible, almighty,
immortal, infinite, love it self, mercy it self, justice it self,
holiness it self, purity it self, goodness it self, wisdom it self,
long suffering it self, and bountifulness it self: which is the Father who
from all eternity begat the Son, coeternall with himself, and of the same
substance with the Father: and the Son not made nor created, but begotten of
the Father from all eternity: and the holy Ghost proceeding from them both,
the Father and the Son, the Creator and conseruer of all things, the Redeemer
and sanctifier of the Elect Ioh. 4.24. 1. Tim. 1.17 Iam. 1.17. Ap. 1.8. Ier.
23.24. 1 John 4.8.16. Exodus 34.6.7. Mat. 5.44.
. Which is no definition (for he that is supersubstantiall, and
incomprehensible, cannot be defined) but such a description as sufficiently
contains all such things as in this life are necessary for us to know, for
the service of God and our salvation.

Is there one God only, or whether be there more?
One only. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear o Israel, the Lord thy God is one God alone 1.
Sam. 2.2. Esa. 41.4. and 44.6. Mark. 12 32.
. And so 1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is no other God but one alone Ephesians. 4.6. 1. Timoth. 2.5.
. And seeing the true God is most high, and most infinite actually, therefore
there can be no more but one God: because there can be no more but one that is
above all, neither any more but one infinite. And this one God is manifested to
us by such testimonies as cannot deceive, to wit, by miracles, prophecies, and
other things which by his omnipotent nature may be done.

How is God said to be one?
Neither by a genus nor species, but in essence and in number, or in regard of
his nature: because there is one only essence of God, and that indivisible.

Why does the Scripture make mention of Elohim, Gods, joining that word as well
with the plural as singular number?
Not to the end that it should make a multitude of Gods, or divide the essence,
but to distinguish the persons: because, though there be one person of the
Father, another person of the Son, and another of the holy Ghost: yet the
Father is not another thing, or another God distinct from the Son and the
holy Ghost: the Son is not another thing, or another God distinct from the
Father and the holy Ghost: neither is the holy Ghost another thing or another
God distinct from the Father and the Son: because the nature of God is but
one and indivisible, although the Father be one, the Son another, and the holy
Ghost another. And therefore they are not of diverse natures, of another and
diverse substance, not conjoined or knit together in one substance, (as men
which have one common essence) not only of the like substance, but of one and
the same substance, having the same essence, the same eternity, the same will,
the same operation, the same power, and the same glory. Phil. 2.6.

How many ways is the name of God taken in the Scriptures?
Two ways: properly for the substance, essence, and nature: and improperly.
Now it is taken properly, or for the essence, when it is taken (...) without
the distinction of any one of the persons, as Ioh. 4.24. God is a spirit, where
God is taken for the whole essence of the Deity, as is also the name Jehovah.
Or else (...), personally, when there is joined unto the name of God the name
of the person: as God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost. Or when
the Father is opposed to the Son, who is very God, and the second Person in
the Trinity, as Romans 7.25. I thank God by Jesus Christ. So Romans 8.3 the
Father is called God, the word Father being used personally, because the Person
sending is opposed to the Person sen^

Improperly, when it is attributed to Angels or men: and truly, either in
regard of their office Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.6.
, or else in respect of the revealing of the will of God, and of their reverence
Exodus 7.2.
: falsely, either by error; or else by usurpation and custom, as 1. Cor. 8.5.
or else by worshipping them. 2. Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.19.

Be there any parts or kinds of God?
None at all, because he is a most simple essence, which does admit no
composition or division; and simply, and in every respect of unity one, and in
act most infinite.

Are there any causes of God?
Not any, for he is the cause of all causes.

Is there any accident in God?
No, in regard of God himself; for whatsoever is in God is his essence.

Seeing the essence of God is most simple, in what respect do power, goodness,
justice, wisdom, mercy differ in God?
Not in essence: for all these attributes in essence, are but one very thing
indeed: but in our weak capacity and manner of knowing, in regard of us, and
by the effects, in respect of the creatures.

How many sorts are there of Gods attributes?
Two: the first whereof is incommunicable, so that there appears not the
least impression thereof in any of his creatures. This kind we may call
Absolute, such is his simplicity, and, which depend upon it, his
immutabilitie, eternity, and immensitie. The second sort is some way
communicable, which you may call fitly a relative property, in that it has
relation to the creatures, such are his power, wisdom, will, goodness,
justice, and mercy.

Be there any effects of God?
There be infinite effects of his grace, justice, power, and mercy.

How are the Gentiles said to be without God, (Ephesians. 2.12.) seeing they adored
so many gods?
Because none of their gods was the true God.

But yet they acknowledged God the Creator of heaven and earth.
I answer out of Hilarie in his third book of the Trinity. Not the name of
God, but even God himself was altogether unknown unto them: because no man
knows God, but such as confess the Father and the Son.

But do you not by this make both Jews and Turks, Atheists?
There are many kinds of Atheists. First, such as acknowledge no divinity:
secondly, such as worship fained gods in stead of the true God: thirdly, such
as do indeed acknowledge the true God, yet not as he is, but as they fancy him
to be. Such are the present Jews and Turks, who deny both the Father and the
Son, as also all Antitrinitarian Heretics, who deny the Trinity of Persons
in one essence: and they also, who say, the Son is not (...), that is, of the
same essence with the Father. And surely they who challenge to themselves the
name of the Catholic Church, may be ranked in this order, who professing in
name one only God, the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, and Christ (...),
God and man; yet set down such grounds, which being granted, the true God is
transformed into such an Idol, as never was, is, or shall be found: and
withal, the humanity of Christ must needs vanish into a ghost.

What use make you of the knowledge of God?
Surely this, that he alone may be rightly worshipped, to which purpose man was
created: and that we being guided by this knowledge, may pray for to him, and
acknowledge that from him we have every good thing.

What things are repugnant to the doctrine concerning God?
Atheism, Epicurisme, the mad worshipping of Idols, the Gentiles making of
many gods: the heresy of Maniche, making two beginnings, one good, another
evil: blasphemies against God: false opinions concerning God, as that of the
Anthropomorphites, who make God like unto a man, all doubting of God, etc.

Of the Trinity.
How many Persons be there in that one Essence of God?
THree, and those both in number, and in very deed distinguished, the Father,
Son, and the holy Ghost: which have their subsisting in one divine essence:
whereupon it comes to pass, that there be not many Gods, but one God, and the
same eternal, infinite, and omnipotent, who is named Jehovah in the Scriptures:
and is said to be most simple by reason of essence, and three by reason of
Persons.

By what testimonies of Scripture do you prove the Trinity?
Genes. 1.1. God or Elohim created the heaven and the earth. In which place the
verb being of the singular number does signify the most simple essence of
God: and the substantive Elohim being the plural number, does note out the
three Persons. Also in the creation of man, God as it were taking counsel with
his eternal wisdom, that is, the Son and the holy Ghost, says thus: verse.
26. Let us make man after our image. Where he says, Let us make, because of
the number of the persons, and after our image, because of the unity of the
essence. Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained from the Lord brimstone and fire upon
Sodom and Gomorrha: in which place the person sending the rain, and the
person from whom it was sent, (that is the Son) is distinguished from the
Father.

Have you any more pregnant proofs out of the new Testament?
1. In the baptism of Christ, Math. 3.16. and Ioh. 1.32. the voice of the
Father is heard from heaven, This is my beloved Son: in the same place there
stands the Son by the river Jordan, the holy Ghost descends in the form of a
Dove and sits on Christ.

2. Again, in the transfiguration, there is the Son, and the voice of God
the Father is heard from heaven, Mat. 17.5.
and Christ is shadowed with a cloud which does signify the holy Ghost. And
further Mat. 28.19. Baptize all nations in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost: he says not in names, but in the name, to show
the unity of the three Persons. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Gal. 4.6.
2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all.

Seeing the Scripture does not use the name of the Trinity, does the Church
well to retain the same?
Yea, no doubt: for the thing it self is found in the Scriptures two manner of
ways: 1. According to the letter. 2. According to the sense.


Now since that the sense of it and the very thing it self is found in the
Scriptures, the Church has liberty to use such words as may familiarly
express the thing it self. Moreover, we call the three Persons in God, the
Trinity, not because the Scripture calls them so, but because the Scripture
says nothing against it. Yet this word three, whereof this word Trinity is
derived, is expressly set down, 1. Ioh. 5.7. There be three that bear witness,
etc. Whence we argue, that as from one comes Unity, so from three comes
Trinity.

How does this word Essence differ from this word Person in God?
Essence is the nature which is not more belonging to one and less to another
of the three Persons, but common to them all: yea one and the same, and cannot
be divided, and is all in each one of them, not without them, subsisting by it
self, to wit, the very Deity it self. And therefore the essential
properties which be in them are one in number and of one nature. Now a Person
is the subsisting in the divine nature or the nature of God, which having
relation to others, is distinguished by some incommunicable propriety: for
indeed the Persons are only distinguished and not severed: as three men are
indeed sundred, though they be but one in kind. The reason is, because the
essence of God is infinite and impartible, and therefore it is all in every
Person, which are not severed each from other, but only distinguished amongst
themselves. But as for the essence of Angels and men, it is finite and
partible, so that it is not all in every singular person, but part in one and
part in another.

How manifold is the difference of Persons?
Twofold: inward and outward. The inward difference is that which is caused by
the internal proprieties, or the works from within: concerning which we say,
Opera Trinitatis ad intra sunt diuisa.
The works of the Trinity from within are divided: that is, the works which
God does within himself without any creature are not common to the three
Persons, but are proper to one person alone.

Now the propriety of the Father is this, that from eternity he was not made
nor begotten, but has begotten his eternal Son of the same substance with
himself Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 1.3.5. Pro. 88.24.
.

The propriety of the Son is this, that he being neither made nor created, but
was from all eternity begotten of his Father without any mother Heb. 7.3. Col.
1.15.
: who is of himself as he is God; but of his Father as he is the Son. For as
light comes from the Sun, even so the Son proceeds from the Father; one
distinct from the Father, and therefore the second in order, so farrefoorth as
he is begotten Psalm. 110.3. Mich. 5.2.
: one and the self same with the Father as he is God. And here let us call to
mind the saying of Nazianzene: The begetting of God let it be honored with
silence: it is no small matter for thee to learn that he was begotten.

The propriety of the holy Ghost is this, that he was neither made nor
begotten, but from all eternity proceeds from them both inseparably Ioh.
14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13.14. To. 8.9.
.

But did the Son take his Deity from the Father?
When we speak simply of the Son without the Father, we avouch truly and
properly that he is of himself, and call him God, because of himself he has
his being, and all that he has; and therefore we call him one alone beginning.
But when we point at that relation which he has with his Father, we justly
make the Father the beginning of the Son, and say that the Son received all
from the Father, Ioh. 3.33. For the Essence is one thing, and the Modus (...).
manner of subsisting another. Hence it is that the schoolmen say, that the
Son is by himself not of himself. So the essence of the Son is without
beginning, but the Father is the beginning of his Person. This made Hilarie to
say: The gifts of the Father do not infirm but affirm the Divinity of the
Son. And Augustine, Christ in regard of himself is called God, and of the
Father is called the Son.

Ob. The Son and holy Ghost are not without beginning, therefore they are not
eternal.

Answ. This is not a beginning of time or continuance, but only of order and
offspring: but the Sabellians here cavil, viz. Christ says, He that sees me,
sees the Father: and beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? Ioh. 14.9.10. therefore the Father and the Son are one person.
Ans. Indeed he that sees the Son sees the Father, because the Son has
the same essence with the Father, and being manifested in the flesh, has
delivered to us the whole will of God, Ioh. 1.18.

Ob. 2. That which is one in number, cannot without contradiction be said to be
th^ee in persons: but God is one in number, ( Deuteronomy. 6.4.) ergo.

Ans. That unity does signify Gods simple essence, not the manner by which
that simple essence subsisteth. Therefore God absolutely according to his
essence is one, because he is indivisible: and only in respect of inward
relation, I mean the reason of subsisting, is three.

Ob. 3. If there be one being of the Father, another of the Son, and another of
the holy Ghost: it follows, that in God there are three diverse beings, and
consequently three diverse persons.

Ans. The being of the Father does not signify that essence by which he is
absolutely God, but by which he is Father, that is, in that he otherwise
subsisteth then does the Son: therefore the being of the Father is one thing,
and the being of the Son is another, and yet both of them have the same essence.

Ob. 4. If there be three Persons truly distinguished, and one only essence,
then is there a quaternitie in God.

Ans. Not so: for the essence differs from Person only in reason: but the
Persons differ each from other both in reason and in being.

Ob. 5. The Father begot his Son either existing or not existing, to say
either of these is absurd.

Ans. We may well say, that the Father begat his Son already existing,
because the Father was never without the Son, even as the sun was never
without his light. Again, it may be as well said, that he begat him not
existing, in that his generation, although it be eternal, yet in order goes
before existence, as the sun is before his light.

Is this difference rational, essential, or real?
It is not essential, as in the creatures, where every one has his proper
essence or being, defined and circumscribed: for the essence of the Father is
not one, and the essence of the son another, and of the holy Ghost another:
but one and the same, which the Father does wholly communicate to the Son;
the Father and the Son to the holy Ghost. Not only in reason, because not in
notion, or mind, or only in word is he called Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
neither respectively or by relation: as one man may both be, and be called a
father and a son. But it is real, yet altogether incomprehensible, because
each person has his own peculiar definition, or his essential and
incommunicable propriety, and differs from another not in essence, but in the
manner of subsisting.

What is the outward difference?
It is taken from the works of God that be without, as that the Father sends
the Son, the Son is sent as the Redeemer: the holy Ghost is the sanctifier.
As in the Creed, the Father is distinguished from the Son by the work of
creation: the Son by his incarnation, the holy Ghost from them both, by the
work of sanctification and regeneration as where he appeared like a Dove, (
Mat. 3.) and in cloven tongues, Act. 2. although all these things be effected
by one and the self same God. As we use to say, the works of the Trinity
without are indivisible: therefore here let us remember the saying of Gregory
Nazianzene: I cannot imagine one, but presently I am compassed about on every
side with the brightness of three: neither can I distinguish three, but
forthwith I am brought again to one. Further, in the persons of the Deity
there is an order, but there is none inequality: there is a distinction, but
no diversity.

What things be contrary to this doctrine?
1. The heresy of Sabellius, who taught, there was only one person of the
Godhead, but sometimes in one respect, sometimes in another, one while called
the Father, another while called the Son.

2. Of Samosatenus who taught, that the Son did no more subsist in God, than
wisdom, justice, and goodness.

3. Of Arrius, who denied that the Son was begotten of the essence of the
Father, that he was coeternall, coequall, and according to his person of the
same substance with the Father.

4. Of Seruetus, who affirmed that the word Person is no otherwise to be taken,
then as in Comedies the name of person is used for the habit and the
distinction of the office.

5. Of the Tritheitarites, who do transform the three persons into three
distinct and several essences: they deny the Son of God according to his
essence, to be of the same substance with the Father, and the Son to be God
of himself.

6. The blindness of the Jews, who do affirm an essence altogether without
distinction. Here must we insert certain objections of one Gentilis an
Heretic burnt at Geneua.

Ob. 1. If there be diverse Iehouahs, there must be diverse essences, but ( Genesis
19.24.) the first is true: for Jehovah did rain fire from Jehovah: that is,
the Son from the Father, therefore the Son is a distinct essence from the
Father.

Ans. It is an Hebrew phrase, signifying that God did miraculously rain fire
of himself from heaven. Again, the word Jehovah is taken sometimes
personally, it is therefore a distinction in the Persons, not in essence.

Ob. 2. There is one life of the Father, and another of the Son, Ioh. 5.26.
therefore another essence.

Ans. First, that place is to be understood of a power communicated to Christ
as he was Mediator. Secondly, although the Son be from the Father in respect of
the origination of his person, yet is he of himself, if he be absolutely
considered, and therefore has the same life with the Father.

Ob. 3. They who have distinct operations have distinct essences, but the
actions of the Trinity are distinct, ergo.

Ans. The proposition is true, if it be understood of natural and external
actions: but if of internal and personal actions it is not true: for these do
not take away the unity of essence, since that the same essence in number is
wholly in every person.

Ob. 4. Each Person has not one and the same power, for the Father can beget
the Son, the Son cannot beget, ergo they have not the same essence.

Ans. They have all one natural power, but not personal, as there is one
nature, but not one person.

Ob. 5. The essence of the Father is communicated to the Son by generation,
therefore there is one essence in the Father, another in the Son, because
there is one essence begetting, and another begotten.

Answ. We must distinguish betwixt generation and communication: for the person
begets and is begotten, but the essence neither begets nor is begotten, but
communicated.

Ob. 6. If the Father and Son have one essence, it must follow, that the
Father was incarnate, which is absurd, ergo.

Ans. The essence of God absolutely considered was not incarnate, but the
second person: and although the person of the Son include the whole essence
of God, yet for the proper manner of subsisting, it is distinguished from the
person of the Father.

Ob. 7. If the Father and Son have one essence, the Son should be Mediator
to himself.

Ans. The Son is properly Mediator betwixt us and his Father, not absolutely
betwixt us and the divine essence. And the office of Mediator depends upon
the most free ordination of God.

The second common Place, concerning Christ.
What does this word Christ signify?
IT signifies Anointed (being derived of a Greek word that signifies
commonly to anoint) as Esa. 45.1. (...).
The Lord said to king Cyrus his christ, that is, his anointed. But in way of
excellency it is ascribed to the Savior of the world: who is called in Hebrew
Messiah, Ioh. 1.14.
because he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, as we
read in Psalm. 45.8. And indeed he is that King, that only Priest and Prophet
which was promised unto mankind. Psalm. 2.6. and 110.4. Esa. 61.1.


Does this name Christ signify his nature or his person?
His person subsisting in both his natures, and not this or that nature alone:
for it is a name concrete, as the Grammarians speak, and not abstract.

What do you call a word Concrete, and what an Abstract?
This word Concrete in the discourse of Christ, is said to be that which
signifies the nature together with the subject, and does comprehend in his
signification both the thing, and the subject wherein the thing is, that is to
say, it does design the person of Christ, as he is the Son of God; because
the Son of God does not simply signify the nature of God, but the person of
the Son of God: so the son of man when it is spoken of Christ, signifies
the Person, and not his humanity simply. But this name Abstract is a word that
signifies the nature simply: as the Divinity of Christ, the humanity of
Christ.

How many things are especially necessary to know Christ, and which be they?
Two: his person, and his office.

What is Christ?
He is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14.
who of his mere love toward mankind Tit. 3.4.5.
, did create unto himself of the seed Heb. 2.16.
of the Virgin Marie Luke 1.31.
, being sanctified by the holy Ghost Luke 1.35.
, and by creating did assume Heb. 2.16.
, and did personally and inseparably for ever unite a true humane body Heb.
2.14.
endued with a reasonable Mat. 26.38. and 27.50.
soul. And so being true God, became true man like to us in all things Heb.
2.17. and 4.15.
sin only excepted.

What things are we especially to consider in the person of Christ?
Four: 1. That Christ is God. 2. That the same Christ is man. 3. That he is
God and man in one person. 4. The phrases and the usual speeches which are
affirmed of Christ in the Scriptures.


By how many, and by what kind of testimonies do you prove that Christ is God?
By three.

1. By apparent and manifest sentences of scripture, wherein the Divinity of
Christ is auerred. 2. By his works, which were altogether divine. 3. By the
worship and honor which was yielded unto Christ both of the Saints that
believed, and of the Angels.
Show some pregnant testimonies whereby you can prove that Christ is God.
Esa. 9.6. This is the name whereby they shall call him (speaking of the
Messiah) to wit, the mighty God, the Father of eternity. Ier. 23.6. The name
whereby the branch of David shall be called, shall be the Jehovah our
righteousness. Iud. 6.11. etc. That Angel which appeared to the holy
Patriarchs, calls himself Jehovah. In the new Testament, Mat. 16.16. Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. John 20.28. My Lord and my God. Romans 9.5.
Christ being God, was of the Fathers according to the flesh, who is God for
ever. 1. John 5.20. And we are in his Son Jesus Christ, who is very God and
life eternal. 1. Tim. 3.16. God is manifest in the flesh. In which places
Christ is absolutely called God, and the name Jehovah so given to him, not by a
trope, or symbolically, by reason of the presence of God, as Exodus 17.15. it is
given to the altar, Psalm. 24.8. it is given to the arc, Ier. 33.16. it is
given to Jerusalem.

Which be the testimonies of the second sort?
The works which none can do but God alone, which are ascribed to him, to
wit, to create and preserve Ioh. 1.3. and 5.17. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2.3.
, to redeem 1. Cor. 1.30. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
, to blot out iniquities Mat. 9.6.
, to search the heart Matthew. 9.4. Mar. 2.8. and 14 13.
, to hear our prayers John 14.14.
, to quicken John 5.27.
, to judge John 5.22.
: moreover, the miracles which he wrought by his own power, according to that
prophecy Esa. 53.5.6. unto which also even Christ himself sends us John
10.25. Mat. 11.4.5.
, and for the working whereof he gave power to his Apostles Math. 10.8.
: moreover, those attributes which do agree only to the nature of God, and
ascribed unto him: as eternal Mic. 5.2. Ioh. 1.1. and 17.5.
, almighty John 3.31. Phil. 3.21.
, infinite Mat. 18.20. and 28.20.
, King of Kings Reu. 19.26.
, Savior Math. 1.21. Act. 4.12.
, and the rest, testify him to be God by nature.

Which is the third kind of testimonies?
The worship and honor which is performed unto Christ, namely, invocation,
adoration, faith, hope. Psalm. 72.11. All the kings of the earth shall worship
him, and all people shall serve him, Esa. 11.10. and Romans 15.12. All nations
shall call upon him, and trust in him. Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are they that put
their trust in him. Every knee shall bow unto him Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10.
. And John. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Act. 7.39. Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. All which do prove that he is true God.

Why is it necessary that Christ the Redeemer should be God?
For two causes especially, whereof the former is the greatness of the evil,
wherewithal mankind was overwhelmed, which could be taken away by no creature:
The latter is the greatness of the good, which could be restored by none to
man again, but by God, who alone is truly good Mat. 19.17.
.

What is the greatness of the evil?
It stands in four things, which be these, The greatness of man's sin, The
infinite and unsupportable weight of Gods anger, The power of death, The
tyranny of the devil: which to take away, to abolish, to appease, to
overcome, none was able but God alone.

What is the greatness of the good, which could be restored by no creature?
The restoring again of the image of God Col. 3.10.
: therefore Christ (1. Cor. 1.31.) is made to us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, not only by revealing and teaching of them, but
by performing and restoring of them Luke 1.77. 2. Cor. 5.21. Mat. 20.28. Romans
3.24. Gal. 3.13. and 4 5. Tit. 2.14. 1. Pet. 1.18. Heb. 5.9.
.

Why is he called the Word?
Basil says, because he proceeded from the mind, and is the image of the
Father, wholly in himself manifesting the Father, and having his being of
himself, even as our speech is the pattern of all that we think: but he (as
Ignatius says) is the Word of the Father, not because he flows from him, but
that he is the essential Word of the Father. Or else as Irenaeus speaks,
because he is the Fathers interpreter, (...).
and is called his speech, as it were speaking, speaking with the Fathers. Or
else because it is he of whom speech is made, that is, of whom the Lord has
spoken, or whom the Lord has promised: or else because it is he who spoke the
word, and all things were made.

According to which nature is he called the image of God? Col. 1.15.
Not according to his humane nature alone, as man is said to be made after the
image of God, but especially according to his divine nature, but manifested in
the flesh; or so far forth as God has truly manifested himself in Christ 2.
Tim. 3.16.
: whereupon he is called the brightness of the glory of the Father, Hebr.
1.3. and the character or engraven form of his person, because he is not some
vanishing representation, but engraven and durable.

Prove that Christ is very man.
Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman is promised, which shall break the Serpents
head. Genesis 22.18. God promised Abraham, that in his seed all the nations of the
earth should be blessed. 2. Sam. 7.12. it is promised to David, that his son
must sit upon his throne and reign for ever. Esa. 7.14. Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bring forth a son. Besides all these, the history of the
Gospel does plainly prove that Christ was conceived Luke 1.31.
, borne Luke 2.7.
, circumcised Verse 21.
, had a true body and soul Luke 22.20. Heb. 2.4. Mat. 26.38.
, was hungry Mat. 4.2.
, thirsty John. 19.29.
, shed his blood John. 19.34.
, that he died, Mat. 27.50.
and that he had all the properties and affections of man's nature, yet without
sin, Math. 9.36. John 2.17. Ioh. 11.33.35. Mat. 26.37.38
that he ascended visibly and locally into heaven, and thence that he shall
come again to judgment Act. 1.9.11.
.

Why must Christ needs be true man?
1. The justice of God required it should be so, that the disobedience
committed in our flesh might in the same be repaired Romans 5.17.18.19. Hebr.
2.14.
.

2. The reason of our adoption: for it pleased the Son of God to take the
nature of man upon him, and to become our brother, and by that means to become
our nearest kinsman, and most near allied unto us, that we being made his
members, might be made the sons of God, Gal. 3.26. and that he might have right
to redeem and ransom us Ier. 32.8. Ruth. 3.12.13.
. Hence is matter of comfort in every kind of temptation. Therefore the Apostle
to the Hebrews, 2.17. and 4.5. says: He took not upon him the nature of the
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and in all things became like to his brethren,
that he might have compassion of his brethren.

3. For the confirmation of our resurrection: for in that Christ took on him
our nature, and has raised it up, and given unto it immortality, and has
exalted it in the heaven, by virtue of that communion (which we have with him)
shall we be raised up at the last day, and this our vile body shall be made
conformable to the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. and 1. Cor. 15.22. As
in Adam all are dead, so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Why was neither the Father nor the holy Ghost incarnate, but the Son?
1. Because it was meet that the world should be redeemed, and all things
restored by him, by whom all things were created, or that man should be
redeemed from death by him, by whom he was first created, and should have been
brought unto life eternal if he had not sinned.

2. It would have been inconvenient, that there should be two Sons, one in
the divine nature, another in the humane nature.

3. It was the eternal decree of the Father, whereby he purposed to save
mankind by the Son. Heb. 2.10.


Whether is Christ God and man, divided or joined together?
Joined and united, but not divided.

By what kind of union?
Not by inhabitation only, as God dwells in the Saints, not by consent
only, Ioh. 17.21.
as the faithful are one in the Father and the Son: not by mixture, as when
water is mingled with wine: not by combination, as two boords be joined
together: lastly, not by composition, whereby of the mixture of two things
there arises a third: but by personal union, which the Greeks call (...)
incorporation, (...), because neither the whole Deity, nor any part of it is
subiectiuely communicated to the humanity of Christ, but only the humane
nature was assumed of the Son of God into the same person, Leu. 2.16.

What is the personal union in Christ?
It is that whereby the person of the Son of God, being a person from all
eternity existing, did assume the most pure nature of man, wanting all
personal existing of it own, into the unity of his person, and made it his
own, the proprieties of each nature being preserved. Or as Paul defines it,
Colos. 2.9. Whereby in Christ does dwell all the fullness of the godhead
bodily. Whereof we have a manifest resemblance in the union of the soul and
the body, but that it does not fit in every point. For in man from the nature
of the soul, and the nature of the body, there arises a third nature
compounded of two, which is called the nature of man. But in Christ there is
not made a frame of one third nature of the divine and humane, but each
remains pure and unconfounded. Neither does that similitude of the iron red
hot agree in every point, because the heat and the light in the iron being
hot, are but qualities, not the very substance of the fire. And therefore the
Apostle does well call it a great mystery of godliness, 1. Tim. 3.16.

How is this union made?
Without all confusion, without all conversion of one nature into the other,
indiuisibly, inseparably. The difference of the natures by no means being
taken away by the union: but rather the propriety of either nature being
saved, and joined together or concurring into one person, and one subsisting,
as the Calcedon Synod speaks in the history of Euagrius, lib. 2. cap. 4.
And from that time that the Word did assume our humane nature, he never left
it, no not in his death. And to this purpose make those verses: Sum quod eram,
nec eram quod sum, nunc dicor vtrumque:
Ignoras, nisime stirpe ab vtraque tenes.
I am that I was, nor I was that I am, now both am I called:
Thou know me not, except thou know me subsisting of both natures.


By what testimonies will you prove, that the divine and humane nature in
Christ did join together into one and the same person?
Esa. 7.14. and 9.6. Luke 1.35. That which shall be borne of thee, shall be
called the Son of God, Ioh. 1.4. And the word was made flesh: not by
sacramental union, in which respect Christ was said to be a rock: not by
confusion of the natures: not by commutation, as water is turned into wine,
Ioh. 2.14. but by assuming the flesh into the unity of the person. The voice
of God speaks thus of Jesus the son of Marie: This is my well-beloved Son,
Mat. 3.17. He that descends is even the self same that ascended above all
heavens, that he might fulfill all things, Ephesians. 4.10. God sent his Son
borne of a woman. Gal. 4.4.

But what means this, that the flesh of Christ is said by Damascene and
Gregorius Nyssenus to be deified?
Not because it is turned into the divine nature, but because it is joined unto
it into one person: and we must understand it of the bestowing of gifts upon
it, whereby the humane nature of Christ does excel all creatures, yet so as
they do not abolish his nature.

Why is it necessary that Christ should be both God and man in one and the
same person?
1. To the end he might reconcile God and man, or that he might make God and
man one.

2. That he might be a fit Mediator between God and men, by reason of his
participation and affinity with them both 1. Tim. 2.5. Heb. 8.6.
.

3. That he might reconcile God unto us by his death, which if he had been God
alone, he could never have suffered; if only man, he could never have overcome.

4. That the works of redemption performed in the flesh of the Son, might
become a sufficient price for sin, whereby God, that infinite good, was
offended. For although certain actions do properly proceed from the divine
nature, and some are done by the humane nature, yet all of them do equally
receive their price and worthiness from the divine nature. So the flesh of
Christ has power to quicken, because it is the flesh of that person who is
God: the obedience of the man Christ does justify, because it is the obedience
of that person who is God: the blood of Christ redeemes the Church, because it
is the blood of God, Act. 20.28.

Of the Phrases.
What is the communication of proprieties?
IT is called of the Grecians (...), which cannot well be englished; and it is
not the effusion of the proprieties of one nature into the other, or a mutual
confusion of proprieties: but the attributing, by Synecdoche, a part for the
whole, or an affirmation one of the other, whereby (because in Christ the two
natures and one person is (...). Dial. 3.
one thing and another; and not one person and another) that which is proper to
one nature in Christ, is attributed not to the other nature, but to the person,
taking the name of one of the natures, whether it be the divine or humane. As
Theodoret says: Those things which be common to the person, are made proper to
the natures by reason of the identitie of the person: (as Damascene says) and
the affinity of the natures one toward another, and because there is but one
person, Orthod. fid. lib. 3. cap. 3. and 4. Or else it is such a manner of
predication whereby those things which be proper to the natures are
indifferently attributed to the person of Christ which is but one: and that
because Christ in his two natures is both, to wit, perfect God and perfect man,
to whom therefore those things are truly and indeed attributed as well which
are proper to God, as those which be proper to man.

Therefore it is well and truly said: God, or else the Son of God was borne of
the Virgin Marie, suffered, was crucified: and God purchased unto himself the
Church with his own blood. 1. Cor. 2.8. Act. 20.28. Not simply, principally,
and by himself, as he is God, but by accident, and in another respect, or in
regard of another thing: because that which is proper to one nature, namely, to
be conceived, borne, crucified, to die, is not attributed to his divinity, but
to the person taking the name of one, namely, the divine nature. For this word
the Son of God, or God (which is the subject of the proposition) is the
Concrete and not the Abstract, and signifies not the divine nature, but the
person, who is God and man.

Therefore it is well said: The Son of man or Christ man, is eternal,
almighty, al-present; saves, raises the dead, gives eternal life. And Ioh.
31.13. No man ascends into heaven, but he that comes down from heaven:
both in respect of the union, seeing that the self same person is both man and
God: for as God by reason of the unity does account those things which belong
to the humane nature proper to himself, says Cyril of the incarnation of the
only begotten, cap. 26: so as he is man by reason of the union, does account
those things which belong to the divine nature to be proper to it self: and
also because the Son of man is a word Concrete, which signifies the person
of Christ, being but one, consisting of the divine and humane nature: and
therefore whole Christ is every where present, but not all that is in Christ.

Totus Christus, non totum Christi est vbique. On the contrary, it is wickedly
said, that the divinity of Christ was borne of the Virgin, suffered, and that
the humanity of Christ is eternal, every where present, almighty: for the
divinity is a word abstract, which simply signifies the divine nature in
Christ, which is most free from all manner of suffering. Now the predication of
diverse natures by reason of the hypostaticall union is of no force, but in
those things which are signified as whole and perfect Supposita: for as we do
not use to say, the body is the soul, or the man is the soul: so neither do
we say, this God (Christ) is the body of Christ, or the soul of Christ, but
only God is man.

Is the communication of proprieties verbal only, or real?
It is a true and real speech, because the person of whom, by the trope
Synecdoche, as well the divine as the humane either names or proprieties, or
effects are indifferently and equally affirmed, contains all those things in
it self truly and indeed, which do agree to very God and very man: those
things which be divine as he is God: those also which be humane as the same is
man, but not in respect of both natures, but according to the one and the
other, as in the same place Cyrill teaches. For then should be brought in the
Eutychian heresy of the confounding of the natures or proprieties, and it
should cease to be a speech by Synecdoche.

But those titles which belong to the office of Redemption, are they to be
attributed to the natures severally a sunder, or to the person?
To the person: as Christ is a Mediator, Pastor, Priest according to both
natures, although each of them in that work retains his own (...).
proper efficacy or operation.

What is the effect of that personal union?
The bestowing of gifts, whereby the humane nature in the person of Christ is
adorned, and whereby it excels all other creatures in wisdom, goodness,
holiness, power, majesty and glory; which the Fathers call the Deifying of
the flesh: the Schoolmen, Habitual grace, of the communion of proprieties
(which is mutual one of another, and the reciprocation of the names)
altogether distinct.

How manifold is the state of Christ?
Twofold: one of humiliation, whereby he willingly undergoing the burdens,
reproaches and punishments of our nature, did humble himself to the death of
the cross; the Divinity in the mean while (according to Irenaeus) resting or
hiding it self, that he might be crucified, and die.

The other, of exaltation, whereby after his death, his humane nature did lay
aside all the infirmities of his humane nature (but not the essential
properties) and was wonderfully exalted above all creatures unto most great
honor, yet not in any case matched, and equalled to the divine nature of Christ
Phil. 2.7.9.
.

What are the doctrines contrary to this?
The 1. heresy of Macedonius and Valentinus, who affirmed that Christ brought
with him a celestial body from heaven: as also of Apelles, who said his body
was ayrie, his flesh starlike, and that he passed from the virgin as water from
a pipe.

2. Of the Manichees, who fained unto him an imaginary body.

3. Of Apollinaris, who denied that Christ did assume a reasonanable soul, but
that his Divinity was unto him in stead of his mind.

4. Of Eunomius, who affirmed Christ to be a mere man, and that he was called
the son of God by adoption: and of Ebion, who said that Christ was borne by
humane generation.

5. Of Nestorius, who taught, that as there be two natures in Christ, so there
are two persons; and that the Divinity is present with the humanity by (...).
circumstance and combination, but not by personal union. Therefore he denied
that Marie was (...).
the mother of God, or brought forth God: and affirmed that man, not God, was
crucified of the Jews.

6. Eutyches heresy contrary to the former: for he taught, that the humane
nature after the union, was endued with the proprieties of the Divinity.

7. Of the Manichees, who avouched that Christ had but one only will, not two,
a divine and humane will.

8. Of the Vbiquitaries, who attribute to the humanity of Christ the
essential properties of the Divinity, altogether forgetting that saying, He
that takes away the proprieties, takes away the nature: and on the contrary,
He that attributes the proprieties, attributes the nature: and of whatsoever
the Essence cannot be affirmed, no more can the essential proprieties thereof
be affirmed of the same.

Of the office of Christ.
How manifold is the office of Christ?
THreefold; Prophetical, Priestly, Kingly, as it is expressed, Heb. 2.10.

What is his Prophetical office?
It is that office, whereby he has revealed to mankind the Gospel, that is,
the secret counsel of the Father concerning the redemption of mankind, by the
Word, by the holy Ghost, by the Sacraments, both by himself, as also by the
Ministers of the word. Ioh. 1.18. Ephesians. 4.10.11.

Show some testimonies.
Deuteronomy. 18.18. I will raise a Prophet like you, etc. Esa. 61.1. He has sent me
that I should preach the Gospel to the poor. Math. 17.5. This is that my
well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. For this cause he is
called a Pastor Esa. 40..1. John 10.11.
, the publisher of peace Zach. 9.10. Ephesians. 2.17.
, the most faithful witness of God John 3.32. Reu. 1.5.
; which office he does execute until the end of the world Ephesians. 4.11.
.

What is his Priestly office?
It is that, whereby he is Mediator between God and man; or that, whereby he
has set himself a Mediator between God and men 1. Tim. 25. Heb. 11.24.
; which agrees to no man, save to Christ alone Heb. 2.17.
.

How many parts be there of this office?
Two: his satisfaction, whereby he fulfilled the law Mat 5.17. Romans 10.4.
, and paid the ransom for the sins of the world Mat. 20.28.
. In respect of which part of his office, he is called a Redeemer Mat. 20.28.
Gal. 3.13.
, and a Savior Esa. 25.8.9. and 53.4.5.6. John. 3 17* 1. Pet. 2.24.
, and a Lamb or a sacrifice Esa. 53.7. Ioh. 1.29.36. Revel. 13.8.
. And his intercession, whereby Christ does instantly desire that his sacrifice
may continually prevail with God his Father, for the reconciliation of his
elect Romans 8.24. Heb 7.25.
.

According to which nature is Christ a Mediator and a Priest?
According to neither of them asunder, but according to both, his divine and
humane jointly together Genesis 3.15. and 22.18. Dan. 9.17. 2. Cor. 5.15. Heb
4.15. and 9.14.
. 1. Because he is in one and the same person, the same God and man. 2. Because
he was after the order of Melchisedech, without father as man, and without
mother as God. 3. Because he must be partaker of them both, that he might
reconcile God to man, and man to God: as Irenaeus says, It was necessary by
reason of his habitation with both, that he should reduce both into love and
concord; and procure that God should receive man, and that man should be
restored to God. 4. Because the works of the Mediator are of him that is both
God and man, that God might accept them. 5. Because none could satisfy Gods
justice but God, none ought but man.

Was Christ Mediator before his Incarnation?
He was, because in the foreknowledge, predestination, and acceptance of God,
the two natures were reputed as united: and with him things done and to be
done, present and to come, are all one. Thus Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ is to day,
yesterday, and the same for ever. So 1. Pet. 1.20. And as the Lamb is said to
be slain from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13. so the prayers then powered
out for the Church in Gods acceptance may be said to be made.

How does the Son make intercession to the Father?
Surely as a person, but yet as man; but so, as that the dignity of those
prayers issue from the excellency of his Divinity, which in Christ is
personally united with his humanity.

Have you any pregnant testimony concerning the Priesthood of Christ?
Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, who was a type of Christ Heb.
7.3.
, as were Aaron also and Isaac Genesis 22.6.9.
.

May the Ministers of the Gospel be called Priests?
They may; but only in two respects.

1. Because they, together with others, are ingrafted into Christ; and so far
forth as they be true Christians.

2. Because they teach the Gospel, and sacrifice men themselves, and offer them
up a living sacrifice unto God by the Gospel. For this cause Paul testifies
of himself, that he had offered a sacrifice when he had sacrificed the
Gentiles by the Gospel, that they might be an acceptable sacrifice unto God,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost, Romans 15.16. Yet in no place in the new
Testament the name of Priest is attributed peculiarly to the Ministers of the
Gospel, because Christ has no copartners of his Priesthood.

What is the Kingly office of Christ?
It is that, whereby he does according to both natures wittingly and willingly
moderate, rule and govern the whole world.

Show some plain testimonies concerning this office.
Psalm. 2.6. He has set his King upon his holy mountain. Mat. 28.18. All power
is given me in heaven and in earth. Ioh. 13.3. All things are given me of my
Father. And for this cause he is called the eternal King Esa. 9.7. Psalm. 45.7.
Luke 1.33.
, the King of righteousness Heb. 7.2.
, the King of Kings Reu. 7.2.
.

How manifold is the administration of this office?
It is twofold in this world; General or powerful, whereby he rules all
creatures by his power: Special, or of grace, whereby he does in special
manner and peculiarly rule, defend, and govern his Church, and does enrich it
here on earth, and glorify it in heaven. In which respect he is also properly
called a King Psalm. 2.9.
. 1. Because he has redeemed his Church, which Satan had invaded Psalm. 20.
. 2. Because he has vanquished the prince of darkness. 3. Because he does
defend and make blessed all those that fly unto him.

Who are citizens of this kingdom, and what be the laws?
The citizens are Christians, so called of the King, Act. 11.26. 1. Pet. 2.3.
the laws are the word of God; the enemies are sin, Satan, hell, death; and
the rewards are the things of this and a better life.

What be the benefits or the effects of this kingdom of grace?
Righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost Romans 14.17
, that is peace, joy, happiness, light, the knowledge of God, begun indeed
here, but made perfect in heaven or in the kingdom of glory: whereby it is
manifest, that this kingdom is not earthly, but spiritual and heavenly Ioh.
18.6.36.
.

Which be the parts of the kingly office of Christ?
Two: Vocation and Judgment.

Vocation or calling by the word of truth, and that double; 1. whereby in
general Christ inuiteth all men indifferently to the embracing of his Gospel,
having appointed the ministry of the word to that end and purpose Mat. 22.14.
. 2. Special, whereby by the labor of his Ministers, he does effectually
illuminate and call unto the knowledge of himself the elect, by the inward
operation of his spirit in his time appointed Romans 8.30.
.

The other part of his kingly office, is Judgment Ioh. 5.17.
, which he exercises after two manner of ways: 1. In this life, both toward
the elect, partly in justifying them, or absoluing them from their sins, which
is the office of a Judge: partly by defending them against all kind of enemies:
as also toward the reprobate, afflicting them with temporal punishments, or
else killing them with the word: and moreover by casting forth superstitions,
and brideling the fury of Satan and ungodly men Psalm. 110.12
. 2. In the world to come, by summoning both of them before his Tribunal
seat, and giving sentence according to his word. 3. By glorifying his elect,
and adiudging the wicked to eternal punishment.

Seeing the kingdom of Christ is eternal, Psalm. 45.7. Mat. 16.27. and
25.31.32. etc.
Why is it said that in the last day ( 1. Cor. 15.24) he shall render up the
kingdom to God even the Father?
Not because he shall utterly deprive himself of his kingdom, but because
that the manner of administration which Christ uses for the gathering and
preserving of his Church in this world, shall then cease.

What things are contrary to the doctrine of the office of Christ?
1. The error of Stancarus, who referred those things which belong to the whole
person (as to be Mediator) to the humane nature apart: and of Osiander, who
ascribed the office of a Mediator to the Divinity alone.

2. The error of the Papists concerning the authority of the Pope, of the
Church, of Councels, in devising new articles of our faith, and expounding of
scriptures, and bringing in men's traditions into the Church. The same men's
error concerning the merits of works, satisfactions, and the sacrifice of the
Mass substituted into the room of Christ, and of the priesthood and sacrifice
(wherein most blasphemously they say they offer up Christ for the quick and
the dead) and of invocation and intercession of Saints.

3. The error of the Popes supremacy, of Christ his Vicarship, whereof he
has no need.

4. The error of the Jews, who dream of Christ his earthly kingdom.

The third common Place, concerning the holy Ghost.
To what things in the Scriptures is this name Spirit attributed?
SOmetime to things created, sometimes to the Creator: whence we may make a
double spirit: one created, another uncreated; but yet by proportion, because
the word Spirit does principally agree to the Creator, and to the things
created less principally. When it is attributed to the creatures, it is used
two ways; sometimes it signifies the substance, sometimes the quality. The
substance either bodily, but by a metaphor: as John. 3.8. The Spirit, that is
the wind blows where it lists: or else spiritually, and that either the
soul, as Psalm. 33.6. Into thine hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit, that is,
my soul. Act. 7.59 Lord Jesus receive my spirit: or else the Angels, and those
either good: Heb. 1.14. the Angels are called ministering spirits: or else as
Luke 11.26. The unclean spirit takes to himself seven other spirits worse
then himself. When it signifies a quality, it is used sometime for the
opinion and affection, as Math. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: or else
for the breathing and motion of the mind, whether it be good, which proceeds
from the good spirit of God; or evil, which is stirred up by the evil and
unclean spirit, as also from our own evil will. And hence it is that the
gifts of God are called the spirit, but by a metonymie, as when Elizeus says,
Let thy spirit be double upon me, 2. King. 2.9. And when God says unto Moses,
Number. 11.17. I will take of thy spirit, and give it to the Elders. And that
either in special, as Esa. 11.2. The Spirit of wisdom: for the gift of
wisdom, infused by the holy Ghost, etc. Ephesians. 1.17. The Spirit of meekness,
for meekness, which the holy Ghost infuseth into the hearts of the faithful:
so the Spirit of faith, 2. Corint. 4.17. and the Spirit of love, 2. Tim. 1.7.
So on the contrary, the spirit of covetousness, the spirit of giddiness, the
spirit of drunkenness, Esa. 10.14. the spirit of slumber, of fornication Esa.
29.10. Hos. 4.12.
, are used for those vices. Or else in general all the gifts of the holy
Ghost: but those especially which in times past in the beginning of the
preaching of the Gospel were bestowed upon the believers for the confirmation
of the heavenly doctrine 2. Cor. 11.4.
. Besides, this word Spirit signifies a quality, when it is opposed against
the flesh: and again, it signifies another quality, when it is opposed to the
letter.

What does the Spirit signify then, when it is opposed to the flesh?
It signifies the grace of regeneration, that is, whatsoever in man, either
the mind or the will, or in the affections is regenerate and renewed by the
holy Ghost, as Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh. Now the flesh being opposed against the spirit, signifies
whatsoever is not as yet regenerate in us, to wit, the pronenesse of the
affection, and carnal quality of the flesh and sin Joh. 3.6.
, which strives against the spirit, so that one and the self same faithful
man (so long as he lives here) may be said to be both flesh and spirit: as
Paul shows by his own example Romans 7.
.

But what does the word Spirit signify, when it is opposed to the letter?
It signifies the power and efficacy of the holy Ghost ingrauing in our
hearts the righteousness of Christ, and by that means the law of God it
self, and bowing our hearts to the obedience thereof as it is, 2. Cor. 3.6.
The letter kills, but the spirit gives life: that is, the bare law
considered without Christ, without the operation and efficacy of the holy
Ghost kills, by the corruption of our nature: but the Gospel by the Spirit
of Christ, which it has joined with it, gives life. Sometimes also Paul
calls the external sign in the ceremonies, the letter, being severed from
the end of that sign, or from the virtue and truth of it, which he calls
spirit, as Romans 2.27. But they that by the letter understand the literal
sense: and by the name of the Spirit the allegorical, speak to no purpose.

But when it is attributed to the Creator himself, how many ways is the word
Spirit taken?
Two manner of ways: one way essentially, otherwise personally. And
essentially either in common, of the whole Trinity, Ioh. 4.24. God is a
spirit, or else specially for the divine nature of Christ, or for the power and
efficacy of the truth in the humanity assumed Mat. 12.28.
: To. 1.4. Of his Son made of the seed of David according to the flesh,
declared to be the Son of God, according to the spirit of sanctification by
the resurrection from the dead, 1. Pet. 3.18. Put to death according to the
flesh, but quickened in the spirit, in the which also he preached unto the
spirits that are in prison. So Heb. 9.14. Christ by the eternal spirit offered
up himself without spot to God: and 1. Tim. 3.16. he was justified in the
spirit.

But when is this word Spirit used personally?
When it is taken for the third person in deity, who together with the Father
and the Son is the same in essence and deity, as Mat. 28.19. Go baptize all
nations in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Spirit.

But why is the third Person called the Spirit?
Because he is that essential virtue and working, being of the same substance
together with the Father and the Son, proceeding equally, and as it were
breathed from them both: or else by a Metonymie of the effect: or else because
he breaths where he lists Ioh. 3.8.
: or else because he stirs up spiritual motions in the hearts of the
believers, and does purify their hearts, and quicken them, which also is
showed by this epithet Holy, not sanctified, but sanctifying, or the sanctifier
in way of excellency (as the Father is called the Creator, the Son the
Redeemer,) of his especial operation in us, which is called Sanctification 1.
Pet. 1.2.
.

Prove now that the holy Ghost is God.
I prove it. 1. By the Phrases of Scripture.

2. By the attributing of those properties belonging to God unto him.

3. By the works or effects which agree to God alone.

4. By that worship and honor which is performed unto him by the faithful.

5. By that punishment which is inflicted upon such as sin against the holy
Ghost.

Show me those sentences of Scripture whereby you can prove that the holy Ghost
is God.
Those words which the Prophets do affirm were spoken by the God of hoasts,
the Apostles do ascribe to the holy Ghost. As that we read, Esa. 6.9. Jehovah
said unto the Prophet: Go and say to this people, Hear and understand not,
etc, the Apostle Act. 28.25. attributes to the holy Ghost. Again, Act. 5.3.
Peter says thus to Ananias: How is it that he has filled thine heart, that
thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? and presently after, Thou have not lied
unto men, but unto God. But the Spirit is in plain words called God, and the
temple is assigned unto him which belongs to God alone 1. Cor. 3.16.17 and 6.19
20 2. Cor. 6.16.
, and he is called Lord and God 1. Cor. 12.4.5.
.

Show some testimonies wherein the proprieties which agree to God alone are
attributed to the holy Ghost?
Genesis 1.2. It is said that the Spirit of God moved upon the waters presently in
the beginning of the creation: therefore he is eternal Heb. 9.14.
. He is said to be present every where, and of infinite greatness, Psalm.
139.7. O Lord whither shall I fly from thy spirit? Wisd. 1.7. The spirit of
the Lord fills the world. Whereupon Basil in his book entreating of the holy
Ghost, against those which deny him, frames this demonstration: Every
creature has a substance circumscribed:
The holy Ghost has not a substance circumscribed:
Therefore he is not a creature, and ergo, he is a God.
He is said to be omniscient knowing all things. Ioh. 15.13. That spirit shall
lead you into all truth. 1. Cor. 2.10. The spirit searches all things, yea
even the deep things of God. And he is called Almighty Esa. 14.13.
.

Prove the divinity of the holy Ghost by his works.
The works which are only proper to God alone are ascribed to him, as the
work of creation, conservation, vivification, Job 33.4. The Spirit of Jehovah
has created me, and the Spirit of the Almighty has quickened me. Psalm. 33.6.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the power of them by the
spirit of his mouth. He is said in like manner to dwell in the hearts of the
faithful as in a temple Romans 8.9. 1. Cor. 3.6.
: Regeneration, justification, sanctification Ioh 3 6.8. 1. Cor. 6.11. 1. Cor.
3.16.
: truth, grace, and whatsoever good thing can be imagined, 1. Cor. 12.4.5.11.
One and the same Spirit divides all things.

How do you prove that he is God, by that worship and honor which is given unto
him?
1. Because faith and invocation is attributed unto him, for we are baptized
into the holy Ghost, as well as into the Father and into the Son Mat. 28.19.
, and as we call upon the name of the Father, and the Son, even so also on
the holy Ghost.

2. We confess in the Creed, that we believe in the holy Ghost.

3. Because even the Angels themselves called Seraphims, do adore the holy
Ghost Esa. 6*3:
, and the Apostles call upon him Act. 13.2.3. 2. Cor. 13.13. Reu. 1.4.
.

How do you prove by the punishment which is inflicted upon them that sin
against the holy Ghost, that he is God?
Because blasphemy against him is not remitted Mat. 12.31.
: for Christ says, Mark. 3.29. He that shall sin, or speak blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come.

Now prove, that the Spirit of God is a person subsisting in God, really
distinguished from the Father and the Son.
1. Out of the Creed: for whereas we say in the beginning, I believe in God,
and presently add, 1. the Father, 2. the Son, 3. the holy Ghost: as we
confess the holy Ghost to be God, so also do we acknowledge the same to be the
third person in the deity, not by degree, but by order.

2. In the baptism of Jesus Christ, the Fathers voice is heard from heaven:
Christ stands by, who was baptized of John Baptist, and the holy Ghost
descended in the form of a Dove, who sits upon Christ Mat. 3.16.17
. But even Christ himself Ioh. 14.16. distinguishes the holy Ghost from
himself and the Father, when he says: Another comforter shall he give unto
you; he says another in person, not another thing in essence, and 15.26. I
will send you the Spirit, even the comforter from the Father. And unto him is
attributed a voice Act. 13.2.
: and his good pleasure Act. 15.28.
, and free will 2. Cor. 10.11
, and a peculiar appearing in a bodily form Cap. 2.3.
: all which be the properties of a person truly subsisting. And Ioh. 5.7. There
be three which bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three are one.

What then is the holy Ghost?
He is the third Person of the Trinity, eternal, coessentiall to the Father,
and proceeding from them both jointly and inseperably; together with the Father
and the Son the Creator and Conseruator of all things, who is sent into the
hearts of the elect to sanctify them; together with the Father and the Son
equally to be worshipped. As for his sending forth, it is in operation not in
essence, the which being unmeasurable, in that it is true God, changes not
place, neither is in a place, but every where as God, Ga. 4.6

Prove that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father.
Ioh. 15.26. He that proceeds from the Father: and Mat. 10.20. It is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

Prove that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son?
Ioh. 14.26. and 15.26. he is said not only to be sent and to be given of the
Father, but also of the Son: and Ioh. 16.14. to receive all things from Christ.
He shall receive of me, and declare all things unto you, Romans 8.9. and Gal.
4.6. He is called the Spirit of the Son. Moreover Augustine says, that Christ
gave the holy Ghost, by breathing him into them, that he might show that he
proceeds even from him Joh. 20.22.
.

Ob. 1. Christ says, that he proceeds from the Father, therefore not from the
Son.

Ans. Christ does not say, that he proceeds only from the Father, therefore
this proves nothing.

Ob. 2. If the holy Ghost be one, he must have but one beginning, and so
proceed from the Father alone.

Ans. It follows not, seeing that breathing of the Father and the Son, by
which the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, is only one.

What then be the proprieties whereby the Persons are really distinguished
amongst themselves?
Not to be begotten, or the Paternitie or fatherhood is the incommunicable
propriety of the first Person of the Trinity, whereby it comes to pass that
the Father is of no other, but of himself, not made, not begotten, but from
all eternity begetting the Son.

Now ^o be begotten, or generation, or the sonneship is that whereby the Son
does receive, and has in himself all and his whole essence from the Father.

(...).
2. Proceeding, flowing, or coming from, being likewise taken passiuely,
whereby the holy Ghost from all eternity does receive that self same and whole
essence from the Father and the Son, and has it whole in himself. Therefore
the holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Father and the Son, not when he is
sent, or powered forth upon the house of Zach. 12.10
David, but in respect of his essence, which from all eternity he received,
communicated unto him of the Father and the Son.

Is there then a difference between generation and proceeding?
There is, but I (says August.) know it not, neither am I able, nor sufficient
to distinguish them: because that as generation, so proceeding is altogether
unspeakable. Yet this difference may be yielded, that (as the same Augustine
says) whatsoever is begotten does also proceed, but not of the contrary,
whatsoever does proceed, is also begotten.

These proprieties by what other names are they called?
They are called the works of the Trinity within, because they be effected
within the very essence, without all respect to creatures after an
incomprehensible manner. They are also called works divided, or distinct and
incommunicable. For to be a Father agrees only to the Father, to be a Son
only to the Son, Proceeding only to the holy Ghost.

What call you the works of the Divinity without?
Which in respect of the creatures are done of the whole Trinity: or which the
three persons jointly together effect in the works of creation and redemption.
And they are said to be undivided, because they be common to the three Persons:
whence comes this rule: The works of the Trinity without are undivided. Genesis
1.26. Let us make man after our own image. And Ioh. 5.17.19. What things the
Father does, the same things in like manner the Son does also; but yet so, as
there is kept the propriety of the Persons, the order of doing, and the
difference 1. Cor. 15.57. Romans 11.36. (...).
. So the work of incarnation being taken actiuely, is a work of the whole
Trinity, in regard of the * accomplishing of it, if you consider the effect,
although only the Son be incarnate.

What names are given to the holy Ghost in the Scriptures?
He is called the (...)
Comforter, that is, the Advocate Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.7.
not of Redemption, nor of Mediation, or of Reconciliation between God and men
(for Christ alone in this respect is Mediator) but of comfort, namely, teaching
us to pray, comforting the afflicted, teaching the truth, begetting those
unutterable gronings, of which Paul speaks Romans 8.25.26. He is called the
Spirit of truth Joh. 14.26.
, because he teaches the truth effectually. Also the spirit of adoption Gal.
4.6.
, because he seals up the adoption of the sons of God in our hearts. Also
the Spirit of sanctification or the holy Ghost Romans 8.15.
, not so much in regard of his essence, as for his effects Romans 1.4.
.

What be the effects of the holy Ghost?
1. In general, to quicken, to sustain, to rule, to govern: in special, to
give testimony unto Christ John 15.26.
.

2. To lead the elect into all truth, to regenerate John. 16.13.
the minds of the faithful. Tit. 3.4. He has saved us by the washing of the
new birth, and by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he works, whilst
that he illuminateth our minds with the true knowledge of Christ, creates in
us faith in Christ by the hearing of the Gospel, and by faith brings forth
in us newnes of life, and incorporateth us into Christ Ephesians. 3.5.16.
, and applies Christ, and the offices and treasures of Christ unto us. Also to
seal up unto us the promises of God. Ephesians. 1.13. He is called the Seal, the
earnest of our salvation, and the earnest of our inheritance, 2. Cor. 1.22.
because by his testimony he does establish, confirm, and seal up in our
hearts the assurance of our inheritance to come.

What ^e the Epithets which are ascribed to the same holy Ghost in the
Scriptures?
1. He is called the finger of God. Luke 11.20. If I by the finger of God cast
out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? because the Lord does
manifest his power by him Exo. 18.17.
.

2. Again, he is called water: John. 3.5. Unless a man be borne a new of
water and the spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of God. And 7.18. He
that believes in me as says the Scripture, rivers of water of eternal life
shall flow out of his belly. Now this he spoke of the spirit, because it
cools us, it quenches our spiritual thirst Ioh. 4.14:
, it waters us being empty of all the juice of life, and makes us
fruitful, it washes away all the filthiness of our hearts, and like water is
poured into the believers, as it is said, I will pour out of my Spirit. Joel
2.28. and Esa. 44.3.

3. He is called fire, as Math. 3.11. He that shall come after me, he shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. From the effect, because he
purges out all the dross, inflameth us to the fear of God, to love and
kindness both of God and our neighbor, and has other effects like unto fire.

4. He is called Seed, 1. John. 3.9. He which is borne of God has his seed in
himself: because by his power, as it were by seed, the faithful are renewed,
and are made new men, that being dead to sin, they may live to God.

5. He is called the anointing 1. Ioh. 2.27. Psalm. 45.8.
, and the Oil of gladness: the speech being borrowed from the custom of
anointing, which was used in time of the law, to signify the fragrant smell
and spiritual sweetness of the gifts of the spirit.

What does the holy Ghost dwell in the hearts of the believers only by his
gifts, or also by his Essence?
Yea even by his Essence, yet not extensiuely, or as it were a part of the
essence of things, as the Manichees and others dreamed: but intensiuely, so
far forth as he is every where present as he is God, and in the efficacy of
his presence. Romans 8.11. The Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead,
dwells in you. And ( Ioh. 14.23.) Christ says, We shall come unto him, and
make our abode with him. For we may not think that he bestows his gifts so
upon us, that he himself should be in another place, but he is present with
his gifts, both to the whole Church, and every particular elect, governing and
quickening them both within and without. 1. C^^int. 6.19. Your body is the
temple of the holy Ghost which is in you. And ^. Cor. 13.13. The communion of
the holy Ghost be with you all.

What doctrines are contrary to this?
1. The heresy of the Pneumatomachoi, who deny the holy Ghost, who do of set
purpose oppose themselves and impugn the holy Ghost: of which stamp was
Samosatenus, who called the holy Ghost the power of God, having no person, and
the simple action of God in the hearts of men.

2. Macedonius, who affirmed the holy Ghost to be not a Lord, but a servant and
a Minister: and that he was not the Creator, but a creature: and by the name of
Spirit, was only signified those new motions which God stirs up in the
regenerate, abusing that place Psalm. 51.12. Create a new heart in me O God, and
renew a right spirit in my bowels. Where the name of Spirit is used for the
created gifts of the Spirit.

3. Seruetus, who imagined that the holy Ghost was nothing else but the power
of God infused into every creature, whereby they move and live, which
Philosophers call Nature.

4. The error of the latter Grecians, who denied that the holy Ghost
proceeds from the Son.

5. The blasphemy of Campanus, and certain other Anabaptists, who cried out,
that the holy Ghost took his beginning as soon as Christ was glorified:
abusing that testimony, John 7.39. As yet the holy Ghost was not given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified. Where it is manifest, that the Evangelist
speaks not of the person, but of those admirable gifts which were powered out
upon the Apostles in the day of Pentecost: as also in that saying of the
Disciples of John, Act. 19.2. Yea, we have not so much as heard whether there
be any holy Ghost or not.

6. The error of those who denied him to be adored with one and the same faith
and invocation with the Father and the Son.

The fourth common Place, of the holy Scripture.
What is the holy Scripture called?
THe Scripture, putting one name for another, is used for the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, which the company of the faithful does religiously use
for the instruction in godliness. And it is called holy, because being
delivered of God, it contains holy things necessary unto eternal life. And
in the same sense it is called the written word of God, and the vnappealable
Judge of all controversies in religion Esa. 8.20. Luke 16.29.31
.

Who is the Author of it?
God himself, who did commit his will unto writing by men called immediately of
himself, and inspired by the holy Ghost, as As his penmen and public notaries.
his servants at hand, 2. Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy was not at any time
brought by the will of man, but the holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the holy Ghost. Hereupon all the Prophets do with one accord repeat this, The
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Esa. 58.14. These things says the Lord,
Ezec. 12.25.28. 2. Tim. 3.16. The whole scripture was given of God by
inspiration. 1. Cor. 2.13. Which things we speak, not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches. Whereupon depend the
adjuncts of the Scripture, as the authority, the excellency, the truth, and
fulfilling of them, which is as necessary, as it must needs be that God is
true. Whence also it comes to pass, that the Scripture alone is to be
believed: for it self of it self is worthy to be believed: neither is it
subject to the censure, addition, diminution, or alteration of Angels or men
Deuteronomy. 12.32 Reu. 22.18.
. It alone is without all error Mar. 16.24.
, and we are bound to believe it alone upon the bare affirmation thereof; by it
alone all opinions which all men shall read, Deu. 17.9.10 Esa. 8.20. Mal 2.7.
Act. 17.2.
are to be confirmed and to be decided Iosu. 1.8. Job. 5.39. Act. 17.11.
. This alone is perfect, and contains all things necessary unto life eternal
Psalm. 19.8. Luke 16.29. Ioh. 15.15. Act. 20.20.27. 2. Tim. 3.16 17
. Lastly, it is firm and constant 2. Pet. 1.19.
.

How manifold is it?
Twofold: for it is divided into the old and new Testament, or into the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which is contained in the Canonical
books.

Which books be called Canonical?
All those which being indicted by the holy Ghost, were either written or
allowed by the Prophets and Apostles, that these alone might be the rule and
direction of faith and good works; by which all other doctrines are to be
weighed and examined, so as all men may understand that it is the doctrine of
God, and true, according to the Apostles precept, to walk by the same rule or
canon, Phil. 3.16. that we should walk after the same rule.

How many books are there of the old Testament?
The ancient Hebrews, to whom (as the Apostle plainly writes) were
committed, Romans 3.2. the oracles of God, and also the Jews do receive at this
day 24. books of the old Testament as canonical and of undoubted authority,
which they call Esrim veorba of the number of 24. books.

How do they divide those 24. books?
1. Into four classes or ranks: the first they call Thorah, the law or
doctrine, and to this rank they assign the five books of Moses, Genesis,
Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers and Deuteronomie, which the Greeks call the
Pentateuch.

Which is the second rank?
It is called Nebijm Reschonim, that is of the former Prophets, and is
contained in four books, Iosuah, Judges, Samuel and the Kings.

Which is the third?
It is called Nebijm Acharonim, that is of the latter Prophets, and contains
four books, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and the book of the twelve small
Prophets.

Which is the fourth?
It is called Sepher Ketubim, that is the book of holy writers, and contains
eleven books, Chronicles, Psalms, Proverbs of Solomon, Job, Ruth,
Ecclesiastes of Solomon, Lamentations of Jeremy, Song of songs, Ester, Daniel,
Esdras and Nehemias, which two last are reckoned for one. All these books (if
they be reckoned together) make four and twenty. Now that some men reckon
only two and twenty, that comes to pass thus, because they reckon the book
of Ruth with the book of Job, and the Lamentations of Jeremy with his
Prophecy as one book.

Are there added to these canonical books any other books?
There are added certain writings, called Apocrypha, as if you would say
covered, secret or hidden, because in old time they were not produced publicly
in the Church to prove any articles of faith, but only to reform manners.

Have the books called Apocrypha equal authority with those called
Canonical?
In no case: because they were neither written by Prophets nor Apostles,
neither are we to believe them for themselves; neither does the efficacy,
force and majesty of Gods spirit shine in them as it does in the Canonical:
and in them there be some things which are clean contrary unto the Canonical
Scriptures. Neither were they ever given to the Jews (to whom notwithstanding
were committed the oracles of God) because they are not extant written in the
Hebrew tongue. And their authorititie was ever doubtful in the Church, and it
is doubted of the authors of them.

Into how many parts is the new Testament divided?
Into four parts: The first contains the four Gospels, namely, of Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John. The second, the Acts of the Apostles, written by Luke.
The third, the Epistles of the Apostles; fourteen of Paul, three of John, two
of Peter, of James one, and one of Jude, James his brother. The fourth, the
Revelation of John.

How do the writings of the Prophets differ from the Apostles?
Nothing in regard of the doctrine; for the same faith and doctrine of manners
is taught in them John 5.46.
, but in regard of the time. For the writings of the Prophets contain
prophesies of Christ to come; but the Apostles writings contain the history of
Christ now exhibited, and show the accomplishment of those prophesies in
narrations and applications. Whereupon the old Testament may be called the
foundation of the new: as the new, the accomplishment of the old: and as the
old Testament gives credit to the new, even so the new Testament gives credit
to the old. And Christ compares the Prophets doctrine to seed time, the
Apostles to harvest: and those things which are obscurely shadowed out in the
books of the Prophets, are more clearly and abundantly unfolded in the books
of the Apostles Mat. 13.16. 1. Cor. 10.11. 2. Cor. 3.13.18. Heb. 10.1.
.

After that the new Testament was added to the old was the word of God made
more perfect?
No: for when there were no mo but only the five books of Moses, they were
sufficient. To these the Prophets were added as interpreters. Therefore the old
Testament was perfect and sufficient in regard of the sense, although not in
regard of the words. And by the adding of the new, it was not made more
perfect, but more plain Genesis 3.15. Esa. 53. Luk 16 29. John. 5.39. 1. Cor.
15.3.4.
.

How may it appear that the writings of the Prophets and the Apostles were
indicted of God?
Partly by testimonies, partly by reasons. And by testimonies, partly inward,
partly outward. The internal witness is one alone: namely, of the holy Ghost
inwardly speaking to our heart, and persuading us that those writings are
inspired of God, and sealing them up in our hearts. Ephesians. 1.13. and 1. Ioh.
2.20.27. Ye have an ointment of the Lord, and this ointment teaches you of all
things: for whosoever are led by the spirit of God, can easily discern his
power speaking in the Scriptures: as it is said 1. Cor. 2.15. The spiritual
man discerns all things: and Esa. 53.1. The arm of the Lord is not revealed
to all men. So Luke 8.10. and Mat. 13.11. The mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven are not revealed to all men, but to those to whom it is given of God.
And this testimony properly makes for our confirmation, and this alone does
satisfy us, being known of them alone that are converted unto Christ Ioh.
14.17.
, which does evermore agree with the Scripture, without which the testimony of
the Church can be of no weight with us. For as none but God alone is a fit
witness to testify of himself in his word: even so the word never finds
credit in our hearts, till such time as it be sealed up unto us by the inward
testimony of the spirit.

The external testimony of the Scriptures that they proceed from God, is to
be taken from the Jews themselves, who with one consent testify, that those
books of the old Testament were inspired by God, and therefore do most
carefully read and preserve the same: whereupon (not without cause) Augustine
calls them the Libraries and Stationers of the Christians, who have affoorded
unto us the reading of the holy books, the use whereof they themselves
despise. Besides, those Jews do testify that Jesus Christ was famous for his
wisdom and unspeakable miracles, and that he was put to death of the people,
and rose again the third day. Josephus lib. 18. 4. of the Jews Antiqu.

What reasons have you to prove, that the Scripture came from God?
1. The Antiquity of them. For that which is most ancient is most true: that
is counterfeit which is later.

2. The event and accomplishment of the Prophecies, as of the Messiah and
Savior of mankind Gen 3.15.
: the foretelling unto Abraham that his seed should go into Egypt, their
slavery in Egypt, and their deliverance which should come to pass four
hundred years after Genesis 15.13.14.15. Act. 7.6.7.
. The promise made of the erecting of the Empire, and kingdom in the tribe of
Judah Genesis 49.8.
. The foretelling that the Gentiles should a long while after be called to the
gracious covenant of God Esa. 45.22.
: of the destruction of Jerusalem Esa. 22.1. Ezec. 15.6. 2. King. 24.14 Dan.
9.26. Mat. 24.2.
: of the return of the people out of the captivity of Babylon Ier. 12.15. and
25.11.12.
: of the acts of Cyrus for the good of the Jews, which are set down Esa.
45.1.2. The foretelling that Josias king of Judah should slay the Priests, and
should burn men's bones upon the altar of Bethel, which was foretold 333.
years before Josias was borne, and 359. years before it was performed 1.
King. 13.2. and 2. King. 23.15.
. Those famous Prophecies of Daniel concerning the four Monarchies, and the
succession of them, of Antichrist and his doctrine, of the end of the world
Dan. 7.17. and 12.2.
, and such like: of the coming and death of Christ Dan. 9.24.25.26.27.
. All which could never be forseene by the wit of man, nor be gathered by
natural causes, and yet they were all proved most true, by the certain event
of them.

3. That majesty of the Spirit to be adored which every where shines clearly
in the Scriptures, under that rude and plain simplicity and humility of
words 1. Cor. 2.4.
.

4. The power of the Scripture, that it has in the minds of men, 1. in the
conversion of a man, when as the Scripture sends forth a certain secret
force, whereby a man is affected, and inwardly moved, and so transformed into a
new man Heb. 4.12. Psalm. 119.111. Act. 13.12.
. 2. In time of affliction when it does enkindle in our hearts a lively and
firm consolation, that at length men should prefer the holy Scripture before
all they do enjoy, neither will they suffer themselves by any kind of
affliction, no not by death it self to be withdrawn from the same: as we have
plain example in the Martyrs, by whose blood it was sealed.

5. That deadly and irreconciliable hatred wherewith the devil and the world
do persecute the doctrine of the Scripture, whereas they can brook other
doctrines, though never so absurd and impious.

6. The invincible certainty thereof, that against so many stratagemes of the
devil, and so many outrages of the world, it abides firm, and by a
wonderful success gets the victory. To which purpose is that we read 1.
Machab. 1.59. That when Antiochus had given in charge that all the holy
Scriptures should be burned, yet continually after that, they peeped forth of
their dens, and not long after being translated into the Greek tongue, were
spread over the whole world.

7. That most sweet harmony, and wonderful consent between all the parts of
doctrine taught by Moses, the Prophets, Christ, the Evangelists, and the
Apostles.

8. The wonderful calling of Moses Exo 2.7.10 and 3.2. and Act. 7.20.
, of the Prophets Amos 7.14.
, of the Apostles, of whom the most were unlearned and simple men, which had
not been brought up in the schools of men, and learned that there which they
taught to others, who did so skilfully dispute of heavenly mysteries upon the
sudden Act. 2 11. and 4.13.
. The wonderful conversion of Paul (being before a professed cruel and
bloody enemy) to a new man Act. 9.3. etc
: and that all these had no regard of their own honor and profit, but only
the glory of God, and of Christ, and of the salvation of men.

9. The perpetual consent of the whole Church, and of all the godly the space
of so many ages over the face of the whole world far and near in embracing
and keeping the Scripture.

10. So many and so famous miracles, as well of the old Testament (which Satan
was never able to imitate, no not in any resemblance, as the raising up of the
dead 1. Kin. 17.22. and 2. King. 14.33 and 13.21.
, the dividing of the sea and of the rivers Exodus 14.21. Ios. 3.15.16.
, the staying and going back of the Sun Ios. 10.13. 2. King. 20.11.
,) as of the new Testament, which the Jews themselves cannot deny, as
Josephus bears witness li. 18. cap. 4. although the Jews at this day
affirm, that the miracles of Christ were done by I know not what superstition
of the word Schem hamphoras, least they should be constrained to confess the
truth, and to acknowledge Jesus the son of Marie to be the Christ.

11. The matter of the Scriptures, which contains doctrine every where
heavenly and favoring of no earthly thing. In it alone is propounded the pure
and perfect law of God Deu. 4.6 7.8 Psalm. 19.9.
: and that alone shows that means of salvation which does not resist the
glory, and most perfect justice of God, and satisfies the consciences of men.

12. The form: because there does appear manifestly the dispensation of the
wisdom of God ordered and disposed.

13. The most lamentable ruin of the persecutors and haters thereof.

What is the true infallible note, whereby all men of sound judgment do
acknowledge that doctrine to be the doctrine of the true God?
Because that doctrine which does teach us to seek the glory of one God, and
of him alone in whole and every where, and to cleave unto him, out of all doubt
that doctrine is the doctrine of the true God Prou. 16.14 1. Cor. 10.31. Jerem.
9.31. 1. Timot. 1.17. Ioh. 7.18. and 8.49.50. and 5.43 44. and 12.43. Gal.
1.10. Phil. 1.9.11.
. But only the regenerate do rest in it, as that that brings salvation and
the doctrine of God with full assurance of their heart.

But how shall we answer them, who ask how we know that Moses, the Prophets,
and the Apostles were the authors of those writings which are published under
their names: and whether there was ever any such Moses or no?
That such a question is not to be vouchsafed an answer, but rather to be
punished: for it is as much as if any man should ask whether there were ever
any Plato, Tullie, Aristotle, whose writings are daily conversant in the hands
of all men.

Seeing that before Moses his time we read not that there was any word of God
written, how did God all that time reveal his will unto men?
Either by oracles pronounced by the mouth and voice of God himself to his
servants Number. 12.8
, or else by Vrim and Thummim, that is, light and perfection, which God gave to
Moses to put it into the breast plate of the high priest Exodus 28.20.
: but what they were, and of what fashion no man knows. Or else by visions
and resemblances, which the Lord offered to the eyes or mind of them that were
waking Ier. 1.10.11.
: or else in dreams, sent of God to them that were asleep Number. 12.6.
: at the last God stirred up Moses, that he should be the first penman of holy
Scripture. Yea, and God himself writing the ten Commandments with his own
finger, did as it were consecrate the Scripture Exodus 31.28.
, and gave Moses in charge to write the books of the Law Exodus 24 4.
. Afterward he delivered his word by the Prophets Luke 1.70.
, by Christ God and man Heb. 1.1.
. Last of all by the Apostles of Christ, both by word and writing Mat. 28.19.
Act. 1.18. Romans 16.25. Reu. 1.11.
: but there was nothing delivered by word of mouth, but that which is now
extant in writing. For although there were more things spoken and done then are
written: yet nothing contrary: and these things which are written are
sufficient Joh. 20.31.
.

But wherefore was the word of God committed to writing?
1. By reason of the forgetfulness of man's mind.

2. Because men are so prone to fall into all kind of impiety whereby the
works of God are corrupted.

3. Because of man's boldness to coin new kinds of religions.

4. Because of the subtlety of Satan, who transformeth himself into an Angel
of light, and deceives the minds of men with counterfeit revelations.

In what tongue was either of the Testaments written?
The old Testament was written by Moses and the Prophets in the Hebrew tongue,
because that was the language of the people of God, to whom especially it did
belong. But the new Testament was written by the Evangelists and Apostles in
the Greek tongue, because that language by reason of the Greek Empire which
went before the Roman, was almost in use among all nations, and was more fit
for the spreading of the kingdom of Christ through the whole world. And
therefore the Hebrew text in the old Testament and not the Greek, and the
Greek text in the new is authentical, and not the Latin or any other.

Ought the Scripture to be propounded to all Christians in their own native
tongues?
Questionless: because Christ him self taught in their native tongue Luke
4.17.
, and the Apostles taught the Grecians and other nations not in the Hebrew but
the Greek tongue, and they taught every nation in their own native language
Act. 2.11.
.

Is the Scripture manifest, or is it obscure?
It is manifest, if you regard the foundation of the doctrine of salvation; as
the Articles of faith, the precepts of the Decalogue: hence it is called a
Lantern Psa. 119.105 and 2. Pet. 1.19.
to those whose mind God does open Luke 24.45.
: but it is obscure to those which be blind, and to all that perish, whose
minds the god of this world has blinded Cor. 4.3.4.
.

But it is not always obscure to the elect Ioh. 16.13.
, and only in part, 1. that they should not too much rely upon their own wit,
but should seek the understanding of it at the hands of God by prayer. 2. That
they might be stirred up to a more careful study of the same. 3. That they
might make more account of the ministry of the word whereby they are taught,
and therefore stand in need to have it expounded Prou. 29.18.
, by the example of Christ Luke 4.17.
, and of Philip Act. 8.31.35.


What is the Interpretation of holy Scripture?
It is the unfolding of the true and natural sense of the Scripture, and the
application of it unto the manifest use of the Church 1. Cor. 14.4. and 5.31.
, which Paul calls prophecy Romans 12.6.
, Peter (...), the resolution of it 2. Pet. 1.20
. For the word of God fondly understood, is not the word of God, says
Theodoret.

Whence must we fetch the interpretation of Scriptures?
Not out of every private man's brain and forestalled opinions 2. Pet. 1.20.
, but it is to be taught out of the Text it self, that is, by observing those
things that go before and follow after, and comparing that place with other
places of Scripture.

What must be the rule of interpreting?
Only one, namely, the Analogy of faith Romans 12.6.
, which is nothing else but the constant and perpetual sense of Scripture
expounded in the manifest places of Scripture, and agreeable to the Apostles
Creed, ten Commandments, the Lords prayer, and general sentences and
axioms of every maine point of Divinity.

What is the use of holy Scripture?
2. Tim. 3.16. The whole Scripture is given of God by inspiration, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reprehension, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, and for exhortation Romans 15.4.
, o^ consolation 1. Cor. 14.3.
: that is, for doctrine or confirmation of true opinions, for reprehension of
errors, for correction of manners, instruction of life in righteousness, for
comfort in affliction, that the man of God may be perfect, and furnished for
every good work.

What shall we answer to that saying of Augustine: I would not believe the
Gospel, unless the authority of the Church moved me?
That Augustine speaks of himself, as yet not converted unto the faith.
Neither is it any marvel that those which are not as yet converted, are moved
with the consent of the Church, and the authority of men. Therefore his
meaning is, that the Church is as it were an (...).
introduction, whereby we are prepared to give credit to the Scripture.

What things are contrary to the Scripture?
1. The error of the Sadduces, which only received the five books of Moses,
which caused Christ to confute their denial of the resurrection, out of Moses,
Mat. 22.31.

2. Of certain Anabaptists who rejected the book of Job as a fained tragical
Comedy; yea the Song of songs, and Ecclesiastes, as if the one taught
Epicurisme, the other were a wanto^ love Ballad. Yet for Job we have his
country and condition set down in the beginning and end of his book, which
argues no fiction: and besides, he is mentioned by Ezechiel, cap. 14.14. and
Iam. cap. 5.11. and Paul. 1. Cor. 3.19. And for Ecclesiastes, it rather
deterreth from pleasure, in that it argues all pleasures of vanity, and
judges them fools who rest upon them: as on the contrary, it makes
felicity to consist in the fear of God, and keeping his commandments, cap.
1.2. and 7.3.8.12.11.9. and the whole twelfth Chapter. As for that of the
souls immortality cap. 3.19. it is meant, not that Solomon so thought, but
that corrupt reason so judges. As for the Song of songs, if it were meant of
Pharaohs daughter, or some Sunamite damsel, the comparisons, cited cap.
4.1.7.2. were monstrous. And albeit the name of God is not mentioned in that
book, yet find we equivalent, and more fit names for that purpose: as Brother,
Friend, Spouse, Beloved, that it might appear that the mystical Spouse of
Solomon was here described, I mean the Church of Christ.

3. The heresy of Manicheus, Valentinus, Marcion and others, denying the holy
Scriptures to be indicted by the holy Ghost, and of others rejecting certain
writings of holy Scripture.

4 The error of the Papists which is manifold: for they hold that the
authority and certainty of Scripture depends upon the determination of the
Church; that the Scripture is not authentical but by the authority of the
Church; and that it is not manifest that the Scriptures proceed from God, but
by the testimony of the Church: which error is most absurd. For if truth be
subject to the pleasure and judgment of men, the consciences are made doubtful
of their salvation; and the same error is confuted by the testimony of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2.20. where the Apostle affirms, that the Church leans upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: which foundation he calls not the
very persons of the Apostles, but their doctrine. For although the Church
should by her judgment approve the scripture, yet does she not make of that,
which is uncertain and doubtful, certain and authentical, but does by her
judgment subscribe to the truth of God, and does embrace it as proceeding from
God.

Moreover, they account the Apocrypha books for Canonical: They prattle that
the Scripture is imperfect and obscure, that the reading of the Scriptures is
hurtful to the Church, that it is the matter of contention, that matters of
controversy cannot be decided by Scripture alone, that it has a nose of wax.
They affirm that power to interpret and give the sense of Scriptures, belongs
to the Bishop of Rome. They match the writings of Fathers, Bishops and Counsels
with the Scripture. They take away from the common people the writings of their
fathers last will and testament, and post them over to dumb idols, as to
laymens books, clean contrary to the commandment of Christ, Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures. Lastly, they account the old Latin translation as
authentical.

The fifth common Place, of Creation.
What is the signification of this word, to Create, in the Scriptures?
IT is peculiar, because the reason of man knows not how any thing should be
created of nothing. For David Kimchi affirms, (...)
that this word to create, most properly is affirmed for every thing which is
brought from no being to a being, as Genesis 1.1. But secundarily, and yet
properly it signifies to bring a form created of nothing to a matter
preexisting without alteration Genesis 1.21.27
. Whereupon Damascene says ( lib. 2. cap. 5.) that God made all things of
nothing: some things indeed immedidiatly, but other some by means, which is a
part of divine omnipotence. Therefore the word to create, is attributed to God
alone in the Scriptures, either in the works of creation, or else by a
borrowed speech in things that be of no less virtue and power then the very
work of creation Esa. 41.20. Ier. 31.22. Psalm. 51.12.
. For this cause these words differ, to beget, to create, to make, For to
beget, is to bring forth something of his own substance like unto it self,
according to the essence: but to create, is to make something of nothing,
diverse from the substance of the Creator. And this word to make, is applied to
those things which be made of some matter; but yet it is restrained by the
circumstance of the text to the property of creation Genesis 1.25.31 Romans 1.20.
.

What is Creation?
It is an external and indivisible work of Jehovah Elohim alone, that is, of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, whereby by his word, power and commandment
alone, he has created all things out of himself, that is* the substance of
all things being severed from his own Essence, to the end that his infinite
wisdom, goodness and power might be made manifest Act. 17.24. Romans 1.20.
.

Prove it by some testimonies.
1 The very history of the creation as it is set down by Moses, Genesis 1. is a
most ample witness of it. 2. Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord were the
heavens created, and by the spirit of his mouth all the power and host of
them. And in the same Psalm verse. 9. He spoke and they were made, he
commanded, and they were all created. Again, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament sounds forth or celebrateth the work of
his hands. Mal. 2.10. Has not one God created us? Job. 9.8. Who alone does
stretch out the heavens. 1. Cor. 8.6. We have but one God the Father, of whom
are all things.

Why is the creation ascribed in the Creed to the Father alone?
Not that the Son and the holy Ghost should be excluded from the effect and
praise of that work, who in that same work manifestly, not as instruments,
but as efficients equally and inseparably wrought together Job 1:3. Col. 1.16.
Genesis 1.1.2.
: but by way of excellency, that the decree of this work and first beginning
of it might be given to the Father: because the Father is the fountain and
beginning, not temporal, but original of the whole Deity, by whom all things
were made.

Further, that there might appear in the Church some external difference,
whereby the Father might be distinguished from the Son and the holy Ghost:
for as Basil says in his book entreating of the holy Ghost, cap. 16. The
Father is the first principal cause of those things that be made, the Son
the isntrumental cause, the holy Ghost the perfecting cause.

What was the moving or impellent cause of the creation of all things?
The infinite goodness of God, joined with infinite wisdom, which it pleased
him to communicate; and by communicating to reveal it, because a good thing is
apt to communicate it self.

And when did God begin to create?
In the very beginning of all things, and in the vety beginning of time, that
is, then when the things which now be, began to be. For though all things in
the world were made in the Son Col. 1.16.
, yet in this place this word beginning signifies not the Son, but some
certain beginning of time, as also Ioh. 1.1.

But whereof and whence were all things made and produced?
Of Nothing: this word being understood negatiuely, that is, of no other matter
that was before. For this word Of, in this place signifies not the material
cause whereof any thing is made, but the order. As if a man should say: When as
there was nothing before, after that there was any thing, it was made: or else
it signifies the habitude or disposition of the material cause, which is
simply denied.

How prove you that?
1. Because there was nothing from eternity, excepting and besides God
himself: and whatsoever there is, it is either the Creator, or else the
creature: but things were not created out of the substance of God: for then
they should be God, or gods, which is very absurd: therefore they were made of
nothing.

2. God is almighty: and therefore does not stand in need of some matter going
before. For this cause, Psalm. 33.9. and 158.5. He spoke and they were made, he
commanded and they were created: that is, God but spoke the word, or
commanded, and the things which were not before, now have their being. And
that God created all things, the Apostle shows Heb. 11.3. of things which did
not appear: that is, of no matter that appeared before. Also this particle of
nothing is thus described, 1. Machab. 7.28. Behold the heaven and the earth,
and understand that God made them of nothing: where the Greek Interpreter
reads it thus, that he made them of things which had no being. And so Paul
speaks Romans 4.17. He calls those things which are not, as though they were:
and Prou. 8.24. When the deepes were nothing, I was begotten, says Wisdom.

3. When as it was Moses his purpose to describe the first original of all
things: And the beginning of things, is the bringing of them from no being, to
a being, it follows, that all things were created of nothing, or of those
things which were not.

What; can the creation of the world be proved certainly by humane reasons?
The eternity of the world may clearly be confuted, because that if the world
should want both beginning and ending, the world should be even God himself,
then there should be many things infinite in act, all the parts of the world
should be eternal and immutable. For as Damascene says: Whatsoever is
created, is mutable, and that only which is uncreated is immutable. A man may
also know even by the testimony of nature it self, that the world had a
beginning. But yet by faith alone we do certainly know, that the world was
made of nothing, Heb. 11.3. or that it was so made in six days as it was, as
also by the same we know, that one day it shall have an end. Therefore Moses
does not use philosophical demonstrations, but simply reports the matter, as
he had received it by the faithful tradition of the Fathers, but especially by
the instinction of the holy Ghost.

Now what was created?
1. The heaven and the earth: in which two, as in a general proposition Moses
does comprehend all things both visible and invisible Col. 1.16.
: because Genesis 1.1.
these two be the first and most principal parts of the whole world. For first
under the name of heaven, he understands all that space which is between the
earth, and the circle of the Moon, which natural Philosophers call the region
of the elements. As Genesis 7.17. The windows of heaven were opened, that is, of
the air: and hereupon we read, the fowls of heaven Genesis 1.30. and 6.7,
.

2. All those celestial spheres, together with their stars both fixed and
wandering, which make that firmament which the Philosophers call the sky or
celestial region, being the distance from the Moon to the sky, or the new
sphere invented by Astrologers.

3. The place of the Blessed, or Paradise, or that heaven into which Christ
ascended, and by a Metonymie also the Angels themselves. All these three
heavens the Apostle comprehends, 2. Cor. 12.2. when he says, that he was
taken up into the third heaven: that is, into the place of the Blessed, which
place is above all those heavens which we see. In which God is said to have
prepared his throne for himself; and in way of excellency to have his
dwelling: and which is called the seat of God, Psalm. 103.9. And is called of
Deuines (...) quasi (...).
Olympus, as it were altogether shining, and Empyreu^.
fiery, in regard of the quality, because it is altogether light and shining.
Which heaven it self God did also create of nothing, as the Apostle teaches,
Heb. 11.10. of which city the maker and framer is God. Now under the name of
the earth, he understands the Earth, the waters, and all those things which
are contained in them. Whereupon Aristotle thus defines the world by the parts
of it, lib. de mundo. The world is a frame consisting of heaven and of earth,
and of the natures which are comprehended in them. And then by causes: The
world is called this order of the whole, and the frame preserved of God and by
God.

How was the creation of the world brought to pass?
1. By bringing forth of the matter: or of the seminary of the whole world
made of nothing the first day, which is properly called Creation.

2. By giving a form unto the same, and all this was done by the very
commandment of God in a moment of time. For he did but say Genesis 1.3.6.9.
Be there, or Let there be this or that, and as soon as he had spoken, this or
that was made.

What kind of matter was that which God brought forth of nothing in the
beginning?
1. It was in regard of substance, partly earthie, partly watrie, and partly
slimie, which is expressed by the name of Earth, and Slime, and Waters.

2. In regard of the quantity, it was exceeding great, and as it were a Chaos
without a bottom. For it was a rude, unformed, and indigested heap, in
respect of the forms after following: or as Moses calls it, Tohu, and Bohu,
that is, empty and void, raw, and impolished, which the seventy Greek
Interpreters of the old Testament call (...), and (...), and the Philosophers
called Chaos.

3. In regard of the quality, it was dark and obscure, that is, void of all
light, virtue and efficacy: over which houered not any wind or air, which as
yet were not made, but the spirit of the Lord (of the which the Angel speaks
to Marie, Luke 1.35.) even like unto an hen when she sits upon her eggs,
and sustained all that whole mass, and cherished it, and prepared it to
receive all forms, out of which the visible heavens, and all the elements were
produced and framed by the power of the word of God. (But those things which
are not seen, were made immediately of nothing,) out of which also the light
was brought the first day: as the Apostle speaks: God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, 2. Cor. 4.6.

But what was the information or framing of the world?
That whereby God fitted a fit and convenient form for that matter which was
made of nothing: by means of which, the world did truly and indeed begin to be,
and to be called the world.

By what means did God give that matter a form?
By distinguishing and adorning of it. By distinguishing, when as God separated
the light from the darkness, whereupon came the making and course of the day
(by the presence of that light) and of the night, (by the absence of that
light.) And the first natural day was the space of four and twenty hours,
or a night and a day consisting of a day artificial and a night, and took his
beginning from the evening, or the night going before. Whereas the artificial
day begins at Sun rising unto Sun setting. Now that light seems to
have been in some body, like unto a little cloud made of the waters, which by
his circular motion made the day and the night: whereupon the Sun came
forth, and was framed with a most perfect light.

2. When as he stretched forth like a curtain Ps. 104.2.3.
that part of the waters wherewith the earth was ouerflowed, being rarefied and
made thin, by which means that spreading abroad is called Rachiang, which
word the Greeks interpret, but not so fitly, (...).
Firmament, especially to signify the stabilitie and soliditie of the heavenly
Circles, not for the hardness, but only in respect of the firmness thereof.
For Moses by that word which he uses, means not only the Firmament and the
celestial Circles, but also the region of the fire, and of the air, which
were made in the second day Genesis 1.6.7.8
. But where it is said, that the firmament or spreading abroad does separate
the waters above, from them beneath, it is to be understood of the air: which
divided the waters above, that is, the clouds which are the cause of raines,
snowes, dew, hail, and such other Meteors, from Psalm. 104.3.
the waters of the rivers and fountains which are beneath.

3 When as the greatest part of the waters, wherewith the earth was before
ouerflowed and covered as it were with a garment Psa. 124.6.7
, was gathered into the channels of the earth, whereby the earth appeared above
the waters; and the waters being gathered into one place were called the Sea
Psalm 33.7. Ier. 5.22. Job 28.9. and 10.11.
. And although there be but one sea, which for the swiftness of it is called
the Ocean, which does continually ebb and flow, and that either naturally from
the North (where it is deeper by reason of the cold, whereby the waters are not
so much dried up, but rather increased, because much air is turned into water)
unto the South, where because of the great heat, the waters are diminished, or
else by some external cause, to wit, by the changeable light, and effectual
motion of the Moon, which by the great providence of God does rule waters, and
all moist things else by her ascending and descending in the day time, does
speedily eb and flow, that so the waters in the sea might be kept pure, and
might not putrify: yet in regard of diverse places whereby it passes, it is
called by diverse names, and from this there flow other seas along in the midst
of the earth, which also are called the Mediterranean seas, and creekes:
besides, certain lakes and gulfes are called Seas in the Scriptures Mat. 4.18.
Ioh. 6.1.
, of which Eccles. 1.7. All rivers (either mediatly or immediately) flow from
the sea, and run again into the sea: namely, by certain secret passages of
the earth, which also men call veins, whereby it comes to pass, that by
daily addition of so many rivers, the seas never increase nor pass their
bounds. And though the waters, by reason of the diverse qualities of the veins
of the earth thorough which they run are affected, and some are of the nature
of brimstone, other sweet, some salt Exodus 35.23
, some be hot and some cold, some wholesome, some noisome, some colored,
some without color, for the great and manifold use of men; yet the waters in
the sea are salt, and for that cause they are called Mare, Mare ab amaritudine.
the sea, because either by creation they be so, or by the force of the Sun,
always working upon it, the more thin and sweeter part of them is taken up
out of them: but in fountains and rivers they be sweet, because as they pass
through the pores of the earth they are purged of the saltness, neither do
they lie open to the continual beams of the Sun. Now that part of the earth
which is above the waters, although it be beneath the sea, is called dry land,
because it is dried from the waters wherewith before it was ouerspread and
covered, to the end that it may be seen, planted, trodden upon, and inhabited:
for which cause the Greeks call it by a word that signifies Habitable; (...).
the Latins by a word which signifies that it is worn of men's feet and
other living creatures. Terra a tere^do.
And that is also called Habitable or Continent, which contains the Islands of
the sea, which distinction was made the third day Genesis 1 9 10. Psalm.
105.7.8.9.10.
.

Into how many parts is the earth divided?
Into two: for the Ocean sea (as it were a most large girdle or band) deuideth
it from the North to the South into the upper part, in which we live: and the
nether part, wherein live the Antipodes (or those which go with their feet
against ours) and which does answer directly to ours: so as when the Sun sets
with us, it rises with them, and so on the contrary. For if in our time there
be some found who have traveled thither, then some also might do so before
them at other times, and to propagate mankind there. Yea this must needs be so,
seeing there are found there so many millions of men, although Moses makes no
mention of them.

What is the use, and what is the nature of the earth?
It is the common mother of all things Eccles. 40.1. (...), gigno.
: and therefore she is called by a name that signifies to bring forth, because
she is most fruitful. For she begets within, as in a womb, metals,
stones, gummes, living creatures that live under the earth, and winds; she
brings forth all kind of fruits, she (...).
nourishes and cherishes al, and preserves all: whatsoever good thing she
has, she imparteth it unto us, she is content to suffer all wrongs, neither
does she cease to do good and to profit all men. Whatsoever seed is cast into
her, she does restore the same faithfully and liberally again unto us, to some
an hundred fold, to some sixty fold, and to some thirty fold Mat. 17.8. Genesis
26.12.
: therefore she is well called the (...).
tribute payer. Besides, she does entertain our dead bodies into her bosom,
that one day she may render them again alive, and incorruptible: yet she does
all this not of her self, or by her self, but by the commaundemet of God, and
by his power. Thus much of the distinction.

What was the adorning of the world?
It is that whereby the earth is adorned with the bringing forth of herbs and
plants: the firmament is adorned by the creation of the two greater lights, the
Sun and the Moon, and the fixed stars Genesis 15.5.
, as also of five wandering stars, being made of the matter of their orbs,
which are as it were goodly shining pearls in their rings: the sea with the
framing of creatures living in the waters, the air with fowls, the earth with
beasts, and men inhabiting of it.

What are the plants?
They are sprouts brought out of the earth, being tilled by no man (but having
received from God power to grow to the end of the world) and without any seed
received into her, neither helped of the Sun nor rain, but only by virtue of
the word of God, both in the beginning with flowers, fruits and seeds, as now
it comes to pass in time of Autumn, which now by using the second causes
(plowing, sowing, the Sun, Moon, rain, all which notwithstanding be in the
hand of God Mat. 6.30. 1. Cor. 3.7.
) are brought forth successively according to their kind, which are and live
only both for meat as also for medicine, and delight, and the manifold use of
the living creatures Genesis 1.29. and 2.9.
. And three are both herbs and trees, created the third day, wherein also
these waters below which covered the earth were gathered together into one
certain place Genesis 1.11.12 13.
.

To what end were the Sun, Moon, and the Stars in heaven created?
1. To this purpose, that they might be receptacles, and as it were vessels or
wagons to carry abroad that light which was created in the first day, to put a
difference between light and darkness, day and night.

2. For signs, days and times, that is, that they might signify unto us many
things to come, raines, winds, heat, cold, drought, and sundry seasons Job
38.31.32 Amos 5.8.
: and that they might be significations of the anger or mercy of God Ios.
10.13. 2. King. 20.11. Luke 21.25.
; and that by their motion they might both make and distinguish artificial
days, months, years, seasons, and courses of times, as the Spring, Summer,
Autumn and Winter, for the great good of living creatures, and the service of
men Deuteronomy. 4 9. Psalm. 104.20.22.23. Mat. 5.45.
.

3. That by a certain virtue given unto them of God, they might affect the
bodies of the elements, by making them warm, moist, dry, cold: namely, by the
approaching of the Sun unto certain stars, by which means are caused
rain, droughts, heat, cold, and humors are increased for the co^ferring of
life, for generation, and for the perfecting of all things which pertain unto
this present life Job. 38.33.
. Whereupon it is said in Hos. 2.21. The heaven shall hear the earth, and the
earth shall hear the corn. And this adorning of the heaven was made the
fourth day Genesis 1.14.15 16.17.18.19.
.

Whether can things to come be foreknowne and foretold by the stars?
Indeed such things may which come to pass by the motion of the stars, by
their situation, and position, by the necessary course of nature, or naturally
and ordinarily: as the eclipses of the Moon or the Sun, fair weather or
tempests, droughts, rain, winds, snow, heat, cold, and such like. And
probably those things which for the most part are wont to follow the motion of
the stars; as kinds of diseases, barrennesie of the earth, dearth of
victuals, and such like: but only in general and not in particular Mat. 16.2.
: neither yet as of their own proper causes, but only as of signs. Also
physical passions, which follow the diverse temperatures of the humors of the
body, because every one follows the disposition of his nature. But not any
of those things which depend upon the free will of man; nor such as proceed
from the mere goodwill and pleasure of God; as those which belong either to
salvation or damnation: as also those things which we use to place in the
number of things contingent, as good success or bad success, which the Lord
distributeth as it pleases him. The reason is, because neither are all the
stars known of us, neither are the influences of those which we know
understood of us, neither can we perfectly observe the moments of times wherein
any man is conceived or borne: and we see that the nature and disposition of
twins is most contrary. And lastly, because God does moderate the stars,
and those things which he portendeth by them, even at his own will and
pleasure Prou. 27.1.
: and James. 4.14 We know not what shall be to morrow. But if any do foretell,
and it so falls out, it either comes to pass contingently, or else by the
revelation of the devil. Therefore that judicial part of Astrology as they
call it, or prognosticating, which searches out what shall befall a man this
or that year, or day, what shall come to pass to a man well or ill, is vain
and ungodly, and by no means to be tolerated in the Church of God Deuteronomy.
18.19. Ier. 10.2. Act 1.17. Ioh. 21.22.
. The first Council at Toledo, Canon 21. If any man think we are bound to
believe his Astrology, or Mathematics, let him be accursed.

Is it a sound opinion, to think that the stars have souls, or that they be
living creatures?
Yea rather it is impious, because it tends to the upholding of their error,
which worshipped the stars, and offered sacrifice unto them 2. Kin. 23.5.
Ier. 7.17 and 44 19.
; and because none of the faculties or operations of the soul, as vegetative,
sensitive, intellectiue, can agree to a celestial body.

Why did God place the creation of the stars between the creation of plants,
and beasts?
To the end he might show, that though ordinarily there does concur the
Sun, with his motion and light, as also other stars, to the generation of
plants and beasts, yet the generation of things does not simply proceed from
the Sun and the stars, but from God: since that even before the stars were
created, he commanded all plants with their fruits to be brought out of the
earth. And before the creation of beasts, he would in great wisdom first
create the Sun and the stars, which might give light to the earth, because
that beasts above all things stand in need of light.

What are living Creatures?
Things created of God, which have their being, live, and have sense, or else
they be substances endued with an isntrumental body which have (besides the
soul whereby they live) sense and power to move themselves from place to place.

Whence were living creatures brought forth?
Some out of the waters as fishes, which are also called creeping creatures,
because they have no feet, which also have no lungs, and therefore breath
only by their gils: and birds which are feathered, winged, twofooted,
(although they seem to be created of the earth) Deuteronomy. 2.10.
and have respiration and a voice, which were made the fifth day Genesis 1.20.22.23.
. Some of the earth which live upon the earth, whereof Moses makes three kinds
of beasts, which be helpful unto man some way, as are cattle which live by
grass, not by flesh, horses, oxen, sheep: and which may be tamed, and live
about the house, as Elephants, Camels, Hearts. Creeping things which have no
feet, or very short ones, wherewith they be a little carried above the earth.
And beasts which be wild, and live by flesh, as Lions, Bears, etc. To all which
he gave power to beget their like in kind, by the conjunction of the male and
female of the same kind, which were created the sixth day Genesis 1.24.24.
. And the same day was man created distinctly from them all, of whom we will
speak in a special place.

How manifold is the procreation of living creatures?
Twofold: Extraordinary, and divine with perfect body and soul, without male
or female, without eggs or seed: whereof God speaks: Let the waters bring
forth, Let the earth bring forth. The other is natural and ordinary which
has God for the principal cause: for Christ says of himself and his Father
my Father works hitherto, and I work, Ioh. 5.17. and the second cause, not
so much the water or the earth, as the living creatures going before, by their
seeds through the conjunction of the male and female, for the knitting together
of greater love between the living creatures, either by the eggs, as those
which lay eggs, or else by the fruit, as those which bring forth young that
be alive, by the blessing of God, whereof Moses speaks, verse. 22. And he
blessed them, saying, Increase and multiply.

What is the end and use of fishes and birds?
For meat, medicine, and delight: and many other uses which no man can utter:
as also for the example of virtues which we should follow, and of vices which
we should shun, being set before our eyes in their natures. As namely, of
humnnitie and (...).
love to man in the Dolphine: of flattery in the fish Polypus: of the
resurrection in the Phoenix: of piety and (...).
remuneration in the Storkes: of simplicity and matrimonial fidelity in the
Turtles: of (...).
unnatural affection in the Ravens, and of crying unto God. And therefore it
is well said: Ask the beast and he shall tell thee; and the bird of the air,
and she will declare unto thee Ier. 8 7. Mat. 10.16. Job 39.3. Psalm. 147.9.
Luke 12.24.
, Job 12.7.8.

And what is the use of those living creatures, which live upon the earth?
They are profitable to cloth, nourish, and to carry men, and for sundry
other uses; yea to till the ground: moreover also they may serve for to direct
the life of men in manners. Psalm. 32.9. Be ye not like the horse and mule in
whom there is no understanding. Prou. 6.6. Go unto the Pismire o sluggard, Mat.
10.16. Be ye wise as serpents, Ioh. 10.3.4. The sheep hear the voice of the
shepherd and follow it. For which respect it is very behoouefull to know the
natures of beasts.

For what cause were those beasts that live upon the earth created the sixth day?
Because they differ in kind from the former, and were to dwell with man, and
were more like to man as well in body as in wit, then either fishes, or birds:
and because many of them should be an help for man: and that there might be an
order kept, beginning with those which are more imperfect, and after with them
which be more perfect.

Seeing that it is written, God saw all that he had made, and they were
exceeding good, how comes it to pass that there be hurtful things, as
Scorpions, venomous Serpents, death, sickness, and such like?
1. We must put a difference between the evil of the fault, and the evil of
the punishment: for the devil is the author of the former, but God of the
latter Esa. 45.7.
.

2. Some things after the fall (and therefore by accident, by reason of man's
sin) began to be hurtful, Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the earth in thy labor,
thorns and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee. And Romans 8.20. Every
creature is now subject unto vanity. But as for death and sicknesses, although
they were not created of God at the beginning; yet they are ordained of God, as
of a righteous Judge, as things that must go before death Wis. 1.13. and 2.24.
1. Cor. 15.21. To. 5..12. Iam. 1.15.
.

3. All things are good and profitable for the whole, and the conservation of
the world, and the adorning thereof: and that which is hurtful for one, it is
Genesis 2.17. Amos 3.6. Eccles. 11.14.
profitable for another; and one poison is cured by another.

What is the difference between the producing of the soul of brute beasts,
and of man?
Because that although both be and are termed spirits, yet the souls of
beasts are brought forth by God, partly of the waters, and partly of the
earth: but now in the ordinary procreation, of the substance of their Sires,
as Moses teaches when he says, that God created every living soul, (speaking
of the whole living creature) which the waters brought forth, and therefore
are mortal. But touching the souls of men, he shows that they were breathed
into us by God immediately: and therefore are incorruptible and immortal: and
for that cause they return to God again who gave them. Eccles. 12.7. and are
called a breath, not of life as beasts have, but of Nephesh Hachaijm
lives in the plural number, Genesis 2.7.

Have brute beasts the faculty of understanding and reason?
We do easily grant, that they have indeed sense, not so much the external, as
sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching: as also the inward, namely,
fantasy, imagination, memory, a certain natural wittiness, and prudence
in some more, in some less. Moreover some birds do well perceive of whom they
are brought up and nourished, yea they can learn certain words of men, and
can tell how to imitate them, as the Parrat and the Thrush. And Bees do declare
a singular skill in making of honey. But we deny that they have the true
faculty of understanding and reason. For David says, Psalm. 32.9. that there
is no understanding in the horse and the mule, both which are seen to go far
in imitation.

Genesis 2.23.
Why is God said to rest the seventh day from all his works?
To wit, of Creation, because in the seventh day he ceased to create new
creatures: For he made not any thing afterward, which in some manner did not go
before in his former works: for after his works finished he rested in
himself, because he satisfies himself, and fulfilleth his own desire.
Again, he works still by conseruing, sustaining, and upholding the things
made without any labor, by his mere providence alone Ioh. 5.17.
.

But whence come those things which have their beginning of putrefaction, or
which be altogether unprofitable, or are only hurtful, as Flies, Waspes, and
such like?
They proceed of putrefaction by virtue of the Sun, or heat, but yet after
the fall of man, as testimonies of Gods anger: but yet ever by virtue of that
word of God, which still continues, (Let the waters bring forth, Let the
earth bring forth.) Neither are they thought to belong unto the works of
Creation within the compass of the six days, whereof we speak here.

What things are we principally to observe in general in the creation of all
things?
Five things: the great variety of things, the power and faculty which God
gave to every thing, the order, the perpetual continuance of the kinds,
lastly, the end of the creation of things.

Lay open these distinctly.
The variety of things so excellently distinguished in their kinds, does
commend unto us the power and wisdom of the workman.

The natural power and property of the creatures put into them, does set forth
the goodness of God, who has appointed every thing for so necessary and
profitable uses.

The twofold order, that is, of creation, (because that before God did create
Adam, he furnished the world with plenty of all good things) does commend his
fatherly providence and care toward us: who before we were borne took care to
provide all things needful for us.

The disposing of them, whereby it comes to pass, that the inferior creatures
serve for the superior, may admonish man, that he should serve God.

The perpetuity, which is perceived in the preservation of every kind, whereas
he maintains some by secret means, to others he gives power to propagate,
does prove unto us his wisdom and power. For which cause this world is
called, the clear looking glass, and most beautiful Theater of the virtues
of God.

And what is the end of the creation of all things?
It is twofold: The nearest end is man himself: for God created this world, to
the end that man might both dwell in it, and be a fit Lord of it Genesis 2.15.19
20. Psalm. 8.27
. But the chief end is the glory of God, as Solomon teaches, Prou. 16.4.
Jehovah made all things for himself: to wit, that his goodness, wisdom,
power and eternity might clearly be seen Romans 1.20.
. His goodness, in that it pleased him to communicate some part of his
happiness to them which had no being Reu. 4.11.
. His manifold wisdom, in that he made so many kinds of things in so
excellent an order, and for so good an use Ephesians. 3.10.
. His power, in that he made all things of nothing, and does perpetually
preserve them. His eternity, because he was before all things, because he
brought them forth to this end, that they might acknowledge, praise and
glorify him: and that men might thereby take occasion to place their confidence
in God, to call upon him, to love him, to praise and for ever to celebrate him.

But why did not God create the world sooner?
Because he would not: for God is a most free and voluntary Agent.

But what did he before he made the world?
It is a curious question; and therefore Augustine in the 11. book of his
Confess. cap. 12. writes, that a certain old man made a witty answer to one
that moved such a question, namely, that he was making of hell for such curious
fellows. We answer that God was sufficient, and blessed in himself, and stood
in need of nothing, and that he did delight himself, in that his eternity
together with his wisdom, that is, the Son and the Spirit being
consubstantiall with himself, For the Word was with God, Ioh. 1.1. And Christ
says of the holy Ghost, All things which he hears he shall speak unto you.
Ioh. 16.3.

What things make against the doctrine of Creation?
The heresy of Basilides, who affirmed that God made the world by the help of
Angels.

2 Of Manichaeus, who set down two beginnings, and ascribed the beginning of
good things to God, and of evil things to the devil.

Is this opinion to be admitted?
God forbid, seeing it is blasphemy against God, for it attributes divinity
to the devils. Besides, it is contrary to the express testimony of Moses,
Genesis 1.31:
who says, All things which God made at the beginning were good. Therefore
evil came in by accident and by the corruption of nature, or else was brought
in by the malice and envy of the devil.

Which are the errors of the Philosophers?
1 Aristoteles error, who affirmed that the world was without beginning,
eternal. That the kinds of all living creatures were eternal, laying this
foundation, Nothing is made of nothing. Which principal is true in that order
of things which is now appointed: but in Divinity, concerning things not yet
made, it is false: or else if you will, it is true in natural and physical
generation, but not in divine creation: for of this it is said, Do not enquire
for the matter, because there was none.

2 The error of Democritus, Leucippus and Epicurus, who dreamed that the world
was made of the moates concurring together by fortune: which opinion is
confuted by the order of things created, by the orderly motion of the heavenly
circles: and lastly by the certain en^^, for which all things were made. For
it cannot be that this order, those orderly motions, and so great profits
should proceed from a thing ruled by mere fortune.

3 The errrour of the same Democritus, who affirmed that there were many, yea
infinite worlds: whereas the word of God makes mention but of one Creator and
governor of the world, Act. 17.24.
not of many worlds: and says that the Son was sent into the world, Ioh.
3.17.
not into the worlds.

4 The Stoickes error, who fained two eternal beginnings, to wit, the mind and
the matter, which cannot possibly stand together. The same is the error of
Anaxagoras, who sets down an eternal Chaos, to which came an eternal mind,
which severed all kinds of creatures from that commixture.

5 The madness of Pliny, who thought that this world was God eternal,
infinite, without beginning, and also shall never have end, all in all, yea the
very whole it self.

6 Of Auerroes, who falsely avouched that the heaven was without matter. Add to
these Galens opinion, who having read the first chapter of Genesis, said that
Moses spoke many things, but proved few things.

The sixth common Place, of Angels.
What is signified by this word Angel?
THe word Angel being a name of office, is a Greek word, derived of (...) to
declare, and signifies a messenger, an ambassador, or one sent of a message.
First, in way of excellency it is attributed to the Son of God, who was sent
into the world by his Father, to the end that being made man, and a sacrifice,
he might redeem mankind. He is so called, Genesis 48.16. The Angel who has
delivered me from all evils: and the eternal Angel, who was the leader of the
Israelites, who is sometimes called the Angel of Iehou^^, and sometimes
Jehovah himself Exodus 14.19 and 33.20. and 1. Cor. 10.
: and he is called the Angel of the Covenant Mal. 3.1.
.

2 It is given to John Baptist, Mal. 3.1. Behold, I send mine Angel or
messenger.

3 Chap. 2.7. it is given to the Church: The Priests lips shall preserve
knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth, because he is the Angel
or messenger of the Lord of hoasts.

4 To those ministering spirits, whereof mention is made, Psalm. 104.4. Who
make thine Angels spirits, and thy ministers a flaming fire. And in this
fourth signification, we use the word Angel here: purposing to speak first of
Gods Angels, and then in order of the wicked Angels.

Whence had Angels their beginning?
From God, who created them of nothing, and that through Christ, Coloss. 1.16.
By whom al things were made, whether in heaven or earth, things visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones or dominations, principalities or powers, I
say all things were made by him, and for his sake.

Are Angels without all matter or not?
They are not altogether and indeed without matter, as neither is the soul of
man; for God alone is without matter. For there is nothing created which is not
also compounded, either by natural composition, as consisting of matter and
form: or else metaphysicall, namely, of the essence, or of the act and the
power. Yet because they do not consist of any corporal matter, which is
palpable, and subject to the sight, but rather spiritual altogether, and (as
they say in the schools) only of the power and the act, they are said to be
without matter. But God alone is a power or pure Act: as Aristotle said very
well in the 11. book of his Metaphysiks, chap. 7.

But when were the Angels created?
Not before the world. For only the Son of God was before the world. Whence
it follows, that they were created in the beginning of all things: but in
what day they were created, it cannot sensibly be defined, but only it may
probably be gathered by the history of Moses, that they were created the first
day, when the heavens wherein they dwell were created: whereupon they be called
the Angels of heaven Math 24.36. Gal. 18.
. The cause why Moses concealed the creation of Angels when he recited the
creation of all other things created is this, that he purposed to apply and fit
his narration to the capacity of the common people, and of the ruder sort, and
therefore only to set down briefly the creation of things visible.

Christ says Math. 18.10. that the Angels do always behold the face of his
Father, therefore they have been always.
The aduerbe always does not signify eternity, or a thing without beginning;
but the continuance of their appearing before his Father for the service of the
godly, which began even from the beginning of the world, which the Greek text
does more fully express: (...), to wit (which is understood) at all times.

What is an Angel?
It is (as Damascene says lib. 2. cap. 5.) a spiritual or intellectual
substance, always moveable, of its own power, without a body ministering unto
God, according unto grace, and in nature immortal. But the Apostle
comprehending the nature and office of good Angels, defines them thus, Hebr.
1.14. They are ministering spirits, sent forth for the service of those who
shall be heirs of salvation.

Are the Angels substances really and truly subsisting?
They are substances: because those things are attributed to them in Scripture,
which can agree to nothing else but to a substance really subsisting: as, to
stand in the presence of God, and to praise him: some of them are said to have
fallen, and other some of them to have continued in the truth. Further, to have
appeared after diverse manners, yea taking unto them bodies, and to have
manifested them selves by sundry effects. Now actions are properly of
substances, that is, of those things only which have their true subsisting.
And therefore look how many Angels there be, there be so many sundry
Angelical essences, subsisting severally, even as there be diverse men.

How were the Angels created?
All of them good, because Genesis 1.31. Whatsoever God had made was exceeding
good: although some of them fell Isa. 14.12.
, and continued not in the truth. And they also were good, and created in the
truth John 8.44.
. And Jude in the sixth verse says, that they kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation.

Are the Angels mutable or immutable?
In regard of their substance they be incorruptible Mat. 22.30.
, because they are without all matter: but in respect of the power of God, as
they were made of nothing, so they may be brought unto nothing again if God
should take away his hand, Psalm 104.20. But in regard of that estate wherein
they now are, they cannot be changed, by means of the grace, will and decree of
God, although of their own nature they be mutable as well to that which is
good, as to that which is evil. For whatsoever is created, the same is
mutable, says Damascene. And God himself speaks thus of himself, I am your
God, and change not, Mal. 3.6.

What is the reason that some of the Angels falling from the truth, others
continued in grace and truth?
The nearest and immediate cause is the goodness of the will of the Angels
themselves, wherein God had created them at the beginning.

The mediate or superior cause was the free favor of God, whereby their will
was helped, that they were enabled to will, and could will to persist in the
truth, and so indeed did continue, whilst that others (to whom this grace was
not communicated) not willing to persist and continue, fell from the truth by
their own default. Phil. 3.8. God works in you both to will and to do.

But the supreme and highest cause of all, is the eternal, firm, and
immutable decree of God and his good pleasure proceeding from his wisdom,
whereby he elected and predestined some to be made partakers of his grace and
to persevere: and rejected the other of his own just pleasure for his own
glory. 1. Timoth. 5.21. I charge thee (says the Apostle) in the sight of God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the elect Angels. If they be elect, then some
of them be elect, not all of them.

Can those then which continued in the truth fall from the same and so fall
into sin?
No: because they are truly happy, seeing they do ever behold the face of
their heavenly Father, Mat. 18.10. yet not by nature, but by grace, and the
blessing of God for Christ's sake.

But seeing they can no more sin, nor become miserable, do they not cease to
have freedom of will?
No: for whatsoever they will, they will it freely. Moreover they are more free
now then before; then they had power to sin and not to sin: now they are so
free from sin, that they cannot sin; and so free from misery, that they
cannot now become miserable any more; for they are made most holy, and also
most happy.

What names are given to the Angels?
Of their nature they are called spirits, because of their spiritual essence.
For Angel is a name of office, Spirit of nature, Augustine. They are called
also shining stars, or morning stars Job. 3.8.7.
: because they are of a most pure, clear, and shining nature. The sons of
God, not by essence or nature, as that only begotten Son: but by adoption
and grace, or discretiuely, to the end they might be distinguished from the
sons of men. Of their office they are called Angels.

For their dignity and power they are called gods, and Satan is called the god
of this world 2. Cor. 4.4.
: so also they are called principalities and powers in heavenly places Ephesians.
3.10.
.

By the effect they are called Seraphim, whom Dionysius calls (...)
fiery, because they burn with the love of God, and in love toward godly
men. They are called a flame of fire, Hebr. 1.7. not as though they were of a
fiery nature and substance, but because they be the auengers of Gods anger,
which do like fire consume the wicked, as often as need requires.

From the manner of appearing they be called Cherubin, of this word Cherub,
which signifies any figure that has wings, whether it be of a man or of a
beast Heb. 12.19.
: also men Genesis 3.24. Exodus 25.18.
: and the men of God Psalm. 18.11. Zac. 1.5.6.
: From their ministry they be called Watchmen, and the keepers of the world
Dan. 4.14.
.

How many ways have Angels appeared unto men?
1. In sleep, or in dreams, as Mat. 1.20. it is said that the Angel appeared
to Joseph the husband of Marie in a dream Mat. 2.13.
.

2. In vision, as namely, to the Prophets: and that either without a true
body, but yet not without some bodily form: or else taking unto them
manifestly true bodies Genesis 18.2. Tertul. de carne Christi.
, and these either created by God of nothing, or else then first formed, not
borne of some matter that was before: for they came not to die, therefore not
to be borne: or else in some other natural bodies which had been before; either
of men, as in Zachary the Prophet, the Angel spoke, Zac. 2.3. As Augustine
understands it, Enchir. to Laurent. chap. 59. or else of other living
creatures, as when the Angel spoke in Balaams ass, as Zanchius understands
it: no otherwise then the evil Angel in the Serpent spoke in old time to Eua
Genesis 3.1.
. And devils have entered into certain men, and by Christ were cast out again,
yea also into hogs Mat. 8.28.
. They took not bodies from the stars or the heavens, as Apelles thought,
nor had they proper bodies making an a^gelicall substance, but their bodies
were earthly, as appears by the feeding, feeling, and washing of them, as
Tertul. proves.

Whether might Angels when they assume unto them true humane bodies be called
men?
No, because they did not join the humane nature hypostatically united unto
them, but they took unto them, and put from them those bodies, (as Augustine
says) even as it were a garment.

What became of those bodies after their ascension to heaven?
They being made of nothing returned to nothing; or made of earth, returned to
earth, or into nothing: for it is all one with God to create of nothing, and to
bring into nothing.

Do Angels move out of their places, and dispatch their business within the
space of time?
Yes indeed, because they be finite spirits, though not circumscribed, because
they are not measured by their place, but limited, because they are so in one
place, as they cannot be in another. And Luke 1.26. The Angel Gabriel was sent
of God into a city of Galile: and Heb. 2.14. they are called ministering
spirits sent for the service of the elect. They are said to descend from
heaven, and to ascend into heaven, as in Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12. and
whatsouer is done is measured with time. But they be so nimble and so swift,
that they are moved in an vnconceaueable time, and dispatch their business
speedily. And for that cause they are said to fly, and to have wings Esa. 6.2.
Reu. 14.6.
.

How many Angels be there?
Dan. 7.10. Daniel is said to have seen million millions of Angels, and ten
thousand hundred thousands. Heb. 12.22. You have come to the innumerable
company of Angels, innumerable indeed to men, but easily numbered of God Mat.
26.53. Jude 15.
. All which notwithstanding, were created of God, so many in number at the
beginning, and not multiplied by procreation one of another.

Are there orders and degrees of Angels?
No man that is conversant in the Scriptures can deny, but that there is some
order among the Angels, because order and distinction in all things is an
excellent and divine thing: for some are called Cherubins, other Seraphims;
some Angels, other Archangels. But this order is not from the dignity and
excellency of the nature of the Angels, as though some were more excellent
then others by nature: but rather from their diverse kinds of offices. Hereupon
Paul Colos. 1.16. calls them thrones, seats, dominations, principalities,
which is an Hebrew kind of putting the Abstract for the Concrete, the
substantive for the adjective, because God uses their ministry in the
administration of Empires, kingdoms and commonweals.

But that there be Hierarchies, and degrees of Hierarchies among the Angels, as
the Papists imagine, it cannot be proved by any testimony of Scripture. For he
is called the Archangell, not who is more excellent in nature, or superior by
affectation of government, because there, as Basil says, all ambition
ceasseth: but he who is designed of God for the execution of some special,
hard, and difficult service, or else he that is set apart of God for a time,
with many other Angels for the executing of Gods commandment. So those names
thrones, dominations, powers, principalities, are borrowed by a similitude from
men's affairs, to signify the excellency of the Angels and their offices, and
how many and diverse, and great works God does bring to pass by them Psalm.
18.11.
.

Has each of them his proper name?
Those names are not proper, but appellatiues or common names, which are
imposed upon them for a time, according to the offices which are given them in
charge: or else according to those diverse means in respect of us, whereby
they do execute the will of God, mightily perform it, and appear unto men. As
Dan. 8.16. and 9.21. Luke 1.19. mention is made of Gabriel, which name does
signify the Might of God, because by him the Lord did show forth his power.
Again, Dan. 10.13. mention is made of Michael, which is, Who is like unto the
strong God? Tob. 3.19. is mention made of Raphael, which name is taken from
Curing or healing: for he came to heal Sara and Tobie, as also of Vriel, 4.
Esdr. 4.1. Derived of the light, because he came to illuminate and to instruct
Esdras.

Have the Angels any knowledge of things?
They have: 1. natural, which God put into them in the creation: for they be
understanding spirits. Whereupon Christ says, Ioh. 8.44. that some of the^ did
continue in the truth, or in the knowledge of the truth, but others did not.
Besides, they have revealed knowledge, or by the revelation of God; as Dan.
8.16. and 9.22. the mystery of the 70. weeks was revealed to the Angel
Gabriell, to the end he might reveal it to Daniel, and Daniel to the Church.

2. They have experimental knowledge, which is obtained by experience, and by
observation of those things which we do here, and Ephesians. 3.10. That manifold
wisdom of God, which shines forth in the calling of the Gentiles, is made
known to the Angels by the ministry and preaching of the Gospel which is in
the Church. So Luke 15.10. the Angels are said to be glad, and to rejoice with
great joy for the conversion of one sinner, whereof they are obseruers.

Mat. 18.10
3. I add to these, supernatural knowledge, whereby they do so perfectly see
God and know him, that they do not desire to fall from him, or cannot will it:
and in that stands their happiness.

Whether do the Angels know the actions of every particular man, or what they
do, say, or suffer?
No, for Heb. 4.14. All things are said to be known to God alone, and they are
manifest in his sight: but yet notwithstanding they know the things of those
men, who are committed to their charge by God. For Act. 10.4. the Angel
tells Cornelius: Thy prayers and thine alms have come up before the Lord.
Therefore they do observe and mark us, and all that we say, or do: so as we
may justly be ashamed to say or do any thing, which we would be ashamed to
commit in the sight of honest men. By which argument Paul does teach, 1. Corin.
11.10. that women should for comeliness sake have their heads covered in the
Church because of the Angels, that is either spiritual Angels, or else
Ministers who are called Angels.

But what, have they also the knowledge of their thoughts and affections?
No (for God alone is the searcher of the heart) unless men do bewray their
affections by actions and signs, or unless God do make them known unto them:
for it is said, 1. Corin. 2.11. None (to wit, either men or Angels) knows
what is in man, but God himself, and the spirit of a man that is in him.

But in what sense are affections (as joy and sorrow) ascribed unto Angels in
the scriptures, seeing they are blessed?
Not after humane or carnal manner, but after that manner which does agree unto
the nature of Angels, and so, as it is beseeming an heavenly and blessed life,
which manner is unknown to us.

What are we to think of the force and power of Angels?
1. They are able to do by the course of nature to bodily things whatsoever may
befall bodies by nature: (but yet in no case can they work miracles, but only
so far forth as the Lord uses their ministry in effecting of miracles:)
either immediately by themselves, Ioh. 5.4.
as to kill, and to move from place to place: as when one Angel slew in a
manner the whole army of Senacherib, and made the rest to fly away 2. Kin.
19.35
: and that he brought forth Peter, and the rest of the Apostles out of prison
Act. 5.19. and 12.7.8.
: and transported Philip from place to place Act. 8.30.
. Or else mediatly, by such things as work by the common course of nature,
being applied of them to such things, yet not after that manner as Christ did
give many their sight by his own power without any means Mat. 9.9:
. Yet in very deed, they can do no more with all their power then God does
prescribe them, and as they shall see to be according to the will of God Psalm.
103.20
.

2. They can affect both the outward senses, as when they smote the Sodomites
with blindness, so as they could not see the door of Lots house Genesis 19.1.
: and of the Syrians 2. Kin. 6.18.
, and caused a great noise in their camp Chap. 7.6.
: as also their inward senses, as when they revealed many things unto the
Fathers in dreams, and bring diverse things into the memory and mind of the
godly.

3. The Angels are able, not indeed to illuminate the mind, or or effectually
to bow the will, which is the proper work of the holy Ghost Prou. 21.1.
: but as the instruments of the holy Ghost, to stir up our thoughts to the
word we have heard, to propound the truth to a man's mind, and to admonish us
of it, that we might assent unto it: and after a spiritual manner to move our
will to some good thing, like unto Counselors only by persuading us, and (as
it were) by speaking and dealing inwardly with us Heb. 1.14. Math. 2.13.
.

Moreover, the good Angels have far greater power then the devils Apoc.
12.7.8 Tob. 8.3.
.

What manner of speech do the Angels use, either toward God, or amongst
themselves, or unto men?
Not a bodily or carnal (unless when they assume unto themselves bodies) but
a spiritual and heavenly, whereby without any audible voice, or vocal speech
and sound, they do spiritually and altogether angelically insinuate, instill,
and communicate every one his mind as he will, either into the mind of
another Angel or of man: or else does show and as it were unfold such things
as he will in his own understanding as it were in a clear glass to be seen
of another. And therefore that which Paul says, 1. Corin. 13.5. If I should
speak with the tongues of men and Angels: is not to be understood properly,
but by a figure called hyperbole, or an excessive speech, and by way of
supposition, and by a concession or granting that they have tongues: as also
that Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from heaven should preach unto you another Gospel
besides that which I have preached unto you. So bread is ascribed unto the
Angels Psalm. 78.25.
, that is most dainty food.

What be the offices of Angels?
They are diverse and manifold: for they are the Ministers, chief servants, and
the Sergeants of God, which do attend upon the commandment of their King
(which they execute willingly and readily) Psalm. 89.7 and 103.21. Heb. 1.14.
for the glory of God, and the salvation of men, as we may gather out of the
Psalm. 104.4. Who makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire:
and who do mutually extol their maker with hymns, as Theodoret says, The
Angels ministering, is Psalms singing Psalm. 148.2. Isa 6.3. Reu. 4.8.9. and
5.13.
.

Again, they be the servants of Christ, even as he is both man and Messiah. So
in that temptation which he endured against Satan in the wilderness, we read
that the Angels ministered unto him. Mat. 4.11.


Especially they be the servants of the elect: Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent for the service of those who lay hold on the
inheritance of salvation? Now they be the ministers of the elect in many
respects: and first in their life time, and that either by directing,
defending, and keeping the elect, according to that Psalm. 91.11.12. He has
given his Angels charge of thee that they keep thee in all thy ways, least
thy foot should dash against a stone Genesis 14.7. Exodus 33.2. Psalm. 34.8.
, and by defending their life from their enemies, and from all dangers 2. King.
6.17. Act. 12.8.11.
: or else by executing Gods judgments against the enemies of the Church in the
behalf of the elect, as we may gather out of Genesis 19.10. 2. Kin. 19.35. Act.
12.23. Also by suggesting into the minds of the godly holy cogitations, and by
moving of them and furthering of them to every good thing Act. 10.4.5.
: for the good Angels never put into our minds any thing contrary to the law
of God Gal. 1.8. and 3.9. Act. 7.53. Luke 1.19.20. Act. 1.11. 2. Kin. 1.3.
. Also by helping them, and comforting of them Genesis 16.7. 2. Kin. 1.13. Act.
27.23.24.
. Again in the time of death, whilst that they do attend upon the faithful
in the very pangs of death, and so carry their souls into the joys of heaven,
as is clear in the example of Lazarus Luke 16.22.
. Lastly, in the end of the world, when they shall gather together the bodies
of all the faithful, that being united again to their souls, they may rise
again to life Mat. 24.31. Mat. 13.41.
. And they shall separate the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them
into a furnace of fire, and shall lead these into the kingdom of heaven.

Have particular men, or countries and Cities some one good and certain Angel
appointed to defend them, and an evil Angel to tempt them?
It may be gathered from the words of Christ, that ordinarily every elect child
of God has some one certain good Angel appointed of God to keep them. Math.
18.10. where it is said: Their Angels do continually behold the face of my
Father. In like manner out of the 12. of the Acts, 15. where the faithful which
were assembled in the house of Mark, said of Peter knocking at the door, It
is his Angel: for the believers spoke there according to the common opinion
received among the people of God. And that this is the opinion of the Fathers,
it may appear out of Augustines 1. book of Meditations, chap. 12. This also
(says he) I judge a singular blessing, that from the very moment of my birth
God has given me an Angel of peace, to keep me even to my very end.

But extraordinarily it is clear by the Scriptures, that as often as need
requires, many Angels have been sent to several believers to defend them.
Psalm. 34. So the Angels are said to pitch their tents about those that fear
God. The same is to be thought of every country. For Dan. 10.13.20.21. and
11.1. and 12.1. it is said, that the Angel of God did fight against the King
of the Persians, and that each of their Angels did defend that kingdom which
was committed to his charge.

Concerning evil spirits we learn thus much, that sometime one man is vexed
by one and the self same evil spirit, as may be gathered out of the history
of Job, 1.12. And sometime that many have been molested by one and the self
same evil spirit, as in 2. Chron. 18.21. one evil spirit deceived many
Prophets. Also we read that sometime many evil spirits did molest one and the
self same man, as Luke 8.30. a legion of devils did possess one man. But that
God has appointed to every man one evil Angel, cannot be gathered out of any
place of the Scripture.

Whether can there arise dissentio^s and discords by our means amongst the
good Angels, as Dan. 10.13. it is said that the Prince of the Persians fought
against the Prince of the Grecians?
A learned interpreter answers, that by the names of Princes are not
signified the Angels which had the defense of the kingdoms of the Persians and
the Grecians: but those men which at that time were Princes of Persia and
Greece. That this should be the meaning of the words, that the Angel fought
against Cambyses at that time king of the Persians, for the space of one and
thirty days, that is to say, that he did hinder his cruel Edicts and plots
made to keep the people of God still in captivity, and more grievously to
oppress them, least they should be put in execution, but that there should
come after him the Prince of the Grecians, to wit, Alexander the great, who
should assuage the fury of the kings of Persis that was kindled against the
people of God, which also came to pass, as histories do testify.

But the Schoolmen answer, that there is the greatest consent amongst the
Angels, in regard of will, because they are blessed; and amongst those which be
blessed, there is the greatest peace: but yet there may be amongst them some
diversity of judgment, to wit, being ignorant of the decree of God, which is
not always made manifest to the Angels, some think they should do thus, and
some think they should do otherwise. But it is not the diversity of opinions,
but the contrariety of wills that ouerturneth friendship.

Have those Angels which never sinned need of Christ the Mediator?
The Angels had need of a Mediator, indeed not of redemption from sin (for
in that sense Christ is the Mediator between God and men 1. Tim. 2.5. (...).
) but of conservation in goodness and grace, and of * combining them again
under one head, to wit, that they might be again united with the elect under
one and the same head Christ, that so they might cleave unto God inseperably,
and without all danger of falling in time to come. And so by this means that
their righteousness and integrity which is imperfect in the sight of God Job. 4
18.
might be covered before God with that most perfect and infinite righteousness
of Christ: for which cause it is said, Ephesians. 1.10. that God did purpose with
himself to gather together again as it were under one head all things which
be in heaven and earth: that is, (...)
to bring them again under one common head, to gather them again together,
and as it were to recall them back again to their head and to their beginning.

Are we to pray unto the Angels, or to worship them with any religious worship?
The Angel answers Manoah, Judge. 13.16. If thou will offer a burnt offering,
thou shall offer it to Jehovah: and Christ says, Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And Paul condemns all
serving and worshipping of images, Col. 2.18. The Angel (Revel. 19.20.)
forbids himself to be worshipped: as also chap. 22.9. because the office of a
Mediator agrees to Christ alone. And the Angels themselves are but creatures,
and do acknowledge themselves to be fellow-seruants of God with us. Neither, as
Augustine says, do the holy men themselves, nor the Angels desire that to be
given to them which they know to be due to God alone. On the contrary, those
Angels which be enemies to the truth, and devils, do do their endeavor to
challenge unto themselves the name of God and the worship of God. Yet we do not
deny, but that we are to honor the good Angels, by thinking well of them, with
love, reverence, obedience and imitation.

Ob. 1. Jacob called upon an Angel, Genesis 48, when he said, The Angel that
delivered me out of all trouble bless these children.

Answ. Jacob did not mean any created, but that uncreated Angel, the Son of
God, who of his office is called that Angel. This is plain from the text, for
the same action is attributed to this Angel and to Jehovah, to wit, that he
would bless Ephraim and Manasses.

Ob. 2. Job 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my friends, for
the hand of God touches me. By friends in this place, Bellarmine says that
Augustine understands Angels, Bellarm. cap. 1. de Sanctorum beatitud. ergo.

Answ. It is plain he meant his friends who came to visit him, but yet vexed
him with bitter and contumelious words.

Ob. 3. John wished Grace to the Churches, from the seven Spirits.

Answ. By seven spirits, we must understand only the holy Ghost, who though
one in person, yet by communication of gifts so works, as if he were many
spirits.

Why would God use the ministry of Angels?
Not for any necessity, for he stands in need of nothing, but of his good
will, to the end he might declare his goodness toward us in that he has
given the Angels to be our servants for his own glory and for our comfort,
because we see such excellent creatures to be created even for our sakes, and
appointed for our service. Again, both to beget and to preserve friendship
between us and the Angels, until such time as we shall enjoy their most
joyful company in the heavens.

What is the reason that whereas the Angels were wont in old time to appear
often to the Fathers in the form of men, and to converse and talk with them
familiarly, now they do it no more?
Because now Christ being come in the flesh, and sitting now at the right hand
of the Father in heaven, and having given his holy Spirit plentifully, it is
his will that our conversation should be in heaven, and not with the Angels upon
the earth visibly. Further, because the Church of God had need at the
beginning of such confirmations from heaven, but now the word of God is
sufficiently confirmed. Heb. 1.1.

What use has the Church of the doctrine concerning Angels?
1. That we might acknowledge the endless love of God, and his fatherly care
over us, who has created such keepers for us, and given them charge over us;
whereby we should learn to worship and to love him. Again, to the intent that
we should walk comely and holily before the Angels, who are witnesses and
obseruers of our speeches and actions. Lastly, that we might be vpholden by
faith in all adversities and dangers, knowing that that saying of Eliseus is
most true, 2. Kin. 6.16. that those which be with us are more then those which
be against us.

What things be contrary to this doctrine?
1. The error of the Sadduces, who affirmed that the Angels were nothing else
but good motions or good thoughts, which God puts into our hearts, and that
they were not spiritual substances, subsisting of themselves.

2. Their error, of whom we read Col. 2.18. who devised the worshipping of
Angels.

3. Of the Papists, who affirmed without the warrant of the word of God, that
every man has appointed unto him two Angels, one good, another evil; the one
to vex him, the other to keep him to whom he is given: and that each of them
is an inseparable companion of every man. The which errors are confuted by
those things which have been spoken before.

The seventh common Place, of evil Angels, or of Devils.
Are there also evil Angels?
THere be: which is not only proved by testimonies of Scripture Genes. 3.1.
Ioh. 8.44. 1. Pet. 5.8. Jude 6. Reu. 12.9.
, but also by very experience, and by the horrible and heavy effects of wicked
Angels.

By what names are they called?
1. Of their nature or spiritual essence they are called Spirits 1. Kin. 22.21
Mat. 8.16. Luke 10.20.
.

2. Of their office, unto which they were all created at the beginning, they
are simply called Angels 1. Cor. 6.3. 2. Pet. 2.4. and Jude 6.
: of their knowledge given to them in the creation, they are called (...).
devils, because they have great knowledge, as may appear in the history of
Adams fall, and are very subtle Deuteronomy. 22.17. Leuit. 17.7. 1. Cor. 10.20.
, whence is the doctrine of devils 1. Tim. 4.1.6.
.

3. From accident qualities, that is, such as they have gotten to themselves by
their own free will, they are called wicked Luke 8.2.
, impure and unclean spirits Mat. 10.1. Zach. 13.2.
, and a lying spirit, or the spirit of lies 1. Kin. 22.22 Ioh. 8.44.
, of fornication Hos. 4.12.
, of maliciousness or giddiness Esa. 19.14.
, Belial 2. Cor. 6.15.
, without all order, without yoke and government, or wicked, which is good for
nothing, and as the chief, that evil one, and malicious, as who should say,
he does wholly give himself to malice, and does exercise himself in it Math.
6.13. and 13.19.
.

4. Of the effects, they be called devils, or in the singular number a devil
Ioh. 8.44.
, which name imports a backbiter, because he does continually accuse God unto
men, and men unto God, yea man to man, and man to himself, that so he might
turn God from men, and men from God, and men from men Genesis 3.1.4.5 Job 1.9.11.
and 2.3.
: he is also called Satan Math. 4.10.
, which signifies an adversary 1. King. 5.4. 1. Pet. 5.8.
: and that Tempter Mark 1.13 Act. 5.3.
, a spirit of divination Acts 16.16.
, the enemy of God, of Christ, and our enemy Luke 10.19.
, and apolluon or destroying Revel. 9.11.
. For the Scripture does use often to speak of the unclean spirits in the
singular number to note out that chiefedome of impiety, which is opposite and
contrary to Christ and his kingdom.

5. They have names from the diverse forms wherein they appeared, hereupon he
is called that great Dragon (as also of his poisoned craft) that old Serpent
Reu. 12.8.9.
.

6. Of his power and pride, which he exercises especially toward the
reprobate: hence he is called Beelzebub, that is, the king of flies 2. Kings
1.2. Math. 12.24.
: the strong man armed Mat. 12.29.
, a roaring lion, the prince of the world John 12.31.
, the God of this world 2. Corin. 4.4,
. Lastly, the prince, and the princes and powers of the air, the governors of
this world, because they rule the wicked at their pleasure; and the Princes of
darkness, because they are the authors of all ignorance of God, of blindness,
mischiefs, unhappiness, malice, of all disorder, treachery, cruelty Ephesians.
2.2. Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 2.15.
.

As for the name Lucifer, it came from a false and frivolous exposition of that
place Isaiah 14.12. which (as may well appear) was in derision, ironically
given to the King of Babylon.

Whence do evil Angels take their beginning?
In respect of their nature and substance they are of God, who did create them
good of nothing, and who does still uphold them. But in regard of the qualities
brought upon them, they are of themselves, as Christ witnesses, Ioh. 8.44. The
devil when he speaks a lie, speaks of his own, that is, of himself: and
continued not in the truth (wherein he was created at the beginning) but fell by
his own free will, and was a murderer from the beginning, not in respect of
Satan himself, but of man that was made, that is to say, then when he first
set upon man: whereupon we may gather, that the Angels sinned before that Adam
and Eve sinned.

What was the first sin of the Angels?
Some think that it was pride, according to that Eccles. 10.15. Pride is the
beginning of all sin. Others think it was envy, whereby Satan envied that
man was made after the image of God, according to that Wisdom. 2.24. By the
devils envy, death entered into the world. But Christ shows (Ioh. 8.44.) it
was lying, or the hatred of the truth, that is, of the everlasting Gospel
touching Christ, who should take our flesh upon him, and of his grace which is
needful for all men to life eternal, and of the nature of man which should be
exalted above all Angels. And therefore indeed it was the hatred they bore of
Christ's glory and man's felicity. Also it was their apostacy and rebellion,
whereby Satan fell from God his maker, and that very sin which Christ
calls, The sin against the holy Ghost Math. 12.31. 1. John 5.16.
: because he fell wittingly and willingly, and of purpose from the truth, and
that also with hatred of that everlasting truth: whereof Christ speaks, I am
the truth, Ioh. 14.6. And to Pilate, I am come into this world that I might
bear witness to the truth. Ioh. 18.31.

The same is proved by the continual practice of Satan, even from the
beginning of the world to the end, sowing lies and heresies, either against the
Deity of Christ, or against his humanity, or against his office. And raising
up most cruel persecution against that truth of Christ.

Is there a great number of those Angels which fell from the truth?
Yes sure a great number and almost innumerable, yet uncertain to us, and not
know howne many. For 2. Pet. 2.4. and Jude 6. we read that very many Angels
fell at one time from the truth, and therefore are cast into hell or the
bottomless pit. And Luke 8.30. mention is made of a legion of devils which
possessed one man. And Mat. 12.45. the unclean spirit returning, takes with
him seven other spirits, that is, many other spirits worse then himself, and
more unclean. And Reu. 12.7. we read, that the dragon with his Angels fought
against the woman: and therefore there is no cause why we should sleep secure
and careless.

What punishment is inflicted upon evil Angels?
Manifold: 1. In that they are cast out of the heavens, wherein the blessed be,
and wherein they were created, into hell, that is, not only into that place
under the earth, ordained for the euerl^^ting torments of the reprobate: (which
Luke 16.23. calls (...).
hell, and chap. 8.31. the bottomless pit, that is, a gulf of a wonderful
depth,) but also into this air which compasses the earth, and into the region
under the Moon, as testifies the Apostle Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12. to exercise the
patience of the godly, and also to punish and to vex the wicked for their
impiety: where also they being tied with the chains of darkness, are kept to
the general judgment. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6.


2. In that their whole nature how great soever, is wholly corrupted and
defiled, so as there is in it nothing at all sound and pure.

3. Their will is so obstinate in sin, as they are not able no not to desire
to repent of evil, nor to be saved. Which is by the just judgment of God, who
has decreed that they which sin against the holy Ghost, that is, they which
wittingly and willingly, and of set purpose sin and renounce the known
truth, should never repent Heb. 6 4. and 10.26. and 1. Ioh. 3.8.
. 1. Ioh. 3.8. The devil sins even from the beginning, namely, continually
and obstinately.

4. Their mind was darkened, to wit, being deprived both of the knowledge of
all that truth, as well of themselves, as of God and of Christ, which might
stand them in any stead to life eternal. As also of that created knowledge of
those things wherein at the beginning they were created, for which cause they
are termed the princes of darkness Ephesians. 6.12.
.

And yet not wholly, because they excel yet in great knowledge of things
concerning both God and men: namely, such as was natural unto them, or they
have by nature: partly, by that natural light which is left in them: partly,
by observation: partly, by the effects of Gods power which come to pass in
time. By which means they knew Christ both to be the Son of God, and also
should be the Judge of the world Mat. 8.21. Act. 16.17. and 19.
: but yet without any affection toward him, without any love or affiance in
him: and to their greater terror and condemnation Jam. 2.19.
. For which cause they are called (...), that is, Skillful, but more truly
(...), because they do always abuse that their knowledge to evil, and never
to good.

Can evil Angels foresee things to come, and certainly foretell them?
To foresee and to foretell things to come, so far forth as they are things
to come, and to know them before hand of themselves, and by themselves, and of
their own proper spirit, they cannot: for it is the peculiar work of God
alone: for so it is said Esa. 41.23. Tell us what things shall come to pass,
and then we shall know that ye are gods. But by the instinct of another, or by
revelation from another, and by the present causes, by the experience and
observation of things, and by probable conjectures to foresee things to come,
it is granted unto creatures.

So then by these means the wicked spirits may foretell things to come: as
namely, such things as they have learned to have been foretold in some place by
some holy Prophet: or such things whose natural causes they see to be present
before their eyes: or such things which they see now are disposed and like to
come to pass: or such things as themselves are purposed to effect, if God
permit them: or have decreed to suggest them to be done of others: or as they
guess by signs, or rashly suppose; but sometimes certainly, sometimes
probably, and for the most part lyingly and doubtfully; but howsoever, always
to seduce men, and therefore never to be listened unto, because though they
speak the truth sometimes, the Lord permitting them, to the end to try us
whether we fear him, Deuteronomy. 13.2.3. yet they ever speak it with a purpose to
deceive, that they might seduce men from God: and destroy them Mark. 1.34. Act.
16.18.
.

What are we to think of Sybils prophecies, and the special oracles of Balaam
and Caiphas concerning Christ, and the mysteries of man's salvation, Numb.
24.17. and Ioh. 11.54?
It is likely that the verses which we have of Sybillaes Prophecies were
written since Christ, because they set down as it were the history of Christ
plainly: else we should think that God revealed his Sons coming more
plainly to a doting woman, then ever he did to his servants the Prophets,
which is absurd. As for Balaam and Caiphas Prophesies that they come from God,
and were put into their minds either not understanding of them, or else
intending some other thing Numb. 23.5. and 24 2.
, to the end that both the Gentiles and unbelieving Jews might be convinced
and made inexcusable by the testimony of those men who were of their own
stamp. And therefore that those Oracles are to be regarded, because they be
agreeable to the Oracles of the Prophets.

Can the wicked spirits know the thoughts of our hearts?
Not certainly, and of themselves, but they can tell many by our speeches, and
gestures, and by external signs, expressed by the inward passion and
affection, namely, hatred, anger, concupiscence, and that only by conjecture
and probability. Which things being diligently observed and known, they
stir men forward to commit these or these evils. Therefore Peter says well:
Be ye sober and watch, because your adversary the devil goes about seeking
whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8.

But what think you of the power of the devils?
That it is great: (for it is compared to the Whale Psalm. 27.1.
: to an armed man Mat. 12.29.
: to a roaring Lion 1. Pet. 5.8.
: and to him is ascribed power, and rule in the air Ephesians. 6.12.
:) but yet not absolute, yea indeed finite and limited with certain bounds,
and so they have a restrained power: so as they can do nothing till God permit
them and give them leave, and no further neither then it makes for the good of
his, and the advancing of his glory Exodus 8.18.19. and 1. King. 22.20.21. Job.
1.12. and 2.6. Mat. 8.31. Luke 8.31. Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26. Reu. 20.7
.

Now the power of Satan shows it self so often as the Lord thinks good: both
upon outward things, as the bodies under the Moon which he can move, trouble,
and affect diversely Job 1.12.19
. To this place belongs that Reu. 7.2.3. of the Angels, who had power given
them to hurt the earth, the sea, and the trees. Also upon the bodies of men,
whilst that he moves them from place to place as he will: for sometimes he
lifts up the bodies of men from the earth in height into the air, and
casts them down again from on high to the ground, as the histories do
report of Simon Magus. Sometimes he does transport them from one place to
another in a very short time, and troubles them at his pleasure. Further, he
can alter them, as when he does affect them with sundry qualities, and makes
them sick bodies of sound, as in the history of Job 2.7. may be seen: on the
other side he makes some sound that are sick, for the greater blinding of the
wicked, and their spiritual destruction.

Besides these, he does bleare the sight of men, that things should seem to be
changed, which are not, or that spirits should be seen in stead of true living
creatures; as those counterfeit frogs of the Sorcerers of Egypt, and such
like delusions, (as that ghost of the devil which was showed to Saul in the
likeness of Samuel by help of the Witch 1. Sam. 28.12
.) And such delusions whereby men are said to be turned into Wolves, or other
beasts in appearance, (as they say) not in very deed and truth. Or else he does
most nimbly place some other bodies in the room of others, of which sort some
think those frogs of Egypt were: for God alone can by himself change bodies
if you speak of their substance from one kind into another kind.

Moreover he does pierce and penetrate into the bodies of men, either by the
virtue of action, as he is said to enter into Judas Luke 22.3.
: or else even by his substance, as in those which were possessed, or now in
these days are possessed of devils: so as he does inwardly move their bodies
diversely, that they should hurt themselves or others, as in those which are
possessed, and desirous to hurt others may be seen Mat. 8.16.32. and 12.28.
and 17.15.18.
.

He has also power upon the outward senses which he moves with diverse
objects: either he hurts the instruments of the senses, as namely, the eyes,
and does ill affect them with internal corrupt humors, so as they cannot well
see and discern: or else puts some other impediment between the eyes or the
ears and the objects.

As also upon the minds, when he stirs up evil thoughts in them, by
troubling the fantasies in the imagination, and stirring of diverse humors,
whereby he does trouble and weaken the powers of the soul and body, as it
befalls those which are diseased with melancholy, or the frenzy, or
madness: and then by means of the objects which he sets before the senses, he
stirs up lust: as also he is wont to move the mind of men, by troubling them
with evil affections: as he moved Judas with the affection of covetousness to
betray Christ: and he filled the heart of Ananias to lie against the holy
Ghost. Act. 5.3.

Last of all, he can object many things unto the senses of the godly, whereby
they are provoked to sundry sins, as it fell out with David 2. Sam. 11.2.
. Also he can hinder them by outward impediments from the performance of good
actions, as the Apostle testifies of himself, that he was hindered by Satan,
that he could not come to see the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
: and by setting of fears before their eyes, so to shake them, that they shall
fall from the faith. Therefore Christ says to Peter, Behold Satan has desired
you that he might sift you. Luke 22.31. He is able also to annoy their bodies,
as Paul said that he was buffeted by the messenger of Satan. 2. Cor. 12.7.

Is the power, which wicked Angels have, alike both toward the elect and the
reprobate?
No, but God permits them to exercise the elect for a time, but never to
overcome them, because that promise ( The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head, Genesis 3.15) belongs to Christ and to all his members. But they
have greater power against the reprobate, therefore the Apostle says Ephesians.
2.2. that the devil does finish his work in the children of disobedience.

In what sense is Satan said ( 2. Cor. 11.14.) to transform himself into an
Angel of light?
Not in regard of his substance, but in regard of his counterfeting, whereby
with strange delusions, appearances and superstitions, he does feign himself
to be an Angel of light, sent of God from heaven, that so his counsels might
be listened unto.

Can they work true miracles, that is, such as do agree with the very things
themselves, or only counterfeit?
Christ says, Mat. 24.24. There shall arise false christ's, and shall show great
signs and wonders. And therefore sometimes they show true signs, that is,
such in truth as they seem to be Exodus 7.12. and 8.7.
, not by their own power, but using certain hidden causes of nature, and yet
but lies, because they are used to deceive and to confirm a lie Deuteronomy. 13.12.
and 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
, and indeed not worthy the name of miracles; and yet the most of them be mere
illusions and deceits, and legerdemaines, like to those of Simon Magus, Act.
8.9.10.11. For it is God alone that does great wonders Psalm. 72.18. and 136.4.
, to wit, such as be done in truth, and be wonders indeed, whose cause is
known to no mortal man, and such as are done without deceit, beyond the
course of nature, and without means, and such as can by no means be effected
by the course of nature: and which are appointed especially to set forth the
glory of God, and to further man's salvation.

Wherefore does God permit them?
1. 2. These. 2.10. That they who will not embrace the love of the truth might
believe lies. 2. That the faith and patience of the elect might be proved,
Deuteronomy. 13.3.

What be the effects and endeavors of wicked Angels?
What man is able to reckon them all? He is the enemy of God, of Christ and of
men: and therefore does take unto himself the glory of God, whether it be by
himself Math. 4.9.
, or whether it be by his instruments, to wit, Antichrist, and such men as
challenge to themselves the honor of God 2. These. 2 4.
.

He is the author of sin: for it sprang from him, and he does daily stir us
up to sin, that he might plunge us with himself into the gulf of eternal
death Ioh. 8.44. Heb. 2.14.
: he works effectually in the wicked Ephesians. 2.2. 2. These. 2.9.
: he does corrupt the word of God Mat. 4.6.
: he sows tares in the Lords field Mat. 13.25.
: he raises up heresies: he provoke men to sundry kinds of idolatry: he
raises persecutions against the godly.

In commonweales, he troubles all with tumults and wars. In the family and
privately he labors to trouble, annoy, and destroy particular men by sundry
means, he urges men to commit mischiefs and heinous sins.

He studieth as much as he can to hurt men's bodies: he does infect the
elements, and troubles them for man's ruin: and especially in this age, wherein
he knows the general judgment to approach, he does show his rage more
cruelly then ever before, by lies and murders, and confounds heaven and
earth together.

Do they take unto them true bodies sometimes?
Sometimes they take unto them counterfeit bodies, as it is gathered out of the
story of the Witch, who raised up a spirit in stead of true Samuel 1. Sam.
28.12.
.

And sometimes true bodies, as may be gathered out of the former Treatise
touching good Angels. For if good Angels have taken unto them true bodies,
there is no doubt but evil Angels are able also (by Gods permission) to take
unto them true bodies, and appear in them, and speak to men, and perform
actions like unto men's actions.

Whether are evil spirits, besides that inward torment of mind wherewith they
are tormented for ever, punished also with that bodily fire of hell?
Christ says plainly, Mat. 25.41. that he will say to the wicked: Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.
Out of which place it is concluded, that evil Angels besides that torment of
mind wherewith they are vexed, are also tormented with that infernal fire, as
though they were bound unto it, no otherwise then the soul being bound to the
body suffers of the body: but we must judge that to be done after a
wonderful, but yet after a true manner, as Augustine says.

For what purpose did almighty God ordain them?
1. To the end that by means of their temptations the godly might be exercised
in humility and patience, and so their salvation might be furthered 2. Cor.
12.7
.

2. That by them as it were certain tormenters, he might punish the wicked, as
well with spiritual as bodily punishments. In one word, that God might use
their boldness to the enlarging of his own glory.

Whether do some men truly collect out of the Col. 1.20. where it is said, that
God does reconcile all things to himself thorough Christ, both which are in
earth, as also which are in heaven: that therefore the devils and the damned
shall one day be saved?
Rather most falsely: For by this word all, we must understand the whole body
of the Church, which is as it were divided into two parts, namely, those which
are in heaven, by whom are simply understood the faithful that died before the
coming of Christ: and into those which are in earth, by whom are understood
those whom Christ found living at his first coming, or those which followed and
lived since his coming, as also Ephesians. 1.10.

What is the use of the doctrine concerning devils?
1. That we might be confirmed in the faith touching good Angels, the kingdom
of heaven, and the blessed spirits; because seeing the effects of contraries is
contrary, if there be devils and evil Angels, then certainly there be good
Angels: and if there be an hell, then certainly there is a kingdom of heaven.

2. That we should be so much the more afraid to offend God, because as Peter
says, 2.2.4. If God spared not the Angels when they sinned, but cast them
bound in chains into hell, assuredly he knows how to reserve the unrighteous
against the day of judgment to be punished.

3. That we might be so much the more watchful, and stand upon our guard: and
therefore should fight even as it were for life and death with our spiritual
weapons, but especially with continual prayers unto Christ, against so many
enemies and spiritual wickednesses, and that we should put on the whole armor
of God, that is, that complete spiritual armor which the Apostle prescribes,
Ephesians. 6.11.13. and 1. Pet. 5.9.

What comfort have we in that battle?
That we have Christ not only a conqueror and triumpher over the powers of
hell Col. 2.15:
, and our captain, but also our defender: under whose standard if we fight
courageously we shall get the victory, according to that promise Gene. 3.15.
concerning Christ, that he should break the Serpents head. And Romans 16.20. The
God of peace shall shortly tread down Satan under your feet: and Ioh. 16.11.
The Prince of this world is judged already: and that comfort Ioh. 16.33. Be of
good comfort, I have overcome the world: as also that we have the good Angels
our keepers and defenders against the wicked, being of greater power then they.

What things be against this doctrine?
1. The error of the Sadduces, which affirmed, that the wicked spirits were not
indeed substances, but evil affections, and wicked thoughts which our own
flesh does suggest unto us.

2. The heresy of the Manichees and Priscillianists, who affirmed, that the
devils were created such as they are now.

3. Origens error, who thought that the devils should one day return to the
Lord and be saved: clean contrary to the sentence of Christ who says, that
the devils shall go into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. all which are confuted
by those things which have been spoken before.

The eighth common Place, of Man.
What mean you by this word Man?
NOt the body alone, or the soul alone, but that which is compounded of both
soul and body, being knit together by a most friendly and straight bond in
one person.

Why did God make man the last of all his works?
1. To the end, that because he would make him such an one as should consist of
body and soul, before he was made he might have all things prepared which do
belong to the happiness of either, both of body as also of the soul.

2. That he might use the things created to the glory of the Creator.

3. That the Epitome of the whole world might be described in man, as it were
in a little map: and so he might be Gods Little world, and as it were a
Compendium of the things that were before created.

4. Because God would communicate himself unto him, and take pleasure in him.

Who is the Creator of man?
Genesis 1.26.27. Jehovah Elohim, the Lord God, that is to say, the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, who did create man after his own image immediately, that is,
without any means; or without the help of the Angels.

How manifold did God create Man?
Twofold: Male and female created he them, to propagate such as sho^^d be like
themselves in the world Genesis 1.27.
.

Did God create them both after one manner?
No: for first he created the man and then the woman: again, he framed man of
the dust, and woman of the ribbe of man Genesis 2.7.^2.
.

Wherefore did not God create the man and the woman at once, as he did the
Angels?
To the end that as God is one beginning of the creation of all things, even so
one man might be the beginning of the generation of all men: so as whilst all
men know themselves to spring from one man, they might love one another even as
one man, and might be knit together by one common bond of blood Act. 17.26.
.

Why was the woman framed out of the side of man, and not of some other part of
the body?
Because she was provided to be neither a mistress not a maid for man, but his
mate: neither was she to be taken out of his head, nor his feet, but out of
his side, that he might understand she was to be placed near unto himself,
whom he had learned to be taken out of his side. In a word, because as the
woman was framed out of the side of man when he was asleep, even so the Church
was redeemed by the blood and water which flowed out of the side of Christ
sleeping on the cross Ioh. 19.34. Ephesians. 5, 25.26.
.

Of how many parts does man consist?
Of two: the body and the soul 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
.

Whence was the body taken?
Out of the clay or the slime of the earth, whereupon he was called Adam of
Adamah, signifying red earth; and Homo ab humo or rather (...), pariter, quia
homo est animal politicon.
man, of a word that signifies the earth: therefore Paul says, 1. Corin.
15.47. that he is of the earth, earthly; which Tertullian in his first book of
the Resurrection, keeping the Greek word, interprets slime. He is called
(...) of the Grecians, from his form, because he has his face upward, or of
looking upward, agreeable to that excellent speech, If then ye be risen
together with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God: Mind those things which are above, and not the
things which are upon earth, Coloss. 3.1.2. Which etymology Ovid has
expressed elegantly in the first book of his Metamorphosis: Whilst other
creatures down do look upon the earthly mold,
To man he gave a face upright, the sky for to behold.


Was not the body of Adam framed of the four elements?
The four humors, whereof his body does consist, do prove that.

Why then does Moses make mention only of the earth?
Because the denomination or name is given of the predominant or greatest part.

What does this teach us that his body was framed of the clay?
It does put us in mind of our original, to wit, that we as well as other
living creatures are of the earth, and therefore that we should not be proud,
seeing we must return thither again Genesis 3.19.
.

What is the essential form of man?
It is the Soul.

Whereof is this word Soul derived?
(...).
Of a Greek word that signifies wind, or breathing, the Grecians call it (...),
of cooling or refreshing.

What then, is the Soul a certain wind or blast?
No: but it is not bodily or material, and therefore indeed a Spirit, or a
spiritual essence, which being severed from the body has his being.

How do you prove that the Soul is a spiritual substance?
Genes. 2.7. It is said that God breathed into man's nostrils the breath of
Rather of lives, which must be noted for the souls immortality.
life. Eccles. 12.7. Solomon speaking of death, says that then the spirit
returns again to God that gave it. And Christ in his passion, Luke 23.46.
says, Lord I commend my spirit unto thee. And Steven, Act. 7.59. Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. And Math. 10.28. Do not fear them who kill the body, but
cannot kill the soul. Besides, Luke 23.43. Christ said to the thief, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: Now he was not with him in body, ergo in
soul. Moreover also the soul is a subject capable of all virtues, vices, arts
and sciences: and if the soul be once taken away, the living body perishes.
Therefore to conclude, it is not an accident, but a substance, not depending of
the being of the body.

After what manner was the Soul created?
Genesis 2.7. Jehovah Elohim, the Father, Son and holy Ghost, breathed or
inspired (which is spoken after the manner of men) into his nostrils the breath
of lives: as Col. 1.16. God is said to have created all things by the Son, as
well visible as invisible.

What manner of breathing was that?
Some there be, who by the name of breathing, understand nothing else but the
commandment of God, as though Moses should have said, by the very commandment
of God the soul was put into the body.

The most ancient Fathers, Justinius, Irenaeus and Tertullian, are of opinion
that the Son (...) God ^uen at that very time taking unto himself the shape
of a man's body for the present (wherein afterward he appeared to the Fathers
to be a beginning of that which afterward he performed truly and indeed) took
clay in his hands, and thereof framed the body of Adam to the likeness of
that bodily form which he took upon him, and by breathing into Adams
nostrils, put into him the soul: afterward he took one of the ribs of Adam,
and builded Eve of that. Which opinion of the Fathers, seems to have nothing
contrary to the analogy of faith. For Christ in the Gospel by such like
actions (as when he made clay with his spittle, wherewith he anointed the
blind man, John. 9.6. and by breathing upon the Apostles, gave them the holy
Ghost) did signify that it was even he himself that had framed Adam of the
clay, and had breathed into him the living soul. And therefore that breathing
(whereof Moses speaks) was created, and no part of the Deity it self; and
it was a visible sign of an invisible thing, to wit, of the soul, which the
Son of God created, and put into the body of Adam: as that breathing of
Christ, wherewith he breathed upon his Disciples was not the spirit of God
himself, but a visible sign of the holy Ghost.

Whereof then was the Soul created?
Not of the Essence of God, as the Manichees thought (for whatsoever is of him,
is the same with himself, neither is that any other then the Son and holy
Ghost) but it was by God, not of the heavenly bodies, not of the elements, fire
or air, not of the temperature and composition of the humors of the hodie,
not at all adventure made of the motes (for in these as Tully says in his
book of Tuscul. quaest. there is nothing that has in it the force of memory,
understanding, thought, that is able to remember things past, foresee things to
come, and can comprehend things present, all which are things only divine) but
altogether created of nothing, even as it is also created of nothing in every
particular man Zach. 12.1.
. For which cause God is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. And indeed
Paul says well out of Aratus, that we are the generation of God, Act. 17.28.
but in regard of the quality, not the substance, to wit, so far forth as we
be adorned with heavenly gifts: in like sense as the Pharisees are called a
generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7.

Are you not then of opinion that the soul inspired by God is a particle of
Gods essence?
I am not, for then should Gods essence be diuisible; yea in some part thereof
mutable, and subject to sin, yea to hell torments, which once to think were
both absurd and blasphemous. As for that of Aratus, We are his generation: it
is spoken in regard of the efficient cause, and the excellent gifts of the
soul.

Why did he breathe the breath of life rather into the face of man then into
any other part?
Because this part of all the rest is furnished with the instruments of the
senses, to perform the duties of the soul, and more fit to behold things that
are above.

And why did he rather breathe into his nose then into his ears, or into his
mouth, or into his eyes?
1. That God might show, that he alone was the author both of our creation and
respiration or breathing.

2. That he might declare the weakness of man's life, which is in his nostrils,
according to that Esa. 22.2. Cease to fear man, whose breath is in his
nostrils.

3. That by this means he might make it clear, that the soul was not created
of the substance of the body, but came from without: as Aristotle concludes
well, de generatione Animal lib. 2. cap. 3. The mind came from without, and is
only a divine thing: not that it is created out of the body Zach. 21.1.
, but because it proceeds not of the substance of the body.

What did he breathe into him?
The whole soul, consisting of his essential faculties, vegetative, sensitive
and intellectiue; or the faculties of living, sense and understanding: seeing
Moses says not, the breath of life, but the breath of lives Genesis 2.7.
. For that which is spoken 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. that in the body is the spirit and
the soul, is either spoken in way of exposition, as Augustine thinks; or
else the Apostle in that speech does distinguish the essential faculties of
the soul into the superior and inferior, understanding by the name of Spirit
the mind, and by the name Soul, the faculty of sense and living.

Be there only one or more souls in one and the same man?
1. Only one, because many and diverse faculties do not make many and diverse
substantial forms.

2. Because there can be but one essential form of one man, or one perfection
of him.

3. Because God breathed into Adam one only breathing Genesis 2.7.
.

4. Because in Scripture there are never more souls then one attributed to one
man, but ever one alone, Act. 7.59. Act. 20.10.
Math. 26.38. although in one man there be more faculties of one soul which are
in it at one time, as there be three unities in the number of three, which is
yet but one number. And all these faculties do manifest themselves in time,
some sooner, some later, even as the instruments of this or that faculty in
the body are fitted strong and lively: or else are first framed and do come
first.

What is the soul of man?
It is a spiritual substance in the body of man, created by God of nothing,
and united unto it to make one person, not only to give life to the body, and
to make the instruments fit for certain functions and actions, but also that
it might have the soueraignetie in ordering the life of the whole man, and
might stir up man to the knowledge and worshipping of God the Creator; and
being sundered from the body, it does not perish, but abides immortal.

When is the soul infused and comes to the body?
When the body in the womb of the mother is firmly rooted, fitted with
instruments, and disposed to receive such a soul: as in the creation of the
first soul appears, which is a pattern of al other Genesis 2.7. Eccles. 12.7.
.

Which is the proper seat of the soul of man in the body?
Especially the heart, because the heart amongst all the intrailes and members
in man, is the first that lives and the last that dies. And every where in
the Scriptures the special actions of the soul are ascribed to the heart Mat.
15.18.19. Romans 2.15. and 10.10. 1. Pet. 3.4.
.

Is the whole soul in the whole body, and in every part of the body the
whole soul?
Of this mind is Augustine, and some other after him, as light is in the air,
which is primarily and by it self in the whole, and secundarily in the parts.
And that it is not only the form, act and perfection of the whole body, but
also of every particular part. And lastly, that it has no body, and is not
circumscribed in any place, and is indivisible.

But others think, that like a certain king she sits in some one part of
the body alone, and in one place, as it were in her princely palace, does
diffuse her virtue thorough the whole body, and that it does exercise diverse
actions in the diverse parts of the body, according to the diverse placing of
the instruments in those parts, (which are necessary for the doing of such
actions.) So it reasons in the head, it wills in the heart, it concocteth
in the stomach, sees in the eyes 1. Cor. 12.17
: to which opinion we subscribe: touching which notwithstanding modest wits may
forbear till they be confirmed.

But how many parts or faculties of the soul be there?
Three essential, according to Plato, the understanding faculty, the faculty
of anger, and of lusting: or after Aristotle's the faculty of reasoning and
discoursing, of sense, of living or nourishing. For the same Aristotle says,
the soul is that principium, to wit, inward and formal, whereby we first
live, have sense, and understand.

But that distinction better befitteth the doctrine of Christians, whereby the
soul is distinguished into the understanding, which is also called the Mind,
and the Will: or, as the Scripture sometimes speaks, the spirit, and the
soul, being taken in a more strict signification 1. These. 5.23 Heb. 4.12.
.

What is the understanding?
It is that faculty whereby we do discern objects either to be liked or
disliked: and the understanding is double: 1. Practicing whereby we discern
good from evil, right from wrong: 2. Speculatiue, whereby we distinguish truth
from falsehood, by the notions of goodness and truth, which God has put into
our minds Romans 1.32. and 2.14.
.

And what is the will?
A faculty of the soul, whereby we either choose or refuse the objects, so
farrefoorth as the understanding judges them to be good or evil. Which if it
follow the rule of reason, it is called election or consultation in a special
manner: but if otherwise it be moved by a false shadow, and appearance of good,
then it is called both a passion and perturbation of the mind, or an affection,
as also concupiscence.

Were all the souls of men created of God at once, as the Angels were?
Origin and other Fathers have been of that mind, and that they were as it were
laid up in Gods storehouse: but the contrary is proved by the Scriptures. For
Genesis 2.17. Moses spoke but of one soul. Again, David shows, that souls are
created successively in every man's body, Psalm. 33.15. who frames their
hearts, that is, their souls, one by one: and Zach. 12.1. Who frames the
spirit of man in the midst of him. Romans 9.11. the Apostle writes of Jacob
and Esaias, that before they were borne, they had done neither good nor evil. If
they had done neither good nor evil, then it follows, that their souls were
not created from the beginning: for it is against reason that all this while
they should do nothing at all.

Whether was the soul of Euah made of Adams or not? and whether are the souls
derived one of another by propagation, or else new ones evermore created of God?
Some of the Fathers were of opinion, that as one candle is lighted by another,
even so the whole man is derived of the whole man, the soul of the soul, the
body of the body. For say they, first, as one Lion begets another, so by the
power and efficacy of Gods blessing, one man begets another, who consists not
only of a body but of a soul. 2. Because we read not that God created and
inspired a new soul. 3. Because the soul is the primarie seat of sin, in
which David says his mother conceived him, Psalm. 51.7. 4. Because in the first
conception, the soul is potentially in the body, which according to the
generatiue power given to man's seed, is brought into act. But the creation of
the first soul (as a plain pattern) shows what is the beginning of all
other souls.

Again, Adam said of Euah, Genes. 2.23. This is now bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh: but he says not, soul of my soul, which he should have said: if
so be that the soul of Euah had been taken out of his soul.

Moreover, the testimony of Zaccharie 12.1. is clear, who frames or forms
the spirit of man in the midst of him. And Eccles. 12.7. The spirit returns
to God that gave it. Peter also commands that we should commend our souls
to the faithful Creator. 1. Pet. 4.19.

Besides, that opposition does seem to require the same Heb. 12 9. where the
fathers of our flesh are opposed to the Father of spirits, because he does not
use the help of men in creating of living creatures: to which we must refer
that of Esa. 57.16. where in express words God is said to make souls, to wit,
immediately and not by propagation of man.

Yea the very nature of the soul does testify the same, which is most simple,
and therefore indivisible. So then seeing to the propagation of it there is
required a decision, it is apparent that it has not his beginning by
propagation from the soul of the parents.

Neither indeed can spiritual substances be changed one into another: and
therefore as one Angel cannot beget another Angel: even so, no more can one
soul being of the same kind and nature, produce another soul. Wherefore it
remains, that it is created in the infusion of it, and infused in the
creating of it, as August. says.

But herupon it will follow, that God rested not from all his works, Genesis 2.2.
I answer out of Augustine, that God rested from the works of some new kind,
but not from the works of the same kind Ioh. 5.17.
.

By what means then is original sin, conveyed to the children?
Neither by means of the soul, nor by means of the body, but by means of
propagation from Adam alone. For that all mankind is corrupted by Adam, does
not so much proceed from generation, (unless it be in regard of the manner,
that is, so farrefoorth as one sinful man begets another sinful man) as from
the just judgment of God: who as he had adorned all men in one as the root
and head of all mankind with original justice: so after that Adam sinned, in
him did justly spoil all of his gifts. Calvin Instit. lib. 2. cap. 1. Sect. 7.
This contagion has his cause neither in the substance of flesh, nor of the
soul: but because it was so ordained of God, that those gifts which he had
bestowed upon the first man, he should both have them, and also loose them, as
well for himself as for others that come after him.

Further, the souls are infected in the bodies being corrupted with sin, not
by physical and natural touching, (as wine put into a sower vessel) but by
the most just appointment of God. For so soon as the soul being pure in it
self is united to the body which is conceived in sin, that disobedience of
our first father is imputed unto man as if it were his own. Whereupon the
Apostle says, that all of us sinned in Adam as in the stock, the meaning is,
that all of us were guilty of sin, to wit, being in his loins, Romans 5.12.
After which manner also Levy is said to pay tithes to Abraham before he was
borne, Heb. 7.9.10. Now this disobedience of Adam imputed, by the just
appointment of God, there follows presently in the soul also contagion, or
corruption, and an inclination to evil, as a punishment of that first sin,
which punishment it self is also sin: even as the obedience of Christ imputed
to us is properly our righteousness whereby we are justified: and regeneration
is the consequent of this righteousness. But as it is better to quench a fire,
then ask how it begun, so is it better to quench original sin, then ask how
it came.

How do you prove the immortality of the soul?
1. By sundry testimonies of Scripture Psalm. 49.21. Eccles. 12.7. Mat. 10.28.
and 22.32. Phil. 1.23. 1. Pet 3.19. Reu. 6.9. and 7.9.
.

Again, by arguments taken: first, from the form of creation: for the soul
of man was created by divine inspiration, and therefore both divine and
immortal.

2. From that very knowledge which God has put into the soul, because such a
vigor as does soon vanish away is never able to aspire to immortality and the
fountain of life: for all things corporal fear to transcend, and so
consequently to search by admirable sharpnes things celestial, divine, and
eternal.

3. By the testimony of conscience, which by the guiltiness of sins does
conceive horrible terrors: now if the soul were not immortal, what need such
terrors of future fear?

4. By the effects or the excellent gifts of the soul, wherewith it does
excel, as that it vieweth the heavens, and shows her force in devising
sundry and very admirable things.

5. From the nature thereof, not only that it is simple in it own essence, and
void of contrariety and all bodily accidents: but because it is the image of
God, Genesis 1.26.27. but no mortal thing can be the image of the immortal God.
Yea the meat of man's soul is immortal Ioh. 6.51. 1. Pet. 1.23.
. And unless the soul be immortal, our faith and al our religion is in
vain, 1. Cor. 15.14. the godly are miserable, the ungodly happy and blessed:
the beasts be more happy then men: God is not affected with any regard of the
just or unjust. To al these add in the last place the common consent of all
nations.

How do souls differ from Angels?
Not in regard of the essence, but because Angels have not any bodily
conjunction, but the souls of men are capable of that conjunction: or else
because they are not the form of any body: but these are.

For what end was man made?
For the knowledge of God: again, for his worship as well spiritual and
internal, as corporal and external in the earth. Last of all, for his
glory. Whereupon should follow the felicity and blessedness of the whole man
in heaven: hence Christ says: This is life eternal, that they know thee the
only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17.3.

What use make you of this common place concerning man?
That we may first acknowledge with thanks Gods power and bounty manifested
in our creation and birth.

2. To comfort us in all troubles, Psalm. 22.18.

What special use make you of the souls immortality?
I am taught first to give all possible thanks to God my Creator for such a
benefit.

2. That I do not like the brute beasts, set mine heart upon these transitory
things: but that I often meditate of those things which concern the eternal
felicity of my soul.

What is contrary to the doctrine of the creation of man?
1. The Rabbis error, who thought, that in the creation of man the Angels were
coworkers with God.

2. Aristotle's error, who thought, that as the world had no beginning, so also
man had none, to which add the fables of Poets and profane Writers.

3. The false opinions of the Epicures and Sadduces, who make a mock of the
immortality of the soul, Isa. 22.14. 1. Corinthians. 15.32.

4. Of the Manichees, Priscillianists, Platonists, who affirmed the soul to be
of the substance of God.

5. Of the Pythagoreans, who thought they went from one body to another body:
and the Egyptians, who thought the number of souls was a set number, and that
when one was dead, his former soul went into another body.

6. Of Themistius, and also of Auerroes, who dreamed that there was but one
soul of all men.

7. The madness of many, who so inwrap their selves in the things of this
life, that they neglect the eternal felicity and salvation of the soul, Mat.
16.26.

The ninth common Place, Of the image of God in man.
What is an Image?
IT is the pourtraiture or representation of some thing: and that both in the
soul of man, to wit, in the mind or faculty of knowledge, and it is called of
the Philosophers an Idea, namely, a form of something conceived in the mind:
and also out of the mind, and it is a similitude and fashion either real of
the substance and qualities together, as when Adam is said to beget men after
his own image, Genesis 5.3. or else of certain adjuncts alone, as Luke 20.24. A
penie has Cesars image: or else it is some vain shadow and figure.

What difference is there between an image and a similitude?
A similitude has a larger signification then an image: for where there is an
image, there is also a similitude, but not of the contrary. For one egg is
said to be like another egg, and yet one egg is not the image of another
egg. But in this disputation of the image of God in man, this word of
similitude or likeness is added to the word image in way of exposition, as
Philip. 2.7.

Was man made after the image of God?
He was: for Genesis 1.17. God created man after his own image: and Paul says,
1. Cor. 11.7. The man ought not to cover his head because he is the image of
God, and Col. 3.10.

^s man only the image of God, or made after his image?
1. Christ is the natural, true, and most perfect image of God the Father 2.
Cor. 4.4. Col. 1.15.
, both as he is the eternal Son. For he is begotten of the substance of the
Father, not made: and therefore is called the Character of his person, Heb.
1.3. As also, as he is manifested in the flesh, because the whole disposition,
perfection, and as it were the face of the Father is beheld in the Son, being
made visible by the flesh 1. Tim. 3.16.
. Moreover, lest we should be overwhelmed with the clear beholding of God, the
Son being clothed with flesh is in stead of a glass to us, wherein the Father
does set before us that his infinite Majesty, goodness, wisdom, truth,
justice, to be seen and beheld of us. Therefore he that sees me (said Christ)
sees my Father Ioh. 12.45. and 14.9.
.

2. The Angels also are made after the image of God, because they also are
called the sons of God Job 1.6. and 2.1.
, and they were created spiritual, immortal, and just. And Christ teaches
plainly, that we shall be truly blessed, and therefore like to God, when we
shall in heaven be made even as the Angels of God, Mat. 22.30.

3. Man is called the image of God, 1. Cor. 11.7. and he is said to be made
after the image of God, not only Adam but also Eua, Genesis 1.26. Col. 3.10.
. But each of these latter images of God in Angels and men is of Gods free
mercy.

Why is man called the image of God?
Because of the true likeness which he has with God.

Why after his image?
Because of the imperfection of this likeness, in that he did not perfectly
represent God, as Christ does perfectly represent the Father.

Was whole Adam as well in soul as in body made after the image of God?
He was, to wit, wholly, not considered according to the parts, for in Moses,
God speaks of the whole man, when he says, Genesis 1.26. Let us make man, (not
the soul or body of man) after our image. Which appears by the contrary to
the image of God which is sin: for it has not only being in the soul, but
also in the body Romans 6.
. And therefore the image of God was not in the soul alone, or the body
alone, but in the whole man Romans 12.1. 1. These. 5.23.
. Nay this appears by the renewing of this image by sanctification, which is in
soul and body.

Moreover, God forbidding man to kill, (Genesis 9.6.) brings this reason,
because he is the image of God: and therefore the image of God is to be
understood of the whole man, which image of God notwithstanding did first of
all chiefly and especially shine in the soul, yet so as the sparks of that
image should appear in the body.

What was the image of God in man, and how many parts of it?
The image of God is considered in man: first, in regard of the substance of
man, and especially of his soul.

2. In respect of the gifts and qualities, but yet so as they be distinguished
from the essence thereof.

3. In respect of the attributes or dignity, superiority, Lordship and
excellency above the other creatures.

Why is man called the image of God in respect of the substance of his soul?
Because the soul which God puts into man is a nature spiritual, and
intelligible; not bodily, but an immortal and invisible essence, which in some
small measure does represent the nature of God Wis. 2.13. Eccles. 17.^.
.

2. There being but one only soul in man, endued with many faculties, as
memory, imagination, will, is such a mystical sign (as Augustine thinks)
which shows the unity of the divine essence and the plurality of persons.

Why in respect of the gifts?
Because God in the beginning did kindle in the mind of man a spark of
heavenly wisdom Col. 3.10.
, whereby he did truly know God, and his will revealed unto him; and so all the
works of God, and the natures of all things with their properties: as it may
be gathered from that, that when as Adam was awaked out of sleep he did know
Eua whence she was taken, saying, This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh, Genesis 2.23. and he gave names to all living creatures according to their
natures, verse. 19.

Further, because in his will God had adorned man with perfect justice and
holiness, whereby he did lively represent as it were in a glass, and imitate
the justice and holiness of God: he had furnished him also with strength fit
for the performance of every good duty. Lastly, with a body most beautifully
framed to obey the soul which moved it most readily and without all weariness
Genesis 1.31: Eccles. 7.30.
. Whereupon Paul says, Ephesians. 4.28. Put on the new man which after God is
created in true righteousness and true holiness, and Colos. 3.9. Which is
renewed in knowledge according to the image of him that created him.

Why is man said to be made after the image of God, in respect of his dignity
and lordship?
Because that by his rule and authority which he has over all living
creatures, and over all the creatures of this earth, he did represent God
himself, the sovereign Lord of al things upon earth. For he says: Bear ye
rule (to wit, the man and the woman) over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls
of the air, over the beasts, and over the whole earth, Genesis 1.26. And Psalm.
8.7. Thou have appointed him Lord over the works of thy hands. To which
belongs that, that Adam by his authority and pre-eminence given by God, did
in the beginning summon all living creatures before him, to which calling of
his, they did obey, Genes. 2.19.20. And this image belongs to the external
appointment of God: whence also 1. Corinthians. 11.7. by reason of his authority
over his wife and over his whole family, Man is called the image of God. For in
that pre-eminence whereby the man does excel the woman, the glory and image
of God is seen in some sort, as in all other superiority Psalm. 82.6.
. And the woman was not made after this image, but it is peculiar to the man,
which is gathered both from the very order and end of the creation: for the
woman was made of the man, and for the man's sake, but not of the contrary. 1.
Cor. 11.8.9.

Did Adam loose by his sin all those part or degrees of the image of God?
The two extreme and last parts, in respect of some small shadows and remnants
remained in man 1. Cor. 11.7.
: and wild beasts do suffer themselves to be ruled and to be tamed, that they
may obey man, or at least may not hurt him. The middle also in respect of the
understanding, and some part of the will remains; otherwise we should be no
longer men, but altogether brute beasts: but in regard of the true knowledge of
God, righteousness and holiness, it is utterly raced by the means of sin,
yet in the regenerate it is renewed daily through Christ 2. Cor. 3 18.
, and shall be perfected in the life to come.

How does the image of God shine in man's body?
1. Not in respect simply that it is a body, and endued with such a form, but
so far forth as the body is joined with a reasonable soul, carries with
it some part of the image of God, and does in some sort comprehend it in the
whole world: whereupon also man is called (...)
a little world, wherein shines the builder and master workman of the whole
world.

2. Because the diverse members of the body, eyes, ears, mouth, tongue, hands,
do represent the spiritual parts of God, that is to say, his spiritual
perfections, wisdom, power, and the rest of Gods attributes, no otherwise
then Heb. 8.5.9, 24. and 10.1. the tabernacle and the arc of the covenant, the
table, vessels and sacrifices were representations of heavenly and spiritual
things.

3. Because the gifts of the mind do make the body shine, even as the light of
the candle does make the skin of the lantern to shine, and the very
righteousness and holiness of the soul did redound to the very body, and to
the members of the body, and so by that means man did exercise by the body
that sovereignty and excellency upon all inferior creatures; and carried in
his countenance a certain sovereign majesty, by means whereof the beasts
also did acknowledge him for their Lord. Genesis 2.20.

Why and to what end did God create man after his own image?
1. That God who is in himself and in his own nature invisible, might make
his essence and nature in some sort visible in man, as it were in a glass: and
so by this means might offer himself to be known of man: for the proper end
and use of a picture, is, that he whose picture it is might thereby be known.

2. To the end that God being so acknowledged of man, he might love, worship,
and glorify him: for every like loves his like.

3. That God himself might of the other side unite man unto himself, as being
like unto him, unto eternal happiness.

4. To the end that men being made after the same likeness of God, might not
only love and reverence God, but one another, both in this life, and that
which is to come.

5. That the reprobates being made after the image of God, might be without all
excuse.

What things are against this doctrine?
1. The heresy of the Manichees, and of the Anthropomorphites, who fained God
to have a body, who should frame the body of Adam after the image and
likeness of his own body.

2. The dotage of Osiander, who taught that the body of man was framed after
the shape or idea of that body which Christ should afterward assume.

3. Also of Flaccus Illyricus, who affirmed that the image of God, that is, his
holiness and righteousness was of the essence of his soul.

4. Of the Schoolmen, who affirmed that the image of God was nothing else but
a certain accessorie and outward decency.

The tenth common Place, of original Righteousness.
What doctrine has affinity with the former touching the image of God?
THe doctrine of original righteousness, or of the first integrity of our
nature.

Was the first man created of God in original righteousness?
He was: which is proved by the doctrine going before. For Genesis 1.27. Moses
says: He made man after his own image, male and female made he them. Now we
said, that the most special part of that image was that pourtraiture of the
righteousness and holiness of God, which was made in man, whereof this was a
sign that they walked naked, and were not ashamed, Genesis 2.24.

Moreover, Genesis 2.31. immediately after the creation of Man, Moses adds
presently: And they were very good. To this purpose makes that Ephesians. 4.24. Put
ye on the new man, which after God is created in true righteousness and
holiness.

Whether (if man had stood in that his original righteousness) should he have
had need of Christ the Mediator?
Not that he might be reconciled to God, and be healed of his sin, (which he
had not yet committed) but by whom so long as he would, he might be kept in the
favor of God, and be preserved from sin: for that sentence of Christ is
always true, without me ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.

That same original righteousness wherein Adam was created, was it a
substance or an accident?
It was not a substance, but it was an uprightness and integrity in nature,
and therefore a quality, which may be present or absent, according to the
definition of an accident, without the destruction of the subject, that is, the
soul. For these differ, a nature right, and the rightnesse of nature: as much
as a right line, and the rightnesse of the line do differ, because the line is
the subject of the rightnesse. Therefore the soul of Adam was the subject of
that original righteousness and integrity, but his soul was not that
righteousness it self.

Again, it is proper to God to be essentially just and good, because God is
very goodness it self, integrity it self, and justice it self. And therefore
if that original righteousness of the first man had been a substance, then
man should have been called justice it self, which without blasphemy to God
cannot be spoken.

Besides the contrary to that original righteousness, to wit, original sin
is an accident, because it entered into the nature of man. Now then seeing
contraries have both one genus or general, it follows that original
righteousness was not a substance but an accide^t.

Lastly, seeing the restoration of that image is nothing else but the
repairing of new qualities, which is wrought by regeneration, It follows that
original righteousness was also a quality (whereby the whole man was just and
right) yet indeed such a one as might be lost, as afterward was proved by the
fall of man.

What then was that original righteousness?
1. The light in the mind of man, whereby he knew God and his will.

2. The ingrauing of the law of God in his heart, whereby he was moved to obey
him, and the integrity of the whole man, whereby the spirit was subject to,
and obeyed God, the soul was subject to and obeyed the spirit, the body was
subject to the soul and obeyed it.

3. The acceptance of the whole man, whereby he was acceptable and well
pleasing to God, but yet so as man might loose it, as the very event showed.

Why is it called original?
Because it was natural, and the first man was created in it, and unto it: not
as a private person, but as the stock and root of all mankind. Genesis 1.17.
Ephesians. 4.24.


Now say that Adam had stood in that original righteousness, should it have
been derived to all his posterity?
It should: 1. because it was the righteousness of man's nature, and not the
righteousness of a private person.

2. Because the contrary to it, namely original sin, was derived by Adams
means to all his posterity (Christ only excepted.)

3. Because every like begets his like in nature and kind: which
notwithstanding should not have been by force of propagatio^, but by the
appointment of God, as it is said before of original sin.

Whether should the grace of Christ have ensued that original righteousness?
Yes certainly: for if God in the law does promise his grace to the children
of the godly Exodus 20.6.
: how much more would he have pursued Adam and his posterity with that grace,
if they had stood in godliness?

What then? should they have been so confirmed in grace, as that they could
sin no more?
Surely the condition of the children and of the posterity should not have
been more perfect and better, then the condition of our first parents, who were
created by the hand of God himself, but mutably good: and this is reserved for
the life to come, that a man should be without all danger of sinning.

What is the use of this doctrine?
That we should bewail the loss of our excellent estate in Adam: and that we
should so much the more eagerly and earnestly by faith embrace Christ the
restorer of the image of God, which in time to come shall be immutable.

What makes against this doctrine of original justice?
1. The dottage of Flaccus Illyricus, who taught, that original justice and
original sin was a substance in Adam, and not an accident.

2. The error of the Papists, who maintain, that original justice (wherewith
as they say the first man was made,) was not his natural condition, but a
supernatural gift, and that man lost neither free will, nor other gifts of
nature, but only supernatural.

The eleventh common Place, of man's free will before his fall.
Is the word Free Will found in the Scriptures?
NO, as neither that Greek word (...), which is of it own power: yet
nevertheless the thing expressed by those words, is found in the holy
Scriptures, wherein in stead of these words they use the word will.

What are we to understand by this word Free Will?
There be some which understand it to be a free faculty to do any thing as
well good as evil, because in good authors it signifies a power: as in that
of Ovid, You have power both of our life and death. Te penes arbitrium nostrae
vitaeque necisque.


The School doctors understand by will, the judgment of the mind; by free,
the will it self; as though free will should signify judgment, which being
made of the mind, the will either chooses or refuses. But the word free is an
adjective, and not a substantive, and it is an epithet or attribute added to
the word will.

Therefore to speak properly, freewill does not signify a faculty of doing
good or evil, or else the liberty of the judgment, but rather faculty of
willing or nilling any thing, or else the free pleasure of the will, which
follows the deliberation of the reason or of the mind and the consultation:
or a freewil, whereby the will does either will or not will, choose or refuse
those things which be objected of the mind or understanding: and it is not
only of the ends but also of the means.

So Latin authors use the word will, as Cicero in the oration for Sextus
Roscius, All things are done by the beck and will of God: that is, Omnia nutu,
arbitrioque Dei aguntur.
they be ruled by the will of God. Aristotle called it (...), free election of
the mind. The Greek fathers more boldly (...), having power of it self, for
it signifies a thing (...).
masterlesse, which is subject to the power of no other, can be let or hindered
by none, which agrees to no creature.

To what things is free will attributed in the Scriptures?
It is attributed to God the Creator, and to the reasonable creature, that is,
to spirits and man.

What and of what kind is free will which is attributed to God, spirits and man?
To God and to the blessed spirits (after their confirmation) is attributed
free will only to good, which is true liberty, as Paul also says, 2. Cor.
3.17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Now God himself is
the spirit, and the spirit does especially reign in the blessed celestial
spirits.

2. To men not regenerate, as also to evil spirits is attributed freewill
only to evil, and not unto good too: for they are not able to do, no not to
think any good of themselves Genesis 8.21. 2. Corinthians 3.5. Ephesians. ^.1.
. Which free will ought rather to be called slavish will, because Christ says,
Ioh. 8.34. He that commits sin is the servant of sin Romans 6.17. 2. Pet.
2.19.
: yet it is called freewill unto evil, because every sin is voluntary Job.
15.16.
. And the will unless it work freely, were no will but nilling.

3. To man regenerate is attributed freewill to good Phil. 2.13. Heb. 13.21.
, but only in part, because it consists as yet partly of the spirit, partly
of sinful flesh, and it has not as yet full, perfect, and free will to good,
which it have one day in the glory to come Romans 7.15. etc. Gal. 5.17
.

4. To Adam before the fall is attributed freewill, which was flexible or
mutable, as well to good as to evil, which difference is especially to be
observed.

How do you prove this latter?
Because there was nothing in man inwardly or outwardly, whereby he should be
compelled to will and to do either evil or good: therefore Ecclesiastes cap.
7.30. God created man right: but they (to wit, Ada^ and Eve) followed many
devises. And Syracides or Jesus the son of Syrach: God created man from the
beginning, and left him to the choice of his own counsel: cap. 15.10.14. Now
let us speak of the powers of freewill.

How far forth did the powers of freewill extend themselves in Adam before
the fall?
To perform al those things which did agree unto his nature. For he was able
to perform the works of nature, as to eat, to drink, to rest, to sleep, to
walk: and political works, as to maintain peace, to govern a family: and
religious works or works of piety, either inward, as to love God, to believe
in God, to call upon God; or outward, as the exercises of religion in teaching
and offering sacrifice, etc.

Did Adam besides these sound faculties stand in need of Gods grace?
He did, whereby namely he might be preserved in that his integrity of nature,
and might be furthered to those actions. (Even a^ a true and living vine,
endued with her natural virtues for the bringing forth of wine, has yet need
of the outward help of the rain and also of the sun, preserving and moving her
natural powers, and furdering her for the effecting of the work of nature.)
For the proposition of Christ is everlasting, Ioh. 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing. And Col. 1.17. Christ is before all things, and all things are
preserved by him. In him we live, we move, and have our being, says Paul, Act.
17.28.

But what kind of grace was that?
Such a one, whereby if he would he was able to live holily, yet not whereby he
would perpetually and constantly cleave to God: for if he had received this
grace, without doubt he had perseuered. So says Austine in his book de
corrept. and gratia, cap. 11. He had received power if he would, but he had not
will to do that he could: that is, Adam had received grace whereby he was able
if he would not to sin, but he had not received grace whereby he would not, nor
could not sin.

Why did God make Adam mutable, and not rather such a one who neither could nor
would ever sin?
Who art thou that disputest with God? Romans 9.20. But yet there be reasons
wherefore he made him such a one.

1. Because to be immutable, is proper to God alone Number. 23.19. Mal. 3.6.
.

2. That man could not sin, is reserved in the heavens.

3. As Augustine answers, he would first show what man's free will was able to
do, and then what the benefits of his grace could do, and the judgment of
justice. For if he had created man such a one as could not sin, then
certainly no man should have sinned, and no man should have needed the grace of
Christ whereby he might be delivered, neither should man have been punished for
sin which he should not have committed. And so by this means there should
have been place neither for grace nor justice: but it was by no means fit that
we should be ignorant both how great the grace of God is in Christ, and also how
just a judge God is in the world.

Ought the first man therefore to be excused from sin, and God to be accused?
God forbid, because he sinned freely, when he had power not to have sinned,
and so did willingly bring destruction upon himself. But in that God did not
give grace not to sin, it was for the greater good of man, and the more clear
glory of God. The first will was to be able not to sin: The last shall be not
to be able to sin, says Augustine.

What is the use of this doctrine?
That hence we may learn that God was no way the author of sin; but in that
Adam sinned, this came from his own free will (because he had power not to sin
if he would, and no man did either compel him or enforce him by any necessity
that he should will evil) and therefore that he was without all excuse. Again,
that we might understand that our estate in heaven shall be much more surer and
excellenter then was Adams in Paradise, and therefore we have recoueuered far
more in Christ then we lost in Adam. For by that free will which the first man
had, he brought destruction upon himself and his posterity: but by this which
man shall fully obtain by Christ, he shall live for ever, and shall subject and
conform himself to the will of God alone.

An addition touching the state of man before the fall. Did God give Adam a
mortal or an immortal body?
Partly a mortal, because he might die, as the event showed Romans 5.12. 1. Cor.
15.21.
; partly immortal, because he might not have died, namely, if he had obeyed
God. This is collected out of Gods threatening, What day soever thou eatest,
thou shall die the death, Genesis 2.17. to wit, by the loss of grace, by the
separation of the soul, by deprivation of glory. But the children of the
resurrection cannot sin any more, nor die. Luke 20.36.

How came it to pass that it was mortal, and how that it was immortal?
That it could die it had it from the condition of nature, for it was taken out
of the watery earth, and therefore of the four elements and of the four
humors having an inward possibility to corruption, according to that Thou art
dust, Genesis 3.19. and therefore by nature mortal.

But in that it was immortal, or had power not to die, it was not from the
constitution of nature, but by the benefit of grace, because God had granted
this grace to man that he had power not to die, if he would have obeyed his
commandments. For if God gave this virtue to the clothes and shoes of the
Israelites, that in the space of forty years they were not worn Deuteronomy. 29.5.
: It is no marvel if he should have given man power, obeying him, that he
should have enjoyed a certain estate wherein he should have lived til he was
old without failing.

Whether could he either be oppressed by external force, or die for famine or
thirst, or be extinguished by diseases, or at length wear away with old age?
He could not, because that the providence of God and the custody of Angels
did watch against all hurtful things Psalm. 91.1. and 121.3.5.6.7.8
.

Against the want of meats he had given him sundry fruits of trees Genesis 1.29.
and 2.16. and 3.2
.

Against diseases arising of the distemperature of the humors, and the torments
of the mind, there was given unto him original righteousness, which did
withstand al disorder, and made the body subject to the soul, and cherished
joy in the heart.

Against old age was given the tree of life, and the translation of man unto
the state of glory.

Did then the tree of life avail any thing to the retaining of that
immortality?
It did avail: for therefore it was called the tree of life, by a metonymie of
the effect, Genesis 2.9. or else by a sacramental signification of Christ, in whom
was life Ioh. 1.4.
, and who is our life. Col. 3.4.


But how did it avail?
Some there be who think that it did of it self, or by it own force which
God had put into it, or by the inspiration of a secret healthsomnesse profit
man against all weaknesses, diseases, and old age, and preserve him so as he
should never die, if he used it at certain times, as the words of the Lord
seem to imply this, Genesis 3.22. Now also least peradventure he reach forth his
hand and take also of the tree of life and live for ever.

Others hold that it was only a sacrament of grace, whereby man might have
lived for ever if he had perseuered in the commandments of God: and in that
respect to be auailable to immortality, so far forth as the sacraments do
avail to the enjoying of that whereof they be sacraments, which opinion we
also subscribe to.

Whether beside the fruit of that tree of life, had Adam need of meats for the
preservation of his life?
He had, for to this purpose God planted trees in Paradise: and Genesis 2.16. it
is said, that he gave man every herb for meat, and the fruit of the tree,
that by the eating of these he might preserve the gift of immortality.

Besides also man was made a living soul, as other living creatures, but
without necessity of dying.

What then should have become of man in the conclusion if he had not sinned,
should he have ever lived upon earth?
No: but he should in the end have removed into heaven, indeed without death
(which is the dissolution of the soul from the body) but yet not without some
change, such as the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 15.51. shall be in the bodies
of the elect, who shall be then living in the coming of the Lord, they shall
remove hence into heaven.

What things be contrary to this doctrine?
The error of the Pelagians, who affirmed that man should have died although
he had never sinned against those speeches, Genesis 2.17. and 3.3. Romans 5.12. and
1. Cor. 15.21.

The twelfth common Place, of Marriage.
What think you of Marriage, is it a divine, humane, or politic constitution?
IT is divine: 1. because it was instituted by God in Paradise Genesis 1.27. and
2.15.
, betwixt Adam and Eve in their innocence, they then bearing the true image of
God.

2. Because it was a type of that truly divine and spiritual marriage, which
was to be betwixt Christ and his Church Ephesians. 5.23.
.

3. Because it was ordained for the propagation of the Church, and for the
further helping forwards the salvation of man.

It is also humane or politic, or (as I may say) of humane constitution: 1.
because it was instituted for the propagation of mankind, and civil society
upon earth, for in heaven they marry not, but are like the Angels of God. Mat.
22.30.

2. Because for the most part it depends upon the honest constitutions made
by man for that purpose.

How prove you that marriage was instituted by God?
Genesis 2.18. God said (that is, in his most wise counsel decreed and ordained)
it is not good for man to be alone, let us make an helper or companion of his
life like unto him: and when he could find none for Adam before him, God
brought upon him a dead sleep, and whilst he was asleep (and so being
brought as it were into an ecstasy, void of grief, and was naturally ignorant
what was done) took one of his ribs and thereof made woman, whom he brought
unto Adam, who being led by the spirit of God, did prophecy, saying, This is
bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called Ischa, that is,
Vira, Mannesse, because she was taken out of man, being as it were alter-ipse,
a second self: For this cause shall man leave his father and mother and cleave
unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.

And after the deluge, God confirmed marriage, and blessed it, saying, Increase
and multiply Gen 9.1.
. At length the Son of God himself restored it, being somewhat decaid Math.
19.4.5.6.
, honoring the same both with his presence and miraculous gift Ioh. 2.11. etc.
.

To conclude, God not only instituted marriage, but also stirs up mutual
love between the bride and the bridegroom, and furdereth marriage Genes 24.14
50* 51.
.

Whence it follows, first that marriages are not by chance, or depending on
man's arbiterment only, but are fatal, and governed by Gods providence.
Secondly, that marriage is a good and a holy thing. Thirdly, that it is to be
undertaken in the fear of God, and invocation for his direction.

But are not Moses and Paul contrary one to another: where it is said, Genesis
2.18. It is not good for man to be alone: and 1. Cor. 7.1, Genesis 2.18.
It is good for man not to touch a woman? 1. Cor. 7.1

No, for that Paul speaks first of good which is profitable, and not of
honesty: and he does not oppose good unto vice or sin, but unto
inconvenient. Secondly, because that in Genesis is understood of the species or
greatest part of mankind, which would decay if it were not continued and
increased by marriage, neither can a man live chastely without marriage: but Paul
speaks of certain indiuidua, or persons, having the gift so as they can live
chastely without marriage: for of others he says, It is better to marry then to
burn 1. Cor. 7.9.
.

But tell me whether Paul speaking of a virgin, 1. Cor. 7.38. 1. Cor. 7.38.
and saying, He that bestows her not in marriage does better: do mean that
virginity deserves more the favor of God then marriage?
He speaks only of some outward commodities of the single life for the
present necessity, that is, imminent persecutions verse 26.
: and for that the unmarried is more expedite and fit to teach, to serve the
Church, to undergo the dangers of his profession, and the duties of piety with
a better and freer mind verse 32.34.
: and insinuates more difficulty to be in marriage then in the single life, as
he speaks concerning the married, Such shall have trouble in the flesh verse 28
, and more distraction of thoughts and care for the things of this world verse.
33.34.
, and therefore that the single life is more profitable unto him that has the
gift of continency, and less subject to distractions and troubles, and in
this respect more blessed then marriage verse. 40.
. Notwithstanding the godly married may also care for those things which belong
unto the Lord, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Zacharias John Baptists father, and
the like.

What is contrary to this doctrine, concerning the efficient cause of
Matrimony?
The heresy of Montanus, the Tatians, Saturnians, Manichees, Marcionites,
Priscillianists, Encratites, who condemned marriage as the doctrine and work of
the devil. Pope Syricius differed not much from this heresy, who called
matrimony, uncleanness of the flesh, in which no man might please God. Unto
all whom, that saying of S. Paul is to be opposed, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.4.


Of the matter of Marriage. Of how many, and of what manner of persons ought
Marriage to consist?
Of two only, one man and one woman: for so says the Lord, Two shall be one
flesh Genesis 1.27. and 2.24. Mat. 19.5.
: and so many suffice for procreation of offspring. But whenas the married
couples give themselves mutually one to another, they are both the second
causes efficient, and they also the matter of marriage.

What is contrary to this?
Polygamie, not of having many wives successively, when one succeeds another,
but of enjoying more then one at one and the same time; Genesis 4.19.
which corruption of lawful marriage begun in Lamech of Cains race, and was
afterward permitted unto the Fathers (not for wantonness, but for increase of
an holy seed) both for that politic customs were at that time, as also that
God might thereby manifest his promise of an innumerable seed to spring of a
few. But Christ condemned it afterward, Mat. 19.8. and 5.32.
saying, It was not so from the beginning: and declaring, that who so puts
away his wife and takes another, commits adultery. For that God being
about to give Adam a wife, took not two, or more, but one ribbe out of him,
and made not many, but one only wife; nor brought diverse, but one wife unto
him. Also whoredom, adulteries, detestable sodomy and buggery with beasts, do
repugne this doctrine. Leuit. 18.20. Romans 1. Leu. 18.20.22.23. and
20.10.11.12.13. Romans 1.26.27. Heb 13.4. 1. Cor. 7.2.


What kind of men may marry?
Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled: wherefore all
sorts of men may marry, yea it is necessary, and enjoined them which cannot
live continently, Let every man have his own wife: where the verb (...), let
him have, is commanding, not leaving it free.

Whether is it lawful for the Ministers of the Church to marry?
Yea, because God has made them also fit for marriage and procreation of
children, Genesis 1.27. and 2.18.24. Heb. 13.4.
and the law of nature allows of conjunction between male and female.
Secondly, because it is holy, good and honorable amongst all men, and the bed
undefiled. For Christ calls marriage, a divine conjunction, and therefore
holy, when he says, Those whom God has joined together. And Paul says,
Marriage, Mat. 19.6. 1. Tim. 4.4.5. 1. Cor. 7.14. 1. Tim. 2.15. Tit. 1.15. 1.
Tim. 3.2. Tit. 3.6.
meat and such like are sanctified by the word and prayer. Also the
unbelieving man is sanctified by the believing wife. Also the woman is saved by
bringing forth children in faith. To conclude, To the clean all things are
clean. And Paphnutius said in the Nicene Synod, that it was chastity for a
man to lie with his own wife. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 23. Thirdly, because a
Bishop (says the Apostle of the Gentiles) must be unreprovable, the husband
of one wife, not of one Church, as the Romanists say, for the Apostle speaks
not in that place of the Bishops office, but of the quality of his person; nor
forbids him to marry any other if his first wife die, for he that marieth a
second wife after the death of the first, is the husband of one wife, if he be
content with his own wife: but he will have an honest man to content himself
with one wife, and not to have two or more wives at one time, after the manner of
the Jews and Gentiles. 4. Because the Ministers of the Gospel represent not
the Leuiticall priests, who yet did not perpetually abstain from their wives,
but only whilst they served about the holy things in the Temple: for they
were types and figures of Christ our Mediator, whose more then angelike
purity, they ought every way to represent beyond the custom of men. Also when
they were to enter into the tabernacle, they abstained from wine Leu. 10.9.
, from the burial of the dead and 21.1.
, and from shauing and verse. 5.
, wherein notwithstanding the Romish priests do not imitate them: but yet they
that are godly, know how to moderate the use of marriage for a time: as also how
to possess their vessels in holi^^sse 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
. And that they must sometimes refrain, that they may give themselves to
prayer 1. Cor. 7.5.
: which yet Paul will not have to be perpetual. Fifthly, (...), or inuersion,
because the priests, prophets, prophetesses, Apostles (as Peter, Philip, and
others mentioned 1. Cor. 9.5.) apostolic men (for Polycrates, son to
Gregory Nazianzene, Bishop of Ephesus, says he was the eight Bishop, and
sprung from Bishops his ancestors) were married Eusebius lib. 5. Eccl. hist.
. Sixthly, because Daniel gives Antichrist this note, to rule in the Church,
not regarding women, but defiling the Church with filthy and incestuous lusts
Dan. 11.37.
And Paul plainly calls the Law of being unmarried in general, a doctrine
of devils 1. Tim. 4.1.
. Seventhly, because Christ says: They worship me in vain, teaching for
doctrines men's precepts Mat. 15.9. and 19.12.
: willing all men to use marriage, except those whom either nature has made
unfit, or some casualtie made unable, or some special grace has made
continent, so as that they can live purely without marriage. To all others
Christ says: All are not capable hereof, save only they to whom it is given:
and again: 1. Cor. 7.2. Every one has his proper gift, one thus, another
thus. And 1. Cor. 12.4. There are diversity of gifts, which one and the same
spirit works, dividing to every one privately their proper gift, as he will.
Eighthly, because the single life of the Romanists abounds with prodigious and
infamous lusts, yea even amongst those Fathers, that would be thought to live
like Curious, but yet are Epicures. Ninthly, out of the Decrees of the third
Council of Carthage holden in the year of our Lord, 421. in which the heresy
of Pelagius was condemned, at which Council Augustine was also present, it is
plain that Bishops were married. For the twelfth Canon is in effect this: We
decree that the sons or daughters of Bishops, or any Clergy man, shall not
marry with heathen people, or Heretics and Scismatickes.

Whether does the Apostle ( 1. Timoth. 5.11.) condemn those widows, whose
marrying have made void their first faith given to God to keep themselves
continent?
This makes nothing for the Nuns vows, wherein at least is to be observed
that, which the Apostle requires the younger widows, for danger of
incontinencie, saying, ver. 14. I would have the younger to marry. But he
teaches that the younger widows were not to be admitted unto the number of
the Deacons: for that they are unfit for that office, who are tied with the
bond of matrimony. But youth did often solicit the younger widows to
marriage, which they could not contract without some offense and sign of
lightness.

What think you then of vows?
Some are holy and free, touching things lawful and possible, and out of Gods
word and will: but others wicked, compelled, rash, besides, and often against
Gods word, and undertaken besides the gifts given by God. The first I think
are to be observed: but these to be broken Deuteronomy. 23.21
: according to the old saying. In an ill promise break thy faith: in a wicked
vow change thy decree.

What things repugne this Doctrine?
The opinion of Pope Syricius and of the Romanists, who blasphemously pronounce
contrary to the Apostle Heb. 13.4.
: that marriage is an uncleanness and pollution of the flesh. They forbid the
married holy orders, urging the vow of perpetual single life, and forswearing
marriage, against the express word of God to those that are to be ordained.
They call the solemn vow of continency, an impediment hindering contract in
matrimony, and breaking the contract made: nor that it is lawful after the
solemn vow, such as the Monks and Nuns make. They say that the single life
is an Angelical kind of life deserving remission of sins.

Whether may a man mary another wife, his first wife being dead?
He may.

First, because that saying of God: ( It is not good for man to be alone Genesis
2.18.
) is general and perpetually true.

Secondly, the Apostle says: If the man be dead, the woman is free from the
law of her husband Romans 7.2.3.
, so as she is no adulteress, if she be married to another: and 1. Tim. 5.14.
Let younger widows mary: and 1. Cor. 7.37. The woman is bound by the law unto
her husband being alive, but if her (not first, second, or third, but
indefinitely) husband be dead, she is at liberty to marie another. So may a
man also by the same law.

Thirdly, Abraham the father of all believers married Cethura after Sarahs death
Genesis 25.1.
.

Fourthly, because it is better to mary then to burn 1. Cor. 7.9. and 15.
, and verse. 8. and 9. he commands the unmarried and widows to mary, if they
cannot live continently: also, If the unbeliever will depart, let him depart: A
brother or sister is not subject in such like things. verse. 15.

What is contrary to this doctrine?
The error of Tertullian, Hierome, and others, who, to the end they might
condemn second marriages, do affirm, that marriage is not dissolved, no not by
death.

What things are required in the right and lawful contract of Matrimony?
Two things: fitness, which is not so much to be gathered by the number of
years, as by the ableness of the body: and lawful consent,

What is consent?
It is a will proceeding from a sound and perfect judgment: whereby, error of
the person, craft, drunkenness, foolishness, parents threats, just fear,
external compulsion, and such like are excluded from contracting matrimony:
all which must be away, to the end that the will may be sound, free, and
proceeding from a right judgment. So when the parents and brother of Rebecca
sat in commission with Abraham's servant about her marriage, they said: Call the
maid, that we may know her willing consent Genesis 24.57.
.

Which is a lawful consent?
That which agrees both with the law of God and nature, and with the honest
constitutions of men.

What does the law of God and mercy require?
Honor and obedience toward our parents: and shame and reverence toward our
kindred.

What is the honor due unto the parents?
That the children contract not matrimony without their parents counsel and
will. First, for that the first man Adam took not a wife without Gods will and
consent Genesis 2.22.
: where God is said not only to have created her, but also to have brought her
unto Adam.

Secondly, because children are not at their own^ ^isposing, but in their
parents power.

Thirdly, for that the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac Gen 24.3 4.
, Jacob and 28.1.12.
, yea and Ismael and 21.21.
, though fierce otherwise, and Sichem a Gentile and 34.4.
, showed that marriage is not to be contracted without the parents consent.

Fourthly, Paul says: Children obey your parents in all things Ephesians. 6.1. Col.
3.20.
, and therefore in that matter of marriage.

Fifthly, God did not ratify a vow made by children without the parents
knowledge or consent Number. 30.6.
: much less matrimony made by contract without parents consent. Esaias married
wives, both which grieved and vexed his parents Genesis 26.34.
. And the Scripture prescribes precepts unto the parents about giving their
children in marriage Deuteronomy. 7.3. Ier. 29.6. 1. Cor. 7.37.
: further Christ says: that the law of honoring parents is violated, when the
children take the parents goods without their knowledge, and offer it unto God
in the temple Mat. 15.5.
. How much more is that law violated, when children withdraw themselves out of
their parents power? Which they do, when they contract matrimony without
their parents knowledge or consent. But yet the godly Magistrate is to
consider, whether the parents have reasonable or else unreasonable cause to
withstand and hinder it.

What contrarieth this doctrine?
The opinion of the Papists, who do ratify secret marriages contracted without
either the parents knowledge or consent: and that their consent is of honesty
only and not of necessity: and with such marriages approve of rape, when as a
maid is taken violently out of her fathers house, that after she is defloured,
she may be taken to wife.

What does modesty or reverence toward kindred require?
That matrimony be not contracted between those of consanguinitie and
affinity, within those degrees which are forbidden, both by Gods law Leuit.
18.6.
, and the honest constitution of Princes. For such marriages are called
unlawful and incestuous, because they are not approved by public laws and
ceremonies: for the word (...) signifies the marriage girdle, which declared
those marriages which were lawful and publicly approved: others which are made
against the constitutions of Princes, are called unlawful.

What rules are to be observed in contracting matrimony?
God has propounded three in his law. First, marriage is forbidden in
infinitum, in the right line, so well ascending as descending, because the
g^^^ter or superior in the right line has always the place of the father, in
respect of the younger. And the Scripture says: A man shall leave father and
mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: So John cannot marry his mother,
grandmother, great grandmother, etc. nor his daughter, niece, cousin, etc. So
Martha may neither be married to her father, grandfather, great grandfather,
nor to his son, nephew, nor cousin of the son or daughter Leuit. 18.7.10.
.

2. In the collateral and equal line, that is between brothers and sisters
only, either of one parent, or both. ver. 9.11. For whereas the first brothers
married their sisters, it is to be understood of necessity and by divine
dispensation, seeing there were no other women in the world, and there was a
precept of multiplying mankind Genesis 1.28.
.

3. In the collateral and unequal line: as thou may not marry thy aunt by
father or mothers side, and so ascending, for they are to thee instead of
parents: and so Martha may not marry her uncle by the father or mothers side.
So though for the uncle to marry his brother or sisters daughter be not
expressly forbidden, yet because a simili, from the like, the like precepts
are deduced, thou may not marry thy brothers daughter, nor his daughters
daughter, because thou art to them in their parents stead. In the 18. of Leuit.
see this at large. Now for affinity, the law forbids the son to marie his
stepmother, the father his sons wife, or his daughter in law, or her
daughter: and these are in the right line. In the collateral line, the brother
cannot marry his brothers wife, his wives sister, his wife living, nor his
fathers brothers wife: nor the children of his son, or daughter in law. See
Leuit. 18.15.16.17.18.

Is this Leuiticall law concerning degrees, a law ceremonial, or judicial,
or natural and moral?
It is natural and conformable unto the law of nature, and therefore not to be
remitted by any, but by God only, because even the Gentiles were obliged and
bound unto it, and the Scripture calls (more or less) all couplings
contrary unto them, in every prohibition, filthiness and abomination before
God. And certainly, that general proposition in the sixth verse: Let no man go
unto her that is near of kindred Leuit. 18.6.
, agrees with the law of nature. And Christians are bound by the judgment of
Paul unto the observation of the Leuiticall law touching degrees. 2. Cor. 5.1.

How then is that to be understood, Deuteronom. 25.5. where the wife of the
brother dying without issue, is to be mar^ied unto the other brother: and that
example of Judah, who gave his first sons wife after his death, unto his
second son: and after he was dead, promised her to his third son also. Genesis
38.8. whereas the Lord in Leuit. expressly forbids the brother to marry
his brothers wife Leuit. 18.9.16.18.
?
I answer, that the law (Leuit. 18.9.) is simply common unto all nations, as
the law is, of not stealing. But that law (Deuteronom. 25.5.) is either not to
be understood of a natural brother, but of the next of consanguinitie in
another degree, (for they are all called brethren amongst the Hebrews:) or
else that it was a peculiar privilege, granted after a sort unto the
Israelites, that the family should be conserved in the name of the first born,
and that the first birth of Christ which should never die, should be signified,
Aug. quaest. 61. in Leuit.

What then shall we think of Abraham, who married his brother Arans daughter
Genesis 11.29.
: of Jacob who married two sisters both alive together and 29.16.
: and of Moses, who was borne of a marriage between the nephew and the aunt
Exodus 2.1. and 6.20.
, as the Hebrew word is taken, Numb. 26.59?
Either that those marriages were made, both while there were but a few of the
holy seed, and also in the public confusion, God dispensing with and
tolerating it: or that those Patriarchs sinned, and are not to be excused in
all things: and we are not to judge by examples, but by laws.

But may a faithful man marry an unbelieving woman?
No, except the unbelieving person promise consent to the true religion. And
thus Moses married a wife of Aethiopia, and Jacob Labans daughter. For God
forbad his people to join in matrimony with the other nations Deuteronomy. 7.3.4.
. And although that precept be judicial, yet it appertains unto all, if the
reason be considered: for he gives a plain moral reason, which is at this day
in force: For she will seduce thy son, that he shall not follow me, but rather
serve strange Gods: and the same is repeated in the Kings 1. Reg. 11.1 2.4.
, and also confirmed by Salom. example. And besides, the unequal matches of
the sons of God with Caines posterity Genesis 6.2.
, brought a pernicious corruption into all the world. But the commandment of
Paul is express: Be not unequally yoaked with infidels 2 Cor. 6.14.
: and again, Let them marry in the Lord Cor. 7.39.
, that is, religiously, and in the fear of God.

What are the constitutions of Princes concerning this?
That a guardian shall not marry his ward, an adopting father his adopted
daughter, or an adopting mother her adopted son. As also that brethren and
sisters children shall not marry. Yet must the Magistrate abolish that law,
which teaches, that witnesses at the font may not marry, nor that he may
marry her for whom he witnesses at baptism.

Do these laws bind Christians?
They do, so far forth as they agree with Gods word. For each one must obey
his governor, when he can do it without breach of piety, and the liberty of
conscience, that is, if it be not a sin to conscience, if it be done
otherwise: so as marriages contracted against these constitutions be not
disanulled.

How is the coupling in marriage called in the Scriptures?
1. Coniugium, wedlock, of that common yoke wherewith the man and wife are
joined into one flesh, and as it were into one man.

2. Matrimonium, marriage, of the end: for a woman is married unto a man to this
end, that she may be a mother of children, and marriage is as it were Matriage
of a mother.

3. Connubium, covering, and in the plural number nuptiae a nubendo, that is,
of covering: for as the heaven is sometimes covered over with clouds: so were
virgins in old time covered 1. Co. 11.5.10
with a veil, when they were brought unto their husbands: and that both to
testify their bashfulnesse and modesty, and also their subjection and
obedience, or another power over them. As the example of Rebecca testifies,
who when she saw her husband Isaac, she covered her self with a veil Genesis
24.64:
. Like unto which, is that spreading abroad of the garment in Ruth 3.9. and
Isa. 4.1.

What is against this?
1. Marriages every where granted by that impure Antichrist, between Uncles and
sisters daughters, against all law both of God and man.

2. The imagination of the Papists, who say, that indeed by the law of nature
it is forbidden the father to marry the daughter, or the mother the son: but
the forbidding of all other persons in Leuit. is a mere positive law, and
concerns the Israelites only. That Christians are not tied to those laws, and
therefore the Pope may dispense.

3 The Jews error, that those persons whosoever are not expressed in
Leuiticus, are also not forbidden to marie: for then it would follow, that the
nephew might marie the grandmother, because it is not forbidden by name, whereas
nature shows it to be wicked.

What is Marriage?
An inseparable conjunction (excepting the causes expressed in the written word
of God) of one man, and one woman Mat, 19.9 Romans 7.2 1. Cor. 7.27
, being fit of years, lawfully consenting into one flesh, instituted by God
for mutual help, as well in divine as humane things: and for procreation (if God
will give them) of children, and bringing them up in the fear of God, for God,
his Church, and common wealth.

How manifold is marriage?
Twofold: begun or promised: and consu^mated, ratified and perfected

What is betrothing or contracting?
It is mention and promise of a future marriage, called Sponsalia, sponsals, a
spondendo of promising: for that they were wont in old time to assure their
daughters unto them, to whom they had promised to marie them, and to covenant
that they in like sort should marie them: and hence proceeded the names of
Sponsus and Sponsa, the man-spouse, and the woman-spouse.

How many kinds of Sponsals or contracts are there?
Two: one conceived by words de futuro, for to come, as they speak in
schools, either plainly, as I will take the to be my wife; as if I should
say, I promise that I will sell thee my house: for there is difference between
promising and doing, Or else upon condition: as, If my parents consent, if I
may have her dowry. Likewise if the contracters be under age, or one of them:
in sense of the Law, such contracts are de futuro. The other is by words de
praesenti, for the present: as, I do betroth thee to be my wife: which present
and actual promise, is called simple and absolute consent, although the marriage
be not yet celebrated. Thus she is accounted betrothed, and named a wife. Who
so defiles another man's betrothed wife, or spouse, let him be stoned to
death, for he has humbled his neighbors wife Deuteronomy. 22.23
. And Jacob speaking of Rachel who was only betrothed unto him, Give me my wife
Genesis 29.21.
. The Angel says unto Joseph: Fear not to take Mary thy wife Mat. 1.20.
, when she was but betrothed unto him: but she that was betrothed was now by
determination accounted a wife, unless some thing fell out which might
frustrate the contract.

Is the bond alike in both contracts?
No, for in the contracts de futuro, indeed touching the promise, and to free
the faith plighted, they may be admonished, but they can not be compelled,
especially if they bring probable reasons why they will change. But the
co^tracts de praesenti, induce an effectual obligation which ought not to be
dissolved by mutual consent: for it is a truly ratified marriage Math. 19.6
, although not wholly consu^mated without adding the duties of marriage. Also
contracts de futuro, if they be confirmed with copulation following, ought to
be ratified.

Why are contracts instituted, and why is there a certain time observed
between it and the celebration of marriage?
There are diverse causes: first, that the bridegroom and bride may first
consent in mind before they co^ioyne in body: or as Austine says, lest the
husband easily obtaining, make light account of that which he longed for, being
deferred. Secondly, that in the mean time the co^tracts may be published in the
Church, to the end that if any just cause ly hid, for which the marriage begu^
may not be co^summated, it may be manifested in due time. Thirdly, natural
honesty, that me^ might not presently after the contract be carried violently
like beasts with the sway of their sensual desires. Which three causes appear
in the contract of Joseph and Marie Mat. 1.18, and Deuteronomy. 21.12.
.

Which is the other degree of marriage?
The consummation, which is done by consecrating or blessing, and by
celebration of the marriage.

What is consecration of marriage?
It is a holy actio^, wherein the bride groom and bride being brought into the
church before the congregation, are taught by the minister touching the
institution, and ends of marriage, and there expressly witness their consent,
either by signs if they be du^b or deaf, or by words if they can speak. For
the Canons say that marriage is of no force except consent be declared by words:
and so i^ their marriage publikly confirmed, and they themselves consecrated
unto God by prayer.

From whence is this custom taken?
From the example of God himself, who as soon as he had given Adam a wise,
blessed them like a Minister, in these words, Increase and multiplyb. Also from
a general rule, which commands, That all things be done in the Church
decently and in good order 1. Cor. 14 40.
. Further, it makes for the dignity of marriage, and freeth the new married of
all ill suspicion, least they should be thought to live together like harlots.
Lastly, it cannot but be approved by God, who will both be called upon, and is
always at hand to them that call upon his name.

What is the celebration of marriage?
All the other whole politic action, by which the covenants of marriage are
confirmed, and the bride is honestly and modestly brought into the bridegromes
house.

Ought a Christian to observe this festiuitie and celebration?
Yea, and that according to the custom of the country where he dwells, and
that rule which Paul commands, Whatsoever things are true, honest, just,
holy, of good report, etc. do them Philip. 4.8.9
.

Think you the marriage feast lawful?
Yea, it is used almost amongst all nations, and also confirmed by many
examples of Scripture: as we read that Laban made a great feast at the marriage
of Jacob and Rachel Genesis 29.22.
: and Christ both with his presence and present of 6. galons of excellent good
wine, confirmed this custom Ioh. 2.1.2.7.8
. But yet in such bankets we must remember that which is recorded concerning
Tobias his marriage, that they feasted in the fear of the Lord Tob. 7.17 and
8.20.
. As also that at King Ashuerus his great and solemn feast, such modesty and
honest^e was observed, as that no man was compelled to drink more then himself
pleased Hest. 1.8.
. Wherefore marriages celebrated with riot, pride, gluttony, drunkenness, unchaste
plays, and al kind of wantonness, are solemnized to the devil and not unto God:
and these are not the least cause of evils which make marriage troblesome and
unpleasant unto many, and withal rob many parents of their children.

What is the form of marriage?
A just conjunction of one man and of one woman into one flesh: for they which
were two before marriage, are after marrying made one flesh, that is one man, by
the conjunction and union both of soul and body.

What positions do you gather out of this formal cause of marriage?
First that the bond of marriage is most straight, far exceeding that which is
between the parents and the children, as God says, a man shall leave his
father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife Genesis 2.24.
. 2. That it is not only most strait, but indissoluble, because that two are
made one flesh: therefore Christ says, Whom God has joined together, let no
man separate Math. 19.6.
.

Thirdly, that it is mutual and reciprocal in one over another body, for
the Apostle gathers hereout, in that they are one flesh, that neither of both
has power over their own body 1. Corin. 4.7.
.

Fourthly, an argument of mutual love between them, The husband must love his
wife as his own flesh, and as Christ loves h^s Church Ephesians. 5.28.
.

Fifthly, that there ought to be a communion of all things, both spiritual and
corporal between married couples.

What and how many are the ends of marriage?
Three, if thou respect the persons themselves: first that they mutually help
one another both in heavenly and humane things. This God expressed, Let us make
Adam a helper like unto himself Genes. 2.20.
: that humane society may be familiar and friendly: yet so, as that the
husband may appear to be the wives head. 1. Corin. 11.3.


The second is procreation of children, which may succeed their parents both in
name and goods, which end the Lord has likewise expressed, Increase and
multiply Genesis 1.28.
.

Thirdly, that it may be a remedy against all wandering lusts, as Paul notes,
For avoiding fornication let every one have his own wife, and every woman her
own husband 1. Cor. 7.2.3.
.

But if you respect either the church or common wealth, then the end of marriage
is that there may be a Seminary for both Church and common wealth: to which
end the Apostle warns parents to bring up their children in the discipline
and fear of the Lord Ephesians. 6.4.
, that so they may become profitable unto the Church and common wealth. But if
you respect God immediately as the author of marriage, then the end thereof is the
glory of God, that so they may learn to acknowledge, fear and reverence him
who has joined them together: and that they may remember that their marriage is
the most sweet image of that secret conjunction which is between Christ and
his Church Ephesians. 5.32.
, being begun in this life by faith, love and obedience, but shall be fully
perfected in heaven.

What contrarieth this doctrine touching the ends of Marriage?
The Papists error, who say that God instituted marriage also to this end, to
be one of their seven sacraments, leaning unto the vulgar interpretation, which
calls that a sacrament which the Apostle names a secret mystery Ephesians.
5.31. and 3.3.6.
: but yet the same interpreter has translated the same word also a Sacrament,
Ephesians. 3. and Colos. 1.27. But note that Apoc. 17.5. the mystery is retained.
See the Rhemish transl.
so calling the vocation of the Gentiles unto the communion of Christ. Let
therefore the calling of the Gentiles be the eight Sacrament. And yet herin
they are against themselves, while they interdict their Priests from this their
sacrament, calling marriage an uncleanness of the flesh, wherein none can please
God. Surely a notable Sacrament, which is defined to be the sign of a holy
thing. But the Apostle teaches, that the mystery or sacrament whereof he
speaks, is in the conjunction of Christ and his church. Neither is our
reconcilement with God confirmed by marriage, which is the chiefest end of
sacraments, although it may in the image of nature be improperly called a
Sacrament: by which reason also, many corporal things may by reason of some
similitude be called Sacraments of spiritual and heavenly things: for there is
almost no corporal thing, but may in this sort be called a Sacrament, as a
vine, a way, a gate, salt loh. 15.1. and 14.6. and 10.7.9. and Mat. 5.13.
, etc.

What are the duties of married couples?
They are twofold, some common to them both: othersome proper to either a part.

Which are common to both parties?
That they live godlily toward God, and honestly and chastely one with another,
be as one under God, perform one to another mutual love, faith, and due
benevolence: use mutual sufferance, equity and consolation in enduring of
common calamities: and lastly to endeavor mutually, not only to bring forth,
and nource up, which even beasts do, but to bring up and instruct their
children in faith and true religion Ephe. 6.4. 1. Cor. 7.3.
.

By what arguments ought married couples to be stirred up to the performance of
these duties?
By such as are drawn from the institution and will of God, and from the
fruits of marriage it self. For seeing they are one body and one flesh, they
ought not to be pulled asunder by any filthiness one from another.

Secondly, because God is the author of their conjunction Mat. 19.6. Heb. 13.1.
, therefore they ought not to be separated.

Thirdly, because marriage is honorable and holy 1. The. 4.3.4
, and the bed undefiled: therefore it ought not to be contaminated with any
filthiness or intemperancie.

Fourthly, because the Apostle says: This is the will of God, your
sanctification, that every one keep his vessel in holiness and honor 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4.
.

Fifthly, because children are the fruit of marriage, which ought worthily to
procure mutual love in marriage Psalm. 128.3.
: therefore children are called filij and filiae, quasi (...), propter (...),
for that love which they should cause between married couples Genes. 30.20
: and hereof children are called the dear pledges of love.

Which are the duties of either to other?
They are likewise twofold, some concern the husband, and othersome the wife.

Which are the husbands duties?
To instruct his wife in the true worship and fear of God Deuteronomy. 11.19. 1. Cor.
7.14.
, to be his wifes head, to defend and cherish her as his own flesh Ephesians. 5.23.8
lovingly, with an honest respect, not tyrannically: for Paul forbids a man
to be bitter to his wife Coloss. 3.19.
, nor use her as his maid, but as the fellow of his life and bed, and mistress
of the house with him; seeing that Euah was taken out of his side, and not out
of his feet Genesis 2.10.12. Gal. 4.28. Ephe. 5.25.
.

Secondly, that he provide things necessary for his wife and family 1. Tim. 5.8.
, comfort his wife, deriuing part of the yoke and burden on himself, regarding
his wife as the weaker vessel 1. Pet. 3.7.
, and therefore behave himself decently and honorably toward her, I mean
with honest care and carfulness, and not with contempt, but prudently, and
(...), according to knowledge, as to one that is heir of grace, to wit, of
eternal life.

Which are the duties of the wife toward her husband?
To honor him with due reverence Coloss. 3.8.
, calling him Lord, as Sara did Abraham 1. Pet. 3.6.
, obeying her husband in all things in the Lord Ephesians. 5.22.24.
, submitting her self unto him, not as a servant, but as the members to the
head, and not froward or imperious, or like Xantippe the wife of Socrates,
never quiet.

What repugne this doctrine?
That monstrous hatred which Satan uses to stir up between married couples,
when they deal hardly with, or forsake one another, or else turn their love
into adultery.

Secondly, in general the filthiness of the Nicolaites, Gnostics, and
Anabaptists, who make their wives common under pretext of religion.

Thirdly, adulteries, wandering lusts, incests, and whoredoms of the Papists
and their single life, without the gift of chastity and necessity.

4 Contempt and dispraising of marriage, and words, or deeds leading to
filthiness.

What ought to comfort the godly in marriage?
First, that God is the author of marriage Genesis 2.18 24.14.
.

2 That being called upon, he is assistant unto those that are godly married,
mitigating their troubles, as he was to that of Cana in Galilie Ioh. 2.2.2
.

3 That obedience, patience, the cross, the troubles in marriage, are things
pleasing God, in them that believe, as S. Paul witnesses Tim. 2.15.
.

4 That marriage is the most sweet Image of that mystical union betwixt
Christ and his Church Ephe. 5.32
.

Lastly, the hope of the resurrection Job. 19.25. 1. Pet. 3.17.
and of the glory to come, is a most present and effectual remedy against
all troubles in marriage.

The thirteenth common place, of Divorce.
What is the reason of the name of Repudium, refusal, and Diuortium, Divorce?
IT is called Repudium, of refusal, for a shameful thing. Diuortium of
diuerting, and going into diverse parts, or as some think, of the diversity of
mind, because he that is the cause of Divorce, is of another mind now, than
when he married; the Hebrews call it Cheritot or cutting off; the Greeks
dissolution, (...) departing, cutting off; as Mat. 19.8. for it was not lawful
for the wife to depart from her husband, or give him a bill of Divorce, but for
an husband separating himself from his wife, it was lawful to give such a
Bill Mat. 5.31. and 19.8. Deuteronomy. 24.1.2 Mal. 2.16.
.

Is there any difference between Repudium and Diuortium?
None at all in the Scriptures. Yet Modestinus says, that Repudium is between
the bridegroom and bride: but divorce between the husband and wife, after that
marriage is consummated. Which distinction we will observe, and first, of the
first.

Whether is marriage to be broken off by mutual consent, as it is by consent
contracted.
No, because it is not done by humane consent only, as other contracts of
humane society, but by the divine authority, and what God has conjoined, let
no man separate Mat. 1^.6.
.

In what cases is Repudium used, or spousals dissolved?
There are seven such cases recorded. 1 If either of them fall into infamy,
after the betroathing, for some crime.

2 If either of both fall into any grievous infirmity of body or mind, such
as should cause the use of marriage to be loathsome or contagious; as leprosy,
epilepsie, palsy, frenzy etc. And indeed, it were very expedient to forbid
such to marie by the Laws, seeing that they do seem to have single life
imposed upon them from Heaven, and are deprived of power to use marriage: for
who can marie with a good conscience, that by marriage must needs undo
himself and others, and beget children to perpetual misery, and the general
hurt of the weal public.

3 If the bridegroom commit filthiness with any of his brides kindred, that
marriage shall be dissolved, though the party innocent be unwilling, and the
incestuous person punished.

4 Malicious and daily absence: but yet he that is absent against his will,
whilst the three publishings are performed in the Church, is no forsaker.

5 Apostacy from the true religion and worship of God.

6 So great offense of the minds of the bride and bridegroom, as that they
cannot by any means be reconciled, and they have not lain together: least some
heinous thing might follow of such constrained marriages: yet so as that they be
punished for their breaking of covenant.

7 If such a maime happen in the mean time, as whereby the person is become
loathsome: provided that they have not lain together. Hereunto add adultery,
which dissolueth the bond both of contract and of matrimony. Also contracts
between those that are under age, or done without parents or friends
authority: or error of person or quality, as Lea for Rachel, or a servant for
a freeborne: or by force or fear, or else under condition only: all which may
be dissolved, so that there have been no voluntary coupling or consent.

How many ways is consummated marriage broken?
Two: 1 When that which of it self and by right is none, is counted for none,
or else is, ipso iure, declared to be none.

2 When that which was confirmed, is for lawful causes broken.

For whas causes is marriage declared, ipso iure, to be none?
1 When the fault is in the contract of marriage.

2 When it is in the persons contracting.

When is the fault in the consent or contract of marriage?
When the contract is either filthy or unlawful, or unjust.

When is the consent filthy?
1 When it is contrary to the law of God and nature, and is contracted under
the degrees of God forbidden.

2 Unlawful when it repugneth the edicts of Godly Magistrates. But yet this
difference is to be noted, that wicked contracts within the degrees forbidden
by Gods law, neither can, nor ought to be confirmed either by humane
dispensation, or Ecclesiastical benediction, or carnal copulation. But
contracts within degrees forbidden by the Magistrate, may be permitted by some
dispensation, where necessity and reason requires it.

What contract is unjust?
That which is done by children that are under the government of their Parents,
against their consent and authority judging well and rightly, which if the
Parents will by no means ratify, Mat. 19.6
it ought to be none: for as Christ says; That which God has joined together,
let no man set asunder so that which man conioyneth against or besides Gods
word, God will have separated.

What fault is that between the persons, which makes marriage, ipso iure to be
none?
Whereas she that was married for a maid, is found by certain testimonies to have
bin defiled: for such a one, ought by the law of god to be stoned to death as
an adulteress Deuteronomy. 22.29. Cause. 29. quest. 1. Can 1.
. Whereas the Canonists say notwithstanding, that fornication following marriage
only hurts. 2 If either of the^ having some natural impote^cy be unfit for
marriage, or if either of the^ have concealed some defect or incurable disease,
which was not known before marriage, as to be an Eunuch, either by nature or
other casualty: Mat. 19.12.
such a defect forbids marriage, when one erreth, the other deceives:
according to that rule; Errantis voluntas nulla, an erring will is no will: and
that contract of good faith, where craft has been cause, is ipso iure none.
And forasmuch as God reprooueth deceit, fraud, and error, he is not to be
called the author of such marriages.

How many ways is marriage made, said to be dissolved?
By two. 1 By death, as the Apostle reasons 1. Cor. 7.39 Romans 7.2.3. Mat.
22.30.
, against Tertullian, Montanus, and Hierom. And Christ teaches that in heaven
they neither marie, nor give in marriage.

2 Marriage is dissolved by Diuorcement.

Does it agree with Gods Law, for a man to put away his wife?
Not simply: for it is neither simply commanded nor forbidden, but permitted
by giving of a bill of Divorce: for hereof Moses has a politic, but not a
moral law Deuteronomy. 24.1
. But the reason of this Law seems not so much to be necessary, as of rash
leuitie and hardness of heart. There was indeed some reason of necessity in
respect of the wives: for it was fitter for them to be once dimitted, than to
be always in ill handling, or else in danger of life. Therefore the Lord
appointed, for such as would not be persuaded to keep their wives, not
Diuorcement, but a manner of Diuorcing: to wit, to give a bill of Divorce, for
the wives safety, against her husbands cruelty, and that not without his own
infamy. But the rashness of husbands exceeded, which for every occasion
sought to be divorced, and this rashness was to be bridled. Whereupon Christ
says: Moses suffered you to put away your wives, for the hardness of your
hearts: but it was not so from the beginning Mat. 19.8. Heb. 9.10.
. And thus we see that Moses Law is worn out with a large measure of the
Spirit of Grace granted unto us by the Gospel. Although some, even amongst us
also, who bear the name of Christians, Mat. 9.8.9
are as hard hearted as the Jews were to their good wives.

May lawful marriage then be broken?
It may, both by the Law of Diuorcement in Deuteronomy. 24.1. and by the words of
Christ, Math. 19.8.9. who makes two sorts, the one lawful, the other
unlawful.

What are the causes why it may be broken?
pell. Although some, even amongst us also, Mat, 9, 8, 9
who bear the name of Christians, are as hard hearted as the Jews were to
their good wives.

May lawful marriage then be separated?
It may from bed and board, both by the Law of Diuorcement in Deuteronomy. 24.1. and
by the words of Christ, Math. 19.8.9. who makes two sorts, the one lawful,
the other unlawful.

What are the causes why it may be separated?
Christ names only one, Math. 5.23. and 19.9. to wit, Adultery.

What is Adultery? Mat. 5.32. and 19, 9

When either of the married couple has wittingly and willingly to do with a
third, married, or unmarried. For adultery is not (as some Iurists say) only
violating the married bed of another, but any dishonest coupling whatsoever.
Therefore Christ in the before mentioned places, uses not the word (...), but
(...) by which word al unlawful coupling whatsoever is signified. Yet some are
of mind, that by a metonymie, they are all sins, equal to, or greater than
adultery which are included, as Sodomie, etc. as for lesser sins they are
excluded.

Is separation or Diuorcement to be used in all cases of adultery?
In some cases it seems, that it is not to be granted.

1 If he that seeks divorce, be guilty himself of the same sin: For in that
wherein thou condemnest another, thou iudgest thy self Rom, 2, 1
.

2 If the husband prostitute his wife, he may not exclude her for an
adulteress, being himself author of the crime.

3 If he have companied with her after he understood of her adultery: for that
is counted for a reconcilement: Or else, if he have forgiven her and received
her again to favor: for herein the innocent party seems to have renounced
his right.

4 If it have been committed of ignorance, mistaking a stranger for her own
husband.

Is the innocent party bound to produce the offender?
Yea, if the fault be public: to the end that the innocent may avoid infamy,
and to be accounted his wives baud. For Chrysostom says; He patroniseth
filthiness, who concealeth his wives sin: and least injury be offered unto
the lawfully begotten children.

May the innocent receive, the offending party repenting, unto favor again?
Yea: but yet a man must be left unto his own conscience, and not compelled to
receive her against his will.

Whereas Christ names adultery to be the only cause of divorce Mat. 5.3^ and
19.9.
, how shall we reconcile Paul, who does allow divorce for desertion 1. Cor. 7.15
?
Christ speaks of making divorce, or of him that puts away unjustly,
touching whom he was asked the question only: but Paul speaks of the
patient, or him that is forsaken unjustly; who being asked if the unbeliever
should forsake the believer, whether that the believer were so bound unto the
other, that he might not matie again? he answers: If the unbeliever depart,
the party forsaken is free from that bond, having first used all means to
rec^ll the unbeliever unto her former duty. Again thus, Christ speaks of
Divorce making, Paul of Divorce suffering for desertion. Christ speaks (as
Augustine witnesses) of marriage between equals, Lib. 1. c. 2. de adult.
coniugiis.
but Paul of married persons dissenting in religion. For whereas he says: Be not
unequally yoaked with Infidels 2* Cor. 6, 14
, he forbids it not, as if being contracted, it were to be made void, but
he does dissuaded it as joined with scandal, and dangerous.

What kind of Desertion means Paul?
Such, as wherein unbelievers depart from their faithful yoakfellowes, through
hatred of true religion: but yet he makes not the departers unbelief the cause
of divorce, as it was under the law Ezra. 9* 1 and 10.17.
, before the covenant of the gospel. But the Apostle wills that if the
unbeliever will dwell with the believer, it should be endured, but he makes only
the unbelievers unjust departure, the cause of divorce. Hereof some great
divines do understand by infidelity, any malicious, unjust, or obstinate
departure, according to that of the Apostle 1. Tim. 5, 8. 1. Cor. 7.15.
. And he seems to understand equal sins also where he says: A brother or
sister is not made subject in such things.

But how is the desertion understood to be made malicious and stubborn?
If either of the^ do simply depart from mutual fellowship; and living together,
the party offending is to be compelled by Ecclesiastical ^ensures, and by
civil punishment, if need require, to live together. But if the party fly out
of the country, and being recalled by the godly Magistrate, return not at the
time prefixed, that is a malicious desertion: and thus to reject the authority
of the Church, and also against all conscience to break off matrimony, he is
an infidel and a forsaker of religion, as well as of his yoakfellow; and then
is the party thus forsaken, to be pronounced free from the bond of matrimony.

What if it ^^e not known in what place the party, thus departing, is?
Here, the causes of that departure are to be enquired into, that if so be the
party complaining, her or himself to be forsaken, and so seaketh to be
divorced, have been, and given occasion of this evil, he or she must not be
heard: for this were against equity. If they say they cannot contain, let
them accuse themselves, bewail their sin, and seek him or her out, whom they
have deprived themselves of, by ill dealing. 2. It is requisite, by oath before
the Magistrate, if need be, to testify that all diligence has bin used for
the finding of the party thus departed. Lastly, there must no such leave be
granted to the wife specially, to mary again, who is bound to follow her
husband, til she have expected his return a year at the least. If the party
departed, do return after this, then he shall be worthy of civil punishment
in most sharp manner.

What is to be done when the one is absent, either through war, travail,
captivity, or other such like cause?
His return is to be expected the whole time appointed by the Magistrate,
whether four or seaue^ years: for he is thought probably to be dead, who is
absent so long: or else it must appear either by witnesses, or by necessary
conjectures that the party absent, is dead

What if he happen to return again, which was thought dead?
The later marriage, contracted by mere ignorance shall be dissolved, and the
fault being thus found to have bin eithers, shall not be imputed unto either of
them.

Does barrenness break off Matrimony?
No: for that defect is commonly hidden and unknown, and God has often helped
it, when as it has bin counted desperate a. 2. Seeing that God gives
children, who shuts and opens the womb according to his own good pleasure,
he seems, after a sorr, to lay violent hands upon God, who rejects the wife
given him by God, because she bears him no children.

Is diuorcement to be permitted for offenses, or for civil death, as to be
condemned to the Galleys, or mines, or banishment, or else perpetual
imprisonment, or else by reason of some disease fallen into after the
consummation of marriage, or for any other the like causes?
Herein the judgments of Doctors do differ: for some deny Diuorceme^t for any
such cause, because god has said: Whom god has conjoined, let no man separate
Mat. 6.
: but man separateth, when he does it without Gods word. But God has not
granted Diu^rcement in his word for such causes. But this question were
superfluous, if the magistrate did his duty: for he should cut off such
offenders, and so should the innocent party be provided for.

Now as concerning civil death, the Canons teach, that the wife is to follow
the husband, either in banishment or imprisonment.

As touching diseases caught after lawful marriage, the rule is to be observed,
Ill accidents are patiently to be borne in marriage, where there is no fault
committed. But yet Leprosy is wont to be reckoned amongst the causes of
Divorce: for seeing there is a law concerning the Leprous, that they dwell apart
by themselves, that it is incurable, that the clean person ought not to be
infected with that disease: yea, and the law has also a caution for the
children, that contagious children be not procreated of infected parents, to
the certain destruction of the whole common weal, it is very convenient, that
the sound person be not compelled to company with the infected yoak-fellow.
Hitherto belongs madness, which breaks out into manifest and incurable
rage, which is to be restrained with bonds, least they hurt their own
children, or wise, or else whomsoever they can come by. Concerning cruelty and
ill usage of one toward the other, Theodosius his law, the Canon law, and also
the judgment of the best Divines, do permit in such cases (after
reconciliation has bin often tried in vain, and domestical separation for a
time) diuorcement to be made, least the innocent party being too much broken
with grief, attempt some unlawful thing: For patience being too much hurt,
turns into fury. But let the innocent party, 1 Cor. 10.13. Mat. 19.8
in the mean time, make account, that he is called to single life, and, in
faith, crave victory of him who suffers not his to be tempted above their
strength. Therefore as Christ accused not, but excused Moses, for granting
Diuorcement, for the hardness of their hearts: so many at this day think,
that the Christian Magistrate is to be excused in helping by diuorceme^t those
who are miserably, unjustly, tyrannously, and cruelly oppressed: for they
think it better for them to live apart angelically, than together diuelishly:
but yet, if both of them do one rage against another, with words or stripes,
they think separation ought so to be made, so as that all hope of new marriage
again be taken from them: that yet by this means, whatsoever before this be
admitted, they may be reconciled. Cod. l. 8. de repud.
But our consistory laws do very well appoint to try al means whatsoever,
before this be admitted. Wherein they agree with Justinian, who says; Even as
we forbid the dissolution of marriage without just cause, so we desire to have
those that are oppressed with adverse necessity to be freed with a
necessary, though an unhappy help.

What is to be done, think you, if either of them, being become an ungodly
Apostate, or obstinate heretic, endeavor to draw and compel the other into
the same Apostacy and impiety, or into any other crime.
Here the Magistrate is to make diuorcement with the sword according to Gods
commandment, That whosoever teaches Apostasy or turning away from the Lord
God, he should be slain, and so evil might be taken from the midst of the
people Deuteronomy. 13, 6
.

What if the Magistrate neglect his duty?
Let the Apostles precept be of force: Avoid an Heretic after once or twice
admonition. Tit. 3.16 Luke: 14.26
And so, also the Atheist, Apostate, and Blasphemer. Also that of our Savior:
If any come unto me, and hates not his father, mother, wife* etc. is not
worthy of me. And again, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out Math. 5.29
. And again, whosoever forsakes house field, or wife etc. shall receive an
hundred fold, and, 19.29.
.

Has the wife the like right against her husband, that he has against her, in
suing for diuorcement?
If you respect the right which the one has in the others body, the bond is
equal. Wherefore, Cor, 7, 4
in an equal Obligation it is meet that the same right be granted unto the one
as to the other: provided that modesty be observed, which becomes the woman
toward her husband, being agent.

By whom ought the diuorcement to be made?
By no private person, or by the innocent party, or of their own private
authority: for no man may be judge in his own cause: but by lawful Judges,
as well Ecclesiastical as civil, if they may be had (because marriage
consists of the Divine and Mat. 18.15 16 17.
humane law mixed) not rashly, but after reconcilement has been sought, and
the cause lawfully known and judged, by alleging and proving on both sides.
For Abrahaam did not put away Hugar upon his own private judgment, but by the
manifest commandment of God Genesis 21.12.
.

What contrarieth this Doctrine?
The error of the Romanists, who affirm that there may be a lawful
separation of marriages, for the attaining of Evangelical perfection, as they
call it; expounding that place of Matthew amiss Mat 19.12.
. For they are said to castrate themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven, which
abstain from marriage, and by the gift of God, live continently, that they may
serve God more freely, as if they wanted their virill parts, such as is the
cutting off the foot and hand, and the pulling out of the eye.

Secondly, that it may be broken for the profession of a monastical life, yea
though one of the married couple be against it, and that only by the Popes
authority.

3. Lastly, this is against the perverse opinion of such, which think that,
that law of Moses concerning Divorce, which is, Deu. 24.2. ought now to be of
force in the Church of Christ.

The fourteenth common place, of the government of the world, or Gods
providence.
Has God so left thus his workmanship whereby he has made all things, as a
builder leaves his house, when he has builded it?
NO, but being continually present with it, he orders, governs and rules
the things which he has made. John. 5.17. My father works hitherto, and I
work. And in the book of Wisdom. 1.7. (...), the spirit which comprehends
all things, neither could the world stand the space of the twinckeling of an
eye, if God should withdraw his government from it.

By what name is the government of the world called?
It is commonly called (...) (Providence,) of the verb (...), or (...), to
provide or take care of, so that (...) is a providence, a taking care of, a
careful tegard, not a bare and idle foreknowing, or knowledge of things, but a
working and effectual disposing of all things. Wisdom. 6.7. (...). God
takes care alike for all.

This also is called (...), the Decree and purpose of God, Act. 4.28
and altogether differs in nature from Prudence, which is proper to men, for
it both deceives and is deceived.

How many parts be there of Gods providence?
Two. One is an eternal and unchangeable disposing of things, whereby he has
decreed from all eternity, to govern all things since their creation, and to
direct and bring them to their appointed ends.

The other is an actual and temporal government of the whole world, whereby
God does govern, rule, and order all things by himself created, wisely,
freely, powerfully, and well: and draws them unto their proper ends.

Why is God said to govern all things vvisely, freely, powerfully and well?
He governs wisely, because all things are known and open to his eyes, and
he directs them Heb. 4.13
unto their proper ends, and in the end to his own glory, by his certain
counsel and Genesis 18.21 psalm. 33.13 15. and 34.16 17. and 94.8 9.10. and 159
7.8. lin. 12.6.7.
determination, although this be sometimes unknown to us.

Freely, because God is a most free worker, who is compelled by no man to this
governing of all things.

Psalm. 115.3
Powerfully, because he suffers no trouble or pains, in executing his will,
but effects whatsoever he wills, and as he wills it without trouble or
weariness: neither can his working be hindered by any strength, or restrained
by any law Psalm. 115.3 Iona. 1.14. John. 4.8 Job. 9.5.6.6 7
Wisd. 8.1. She extends her self through all things from one end to another
mightily, and comely does she order all things.

Well, Genesis 50, 20
Because he works well always, yea even then when the instruments offend and
sin in the work.

How many sorts are there of Gods providence?
Three sorts in respect of the creatures. Universal, Special, and Particular,
or singular, Suidas cites out of the ancient Divines, (...), the providence
of God is in three manners, 1. (...), in administration, maintaining and
upholding of things. 2. (...), in his approving and allowing, in good actions,
3 (...), in his permission, in evil actions.

What is the Universal providence?
It is that whereby God directs all creatures according to that secret
instinct which he has put into them at their creation, and so preserves the
order of nature, which himself has appointed.

Whence prove you this Universal providence of God?
From diverse testimonies of Scripture. The whole Psalm, 104. contains a
notable declaration and praise of it. Likewise Christ speaks of it John 5.17.
My father works hitherto, and I work. And Act. 17.28. In him we live and
move, and have our being. And Heb. 1.3. All things are sustained by the word
of God.i. by the appointment or power of Christ's word.

What is Gods special providence?
It is that whereby God governs and rules all parts of the world, yea even
those which seem most base, and all their actions and events whether in heaven
or in earth, as likewise amongst men. In heaven, so as not the least cloud is
bred, moves, changes or vanishes, but by the appointment of God. In earth,
not so much as a little herb or weed, grows, florisheth or fades without
his hand, no not the least creature is bred or preserved but by God. And
amongst men none are conceived, borne, neither do live, are preserved, or
move, neither do any thing, or die, but by the commandment and will of God.

Show me some testimonies of this particular Providence, concerning all
creatures?
Psalm. 147.8. Which covers the heaven with clouds, and gives rain to the
earth in season, and makes the grass grow upon the mountains. Which gives
snow as wool, and scatters the hoar frost like ashes. v. 16. Which gives
to beasts their food, and to the young ravens which call upon him. v. 9.
Christ speaks thus. Mat. 5.45. Your heavenly father makes his Sun to
arise, and he raineth upon the just and unjust. And Chap. 6.30. God clotheth
the lilies and grass of the field. Chap. 10.29.30. Are not two sparrowes sold
for a farthing, and one of them falls not to the ground without your father.
Yea even the hairs of your head are nombred.

So God sent a wind upon the Sea, and prepared a fish to swallowe Jonah, Iona.
1.4.17. He prepared a plant called Ricinus (which is a shrub coming nigh the
highness of a tree, having leaves like the Plane tree, It is commonly called
Palma Christi) which went over his head, and he also prepared a worm to
destroy this plant and make it wither. Chap. 4, 6.7.

1. Sam. 2.21. God visited Anna, and she conceived and bare three sons and
two daughters. Deuteronomy. 30.20. He is thy life and the length of thy days. Isai.
38.5. The Lord added to King Ezechias his life fifteen years. Ierom. 10.23.
The way of man is not his own, that he can walk, and himself direct his
steps.

Prove. 21.1. The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns
it which way he will. 1. Cor. 12.6. Who works all in all. And all these
things are spoken of the particular providence of God.

Paul has this speech. 1. Cor. 9.9. Does God take care of Oxen? Does he in
these words exclude them from the providence of God?
No, for he feeds them as all other creatures. Psalm. 147.9. He gives meat to
all flesh, and to beasts their food. Also Psalm. 36.6. Thou Lord preseruest both
man and beast, But in that place, Paul teaches, that the Law was not chiefly
writ for Oxen, which is, Deu. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
which treads out the corn. But that it was made for men, that they may
learn to perform such offices as Justice requires: and by an argument, a
comparatis, may know, that stipends are due to Ministers, who faithfully labor
in their places.

Seeing all things are ruled by the providence and appointment of God, whence
comes such confusion and disorder in the world, that for the most part it
goes well with the wicked, and ill with the good?
I deny that is Disorder. But it is the most wise ordinance of God, whereby he
suffers the wicked to flourish, thereby to make them inexcusable: but the
godly to be scourged, that their salvation may so much the better be furthered
thereby. Pro. 3i 12. Heb. 12.10.
And so the Doctrine of the judgment which is to come, is more confirmed. Also
this life is short: neither are the punishments in this life, of great
continuance, nor the pleasures of this life: but eternal good and evil things
are no vading shadows. Moreover, heinous sins, for the most part, are
punished with grievous plagues in this life, either in the body of the sinner
himself, or in his posterity.

There is no doubt, but all the actions of the godly are directed by God, but
does God also work in the hearts of the wicked (as Augustine speaks in the
book of Grace and Freewill) and does he decree and govern their works?
He that receives and allows the holy Scripture, can in no sort deny it:
namely, that nothing can be done, but which he decrees. For Exodus 4.21. and
7.3.9.12. and 10.1. God speaks thus. I will harden the heart of Pharaoh, that
he shall not let my people go. Deuteronomy. 2.30. The Lord hardened the spirit of
Sehon King of Hesbon, and made his heart obstinate. And Paul says thus, Romans
9.18. God hardens whom he will. An example hereof is in Semei. 2. Sam. 16.10.
To whom God spoke that he should revile David, In the book of grace and free
will. chap. 20.
not by commanding that he should obey (says Augustine) but in his just
judgment enclining and disposing his will in it self wicked, and his evil
mind, by such punishment to exercise David. So the Medes and Persians are
termed to be sanctified of God, and instruments of Gods wrath. The King of the
Assyrians is said to be in the hand of God as a rod, a staff, a hatchet, and a
saw. Isa. 13.3. and 5.3.5. and 10.5.15. Yet does he also set limits to their
malice: that they extend not their cruelty further then him pleases, yea he
turns even the wicked things which the ungodly do, to very good ends,
serving for his glory and the salvation of the elect.

But do we not make God the Author of evil, by this means.
Far be it from us: for the wicked are so set on work by God, that they also
play their own parts: to wit, by their depraved counsel, purpose and will,
for the evil which they will, they will it voluntarily, freely and without
compulsion or violent constraint: as also do the evil Angels.

Again, God does not infuse malice into the wills of the wicked, as he
infuseth goodness into the hearts of the godly, neither does he compel, or
allure their wills to sin: but he only moves evil, or sinning wills,
such as he finds them become by the corruption which has ensued the falling
away of devils and men from God: such I say, he moves, enclyneth, turns,
and directs wisely, justly mightily, where, when, how, and as far as he
pleases, either mediately or immediately to follow or avoid objects, that they
(who purpose no such thing) may fulfill that which the hand and Counsel of God
has decreed Act. 4.28.
. Moreover, good writers have used thus to speak, that God indeed works in
the Godly and by the godly; but (say they) he works by the wicked, but not
simply in the wicked.

But are not they which commit evil deeds excused hereby?
No. 1. First, because they are reproved by their own conscience. And the
actions of God and of wicked men differ in that which is willed, that is, in
that end which he and they properly aim at, neither do, they that they do to
obey God, but to satisfy their own lusts Isa. 10.5.6.7.
: and they are the instruments of God not merely passive, as the hatchet in
the hand of the artificer, but active: neither unreasonable, as a horse and a
dog, but reasonable that is, endoued with reason, and such as have in
themselves the inward, voluntary and elective beginning of their actions. So
that the whole evil remains in themselves alone, and in God there is no more
to be found, but the lawful use of their malice, who executes justly by the
evil wills of the wicked those things which he wills well: as it is to be
seen in the selling of Joseph Genesis 5.20
. Likewise in the reuolting of the ten tribes from the family and house of
David 1. King. 11.31.35. etc. 12.15.16.
and in the betraying of the Son of God Act. 4.27. and 13.27.
.

2 In one and the same work of the wicked, the good and just action, which is
the proper action of God is to be discerned, from the defective and faulty
action of the wicked. For in tha the wicked sin, it is in themselves, but
their doing of this or that in sinning, is from the power of God, who divides
darkness as he thinks good, as Augustine has well written. And so (says
the same author in the same work) God is found to be just, but man guilty,
because that in one and the same thing done by both, the cause wherefore either
of them did it, is not the same. Which thing the Learned declare by these
similitudes. 1 Of an Executioner who puts to death the offender, though by
the just commandment of the Magistrate, yet in his own wicked desire of
doing it he sins. 2 Also by that of one who rides upon a lame horse, who
neither himself halteth with the horse, nor is cause of the horses halting.
Likewise by example of the soul which moves the body in a diseased and lame
body. 4. Of the thief who kills a man whom God in his just judgment will
have slain. Where note this rule. When there are many causes of the same
effect, and some of them good, some bad, that effect in respect of the good
causes is good, in respect of the evil, evil.

Were it not better to refer these things to Prescience, whereby God
foreknoweth all things indeed, before they come to pass, but does not decree
them?
No, because when the Scripture says that God blinds, Isa. 6, 9.10 Ioh, 12
40,
hardens, Deuteronomy, 8, 2, and 13, 3
tempts, Romans 1, 28,
gives over unto a reprobate sense, it notes somewhat more then a
foreknowledge, or a bare and idle permission, to wit, an effectual operation,
which God performs not by working that obstinacy, as a most just Judge, two
ways Romans 1, 28,
.

1 Whereas they are already corrupt, by forsaking them more and more, by
depriving them of his grace, or deniing them his spirit, or also by taking it
from men, and leaving them to their own malice.

2 By delivering the wicked to Satan the minister of his wrath, and in justly
giving them over to the lusts of their own hearts.

Is it true therefore that God wills not iniquity. Psalm. 5.5.
If you understand it simply that God in no sort wills it, Isa, 19, 14, Rom
1, 24, 26.
the Scripture gainsaieth. For we read of Herod and Pilate. Acts. 4.28 That
they did which the hand and counsel of God had decreed to be done. Also it
overthrows the Omnipotency of God, as though it were done quite against his
will. Therefore this case is to be cleared by this explication. That God
wills not sin by his approving will or his reueiled will, or voluntate
signi, the will which he has signified to us: for by this he condemns,
forbids, and punishes it: But he wills it by his Secret will, voluntate
arcani sieve beneplaciti, which will though hidden, yet is most just. Further,
sin ought to be distinguished into the action and malice of the action. From
the first God can not be excluded, for in him we live, move, and have our
being. Act. 17.28. But it cannot be denied that he is a willing sufferer, and a
most wise ordainer, except the wisdom and power of God, be likewise denied.
For sin serves both for the glory of God, and the Romans 3.5.
manifestation of his Divine justice and mercy, and also for the salvation of
the elect, To whom all things work together for their good, Romans 8.28. Yea
even sins, says Augustine. Although not of themselves or from themselves,
but this comes to pass by accident, and from the goodness of GOD, and that
in them only to whom their sins are forgiven, and their sins so far
forth as they are sins, were ordained to this purpose, that the Son of God
by his blood might make satisfaction for them. Moreover also he punishes sin
by sin Romans 1, 21
: therefore he wills sin not as sin, but as it is a punishment or an act
of Justice. For every punishment of sin is just, and therefore God. So God
will not have incest to be committed as it is a pollution, and violating of the
order of Matrimony, and a transgressing of the law: and yet God willingly
performs the office of a Judge, in as much as he uses both that incestuous
copulation and other sins of Absalons to exercise his revenge 2. Sam. 11 12.
and. 16, 21, 22.
.

Are there granted two contrary wills in God, when by his secret will, he is
said to govern and rule those things, which notwithstanding he forbids
openly in his law?
Noe, but whereas there is one simple will of God, it appears more diverse
unto us, because through the weakness of our mind we cannot conceive how God
not by one and the same means and end, but by diverse means, should will and
not will the same thing to be done. For his wisdom is (...), manifold and
diverse. Ephesians. 3.10. And dwells in light that may not be approached unto. 1.
Tim. 6.16. Therefore Augustine says. Enchiridium ad Laurentium, cap. 101.
Great are the works of God, and his will toward all men, exquisite, so that
in a wonderful and unspeakable manner, that is, not done against his will,
which yet is done against his will.

Do all things come to pass by the providence of God, as all Contingencie and
Fortune is taken away?
1 If we respect the nature of second causes, the Contingencie and mutabilitie
of effects may well be maintained. For that is Contingent, which when it is
done, has such cause, which could in it own nature have done otherwise: But
in respect of the first cause, even Contingent things are necessary, namely, so
as that all things depend upon the appointment and will of God. So the bones of
Christ in their own nature might have been broken, which by the decree of
God, could not be broken. Ioh. 19.36.

2 There is one Necessity of Infallibility, and another of Compulsion: such a
necessity was in Balaam when he blessed the people of Israel, resisting his
own action with his whole will, Numb. 23.12. so those things which men or
Angels do, they do necessarily (because God has in his providence decreed
this shall be done) yet not by cempulsion or against their wills, for God turns
their wills to that part which he has decreed shall be done, that whilst they
do, they themselves also will that they do. Even as men (that they may live
in this world) eat and drink necessarily indeed, but yet willingly, God
enclining their wills to that part.

3 There is one Absolute Necessity, which is (...) or simply called
Necessity, namely of those things, the opposites whereof are simply
impossible, by reason of the nature of the cause or subject, of which it is
said, as God loves, is wise, just, good. And there is another necessity of
Consequence or by Supposition, which is of the effects of those things, which
when they are granted it is necessary the effect should follow:
notwithstanding the causes might either not have been, or have been changed.
So those things which God has decreed should be, are necessary, because of
the vnchaungeablenesse of the divine decree: notwithstanding that which God
has done most freely, that is, from eternity, he could either have not
decreed them at all or otherwise decreed them. Likewise those things which are
indeed wrought by second causes, which causes are so made by God that of their
own nature they cannot otherwise work then they do, but yet by him they they
may be taken away, hindered or changed. So the sun necessarily moves, and
yet it stands still at Iosuahs sight Ios. 10.12 13.
. The fire burns the bodies put unto it, and yet burns not the three young
men in the furnace at Babylon Dan. 3.92 94.
. So those sayings of Christ. Matthew. 18.7. It is necessary that offenses
come: And of Paul. 1. Cor. 11.19. It is meet that heresies should come, are to
be understood of the Necessity of Consequence, whose next causes are to be
sought in the very wills of men and devils. But that which is Luke. 24.46. It
behooued Christ to suffer, is spoken by a supposition of the end, or Necessity
of the Decree.

Note therefore an usual saying in the Schools, Future things when they are
compared to the first cause and prescience of God, they are necessary: but
compared to next causes, and considered in their own nature, they may be
Contingent, and it is no contradiction, that the same thing in diverse respects
should be necessary and contingent.

What does this necessity differ from the Stoics Fate?
Much, because they say necessity consists in the continued and perpetual
order and inevitable conjunction of second causes, but we, in the will and
decree of God.

Again, they subject God to Necessity, we Necessity to God.

Does nothing come to pass by chance or fortune?
Nothing indeed at all, if we consider the providence, power, and knowledge of
all things which is in God: but in respect of our selves who are ignorant of
the true causes, and look only upon the inexpected events, a thing may be
said to come to pass by fortune. So Numb. 35.29. There is a law of murders by
chance, which that they come not by chance to pass, it may be gathered out
of Exodus 21.13. Where GOD is said to give him into the hands of the slayer,
who is slain in this manner. Yet are they said to be by fortune in the
judgment of men, because they are not done of us by premeditate advise. Where
notwithstanding we must remember the saying of Basil, that Chance and Fortune
are words of Heathens, and as of Augustine, It repented me that I have used
the word Fortune

Is not Free Will taken away by this unchangeable providence of God, and
administration of all things?
No in no sort: because God rules and governs man's will according to the
nature thereof: But it is the nature of men's will, that whatsoeuet it wills,
either good or evil, it wills it freely and of it own accord, not against
the will, and by constraint, otherwise it should be no will but a Nilling; For
example, Matthew. 27.1. Herod, Pilate, and the Jews condemned Christ of their
own free will and of set purpose, yet the Apostles say, they did nothing, but
tbat which the hand and counsel of God had decreed to be done. Acts. 4.27.28.

Do not these places of Scripture seem to make against Gods providence, where
it is said; It repented God, Genesis 6.6. 1. Sam. 15.11. and those abrogations of
his decrees which are recorded. Joan. 3.4.10. Isai. 38.1.5.
No, because in those places the Scripture descends, and applies it self to
our capacity, and describes God, not such as he is in himself, but such as
we understand him, even as when the same Scripture says of God that he is
angry. But those denuntiations of judgment, do contain a condition not
expressed. Genesis 20.3.7.

Is it not unseemly for the highest Majesty of God to abase it self, even to
take care of these lowest things?
No, for as it was no disgrace to create them, no more it is to take care of
them being created.

What is the peculiar providence of God?
That whereby God by his grace, or holy Spirit, lives and reigns in his
Church, governs and cherishes the godly, works in them both the will and
the deed, he makes them to walk in his precepts. Ezech. 36 27
defends them, terrifieth, restrains and vanquisheth their enemies.

Show me some testimonies of this?
Psalm. 1.7. God knows the way of the righteous. Psalm. 34.16. The eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous. And the whole. Psalm. 91. He that dwells in the
secret of the most high, etc. To this purpose serves that place. Math. 10.30.
Even all your hairs are numbered. Math. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against the Church. 1. Tim. 4.10. God is the Savior of all men,
especially of the faithfall. And innumerable others like to these.

Does God govern all things by himself alone without means, or by means and
second causes?
Neither, simply, but partly by himself without means, yea often against or
besides ordinary means he brings things to pass. As without means he
sustained Moses forty days in the mount, Exodus 34.28
and the Prophet Elias 1 Reg- 19.8
. But against means and natural causes he divided the red Sea Exodus 14.16
, as likewise by his power the waters of Jordan stood Iosue 3.19.
, and the waters were divided into two parts 2 King. 2, 8
. He made the Sun to go back 2 King 20.11.
: He restrained the force of the fire in the Babylonian furnace, that it could
not burn the young men Dan. 3.21.91
. He turned the rock into pooles of waters, and the crag into fountains of
waters: Psa. 114.8
He made the Iron to swim in the water 2 King. 6.6
. Partly also he rules and administreth by himself and with means or second
causes, yet so as God is always present with them, and in them shows his
special power, according to that, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man lives not by bread only,
but by all that which proceeds out of the mouth of God. So with five loaves
he feeds a great multitude John. 6.9.11.12.
. From second causes he produces another effect then their nature and
disposition affords, and when the second causes are in action actually, he
hinders their effect, changes, mitigateth, or makes it more grievous. As in
Elias his time, it rained not for the whole space of three years. 1 Kings 17
1.7
Isay. 5.6. I will command the clouds that they shall not rain.

Why does God ordinarily use middle or second causes, seeing he can do all
things by himself without means?
1 He does it for our cause, that we may more easily perceive God helps us in
them or by them: for seeing we are carnal, we need visible things that our
faith may be the better confirmed and rest assured in Gods promises. And also
that he may declare his goodness to us, whilst he makes us as it were
fellow-workers with himself in ruling our selves or others.

2 That he may show himself Lord of all things, which uses creatures and
means as he pleases, to his glory and our salvation.

3 That we should not abuse means, as being ordained of God.

4 Least in the pretense of Gods providence we should neglect means or second
causes odained by God, for who so neglects them, despises the ordinance of
God. For God has not only decreed the ends of actions, but their means also,
which means are therefore subject, and subordinate to providence: as the
drinking of a potion belongs to the sick man, and bread to him that is
hungry. So God promised victory to David, but thus, if he fought and laid
ambush 2. Sam. 5.19.24
, he has promised to nourish man, but with condition, if he labor Psa. 128:2
.

If therefore the determination of God be unchangeable, and all things come to
pass infallibly by the counsel and will of God, is there any place left for
our deliberations, counsels, comaunds, prayers, teaching, cautions, and
endeavors?
It is certain that to events certain and decred by God, it is in vain to
use and apply those means, without which God has decreed, or has said that
he will effect such things: but those means which both himself has decreed
to use, and which he has showed both in his word, and the course of nature,
them he will use, and also has commanded us to use them: it can not be said
of these (without a wicked contempt of Gods word, and the order by him
appointed) that they are used in vain. For where the first cause is granted,
we ought not remove or take away the second, nor contrarily. And as God has
made the ends, so likewise has he created and prescribed unto us the means,
whereby it pleases him to bring us unto them, which means to neglect, is to
tempt God Mat. 4.4.
. Therefore neither does Gods providence take away man's deliberatio^, neither
his prudence, and seeking out of necessary means: for the same providence of
God has decreed all these things, that by them we might attain the ends
decreed by God.

But why does he use no means at some times?
To show he is not tied to second causes, and that he can work as well without
means as with means. And further, that when means fail, we should not doubt
of his providence.

What is the use of this Doctrine?
1 That by the administration of all things we may acknowledge God such as he
is, namely wise, good, and mighty above all. Lord of all things, at whose
command all creatures are, and do addict themselves to obey him.

2 That we repose all our trust in him as in our father who takes care for us
all, applying to our use that saying Genesis 22.8. The Lord will provide. And that
we securely rest in his protection, to whose pleasure and disposition is
subject, whatsoever ^arme may happen wheresoever it come, and by whose
government Satan with all his rage is kept in subjection.

3 That in adversities we lift up our eyes not to second causes, but unto God
the first cause of all things, as Jobs example teaches Job. 1.21. and. 2.10.
that we confess our sins and amend them, that we be patient, knowing that
God sends adversities for our good, not our destruction. Genesis 45.5. and.
50.20 Amos. 3.6. Romans 8.27
Again, that in prosperity we should celebrate and magnify God as the author
thereof, seeing it is evident that God enclineth the wills, and actions of men
that they should both wish well and do well unto us, Genesis 31.24. and 32.6.
and. 33 4. Exodus 3 21
as also he gives such virtue to things void of life, whereby they become
profitable unto us Luc. 12 15
.

4 That we fear and reverence God, in whose hand are all creatures, and who
can arm them all against us.

5 That our hearts be possessed with a love of God, who takes special care of
us. Psalm. 55.23 1. Pet 5.7.
.

6 That we maintain charity and mutual love, seeing we are all in the same
family of our father, and so linked together, as we need one another help.

7 That we neglect not such means as God has ordained, if we have the^ in
readiness, neither that we employ the^ to other uses or put our trust in them.
2 Chronicles. 16 12.
And when means fail, that nevertheless we should put our trust in God, who can
do all things by his word Mat 8.8.
.

8 That by Gods example who never departs from the administration of the
world, we learn to use all diligence in our place and calling.

What things are opposite to the providence of God?
1 That abuse of Gods providence by them, who being preposterously secure
neglect all maenes, saying, wherefore should I vex my self with care and
trouble? God will provide and dispose of such things as are necessary for me.
Which men neglect the means appointed by God, or wickedly make the providence
of God a color for their sins.

2 That opinion of the Stoics concerning Fate or fatal necessity, which
depends (say they) upon the continual knitting together, and that strait
conjunction and inevitable order of causes, which they call (...), which they
thus declare. In causes essentially ordered, when the second works, the first
also of necessity works, and that neither the first can work without the
second causes, neither otherwise then according to the nature and disposition
of the second causes. Yea, that neither God, nor second causes are otherwise
carried, or do otherwise work of their own nature, then they do work and are
carried to work. Also, that of the Manichees impugneth Gods providence, who
said, that wicked men become wicked by fate, (...). That of Marcion, that
sins are committed not by man's will, but by necessity.

3. Their error, who imagined that God did only make the world, and that
other things were since made by the world, as he ordained and commanded.

Also that of certain Philosophers, who thought that only incorruptible things
are subject to Gods providence, not corruptible things, but only in respect of
their kinds (species) which they affirm to be incorruptible and eternal.
Likewise that folly of theirs, who said; The Gods care only for great things,
but neglect the small. And that of the Astrologers who said that the heavens
are governed by God, but that all things under the moon are ruled by the power
of the stars, their influences and constellations.

4. The blasphemy of the Libertines, who slanderously affirm that the sins
of devils and men, so far forth as they are sins, are attributed to God, and
yet that he does not sin, because he is freed from the law, who
notwitstanding is a Law to himself.

5 That fained imagination of barefore-knowledge, and only general providence.

The error of Epicures, and almost of all the Ethnicks, who supposed that
fortune and chance ruled the world, and governed men, and that all things
without order and providence were tumbled up and down, and that all effects
were produced by a casual and accidental application of the agent, or working
cause to the subject receiving the action, even like unto motes in the Sun,
which by chance, light one upon another,

7. The wicked error of them, who dream of an idle and delicate God who cares
neither for his own nor other matters: and as for a blessed life after this
painful life, they esteem it a fable.

The fifteenth common place, Of Sin in general, and especially of Original
Sin.
What is the reason of the word Sin, and of the Latin word Peccatum.
PECCATVM a peccando. The Latin word Peccare, signifies to sin, and it is
(as Cicero in the third Paradox defines it) to pass and ouergoe those lines
or limits within the compass whereof you ought to keep your self. Of the
Latins Vitium, and Malitia, are used of the evil qualities of the mind.
Error and delictum, of other outward and smaller offenses. Flagitium, facinus,
scelus, of outward, outrageous and notorious faults. Crimen and Culpa are names
of the guilte of the sin.

Of the Hebrews it is called (...) Chata. This word signifies, to miss the
mark you propounded to your self, or to wander and decline from the right, to
wit, the rule of Gods Law.

In Greek it is called (...) and (...), Suidas terms it (...). It is also
called (...), i. an offense, a falling, an error, namely, when we fall beyond
the right line of Justice, of (...) and (...), or of the verb (...) that is to
touch a thing rashly with the hand often missing it. It is also called (...),
debt. Mat. 6.12. and forgive us our debts, because of the likeness, for by
sin a man becomes debtor unto God to undergo punishment, and also owes
recompense to be made to his neighbor. For as debts do ciuilly bind to
satisfy the punishment, unless they be remitted: so sin does ciuilly bind to
satisfaction of punishment, except it be forgiven. Likewise it is called (...)
a defect. As 1. Cor. 6.7. Now therefore, there is a weakness (or defect)
amongst you. Which word comes of the verb (...), which signifies to be
overcome, to faint or yield. Also it is called (...), wickedness, naughtiness,
lewdness sin, scelus 1 Cor. 5.8.
. Also (...), transgression Rom 4.15
, (...), breaking of the law. Heb, 1.9.
(...) unrighteousness, 2 Timothy 2.19
(...), ungodliness, which is referred to the first table, against God, (...)
vnrigteousnesse, to the second against men Romans 1.18.
.

What is sin?
1. John. 3.4. It is there defined ((...)) by taking away of the contrary to
it. That is a transgression of the Law, or a privation of the Law, to wit, of
the conformity of our actions both of soul and body with Gods law; for the
word (...) contains the value of two words, because it consists of the
privative particle ae, and (...): or (as Ambrose briefly expressed it) Peccatum
est legis divine praeuaricatio. Sin is a Praeuarication, or going beyond the
Law of God.

Augustine says thus, Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum contra
Legem dei. Sin is, whatsoever is said, done, or coueted against Gods Law.
We define it thus. Sin is a rouolting, a declyning or wandering from the Law or
will of God, binding the sinner to suffer eternal death.

But sometime: it is used Metonymically, for the whole man, being corrupted, as
also for all his actions which oppose the law of God, also for a sin
offering and sacrifice for sin. Exodus 29.36. And thou shall offer a calfe for
sin (i. a sin offering) every day, for atonement, and thou shall sprinkle
the Altar with the sin, that is, with the blood of the sacrifice for sin.
Leu. 8.15. and 2. Cor. 5.21. For he made him, who knew no sin, to become
sin for us; that is, a sacrifice for sin or a sinner, not in himself, but
by the guilte of all our sins imputed unto him, as the opposition added in
that place, requires this interpretation, That we might be made the
righteousness of God, that is, righteous with God, and that by no inherent
righteousness, or properly our own, but that which being in Christ, is
imputed to us.

What be the causes of sin?
They are of two sorts: Outward and Inward. The outward are diverse

1. Satan by his poisoned suggestions Genesis 3.1.4.
.

2. Men, by their evil examples, words, and flattering Genesis 3.6
. Especially the fall of our first parents, as it is described in that place.

3. But by accident, the objects wherewith our senses meet, enticing us to the
abuse of them, and so to sin Genesis 3 6 1 John. 2.16 2 Samuel 11.1
.

4. By accident also, the Law of God it self, which is holy and just,
becomes cause of sin, by forbidding those things which please the flesh, and
commanding those which displease, according to the verse, The thing forbidden
we most covet,
And that is denied we most love it Rom 3.20 and. 4.15. and 5.20 and 7.7.8.
.
All which are confirmed by the example of Adams first fall. Genesis 3.

5 The cherishers of Sin, Idleness and Delicacie Ezech. 16.49
.

But seeing nothing comes to pass in the world, or can come to pass,
without the most wise and just providence of God, may not he be called thc
Author, and cause of sin?
God forbid: for he hates, forbids and punishes it, as a thing most
disagreeing with his greatest goodness. According as John says in his first
Epistle 2.16. Concupiscence (by which name he understands all sins) is not
of the father, but of the world. And James. 1.14.15. Every man is tempted
whilst he is drawn away and enticed by his own concupiscence. Then
concupiscence after it has conceived, brings forth sin. And Ecclesiastes.
7.30. This I know that God made man righteous, but they have sought to
themselves many inventions. Although he suffers sin in his certain
counsel, as we have said in the Place of Gods providence.

What is the inward cause of sin?
This likewise is of diverse kinds. 1. The corruption of our nature, which also
is called usually by the Apostles, concupiscence. Ephesians. 2.3. We have had our
conversation in the lusts of our flesh, in doing the will of our flesh, and our
own thoughts.

2. The consent of the will. Mat. 5.28. He that looks on a woman to lust
after her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart.

3. Ignorance, by which the will is often deceived, of which also the Apostle
speaks. 1. Tim. 1.13. I thank Christ, who has set me in the Ministry, who
before was a persecuter and a blasphemer and an oppressor, but be had mercy on
me, for I did it ignorantly through unbelief.

4. Weakness of mind and feebleness of faith, whereby it comes to pass,
that we cannot always resist the temptations of Satan and the flesh, but
though we see that which is better and approve it, yet in the mean while,
being overcome, we follow the worse, as it came to pass in Peter Mat. v 6.69.
and. the verses following.
, when he denied Christ, and to David, when he committed adultery 2. Sam.
11.2.4..5.
.

5. The wilful and set malice of man, of which Jeremy speaks, The heart of
man is evil and unsearchable, who can know it? Ierem. 17.9. Such was the
sin of the devil. 1. John. 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil,
for the Devil sins from the beginning. In which place, to commit sin,
signifies not simply to sin, but of purposed malice to endeavor to sin, and
to be led with a desire of sinning. As Judas the traitor, who hears that said
to him; That thou do, do quickly. In such manner the faithful commit not
sin. 1. John. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, or commits not
sin, that is, does not favor sin, otherwise, If we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. 1. John. 1.8.

6. A habit or custom of sinning, is not the least cause of sin; as, Ephesians.
2.2. Ye walked in your sins, according to the course of this world.

7. Sin it self is the cause of sin, according to that. John. 8.34. He
that commits sin, is the servant of sin.

How many ways comes it to pass, that one sin is cause of another sin?
Five ways.

1. When as one sin being committed, the grace of the holy Ghost is lost,
which being lost, man cannot choose but fall into other sins.

2. When God punishing sin with sin, delivers him that has sinned, into
the hand of Satan, who works further in him effectually Rom 1.26 Ephesians. 2.2
2 Thessalonians. 2.11.22.
.

3. In as much as it is easy falling from one sin into the like: for by the
acts of things, are caused and wrought dispositions, and habits inciting a man
to the like actions. So prodigality is cause of theft, drunkenness of lust,
and one sin draws on another.

4. Because one sin cannot be committed without many other sins. In which
sense the Apostle says. 1. Tim. 6.10. That covetousness is the root of all
evil. And James, 2 10. He that offends in one is guilty of all. Ephesians.
5.18. Be not drunken with wine, wherein is riot.

5. In regard of the end. Because often one sin is committed because of
another, as Judas, for the love of money betrayed Christ John. 12 6 Mat. 26.14
15.15.
.

Is sin any Positive and Privative thing?
Sin is not a thing positive, that is, which has a being, and is created of
God, neither is it simply nothing and a mere privation, as death is the
privation of life, and darkness of light: but it is a defect and destroying of
a thing positive, namely, of the divine work and order, in a subject, who
suffers the punishment of his deprauation and reuolting from God. And Paul
calls it, a defect or privation, when he says; All are deprived of the
glory of God. Romans 3.23. Although in sin there be, indeed, inward and
outward motions, which are things positive, but such as have in them error and
confusion: as in Cains murder of his brother, the motion or lifting up of his
hands is a positive thing Genesis 4.8.
. But sin it self is a reuolting from the Law of God, a wandering and
straying from the will of god, a disorder and confusion of gods order. In this
sense Thomas says, that sin is not a mere privation, that is, only an
absence of a good thing, but a certain corrupt habit, or an act void of all
due order, that is a renting asunder, and a troubling of that order, whereby
all our strength and inclinations ought to have been ruled.

What is the subject of sin?
The reasonable creature, because it is only incident to such, (because this
creature only understands the Law, and will of God, and his actions are by
election and choice of the thing to be done) but to brute beasts this cannot
befall.

How many parts of sin are there?
Two, the material, and the formal part of Sin, or the evil of the fault,
and the evil of the guilt.

The first, which is malum culpae, and is the material part of sin, is, a
disorder, or transgressing of Law, a defect, a corruption, an inclination or
action opposing the Law of God, which disease cleaves unto us of it self:
but the guilt or formal part of sin, is a binding unto temporary and
eternal punishment, according to the order of Gods will and Justice Romans 5.12.
Ephe. 2.4
.

A remedy of this, is the obedience or righteousness of Christ imputed unto
us by faith. The other is remedied, both by the heavenly power and virtue,
which springs from Christ's resurrection, which we call Regeneration,
commonly Inherent righteousness; and also that most perfect sanctification of
man's nature in Christ.

What is the fruit of sin?
Death, and that of three sorts. 1. The first, a spiritual death of the soul,
by which it comes to pass, that the wicked being deprived of the presence
of the holy Ghost (which is the soul of the soul) can do none of those
things, which are of God, and so being dead unto God, do live unto Satan.

2. The second of the body, by which death also, are signified the miseries
which bring us to this death.

3. Everlasting death of body and soul, unless in this life we turn unto
Christ. These things are confirmed by testimonies. Genesis 2.17. Thou shall die
the death. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven upon all
ungodliness. Romans 6.23. The wage of sin is death. James, 1.5. Sin when it
is accomplished, brings forth death.

Whence are we to value and esteem the grieuousnesse of sin?
1. By the greatness of the disloyalty against Gods Majesty.

2. By the punishment which followed Adams fall, the calamities and sorrows
which ensued, as sickness, war, famine, pestilence, and other private or
public evils, wherewith we are at this day cumbred, and inwrapped.

3. By the value of that price wherewith we were redeemed from sin, namely,
by the death of the son of God, whom it behooved to become a sacrifice, to
make atonement and satisfy the justice of God.

4. By the horrors of conscience, whereby men's hearts are tormented with the
feeling of Gods anger.

5. By temporal death.

6. By the threatenings of eternal punishment, which God seriously threatens
to those that be not converted.

How many kinds then are there of sin?
Two kinds, to wit: The first fall of certain Angels and our first parents.

2. That corruption and deprauation of men's nature, before it being good, and
which followed upon man's fall.

What a fall was Adams fall, which kindled the horrible vengeance of God
against all mankind?
It was a voluntary transgression of the Genesis 2.17
first commandment or law, and of the order appointed by God, proceeding from
the suggestion and instigation of the Devil Genesis 3.4.
.

Whence came it to pass, that man wittingly and willingly, suffered himself
to be driven to such a horrible fall?
Not by intemperance in appetite, seeing he abounded on all sides, with
whatsoever delicates could be desired; but by Infidelity, whereby, first
calling into question the truth of God, then contemning it, he turned to
embrace a lie. From whence issued, Ingratitude, Ambition, Pride; to which was
annexed contumely and stubbornness against God; seeing that Adam being not
content with his own estate did unworthily despise so great liberality of God,
and sought to become equal to God, whereby, also he subscribed and consented
to those calu^niations of Satan, by which he accused God of lying, envy, and
malice, and he gave more credit to Satan, who in lying, promised him great
benefits by sin, then to God himself, who threatened him destruction. And to
conclude, he broke the commandment of God his Creator, his King and Lord, and
shook off his government, lewdly, wilfully, and obstinately. By which means
it came to pass, that he, reuolting from God, by a cursed Apostasy, fled into
the camp of the Devil, the most cursed enemy of God, and became the Devils
bond-slaue.

What is that corruption or deprauing of man's nature (which before was good,
and to which Adam was created) ensuing that Transgression?
It is a deprivation of the heavenly image (to which Adam was created) that is,
of wisdom, virtue, holiness, truth, righteousness, wherewith he was before
in his creation adorned, and a succeding of Satan's image in the place hereof,
namely of blindness, impotencie, uncleanness, vanity, and unrighteousness,
so that since that came to pass, man can do nothing but sin Romans 6.16 17.
and. 7.23.
.

How many sorts are there of this corruption?
Two* Original and Actual.

The first is the parent, the last the miserable issue of the first: The first
a loathsome pudle and filthy Camarina, the second a most grievous plague: the
first is called Original, or that which is borne and propagated together with
us Ehes. 2.3 Psalm. 51.7.
. The second is called actual sin, or the same which our selves have brought
upon us, and committed our selves. These two, notwithstanding, are, species
subalternatae inter se, Kinds subordinate one to another, rather then opposing
one another. For the one of them is, as it were, a cause and root whence the
other as a fruit and effect proceeds, which distinction of them is gathered
out of Romans 5.14.

What understand you by the name of Original Sin?
It is that blemish and stain which is derived from the first parent of all
men according to the flesh unto all his posterity descended of him.

But what is derived from Adam to his posterity?
Both the formal and the material part also of sin, that is as the Apostle
teaches, manifestly, Romans 5. from the xii. verse to the end of the chapter,
not only a depriving of original righteousness, and a corruption of ma^s
whole nature, but also a guilt and obliging of them to eternal punishment, in
which Adam entangled himself and all his posterity, that is; The very
disobedience of Adam, insomuch as it is imputed to us all, and has therefore
spread it self upon al men though not by act, yet by guilt and imputation. As
Romans 5.12. We are all pronounced to have sinned in Adam as in the root, or a
mass, whereout all mankind was framed, we all being at that time in his
loins. And verse 16. and 18. By one man's fall the guilt came upon all to
condemnation. And verse. 19 By one man's disobedience all are made unjust, that
is, guilty of gods anger and eternal death.

Seeing Levy is said to pay Tithes in Abraham, because he was in the loins
of Abraham. Heb. 7.9. Why also is not Christ said to have sinned in Adam?
Because he was not borne in ordinary manner of the seed of man, but
conceived of the Holy Ghost; therefore he became free and exempted from
Original sin, and from the guilt thereof, as also he did not pay tithes in
Abraham's loins, but was represented in Melchisedecks person, as being an
eternal Priest, not giving but receiving tithes.

What is the cause that sin is derived and propagated from the father to the
children?
The cause is the Law which God has justly made, that man should be borne in
such estate, if man sinned: even as of a leprous father is borne a leprous
son, of a base father a base son, of a poisonous serpent a serpent.

But is it righteous that the whole offspring should be partakers of the
punishment deserved by one?
It is most just with God: Yea amongst all nation it is received, that what the
head does, in respect it is head, that is imputed to the whole body
worthily, and children are spoiled of all their fathers goods because of their
fathers rebellion. For as the Lord of a Fee justly takes away from his
ungrateful vassal and his posterity, the fee, which before was granted to
him upon certain conditions: so it is a deed of Gods Justice, in that he
takes from Adam and all his posterity, those good things which before were
given to mankind in their first parent.

Moreover, that which Christ has done as head of the Church and of all the
elect, is imputed to the Church, and we are said, in Christ to have kept the
Law, to have been dead, buried and raised again, and to sit in the heavens.
Ephe. 2.6. and in many other places. Therefore that which Adam has sinned, as
head of mankind, that is rightly imputed to us, because whatsoever was done by
him, was supposed to be done by all men and every particular man, and he
represented his whole stock. Therefore also did he lose that which was
committed to his keeping for his whole stock.

But by what means is this guilt and this blemish and corruption conveyed to
his posterity?
The guilt by imputation, as has been said: but the corruption not by example
only or imitation, or only by ill custom, but by propagation and generation.
Because Genesis 5.3. Adam is said to have begot Seth after his own image, that
is a sinner Romans 15.12. Job 14.4. and 15.14.
.

Again, because little infants do not sin by example, but are conceived and
borne in sin Psalm. 51.7.
. And the Apostle says Ephesians. 2.3. That we are all, by nature, the children
of wrath, by nature, not by Imitation. But let us remember that saying. We
ought rather seek what way to escape from that evil, then search how it came
upon us, as we must not so much enquire how a fire began, but how it may be
quenched.

But why are children, borne of Godly parents, not sanctified by their purity,
as well as they draw corruption from them?
Because they descend from them not by spiritual, but by carnal generation,
for their posterity is borne of them, not by grace, but by nature. For the
guilt and corruption comes from nature, but justification, which is opposed
to the guilt and Sanctification which opposes corruption is from supernatural
grace, Ioh. 1.13. The sons of God are not of blood but of God. And chap. 3.3.
Except a man be borne again etc.

To whom is original Sin derived?
To all whosoever descend of Adam, the infants, as yet in the mothers womb not
excepted Psalm. 51.7
. For although they have not yet brought forth the fruits of iniquity, yet
their nature is a certain seed of sin, and therefore hateful and
abhomin^ble to God. Romans 5.14. Death is come upon all, for so much as al have
sinned. But infants have not sinned actually, therefore they have sinned
Originally.

Is none amongst all mankind excepted?
Only Christ, who though he descended from Adam by a continued line and race
Luc. 3.23
. Yet not in a natural manner, as other men, and by means of man's seed, but
by the only power of the holy Ghost he was conceived of the virgin Marie,
and sanctified from his first conception that he might be without sin Mat.
1.18. Luc. 1.35.
.

Yet the children of the faithful are holy. 1. Cor. 7.14. If the root be
holy, the branches also are holy. Romans 11.16.
They are holy in regard of their society with the Church, which we profess
in the Creed, to be the communion of Saints. Neither is forgiveness of
sins and righteousness tied to propagation; but to the grace and mercy of
God, or Gods most free election.

Secondly, they are holy, because they are comprehended in Gods covenant, of
which it is said, I will be thy God, and of thy seed after thee. Genesis 17.7.

Is Original sin, the sin of another, or is it every man's proper sin?
It is another man's sin, because being committed by Adam, it is derived to us
from the same author, and yet is not less proper to any one of us then it was
to Adam.

First because Adam sinned not as a private man but as head of all mankind.

2. Because as man's nature communicated by him, becomes every man's own nature,
so also his sin communicated by propagation, and death, which entered by sin,
becomes every man's own sin.

3. Because the opposition betwixt the obedience of Christ, and the
disobedience of Adam, requires it to be so Romans 5.18.19
. As therefore the obedience of Christ is so communicated to his members, that
every faithful person may call it his own, so the unrighteousness of Adam is
so made common to all men, that every man is punished for his own fault.

May the sins of other parents be said to be conveyed into their children, as
the sin of Adam is said to be?
The case differs, because that first sin was not so much personal and
proper to Adam, as natural, that is, common to al men's nature, which originally
and naturally was in his Loins, and therefore truly original. But other
sins of Adam and of other men were truly personal. Of which Ezech. 18.20.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, but the soul that
sins shall die.

Yet it shall be no absurdity, if we say that the sins of our next parents
and ancestors are communicated to their children by corrupt seed, their body
being first stained with sin, and after the soul being infected by the
body, whence is is said, Exodus 20.5. I will visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children. But, that children are not always borne like to
their wicked parents, it proceeds from the special grace of God.

Is Original sin a Substance, or an Accident?
It is no substance, for then it should be either a soul or a body: but the
body and soul in respect of the substance, are the good creatures of God,
which are also, as yet, created by God, wherefore they are not sin. Neither
is it a substantial property or any thing substantial in man: but it is an
outward and accidental quality, which notwithstanding is called natural, not
that it has proceeded from nature (insomuch as it is created) but because it
seizes upon men, and possesses them as by right of inheritance, and cleaves
to the nature of man, his strength and natural faculties, and is naturally
bred in man. Ephesians. 2.3. By nature we are the sons of wrath. Rom,
7.17.20.21. The Sin that dwells in me, the evil which is present with me,
says the Apostle.

Is it an accident which may be separated from man?
Augustines words may serve for answer hereunto; Lib. 1. de Concupiscentia. c.
25.
Original sin is remitted, not so as it is no longer original sin, but so
that now it is not imputed: the guilt thereof is past and gone, the actual
being of it, remains, therefore also does death it self remain.

What is the subject of Original sin?
The whole man both in body and soul, from head to foot, with all his powers
and faculties of body and soul, as well the higher as lower, as
understanding, will, sense. Whereupon the Apostle Ephesians. 4.17.18. affirms the
mind is addicted to vanity, the thought to blindness, and the heart to
wickedness. Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. The
same thing is manifest by our renewing, which the Apostle attributes to
spirit, soul and body Romans 12.1. Ephesians. 4.33. 1 Thessa. 5.23.
.

How many parts are there of this corruption?
Two. A defect and concupiscence, or a perverse and inordinate inclination to
evil. The defect is a wanting of Original righteousness; as there are in the
mind of man, blindness and ignorance of heavenly things, in the will and
heart, a turning away from God, or a deprivation of the love of God and men
Romans 3.23.
. 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of Gods spirit.

Concupiscence is not a natural desire of meat, drink, generation, and
delight in the senses* neither motions of the heart, such as affections are,
neither only a disorder of appetites and desires, but it is a ready
inclination of all our strength, to do those things which are forbidden in the
law of God, of which nature is darkness of our understanding, doubting in our
minds, of God and of his providence, in our will and heart contumacie and
stubbornness against God.

Because Paul says Romans 7.18. I know that in me, that is in my flesh there
dwells no good: and verse. 23. I see another Law in my members, resisting the
Law of my mind, does it therefore follow hence, that the highter part of the
soul is not the subject of concupiscence, but only the sensitive part?
No, for he does not oppose flesh and members, to the mind, that is reason,
such as it is, without the light of the holy Ghost, but he opposes the flesh
to the spirit, that is, to spiritual gifts or regeneration, in as much as it
is begun in man by the Holy Ghost.

But are that privation of Original righteousness, and concupiscence sins?
They are. 1. Because that privation is transgression of the law.

2. Because it is a sin not to be such a one as God commands thee to be. But
concupiscence it self also is a sin, because Deuteronomy. 10.16. we are commanded
to circumcise the foreskins of our hearts, and in the law it is said; Thou
shall not covet. Exodus 20.17.

3. Because, Romans 7.7. the Apostle teaches that concupiscence remains, even
in the regenerate, which constantly he calls a sin, against which we must
without ceasing, fight, and he plainly affirms, that it disagreeth with Gods
Law, I had not known (says he) that concupiscence is sin, except the Law
had said; Thou shall not covet. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after
her, has already committed adultery with her in his heart. Mat. 5.28. And 1.
John. 2.16. The concupiscence of the flesh is not of the father. And the
Apostle calls even that evil, which he wills not; that is to which he
yields not consent. Romans 7.19. I do not that good I would, but that evil
which I would not. Lib. 3. contra Iul.
Therefore Augustine ascribes three things to concupiscence, that it is sin,
and the cause of sin, and the punishment of sin.

What is Original sin therefore?
Anselmus thus describes Original sin. It is a wanting of original
righteousness which ought to be in man. We describe it in this manner. It is
not only a privation of Original righteousness, but both a deprauing and
corruption of man's nature spread upon al parts of the soul, propagated from
Adam to his posterity: and it is a guiltiness, whereby even the new borne
infants are also corrupt by Adams fall, and are therefore guilty of Gods anger
and eternal death, until pardon be granted, and except the benefit of Christ
help Ioh. 1.29.
: and besides these, it comprehends those works which the corruption of our
nature brings forth in us, which the Scripture calls, The works of the
flesh Gal. 5.19
.

By what names is this sin called in the Scriptures?
The sin that dwells in a man, because it remains continually in the
flesh until death: but in them who are not regenerate it reigns, in the
regenerate it only dwells and not reigns Romans 7.17.20
. Malum adiacens, The sin which easily cleaves to us, and compasses us
round about, occupying all our strength Heb, 12.1.
; The sense and understanding of the flesh Romans 8.6.
. Also it is absolutely and simply called Sin Rom 7, 8.
. Because it is the source and fountain of all sins. The body of sin Romans
6.6.
. because in it are gathered together all sins which break forth when occasion
is given. The Law of the ^^mbers. i. because all the members of soul and
body, Romans 13.4.
that is all the parts and powers of man, obey it as a Law. Flesh; Genesis 6, 3.
concupiscence, etc. (to which is opposed the Spirit, which signifies the
grace of regeneration Gal. 16.17
) The heart of man Gen, 8, 21
. Also old Adam Rom, 6, 6.
.

How does Original sin differ from actual sin?
As the tree differs from the fruit, or the root from the branches,
Original sin is like a tree and a root, out of which, evil fruits and
boughs do spring, namely, actual sins, not only outward, but also inward. Out
of the heart proceed evil thoughts (says Christ. Mat. 15.19. Gal. 5.19.) In
that place are recited the works and fruits of the flesh, that is, of
original sin.

Moreover in actual sin, the matter of the sin, remains not, for when a
man has either committed adultery or spoken blaspheamie, those actions
straight cease to be, when the thing is done, notwithstanding the offense to
God, and the guilt remain still. But in original sin, the matter thereof
passes not away: for we find in experience that the corruption of nature
sticks by us: seeing still we run into sin, and are untoward to heavenly
things both in body and soul,

What is the end or wage of Original sin?
Eternal damnation, together with all the mischiefs incident to this life
Gen, 2, 17 and 3, 19,
,

What is the effect thereof?
It deceives, it works all concupiscence, it kills Romans 5, 12 17,
.

What use is there of this Doctrine concerning Original sin?
A threefold use. 1. That we may acknowledge our uncleanness, and that laying
away all arrogancy we may betake our selves and fly to Christ our Savior.

2. That in what manner we understand that the unrighteousness of Adam is
imputed to us, in the same manner we may beeleeue that we by the righteousness
of Christ, are accounted truly and perfectly just before GOD, as the Apostle
teaches. Romans 5.15.

3. That because our birth and generation was and is, full of vice, we may
know we have need of a regeneration according to that. Ioh. 3.5. Except a man
be borne again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

How is this Doctrine opposed?
By sundry errors. 1. Of the Pelagians, who deny that Original sin is
derived by propagation to posterity, but say it is conveyed only by imitation
and example. They also affirm, that death is the condition of man's nature,
although Adam had not fallen. Also that Adams sin hurt no man but himself
only. Also they say that infants when they are borne do not bring with them a
prauitie of nature resisting the law of God, contrary to Paul's assertion Romans
5:12.

2. By the Monks who deny that Original sin is a sin worthy of death, but
either a guiltiness only of another man's faults, or only a fuel and matter
to feed sin, contrary to Paul's speech. Ephesians. 2.3. where he says; We are
the children of wrath. Also they determine that it is only in the body, in
the senses and inferior faculties, but not in the mind and will. Also that by
Baptism not only the guilte, but the evil and prauitie of concupiscence is
taken away: that concupiscence is not a sin, but a natuall appetite or
desire, and that it is only in the sensual appetite, and given unto man, that
by striving with it, he may more and more be sharpened to follow virtue, and
may bind God to himself by his greater desert. Also they say, that infants
damned for Original sin only, have not poena sensus, no punishment of feeling,
in their bodies, but only poena damni, or punishment by loss of the sight and
enjoying of God: although it be credible, that those are more gently to be
punished, in whom original sin has not yet broke forth into works. Also
that Marie the mother of our Lord was conceived and borne without original
sin, which judgment also they hold of John Baptist: therefore that Christ died
not for Marie and John Baptist, because he died for original sin only,
which they wanted: yet Mary rejoiced in God her Savior: and John confesses,
that he is not worthy to bear the shoes of Christ.

3 Of those who say the corruption only of nature is imputed to us, not the
guilt also of Adam: and contrarily of those who say the guilt and not the
corruption is to be understood by the name of original sin.

4 Of those Papists who hold that only actual sins are forbidden by the
law, and that therefore a man may satisfy the Law.

5 Of the adherents of Flauius Illiricus, who teach that it is not an accident,
but the very nature of man, and the substance thereof corrupted, contrary to
that saying of Paul, Romans 7.21. Sin is present with me, (...), and contrary
to those testimonies which teach that God is author of man's nature even since
his fall: and also against those places whereby we learn that Christ took
our humane nature and substance, and redeemed man, but not sin.

6 Of the Philosophers, who call that only sin which resists reason,
whereas reason it self can do nothing but err, until it be enlightened by
the light of God.

7 Of the Libertines, who define and restrain sin to be only that wherein a
man thinks himself to sin.

8 The blasphemy of the Manichees, who say that sins proceed of God.

The sixteenth Place. of Actual sin.
What is actual sin?
IT is a fruit of Original sin, when the law of God is actually violated,
to wit, every action, affection, speech or omission disaagreeing with Gods
will, whereby a man becomes guilty anew, and is guilty of Gods anger and
eternal death: Of which James speaks. 1.15. Concupiscence after it has
conceived brings forth sin, and sin finished, brings forth death,
whereby Concupiscence, he understands the root, that is, Original sin, by
sin finished, actual sin, that is a fruit of the same nature and quality.

How is it divided?
Into two parts. 1. As it is considered in it self without any relation, for
of the sins produced and arising from Original sin, some are only inward,
namely, doubtings of God, the inflaming and kindling of evil affections, evil
thoughts, wicked wills, whether those wills be informs, without form, or
full and resolute, as the Schoolmen speak. Other are external, which show
and manifest themselves by their outward works, and use in their committing
some outward help and service of the body.

2 As it is considered before or after the Doctrine of the Gospel was
delivered concerning Christ, Justification and Regeneration.

Of how many kinds is sin considered in it self before or without the
doctrine of Christ.
Of two kinds. Of omission and Commission Jacob. 4.17
. The first is when we do not evil, but omit that good which God commands
us to do. The second, when we commit that evil which he forbids us to do.
The first proceeds from thence, for that we are unfit for good things, the
latter from this ground, because we are prone to all evil.

2 In respect also of the object, some sin is said to be committed against
God, some against our neighbor.

3 In respect of the law, some sin is dead, some living. The dead sin: is,
which though it be in us, yet is not acknowledged for sin, neither does it so
rage as it uses after the knowledge of the law. Romans 7.9
The living sin is that which is acknowledged to be such, and outrageth in us
after the knowledge of the law.

4 In respect of the inward beginning or original of sin, some sin is of
infirmity, which through our weakness steals upon us against our wills and
conceits, as sudden anger, vain thoughts, desire of things unlawful. Another
sin is of ignorance, of which it is spoken, Psalm. 19.13. Leuit. 5.27. And
Christ says. Luc. 23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Another sin is of Malice, which is of two sorts, one directly opposing
grace, is blasphemy against the holy Ghost, (of which we will speak in proper
place,) the other not directly resisting grace and the holy Ghost, such are the
particular falls against the precepts of the ten commandments, as Idolatry,
adultery, etc. In respect of the complement of Christ's redemption, those sins
are called past, which were done in all that time before he suffered, and
present committed since, the manifestation of the Gospel, by which through the
blood of Christ, free pardon of all sins both past and present is offered to
mankind. Romans 3.24.

How is sin divided being considered after the Doctrine delivered by Christ?
Three ways. The first, whereby one sin is called, the sin which reigns,
or the sin which sins, another kind of sin which reigns not, or sins
not. The sin reigning, is when a man not regenerate serves, and as it were
loses the bridle, to sin, and with whole heart and determinate purpose is
carried and rusheth forward to sin. This also is called voluntary, because it
is done of set purpose and intent, wittingly, with the whole will, and against
the conscience, to which sin he is said to live, whosoever is in the flesh,
and is said also to be dead in his sins Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2.13.
who is entangled more in his sins, is drowned and dead in them.

The Sin which reigns not, is when a man regenerate, being drawn back and
reclaymed by Gods spirit is not carried with all his force to sin, and it is
called Inuoluntarium, that which is not with the will, because the godly do
wrestle against it. Romans 7.19 That evil which I would not, that I do. To
which also they Romans 6.2.
are said to be dead, in which the vigor and power of sin (which by a
borrowed speech is called the life of sin) is extinguished by the power of
Christ, with whom they are united and incoporated by faith: and contrarily they
are said to live to God, or to righteousness, or to Christ, who labor to
attain innocence and righteousness Romans 6.10.11. 1. pet. 2, 24.
.

Whence is their division taken?
From the Epistle to the Romans. 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal
body, that you should obey sin in the lusts of the body.

And Verse. 14. Let not sin reign over you, for you are not under the law,
but under grace* and out of 1. John. 3, 6. Whosoever remains in him sins
not: Whosoever sins has not seen him, nor known him, and verse. 9.
Whosoever is borne of God commits not sin, because his seed remains in
him. And yet notwithstanding in the same Epistle, cap. 1.8. If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

What is the second division?
Sin either Mortal or Venial.

What do the Papists say either of these to be?
They say that Mortal sin is the works of the flesh reigning. But Venial
sin (say they) is the concupiscence or desire of the flesh which does not
long tarry in the heart. And therefore they scarce acknowledge original sin
to be a sin, which they will have to be washed away with light sprinkling of
water, ex opere operato, as they say, by the work wrought.

Is this division to be received.
Not simply. 1. Because every sin whether great or little, makes a man
guilty of eternal death.

Romans 5.14 and 6.13.
2 Because Concupiscence it self is by the nature thereof a sin, for it is
against the law of God, Thou shall not covet. Exodus 20, 17. And Genesis 6.5. and
8.21. Every thought of man's heart from his childhood is only evil.

3 Because James. 2.10. says. Whosoever shall keep all the law, and shall
offend in one, is become guilty of all: Namely, because though he has not
broken totum legis, the whole entire law in every part, yet he has broken
totam legem, the whole law, and the effect thereof, by violating the Majesty
of the Lawgiuer.

4 This is also manifest both by the consideration of the nature of God, and
also of the nature of sin; for no man can violate the infinite Majesty of God
venially; but he shall be guilty of infinite punishment, and that infinite
purity of God cannot endure so much as the least spot or stayne in a sinner.
Therefore he is deceived who thinks there is any sin before God. Which
draws not with it the weight of his eternal anger.

Are therefore all sins equal?
Thus far they are equal, that even the least thought of the least sin
does a thousand times deserve eternal death, according to that saying, Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that abides not in all things which are written in
the book of the law, that he may do them. And Romans 6.23. The wages of sin
is death. Yet notwithstanding in comparison of one with another, some sins
are more grievous then other, as they go astray more or less from the
ordinances of God, and as the objects vary: as, it is a more grievous sin
whereby a man offends against God immediately, then against man, and it is a
greater sin whereby we sin against our parents, then that whereby we sin
against others. On the contrary he sins less that steals, being
compelled by hunger, then he who provoked by lust commits adultery with his
neighbors wife. Proverb. 6.20.
.

Also sins differ in degrees, as, to be angry, or to covet an other man's
wife is a sin, but it is a greater sin to kill, or to commit adultery Mat.
5.21.22, 27 28.
. Also they differ according to the variety of circumstances and causes Mat.
11.22 24.
. Moreover the law it self distiguisheth the works of the first and second
table Exodus 34.1
. And Christ says to Pilate. John. 19.11 He that delivered me unto thee has
the greater sin, therefore also are they not to be punished with equal
punishments.

How far therefore may that division be admitted?
Not in respect of the quality of the sin, but in respect of the persons
which sin, insomuch as they either believe or not believe. For that is
mortal sin, which makes all who believe not, guilty of eternal death: And
such are the sins of all men until they believe, that is, until by faith
they receive remission of sins.

But venial sin, is not that which does deserve pardon, but that which
freely is forgiven and pardoned for Christ's sake, to them which believe, and
such is the sin of all who truly believe. For that which of it self, and in it
own nature is mortal, becomes venial in the believers by the grace and
mercy of God, whilst it is pardoned and forgiven them, according to that,
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, for, they
come not into judgment, but have passed from death to life. John. 5.24. In a
word, to the elect all their sins, even the greatest are venial and
pardonable through Christ Ioh, 5.16.
, but to the reprobate no sin there is which is not mortal Romans 6, 23
.

What is the third division?
Some sin is said to be Pardonable, some Unpardonable.

What sin is Pardonable?
Every sin which is committed against the Father and the Son Mat. 12.31,
, that is every transgression of Gods law which is repented of; which is
remitted of God, if the transgressor cease to sin, and fly to Christ the
Mediator, otherwise not, therefore it is called Pardonable, from the event, not
because of the nature thereof.

How does remissible or pardonable sin differ from venial sin?
Remissible or Pardonable is that which may be forgiven to all that believe.
Venial, is that which is actually remitted to the believer.

What things do oppose this doctrine?
1 That distinction of the Papists of sin into mortal and venial, which is
improper, except in the diverse respects of the elect and reprobate.

2 That Paradoxe of the Stoics, who did therefore make all sins to be
equal, because sin is that thing whatsoever is not lawful. We grant indeed,
the unlawfulness to be alike in all kinds of sin.

The seventeenth Place. of sin against the holy Ghost.
What is the sin which cannot be pardoned?
IT is a kind of sin so deadly, that eternal death ensues it without any
hope of pardon, or forgiveness, or, it is the sin which is not repented of.

How is it called?
It is called the Sin against the holy Ghost, blasphemy of the holy Ghost,
that is against the holy Ghost Mat 12, 13
, and (...). The sin which is unto death 1 John, 5, 18
.

But what is this sin?
That we may the better understand it, testimonies of Scripture are to be
gathered, by which we may understand both what it is, and what it is not. First
therefore comes to our hands that saying. 1. Ioh. 5.17. All unrighteousness
is sin but not unto death. Who so knows that his brother sins a sin
which is not unto death, let him ask and life shall be given him which sins
not unto death, there is a sin unto death I say not that thou should pray
for it. Here sin unto death, is distinguished from (...) unrighteousness,
which is the transgression of the whole law. Hence therefore I gather that the
sin against the holy Ghost is not any transgression of the moral law,
neither universal nor particular, either of ignorance or infirmity, or of
malice committed against the law.

2. That place of Matthew is to be remembered. Mat. 12.31. Whosoever speaks
against the son of man it shall be forgiven him: and of Paul. 1. Tim. 13. He
confesses that he was a blasphemer of Christ, a persecutor, a violent man, but
yet notwithstanding that he obtained mercy, because he did it of ignorance
through unbelief. From whence I gather that blasphemy and persecuting of
Christ and of his gospel, which proceeds of ignorance, is not a sin against
the holy Ghost.

3 Hence comes to our consideration Peter's denial of his master, who denied
Christ, and that when his own conscience cried against it, and with an
execration Mat. 26.69.
but this was done through the horror of the danger at hand, neither did his
judgment consent with his tongue, and that faith (for which the Lord prayed it
might not fail Luc. 22.32.
) was not extinct, but labored and boiled within him, otherwise he would have
joined himself to the persecutors of Christ, when on the contrary, weeping
bitterly he flung out of doors. From whence I conclude that the denial of
Christ proceeding from infirmity, and not from a purpose to forsake Christ,
but so that a man may find out some way for his own safeguard, is not the sin
against the holy Ghost, although nothing comes nearer it then this denial.
Marc. 3.28 Luke 12.10


4 Let us consider that saying of our Lord, Mat, 12.31. and in the verses
following, where he obiecteth to the Pharisees blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, who not only despised Christ and his Gospel, but also said that Christ
cast out devils by Beelzabub the prince of the devils, when as notwithha^ding
they knew Christ by the Prophets, his own doctrine and miracles, and were not
ignorant that those works of Christ were done by the power of the holy Ghost.
Hence therefore I gather by the place, a concreto, that the matter or general
difference of sin against the holy Ghost is, To deny Christ being known,
and his holy Gospel, and against a man's own knowledge and conscience to
ascribe to Satan that work which is proper to the holy Ghost. And this is one
manner, and one kind of sin against the holy Ghost, which was the Pharisees
sin. Such is theirs, who have known the truth and have nevertheless not
submitted themselves to the truth, but revile and slander the truth, calling
it heretical, erroneous, and diabolical.

Lastly, consider we of that place. Hebr. 6.4. It is impossible that those who
have been once enlightened, (and after Catechizing have professed
Christianity, and by Baptism have been chosen and incorporated into the
Church,) and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been partakers of the
holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world
to come, (but have not swallowed it, much less digested it,) if they fall away
(namely, not into a particular sin against the first or second table, but
into an universal apostasy, and reuolting from Christ) If they fall away they
should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him. And Heb. 10.20. To them
which sin voluntarily (that is with full consent, and of set purpose revolt
from Christ, after they have received knowledge of the truth) there is no
sacrifice left for sin. And this kind of sin is in them, who not only
have known the truth, but also professed it.

Whence, 1. I gather that there is a second kind or manner of this sin
against the holy Ghost, Whereby a man universally and with full consent
reuolteth from Christ, being truly acknowledged and known both out of the
Gospel, and by the holy Ghost enlightening the heart: whereby also a man
denies Christ, and with all his strength persecuteth the truth of set malice,
reproacheth and disgraceth Christ, despising his sacrifice.

2 I gather that the subject of this sin is not in all the reprobate, but in
those only who have acknowledged Christ and his truth.

3 That the elect are not subject to this sin, seeing the counsel and
purpose of GOD to save them, cannot be made void.

Therefore what is the sin against the holy Ghost?
It is an universal Apostasy, and falling away from Christ, that is a
renouncing of the truth of the Gospel being evidently known, and a rebellion
springing from hatred of the truth, joined with a tyrannical, and sophistical
and hypocritical opposing it. Or thus, he is said to sin against the holy
Ghost, who notwithstanding his sight be dazeled with the bright shine of Gods
truth, yet he resists it to this end only that he may resist it.

Give me some examples of this sin.
An example for the former is of those Pharisees, against whom Christ disputes
of this very sin. Math. 12.31. For they did not only know Christ was from
God. John. 3.2. but also who he was John. 7.28. ye both know me, and know
whence I am says Christ, and yet they ceased not wittingly, there own
conscience withstanding it, to detract from his heavenly works, and in a hatred
of the truth to persecute him even unto death. Such were many of the Jews.
Act. 6.10. who when they could not resist Stephen speaking by the spirit of
God, yet they labored to resist him. Yet there is no doubt but many of them
were driven to do this through a zeal of the law. Whereupon Peter, Act. 2.41.
In the day of Pentecost received three thousand men which repented, who had
persecuted Christ to the death. But it appears there were others who out of a
malicious impiety did rage against God, that is, against the doctrine which
they were not ignorant came from God.

Examples of the latter are Saul, Judas, Arrius, also Julian the Apollata, for
this man was rightle trained up in the Christian religion, he knew the truth of
the Gospel, which also he publicly had professed, having been baptized: but
afterward by the persuasion of certain wicked Philosophers, Libanius,
Iamblicus and others, he fell from Christ, became an enemy of Christ, and a
persecuter of the Church, he sacrificed to the Idols of the Gentiles, and with
all his might endeavored to abolish Christ's religion.

How must we judge of this sin?
It is hard to pronounce sentence thereof, especially at this time wherein the
gift of discerning of spirits, does not so flourish as in the ancient Church 1
Cor. 10.9.
, by which gift Peter knew the hypocrisy of Ananias and Sapphira Act. 5.3.8.9
. Therefore judgment cannot be given of this but a posteriori, of the
consequence, and final impenitencie which follows it. For Manasses the son
of Ezekiah King of Judah, did many years furiously persecute the word of God,
erecting abominable Idols against Gods commandment 2. King. 21.6
, and shedding innocent blood in Jerusalem King. 24.4
. Yet, because afterward he repented 2 Chronicles. 33 12.13.
, he brought not his sin against the holy Ghost to the height and top,
therefore this sin was indeed begun in him, but not accomplished.

Ought we to make prayers for them who sin against the holy Ghost?
By how much any man shall seem to be nearer to extreme danger, so much the
more carefully ought we by all means to reclaim him into the way, and
especially by prayer to commend him to God. Notwithstanding if God have showed
us any man as it were with the finger, who has sinned unto death, we are
plainly taught what to do. 1. Ioh. 5.16. I say not that any man should pray
for him. And 1. Sam. 16.1. The Lord chideth Samuel because he was in
continual heaviness for Saul, whom he had rejected. For as Hippocrates
forbids to attempt the cure of desperate diseases: so God will not have the
spirit of prayer to sigh in vain and offer prayers for them whose diseases are
incurable.

Why is this sin said to be committed especially against the holy Ghost?
Not in respect of the Essence or person of the Godhead of the holy Ghost, for
neither is the dignity of the holy Ghost greater then the dignity of the
Father, or of the son: neither can one person be offended, but the injury of
the sin redoundeth to the whole Godhead: But in respect of that grace and
enlightening whereof the holy Ghost is proper author in the hearts of men, in as
much, namely as it is the proper and immediate office of the holy Ghost, to
enlighten us, and when we are brought into the light of the truth, to show us
the way to the Father, the Son and himself. For though this work be common
to all three persons, yet the spirit does this properly and especially, as the
father works in the work of Creation, the son in our redemption.

Why is it said to be unpardonable?
Not because of the difficulty of pardon, to be obtained for it, as many
think, neither also because it is mightier or greater then the grace of God:
for that rule of Paul stands good. Romans 5.20. Grace superaboundeth sin.
But because they are stricken with everlasting blindness, who sin this
sin, for their ingratitude, by the just judgment and ordinance of God, Gal.
6.7
who suffers not himself to be mocked, or his spirit which is the spirit of
truth to be convicted of falsehood or lying.

2 Because of their impenitencie or impossibility to repent, as the Apostle
says, Heb, 6.4.6. It is impossible that such should be renewed again to
repentance. For whereas true repentance comes from Gods spirit, and we
obtain the spirit of God in Christ alone by faith, therefore they can never
repent who have sinned against the holy Ghost, and therefore can never obtain
pardon. For if they repented certainly they should obtain pardon, as God
promises by Ezechiel. cap. 18.21. That he will be merciful when a sinner
shall truly be turned, seeing God can no more despise him who truly repents,
then his own spirit. 1 Ioh. 5.16.


How does unpardonable sin differ from mortal sin?
1 Because all unpardonable sin is mortal, but not all mortal sin
unpardonable.

2 Because the mortal sin becomes venial, when they do now believe who
before did not believe: but unpardonable sin never becomes venial, because
they never repent or believe who have this sin.

What sins come near to this sin?
1 The sin of the devils, who wittingly and willingly persecute the known
truth with horrible hatred and fury.

2 Denying of Christ proceeding of infirmity,

3 Sins against a man's own conscience often repeated and fallen into, are
the way to sin against the holy Ghost, for as it is said of diseases of the
body, so fitly it may be applied to the diseases of the soul.

Too late is help of medicine found,
When old disease has gotten ground.
What opinions are contrary to this Doctrine?
The error of the Donatists and Nouatians, who denied that they who fell could
have pardon or remission of sins, abusing that place, Heb. 10.26. Whereas
there is great difference betwixt the fall of them who sin knowing of it, and
their fall, who professedly do altogether depart and revolt from Christ, are
delighted with impiety, and make war against the truth. Otherwise David's and
Peter's cases were desperate, yea we were all gone, contrary to that saying of
Christ, Forgive seventy times seven times. Math. 18.22. and Ezech. 18.21. At
what time soever a sinner repents, I will no more remember his sins. And
likewise this is contrary to the examples of David, Ezechias, Manasses, Peter,
who were received into favor and mercy.

The eighteenth common Place. Of free will after the fall of man.
What is usually understood in this disputation by the name of freewill?
A Faculty or power of man's mind or understanding, to discern and know good or
evil, of the will to choose or refuse either, and of the strength to perform
either good or evil.

What is the reason of this name, Liberu^ arbitriu^?
In respect of the mind which shows the object to be chosen or refused, it is
called Arbitrium will: and in respect of the will which voluntarily, and of the
own accord follows or tefuseth the judgment of the understanding it is
called Liberum, free.

Is there such free will in man after the fall?
There can be no answer made simply to this question, but there is need of a
twofold distinction: for men's actions are to be distinguished, whereof some are
natural and sensual, as to eat, to drink, to move from place to place: some
moral and animal, or pertaining to the reasonable part of the soul, such are
private actions, Oeconomicall or Political, also outward actions in Gods
worship, and some are supernatural or spiritual.

In the first sort of actions man has choice left unto him.

In the second, the mind is much darkened, the judgment is not sound, nor the
will cheerful, neither the strength able to perform. Thereupon came that
speech of Medea.

Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor.
I see the better and approve it.
But still the worse my mind does covet.
In the third kind another distinction must be used, for a man after the fall,
is considered in three respects, before his conversion and regeneration, in his
conversion, and after his conversion.

What think you then of the free will of man before his conversion?
I think it is altogether wicked and evil, for the soul though it remain
whole in the essence thereof with her powers the will and understanding, yet the
strength and ability of these powers unto any spiritual good, is lost. For the
understanding is plainly blind in heavenly matters, destitute of the true
knowledge of God, and of the wholesome understanding of the word, according to
David's saying. Psalm. 14.3. Romans 3.11
There is not a man that understands. And of Paul, 1. Cor. 2.14. The natural
man perceives not the things of the spirit of God. And Rom, 8.7. The wisdom
of the flesh is enemy to God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. And Ephe. 4, 23. he bids us be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, by the spirit of the mind, understanding the principal part of the whole.
(...) as the Philosphers term it. The will is altogether turned away from God,
Psa. 53.3. There is none that seeks God, they are al gone astray.

3 Our strength and endeavors are taken quite away, they altogether become
unprofitable, in the same Psalm Romans 3.3.
. And 1. Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
ghost. And 1. Cor 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any good
thing. And Phil. 2.13. It is God who works in us both to will and to do.

Are we therefore like senseless stocks in regard of spiritual things?
No, for man is not spoiled by sin of the power of understanding or willing,
but his understanding is become blind, and his will perverse.

But what, does not Paul say, Romans 2.14. That the Gentiles by nature do the
work of the law, and in the 15 verse. that they show the work of the law
written in their hearts?
The Apostle speaks of that natural knowledge which is written in the minds
of all men, which is sufficient to take away from men all pretense of
ignorance, and to make them inexcusable, but he speaks not of ability to
fulfill the law. And Paul says not that the Gentiles did the law, but the
things of the law, that is certain outward works agreeing in some sort with
the law: for in other places of Scripture, as in Ierem. 31.33. they are said,
to have the law written in their hearts, whose hearts God has circumcised by his
holy spirit

Deuteronomy. 30.6.
But the Gentiles excelled in notable gifts, which gifts seem to show that
man's, nature is not altogether corrupted.
1 The corruption and faultines of their nature was not purged away, but kept
in and restrained by God, least that like a wild beast, it should violently be
carried to the mischief of mankind.

2 Those gifts were not common gifts of nature, but special graces of God,
which he dispenses and distributeth to men otherwise in themselves profane,
diversely and in certain measure, that he may thereby provide for the welfare
of mankind.

3 Whatsoever in their actions was praise-worthie, was polluted with ambition,
and was far from a desire of illustrating gods glory.

4 They were not virtues properly, but Images and resemblances of virtues,
which although they are praised in the courts and judgment places of men, yet
before the heavenly tribunal they are of no moment to deserve righteousness.
Yea more, they are sins, because whatsoever is done without faith (that is
without acknowledgment and trusting in the Mediator) is sin, Romans 14.23.

Therefore what kind of will is remaining in a man not regenerate?
A will altogether evil, namely which does with a prone inclination make have
to sin, for man is not deprived of will, but of the soundness and goodness
of his will. Therefore Bernard speaks thus: Simply to will comes from man's
nature, to will wickedly comes from corrupt nature, to will well, from
supernatural grace.

But does not man's will freely incline to evil?
If free be opposed to compulsion or violent constraint, in this case man is
carried to commit sin freely, that is of his own accord, voluntarily and with
earnest desire, and so there is in him free will to evil Iam. 1.14 Pruu. 2.24.
. But if free be opposed to servitude or necessity certainly man enclineth to
evil not freely, but necessarily, and so man's will is servile and thrall, but
so as this necessity and slavery is voluntary. So the will of a man
unregenerate is a Servant, and it is also free in diverse respects, a servant,
because of the necessity of sinning, free in regard of his will. John. 8.34.
Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. and verse, 38. If the son
shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. Therefore if he shall not make
free, the will shall be a servant, not free, and therefore more truly it shall
be called servile or slavish will, not free will. For by whomsoever a man is
overcome to him he becomes slave, 2. Pet. 2.19.
but if a man become slave unto sin, he is no longer free.

How stands the vvil of man in his conversion, is it meerrly passive or active
also?
In respect of grace which comes from without a man, and preuenteth him, the
will (in as much as it is not yet begone to be regenerate) is merely passive,
as the clay in the hand of the Potter Romans 9.21
, because all his strength concerning spiritual and heavenly things is extinct,
by which he might prepare himself to grace, or of himself receive it being
offered, or by his natural strength turn unto God, or will, desire, or follow
after that which is good and acceptable to God: for we are all dead in sinb,
but the dead man is only passive in respect of his quickening: yea moreover the
will is not only dead, but also it is stubborn of it self: and of it self,
and by it self, Epes, 2.1. Colos. 3 12
it cannot choose but resist, being not moved and kindled by God John. 6.
. Therefore David faith, Psalm. 51.12. Create in me O God a clean heart. But in
respect of the time in which the conversion it self is wrought, the will is
not like a stock, but whilst it is healed and cured by the holy Ghost, it is
also active, that is, the will in the act of conversion, is not idle, and void
of all sense and motion as an Image, but follows the holy Ghost who draws
it. For at the same instant God cause us both by grace to will, and to will
indeed, that is, he moves and bends our wills, and causes us to will
indeed: but yet so as all the whole efficacy of the action depends upon Gods
spirit. Hereupon Aagustine lib. de Gratia, and lib. arbitrio, cap. 2. It is
certain that we will, when we will, but he causes us to will who works in
us to will. Therefore Phil. 2.13. It is God who works in us both the will and
the deed, where Will is not understood of the substance of the will, but of a
new quality.

How is that to be understood which Christ speaks, Ioh. 6.44. No man comes
to me except the father draw him?
Not so, as if the will in the act of conversion (that is, when the party
converted is begone to be drawn by the word and holy spirit) did like an enemy
make resistance: neither is the case alike, as when evil spirits use the
members of bodies possessed by them. For we do not believe against our wills,
because faith is a knowledge in the mind, and an assent in the heart: but
because of unwilling God makes us willing, of resisting, consenting, of
sluggish and lasie persons, God makes us to become runners. In which sense is
that saying of Chrysostom to be taken God indeed draws, says he, but he
draws so as the party is willing, Act. 26.19. I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision.

What therefore be the causes of our conversion?
The efficient cause and effectual by it self, is one, namely, the Holy
Ghost, of which it is said. Ezech. 36.26. I will give you a new heart, a new
spirit will I put in the midst of you, and I will take the stony heart out of
your flesh, and I will give you a fleshie heart, and will make you to walk in
my commandments.

The isntrumental cause, or means, is the word of God. Romans 10.17. Faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, by which word being read, heard and
thought upon, the Holy Ghost becomes regularlie effectual, enlightening the
mind and turning the will.

The subject of Conversion, is the understanding and will of man, which
notwithstanding is said also to concur, not to the conversion, but in the
conversion, because no conversion is wrought without the thing to be converted;
but in that regard, that it is moved not of it self, but by the Holy Ghost,
that being driven forward thereby, it works, and of unwilling beco^ming
willing, it wills. For the will is not only the subject of Gods operation,
which the spirit of God works in the elect, but it is also such an
instrument, which being renewed and moved by the Holy Ghost, does it self
also work together with it, and moves it self.

What manner of free will is there in a man regenerate?
It is partly to good, partly to evil.

How to good?
Because the Holy ghost renews by the word of God, man's nature only in part:
and therefore that will which before was servant, becomes free only in part,
that is, because a new l^ght and knowledge of God is kindled in the mind: and
in the will and heart, new inclinations and motions agreeing with gods law,
that so man being caused by God to work, may himself also work. As John.
6.45. Every one that has heard and learned of the father comes unto me.
Phil. 2.13. It is God who works in you both the will and the deed.

How is there in them a free will to evil?
1. Because Regeneration is only begun in this life, not perfected, (by
regeneration, is to be understood a 1. Cor, 13 9, 12. and 2, Cor. 11, 9,
renewing of mind, will and affections) and the relics of the flesh or of
sin do always remain, Rom, 7, 19
which do much obscure the knowledge and incline the will, that we do not
straight put in practice that which we will. 2. Because the regenerate are
sometimes for a while left to themselves and forsaken of God, who at that time
does not, as before, show his power and efficacy in them, so that falling
into sin, they may be humbled and return to God: as it may be seen Psalm.
51.13. etc. which is done, 1. To humble them. 2. To make the^ pray for grace:
3. That they may acknowledge that grace is of God.

Is it in our power to refuse or accept the grace of God offered to us, and
continue in grace, or again to fall from it?
If man be considered such as he is of his own nature, that is, being wholly in
the power and slavery of sin, he can indeed refuse grace, neither can he turn
unto God. But if you look to Gods purpose, election and effectual calling, he
that is elect cannot, but in his time receive grace. For the counsel and
determination of God cannot be made void. Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord
remains for ever And Ephe. 1.11. In whom we are predestined according to
his purpose who works all things according to the counsel of his own will.
Notwithstanding spiritual gifts are to be ascribed to God only. And the
regenerate stand not by their own power, but by the only power of the holy
ghost, by which power also they rise after their falls, and persevere unto the
end. Ps. 37.23. The paths of a man are directed by the Lord, for he loves his
way, though he fall, yet he shall not be crushed in pieces, for the Lord
puts under his hand. Heb. 13.5. I will not fail thee neither forsake thee.

But after we have bin converted and have given place to the first grace, does
not our strength work together with the grace which follows?
Where the grace of God reigns, there is readiness to obey and co^sta^cy to
persevere, but so as it always proceeds from gods spirit consenting thereto
Phil. 4.13. I am able to do all, through Christ that stre^gtheneth me. But that
a man should take so much from him self, as thereby to work with gods grace:
this does plainly oppose the Scripture. Phil. 2.13. It is God who works in us
both to will, and to do, according to his good pleasure. Also Ps. 23.6. and
9.11. His mercy prevented me, and his mercy shall follow me. Also Phil. 1.6. He
that has begun his good work in you, he will also finish it eue^ unto the day
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And 1. Pet. 1.5. You, who by the power of God are
kept by faith unto salvation. Therefore the whole benefit of our conversion and
salvation, in the beginning, midst and end thereof is of gods free mercy.

If a man can do nothing in spiritual things, in vain therefore are propounded
all punishments, precepts, reproofs, exhortations, promises, as these If you
will do this etc. You shall eat the good things of the Land etc.
Concerning punishments, I answer, that seeing sin is committed by a voluntary
desire, therefore they are justly inflicted upon sinners. For the other Aug.
lib. de corrept and gratia, makes answer on this manner. O man, in the
Commandment know what thou ought do. In thy correction know, that through
thine own fault, thou have not that thou should have: In making petition,
know whence thou receiuest that thou would have. And God conuerteth a
man, and kindles faith in him not without means, that is, not without the
word, not without hearing, reading and meditating upon the doctrine which
sounds in the ministry, and not without a wrestling and resista^ce of his
will. Certainly the wicked can impute their hardness to none but themselves, but
by the word they are urged in their consciences, and are made more inexcusable
against the day of judgment. But the godly by exhortation, are prepared to
obey exhortation and are convicted by reprehension of their sins. To conclude,
God by his promises testifies how unworthy the ungodly are of his goodness: but
the godly he allureth by the swetnes thereof to love of his precepts.

But Zachary Cha. 1.3. seems to part and divide the effects of our
conversion betwixt God and us, saying, Turn you unto me, and I will turn unto
you?
I answer. Zachary speaks of an outward conversion to good works, and he
speaks of such a conversion in god, not whereby he renews man's heart unto
repentance, but whereby he shows himself to be merciful and well pleased, by
the prosperity he sends. For concerning the inward conversion. Jeremy
speaks in the Lam. 5.21. on this manner; Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be
turned. And Deuteronomy 29.4. God has not given you a heart to understand, to which
is answerable that saying of Augustine, O Lord give that which thou coma^dest
and command what thou vvilt. Da quod iubes, and iube quod vis.

But Moses, Deu. 30.11.14. speaks thus; The commandment which I command thee
this day, is not hid from thee, neither is far off, but it is with thee, even
in thy mouth and in thy heart that thou may do it?
1. I answer in general, that Moses does not speak of any power in the^ to
perform perfect obedience to the law, but of a natural and doctrinal notice of
the co^mandeme^ts of the Deacalogue, so that the people could pretend no
ignorance, seeing they had the tabls thereof written for them so might repeat
them by heart, and had the law written and engraven in the knowledge and mind.

2 According to Paul's application Romans 10.8. we add further that Moses
speaks not simply of the commandments of the Law, but of the promises of
the Gospel, and that he makes this easines of performance to consist not in
man's power, but in the help and assistance of the Holy Ghost, who
accomplisheth mightily his work in our infirmity 2 Cor, 12.9
.

What is the use of this Doctrine?
That man being taught that no good remains in him, may be humbled: that he
may glorify God by the confession of his own want, that he may aspire and
labor to that good which he wants: that distrusting his own strength, he
may rely upon God: that he may learn, that he must recover in God that
which is wanting to himself, that he may acknowledge the greatness of Christ's
benefits: that he may knowledge and profess the free gift of the Holy Ghost
working in him: that he may yield obedience to the operation of the same Holy
Ghost, and may so much the more consta^tly continue in calling upon God by
prayer.

What things oppose this Doctrine?
1. The error of Plato who labors by disputation to prove that vice is not
voluntary, and that men of their own disposition are not evil. Also that of
Aristotle, who says that reason moves and persuades a man to the best
things, and that reason is a thing disagreeing with sin (in the end of his
Ethics) when as notwithstanding, reason does not only not understand those
things which belong to true piety, but even in things belonging to this life
is blind, and often is deceived.

2. That saying of Cicero. That a man must ask of God good fortune, but
wisdom he must take from himself.

3. Of the Pelagians, that man by the proper strength of his nature, without
the grace of God, can turn himself to God, and by his pure natural gifts can
fulfill the Law.

4. The error of those Semipelagians, who attribute our conversion partly to
Gods grace, partly to the power of free will. And that of the Schoolmen, who
say that a man by doing as much as lies in his power deserves grace de congruc:
that free will works together with the grace of God, and that in motions of
the Spirit it is not taken away nor lost, but only weakened, and that the will
can prepare it self to grace.

5. Of the fathers of the Counsel of Trent, who affirm that the strength and
faculties of the soul are indeed bound and entangled in the snares of sins,
so as a man cannot by his own power wind himself out: but yet that they are
not put out nor extinct, but only feeble, as a sick man whose strength is
impaired by some disease, who is refreshed when the physician comes to him,
and lays his hand upon him: or as a bird, which has ability and power to
fly, but being tied by a thread, can not exercise the use of that faculty.

6. That Position of the first universal grace, that the Lord opens all men's
eyes that they may see, and their ears that they may hear, if they will,
seeing it is required that they have a power to will.

7 The error of the Enthusiastes, who boast of visions, speculations,
conference and familiar speech with God, inspiration without Gods word, and do
imagine that men are compelled, haled and pulled to their conversion, and upon
this false ground, they contemning the word of God, do expect that drawing and
forcing of the spirit.

The ninteenth common Place. Of the Law-
From whence is the Latin name of Law, to wit Lex, taken?
EITHER of binding, Lex a ligando, because the Law binds those upon whom it
is imposed, either to obedience or punishment, or else a legendo of reading,
because Laws were used to be read publicly, or ab eligendo chosing, because
it is a rule of things to be chosen or refused; the Greek word is (...) a
(...) to distribute, because it gives each man his right.

What significations has the word Law?
1. It is in general used for all Doctrine which prescribes any thing, as in
Hebrew it is called (...) of (...) Torah of Iarah, which signifies to teach.
For which cause also the Gospel is called a law. Esa. 2.3. The Law is gone
forth of Sion, and the commandment of the Lord from Jerusalem. So Ierem.
31.33. I will put my law in their inward parts, and in their hearts I will
write it. And Romans 3.20. The Gospel in that place is called the Law of Faith,
(...), (by imitation) that is a Doctrine which propounds salvation upon this
condition, If thou believe.

2. More specially, the Law signifies the Old Testament, Romans 3.19. We know
that whatsoever the Law says, it says it to them which are under the Law.

3. When the Law is opposed to the Prophets, it signifies only the books of
Moses, and it is distinguished from the Prophets and Psalms. Luc. 24.22. Those
things which are written in the book of Moses, in the Prophets and in the
Psalms. And Romans 3.21. The righteousness of faith has testimony in the Law
and Prophets.

4. When it is opposed to the Gospel, it is taken for the Law, and the things
thereto belonging, as it is in the same Chapter ver. 28. We are justified by
faith, without the works of the Law.

5. When it is opposed to grace, it signifies the wrath of God, and damnation,
and the rigor of Justice, as Romans 6.14. We are not under the Law, but under
grace. So, Gal. 3.18. If ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.

6. Sometimes it is opposed to the truth, and then it signifies the shadows
of the Law, that is, the Ceremonies of the Law. As John. 1.17. The Law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ.

7. When it is opposite to the time wherein Christ was given, it signifies the
whole policy and government of Moses, as Gal. 3.20 Before faith came, we
were kept under the law. As also it signifies the ordinance of the
Priesthood. Math. 11.13. The law and the Prophets prophesied unto John Heb.
7, 12 and 10.11.
.

8. The Law is sometime by a Metonimie taken for rule, authority, sovereignty,
and command; or that force which constrains a man to any thing, as when it
is said; The law of the spirit of life, the law of Sin and death Romans 8.2
the Law of the members Romans 7.23.
.

But what understand you in this place by the word Law?
I understand, a law put into men's hearts by God, and afterward repeated by
Moses, which commands holy and just things, and promises eternal life on
this condition; If thou shall do all these things. Again, it threatens a
curse, if a man fail but in the least of them Iam. 2.10. Gal 3, 10.
.

What Epithets and titles be given to the Law in Scripture?
Diverse, but in diverse respects: For when comparison is made between the Law
and Gospel, especially in the article of Justification, then Paul gives the
law such terms and appellations as seem ignominious, but this is by relation.
1. By our fault, not any fault in the Law. For he calls it, a
Schoole-maister, a prison that shuts up Gal 3.23.24
, the yoke of bondage Gal. 5, 1
, the power or force of sin 1, Cor 15 56.
, the operation of wrath and of death Romans 4.15 and 7.5.
, vveake and beggarly elements of the world, Gal. 4.9,
the ministry of death and condemnation, the killing letter 2 Cor. 3, 6, 7.9
the hand vvriting which is against us Col, 2, 14,
, the Testament which begets unto bondage Gal. 4 24
. But being considered by it self as a Doctrine published by god, it is called
a holy Law, and a holy and good commandment, i. a word of life, a
commandment which is unto life. Romans 7, 12


Who is author of the Law? Act, 7, 58
Romans 7, 10

God himself, who in the beginning, put it in the minds of men, then in Mount
Sinah, he engraued it in tables of stone, and gave it Moses to be published
Exodus, 32 16
.

What joint causes and Ministers were there in publishing the law?
1. The Angels, who were not the authors, but messengers and witnesses employed
in the publication of the Law, which was done by God. Act. 7 53. Ye have
received the Law by the ordinance of Angels. And Gal. 3.19, The Law was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, or messenger, that is, it was
given to Moses his Messenger, by the ministry of Angels.

2. Moses, who was specially appointed by God. Exodus 19.3.20. and John 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, which is confirmed. Act. 7.38. For Moses being
the messenger betwixt God and the people Deuteronomy, 5, 5
coming down twice from the mount, brought to the Israe ites the two tables
of the Law, which he had received from God by the ministry of Angels.

What is the matter, or argument, or object of the Law?
The love of God and of our neighbor. Mat. 22.37.39. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
thought, and thy neigbour as thy self.

Of how many sorts is the Law of Moses?
Of three sorts; Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, Deuteronomy. 6.1. These are the
Precepts and ceremonies, and judgments which the Lord commanded. Romans 9.4. To
the Israelites pertain the covenants, and the service of God, and the giving
of the Law (...). Whereof the first sort are common to Jews and other
nations, the latter sorts were private, and proper to the Laws of that people
and body.

What is the Moral Law?
It is a precept and ordinance made by God, containing a rule of living godly
and justly before God, requiring of all men a perfect and perpetual obedience
toward God* and such a Law it is as promises eternal life to them who
perfectly obey, but threatens death and damnation to them who perform it not
perfectly, according to those sayings, He that does these things, shall line
in them Leuit. 18.5. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.12. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is
he who does not all the words of the Law. And it is called Moralis (...),
because it is a perpetual rule, to live by, by which every man's manners are to
be tried, both toward God and toward his neighbor: this is summarily
comprised in the ten Commandments or Decalogue Exodus 20.10
.

What difference is there betwixt this moral Law and men's Laws which concern
manners?
A very great difference: For humane Laws do only require or forbid outward
works, and a discipline only for fashion and orders sake, and only require
of us an inward moderation of our affections after the judgment of our own
mind. But the law of God does not only require outward deeds, but a
conversion of man's whole nature unto God, absolute obedience, and an orderly
framing of all affections to the eternal rule of Gods mind, and also
spiritual motions agreeing entirely and purely with the law. Which thing Paul
means when he says Romans 7.14. The Law is spiritual. And Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and thy neighbor as thy
self. Also these words declare so much, Thou shall not covet. Exodus 20.17.
Besides in man's laws are denounced temporal, in Gods both temporal and
eternal punishments.

Is the Moral Law another Law then the Law of Nature?
No.

What needs then the promulgation of the ten Commandments?
1. Because since Adams fall, darkness has surprised the minds of men, which
makes the knowledge of the Law of Nature more obscure: as also his assent to
obey is weak, and there is a great obstinacy and resistance of the inferior
parts in him.

2. Because God would by this new publication declare and testify that he is
author of the Law of nature, and of the natural notions in man: also he
signified hereby that he would not have his Law to be forsaken.

3. He would have the express voice of his judgments against sin to be
extant, and that it should be known, that punishments fell not by chance, but
by the order and appointment of God.

4. That there might appear a certain manner and order of worshipping God.

What is the end of the Law?
1. Tim. 1.5. The end of the commandment is love, out of a pure heart, a good
conscience and faith unfeigned.

Can we perform that obedience to the Law which it requires?
That even the regenerate can not do it, it is proved not only by universal
experience, and testimonies of Scripture, as Ecclesiastes 7.21. Proverb. 20.9.
1. King. 8.46. There is not a just man upon the earth, which does good and
sins not. Psalm. 14.2.2. In thy sight shall none that lives be justified.
And Romans 7.21. When I would do that which is good (for he speaks in that
place of one and the same work which is good) evil is present with me. Phil.
3.12. Not as though I had already attained to it, or were already perfect: but
also the new way into heaven showed unto us (that is Jesus Christ our Lord)
does clearly euict annd manifest it: For if righteousness be of the law
(says Paul Gal. 2.21.) Christ dyed in vain.

Is God therefore unjust, because he requires these things of us which we
cannot do?
Far be it we should say so, for he asks again of us that which is his
own, and which before he had given us: for he gave to our first parents in
their creation a power, and ability to perform the Law. Even as if one should
lend any man money, and the debtor should by his negligence and fault spend or
lose it, and is no more able to pay, notwithstanding the creditor can not be
proved to deal unjustly, if he demand the lent money of him and his heirs.

But how can these two sayings, (which are thought to be Ieroms) be
reconciled, Cursed is he who says that God commanded impossible things: and,
cursed is he who says, the Law is possible?
They are to be reconciled by a distinction of times and subjects. God did not
command impossible things, namely, to our first parents before the fall,
neither also to the regenerate, unto whom the Law is possible by grace. And
this is.

1. First, by imputation of Christ's satisfaction, and remission of sins. for
Christ is the end or scope, the fulfilling or perfection of the Law, for
righteousness, unto every one that believes. Romans 10.4. And Ambrose says;
He has the fulfilling of the Law that believes in Christ.

2. Secondly, by the beginning of a renouation, which is wrought by the holy
ghost unto some degree of a good conscience, according to which they are called
perfect Phil. 3.15 1 Cor. 2, 6.
, but are so by an imperfect perfection Philip. 2 12
. In this sense, the commandments of God are not grievous 1. John. 3, 5
, because they have the forgiveness of sins joined to them Rom, 6, 14
, and because the spirit of renouation works in the believers such a will,
that they are delighted in the Law of God.

Rom, 7, 22
But the Law is impossible, namely, to a man in this corrupt nature, in his own
strength and actions, and the Scripture fears not to say concerning the
observation of the Law. that it is, a yoke, which neither the Apostls, nor they
which believed, neither the primitive Church, nor the fathers could bear. Act.
15.10. which thing surely is to be understood also of the justified and
regenerate persons.

What is the first use of the Moral Law?
There is a threefold use of it, to Restrain, to condemn, to Teach.

1. The first is outward, which is also called Paedagogicall, Disciplinarie,
and politic, which by fear of punishment and the terror of Gods revenge,
does restrain even the unregenerate men from the outward work of sin, and
it is necessary to preserve the public society and community amongst men,
and to maintain peace. Which use Paul commends. 1. Tim. 1.9. when he says,
The Law was not given for the righteous man (not only in regard of
justification or condemnation, but in respect of compulsion: as the mother
loves and cherishes her own child of her own accord, not being compelled
by the Law, though the Law command this also) but unto the unjust, to the
disobedient, etc. And this use may serve to keep every man in the limits of
his duty, and to rule his outward manners; with which use the Pharisees and
Hypocrites contented themselves. In respect whereof also Paul, Phi. 3.6. says,
that before his conversion he was unrebukable.

What is the second use?
It is inward or secret, which smites the conscience of man, and does detect,
convince and condemn sin, and brings man forth to Gods judgment seat, and
makes him subject to the sentence of Gods curse. Of this use it is said, Romans
3.20. By the law, is the knowledge of sin. And chap. 7.9. I lived sometimes
without the law; (that is, through my security, I felt not the judgment of
the Law) but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I became dead that
is, I understood I was worthy of death and damnation. In respect of this use,
the Law, is said to work wrath, Romans 4.15. because it denounces the wrath
of God, and proclaims us subject to Gods anger. And 2. Cor. 3. The Law is the
ministry of death, that is, it causes by the acknowledgement of sin, to
understand, that we are worthy of death, that is condemnation.

This property the law has in it not by any fault in it self (for in the own
nature it is good and holy) but through the fault of our corrupt nature. For as
the touch stone is not gold, but a means to discover pure Gold from
counterfaite, so the law is not the cause of sin, but a touchstone discovering
just from unjust, Romans 7.5.7.

This use serves to terrify them that are desperate and forlorn, and to
bring them in awe, who are not desperate, and to prepare them to seek remedy,
and to receive that remedy which is offered to them in Christ. In which respect
the law is said to have bin our Schoolmasters, to bring us to Christ, Gal.
4.24. For where as it reproved all men of unrighteousness, it likewise
admonishes the^ that righteousness was to be sought in Christ, except they
would rather perish.

An example of this use we have in David after he heard himself rebuken by
Nathan 2 Samuel 12.1 13.
, and in Ezechiah who says Esai. 38.13. Like a Lion he has broken all my
bones. And Act. 2.14.23.37. When as at that Sermon of the law made by Peter,
wherein he obiecteth to them ingratitude toward god, and murder of Christ the
innocent, that is the breaking of both tables of the law; they being pricked
in their hearts said unto the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do.
To whom Peter answers; Repent you. verse. 38. For as lime is set on fire by
the water, and quenched with Oil, so by accident sin is increased by the
Law, and the terrors, and astonishments of the heart daunted by the judgment
and sentence which the law awardeth, are healed by oil powered upon, that is
by hearing the comfort of the Gospel.

What is the third use?
It is a spiritual use, because it belongs to men regenerate by Gods spirit,
whom it teaches and instructs in the true worship of god, and the rule of
living rightly. Concerning this, god by Ezechiell speaks Chap. 20.19. Walk
ye in my precepts, etc. In respect of this Law, David commends the Law, and
diversely magnifieth it. The Law of the Lord is unspotted, converting souls,
the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, the commandment of
the Lord is cleeere, and gives light to the eyes, etc Psalm. 19.8.6
.

Have they, who are regenerate by the holy Ghost, any need of the Law, seeing
they have the Holy Ghost for their teacher and leader?
They have need.

1. Because man's reason easily wandereth and erreth from the way, as soon as
it is not ruled by gods word.

2. God will not have us by our endeavor, and at our own pleasure to invent
works or service for him; but he will have us governed by his word, Psalm.
119.105. Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet. And, Mat. 15.9. In vain they
worship me teaching Doctrines and commandments of men.

3. That rule of living godly and well which the Holy ghost teaches, is no
other then that which the law prescribes.

4. Because of the relics of the flesh: for the faithful are not in all
parts regenerate: and therefore ir is expedient that they be daily more
instructed concerning the will of god, and that their slothfulness should be
stirred, and as it were spurred forward by exhortations, ready to obey.

What is the ceremonial Law?
It is that which prescribed in Ecclesiastical rites, and outward ceremonies
as.

1. Sacrifice.

2. Other holy things, as places and vessels, or set times and solemnities.

3. Sacraments.

4. Certain observations in meat Deuteronomy. 14.6, 12, 21
apparel Leui p, 17, 12.
, plowing deuteronomy. 22.5 11.
, sowing Verse. 19,
, uncircumcision of trees Lev. 19.23
, fouling Deuteronomy. 22, 6
, and many other thing: as also the outward worship of God: the use lasted
whilst Moses government endured both in the Tabernacle, which was made to be
carried about and also in Solomon's T^mple, which was seated in one place; as
likewise without the Temple.

What was the use of Ceremonies and Sacrifices?
1. That they might be Images or pictures of the inward worship which was due
unto God.

2. That they might show the uncleanness of sin, which cleaves to man, and
that they might testify what men deserve in themselves, namely, death and
eternal damnation, and thus far they were appurtenances of the moral Law.

3. That they might be visible sermons to the godly, of Christ's passion and
death, by which they should be delivered from that misery, and in this respect
they were (as it were) certain types of the Gospel, in which consideration,
the Law is s^^de (and that chiefly) to be a Schoole-maister to bring us to
Christ Gal, 3.24
. For Circumcision did mistically preach the promised seed of Abraham:
Washings admonished them of the uncleanness which was to be cleansed away by
the blood of Christ. Sacrifices did typically shadow out that Sacrifice which
was to follow. Whereupon Col. 2.7. and Heb. 10.1. The Law had the shadow of
good things to come, not the very image of things, but the body was Christ.

4. That they might be signs and sacraments whereby the holy Ghost might be
effectual, and this not ex opero operato, for the work sake as it was
wrought, but being used in faith. In which sense Sacrifices are called an
atonement for sin Leuit. 19, 27
.

5. That they might be marks of their profession, signs and distinctions,
or, as it were, a wall to separate the Church of Israel from other nations,
and to drive them from the Idolatry of other nations.

What was the Judicial or Politic Law?
It was a commandment concerning outward actions, by which the civil
society of the Israelites should be governed; or you may call it the Civil
Law of the Israelites, concerning Magistrates, distinction of governments,
distribution of inheritances, punishment of offenses, the distinction and
propriety of inheritances, the order and process of Judgments, Contractes,
Rites of Marriage, Divorces, bondage, the order and laws of war, witness,
usury, of raising seed up to a man's brother, punishment of blasphemy,
perjury, profaning of the Sabbath and ceremonies, sedition, disobedience,
manslaughter, damage done to a man either in goods or body, adultery,
whoredom, theft, and to conclude, of all outward offenses against every
commandment of the Decalogue.

What was the use of the Judicial Law?
1 The maintaining of the State, according to the condition of time, place, and
nation.

2. Secondly, that there might be an apparent and notable difference betwixt
that state wherein the Messiah shouldbe borne, and that of other nations.

How far is the Moral Law abrogated?
1. In respect of justification, we must think alike of all parts of it,
namely, that no man is just or accepted unto eternal life, for any works of
the Law.

2. In respect of obedience, we must make a difference in the parts of the
Law, and the Moral Law has two parts as it were, precepts or the rule of
life, and an appendix concerning promises or threatenings.

3. In regard of the rule of men's lives, the Law shall not be abolished either
in this life, or the life to come, for so much as concerns the
commandments: For God requires a perpetual love toward himself and his
creature, in his place; and in this respect Christ testifies that, He came not
to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it, and that One iotte of the Law should
not pass away, but it should be fulfilled.

4. In regard of the appendices and appurtenances, all the promises of the
Law are ratified to the regenerate in Christ Romans 8.4.
.

Now for the threatenings, the inexorable severity of the Law, and the severe
exacting of obedience, these are abolished to the regenerate. Romans 6.14. You
are not under the Law but under grace. Also Chap. 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Also Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, becoming a curse for us. Also cap. 4.4.
Christ became subject to the Law, that he might redeem them who were
subject to the Law.

But the unregenerate are subject to the whole Law, and the sentence of
condemnation which it pronounces according to that which is said Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is he that does not all things which are written in the book of the
Law.

Is the ceremonial law abrogated?
It is abrogated, not in respect of the signification or Scripture, that it
should no more be read: for this may serve to confirm and instruct us
concerning Christ: but in regard of the use and outward observation. For Dan.
9.27. it is said, He (that is Christ) shall confirm the covenant with many,
for in one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifices and oblations to cease.

And Christ says; Math. 11.13. The Law and the Prophets were until John
came. And John. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ.

Therefore by a public decree of the Holy ghost, in an assembly or counsel of
the Apostles. Act. 15.6. the ceremonies were abrogated, so as they are not to
be called again, seeing Christ, of whom they were a type, is already come,
and has fulfilled them all and has put out the hand vvriting of ordinances
which was against us. Colos. 2.14. That is the ceremonies which were usual
instruments which testified our guiltiness and uncleanness. So Heb 10.14. for
by one oblation has he made perfect for ever those who were to be sanctified.

This was also signified by renting of the veil of the Temple at Christ's
passion Mat. 27.5.
. Therefore says Paul, Gal. 5.2. If you be circumcised Christ shall nothing
profit you.

In stead of this Law, the Lord has appointed the administration of Sacraments
to be observed in the Christian Church, according to his direction, unto the
end of the world. Marc. 16.15. Go preach and baptize. And 1. Cor. 11.26. Show
forth the Lords death till he come. But for those things which pertain to the
order of administering them, those he left free to the Churches disposition.

Is the judicial law in like manner abrogated?
It is abrogated in regard of the Obligation, namely for so much as no common
wealth is bound to receive the politic Laws of the Israelites, as also in
regard of the manner, limitation, form and decreeing of punishments, or the
appointment of them to be set down according to certain circumstances, which
thing is left to the liberty and disposition of good princes accordingly as
place, time, and person shall require. For the Civil Law binds only those
to whom it is given. Moreover, that law which is made only for a certain
time, does not stand in force after that time: but this Law was only given for
a time, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not be taken away from Judah, and the
Lawgiuer from the midst of his people, until Silo come. To the same effect
is also that saying of Christ. Luke 16.16. The Law and the Prophets (that is
the government and policy of Moses) was unto John.

Therefore the Judicial Law was positive, and therefore Christians are not
compelled to govern their Common wealths in the same manner, in which the
Israelites common wealth was governed, but it is lawful for them to use the
politic Laws of their Nations, which agree with the Laws of Nature, and the
ten Commandments, according to that Commandment, Romans 13.1. Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers 1 Pet. 2.13
.

Again, God by a notable judgment has destroyed the politic government of
Moses Dan. 9.26 27. Mat. 24.15.
.

But yet it is not abrogated, in respect of the substance and end, or that
natural and universal equity which groundeth upon the Law of God and of
nature, and in respect of that moral kind of Laws, which takes order that
the disturbers of humane society may be punished, that honest and lawful
peace be maintained, that the public safety and quiet be preserved, and that
judgment and justice prevail.

What things are Disparata, i. disagreeing, or of other nature then the Law?
The Gospel is of another nature, of which we will speak in next place.

What opinions do oppose this doctrine of the Law?
1 The error of the Manichees, who say the Law is evil, because it works
wrath, Romans 4.15. whereas it does not work this effect properly, but through
the transgression of him that breaks it.

2 Of the Pelagians, who thought themselves to be so disposed and able by
nature, as to perform it.

3 Of the Antinomi and Libertines, who think that Christians have no more need
of the moral Law, and that the ten commandemens are not to be preached in the
Christian Church, because the faithful are borne again of the spirit.

4 Of the Pharisees who thought the fulfilling of the law to be easy and
possible Mat. 19.20.
, and that some of the commandments were great commandments, as those which
concerned more gross sins, murder, adultery, perjury: some (they thought)
were the least commandments, the transgressing whereof God did not regard, as
the inward affections wandering from the law of God Matt. 5.19.
. Also that error of the same Pharisees and of the Ebionites, who taught that
the observation of the ceremonial law, was to be joined with the Gospel.

5 Of the Papists, who affirm that perfect obedience to the law may be
performed by a regenerate man (pro statu viatoris) as he is in the estate of a
pilgrim, and that the scripture does ascribe to the godly diverse and several
works, whereof some are good, and such as satisfy the law, some evil and
resisting the law, and that the law does not require of men any more perfect
obedience then that which may be performed in this life: yea moreover, that a
man may do more then he ought, if he will, which works they call Works of
supererogation, and that therefore men become just before God through the
observation of the law, and do deserve by it eternal life.

6 The same Papists foolish and perverse imitation, who bring into the Church
the Leuiticall ceremonies.

7 Of those brainsicke heads, who will have Christian commonweals to be
governed only by the politic laws of the Jews.

8 Of the Anabaptists who feign that the Patriarchs believed nothing of the
Gospel or promises of eternal life, but that they were only fed with the
outward and corporal promises, because they are said to have been in the law
Romans 3.19
, and under the law Gal. 4.3.5
, as also because it is written. Math. 11.13. that the law was until John
came. To conclude, all errors concerning the true meaning of the law, as also
all sins which are against every of the ten commandments.

The twentieth common Place. Of the Gospel
What does the word Euangelium signify?
IT properly signifies a good, joyful, happy and glad tidings or message, in
which sense Aristophanes uses, (...), I told them good tidings. So in Appians
writing of the murder of Cicero, (...), carrying the good news to Anthony.

2 It signifies a reward given to them who brought good tidings: Hom. odyss.
14.

(...),
(...).
(...).
That is,

Let this be my reward for my good news, that when he shall return to his
house, you cloth me with good apparel, Ierkin and Coat.

3 It signifies a Sacrifice offered for good news received. Xenophon (...),
he offered Sacrifice upon receipt of his good news.

But in what signification does the Scripture use this word Euangelium, or
Gospel?
1 As the verb (...) signifies to report joyful things, Isa. 52.7. How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of them who bring the glad tidings
of peace, and tidings of good? for which word the Prophets use (...): which
signifies, to report good news: so the Apostles (...) have termed Euangelium
or Gospel Marc. 1.15.
, that notable and joyful report of salvation procured by Christ to them that
believe, or a solemn preaching of the grace of God manifested and exhibited in
Christ. Luke 2.10. I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all
people, for this day is borne unto you a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

2 By Metonymie it is taken for the history concerning Christ, concerning
things which he taught and did Act. 1.1
. And in this sense we reckon four Gospels.

Sometimes also it signifies the publication of the doctrine of the Gospel,
the preaching and notifying of the same, as 1. Cor. 9.14. Live of the Gospel,
that is, of the preaching of the Gospel, and 2. Cor. 8.18. Whose praise is in
the Gospel.

But what is the reason of this name?
Because, as to malefactors condemned to a most grievous and ignominious
punishment for their offenses, nothing can happen more joyful and acceptable,
then that being freed from the sentence of condemnation, they should enjoy the
liberty and glory of kings: so likewise to men cursed for their sins, and
condemned eternally, nothing can happen better or more welcome then to hear
that being free from the sentence of him that condemned them, that they are
reckoned, and are indeed in the number of the sons of God.

What is the Gospel?
It is a heavenly doctrine brought out of the secret bosom of God the Father
by the Son, preached by the Apostles, and comprehended in the books of the
new Testament, bringing a a good and joyful message to all the world, namely,
that mankind is redeemed by the death of Christ, the only begotten son of
God: so this remission of sins, salvation and eternal life is prepared for
all men, if so be they repent and believe in Jesus Christ.

Who is the author or efficient cause of the Gospel?
God who has vouchsafed to reveal his hidden purpose and good pleasure
concerning our redemption, whereupon it is called the Gospel of God. Romans 1.1.
A fellow cause or joint cause is the word, that is the Son of God, who
coming out of the fathers bosom has declared it to us, as he first
pronounced the promise of the Gospel in Paradise, Genesis 3.5. The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head.

By what isntrumental cause, or by whose means was the Gospel made known to
the world?
1 By an Angel of God, who soon after Christ was borne, said, Luke. 2.10. I
bring you tidings of great joy, etc. For this day is borne unto you a Savior.
etc.

2 By John who preached the sum of the Gospel, showing Christ, and calling
him the Lamb of God, that is a Sacrifice, appointed by God to make
satisfaction for the sins of the world. In which respect John was greater then
the Prophets Luc. 7.26
: notwithstanding because he had not yet manifested the power and glory which
appeared in the resurrection of Christ, therefore Christ denies that he was
equal to the Apostles Matt. 11.11
, but he closely shows that he had a middle place betwixt the Prophets and
the Apostles.

3 By Christ himself being manifested in the flesh, to whom it is properly
attributed that he preached the Gospel of the kingdom of God, but only in
Judea. At the length, by the Apostles, by the commandment, of Christ Mar^
16.15
, which thing they performed by their preaching and writing.

Did not the Patriarchs also and Prophets preach the Gospel and mention it in
their writings?
Although even from the beginning of the world, the ministry of the Gospel
was signified to the fathers, and the Prophets spoke and wrote of this as Genesis
3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent. And Genesis
12.3. Genesis 18, 18 and. 22.17. and. 26.3.4 and 28.14 15,
. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed, Genesis 49.10. Silo (that is Christ
the seed of the woman borne of her womhe without the operation of man) shall
come when the scepter and kingly dignity is taken from Judah. Deuteronomy. 18.15. God
there repeateth and illustrateth the promise of the Gospel Psalm. 2.6.8. and.
8.6. and. 45.8. and 110.1, 4. etc
. Isa. 7.14. Behold a virgin shall bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuell, that is, God with us, because the word was made flesh. John. 1.24.
And the whole 35 Chapter contains an Euangelical Sermon concerning the death
of Christ and the fruits thereof. Notwithstanding that which they preached was
rather the promises of the Gospel, then the Gospel it self, seeing they
prophesied of a thing to come, but did not declare and publish the thing
already exhibited and performed. Gal. 3.16 To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made. Therefore the Apostle speaks thus, Romans 1.1. Set a part to the
Gospel of God, (namely to preach it) which he had promised before by his
prophets in the holy scriptures. If it were promised, therefore it was not
already then exhibited. And 1. Pet. 1.10. Of which salvation the Prophets have
enquired and searched forth, who have prophesied of the grace which was to come
upon us. But at length the Apostles did publish it being exhibited, whereupon
sometimes they call it their own Gospel. Romans 2, 16. God shall judge the
secrets of men by Christ Jesus according to my Gospel: and 2. Cor. 4.3. But if
our Gospel be hidden, etc. By these speeches they show themselves the
preachers not the authors of it.

Was there therefore one and the same Gospel from the beginning of the world,
or one and the same way to obtain salvation common to all men in all times?
It was always one, for Heb. 11.4. Abell by faith received that testimony
that he was just before God. Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness. Genesis 15.16. and Acts. 10.43. To Christ do all the
prophets bear witness, that whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins by his name. Hebr. 13.8. Jesus is the same yester day and
to day, and for ever. Therefore Revel. 13.8. he is called the Lamb which was
slain from the beginning of the world, which is to be understood, not in
deed, and actually, but in efficacy.

Is there then no difference betwixt our doctrine and theirs who lived under
the law?
None in regard of the substance, but much in regard of the manner of
dispensation. For to them it was revealed, (...). Heb. 1.1. Many ways, and in
diverse manners, and therefore more obscurely and by parts, and as it were by
diverse degrees, and in diverse man's, and when the day drew nearer, the
doctrine of free reconciliation in the Messiah was more clearly revealed.

Again where as the ancients did touch it sparingly, we have received a more
full enjoying thereof. Therefore Christ extolling the measure of grace, whereby
we excel the Jews says to his disciples. Mat. 13.16.17. Blessed are the eyes
which see that which you see, blessed are the ears which hear those things
which you hear, for many Kings and Prophets have wished for this thing, and
have not obtained it. In a word, they believed in a Messiah to come, we in him
that is come already.

What is the matter of the Gospel, or the subject where about it is employed?
Christ, who died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Romans
4.25. For concerning him is the Gospel, and him only it does preach. Romans
1.3. The Gospel which he promised concerning his son. For which cause it is
called the Gospel of Jesus Christ Marc. 1.6.
, the testimony of Christ 1 Cor. 1.6.
, also the word of the cross v. 18
, because it is a preaching of Christ crucified. And in the 22 verse. The Jews
ask a sign, and the Grecians wisdom, but we preach Christ the power of God,
and the wisdom of God.

What is the subject to whom the Gospel belongs?
Christ teaches us, Mark. 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature, that is not to every particular man, but to all
nations, at Matthew expounds it. chap. 26.13. and 28.19. and Luke 24.47. by
whith it is signified that in the Gospel, is neither Jew nor Grecian, bound
nor free, male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Hereupon it is
called the Gospel of the uncircumcision, Gal. 2.7. metonymically, and the
Gospel of the Circumcision, which was to be preached by Paul amongst the
Gentiles, and by Peter amongst the Jews. But the virtue and efficacy of the
Gospel, or of the promises of the Gospel, belong only to them who believe
and are elected, according to the testimony of Christ John. 17.9. I pray not
for the world (says he) but for those which thou have given me because they
are thine. Neither does Christ therefore mock any man, seeing all the fault is
in the reprobate, whose own conscience does convict them of voluntary
contumacie.

What is the end of the Gospel?
To propound and apply unto us who are found guilty by the law, the grace and
mercy of God promised by faith in Christ, or to promise unto us the forgiveness
of our sins, and our justification before God in Christ alone, and by the mere
mercy of God Romans 3.23 24. 1 Pet. 1.9
.

What are the effects of the Gospel?
1 To create faith, whereupon it is called the word of faith, 2 Cor. 5.19
1. Tim 4.6

2 To minister unto us the spirit, therefore it is called the Ministry of the
spirit, because it has the power of the spirit joined with it 2 Cor. 3.8.
.

4 To regenerate, for which cause it is termed the good seed, Mat- 13.37
.

5 By preaching of the remission of sins, and all good things in Christ to
comfort afflicted consciences, and refresh them, whereupon it is called the
good word of God Heb. 6.5.
.

6 To heal them who are sick in spirit, therefore it is called the wholesome
word Tit, 2.8.6,
.

7 To quicken them who are dead in their sins, therefore it is called the
word of life Philip. 1.16
.

8 To pacify troubled consciences, therefore it is called the Gospel of peace
Ephesians. 6, 5,
.

9 To establish the kingdom of God, therefore it is called the Gospel of Gods
kingdom.

10 To turn unto death to the unbelieving, but unto life to the^ which
believe, Marc. 1.14
for which cause it is called the savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2.16 (but
this is accidental) and the Jauour of life unto life. As an ointment gives
strength to the Done, but destroys the beetle of life, says Nyssenus.

Finally, to preserve us unto eternal life, whereupon it is called the Gospel
of our salvation. Ephesians, 1.13


But whence proceeds this efficacy of the Gospel?
From God alone by the holy Ghost, and hereupon, Romans 1.16. The Gospel is
called the power of God to salvation unto every one that believes, by a
definition taken from the effect. So 1. Cor. 1.18. that is, it is a lively and
powerful instrument of Gods power, which shows it self in working in us the
knowledge of our salvation, therefore it is named the Scepter^ of Gods power
psalm. 110 2
, and the arm of God Isac. 53.1
, But in the 14. of the Revelation, verse. 16. it is called the eternal
Gospel, not in respect of the dispensation which had the original in Christ's
time, and shall make an end with this world: but in regard of the efficacy and
virtue, which beginning from the creation of the world, shall last for all
eternity.

How many parts of the Gospel are there?
Two, 1. Preaching Repentance. 2. And promise of Justification or remission of
sins. Luke. 24.47.

Is it the proper office of the Law or of the Gospel to preach repentance?
If by the name of repentance, you understand not (...) that is not contrition
and sorrow for sin, but (...), that is, a saving conversion to God by faith,
it is the duty and office of the Gospel, (being taken for the whole
ministry of the New Testament) not of the Law.

1 Because that which offers us grace, to that also it belongs to inuit
unto repentance: but the offer of grace is made by the Gospel. Therefore
Christ will have repentance to be preached in his name, Luke. 24.46.

2 Because Baptism which is a visible preaching and mark of repentance which
consists in mortification of sin, and raising up of the new man Romans 6.3,
, is not a Sacrament of the law, but of the Gospel Mark. 16.16
.

3 Because true repentance cannot be without regeneration: but no man is
regenerated, 1 Pet. 1.23
but by the Gospel, the holy Ghost working within him by faith Mark. 16.16
.

4 Because faith and repentance are united by an inseparable conjunction: but
faith is preached by the Gospel, and is infused into men by the means
thereof, and is wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost John. 17 20.
. Thererfore also repentance.

5 Because the Law works death, 2. Cor. 7.10. therefore it works not that
grief which is according to God, and therefore not true repentance neither.

6 Because repentance and forgiveness of sins are joined together by an
inseperable bond Luke 24.46.
.

7 Because that which Luke, 9.6. calls to preach the Gospel, the same is
expounded by Mark, to preach that men should repent, that he may teach us thus
much that the Gospel is the preaching of repentance and of forgiveness of
sins in Christ's name. Notwithstanding we confess that the law is a
preparation to repentance, and that it detecteth the sins known to it Romans
3.20
, but the Gospel only inuiteth us to the true and saving repentance for them.

What opinions are against this doctrine?
1 A sinister and perverse exposition of the words of Augustine, De fide and
operibus, cap. 9. That the proper doctrine of the Gospel is not only
concerning faith, but also concerning the works of the faithful. Of Jerome in
his preface upon Mark saying, that there are four qualities of the Gospel.
1. Precepts commanding to decline from evil. 2. Commandments enioyning us
to do, that is good, 3. Testimonies showing us, what we must believe concerning
Christ. 4. Testimonis of examples which show perfection,, as, Learn of me, for
I am lowly and meek. Mat. 11.29.

2 The blasphemy of the wicked, who say the Gospel is a firebrand of
sedition, and a foul puddle and sink fraught with many mischiefs.

The one and twentieth common Place. Of the agreement and difference of the Law
and Gospel.
Are the Law and Gospel doctrines one opposite to another?
NO, but only diverse and several so as in some things they agree, in others
there is a great difference.

In what things do they agree?
1 In the efficient cause: For one and the same God is author of the Law and
Gospel.

2 In their last end, for God does require the very same thing in the Law and
Gospel, if we consider the last end, namely, full, perfect, and spiritual
righteousness which leads to eternal life, for without perfect
righteousness, that is, entire obedience to Gods law, no man enters into
life: and look what things the Law requires, namely, satisfaction for both
the fault and punishment, and most perfect obedience, these does the Gospel
bring to them which believe in Chtist, and so by the Gospel the Law is
established, not destroyed. Romans 3.31.

But wherein do they differ?
1 In the manner of knowledge, for the Law is known in some sort by nature,
for as it is said, Romans 2.15. The Gentiles show the work of the Law written
in their hearts. But the Gospel is not perceived by no sharpnes of reason. But
of it, it is said, Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, the son
who is in the bosom of the father, he has revealed him to us. And Ephesians.
1.9. Colos; 1.16 2 Timothy, 1, 10
The Gospel is called a Mystery, that is, a secret, hidden from everlasting*
and made manifest by the ministry of the spirit. And 1. Cor. 1, 23. We preach
Christ crucified, foolishness to the Gentiles, and a stumbling block to the
Jews. And 2.7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid
wisdom which God has determined before the world unto our glory, which
none of the Princes of this world has known.

2 Again in order of the manifestation, because the law goes before, the
Gospel follows, by nature, publication, and ministry. Also in respect of
the minister, for the minister of the law was Moses, the minister of the
Gospel is Christ Ioh, 1, 17 and, 7, 22,
. Likewise in the manner of coming to the end which is common both to the Law
and Gospel, or in the manner of obtaining righteousness: for the doctrine of
the law is the law of works which preaches of doing, and gives the reward to
him that does the law: but the Gospel is the law of faith which imputes
faith unto righteousness to him that does not work, but believes in him, who
justifies the ungodly. Romans 3.21. and 4.5. and 10.5. Moreover the law
requires of man a man's own proper righteousness, and perfect obedience to all
the commandments of God, which he is bound in his own behalf to perform.
Leuit. 18.5. Mat. 19.17. If thou vvilt enter into life, keep the
commandments: but to him that has not this obedience it threatens a curse
Deuteronomy, 7, 2. Gal. 3, 10
But seeing it is impossible for man to attain this end, by reason of the
corruption of the flesh Rom, 8, 3.7
, the Gospel offers us the righteousness of another namely of Christ, to be
received of us by faith, that they which believe the Gospel may have by
imputation that which the law requires to be in a man by property. Romans 5.19.
By one man's obedience shall many be made righteous. And, Christ is the
fulfilling of the law unto righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.
or, (which comes to the same effect) we may thus say, The law dema^deth the
sum of our debt, the Gospel publishes the remission of it.

3 They differ in the form or difference of the promises: for the promises in
the law of eternal life and temporal benefits are conditional. That is they
require the condition of perfect fulfilling the law, as a cause, as for
example, If thou do these things thou shall live in the^, where the particle,
If, for because, expresses the cause, for our obedience is required in the law
as a cause. But the promises of the gospel are free, and are not given because
of fulfilling the law, but freely for Christ's sake. Therefore when it is said. If
thou believe, the particle If is not causal, but syllogistical, that is, it
shows a consequence, neither is there signified by it a cause or desert, but
a mean and instrument, without which, application of Christ's benefits cannot be
made. Therefore the particle freely, does especially make a difference betwixt
the gospel and the law. Rom, 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace through
the redemption of Jesus Christ, which grace is set forth by many parables in
the gospel.

4 They differ (...) that is to say by the effects, adjuncts, efficacy and
office of either of them. For, first the law teaches good works, neither does
it minister strength to the auditors thereof, by which they may perform those
works, neither changes the minds of men: for of the law Moses speaks thus,
Deu. 29.4. Ye have heard and seen, but God has not given you an understanding
heart: But the gospel endoweth the saints with the holy ghost, which spirit
does also give that which the gospel requires, to wit, faith, Ier. 31.33. I
will write my law in their hearts not with ink, but with my spirit. And the
Apostle Gal. 3.2. speaks thus. This one thing I would know of you, have you
received the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith.
Therefore Paul 2. Cor. 31.8. calls the law the ministry of death, written
in the tables of stone, but the gospel, the spirit planted in the heart* and
ver. 9 he calls the law, the ministry of condemnation, but the gospel* the
ministry of righteousness. 2. Again* the law shows the disease, accuses,
exasperateth and lays open sins, but does not take them away, Romans 3.20. But
the gospel covers sin, and heals the disease by declaring and pronou^cing
free pardon of sins by Christ alone, and for this cause no man could ever be
justified by the law, but by faith of the gospel we are all justified. 3. In
the law is reueiled the wrath of God upon every man, in the gospel without the
law is reueiled the righteousness of God, from faith unto faith. Romans 1.17. and
3.21.

5 Lastly, the Law and the Gospel do differ in the application to the obiectes
or degrees of men: for as the Apostle commands. 2. Tim. 2.15. that Doctors
should rightly cut the word of God (...), the preaching of the law properly
belongs, to the impenitent, and they who are not yet converted, and those who
continue in their sins, hypocrites, and secure persons, as Christ Mat. 22.37.
uses the threatening of the law against a proud Lawyer. Therefore says the
Apostle. 1. Tim. 1.9. The law was made for the unjust. But the Gospel
belongs to the repentant. Therefore Christ in Luke* 4.18. out of Isay. 61.1.
teaches that the Gospel is to be preached to them that are poor in spirit,
and of a contrite heart. Therefore also Luke. 7.48.50. he preached grace and
mercy to the penitent woman.

Is it necessary and profitable to know the difference of the Law and Gospel?
It is, for the name it self does cleeeely prove that the law is one kind of
doctrine, and the Gospel another.

2 Because the not knowing of this difference is a fountain of error obscuring
the light of the doctrine of Christ, of the righteousness of faith, and of
perturbations of conscience. On the contrary, by the difference of them both
the office and benefits of Christ are better understood.

3 The Church is discerned and acknowledged from other sects, and true faith
and conscience is kept in great and true horrors of conscience.

What things are repugnant heerto?
1 The error of the Papists, who make no difference betwixt the Law and the
Gospel, but transform the Gospel into a law, and call it a more perfect law:
saying also that the old law was a law of fear, the new, a law of love: and
that Christ has merited and does give to us that grace, whereby we may fulfill
the commandments, and by them attain righteousness and eternal, life.

2 Of the Monks, who call those things which Christ, Mat. 5 38. and 6.31. and
19.11.12.21. speaks to expound the law, to lance the conscience, and to
stir them up to a desire of himself, counsels only necessary for them who
desire something more perfect then the law of Moses commands: and of this
nature they feign three things chiefly to be delivered by him. 1. of not
reue^ging, 2, of poverty, 3. of virginity* but the precepts they say are
necessary to al men, where as on the contrary there is not the least word which
Christ spoke which we must not obey.

3 The error of Pelagius and the Schoolmen, who have taught that the
Patriarchs were justified and saved by observation of the law of nature, the
Jews by keeping the law of Moses, but Christians by observation of the new law
of the Gospel.

The two and twentieth common Place. Of the difference of the old and new
Testament.
What signifies the word Testament?
PRoperly it signifies the just and true meaning of our will, when a man
disposes of his goods how they shall be ordered after his death. The Grecians
do properly and peculiarly call it (...).

2 According to the use of Scripture it is understood to be a covenant or
agreement betwixt God and men, who before were at variance, in which covenant
God does promise to man those benefits which himself has, namely salvation
and eternal life: and man on the other part does rely upon God by confidence
in his promises, and does confirm his faith, and nourish it by the testimony
of the covenant Heb. 7.22
. And for this cause is called of the Hebrews (...) Berith, which properly
signifies (...) in Greek, that is a covenant betwixt them which live.

3 Metonymically, with addition of Old or New, it signifies the books and
distinct parts of the Bible. The old Testament signifies the writings of
Moses, and the Prophets, and the new contains the writings of the Evangelists
and Apostles. 2. Cor. 3 6. God has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament. And verse 14. Even until this day the same veil remains in the
reading of the Old Testament.

Seeing the word (...) Berith does not signify (...) or a testament, but
(...), that is a covenant amongst them who live: 1. Reg. 5.12. why do the
Greek interpreters of the Bible call the covenant made by God with men, (...)
or a testament?
Because (...), in a general word signifies also (...), that is, a bargain
or covenant, (...), which generally signinifieth to covenant and agree upon a
bargain. Luc. 23.29. (...) i. I make a covenant with you as the father
couenanted or gave order to me.

2 Again because this covenant of God with men has some thing common with a
testament, and differing from other covenants: for in other covenants nothing
is less required then the death of them who enter covenant: here on the
contrary it behooued that the covenant made betwixt God and men, should be
confirmed by the death of Christ. For these causes also the Apostle, Hebr.
9.15.16.17. Does keep the word (...), and draws an argument from the proper
signification thereof.

And it is called a testament, because it is a certain testimony of the will
of God.

Of what parts consists the Testament betwixt God and men?
Of three. 1. A free promise on Gods part.

2 Faith in the promise on man's part.

3 The outward testification or mark of the same: every of which parts by a
Synecdoche, a part for the whole, receive the name of Testament, as Gal. 3.17.
The law does not make void the covenant confirmed before by God: where the word
Testament is used for a promise made by God to Abraham Genesis 17.7
. 2. God said to Abraham v. ^.
. Thou therefore keep my Testament. and Psalm. 44.18. All these things are come
upon us, yet do we not forget thee, neither deal falsely concerning thy
Testament, where the word Testament is used to signify the faith of man
toward God. 3. Genesis 17.18. This is my Testament that every male among you be
circumcised. and Luke 22 20. This cup is the new testament in my blood, and
Act. 7.8. God has given to Abraham the testament of circumcision. It is used
Metaphorically for an outward sign or testimony and badge of the testament.
Genesis 17.11.

Has God made more, or only one covenant with men?
As since, the time of the fall of our first parents, has been and is the
same way to attain salvation by Christ, so there is one perpetual covenant or
testament of God, whereby God binds himself to give salvation to all those
who believe in Christ.

But does not the scripture mention two covenants?
It does indeed, because of the dispensation of the same covenant which at
diverse times was diversely appointed by god, whereof the one is called the Old
Testament, and the other the New. Yet we must note that the old Covenant, is
understood and called two ways: sometimes in respect only of Moses his
lawgiuing, and it is called the covenant of the law, the sanction and
establishing whereof is described, Exodus 24. and sometimes to signify the
covenant of grace or free covenant, in what manner it was made with Abraham and
his posterity, Genesis 17.7.

But by the appellation of the new covenant, is vndestoode no more then the
free covenant. Of both these Ierem. 31.31.32. speaks thus. Bebold the days
shall come says the Lord, and I will make with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah my covenant, not according to that covenant which I made with
their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the
land of Egypt, but this is my covenant which I will make with the house of
Israel. After those daiet (says the Lord) I will give my law in the midst
of them, and I will write in their heart, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, and I will be merciful to their iniquities. After which
words the Apostle adds, Hebr. 8.13. When he says a new one, he has
abrogated the former. And Galat. 4.24. He teaches that Agar the servant was a
shadow of mount Sinai, from which was given the Law, and that Sarai the free
woman was a f^gure of the heavenly Jerusalem, from which sprung the Gospel:
and he adds, that by these are signified the two Testaments, the one bringing
forth children unto bondage, that is slaves, and the other to liberty, or free
men* and in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews, he makes a comparison of the
Old and New Testament, the sum whereof comes to this purpose, that the Old
testament was a shadow of the New, and the New a fulfilling of the Old: the
new was folded up in the Old, and the New enfolded in the New. But in this
place where the question is concerning the likeness and difference of the Old
and New Covenant, we by the name of old understand only the free Covenant, in
such sort as it was made with our first parents straight after the fall, and
was confirmed to Abraham, of which the law of Moses was an help, and at length
it was renewed in Christ. Dan. 9.27.

How are these two testimonies one, which are so diverse?
In substance, or in respect of all the causes thereof, to wit, Efficient,
Matter, Form, and End.

How do they agree in the efficient cause?
Because the antecedent cause of both the covenants was the wonderful
descending, and as it were abasing of God, whereby he stooped so low as to
bind men in league and covenant unto him, which thing Moses testifyeth, Deuteronomy.
8.17. and 9.5. Offering the pure mercy of God against the merits of the Jews:
and Joshua 24.2.3. But the antecedent and meritoriovs cause is the death of the
Mediator, Apoc, 13.8 Dan. 9.27.
.

How are they all one in matter?
Because the foundation and substance th^reof is only Christ the Mediator,
without whom God cannot receive men into favor, and this is he who is that
blessed seed in whom all the nations of the earth were to be blessed Genesis 12.2.
. So Paul 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ not imputing their sins, and Heb.
13.8. Christ remains the same to day and yesterday and for ever.

2 Because both the Sacraments have one signification, yea the Sacraments of
both covenants are the same, I say the same in signification and use, that is
testimonies of the same grace, as Paulo testifies, that the Israelites had the
same Baptism, and the same supper which we have. 1. Cor. 10.2.3. for although
there appear some diversity in the matter of the signs and the number
thereof, yet here is no matter to be made thereof, as in the marriage ring used to
make contracts, there is no regard made whether it be of gold or of silver,
whether it be one or more, but only the end and promise made to the
confirmation of that, whereof it is made.

How do they agree in the form?
Because the mean or manner whereby we cleave to God was one always, namely
faith, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 11. and Christ John, 8.56: Abraham rejoiced
to see my day, and he saw it, namely, by the eyes of faith: and Paul. Romans
3.21. that the righteousness Which is of Faith has testimony from the Law and
the Prophets. And Genesis 15.6. Ahraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him
for righteousness, which was written for us, etc.

How agree they in the end or mark whereat they drive?
Because the old testament (as also the new does) did stir up the elect, not
unto a carnal or earthly felicity and the benefits of this present life, but
much more unto hope of blessed immortality.

How prove you this?
1. By the form of the covenant it self, which was one both before and after
Christ's manifestation in the flesh: for God always made such a covenant with
his servants, as he did with Abraham, Genesis 17.1.7. I am Schaddai, that is, God
all sufficient, thy God, and the GOD of thy seed after thee, keep thou my
covenant, walk before me and be upright. Leu. 26.12. I will be your God and
you shall be my people, in which words even the Prophets themselves declared,
that life, salvation, and all blessedness, yea even heavenly blessedness is
comprehended. For he declares to the^ that he will not be the God of their
bodies only, but especially of their souls: but the souls, unless they be
joined unto God by righteousness, are separated from him and remain in death.
Yea moreover, God has professed himself to be the God of them who are
already deceased, namely, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob Exo. 3.6 Mat. 22.32
.

2. By the examples of the fathers, Adam, Abell, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who neglected this present life amidst the many temptations and sorrows
which happen in the whole course of their life, did with all their hearts
labor to come unto the habitation of eternal felicity, so as both they, and
they also who believed under the new testament, did aim at the same mark.
Which thing the Apostle confirms Heb. 11.9.10. By faith Abraham tarried in
the Land of promise, as in astrange country, as one that dwelled in tents with
Isaac and Jacob, who were partakers of the same inheritance. For he looked for
a city having a good foundation, whose builder and maker is God. And verse,
13. All these dyed in faith and received not the promises, but savv them a
far off and believed, and received them thankfully, and confessed that they
were strangers and pilgrims in the earth. Genesis 47.9. Whereupon we
necessarily gather that the promise of that land made unto them by God, is not
principally and properly to be understood, of that very land it self, and of
an earthly felicity, but of eternal life signified by it. Therefore also they
desired to be buried in that land, as being a pledge of eternal life given
them by God Genesis 47.29.30. and. 50.25
. And Jacob being ready to die, professed that he waited for the salvation of
the Lord Genesis 45.18.
.

3 By the testimony of Balaam himself, who was not void of the knowledge of
this end, when as he said, Numb. 23.10. Let my soul die the death of the just,
and let my last end be like his. The same thing David afterward expounded, Ps.
116.15. when he says, that the death of the Saints is precious in the sight
of the Lord, but the death of the wicked is very evil.

4. By the testimony of the Prophets, who in a most full and perfect light,
did behold and expect eternal life, and the Kingdom of Christ: as David
psalm. 39.13.14. I am a soiourner and a stranger as all my fathers. And v.
6.7.8. Every man living is vanity, every man walks like a shadow, and now O
Lord, what is my expectation? my hope is even in thee. But above all others
most notable is the saying of Job. cap. 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives
and I shall see God in my flesh. My hope is within me. The Prophets also do
testify that this covenant made by God with the fathers, was spiritual,
eternal and heavenly Isa. 51.6. and. 66.22. Dan. 12.2.
.

5. Because Christ promising heavenly felicity to his Disciples says, that
they shall sit down with Arbraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. 8.11.

6. Because the holy fathers were endewed with the same spirit of faith
wherewith we are Genesis 15.6. 2. Cor. 4.13, Heb. 11
. Out of which and other like places, that is euicted which we were to prove,
namely, that in the old testament the same end was proposed to the faithful,
which is proposed to the believers in the new testament.

Seeing that in substance there is one only Testament, why is it called 2.
Testaments, namely the Old and the New?
By a division, not of the Genus into Species, but of the subject into
accidents, that is, the substance is not divided, but the diverse accidents
which are without the essence of it make things seem diverse, which in it
self remains one and the same in substance.

Therefore in what does the diversity of the covenant consist?
It is wholly in the adjuncts, which are outward and accessarie things, or in
the manner of administration and circumstances of the dispensation thereof.

What is the first difference?
It is taken from the manner of leading unto the end, propounded to both
testaments, namely to eternal life: for under the old testament, the Church
which was yet in her nonage and tender years, was led, as it were, by the hand
unto the heavenly inheritance by the help of earthly benefits, especially by
that grosser and plainer type of the Land of Canaan. Therefore Abraham is not
suffered to rest in the promise of that Land, when he had received it: but is
advanced and lifted up higher by a greater promise. For thus he hears God
speak to him; I am thy protector and thine exceeding great reward. So David
from temporal blessings rises to that highest and last blessing. Ps. 73.26.
The Lord is my portion for ever. And Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance, and of my cup, thou shall maintain the lot of mine
inheritance. As on the contrary, the deprivation of that Land, as being a
sign of eternal life, was acounted a curse. But in the new Testament, we are
led the direct way, without any turning unto meditation of eternal life, these
earthly and gross helps being omitted.

What is the other difference?
It is taken from the Doctrine annexed to it, or from the manner of leading men
to the fountain and author of salvation, and the knowledge of mercy in
Christ, for before the coming of Christ, the administration was more
burdensome, troublesome and costly, for God brought up and led the ancient
Fathers more straightly, by laying upon them the tuition and government, the
teaching and observance of the Law Gal. 3.24 and 4.1, 2.3
, with hard conditions, and laying upon them the yoke of many several
ceremonies Act. 15.10
, and the burden of his curse also. But us he entreats more kindly and
liberally, without that hard and strict exacting of the performance of the Law,
the burden of the curse being removed from our shoulders, and that intolerable
yoke of ceremonies, by the preaching of the Gospel. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy leaden and I will refresh you: Take my yoke
upon you, for my yoke is easy.

And from this adiunct does Ierem. 31.31.32. take a difference betwixt the Old
and New Testament, by a Metonimie of the Adiunct for the Subject, calling the
Law of Moses, considered by it self and in it self, a Legal and ancient
Covenant, because it was the law of creation, whereby God took of us assurance
and full covenant for our perfect obedience to be performed by our own
strength Gal. 3.12 Math. 19, 19 17. Deuteronomy. 6.5 Luke 10.27
.

But the Gospel couenanteth with us, that perfect obedience shall be given us
by him of his free voluntary favor, and is therefore a new and free Covenant
Ephesians. 2.8 John. 6.45
.

So also in respect of this adiunct the Apostle 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.11 and Gal.
4.24. Compares the Old testament or Law, with the New testament or Gospel,
and the Old he calls the Letter, the ministry of death and condemnation,
consisting in the Letter, and engraven in stones, because the law in respect of
them that hear it, has no more power then any writing in it self void of all
force and can do nothing else but accuse us of unrighteousness, and wrap up
all mankind in the curse.

But the New Testament so far forth as it is opposed to the law being
considered by and in it self nakedly, he calls the Spirit, and the
ministry of the Spirit and righteousness, that is the preaching of the
Gospel, because it reuealeth the mercy of God, by which we are justified,
and renewed by the spirit of Christ: whom the Gospel has, being joined unto
it, who also gives to the elect that faith which he requires of us.

Again, he calls the Old testament, a testament of bondage, because it
breeds a servile fear in our minds, because the law, by adding a most hard
and impossible condition, can stir up nothing in our heatts, but the fear of
Gods wrath. But the new he calls a Testament of Liberty, because it stirs
up the believers to a sonne-like trust in God. Romans 8.15. Ye have not received
the Spirit of bondage again unto fear, but the spirit of adoption, by which
we cry, Abbafather.

What is the third difference?
It is taken from the quality and manner of revelation: for in the Old
testament all things were set down more darkly: and the Old testament did
shadow out Christ to come, by promises, types figures, ceremonies, and diverse
rites, and it was a portraying and slight shadowing of the New testament: for
as the high priest himself was a type of Christ Heb, 8, 1.2 and 9.7.8.9.11
, likewise also the mercy seat Romans 3.24
. So also were the sacrifices, shadows, yea visible Sermons of Christ's
passion, as also the purifications in the Law did shadow forth the only and
true expiation and pacification for sins, which was to be made by the blood
of Christ, as it is said, Heb. 10.1. The Law had in it a shadow of good things
to come, and not the very Image of the things.

But the new is administered more clearly plainly by the preaching of the
Gospel, by Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, it also gives unto us the
present inheritance and solid body, or it shows unto us Christ, who is given
Act. 1.8 Mat* 26.28
.

And in respect also of this adiunct, the New testament is opposed to the Old
Heb. 10.1 etc.
. And the Old was confirmed by the slaughter of beasts, and the sprinkling of
their blood, but this by the blood of Christ: whereupon Christ says at his
Supper, Luke 22.20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood. The Old was
temporary and to be abolished, and is taken away by the coming of Christ,
because it had a resemblance of things to come: but this, because it gives us
the body it self, and the truth of the thing, it is eternal and shall never
perish, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn and it shall not repent him, Thou art
a Priest for ever, etc. Thefore Augustine says In the Old Testament is a
hiding of the New: in the new a manifestation of the Old.

What is the fourth difference?
It is taken from the measure of the Spirit, because now is greater abundance
of the Spitit in the New Testament, and a greater knowledge then was before
under the old testament, if you consider the body it self of the Church Act.
2, 17, John, 7.38 39 Ierem. 31 34 Isa. 11.9. and 54, 13 John. 6.45, 1 Cor. 2.10
1. Ioh- 2, 20.27
. For although there were many under the Old testament, who seem to have been
endewed by God, with greater gifts, then any under the New: yet we must judge
of the abundance and greater efficacy of the spirit under the new Testament,
not in respect of every particular man amongst the faithful, but of all in
general, or the whole Church together.

Hereupon Joel. 2.28. I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, that is, I
will give it in great abundance. Hence also the old testament is called by Paul
a testament of the Letter 2. Cor. 13.6.
. But the new is Spiritual, because God does show more power of the spirit in
the preaching of the Gospel, then of the Law.

What is the last difference?
It is in the largeness and newness of the people of God gathered together
out of the Jews and Gentiles, or the whole company of them, who are received
into the covenant: for the Old covenant properly belonged to Abraham and the
Israelites his posterity, Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the most high God divided to the
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he appointed the
borders of the people according to the number of the children of Israel, Genesis
15.18. and. 17.7
for the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

But the new covenant belongs to all nations to whom God has vouchsafed the
light of the Gospel, Mark. 16.15. Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be
saved, etc. Act. 10.15.34.35.43. Romans 1.16. and 3.29. As in many other places.

But may not God seem mutable or unlike himself, seeing he has changed that
which once he purposed?
No in no case, for neither has he changed his purpose, nor done any thing
disagreeing with it: but he shows himself most wise, because in diverse
ages he knows how to use diverse means, to bring his elect to the knowledge
of their salvation in Christ, according as he saw the estate of both, that is,
as both old and latter times required: Even as the Physician takes one course
of cure in a child, another in a man of ripe age, according to the diversity
of their constitutions: and yet can he not therefore be termed inconstant or
unlike himself. Therefore Paul, Ephesians. 3.10. calls this dispensation of the
covenant, the manifold and diverse wisdom of God, because God in his wisdom,
does in other manner call the Gentiles, then in old time he did the Jews.

(...)
What therefore is the Old Testament?
It is a solemn manner of confirming the Covenant comprehended in the Moral
Law, the ceremonies and Sacrifices, ordained to this end, that the promise of
grace and eternal life for Christ's sake might be kept, with condition of
faith and obedience through faith on man's part to be performed.

What is the new Testament.
It is a full manifestation of Gods grace, which has shined to the world since
Christ's coming into the world, which is effected, without the strict and hard
exacting of the Law, and the administration of the ceremonies.

When was this ordained?
In Paradise, straight after the fall of our first parents: for at that time
was uttered the first promise pertaining to the Gospel, concerning Christ to
come Genesis 3.15
, and afterward it was made to a certain family, namely of Abraham Genesis 12.3
and, 17, 4, 5, 19. and, 22, 18,
, It was performed at the time when Christ was exhibited, and confirmed by his
blood and death

But why is one and the same Testament called Old and New? Luk 22, 20

It is Old, in regard of the promise, New, in regard of Christ already
exhibited. Also it is Old in respect of the adiunct. For the publishing of the
Law did, in time go before the sending of Christ, and that ample declaration
of the Gospel: or new, as it were, renewed, as John. 13.34. The Lord there
calls the commandment of Love, a new commaundemen, wholly renewed, or which
must be ever new.

Besides, because it was confirmed by Christ's death. For a Testament is
confirmed and in force, when the testator is dead, otherwise it is not of force
whilst he lives who made it. Heb. 9.17.

Who made this will or Testament?
The son of God.

Who are the hearers?
All that believe.

What is the inheritance?
All the benefits, which the death of Christ has procured us.

What are the tables of the Testament?
The holy Bible, or holy Scripture.

What seals are there to this Testament?
The Sacraments, which in the Old testament were circumcision and the
Passover: but in the new Baptism and the Lords Supper?

What is the use of this Doctrine?
It shows, that there was always one way to attain salvation, namely by
faith in the free promise of Christ, and that there was one and the same Church
in the old and new Testament.

What opinions are against this Doctrine?
1. The error of Sernetus and certain Anabaptists, who feign that the people
of Israel was fatted and pampered in this life, without any hope of heavenly
immortality, even as swine or beasts are for the slaughter.

2 The madness of them who falsely imagined a threefold way of salvation,
namely, the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, and the Law of Christ, as if there
had been three several covenants of God, differing in substance.

The three and twentieth common place. Of the passion and death of Chist.
What understand you by this term of the passion of Christ?
1 I understand by a Synecdoche, a part for the whole, whatsoever Christ
suffered from the first moment of his conception: as for example, his lying in
the maunger when he was newely borne, when there was no room for his mother
in the Inn, Luke 2.7. And afterward when upon the eight day after his
nativity he shed his blood in the circumcision, the same Chap. verse. 22. and
from thence until the time wherein he was offered a sacrifice for us upon the
Altar of the cross, but especially all kind of injuries and that horrible
punishment, which was executed upon him under Pilate.

2. The passions of Christ are called the crosses or calamities of Christ's
mystical body, which is the Church, or of his members, which must be here
accomplished until all the members in their certain manner and measure become
conformable to Christ by the cross. Whereupon the Apost. Colos. 1.24. says
thus, I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ, in my flesh, for his
bodies sake, which is the Church, that is, for the comfort of the Churcha, for
(as Leo the first says;) The just hau^ received, not given crowns: and from
the fortitude of the faithful are sprung examples of patience, not gifts of
righteousness.

3. Metonimically the adiunct for the subject, by passion is understood the
History, describing Christ passion.

What is the Lords passion or suffering?
It is a part of Christ's obedience, whereby he himself being innocent became
a sacrifice for the guilty: or thus; It is a propitiatory, sacrifice whereby the
son of God, being made man, offered himself to the father, that he might
merit for all that believe in him, eternal justification, sanctification,
deliverance from sin and eternal death, and in the end eternal life; as
Christ himself does expound the matter, Ioh. 17.19. I sanctify my self (that
is, I offer my self) to the Father for them, to be an holy and pacifying
sacrifice, that they also may be sanctified for ever.

What are the efficient causes of Christ's passion?
There are three efficient causes thereof. God, Satan, and men: and all these
in diverse respects.

1. The Counsel and determination of God, the most absolute and high will of
God, that is, his ordinance, whereby from eternity he has so disposed of this
business, that therein he might manifest his justice and mercy.

2. The primitive or outward cause moving unto it, the calamity of mankind,
and the tyranny of the Devil over mankind.

3. The antecedent or inward cause moving here unto was the unspeakable love
of God the father, toward his creature, as it is said Ioh. 3.16. So God loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc.

4. A fellow cause working voluntarily and with election, and obeying the
father, was the son of God himself, who as Paul says. Phil. 2.7. Made
himself base, taking on him the form of a servant, and became obedient to the
father even unto the death of the cross. For he delivered himself into the
hands of his enemies voluntarily and readily, according to the prophecy. Esai.
53.7. He was offered because he would* and Heb. 10.4. out of the Psalm.
40.7.8.9. Because it was impossible by the blood of Bulls and Goats to take away
sins, therefore Christ entering (namely into the world) said, Sacrifice and
oblation thou would not have, burnt sacrifices for sins thou wast not
pleased with, then I said, Lord I come, (in the beginning of the book it is
written of me) that I may do thy will, O my Lord.

Satan also is a chief cause of Christ's death, because with an ancient hatred
he persecuted the seed of the woman, and when he could do no more he bit his
heel, as it was foretold Genesis 3.15.

All men are causes of Christ's death, and to them it must be imputed because of
the guilt and the sin wherein every one is entangled.

The helping or isntrumental causes of Christ's death were, Judas, and the high
Priests who counted to Judas the 30. silver pieces Mat. 26.15.
. Annas also and Caiphas, Pilate, and the people which cried Away with him,
away with him Ioh, 18.15
. And the Roman soldiers who were his executioners, which instruments,
notwithstanding God so used, as he finished, by them a work most holy, to wit,
the redemption of mankind: but the cursed instruments (for none but the most
vile and wicked could endure to betray, condemn and murder an innocent) he did
punish with most just punishments, seeing they sinned not by constraint, but of
their own accord and most of them against their own conscience.

What is the subject often this passion?
The Lord himself, the very son of God being made man.

But whether was the passion a suffering of his whole person, or of one of his
natures only?
The passion was of the person, because that person which suffered was God and
man: but he suffered not in his divine nature, for it cannot be that an
immutable thing should suffer, and an immortal thing die) but in man's nature,
which he took upon him and which was subject to suffering. Therefore Paul in
respect of the person says, Act. 20.28. That God purchased to himself the
Church by his blood. And in respect of the humane nature 1. Pet. 4.1. the
Apostle affirms that Christ suffered in the flesh. And in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. 2.14. the author says, That the son of God was made partaker of
flesh and blood, that by death he might destroy him who had the power of
death. Therefore although the passion and death of Christ be properly of the
flesh according to nature, yet according to the person it belongs, to the
word, because it is one and the same person both of the flesh and the word.

What was the formal cause?
The suffering both of the body and soul, both which sufferings are described
by the Evangelists in certain degrees and parts.

What was the suffering of his soul?
The inward torment of the soul, which Christ felt especially after the
administration of the Supper, and that arises by certain degrees.

1. For first, in the garden he feeling the anger of God, kindled against our
sins, out of his great trouble of mind cries. Mat. 26.38. My soul is very
heavy even unto the death, and, Father, if it be possible, remove from me
this cup: by which cup, according to the Hebrew phrase he understands the
anger of God, and the punishment for our sins: yet notwithstanding he adds
a condition, Not as I will, but as thou vvilt. Mark. 14.26. Whereby he
signifies not an opposition, but a diversity of wills, which is not of it
self faulty, especially where the will of man is subjected to Gods will: so a
man is and ought to be sorry at his friends death, yet does he willingly yield
to the purpose of God.

2. This torment was so increased, that he sweateth drops of blood through the
grieuousnesse thereof. Luke 22.44. At last, upon the Cross, as though he were
oppressed by these griefs and forsaken of god, he cries out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me. Ma. 27.46. not as though God were separated from the
humane nature, but because it is (as Bernard says) a kind of forsaking when
there is no performance or exhibiting of power in so great necessity, neither
any showing of Majesty: which complaint was the complaint of one, not
despairing or distrusting (for he calls God his God) but of one wrestling
with a most grievous temptation. Calvin calls this sanctam desperatione^ an
holy desperation. For this cause David prophesying of Christ, Ps. 18.5.6. says
thus; The sorrows of the grave have compassed me about, that is I have
suffered horrible griefs, and such if as these griefs should have been
endured by an angel, yea all the Angels, they would have bin brought to nothing
and altogether oppressed of the^. And He. 5.7 it is thus said of him. Who in
the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplycations, with strong
crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death and was also
heard in that which he feared, or was delivered from his fear, that is, from
that terror and astonishme^t which possessed him when he thought upon the most
severe judgment and anger of God.

But what was the cause of such torments in Christ's soul?
Not one, but many.

1. The thinking upon the tyranny of sin, death and Satan which made hauock
of mankind.

2. The meditation of that horrible, infamous and cursed punishment Gal. 3.13
which he foresawe, he should suffer in his most holy body, as also those
contumelies which should be cast upon him.

3. His thinking upon the ingratitude of the greatest part of the world.

4 Especially the sense of Gods horrible wrath, which he sustained for our
sins, for which he took upon him to make satisfaction. Whereupon John. 1.29.
He is called the Lamb of God which takes away, or which bears the sins of
the world.

What was the suffering of the body?
His outward suffering which befell to him besides those griefs which in his
soul he sustained, which may be divided according to the subjects or places
in which he was diversely afflicted, as the garden, Caiphas his house, or the
Co^uocation of the Priests, the Pretorie or town Hall, the place without the
city where thieves were punished.

What did he suffer in the Garden?
1. He was delivered by a kiss of one of his disciples.

2. Being taken and bound by the hands of soldiers, he was carried away as a
thief or robber, that he might deliver us from the bonds of our sins and of
the Devil.

3. Being forsaken of all his Disciples, least we should ascribe to them any
part in the work of our salvation and redemption.

But why would Christ (who is the second Adam) be taken in the Garden.
That he might put away the sin which the first Adam committed in the garden
of Paradise.

What did he suffer in Caiphas his house, or in the assembly of Priests?
1. He was arraigned in the Ecclesiastical court: for it was not meet he should
be slain in a tumult, but that for us he should appear in judgment, who were
subject to the sentence of the eternal judge, and for our sins deserved to be
condemned.

2. He is mocked.

3 By false witnesses, and reproaches, he is accused of attempting to destroy
the Temple and worship of God.

4. He is adjured by the living God, to tell whether he be that Christ the
son of God.

5. When he had confessed the truth, straight he is convicted of blaspheamie,
and adjudged to die: because it behooued he shoud bear the blame and guilt of
that fault by which the first Adam had sought to become equal to God.

6. He is stricken on the face by the high Priests servant.

7. They spit in his face.

8. He is again beaten, to the end he might take away from us the shame of
sin.

9. His face being covered, he is stricken and bid to prophecy who it was that
struck him, and is beaten with rods by the servants. Which indignities and
disgraces, being all due unto us, he suffered, thereby to free us from all
shame, and to provide for us, who had lost our face or first Image: and that he
might make us an entrance and access to the face of God. To conclude, he
suffers the shameful deny all by his disciple, that he might bear the blame
and fault of Adams revolting from God.

What suffered he in the Hall?
He is brought before Pilate the Roman President, so that even from hence it
is manifest that the Scepter of the kingdom was taken away from the house of
Judah when Christ suffered, as it was prophesied Genesis 49.10. and that therefore
no other Messiah is to be expected: and that Christ the innocent was condemned
for us by an earthly judge, that thereby we may know we have escaped the
condemnation of the heavenly judge.

2. He is there falsely accused of three crimes, of seducing the people,
Sedition, and conspiring against the state, that he overthrew the nation,
forbad to give tribute to, Casar, and said of himself, that he was Christ the
King. Therefore he was accused of treason, both in the Ecclesiastical and
Civil Court: in the Ecclesiastical court of treason against Gods majesty, in
the civil Court, against man's rule and majesty; that so he might derive and
take to him self that rebellion against Gods majesty, whereof we were all
guilty in Adam, and that he might make satisfaction and reconciliation for the
same by humbling himself extremely and obeying in all things. Neither does he
defend himself as most easily he might have done, but is silent, and is like a
lamb that opens not his mouth before him that sheareth him Esa. 53.7. least
if he had bin quit: we had perished, and that by his silence he might obtain
liberty for us to cry unto God Romans 8.15
.

3. Yet notwithstanding, in the same place he is pronounced innocent by the
voice of the Judge, because in himself he was pure, and not guilty for his
own cause, but for others: and his enlargement was labored for; yea he was
whipped, if at least by this means the minds of the Jews might be appeased:
but all came to no effect: he is balanced with Barrabas, and Barrabas
preferred, who was a captain and author of sedition, and a grand thief: he is
cried for to be executed on the cross by great and seditious clamors of the
people, ct all this, that thereby he might advance us to the dignity of the sons
of God, being made fellows with the holy Angels.

4. He is condemned by the Judge sitting in the judgment seat, in place of
the Emperor, and in the name of the whole Empire of Rome, as a man most wicked
and worthy of death, because he bound himself to become suerty for us, who
were guilty of eternal death, before the eternal Judge.

5. Being now condemned as one that sought to surprise the Kingdom and state,
he is laughed at by the soldiers, and is clothed with a soldiers garment, or
purple cassock, to work him more contempt and disgrace: a crown of thorns is
put upon his head, in stead of a Scepter a reed is put in his hand, thereby to
signify that his ridiculous kingdom was a miserable, a pitiful, and as it
were, a kingdom of reeds: the^ they mock him bowing the knee, and with this
tant saluting him, Hail King of the Jews. They spit again in his face, they
buffet him, and beat his most holy head with staves.

All these things he suffered most unjustly, if you consider Christ's person:
but most justly if you consider the person which he took upon him, which is
ours, For the Lord (says Esaias 53.6) has laid upon him the iniquity of us
all. Therefore he endured these reproaches both because we had deserved them,
and also that he might deliver us from the like.

What did he suffer without the Hall?
1. Being unclothed of his purple, he is led forth of Jerusalem bearing the
cross to which he was to be nailed, a type of which deed went before in Isaac
Genesis 22.6
: for like as the bodies of those beasts (as is said Hebr. 13, 11.) were
burned without the camp of the people of Israel, upon which the sins of the
people were laid, and were therefore accursed, so that the Priests did eat
nothing thereof Leuit. 4, 11 and, 6.30. and 16.27. Gal. 3.17
: so Christ bears our sins and the curse due to them together with the
cross, a token of the curse, out of Jerusalem being made even as a cursed
sacrifice and unworthy of the company of men, who in himself was most pure
and innocent, so that he only is to be acknowledged that sacrifice whereby the
sin of the world is taken away. Now concerning Simon of Cyrene his Mark 15.21
bearing of the cross, by compulsion, when Christ himself fainted under the
burther thereof through wearines and sadness, this shows both the monstrous
insolency and cruelty of the Jews, as also the communion and partaking of
Christ and his holy Martyrs in his suffering, though on their part, it be
without all expiation of sin.

2. He is led into the place of dead men's souls called in Hebrewe Golgotha, in
which seditious persons, thieves and other malefactors were wont to be
ignominiously punished, that hence it may appear, he was despised of men, and
full of sorrows, according to Esais Prophecy cha, 53.3.

3. He is crucified: Gal. 3.13
then which punishment there was at that time none more grievous and
ignominious: for as it is to be gatherd out of Ps. 22.17. and the words of
Thomas, John. 20.25. they being strongly stretched upon the cross, were
fastened unto it with nails driven through their hands and feet, afterward
being set upright and on high they ended their life in the horrible torments of
all their nerves and whole body: also the death of the cross was most
abominable and pronounced accursed by gods own mouth Deuteronomy- 21 23.
This curse would the son of god undergo, thereby to free us from the curse we
had deserved; and that it might appeaer that sin was most abominable: for
which god would have his son undergo such punishment: that even as death by a
tree entered into the world, eue^ so by a tree of the cross it might be taken
out of the world. To conclud, that the truth might be answerable to the
figure: for even as the sacrifice was lifted upon the Altar and offered Lev.
1.9.13 Deuteronomy- 2-27
, so Christ was lifted up from the earth into the air, being hanged and killed
upon the Cross, because he must overcome the powers of the air. Ephesians. 2.2.
Also John. 3. 14. And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must
the, son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish
but live for ever.

He suffers betwixt two the eues, as a captain of thieves, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, Esa. 53.13. He was committed among the
transgressors, and prayed for sinners, that he might suffer the punishment
which we had deserved, and might the second time make us equal with the Angels
in the kingdom of his father, by the merit of which punishment he also
sanctified the infamous places appointed for punishment of malefactors, as also
the punishments themselves of malefactors, least any man should think that the
infamy of them should be any hindrance before God, to them which believe in
him, or that they could be any impediment to man's salvation.

He was crucified with his hands spread abroad, that with the one he might call
and inuit the Jews, with the other the Gentiles unto him, offering them his
merit: and likewise, as one that should become judged of all men, and should
set some on his right hand, some on the left.

6. He hangs alive upon the cross three whole hours, namely, from the sixth
hour to the ninth, that is, from twelve of the clock after our count, til
three in the afternoon. Which great ignominy of Christ* is the reward of our
arrogancy, and and also our greatest glory and prize before God, by which, all
our iniquity is put away. Therefore Paul, Gal. 6.4. says, God forbid that I
should glory in any thing but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. He hangs naked, that he might make satisfaction for the sin of our first
parents, who were disrobed and spoiled of the garment of innocence, also that
he might cloth us with his innocence, glory, and immortality, that he might
enrich us by his poverty, to conclude, that such as the first man was dwelling
in Paradise, such might be the second man at his entrance into Paradise. Also
lots were cast upon his garments, which thing was also foretold, Psalm. 22.19.
that we might believe the events of things showing us that this was he which
should come.

8. He feels thirst corporally, coming through the anguish and bitterness
of his grief, and through the sense of Gods wrath as also spiritually through
a most ardent desire of our salvation.

9 In steed of Hippocras or some precious wine that was wont to be given to
them who were condemned to die, that thereby they might be comforted Proverb.
31 6.7
, he is made to drink a most bitter drink of vinegar and gall mixed together,
that in him might be fulfilled that which long before was foretold by David,
Psalm. 69.22. And that the second Adam might suffer punishment for that sweet
juice which the first Adam sucked out of the forbidden apple.

10 Men of all conditions revile him, the common people, the Priests and
Scribes, the thief upon the cross, the soldiers scoff at his prayers, and
wrest them to a very wicked sense, as though forsaking God, he asked help of
the creatures.

11. He dies, else would the crucifying have done no good unless the soul
had been pulled away from the body, because God had said. In dying thou shall
die the death. Genesis 2.17.

12. His side is thrust through with a spear, out of which ran blood, by
which the Church springs, and is quickened (even as Eua was formed out of
Adams side) and water, wherewith the Church being new born is washed. And from
this wound, as from a fountain of life, springs the salvation of the Church,
comfort and expiation of all sins, satisfaction, and that washing or purifying
(which behooued to be done with the blood) is understood to be now
accomplished: for without the shedding of blood there is no remission of
sins. Heb. 9.22. Also by this wound the death of Christ was made manifest and
certain, for the water which issued out of that wound of his side showed that
the weapon entered even into the (...) namely that skin which being full of
water encloseth the heart, which being wounded, it is necessary that every
creature so wounded should forthwith die.

At what time was he crucified?
At the feast of the Passover, that he might show himself truly to be that
Pascall Lamb which was slain for the sins of the world.

As the soul of Christ was separated from his body for the space of three
days, was the Godhead likewise separated from them both, or was the Godhead
joined with the soul, and severed from the body?
Neither, says Damascenus. For the Godhead remained inseperable from both, de
Orthod. fide
and that which the word once took upon, him never afterward left.

But how could it be that the divine nature should continue united to the soul
which was in Paradise, and the body which was in the earth.
The divine nature of the Son, because it is both infinite and present in all
places, remained whole and undivided, united to both together, that is as well
to the soul of Christ which was in Paradise, as to the body which lay liueles
in the earth. For seeing the nature of God is most simple, and so not to be
parted or divided, God is not to be said to have one part in heaven, and an
other in earth, but he is whole in heaven, and whole in earth, not at several
times, and by succession, but both together, which thing no created nature can
do. Hence comes the saying of Augustine. It is proper to the whole Trinity*
to be whole every where, in spaces of places not divided.

Whether was Christ being now dead, true man?
He was, for although the soul and body were separated, and so it was a true
death, yet by the conjunction of personal union they remained together in one
third, as it were, so that our life was truly hid in Christ, yea even when he
was dead. Others answer that Christ in that three days was man materially,
because he was truly soul and body: but at his resurrection (they say) he was
man formally, after his soul rerurned into his body.

Who therefore died, and what he the the adjuncts of his death?
The son of God, at the mention of whom the whole frame and nature of things
in this world trembled: for when he hanged upon the cross three hours before
his death, there was an Eclipse of the Sun against the order of nature, which
lasted from the sixth hour to the ninth: whereupon followed darkness upon all
the earth. Mat. 27.45. that is through the whole world, as Tertullian will
have it, or (as others expound it) through the country of Judea, which
Eclipse did betoken to the Jews a most miserable blindness.

But when the Lord died, the veil of the Temple was rent, that we may know
how by his merit there is a way opened for us into heaven Heb. 9.5
, and that the ceremonies of the law were abrogated: the earth shook: the
rocks were rent asunder: the graves opened, out of which certain of the
Saints arising, went into the City. By which signs is euicted and proved the
indignity of the crime committed against the Son of GOD, Heb. 9.8
the hardness of the wicked, and the power of Christ's death is showed, Of
which things this effect also ensued, that many of Christ's enemies were
converted, so as they say: Of a truth this was a just man, and the Son of
God. Math. 27.54. And all the company that came together to that sight,
beholding the things that were done, smote their breasts and returned Luke.
33.48.

What was the end of Christ's death and passion?
The chief end is the glorification of God for his justice and mercy. But the
next end is the redemption and eternal salvation of mankind. Ioh. 3.14. As
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lift
up on the Cross, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, And Romans 4.25. He died for our sins, namely to make
satisfaction for them.

Unto whom is the death and passion of Christ profitable?
Although he might have been a sufficient price for the sins for all men, yet
actually and effectually he died for his elect only, who receive him and
believe in him, Mat. 1.21. He will deliver his people from their sins. Ioh.
10.15. I lay down my life for my sheep. And Chap. 17.19. For those (which
believe, and whom the father has given me) I sanctify my self. For otherwise
it would follow that Christ dyed without profit, and to no purpose, in regard
of many, and that the efficacy of Christ's death could be made void by men.

Whereupon depends the dignity and efficacy of Christ's death?
On the dignity of his person, for therefore the passion and death of Christ
was perfect and acceptable to God.

1. Because the son performed voluntary obedience to the commandment of
the father: For he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. Phil. 2.7.

2. Because it is of infinite merit, namely, it is the death of that man, who
is God.

How can that prayer of Christ, which he thrice repeated, Mat. 26.39 stand with
this obedience. O my father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, yet
not as I will but as thou will?
Very well, namely in* diverse respects, and according to diverse purposes, for
in so much as Christ would not, it was by reason of the infirmity of his
flesh, which naturally and without any sin fears death as an enemy unto
nature: but that he would, it came from the readiness of the spirit, because it
was necessary to the salvation of mankind, according to that which Christ
afterward says, Verse. 41. The spirit indeed is ready, but the flesh is
weak. Yea in this, the obedience of Christ appears more plainly, seeing
that although the flesh would have had the matter gone otherwise, yet
notwithstanding he wholly submits himself to the will of his father.

What effects then or what fruits be there of the Lords passion?
Many. I A most full satisfaction for sins: for the hand writing which was
against us by the law, is taken away from us, and nailed to the cross. Coloss.
2.14. that the remembrance of our sins might be put out by the blood of
Christ, that at no time they should come into Gods sight 1 John. 2.7
.

2 God is pacified and reconciled to man Rom, 3.24
.

3 The devil is overcome Genesis 3.15 1 Ioh. 3.81.
.

4 Death is swallowed up Osea. 13.14.
. and the fear thereof is taken away Heb. 2.15.
so as to the faithful it is nothing but a passage to eternal life.

5 Man is absolved from his sins and justified Romans 4.25, and. 5.19.
.

6 The partition wall which was betwixt the Jews and Gentiles is broken down
Ephesians, 2.14.
.

7 All things in heaven and earth, that is all the faithful under both the Old
and New testament, are become subject to one head, and are called again to that
head from which they were fallen, and are gathered also into one body. Ps. 28.
Ephesians. 1.10.22. Col. 1.20

8 The prophecies are accomplished, the truth is become agreeable to the figure
of Samson, of the brazen serpent, of the sacrifices, and other types.

9 The mortification of our flesh. For he died once, that we might die unto
sin for ever: 1. Pet. 2.24. And our old man is crucified with him that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
Romans 6, 6.

10 And that in few words I may comprise the whole matter, the free remission
of sins, the purging of the blots in our souls, and everlasting life is hereby
purchased for us.

2 The infinite mercy of God who would rather have his son to die a most
shameful death, then destroy mankind created by himself.

3 The exceeding humility of the eternal son of God, the Lord of all things
who was debased and cast down lower then all creatures, by which humiliation he
testified his love toward mankind, in suffering so great things for the
redemption thereof.

4 The ouglines of sin is to be remembered by that most vile kind of death.

5 The estate of the godly in this world, in which they are conformable in
their miseries to Christ their head: all which things let them work in us a
hatred of sin, let them stir us up to integrity of life, and raise us up to
conceive certain hope of our salvation, and patience in adversity. The saying
of Augustine is very worthy remembrance. Look upon his wounds when he hung on
the tree, his blood when he died, the price vvherevvith he redeemed us. He
has his body so placed on the cross, as he bovveth it to kiss thee, his
arms spread to embrace thee, and his whole body given us, to redeem thee.
Consider how great things these are, weigh these things in the balance of
your heart, that he may be wholy fastened in your heart who for your sakes
was wholy fastened to the cross.

How is the passion of Christ applied unto us?
By the word, by faith and the Sacraments, for by the word he is offered as by
the hand of God, by faith he is received as by the hand of man, by the
Sacraments he is sealed up unto us.

What opinions are against the sacrifice and passion of Christ?
1 The blasphemy of the Marcionites and Manichees, who affirmed that Christ did
not suffer truly, but imaginarily and in appearance to men.

2 The blasphemy of the Papists, whereby they affirm that Christ is still
offered daily unto the father by priests in the Mass, and that really for the
quick and the dead, contrary to that which is said. Heh. 10.14. with one
offering has he consecrated for ever them which are sanctified.

3 The righteousness which is of works, Pardons, Inuocations of Saints, that
forged Purgatory, and whatsoever men devise thereby to make satisfaction for
sin.

The four and twentieth common Place. Of the burial of Christ.
What is burial or burying?
IT is a proceeding of death, and so also a confirmation of death, for not
living, but dead men use to be buried. The Latin word Sepultura Burial, is
derived a sepeliendo, or a sepiendo, because the corpse is enclosed and fensed
with earth, stone, or some other matter, and is laid up in the grave or tomb.
But Funerare or Pollincere is to make ready the body for burial, by washing,
anointing, and the like complements Genesis 50.26. Math. 26.20 Mat. 27.60 1 Cor.
15 4
Whereupon Pollinctores were a several sort of men from Libintiarii.

But what was the burial of Christ?
It is a part of Christ's abasing, whereby after death his body being severed
from the soul, was laid in a Sepulcher according to the fashion of the Jews
b, yet so as this was a preparatiue and entrance to the glory of his
resurrection.

What is the chief cause thereof?
God who not only has engraven in the minds of men the custom and manner of
burying according to that, Genesis 3.19. Earth thou art and to dust thou shall
return, (as the ancient examples of the Saints, who were buried do testify
Genesis 23.4 15. and. 49.29. and, 50 13. 2 King. 13, 3 Tob. 4, 3
, and the deprivation of burial, which is reckoned amonst the signs of Gods
wrath Psalm. 79.3 2 King. 6.35. Ierem, 14.16. and, 22 19.
:) but did also specially ordain all things which were done about Christ's
burial.

Who were the ministers and means of this burial?
Noble and rich men who were of the degree of Senators, Joseph of Arimathea
(which some think to be the same with Ramathaim 1. Sam. 1.1
) and Nicodemus who were the Disciples of the Lord, but in srcret, through the
fear of the Jews Ioh: 3 2, and. 19, 38
, and who as grateful Disciples performed to their well deserving master the
honor of burial, when as there appeared no danger, or but very little, whom
whilst he lived he durst not confess. For when the open and professed
Disciples of Christ were dispersed and hid themselves for fear, they then,
stirred up and confirmed by God, took the body of Jesus, being given them by
Pilate, that it should not fall into the hands of the rascal, executioners,
who were wont to cast the bodies of thieves into stinking pits. whereby it
appears: how great the power of Christ's death was, who made these men so
coragious, as they feared not to attempt an enterprise most base and
dangerous: namely, to take down from the cross a man condemned by the
authority of the whole council, and the President, and by this their deed to
accuse their judgment of injustice and impiety, whereby also they incurred
extreme danger for his sake, and in the extremest ignominy which Christ
suffered, what time he was hanged betwixt two thieves, they professed
themselves his Disciples: how much more does it now become us so to do when he
reigns in glory.

What was the manner of his burial?
Joseph, as it is recorded, Mat. 27.58. went with a bold courage to ask Pilate
the body of Jesus: of whom he obtained it after he had understood certainly by
the centurion that he was dead. Mark. 15.44. so God uses to bless those who
earnestly and uprightly go about his business which pertainineth to the public
weal and benefit. Nicodemus in the mean while, prepared a mixture of myrrh
and aloes (which things do preserve bodies from putrefaction) to the weight of
an hundred pounds. Ioh. 19.39. And so they both come, and openly with their
own hands take the naked body of Christ from the Cross, and wrapped it in
clean linnens with those precious odours, after the manner which the Jews used
with their Nobles, in hope of the resurrection: and also hereby to signify
that Christ would rest in a pure mind well seasoned and spiced with sweet
smelling virtues.

Yet it was anointed because they could not do it by reason of the shortness of
time. For the Sabath was at hand, on which day it was not lawful to do any
work, and the women, Ioh 20.1 Mark. 16
when the Sabbath was ended, came to the Sepulcher, to anoint Jesus, but he
was now risen again.

Yet those spices were (which thing belongs to God) types of that quickening
odor which arises from Christ's death.

And God would by this glorious burial declare the innocence of Christ, and
abolish for the most part the ignominy of the cross, according as Esaias had
foretold, and his sepulcher shall be glorious, cap. 11.10.

What are the subjects and adjuncts of Christ's burial?
The place, the time, the shutting up, and keeping of the Sepulcher.

Where was the Lord buried?
1 In a garden planted with herbs and trees, next unto the place where he was
crucified, in which place Joseph had his Sepulcher, that in the very place of
his delights he might be admonished of death by the beholding of the monument.

1 Because the first Adam died spiritually in a garden.

2 Because (as Cyril says) there is prepared for us a return into Paradise by
the death of Christ.

3 To show the plentiful fruit which should grow to all that believe, from his
death and burial.

4 Because from the cross there is a passage to Paradise.

Again, he is buried in a Sepulcher. 1. Hevven out of a rock, least the
adversaries should cavil, that the Lords body was stolen by his Disciples
through some vaults under the ground.

2 In a new one, that we might know how that the condition of death is changed
by his merit, and because of the mystery of a new breast, wherein the Lord
rejoices to dwell.

3 He is buried in a Sepulcher, wherein no man was buried before, that his
resurrection might not be slaundered, as if some other rose again, says
Theophylact: that is, that they should not devise this slander, as to say,
that some one, or more other did rise again, and not Christ himself, or that
he rose again by the touching or power of another who had been buried before
in the same very place, as we read of him. 2. King. 13.21. who being cast
into the Sepulcher of Elizeus revived, when he had touched his bones.

4 In an other man's Sepulcher; because as Augustine says, he died and was
buried for other men's salvation.

What fell out about the burial of Christ?
A great stone was rolled to the door of the Sepulche, first, because so was
the manner. 2 Least the body of the Lord should lie open to the abuse of the
adversaries. 3 By Gods counsel and providence, to give the greater certainty
of his resurrection, and to take away all suspicion of deceit, and taking away
of his body. Moreover they sealed it up, and warded it, both these being done
not without the singular providence of God, namely, that the most hateful
enemies of Christ, by whose seal and custody the Sepulcher of Chist was
guarded, might against their wills be compelled to acknowledge the resurrection
which soon after followed. And to this use also even at this day remains the
Sepulcher of Christ unviolated. For although the Turks do keep it for gain
sake (which they reap in no small measure by them who travel thither for
religion sake) yet God would have it extant, that it might be a monument of the
history of Christ's death burial and resurrection.

How long did he lie in the grave?
Not so long as Jonas lay in the fishes belly, to wit, three natural days
Ion. 2.2. Math. 12.4^
, for neither was it necessary that the truth should in all things answer the
type. But we must know that (whereas Christ then hasted unto the victory, as
it were) the Scripture by a Synecdoche does give the appellation of the whole
thing to the beginning and end thereof, and puts the space of three days
for the time which raught unto three days: For on that very day that Christ
died (which day we call Friday) three whole hours after his death his funeral
was prepared, and his corpse committed to burial, this is the first day of
Christ's burial.

2 The day following he lay in the Sepulcher all the Sabbath according to the
manner of the Jews who reckon a natural day consisting of four and twenty
hours from evening to evening. This is the second day.

3 In the beginning of the day following (which was the first of the week, and
it is called Sunday, before the day grew light) he rested twelve hours or
thereabout in the Sepulcher, and rose again on the same day, whereupon it is
called of us the Lords day. Therefore from Christ's death to his resurrection,
passed almost forty hours. And three days are reckoned, because (as
Augustine says) the first day is taken according to the last part thereof: the
second as it is whole and entire, the third in regard of the first part
thereof. And so there are three days, and every one of these days has his
night.

But why did the Lord rest the whole Sabbath in his Sepulcher?
Because as God having finished the work of creation on the sixth day rested
the seventh day. Genesis 1.31. and 2.2. So the Son of God having accomplished
the work of our redemption, upon the cross, on the sixth day of the week,
rested the seventh day in the Sepulcher, that this resting of Christ in the
grave, may be a document and instruction to the faithful, that they are
spiritually to rest from the works of sin in this life, as also a pledge and
sign unto them of their eternal rest from all labor after this life, and
with all that we must keep holy the Sabbath day.

How came it to pass that the body of Christ was all that while preserved
from corruption?
Not by virtue of the spices, with which he was not embalmed, but in that the
cause of corruption is from sin, now there was no sin either in the flesh
or bones of Christ, yea he had no longer no other men's sin, which was imputed
unto him, for he had abolished it by his death which was past.

What are the ends of Christ's burial?
1 That it might appear he was truly dead.

2 That he might pursue and overcome death, flying as it were into his lowest
den, and so the expiation of our sins made by his death, might be grounded
on a more firm testimony.

3 That he might bury our sins together with himself in his grave, and
might for ever hide them from the sight of God.

4 That we being made partakers of his burial, might be also our selves buried
in sin.

5 That he might sanctify our burying places, and perfume them with the
quickening odor of his death, and so might take from us all fear of the
grave, and confirm unto us the hope of our resurrection.

What be the effects of it?
1 That, as, when Jonas was cast into the Sea, and hid in the fishes belly, the
tempest was calmed Iona, 11, 15
, so Christ being cast out from the number of the living, and hidden in the
Sepulcher, all the tempests of Gods wrath which were raised against our sins,
are pacified at the appearance of the mild countenance of our God and Savior.

2 That as he rescued his body from the effect of death, that is, the
dissolution of his body: so by the same power he will bring our bodies to
incorruption, so that now burial is like a seed time, in which our bodies
being laid in the earth when they being dissolved by it, shall have put of
their corruption, 1 Cor. 13.30 42, 43.
they shall hereafter in the last day rise again glorious and excellent.

3 The burying of the old man, or of sin which by little and little dies in
us: in which respect. Romans 6.4, we are said to be buried together with him into
his death, that being dead unto sin, we may no more live in it, fulfilling
the desires thereof, but may rest from ill. Whereupon Ambrose says that, The
burial of Christ is the rest of a Christian.

What is the use of it.
1 That, for as much as Christ has hid our sins in his grave, that we should
not seek to dig them up, and bring them again to light: For this were to
violate the Sepulcher of Christ, and to commit sacrilege.

2 That we should take care for the burial of the dead, that it be honest and
inuiolated, and that the bodies of the dead be not neglected or vexed against
the law of humanity, which when they lived were the instruments and temples of
the holy Ghost, if they were the bodies of believers. 1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19.
but that they be suffered to rest as in a soft bed. My flesh shall rest in
hope, says the Prophet, Psalm. 16.9.

Is it needful to bring again into use the Jews fashion of embalming bodies?
No, because unto Christians (to whom has appeared the most clear light of
truth) their faith and belief of the resurrection ought to be more certain,
then that it is expedient to confirm it by needless rites. But concerning
that which Christ says: Math. 26.10. to his Disciples of the woman's deed, she
has done a good work in me, he does not allow of this as an ordinary
worship, but because of the cricumstance, because by this sign he would
testify that the Sepulcher should be odoriferous and of sweet savors.

Does the burial of Chrst belong to the state of the exinanition, or of the
exaltation of Christ?
To both, for it was a part of his punishment and misery, when his body no
less then a another carcass was cast into the earth. Again it was a part and
beginning of his glory, in that he was honorably buried, by the chief of the
Jews, and the beginning of his victory, for so much as his body felt no
corruption, as it was foretold. Psalm. 16.10. Act. 2.27. although it lay in the
grave without life, and without any embalming. Whereupon it is said, Esai.
53.9. His grave was with the rich, or it was glorious.

What is opposite to this burial?
The cosenage of these deceivers, who superstitiously and foolishly show a
linen cloth to be worshipped, in which the whole body is painted. Which also
they sottishly call Sudarium, a napkin, whereas according to the Jews fashion,
the head alone was severally wound in a napkin or veil, but the body was
accustomed to be wrapped with linnens or bands. John. 11.44. Then he that was
dead came forth, bound hand and foot with bands, and his face was bound in a
napkin.

2 The superstition of the Papists, who consecrate graves with frankincence,
holy water and other trumperie, which graves Christ himself sanctified: they
also think that the salvation of souls is furthered by superstitious rites of
exequies, candels, procession with a cross carried before, funeral verses and
songs, doles of flesh, bread, wine, money, and other things, by funeral
suppers, by white and black vestments, and to conclude by Masses. Their devise
also it is that the place of burial should be nere the Churches and in the
Churches themselves, near the high Altar, for superstition and gains sake,
that they might exact tribute eue^ of the dead and might make a gain of smoke,
iangling of bells, sprinkling of water.

3 Their pride who either build tombs, (which thing Esaias long age accused in
Sobna, cha. 22.15, 17. and also do hang up their arms in them to be seen as
though they still desired even afterdeath to carry about with them the terror
which men of war have, or else they are wrapped and wound in costly clothes
(to no purpose, and with hinderance of their alms to the poor) in which
cloths they may make themselves brave for the worms against those testimonies
of scripture, Job. 1:21. Naked I came forth of my mothers womb, and naked also
shall I return thither. 1. Tim. 6.7. For we brought nothing into the world,
and it is certain that we can carry nothing out. 1. Cor 15.43. The body is
sown in dishonor, it arises again in glory. To this purpose is the saying
of Ambrose in his Sermon. To what purpose is the bravery of Sepulchers? they
are rather loss unto the living, then any benefit unto the dead.

4 The immoderate mourning of some who show themselves either to doubt of the
salvation of the dead, or to despair of Gods help, contrary to the serious
admonition of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

5 That fained imagination of the Gentiles, who thought that those souls whose
bodies lay unburied, did wander up and down, in Virgil fondly writes of
Palinurus and other his partakers in shipwreck.

6 Their cruelty who cast the bodies of the dead to wild beasts to be torn in
pieces, or through negligence defraud them of the honor of burial, or show
their cruelty upon their bones or ashes.

7 Those false Nicodemes, who abuse the examples of Joseph and Nicodemus to
cover and cherish the cowardnesse of the flesh, and are not bettered by them,
that they may show the strength of their faith, what time God requires their
endeavor

The five and twentieth common Place. Of Christ's descending into hell.
Was the article of Christ's descending to hell always joined with the rest of
the Creed?
RVfinus upon the Creed, Lib, de Resurrect. carnis. In symbolo. Sermon. 115.
(who is commonly reckoned amongst Cyprians works) does testify that in times
past it was not expressed in the Creed of the Roman Church, and that it was not
used neither in the Greek Churches. Notwithstanding Tertullian does plainly
confess the descension of Christ into hell, as also Athanasius, Augustine, and
other of the Fathers.

Psalm. 16.10 Isai. 53.8. Act. 2.24. Heb. 5.7. ephesians. 4.9.
But it is especially confirmed by testimonies of Scripture a, and the whole
Church in all countries does at this day with great consent acknowledge and
confess that article. And Rufinus himself does manifestly set down this
article and allow of it. Neither was it to be omitted, seeing it is of great
force to give us full assurance of our redemption, and does minister great
comfort to the godly.

What does the word Infernus (which is commonly translated hell) signify in
Scriptures?
1 The grave and that properly Gens 42.38.
Psa. 6.6. For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall
praise thee?

2 That horrible place which is appointed for the punishment of the reprobate.
Number 16.30. It is written of Core, and those of his conspiracy that they went
down alive into hell. Luke. 10.15 And thou Capernaum which art exalted to
heaven, shall be thrust down to hell. And Cap. 16.23. The rich man also died
and was buried: and being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes and saw
Abraham a far off, Lib. de anima. cap. 35.
and Lazarus in his bosom. Tertullian. By hell we understand not an open
hollow place, neither some sink in the world lying open to heaven, but a vast
and deep pit, and a depth hid in the very bowels of the earth. This place the
Greeks do call (...) which signifies a dark place, for the word is compounded
of the privative particle (...) and (...), which signifies to see, because all
things are there dark, so as no light may be seen.

3 The torments and pains of hell, that is, the terror and torments of the
soul, such as the damned feel in hell. 1. Sam. 2.6. The Lord brings down
to the grave, and raises up, etc. and Psalm. 18.8. The sorrows of the grave
compassed me about. Psalm. 16.3. When the sorrows of death compassed me, and
the griefs of the grave caught me, when I found trouble and sorrow.

4 According to some men's interpretation, it signifies the general state and
condition of the dead, whether the good estate of the aged or the evil of the
wicked.

5 In others judgment, it signifies the extreemest degree of humiliation.

What signifies the word Descending?
1 It properly signifies a motion from a high place to a lower.

2 By a tropicall speech, it signifies (...) the descending of Christ, or the
last degree of his humiliation, ^s Ephesians. 4.10. He that descended, (that is, he
that made himself base, and of no reputation and taking upon himself the
form of a servant, subjected himself to the miserable condition of this
earthly life) he is even the same that ascended above all heavens.

What therefore is the meaning of this article, He descended into hell?

It is diverse, accordingly as the simple words are taken in diverse
significations.

What is the first?
The first interpretation is of them that think these words are added for
better explanation sake, against the heresy of the Valentinians, and that no
other thing is hereby meant, then that Christ was truly dead and laid in his
grave, as other men who have been dead and buried.

What think you of this exposition?
That it is too slight and trifling, because it is not likely that the burial
of Christ being declared in plain words should be delivered in a more obscure
form of speech, neither does such a rep^tition of the same thing befit such a
brief and compendious rehearsal of the chief heads of our faith.

What is the second?
It is Hieromes and the Papists who think that Christ's soul being separated
from the body came to a certain place, which they call Limbus patrum, to wit,
the upper part, or an upper room as it were of hell, in which there are no
punishments, but only a deprivation of a better and more perfect good. In
which place they say the Spirits of the faithful fathers did remain before
Christ's incarnation: from whence afterward, the soul of Christ coming
thither in deed, did bring them with himself into heaven. Which thing they go
about to confirm out of Matthew, 27.52. Many besides of the Saints rose again,
either with Christ or after him, and 1. Pet. 3.19. By which also he went and
preached unto the spirits which are in prison, and 4.6. for unto this purpose
also was the Gospel preached unto the dead.

Do you like this opinion?
No, 1 for such a place cannot be proved by any testimony of Scripture.

2 Because we read that not all the Saints bodies, but some only rose again
with Christ to testify the power of Christ's resurrection, whereby life is
restored to us.

3 The place, 1. Pet. 3.16. Is manifestly to be understood concerning Christ's
spirit which preached repentance by the mouth of Noah, to the disobedient and
wicked: and the place in the fourth Chapter is to be understood of the Gospel
which was preached to them which were dead in former times, that is, which were
indeed alive when they were preached unto, but were dead at what time this was
spoken of them.

Also, because this opinion does not a little detract from the power of Christ's
sacrifice, the price whereof is infinite, and extends it self unto all times
according to that which was said, Apoc. 13.8. The Lamb was slain from the
beginning of the world. Therefore Abraham was delivered from hell, by the merit
of Christ's sacrifice, no less then Paul or any one of the godly that died
after Christ was given for our redemption.

What is the third opinion?
The third is of them who think that Christ did indeed descend into the place
of hell. But this opinion is divided three ways. For some there are who say,
that the soul of Christ did go down thither whilst his body lay in the
grave, that there it might suffer for the souls of men. Which opinion is by
three reasons confuted.

1 Because the blood of Christ is a most perfect expiation for all the world
John. 1.7
.

2 It is confuted by Christ's saying upon the cross. It is finished Ioh. 19.30.
Therefore he had no more to suffer, when as death made an end of his torments.

3 Because Christ endured horrible torments in his soul whilst it was yet in
his body, as is manifest by that terrible crying. My God, my God. etc. Mat.
27.46. which shook both heaven and earth.

2 Others say that the soul of Christ descended into hell, not that it might
suffer any thing there, but that as in his body he had preached upon earth the
Gospel to them who were living: so being dead, he might in his spirit preach
the Gospel to them in hell, which opinion comes near to the second of those
formerly repeated by us. But to what purpose had this been? seeing after death
there is no place left for preaching and repentance. Moreover he commended his
spirit into the hands of his father, and said unto the thief, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, where undoubtedly there is no hell. Luke. 23.43.46.

3 The fathers for the most part of them do labor to show that in the very
earthquake and momet of his resurrection Christ did present himself alive to
the^ in hell, and showed himself not so much in words as in deed, conqueror
of death, and of the Prince of darkness, and that Satan had no more power
over the elect, and that he had a name given him above all names that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow both of things in heaven, and things in
the earth, and things under the earth. Phil. 2.10. For this cause Augustine
says thus. The whole Son was with the Father, the whole Son in the womb
of the virgin, the whole in heaven, the whole in the earth, the whole on the
Cross, and the whole in Hell.

What think you of this judgment of the Fathers?
I dare not condemn it, seeing it is not against the holy Scriptures, and has
in it no absurdity. And the consent of Fathers (when as it manifestly does not
disagree with the Scriptures) is not lightly to be accounted of.

Yea more, this opinion may seem probable to be gathered out of the Apostles
words? Ephesians. 4.9. Now that he ascended above all heavens, what is it else, but
that he had also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? For here
there is a manifest opposition betwixt; above all heavens, and the lowest part
of the earth. But the first is taken according to the letter, therefore also
the second, as it seems, must be understood according to the letter, but
there is no part of the earth lower then hell, which is the place of the
damned. Although others, by the lowest parts, understand simply the whole
earth, which is the lowest part of the world, into which Christ descended, and
lived in it for many years.

What is the fourth opinion?
Of them who say, that nothings else is meant by these words then that Christ
did descend into the state of the dead, and that he was added to the number
and company of other the dead, for whom he dyed, according to David's saying.
Psalm. 28.5.6. I am reckoned amongst them which go down into the grave. And
Psalm. 88. I am as a man without strength, I am counted among the^ that go down
into the pit, Free among the dead like the slain lying in the grave, whom
thou remembrest no more, and they are cut off by thine hand: Whereupon he is
said to be raised again, not from the grave, but from the dead, which sense
and opinion does not much differ from the first of the former.

What is the fifth?
The first is of them who allegorically, or metaphorically by the descention of
Christ, understand his great ignominy and extreme humiliation, whilst he lay
in the grave, until the third day after his death, as if he had been foiled
and vanquished by death, and the devil, at which time the devil and the
Pharisees did, as it were, insult over him, as though he were quite gone, and no
more remained.

Do you approve of this then?
I do not dislike it: for it is agreeable to the type set forth in David.
Psalm. 88.7. Thou have laid me in the lowest grave, in darkness, and in the
deep, and it is agreeable to that place which is Ephesians. 4.10. in which as by
ascending above all heavens the Apostle understands his greatest exaltation:
so by his descending to the lowest parts of the earth, or to hell, he
understands the greatest humiliation or debasing of Christ. So Esa. 14.15.
Descending to hell is taken for extreme humiliation. Thou saidest in thine
heart I will ascend into heaven, etc. but thou shall be brought down to the
grave, to the sides of the pit. And so may the place of Matthew. 11.23. be
expounded; Thou, O Capernaum, which art lifted up unto heaven shall be brought
down to hell.

What is the sixth?
It is theirs who say, that by Christ's descending to hell, is signified those
great torments of mind, which Christ in his agony and upon the cross
sustained, of which, we have spoken in the Passion of Christ.

Is this exposition agreeable to truth.
It is, for it is agreeable to Scripture, and proportionable to faith: For Esa.
53.5. says, that Christ was broken for our iniquities. And Psalm. 18.6. The
sorrows of the grave have compassed me round about. And Act. 2.24. Peter
says, that he was entangled in the pangs of death, the griefs which the curse
and wrath of God procures. And Gal. 3.13. it is said; He was made for us a
curse, and that truly and without trope, not in himself indeed, but in as
much as he was our surety, so that he truly felt our burden to be laid upon
him. And Heb. 5.7. the Apostle says, that Christ was heard from his fear
when he prayed with tears and strong crying. And that which is very
wonderful, is recorded of him, that through vehemency of his torment drops of
blood ran down from his face, and that he could not be comforted: but by the
sight of Angels. Luke 22.43. And in the end we see that Christ was cast down
so low, that he was constrained to cry out, when his anguish urged him; My God,
my God, way have thou forsaken me. Mat. 27.46. By all which it may be gathered,
that he wrestled and grapled, not with a common manner of death, but with the
forces of hell and the horror of eternal death.

But this seems to make against the exposition, namely, that the torments of
the mind, are put after the griefs of the body, in the creed?
This is done, because the grief of body first offers it self to the
senses, but not so the torments of mind-

But it may be objected. Although they ought to be set after death and
crucifying, yet they should not have been mentioned after burial?
Although the descending of Christ to hell was ended in death, and in time did
go before the burial of the body, yet it is set after it in the order of the
narration of the articles of our faith, because it seemed good in one continued
course of speech, to describe whatsoever pertained to the debasing of his
body, and afterward to come to the suffering in soul.

But could God ever be angry with his only and most beloved son Christ, or
forsake him?
Never, but yet he so hid his favor and help for a time, that the humane
nature of Christ did truly feel these distresses, wherewith they are urged,
who are cast away and forsaken of God. And as Barnard says, Sermon. 5. de verbis
Esaiae. It is a kind of forsaking, when as in so great necessity there was
no shevving of power, no shevving of Majesty.

Why was it needful he should suffer these torments?
1. Because when as all our sins were cast upon him, therefore it was fit
that he should so feel the wrath of God against them, as if he himself had
committed the sins of all men.

2. That for our sakes he might try and overcome all manner of griefs and
temptations, and so the torments of death and of hell for our cause.

3. That he might advance and carry us up to the joys of heaven, being
delivered from the power of Hell.

What profit redounded to us by Christ's descending into Hell?
1. Victory over the power of the devil, the horror of death and the pains
of Hell is obtained Ose. 13.14
.

2. Our enemies are tryumphed over. Coloss. 2.15. And he has spoiled
principalities, and powers (that is, Satan with his Angels Ephesians, 6, 12
) and has made a show of them openly, and has tryumphed over them in the same
cross.

3. Having overcome the sting of death, he has opened to all believers the
kingdom of heaven. Therefore Hilarie says, lib. 2. de Trinitate. The cross,
death and hell are our life.

What is the use of Christ's descending into hell?
1. That we should not now be afraid in death of those things which our prince
has swallowed up.

2. That look how much more we see him humbled and abased for our cause, so
much the less we should doubt, either of the fathers love toward us, or our
redemption wrought by him, and the exaltation we shall hereafter receive in
Heaven.

What is opposite to this Doctrine.
1. That fable of Purgatory, the pains whereof seeing Christ did not undergo
nor suffer, for ought we can read (who notwithstanding suffered for us all
kind of griefs Isa. 53.3, 4
) therefore it follows, that these are forged and counterfaite, and to be
feared of none who believe: For if it were as they say, it should then follow
that there are some griefs which Christ did not suffer for our sake.

2. Of those Limbi which they have in their own inventions appointed for the
fathers under the Law, and infants under the Gospel who have been deprived
of the sign of Baptism.

The six and twentieth common place. Of Christ's Resurrection.
What is meant by rising again?
THat properly rises again (says Hierom) which before fell by dying, and
therefore neither the divinity nor soul of Christ properly, but the same body
which fell by death, rose again. Notwithstanding the Resurrection of Christ
belongs also to his soul, but in some respect only, that is, so far forth
as by the resurrection it was restored to the own body.

What therefore is the resurrection of Christ?
It is the first degree of his exaltation, whereby he according to his humane
nature, by the power of God, putting off infirmity, and mortality, his soul
returning into his body, reviving, came the third day out of the Sepulcre, as
conqueror, and tryumphed gloriously over death and hell: that he might quicken
all that believe in him, and that the dead being raised again in the last day,
he, as a king of the Church, might give to all the elect, a joyful victory,
and immortal life, casting the wicked away into perpetual torments.

By what power did Christ rise again?
Not by any power begged from others, or any power of a nature created, but by
the proper power of his Godhead. John. 10.18. No man takes my life from me,
but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again. For which cause his true Doctrine is showed by his
resurrection. Romans 1.4, in these words; And declared mightily to be the son
of God, touching the spirit of sanctification, by his rising from the dead. Yet
because the works of the trinity ad extra without are undivided, therefore
this rising again, being taken actiuely, is attributed both to Christ
himself, to the father and the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1.20. according to his
mighty power, Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly places. Also Coloss. 2.12. and
Romans 8.11. If the spirit of him that has raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in
you, he that has raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his spirit which quickneth and dwells in you. For that power
whereby Christ was raised again is essentially common to the three persons.

Did the humanity of Christ work together with the Godhead in his
resurrection?
According to the Divine nature, Christ himself wrought his resurrection 2.
Cor. 13 14.
, he suffered through the infirmity of the flesh, and lives by the power of
God. But properly, he rose again according to the humane nature, which obeyed
the Godhead, raising it up, and moved it self as the will and power of the
Godhead directed it. Whereupon came this common effect, or work of both
natures, Death was swallowed up in victory. 1. Cor. 15.54. and the
Resurrection is attributed to the whole Christ Romans 1, 4.
, but actiuely according to the spirit of sanctification, passiuely according
to the flesh.

From whence is the confirmation and certain knowledge of Christ's resurrection
to be taken?
From the adjuncts or testimonies, both those which went before, which
concurred at the time of it, and which came after.

What are the testimonies going before?
Partly prophecies, partly figures or types, by which the resurrection of
Christ was aforehand signified. Prophecies are evident and plain affirmations
concerning the resurrection of Christ, which was to come. As among others these.

1. Out of Moses. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bru^e the head of the
Serpent, that is, Christ shall overcome sin, death and Satan, which he could
not do otherwise then by rising again.

2. And Psalm. 16.8. where David in the person of Christ says, Thou will not
leave my soul in the grave, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption.

3. Out of the Prophets: Esai. 53.10. When he shall make his soul an offering
for sin, he shall see his seed, and shall prolong his days, and the will of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand; therefore he shall rise again. And Daniel
9.24. says, that Christ shall be slain and yet he ascribes to him a
perpetual kingdom, in which iniquity shall be taken away and everlasting
righteousness brought in place. Therefore he foresaw that Christ should be
raised again. Which prophecies are proved true by the euenr.

What figures of the resurrection were there?
1. Adam who was cast into a sleep, and again raised up, out of whose side,
whilst he slept, was Eua made. Genesis 2.21.22. was a type of Christ, who died
and was raised again, out of whose side being opened, issued forth both water
and blood, by which the Church was bred and purged.

2. Isaac, who was laid on a pile of wood, and was delivered by an Angel Genesis
21.9.11.
, was a type of our Redeemer, who died so for us in regard of his humanity in
his sacrifice for us, that notwithstanding in regard of his Divinity he
remained immortal.

3. Joseph, who was cast into prison, and afterward brought out again and
advanced to great honors Gen^ 39.20, and, 41.41.
did resemble Christ rising again from death, who received the rule of heaven
and earth.

4. As Samson when he was shut up, the city gates being locked, did
notwithstand securely go forth, breaking the lock and carrying away the gates
Judge. 16.3
, so the Lord opening the Sepulcre, which was sealed up, was delivered from
death.

5. Jonas being cast quick out of the fishes belly Mat. 12.5 40,
resembled Christ, who came out of the grave alive. To conclude, David having
escaped so often out of persecution, and being advanced to the kingdom, did shadow
forth the death and resurrection of the Lord.

And what is the use of all this, which has been said?
That our faith may thereby be confirmed: for the certainety of our faith (as
Augustine says) consists in this, that all things which have bin foretold of
Christ, have fallen out upon Jesus the son of Marie. Therefore he is the true
Messiah and Savior of the world.

What are the adjuncts of Christ's resurrection which co^curred with it?
The time.

At what time did Christ die, and was raised aaaine?
At that very time when the Patriarch Jacob foretold that he should come,
whilst Moses his form of government yet lasted and stood, but bended to
ruin. Genesis 49, 10. The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah, and the lawgiuer
from between his feet, until Silo come. And Daniell does express the very
year of his passion. Whence may be perceived the certainty of gods promises,
and our faith concerning the promises not yet fulfilled is confirmed, and the
error of the Jews who hold the messiah is not yet come is confuted.

At what time of the year did he rise again?
In the Spring time, that the time it self might admonish and put us in mind
of the power of Christ's death and resurrection, as Lactantius has elegantly
expressed it in these verses.

Ecce renascentis testatur gratia mundi
Omnia cum domino dona redisse suo.
Namque renascenti, post tristia Tartara, Christo
vndique fronde nemus, gramina flore fauent.
See how the world her face, and eke her grace renews
And now her Lords return, with all like grace she shows.
Her late revived Lord from hell, she entertaines
and deckes with leaves the woods and with her flowers the plains
One what day of the year?
One that day as the skillful in Chronology do write, on which Moses with his
people of Israel passed through the red Sea, and came safe to the shore as it
were from the grave to life: Pharaoh and his company being drowned in the
waves. Exodus 14.22.28. Even so the Lord with his people the Church, having
vanquished his enemies, passed from death to life by his glorious resurrection,

How many days after his death?
One the third day after it, according to the figure. For as Jonah was three
days and three nights in the whales belly, so the son of man did lie three
days in the sepulcher Mat. 12.40.
according to the prophecy of Osea. 6.2. He will quicken us after tvvoe days
(namely the Messiah) and one the third day he will raise us up (namely in his
own person) and we shall live in his sight. For the resurrection of Christ
which came to pass one the third day is a pledge of ours. But here we must
remember Augustines supputation of the days, of which we made mention in the
place of his burial.

Why did he defer his resurrection until the third day?
That it might plainly appear he was dead, but he stayed no longer then the
three days, least the faith of his disciples should be hazarded and shaken:
neither did he defer it till the last day, because of our hope. 1. Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the father of our Lord who has regenerated us unto a lively hope
by the resurrection of Christ from the dead.

Moreover, that he might be the first of them which rise again 1. Cor. 15.20.

On what day of the week did he rise?
When the Sabbath was now passed, and the first day of the week next following
was begun, that is upon Sunday. Mark. 16.1.2.9. That on the same day wherein
God made heaven and earth, both heaven and earth might all joy for the Lords
resurrection: whereupon this day is called the Lords day. Apoc. 1.10.

In what hour of the day?
At Sun rising. Mat. 28.1. that he might thereby signify himself to be
the true Sun which enlightneth those which sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way of peace. Luke 1.79.

What adjuncts followed the resurrection.
Signs, testimonies, and his own appearing after his resurrection.

What signs testified that Christ was truly risen?
Four chriefly.

1. An earthquake, as though the earth even did long to restore him to heaven,
and for a testimony of the Resurrection accomplished, as also of the
efficacy, and so of the omnipotency of Christ, who by his power, and at his
pleasure does shake heaven, earth, and sea.

2. An huge stone was removed from the sepulcre by the Ministry of an angel.
Mat. 28.2.

3. The Sepulcre left empty.

4. The garments of the sepulcre left in it, namely the linnens and the napkin
wrapped together apart. John. 20.5.6.7. With signs did convict the keepers of
the Sepulcre, of a lie, who though they knew by the earthquake and other signs
that Christ had truly risen again, which thing also they told to the chief
Priests, Mat 28. Yet being corrupted with money, they forged this lie, that the
body of the Lord was stolen away by the Disciples, Mat. 28.13. For neither
would the Disciples have taken away their Master naked, leaving the clothes
behind them, when it was more ready and handsome for them to carry away the
body as it was wound; neither would they, being afraid of the Soldiers, who
were present and warded, have laid together the garments, so handsomely and
severally, when as their attempt would have admitted no delay, in regard of the
present danger.

What did this laying of the clothes in the Sepulcre signify?
That the Lord did not need any funeral ornaments, but that he had put on
immortality: that the former innocence which we lost in Adam, was recovered
for us in Christ: and that the cause of shame being taken away, in the last
day we shall be adorned with eternal life in stead of garments, and with
heavenly glory.

What witnesses were there of this rising again?
1. The enemies of Christ, namely the Roman Soldiers, to whom Pilate
committed the custody of the Sepulcre, who gave testimony to the Priests of
the Lords resurrection: although being by them corrupted by money (which is an
usual thing with that kind of men) they made an impudent lie, that the
Disciples of Jesus had taken away his body whilst they slept. But it is an
apparent lie, for if the keepers slept, how knew they, that the body of the
Lord was stolen away by his Disciples? If they were awake, why do they lie,
in saying they slept? if they took his body, why left they his clothes?

2. The Angels of God appearing in white garments, one while sitting within the
Sepulcre, Ioh, 20^ 12
and sometimes standing without it: not as though Christ could not without
their help come out of the Sepulcre, but that they might testify themselves
to be Christ's ministers, that they do serve him and the Church Heb, 1: 4^
; and the women and the Apostles might be assured that Christ was risen
again, that there might not want heavenly witnesses also hereof: for they
bear witness that Christ is truly risen again. Luke 24.4.5.6. Mark. 16.6.
Why seek ye the living among the dead? Again they say, He is risen, he is
not here, he is risen.

3. The Disciples of Christ saw the Sepulcre empty, and Christ raised up
after death, who could not be suspected of false dealing. For they could not
be persuaded of Christ's resurrection, unless they with their own eyes and
ears were joined together with him, they were so far from devising it by a
plot amongst themselves. They also bare record hereof by their Doctrine, life,
and blood.

4. Jesus himself being dead and buried, did afterward show himself in
sundry manners, when he was revived.

What were the appearances of Christ, after he was raised again?
Manifold, whereby Christ presented himself alive, both in the day of his
resurrection, as also in other days following; and that forty days, in which
he was conversant upon earth, the beams of his brightness and glory being
repressed as yet.

How often did he appear on the day of his Resurrection?
Five times.

1. To Marie Magdalene alone at the Sepulcre, out of whom he had cast seven
devils Mark. 16, 9 John. 20, 14
.

2. To the same Marie Magdalene and the other Marie, when they were gone back
from the Sepulcre, in the way Mat, 28.9
, that all suspicion of fraud and violence might be taken away, and that he
might show himself the Redeemer of the female sex.

3. To the two Disciples Cleophas and his fellow as they were going to Emaus
Luk, 24.13 31.
, of whom when he was not discerned at the first, because their eyes were
held from discerning him, he was afterward known of them in the breaking of
bread, their eyes being then opened: and again, he vanished from them, not
in respect of himself absolutely, but in respect of his Disciples, and
therefore it is added (...) from them, that is he ceased to be seen of them,
who, notwithstanding in himself was visible. Which came to pass either
because of his sudden departure from them, or because their sight was again
dimmed, that they could not see him.

4. To Simon Peter alone. Luke 24.34. 1. Cor, 15
.

1 Cor. 15.5
5. To the Apostles, the eleven, as Mark has it Mark. 16.14.
, or as Paul the 12. 1. Cor. 15.5
, they being so called, because of the common title of their society and
fraternity, being gathered together all, save Thomas, at Jerusalem. Unto whom
he entering. John. 20.28. (...) the gates being shut (not through the gates
being shut, but after the gates were shut, and no man opened to him, seeing the
wall or gates by the almighty power of God might in one moment make entrance
to his body which pierced them in a moment, and the creature shall give place
to the Creator) he stood in the midst of them, and when they doubted whether
it were he, he gave himself to be seen and handled of them. And proved his
body to be a true body, and took away all suspicion of spiritual entrance,
and penetration of dimensions incircumscription, inuisibilitie, illocability,
and lastly of the appearing of a Ghost. Mark. 16 14. Luke 24, 26, John. 20, 19
and seq.


What appearances made he in the days following?
Six. 1. On the eight day after the resurrection he appeared to his Disciple
Thomas being present, when he entered again to them the gates being shut John,
20, 26.
.

2. At the sea of Tyberias he appeared to seven of his Disciples, who were
fishermen John, 21.1.2.3
.

3. To eleven Disciples at once in a certain mountain of Galilie, as he had
appointed with them Math, 28, 16
.

4. To more then 500. brethren at once 1, cor, 15.6
.

5. To James by himself Ibid, v, 7
, concerning whom, the testimony of Paul is sufficient for us.

6. On the very day of his ascension, he appeared to the Apostles on mount
Oliuet, when he was taken up into heaven out of their sight Luk, 24.50 Act. 1,
6, 12
.

Why do not the Evangelists and Paul 1. Cor. 15.5. keep a like order in
rehearsing his appearances, but some have not some, some other appearances?
That not so much the order of the appearances (which might be also greater)
as the truth of his resurrection, in which our salvation stands, might be
regarded: and that variety might evidently prove that the Evangelists did not
agree, and devise amongst themselves to write those Histories, but that they
might show that the Lord rose again truly.

But why appeared he not to all, or at least to the chief Priests and Elders
of the people?
1. Because, as the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, Io. 18.36
so neither does it depend of man's patronage.

2. As with God there is a time of mercy, so also there is a time of judgment.

3. Because the resurrection of Christ was foretold by the Prophets, publicly
preached by the Apostles, proclaimed to all nations, and confirmed enough and
more then enough by testimonies which followed the ascension, as. First, by the
visible giving of the holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost. 2. By the gift of
tongues. 3. By the admirable audacitie and confidence which appeared in the
Apostles. 4. By the efficacy of the Gospel in converting very many. 5. By the
miracles done by the Apostles, by invocation of Christ Act. 2.2.43. and. 3.6.
and 4, 13.31.33,
. 6. By the appearance of the Lord himself unto Stephen, when he was stoned
Act. 7, 55
, and to Paul when he went to Damascus Ac^. 9.3. 1 Cor, 15.8.
. 17. By the preservation of the Church according to Christ's promises. Mat.
16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 8. By Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord i. 9. Lastly by the feeling of Christ dwelling in the hearts
of the godly, and by the earnest of the spirit.

4. Because the condition of Christ's kingdom, which is of grace, is this, that
it is not manifest to bodily eyes, but to the eyes of the mind and faith,
according to that, John. 20.29. Blessed are they who have not seen and
believe. 1* Rom, 6, 4


How differ the Resurrection of Christ, and of other dead men.
1. In the efficient cause, for Christ rose again by his own power, that
which no man besides himself could ever do.

2. In the end: for others who have been raised up, have risen again subject
to the miseryes of this life, and being to die again; But Christ first,
swallowing up mortality and laying away at once all the infirmities of man's
life, rose again unto immortality Romans 6.^
.

3. By the effects.

What manner one was Christ when he rose again?
Wholly glorious.

1. In respect of the Divinity, for whereas before it was hid in Christ, now
it was fully manifested and revealed.

2. In respect of his humanity, because all infirmities and accidental
properties, with which Christ was borne, as also all adversities and miseries,
and all necessities of having meat, drink, sleep, etc. being laid away; it
was fully and to the highest degree of perfection, adorned with new qualities,
but such as were created above and besides the common order of nature, as in
the soul, wisdom, ioyfulnes, etc. In the body, incorruptibilitie,
subtilitie, nimblenesse, brightness and shining, through the power of the
Godhead dwelling in it, by which also it was exalted far above all creatures
Psalm. 45.7.8
. But the essential properties of it being still kept, so that his body being
now in glory, is still according to the ordinary dispensation of nature, to
be seen and felt, composed of isntrumental parts, finite, and contained in
place, as Christ himself after his resurrection teaches. See ye my hands and
my feet, for it is even I my self. For a Spirit has no flesh and bone, as
ye see me have. Luke 24.39.

For whom did Christ rise again?
Only for and to the elect: for the ungodly shall rise again, not because of
Christ's resurrection, but by the just judgment of God: they shall rise again
unto eternal damnation, and by the force of that sanction and decreee, which
was added to the commandment given to Adam. Genesis 2.17. In what day thou shall
eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death,
namely, as well the first as second death.

What was the end of his resurrection?
The glory of God and Christ, and the salvation of the elect. Romans 6.4. Christ
rose again to the glory of the father.

2. in respect of Christ, that he might obtain eternal glory due to him by
the express form of the promise in the Law Leu, 18.5. Gala. 3.12
.

3. That he might translate and bring us to eternal life, being freed from
mortality.

What are the effects and fruits of Christ's resurrection?
The first concerns Christ, for by his resurrection he was declared to be the
Son of God. Romans 1.4. he became conqueror and tryumpher over sin, death,
and hell, and over the whole kingdom of Satan. For in Christ, God strove with
the devil, righteousness with sin, life with death, who all overcame, and
that Prophecy was fulfilled. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall break the
head of the Serpent; that is, Christ shall destroy the works of the Devil. 1.
John. 3.8.

The second respects, Satan who being trodden down, lies under the feet of
the conqueror. John. 16.11. The prince of the world is already judged, and
expulsed in respect of the faithful, and that in such manner, as he can not
hurt them in such sort, as he would, and he trembles at the name of Jesus
Christ by whom he knows himself to be overcome and condemned to eternal
punishment.

The third pertains to us, unto whom he is raised, that we might be
absolved from sin and justified. 1. Cor. 15.7. If Christ be not risen again,
ye are as yet, dead in your sins. For the death of Christ is of no efficacy,
if Christ remains still in death. And To. 4.25. He is risen again for our
justification, not because he added any thing thereby unto the price of our
redemption, seeing he fully made satisfaction for our sins by his death,
but because the resurrection of Christ is an evident testimony of Christ's
perfect righteousness and obedience according to the Law, and that not in
respect of some parts only thereof, as the righteousness of Elias and other
the Saints, but in respect of the degres of the parts, so as it may suffice to
make us righteous before God, and may give strong testimony that the passion of
Christ is a sufficient sacrifice acceptable to God, and appeasing his anger,
and that he did plainly conquer and disarme death Luc. 11.22
, and therefore did Os^^, ^3.14
perfectly abolish sin, whereupon the rule of death depended. Neither could
our sins have bin perfectly expiated and done away by Christ's death, if death
had got the upper hand in this combat: whereupon it comes to pass that our
faith and hope safely relyeth upon God 1. Pet. 1.21
. 2. Because, by the power of Christ's resurrection, we shall be quickened, that
is, we shall be regenerated unto a lively hope Ephesians. 2.5.
. And Romans 6.4. He has risen again, that we might walk in newness of life.
The third cause is the stay, the supporting and pledge of our resurrection unto
immortality: for seeing Christ is our head, and is risen again, For ye are al
(says Paul. Gal. 3.28.) as one man in Christ) we also of necessity shall rise
again, who are his members. Therefore as when we see a man's head above the
water, we doubt not but the rest of the members will also get forth and straight
follow* so must we think of Christ and of our selves. Hereupon Paul says. 1.
Cor. 15.20. Christ is risen again, therefore shall we also rise again. And 1.
These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus is Dead, and is risen again, even so
them which sleep in Jesus (that is in faith, whereby they are ingraffed into
Christ) will God bring with him. Also Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in
heaven, from whence we look for a Savior, even our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall transform our base body, that it may be made like to his glorious body.

What is the use of the resurrection?
1. That by cur believing this Article, we may conceive unspeakable joy of
conscience by lively sense of the remission of our sins, of our Justification
and regeneration by the resurrection of Christ. For hence proceeds our
greatest joy, in that we behold man beautiful, glorious, immortal in Christ,
who before in the Passion was so miserable, ignominious, sorrowful, bloody,
filthy and horrible for our sins.

2. That we may both in prosperity and adversity think of that most happy
estate which we expect in the life to come, and may raise up our minds unto
hope of our future glory. Job. 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives etc. And
Paul. 2. Tim. 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ is risen from the dead.

3. That we may triumph and find security in death, for so much as Christ,
by his resurrection, has overcome and destroyed our twofolde death, namely,
the death of sin, and the death of hell.

What is against this Doctrine?
1. The obstinacy of the Jews who deny Christ's resurrection.

2. The error of the Eutychians, who dreamed that the humane nature of Christ,
was turned into the Divine, after his resurrection.

3. The error of the Vbiquitaries, who make the body of Christ such as no body
is, and that both before, and especially after his resurrection, seeing that
they will have all properties of a true body laid aside, and that it is now in
no certain place, but spread abroad in all places in an unspeakable manner.

4. Of the Papists, who every year do lay in a grave the Image of Christ's body
and cause Priests and monks to guard and watch with it, who also with a
mournful song, do celebrate his burial, and do bestow upon a wodden Image,
those things which he commanded to bestow upon the poor John. 12.8
. 2. They superstitiously take pilgrimages to that place which Jesus did honor
with his burial, contrary to those sayings of Christ. John. 4.23. The hour
is come, and now is when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and truth. And of Paul, 1. Tim. 2.8. I will therefore that the men pray
every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting.

The seven and twentieth common Place. Of Christ's Ascension.
What is the History of Christ's Ascension?
IT is to be taken first out of Mark* ca. 16.19. The Lord, after he had spoken
unto the^, was again taken up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
Again out of Luke in the Gospel, cap. 24.50. Afterward he led them out into
Bethania, and lift up his hands and blessed them. And it came to pass, that
whilst he blessed them, he departed from them, and was carried up into heaven:

And in the Acts. cap. 1.9. And when he had spoke these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up, for a cloud took him up out of their sight, and while
they looked steadfastly to heaven, as he went, behold two men stood by them in
white apparel. Which also said, Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing into
heaven? this Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye
have seen him go into heaven.

And Paul bears record of it. Ephe. 4.8. Wherefore the scripture says. Psa.
69.19* When he ascended up on high, he led coptiuitie captive, and gave gifts
unto men. Now in that he ascended, what is it but that he had also descended
first into the lowest parts of the earth. He that descended is even the same
that ascended far above all heauen's, that he might fill all things. See 1.
Tim. 3.16. Heb. 4.14. and 9.24.

What must be understood by ascension?
Not a changing of one condition or estate into another, or a vanishing out of
sight, but properly (...) that is, a motion from one place to another, and that
from the lower to the higher. For they are said to ascend, who remove from a
lower place to a higher. 2. King. 2.12. And Elias ascended by a whirlewind into
heaven. And Psalm. 139.8. If I ascend into heaven, thou art there.

But figuratively ((...), or attributing that to God which belongs to man) it
is spoken of God. Genesis 17.22. God went from the sight of Abraham. And Psalm.
47.16. God is gone up with triumph, even the Lord with the sound of the
trumpet. But also John. 3.13. in the first part of the verse, to ascend into
heaven, signifies allegorically to be endued with the light of spiritual
understanding.

Is the word Ascension used properly or figuratively in this place?
Properly without question, as it may manifestly be proved out of diverse forms
of speeches, which the Evangelists have used for better declaration sake: for
Mar. 16.19. says (...) that is, he was taken up, and on high into heaven, and
Luke 24.51. says, (...) he was removed from them, or went away from them. But
it is plain how by the word of going away, is signified a removing into
another place. And the same Evangelist gives to understand whither he went
away, (...), and he was carried up into heaven. He was carried (says he) which
again certainly notes a motion from place to place. Act. 1.9. (...). He was
lifted up, and Nubes (...), a cloud took him up out of their sights. Not
because of himself he became invisible, but because he went higher and further
off, then his Disciples sight could reach. Moreover the Apostles do follow him
with their eyes and sight as far as they can, whilst he did not vanish away
out of their sight, but still went up on his way. For while he was going,
((...)) which signifies removing from place to place, they stood steadfastly
with their eyes up to heaven. Which had been a foolish part of the^ if they
had not seen him carried on high. To conclude the Angels helping the defect of
the Apostles sight, do testify that Christ was taken up by them into heaven,
and that he should so come as they had seen him going into heaven.

Hereupon the Greek Fathers do call it (...), the assumption or taking up of
Christ in the flesh, and (...), his ascension or going up. By the examination
of these things which have been said it follows that the ascension of Christ
is not an act vndivisible or momentanie, but devisible, and distinguished by
parts of his motion, and going forward, and by times and places, by which he
was carried up from a lower place to a higher, namely from earth unto heaven.

Seeing (in that saying of Paul Ephesians. 4.10 he that descended, is also the
same that ascended) the word of descending does figuratively signify the
humiliation of Christ, why is not also the word of ascending taken figuratively
for the same Christ's exaltation and glorification.
Because when Christ descended from heaven, he descended without changing his
place, at what time he was God only, and not man, but by that his descension
was made man: but when he ascended into heaven, he ascended with changing of
place, when he was God and man.

Who ascended?
Christ who is both God and man, the same who was borne man of the virgin
Marie, who suffered and died, who rose again, and after his resurrection
stayed forty days with his Disciples upon the earth. He I say, and no other
descended. He that descended is even the same that ascended. Ephesians. 4.9.
Therefore the whole Christ did really ascend, because the same Christ was true
God, and true man, but in respect of his humanity, he in his body ascended
properly and locally from earth into heaven, even as before he had ascended
truly, and by a local motion out of the grave into the land of the living.
Therefore in respect hereof it is said by Mark, being taken or received up: and
of Luke in the Acts, being lifted up. For these things do not agree to the
Divinity or Godhead, of which it is said. Ierem. 23.24. I fill heaven and
earth: but by a communication of properties (...), that is said of the whole
person of Christ which is only proper to one part of his nature. And as
Theodoretus says: Those things which are proper to the nature, are
communicated to the whole person.

Who is the efficient cause or author of Christ's ascension?
Christ himself, who by the Almighty power of his Godhead did carry up his
humane nature, and bring it into heaven, but because the divine power of the
Father and Son is all one, this removing into heaven, (as also the raising of
him up again) is ascribed also to the power of the Father. Act. 2.33. By the
right hand (that is by the power and virtue) of God he has been exalted, and
has received of his father the promise of the holy Ghost, and cap. 5.30. The
God of our fathers has raised up Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.
Him (I say) has God lift up with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior.
But his humane nature having gotten agility and nimblenes of body by the
resurrection, moving it self by the appointment and command of the Godheed
went upon high, and ascended truly and properly, and therefore it may be
called a ministering or serving cause of the ascension.

From whence is the reason and certainty of the ascension to be taken?
From the adjuncts or circumstances, namely of time, the place from whence,
the manner of his ascension, the place unto which, and the vvitnesses.

What time did he ascend?
On the fortieth day after his resurrection: after that he had spoken to his
Disciples concerning the kingdom of God, that is after he had enstructed them
more fully of the things pertaining to salvation, and had confirmed and assured
them concerning his resurrection, and the truth of his body, so as they could
no longer doubt of it.

From what place did he ascend?
Luke in the Gospel, cap. 24.50. says that the Disciples were led forth by
Christ unto Bethania, a village of Judea, and that from that place Christ
ascended. But in the Acts, cap. 1.12. he said that they returned from Mount
Oliuet, which is near unto Jerusalem, whence it is manifest that Christ
ascended from some part of that mountain, not far from the town of
Bethania, into heaven.

Why did he choose to himself this place?
That like as he had given proof of man's weakness, and of his exceeding great
love toward us in Mount Oliuet, in that he sweat blood in his conflict with
death. Luke. 22.39 44. so departing from the same place into heaven, he might
give certain trial and proof of his Godhead John. 6.62
, and so the same place might serve for Christ's glory, which had given the
beginning to his ignominy and passion.

2 That the mountains might put us in mind of heaven.

3 That from hence we might learn that those who go into heaven out of
Bethania (which is expounded the house of affliction) do find entrance by
Christ unto the joys of heaven and admittance into the kingdom of heaven
through many tribulations.

What was the manner of his ascension?
1 Departing from his Disciples like a good guest, he lifting up his hands to
heaven in solemn manner blesses them, and bids them farewell, that is,
commends them to Gods protection, thereby to testify he was that blessed
seed, in which all nature are blessed Gen, 22 18
: that full salvation is obtained for us, and that we are freed from all curse,
and reconciled to the father, that he has blessed all that believe in him, and
that his blessing shall remain sure for ever, seeing to him is given all power
in heaven, and in earth, Math. 28.18.

2 Whilst the Disciples looked on, he was taken up on high. Therefore he
vanished not out of sight, or in himself became invisible, but whilst his
Disciples beheld, he went visibly from the earth (where he was formerly) taken
up unto heaven, where he was not before.

3 The ministry of a cloud was used, which cloud r^ceiued him at his going
away, carried him as in a wagon, and carried him at length* out of their sight,
that thereby he might testify that he was that person of whom it is spoken.
Psalm. 104.3. He makes the cloud or clouds his chariot, as also that by this
means he might as with a veil put betwixt him and them stay his disciples
from further curiosity and searching after him.

Whither did he ascend?
Into heaven. And least the word Heaven should be doubtful and uncertain, or
should be only understood of Heavenly conversation (such as may be even in the
earth) or only of the heavenly glory he attained, Luke says, He was taken up
on high, and Mark, that he was received up into heaven. Act. 3.21. it is there
said: That the heaven must contain him. In which manner also Nazianzen does
expound it, (...), and to be contained of heaven, until the time of restoring.
And Oecumenius Scholiastes, he calls the heavens (...) that is, the
receptacle or harbor of him that was sent, namely Christ: to wit, the place of
eternal blessedness which is without this corruptible world, and so above or
without all heavens.

But Paul Ephesians. 4.10. says, That he ascended above all heavens.
It is true. For the Scripture makes mention of three heavens. i. The air. 2.
the celestial orbs. 3. the seats of the blessed, into which Christ was
received. Therefore he is rightly said to asend above all heavens, because he
remained not below or within the worldly heavens, but was carried above the air
or ayrie region, and the celestial orbs: neither did he stay in those visible
heavens, but entered into the highest heaven, which is above all these moveable
and worldly heavens, which being beautified by the light and glory of God is
subject to no change, but is invisible to us which as yet live upon the earth.
And this is that (...) that hight, of which it is said Psalm. 68.19. Thou have
ascended up on high.

By what names is that heaven called?
1 The heaven of heavens, and the highest habitation of heaven 1. King. 8, 27^
39
. Also (...), the highest places Man. 21.9.
. Also the third heaven 2. Cor 12.2
, in respect of the air, which is, the first heaven, and next to us Math, 6.26.
, and in respect of the celestial spheres (...) Paradise or the Garden of
pleasure Luke 23.43, 2 Cor. 12, 4. Apoc, 2.7
, because it was figured and shadowed unto us by the earthly Paradise (planted
in Eden Genesis 2.8.
) and it is now prepared for us in stead of that earthly Paradise.

3 The house of God, the habitation, seat and dwelling of the blessed John.
14.23.
, because there the father openly and immediately manifests himself, and his
glory and goodness, and also communicates them to the blessed.

4 The Schoolmen call it Coelum Empyreum, or the fiery heaven, not because it
burns with fire, but because it shines with a light like fire.

But if Christ be ascended above all worldly heavens, therefore his body is no
longer in place, because (as Aristotle proves in his first book De coelo)
above all the heavens there is no place.
Although every place be not of the same nature, and such as Aristotle in his
Physics describes, yet notwithstanding wheresoever any body is, there (of
necssitie) is a space in which that body is contained, according to that known
saying of Augustine. Toll spatia locorum corporibus, and nusquam erunt. etc.
Take away from bodies the space of places, and they shall be no where, and
because they shall be no where, they shall not be at all. This space therefore
is called in the Scriptures a place. John. 14.2. I go to prepare a place for
you. But further we oppose the authority of Jesus Christ to Aristotle's
authority.

Does not the ascension of Christ imply a contrariety to that his saying, Mat.
28.20. I will be with you until the consummation of the world.
It is not contrary, for Augustine says: He is both gone, and is here also:
he will return, and he has not forsaken us: Tract. 50* in Johan.
for he has carried his body into heaven, but his Majesty he has not taken
away from the world. Therefore Christ's saying is to be understood in respect of
his Divinity, which is present in all places, and at all times, and cannot be
contained in any certain space of place, seeing it contains al things: but
especially it is meant concerning his perpetual active power and presence in
the Church which works in the minds of them that believe, not of the presence
of his humanity, which is finite and included in place. In respect of which his
humanity he says. John. 12, 8. The poor are always with you, but me you
shall not have always. And Mat. 24.23. he foretells that Antichrists should
say, Lo he is here, lo he is there. And Paul bids that we show forth the Lords
death till he come. 1. Cor. 11.26.

What therefore is that which Paul says, Ephesians. 4.10. that Christ ascended
above all heavens that he might fulfill all things?
The meaning is, that he might pour out upon the Church which consists both
of Jews and Gentiles, his gifts and benefits by the holy Ghost Ioh. 14.16
. For so is the word of fulfilling taken Isa, 33^ 5. Ierm. 31, 25
. And this particle answers to that which he said before out of Psalm. 68.19,
He ascended up on high. and gave gifts to men, the similitude being taken from
Princes, who after victory obtained do show their liberality to all their
people, 1. Sermon. de aduentu.
either by solemn feasts, or largesses and gifts.

Or understand it so as Bernard has observed, that he might fulfill all
things, namely which were foretold, and which were required to our salvation.

What witnesses were there of his ascension?
The Angels, for it was fit that he who in his conception, natiuite,
temptation, death and resurrection had used the ministry and testimony of
Angels, should now also use the same for witnesses, when he was to perform the
greatest work pertaining to his divine majesty.

1 That he might mitigate their grief, which his Disciples took at their
separation from their meekest Lord and Master, by the promise of his future
coming*

2 That when the sight of the Apostles failed, they might show the way into
heaven, as Chrysostom says, homilia de ascension^ Domini.

3 That they might teach, that though he was absent in body, yet he would
defend his servants by his spirit, and protect them by the ministry of
Angels. Besides this witness of the Angels, the Disciples also were witnesses.

Who were the foretellers of this ascension?
David, a thousand years before it fell out, saw this triumph in the Spirit,
and sang a song of victory to Christ triumphing Psalm. 68.5.
.

Enoch the son of Iared, the seventh man from Adam, a man very godly and a
Prophet, was taken up into heaven, and did figure this ascension Gen* 5.24 Heb.
11.5
, being suddenly made of mortal, immortal and translated into eternal
blessedness 1. Cor. 15 52. 1. These. 4 17
.

But chiefly Elias being carried up into heaven by a whirle wind. on a fiery
Chariot and horses, that is, which shined with light like fire 2. King. 2.11,
, was a notable testimony and example, not only of the Lords ascension, but
also of eternal life. For that which the Lord says, John. 3.13. No man
ascends up into heaven, but he that has descended from heaven, the son of
man which is in heaven, is to be vndestood of the proper virtue of his
ascension, and his advancement above all creatures.

But how does the ascension of Elias differ from Christ's ascension?
As a shadow differs from a body, or a picture from a quick man.

For 1 Elias was translated into heaven without the panges of death, that God
by this public testimony might auow and ratify his doctrine, and by this
means might reclaim the Israelites from Idolatry to sincere religion and
piety. But Christ before he ascended, suffered and died; but he revived and
manifested the glory of his resurrection, by ascending, and confirmed also
whatsoever was said or done by him.

2 Elias ascended by the ministry of Angels in a fiery chariot, In homil,
ascensionis.
because (as Gregory says) Pure man needs the help of other things, neither
could he ascend into heaven by himself, whom the impuritie of his flesh did
oppress and keep down. But Christ was carried up into heaven, not in a
chariot, but by his own power without the ministry of Angels, because he who
had made all things was by his own power carried above all things.

3 Elias left unto Eliseus his cloak and the gifts of the spirit doubled upon
him, but Christ compassed his Disciples with his cloak, that is, he put upon
them power from above, filling them with the gifts of the holy Ghost, and gave
unto them power to work miracles double to his, and greater then his own Ioh.
14.12
not in nature, but in number and efficacy, or with greater effect, I say with
greater power not of the Disciples, but of their master who wrought in them:
but especially the conversion of the Gentiles unto Christ by the preaching of
the Gospel.

4 Elias was made a Citizen of heaven, but unto a Christ alone is given a name
above all names, and he is become so much more excellent then Angels, by how
much he has obtained a more excellent name then they have. Ephesians. 1.21. Phil.
2.9. Heb. 1.4

What is the end of this Triumph?
1 That he might seal unto us the work of our redemption being now complete
and perfected, and might testify that eternal righteousness was brought unto
us. For which cause Augustine calls it the confirmation of the Catholic
faith. To the same effect is that, Ephesians. 4.10. He ascended that he might
fulfill all things, namely all the oracles and prophecies which were extant of
him, (such as was the foretelling of his ascension) and which it behooved to be
fulfilled to accomplish the work of our redemption.

2 That he might give a clear testimony of his Godhead, by which man's nature
was carried on high.

3 That having overcome death, he might obtain that glory in his humanity,
which (before the foundations of the world were laid) was prepared for him Ioh.
17.5.
. For then Christ's glory was made most apparent, when as the new guest who was
both God and man was entertained in heaven, which then the Angels had not seen
from beginning of the world. To the same purpose is that which is said. Psalm.
24.7. Ye Princes open your gates that the king of glory may enter in.

4 That he might provide for us a mansion and abode in the heavens, and might
put us in certain hope, that our souls being separated from our bodies should
go unto him: and that we also may ascend into heaven in body also at the last
day, for where the head is there also must the members be. John. 14.3.

What are the effects and fruits of the Lords ascension?
1 Captivity was led captive, and Christ triumphed over Satan, death, sin,
and hell, of which it is said, Coloss. 2.15. And he has spoiled principalities
and powers, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed over them
in the same cross.

2 The sending of the Comforter, that is, the holy Ghost, and that visibly,
namely on the fiftieth day after his resurrection. Act. 2.1. etc. Which the
Apostles should not have received, unless Christ in his body had departed
from them. John. 16.7. Then a visible pouring out of diverse gifts of the same
spirit upon the Church. Epist. ad Dardanum
And to this effect is that saying. Ephesians. 4.10, He ascended that he might
fulfill all things, not in his humanity (because as Augustine says, he gave
unto it immortality, but took not from it the proper nature thereof) but by
distributing the gifts of the Spirit into the hearts of all the elect, in what
place soever they be. To the same purpose also John says, cap. 7.39. The
spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet glorified.

3 Away was opened for us into our heavenly country: for till that time
Paradise was kept with a flaming sword; but by Christ's ascension heaven was
opened, from which we were by Adams transgression excluded.

4 Possession of our heavenly inheritance is taken in all our behalfs, so that
we do not now in a bare hope only expect salvation, but do indeed possess it
in our heart, and in our flesh. Ephesians. 2.6, God has raised him up, and has made
us sit together with him in the heavenly places. Therefore Tertullian speaks
thus. Even as he has left unto us the earnest of the spirit, so also he has
taken of us the earnest of the flesh, and has carried into heaven a pledge, for
the whole sum whith hereafter shall be received of him there: Be ye therefore
secure ye flesh and blood: for ye have taken possession both of heaven and the
kingdom thereof in Christ

5 As Leuit. 16.2. The high Priest yearly entered within the veil into the
most holy place not without blood, that he might stand before God in the
behalf of the people: so Christ is entered into heaven, to make intercession
for us, as it is said. Heb. 9.24. Christ is not entered into the holy places
that are made with hands, which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary, but is
entered into very heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us. Where he so
turns the eyes of God upon his own righteousness, as he turns them away
from our sins, and makes us a way to his throne, and causes him to become
merciful and gracious unto us, who otherwise was very terrible to wretched
sinners.

What is the use of this?
1 That in the fear of sin and death, we may fly to the ascensio^ of christ
which is a most certain seal to us of his conquest over our enemies.

2 That in temptation we may assure our selves there is one for us in heaven,
which makes intercession for us, and reconcileth unto us the father. 1. Ioh.
2.1. My babes, these things write I unto you that ye sin not, and if any man
sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the just.

3 That by our hope of ascending to him hereafter, we should comfort our selves
in our losses.

4 That seeing our body now lives and reigns in heaven, and our
conversation is there, we should abandon the delights of this life, and aspire
unto heavenly things, Coloss. 3.1. If ye have risen again with Christ, seek
the things that are above.

5 That we know how he sees all things, and that all things are open to his
eyes, Heb, 4.13
so that there is now no cause why we should be faint hearted.

What is against this doctrine of Christ's ascension?
1 The position of the Vbiquitaries, who make a doubt of the asascension, and
who by ascending, understand vanishing or becoming invisible: as though in
Christ's ascension there were no motion of his body from place to place, but
only a change: so that he who before was visibly conversant in the earth, now
being become invisible, is notwithstanding truly and corporally, but yet
inuisibly present with us: the same Sectaries make heaven the same thing that
glory is, and also make heaven a certain spiritual place* and without body
which is euerywhere. But this their doing is nothing else, but to confound and
mingle the highest thing, with the lowest, and the lowest with the highest, and
to deny the truth of Christ's body.

2 The manners of them who favor their wicked affections, are fast bound to
this earth, who do follow the works of the flesh, and do by their deeds
testify, they have little care of heavenly things, and by their ungodliness do
rather plunge themselves into hell then labor to clime up to heaven.

The eight and twentieth common Place. Of the sitting of Christ at the right
hand of the Father.
Is the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his father a d^stinct article
from that of his ascension.
IT is. For Saint Mark in his 16 chapter, and 19. verse does manifestly
distinguish them, when he says that the Lord after he had spoken unto them,
was received into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.

Besides, the ascension into heaven, if ye respect the change of place, is
common to the word Incarnate, to the Angels, to Elias and the rest of the
elect. But, to which of the Angels has he said at any time, sit thou at my
right hand. Heb. 1.13. Therefore his sitting neither can nor ought to be
confounded with his ascending.

What signifies the right hand?
The right hand and left are proper differences of corporal positions, and are
proper to man, and not to God, who is a spirit, having no body. Io. 4.24. and
therefore has neither right nor left side, but is altogether unmeasurable and
infinite. But because in the right hand a man's strength both most consists,
and is most perspicuous, and the right hand is most fit for any action or
exploit, and more usual for the confirmation of faith: therefore sometimes the
right hand of a man is taken for a man's power, stength, hope, or promise which
he makes, as Psalm. 144.8. Their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

Moreover, from men, by the Figure Metaphora, or (...) it is translated unto
God. And then 1. It signifies (as the hand and the arm do) the verue, power,
and help of God, as Psa. 44.3. Their own arm shall not save them, but thy
right hand and thy arm and the light of thy countenance. And Act. 2.33. By the
right hand of God Christ is exalted^

2 It signifies the majesty, authority, glory, and honor of the divinity*
Psalm. 110.1. Christ is commanded to sit at the right hand of the Father.

3 It signifies the place of bliss and happiness which we shall enjoy in the
life everlasting. Psalm. 16.11. At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.
And Ephesians. 1.20^ and he set him at his right hand in heavenly places.

What signifies sitting?
It properly signifies that manner of setting of the body that is opposite to
standing or motion. But by the figure Metalepsis, it signifies to dwell, to
abide, to converse, to rest: and sitting signifies dwelling, as Luke. 24.49.
Tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high,
in the original it is sit ye. After which sort we say of a man, he stayed in
that countey three years, or he sat there three years.

Secondly, it signifies to rule and govern, as 1. King. 1, 30. Solomon my
son shall sit upon my throne after me. and Pro. 20.8. A king that sits in
the throne of judgment chaseth away all evil with his eyes. And of the
government of the Messiah. Isa. 16.5. In mercy shall the throne be prepared,
and he shall sit upon it in steadfastness in the tabernacle of David. And in
this sense sitting does signify a Royal or Judicial dignity and authority.

But what does it it signify jointly, Mat. 20^ 2
or together to sit or to stand at the right hand of any man?
1 In humane affairs by the figure Metonymia, it signifies to obtain the
next place of honor and dignity to any man, as Psa. 45, 9 Upon thy right hand
the Queen stands in a vesture of gold and silver.

2 To be a fellow and companion, or copartner of the rule and Empire.

3 To give help and aid, as Psalm. 142.4. I looked on my right hand, and beheld
whether any stood by me, that is to say, to help me.

Metaphorically it is attributed to God, to the Church, to Christ himself.

As for God he is said to stand at the right hand of men when he does help and
succor them, and protecteth them against their enemies, and dangers, as Psalm.
16.8. I have set the Lord always in my sight, for he is at my right hand, that
I may not he moued-So is God the father in this sense said to stand at the
right hand of Christ, that is to say, that he is in degree of honor and
dignity next unto himselfe^ Psalm. 45.10, The Queen. 1. The Church, does stand
at thy right hand: namely at the right hand of Christ, that is it stands in
the next degree of dignity. 3 Christ is said to Mark. 16.19
, sit Act. 7.55.
, stand and Romans 8.34
be at the right hand of God the father.

Is Christ said to sit at the right hand of the father properly or
Metaphorically.
Not properly, for it no way agrees with his Deity: and although it may in
the proper signification be attributed and applied unto his other nature which
is bodily, yet it must not be imagined, that that glorious body in heaven does
either continually sit, or is moved or stands, although it be indeed limited
and local: and as for the right hand of God, much less is that to be taken
properly, seeing God is without a body as is already said.

Seeing then Christ sits at the right hand of the father, does it thereupon
follow that the father sits on the leaft hand?
No indeed, for the father is not limited; and in everlasting happiness all is
the right hand, because there is there no misery.

What is therefore meant by this kind of speech?
In his exposition. of the Creed.
Augustine takes it for resting with the father in that everlasting
blessedness, for this was convenient, for Christ (says he) after so many
labors sustained, after the cross, and after death to rest blessed in heaven,
not indeed idle, for he gouernes the Church and makes intercession for us, but
yet without labor.

The same Augustine also calls the right hand of the father, that eternal
and unspeakable felicity, Against the Sermon as Arius. c, 12.
whereunto the son of man is attained having received immortality even of
the flesh.

2 Damascen says, that Christ has together with his father equal glory of the
divinity which he had before all beginnings. And in this sense the transitiue
preposition (to) does note only a personal distinction, Lib. 4. cap. 2
and order of beginning, but not any degree of nature or dignity, for there is
no such matter in the persons of the deity.

3 But we say also that it is meant thereby, that Christ has obtained all
power in heaven and in earth, as he himself, who is his own best interpreter,
expounds it, Mat. 28.18. by a phrase borrowed from a King or a Prince which
has a son, and that an only begotten son, or a first begotten son, whom
at length he appoints to be his heir and successor, and makes to sit at his
right hand, that he may reign with him, and may exercise the right of dominion
over all things which appertain unto the kingdom. of the cceed. Chap. 4.
Whereupon Saint. Augustine says thus. By the right hand understand the power
which that man that was taken from God did receive that he might come to be a
Judge, who before came to be judged. For the father judges no man, but has
given all judgment to the son, that all men might honor the son as they
honor the father. Ioh. 5, 22

What is then the sitting of Christ at the right hand of the father?
It is his exceeding glorious estate, or the great and high degree of Christ's
exaltation wherein he is placed by his father, the truth of both natures still
reserved: in which estate Christ does not only rest from labor, and enjoy
unspeakable glory, and unmatchable felicity, but especially he is placed not
only the head of the church, but the king and governor of heaven and earth,
that together with his father he may govern all things both in heaven and in
earth, all things created being subject unto him.

Whence do you confirm this Exposition?
Out of the Psalm. 110.1. Sit (says the father to Christ) on my right hand,
till I make thine enemies thy footstool, which Paul 1. Cor. 15.25 expounding
says, He must reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet.
Therefore to sit, is to reign. And Ephesians. 1.21. after the Apostle had said, that
Christ sits at the right hand of God in heavenly places, he adds for
expositions sake, that he is exalted above all principalities and powers, and
that all things are made subject under his feet, and that he is appointed head
of the Church.

What is the cause efficient?
The father by whose will and ordinance he sits at the right hand of the
father. Psalm. 110.1. Sit at my right hand. And Ephe. 1.20. And God has set him
at his right hand in the heavenly places.

This sitting then, is it of the whole person, or only of one of the natures,
namely of the humane?
Words and phrases are to be taken according to the matter about which they are
used. For to sit at the right hand of the father, does declare two things. For
sometime it shows the great equalilitie of the divine glory, majesty,
power, and honor, sometime it signifies the quality, that is, the high
perfection and felicity of the flesh of Christ, now that it is exalted unto the
right hand of God, which the schoolmen call Habitual grace. In the later
signification therefore sitting, is to be applied unto the humane nature,
wherein the humane nature in Christ is more blessed then the rest of the
creatures and has royal and judicial power over all creatures John. 5.27
, but in the former which is the chief and principal, of the whole person,
because as the whole person was brought low, so the whole also was exalted in
the Resurrection ascending into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of the
father philip. 2.9 10.11.
.

But as Christ is said to be raised from the dead, not in respect of his divine
nature but of his humane, shall he not also he said to sit at the right hand of
his father only in respect of his humanity?
No, for the sitting of Christ at the right hand of the father is not a
property of the nature, but a state of the person of Christ, and does belong
unto his office of Mediator, King, and Priest. Now the names and titles of
office, that is which do point out and set forth the office of Christ, they are
spoken of Christ in respect of both natures. Christ therefore in respect he is
God (yet not simply and absolutely in respect of his divine nature, which he
has all one with the father, but as he is God manifested in the flesh) sits
at the right hand of the father: as on the contrary the same Christ not as he
is man simply, but as he is man subsisting in such a person, sits at the
right hand of the father: neither indeed can it agree with any creature
considered apart by it self to sit at the right hand of the father. And
therefore the Apostle, Heb. 1.13. saying. To which of the Angels said he at any
time, sit thou on my right hand (as if he should say to none) by the sitting of
Christ at the right hand of God, does conclude that he is not a mere ereature,
but also true God, even God manifested in the flesh.

And therefore the humane nature in Christ, as being considered simply in it
self, as Damascen says, lib* 4. cap. 3. It cannot be worshipped, seeing it is
a creature, but only in respect it is inseparably united to the person of the
son of God. Luke 24.52. Lib. 4. Cap. 2
For, says Damascen, one (...) or substance is adored with one and the same
worship with his flesh by every creature, so also it is not said to sit at the
right hand of the father by it self, but in the person of the son of God,
namely, for that he that is man, is also God, the father not being pleased to
give his glory unto another. Although indeed the same hmanitie dwelling bodily
in it self, from the Divinity is adorned with so many and so great gifts and
gaces, as cannot happen unto any creature; so that it shines unspeakably above
all other creatures, whether you respect the degree or the number of those
gifts; neither is this excellency of the flesh of Christ, to be comprehended
of the very Angels; but yet so, as this glorification does not abolish or
confound the property of the nature of Christ, neither does the Sitting at the
right hand, take away all subjection, whereof John. 14.24. My Father is greater
then I And 1. Cor. 15.28. The son himself also shall be subject unto him
that did subdue all things under him, not as he is God, but as he is a
Mediator, for God is the head of Christ, even now that he is glorified, 1. Cor.
11.3.

But has not Christ always reigned with his Father, and so likewise has he
not always Sit at the right hand of his father?
He has reigned indeed, but as God merely and barely without flesh, or being
arrayed with his own glory only before the taking of the humanity upon him.
But afterward in time, as God clothed with flesh, after the time of his
emptying or abasement was past, he began to sit at the right hand of his
father. First, to reign in heaven and in earth. So, he took the kingdom
which he had before; he took it, I say, in respect of manifestation, as a
thing is then said in the Scriptures to be done, when it is manifested.

When did he begin to sit at the right hand of the father?
Surely in right he began to sit there at the first moment of the
hypostaticall union; but actually and really, or as we say, de facto, he
began after his suffering, resurrection, and ascension: for so the Scripture
and the Apostles Creed, do distinguish these articles, that the sitting at
the right hand of the father Mark, 16.19. Luke 24.26 Ephesians. 5.20 21. Heb. 1.3.
1. Pet. 3.22 Apoc. 3.21*
may follow the resurrection and ascending into heaven.

What is the place of this sitting at the right hand of the father?
In respect of the Divine nature which is infinite, Christ sits at the right
hand of the father euerywhere, but in respect of the humane nature, which is
finite, he sitteh there where he is with his body. i. since his ascension in
heaven, but not in earth, Col. 3.1. Seek the things that are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God, Heb. 1^ 3. He sits at the right
hand of the Majesty in highest places. And Heb. 8.1. We have an high Priest
that sits at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven. For the
glorious estate of Christ is one thing, and a place is another thing. And
therefore the Apostle distinguishes both Ephesians. 1.20. He sits at the right
hand of God in the heavenly places. For those words of sitting at the right
hand of God, do signify an estate or quality, and the other (in heavenly
places) do signify a place.

The estate, indeed, always does and shall continue one and the same, but the
place may be changed by Christ, so that he shall not sit always in one and the
same place, but there where he will in heaven; yea, and it shall also be
changed: For he is now in that third heaven, into which he did ascend, and in
which he is not held captive, but is there at liberty, and by the decree of
his father, shall remain there until the last Judgment, Act. 3.21. Whom the
heavens must contain, etc. But at the latter day he shall visibly descend in
the clouds from heaven. Mat. 24.30. (but yet always sitting at the right hand
of his father) Mat. 26.64. Ye shall see the son of man sitting at the right
hand of the power of God. Also Mat. 25.31. When the son shall eome in the
throne of his Majesty to judge the quick and the dead, and that judgment
being finished he shall return again into heaven, where we shall see him
sitting at the right hand of his father for ever, because we shall be always
with him Ioh. 14.3. and 17.21 1 These. 4.17
.

Why is he said to sit rather then to stand?
That we might know that he has solemnly taken possession of the office
committed unto him, and not only once entered upon it, but that he does abide
therein until he come down again unto judgment. Neither is that any thing
against this, that Act. 7.56. Stephen is said to see him standing at the right
hand of God: For by the word Sitting, not the placing or disposition of the
body, but the Majesty of his government and a^thoritie is signified, even as
by the word Standing is meant his intercession and presence for defense and
protection. Whereupon Gregory in his homily of the Ascension, To sit, says
he is proper to him that judges, to stand proper to him that fights and
defends. Stephen therefore being in the labor and travel of his combat,
saw him standing whom he had for his helper, but then after his ascension
Mark describes him sitting, because after the glory of his Ascension, he
shall in the end be seen as a Judge, thus far Saint Gregory.

Does not the omnipresence or the being every where of his body follow upon
the sitting of Christ at the right hand of his Father, seeing the right hand of
the Father, at which he sits, is every where?
Surely no, no more then eternity or vncorporallenesse does, inasmuch as the
same right hand is without body and eternal.

2. The body is not said to be the right hand, but figuratively To sit at the
right hand. Now, it is no good argument to reason from a figurative speech to a
proper.

3. We shall also be placed at the right hand of Christ, and yet we shall not
be every where.

4. A man may reign in many several places, although he be not essentially
in them; and therefore it is but a least to make the essence of Christ's
humanity to stretch as far as his rule and government, or on the contrary
to hemme in his power and essence within the same limits. Neither does this
sitting take away the essential properties of his humane nature, which being
taken away, the nature of man should not be glorified, but utterly abolished.

But what then? is not Christ every where?
He is, but by communication of properties, to signify that great conjunction
of two natures in Christ alone, according to that John. 3.13. No man ascends
up into Heaven, but he that has descended from Heaven the Son of man which
is in Heaven. For Christ is so one, as that which is proper unto him in regard
only of one of his natures, is sometimes attributed to whole Christ, in
respect of the unity of his person.

How many parts are there of this sitting?
Two.

1. Exceeding great glory, and that both humane and inherent in the humane
nature, as in a subject, and by habitual grace shining over every Creature;
and also Divine proceeding from the deity dwelling in humane nature. In this
respect Act. 7.55.56. Stephen saw the glory of God and the heavens open and
Christ sitting at the right hand of the father. that is in an estate exeeeding
glorious or shining with the Divine and humane nature.

2. A full administration of a kingdom, whereby Christ being so exceeding
glorious, does exercise dominion over all things created in heaven and in
earth. Ephe. 1.20.21, 22. This Jesus, when he raised him from the dead he set
him at his right hand in heaven, far above all principality and power, and
might and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that, that is to come. And 1. Pet. 3.22. which is at the right hand of
God, gone into heaven, to whom the Angels and powers and might are subject.

What is the end?
1. That such exceeding majesty and glory might follow such extreme
humiliation and infamy.

2. That he might enjoy most blessed rest both in body and in soul.

3. That both heavenly and earthly creatures might look up unto his majesty,
might be governed by his hand, attend upon his beck, and might be subject to
his power, Phil. 2.9.10. God has highly exalted him and given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.

What are the effects or fruits?
1. That he subdueth all his, and his servants enemies.

2. He governs his servants by his spirit, and by little and little
perfecteth them.

3. By his intercession to his father, and by the perpetual force and
efficacy of his sacrifice, he obtains peace for his servants. Heb. 7.25.
He ever lives to make intercession for them, and he does bring to pass, that
the father does account all his servants acceptable and beloved in his son,
and does always embrace the^ with a fatherly affection: and he does always
appear before his father in heaven, that (as the only Mediator) he may
sanctify their prayers by the sweet smelling savor of his sacrifice, and may
offer them to his father, and make them acceptable, Romans 8.34. Christ sits
at the right hand of God, and makes request for us.

4. Having all things in his power, he does most mightily defend and preserve
his Chrurch, yet militant on earth, and that by diverse means against all the
assaults of Satan.

5. He admits his members (according to that they are able to receive) even
to the fellowshippe of his eternal glory, not only in potentia in power, nor
in right, or in hope alone, but even in act: but yet in himself, as in the
head, as members joined unto the head, and that by a threefold manner of
conjunction or knitting together. 1. Of his eternal predestination, whereby he
has chosen us to be his members. 2. By the conjunction of his flesh, whereby
he has coupled our flesh unto himself by an hypostaticall union, although not
in general, for then it should agree with every man to be the word of God, as
it agrees with Christ: but yet in the particular and in indiuidno, as Damascen
speaks in his first book and 11. Chapter. 3. By the conjunction of his
spirit, whereby, communicating unto us his spirit, he does join us most
nearly unto himself, and makes us flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones.
Ephe. 2.6 And has raised us up together, and has made us sit together in
Heaven in Christ Jesus. But in the world to come he will indeed really admit
us to the fellowshippe of this eternal glory in full possession. For Mat.
25.23. He will place the sheep on his right hand. And Mat. 19.28. It is
said, That we shall sit together with Christ in heaven. And 1. Cor. 6.2.3.
that we shall judge the world and the Angels, and shall reign together with
Christ. Apoc. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my
throne even as I overcame and sit with my father in his throne. And Ioh. 17.24.
Father, I will that they, whom thou have given me, be with me euenvvhere I
am: yet so that Christ as the head always has the preeminence.

What means Christ then when he says Mat. 20.23. To sit at my right hand,
and at my left hand, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for
whom it is prepared of my Father?
He speaks according to their opinion by whom he wa^ demanded, and which
dreamed of a kingdom of the Messiah in this world, neither does he derogate
any thing from his own power, but declares that it was not enjoined him by
his father, that he should assign unto every man a degree in the kingdom of
heaven, but that he should teach the way thereunto.

What is the use of this Doctrine?
1. The exaltation of Christ does show, that the Mediator was not only a man,
but truly and essentially God, that so our trust in him might be the more
steadfast.

2. It lifts up our minds to heaven and causes us to be there conversant in
mind and affection, where our head is, even as now we are in him out of this
world.

3. We see what we also must hope for, that are the members of Christ. Both
which uses the Apostle does unfold. Phil. 3.20.21. Our conversation is in
heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue
all things unto himselfe^

4. Heb. 4.16. Let us go boldly unto the throne of the grace of God, seeing
that Heb. 8.1. We have such an high Priest, that sits at the right hand of
the throne of the majesty in heaven.

What is contrary to this Doctrine?
1. Their error, who do call the personal union of the Divine and humane
nature, the sitting at the right hand of God, or do affirm that Christ then
sat at the right hand of God, when the two natures began to be united, or do
apply the personal union of the two natures, for the expounding of his sitting
at the right hand of his father: for by that means they confound the Articles
of our belief.

2. The error of the Vbiquitaries, who do call the sitting at the right hand
of God, a measure of majesty, whereby they think the flesh of Christ was made
omnipresent, or to have a being in all places at once, which is to take away
from Christ, the truth of his flesh.

3. The error of the Papists, in their intercession, and protection of Angels
and Sainrs deceased, as if these were our Patrons, advocates, and Mediators to
procure grace for us by their prayers and merits, and to present our prayers to
God, contrary to that, that is said, 1. Tim. 2.5. There is one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And contrary to the commandment
of Christ John. 15.16. and 16.23. Whatsoever ye ask of the Father, ask it in
my name. And to that Esaias. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel
knows us not.

The nine and twentieth common place. Of Faith.
Whence is Faith derived?
THE Latin word Fides, is derived from fio to be done, because that is done,
that is spoken or promised by any man, and sometimes it signifies actiuely,
sometimes passiuely, as in him that promises it signifies to give a man's
faith, or to keep a man's faith; in him that believes the promise, it
signifies to have faith.

In Hebrewe it is called Emunah, from the firmness and constancy of words
and promises, and is derived from the word (...), It was true; from whence
comes Amen, a word known to every man, Let it be true, or firm, or
ratified. The Grecians call it (...), from the third Praeterperfect tense
Passive (...), from whence comes (...), I am taught, I am persuaded, I
assent, and I do plainly believe, as Romans 8.39. I am certainly persuaded
that neither death, nor life, nor any thing else shall separate us from the
love of God in Christ Jesus. The verb Active is (...), I persuade, I teach, as
1. John. 3.19. We shall before GOD assure or persuade our hearts. The
preterperfect tense mean is (...) I persuade my self. As Romans 2.19. (...),
thou perswadest thy self that thou art a guide to the blind. And Phil. 1.6.
(...) I am persuaded, or I do certainly know or believe this same thing that
he that has begun this good work, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. So that the word faith (...) does well answer his original, that it
should be a daughter, (...), or (...), of a teacher or perswader. Hence it is,
that Valla thinks faith to be rightly termed a persuasion or firm assent
unto a thing. Hereof comes the word (...) to assent, to believe, to assure,
as in that of Phocylides.

(...).
That is to say; Believe not the common people, for it is an inconstant rabble,
one while allowing, another while disalowing this thing or that thing.

What differs faith from opinion and knowledge?
That is said to be opinion, which inclyneth to one side, not without fear or
doubt of the truth of the other side. Knowledge ingendreth a firm assent,
Syllogismus scientificus.
but yet by the application of demonstration, for demonstration is a Syllogism
which causes knowledge. But faith rests upon authority, and yields free
assent unto the word of God, as it makes for us by the inspiration of Gods
spirit, and relyeth upon the authority of GOD himself.

What are the significations of Faith in the Scripture?
They are diverse, and those diverse significations make diverse kinds and
sorts of faith.

1. It signifies fidelity, truth, and constancy in the keeping of promises
and covenants. Romans 3.3. And so it is used in the common verse of Sophocles,
(...). Faith dies unfaithfulness buddeth.

2. It signifies the Doctrine of faith, or the Gospel, which we do believe,
for the master of the Sentences in his third book and 23. distinction,
learnedly says, That faith sometime is that wherwithall we believe, and
sometimes that, that we do believe. Gal. 1.22. He which persecuted us in
times past, now preaches the faith which before he destroyed. Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply that they may be found in faith.

3. The profession of religion, whether it be true, that is to say, the zeal
of religion. Romans 1.8. Your faith is published throughout the whole world; that
is to say, your profession of the Christian faith is commended: or whether it
be only a fained and outward profession, Iam. 2.24. A man is justified by
works, and not by faith only. And this faith is called a dead faith
ineffectual, and hypocritical. Math. 17 20.
Mat. 14.3^


4. It signifies the bare knowledge of the benefit of Christ and the
persuasion of the whole word of god, as in the same place of Iam. 2.24. And so
the Devils believe and tremble, James. 2.19. This is called an Historical
faith, common both to the godly and the ungodly, and therefore grows only
from the light of nature, and from arguments which man's reason is able to
comprehend; without any peculier enlightening of the holy spirit.

5. It signifies a knowledge, assent, and persuasion of the grace of God, but
yet brickle and unconstant, as not taking root in Christ, as it is taught in
the parable of the seed. Luke 8.13. But it is as a tree, which being not
planted deep enough, in process of time does wither away, so Simon Magus is
said to have believed after this manner. Act, 8.13. and the Apostates which had
in some sort tasted of the sweetness of the Doctrine of the Gospel, but had
not swallowed it down nor disgested it, as being destitute of the lively heat
of the holy Ghost. Heb. 6.4.5.6. which faith proceeds indeed from the inward
working of the holy Ghost, but not from the spirit of adoption. And this is
called a temporary faith.

6. It signifies sometimes a certain persuasion of some miraculous effect to
come, the same persuasion being conceived by Revelation, or some special
promise, or by the motion of the holy Ghost, the object of which faith and
persuasion is the power of God Mat. 7.22 and 17 19.20
able to work miracles 1. Cor. 12.9. To one is given faith by the same spirit.
And 1. Cor. 13.2. If I had all faith, that is to say, If I had a kind of
perfection of this faith of working miracles, so that I could remove
mountains etc. It signifies also the confidence of obteyning some particular
object. As Act. 14.9. A certain man at Lystra being impotent in his feet,
had faith to be healed of saint Paul. Which faith, they call the faith of
miracles and particular faith, the one active, the other passive. And to this
faith of miracles is opposed also a doubting, which was found in great measure
even in Moses himself Number. 20.12.
and in Aaron, in the Disciples Mat. 7.22 and 17 19.20
and in Peter Number. 20.12.
.

7. It signifies saving faith, which is common to all the true members of
Christ; of which in this place we are purposed to speak.

Is the name of faith spoken absolutely, or by relation?
By relation, especially in Paul, because there is therein a respect to the
object, neither can faith be defined, but by making mentition of the
correlatiue.i. of mercy promised for Christ's sake.

What is the object of Faith?
The object of faith, level (is they call it) that is to say, beyond which,
faith does not extend it self, is every word of GOD in general, set down in
the books of the Prophets and Apostles. Hence it is, that that is called
general faith, whereby we are persuaded that those things which are revealed
unto us in the word of God are true, not by reason, but because we are assured
inwardly in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, that they are delivered and set out
by God, who is true and almighty. By this faith we understand that the world
was made by the word of God. Heb. 11.3. of nothing. (Contrary to the Axiom of
all the Philosophers, that of nothing nothing is made whereas otherwise, by the
very testimony of nature it might be acknowledged, that the world was made)
this faith, Justifying faith does necessarily presuppose, and yet of it self
it does not justify. Of this faith the Lord speaks Esa. 55.3. Hear me.i.
Believe me, and your soul shall live. And John. 20.31. These things are
written that ye should believe. And the word of God is not only the object
whereat alone faith must aim, but it is also the Basis and foundation whereby
it is underpropped and sustained, from whence, if it do never so little
decline, it by and by falls to the ground. And therefore Paul says, Romans 10.14.
Faith is by hearnig, and hearing by the word of God, from whence we gather,
that nothing is to be accoumpted for the Doctrine of Faith and religion, which
is not derived out of the word of God.

But the principal, chief immediate and proper object of faith, by the
apprehension whereof it does justify, is Christ crucified, with all his
benefits, so far forth as is offered unto us in the word and Sacraments, and
in him God the father. 1. Pet. 1.21. By Christ his means you do believe in
God, which raised him from the dead, and gave him glory that your faith and
hope might be in God* or the promise proper unto the gospel, for the free
mercy of God, forgiving sins for his sons sake, and accepting and
receiving believers unto life eternal. He that believes in me has life
eternal. Ioh. 6.47. The Law is not of faith. Gal. 3.12. And this faith is
properly and specially called Saving and justifying faith. And by this object,
Christian faith is discerned and distinguished from all sects, which indeed
do profess themselves to believe in God, but not in Christ.

How many integrall parts are there, that do make faith?
Three. 1. (...), Illumination or knowledge in the mind, of Christ crucified
and his benefits, not such knowledge as comes by the beholding of him with
bodily eyes, but by the 1. Tim. ^.4
offering of him unto us in the word and Sacraments, which knowledge may be
common also to others, besides those that are justified. Heb. 10.26. If we
sin willingly, that is to say, of set purpose generally flying from Christ)
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sins.

2. A consent, and judgment likewise in the mind allowing that as true, yea
as the very truth of God, which is taught in the word, concerning Christ and
his benefits, Of which consent and judgment Paul speaks. Romans 7.16. I
consent unto the law that it is good. And. 1. Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual
discerns all things. But yet this general judgment is not enough, unless
there be also a special judgment, whereby the believer does apply unto
himself those good and wholesome things which are offered in the word, that is
to say, the general promise of life eternal purchased unto all believers by
the blood of Christ, this he must apply to belong unto himself. And of this
judgment arises that (...), that is assurance of faith, which is spoken of
Hebrews 10.22.

3. The apprehension of the heart in the will and affection, whereby it comes
to pass, that with our heart and will, as with a hand we do apprehend, and
with both our arms we do embrace that which our mind has judged, and
discerned not only to be true, but also good, holy, and to salvation, and
withal, to belong peculierly unto our selves, Romans 10.10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness.

What is faith?
It is a knowledge, consent, and longing for grace promised in the word of God,
and so also a steadfast confidence and apprehension of the obtaining of
salvation for Christ's sake, or faith is a firm and certain knowledge of the
goodwill of God toward us, which being grounded upon the free promise of God
in Christ, is revealed unto our minds, and sealed in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, or faith is the desire and apprehension of the heart, arising out of the
knowledge and approbation of the mind, and from a special judgment and
discerning whereby we do apply every one particulerly to himself, Christ
crucified, with his benefits offered unto us in the word and sacraments: or,
faith is the organ, instrument, or mean whereby man being a sinner
apprehends and applies to himself Christ wholly with all his benefits, and
is united unto Christ, and lives in him. The Apostle. Heb. 11.1. describing
faith says thus, Faith is the substance of things which are hoped for, and the
evidence of things that are not seen. And Paul, To. 4.20.21. painting out faith
(as in a map) brings in the example of Abraham the father of the faithful,
and says He doubted not of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strengthened in the faith and gave glory to god, being fully assured that he
which had promised was also able to do it.

Is that description of faith Heb. 11.1. differing from the rest?
No, forasmuch as therein there is exact mention made both of the form of
faith, which is declared in the words Substance and Evidence, and also of the
objects, namely, things hoped for, and things not seen. For by the word
Substance, he means not a person, as in the article of the Trinity Heb. 1.3.
, but the ground, and as it were the prop, whereupon a godly mind must stay
and rely it self, to signify that faith is a certain sure and safe
possession of those things which are promised unto us by God. As Psalm. 39.8. My
Hypostasis or substance, that is to say, My hope is even in thee. And Heb.
3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end (...) the
beginning, wherewith we are vpholden or underpropped. Some translate the word
Hypostasis existence or subsiste^ce because faith in some respect, causes
things to have a being as if they were, which in truth are not, that is to
say, it sets things before us as if they were present which only are in
expectation.

Budaeus translateth it Strength or Courage. In which signification it is used.
2. Corinthians. 9.4. Least we should be ashamed (...) (...), i. In this constant
boasting, and Cha. 11.17 By a word derived from the verb (...), which is to
sustain, to except, not to give placc to violence. Hereupon it is that a
soldier is called (...) which is bold, and hardy, and turns not his back
to his enemy, but goes to meet him and resists him, and (...) boldness,
whereby a man stands stoutly to it, and without stirring his foot, receives
his adversary that inuadeth him. And surely this notable signification does
well agree with faith. For in the act of believing, we have need of strength
and patience, we must resist the flesh, we must conquer reason, we must
withstand our own conscience, sin, the wrath of God, and all other things
whereby the consent of faith is hindered and oppugned. We had need to be
armed with such a strong shield that we may receive, and quench all the fyrie
darts of the devil Ephe. 6.16. and overcome the world. 1. John. 5.4.

As for the word (...) which is translated Evidence, it is not a refutation or
a reproof, but an argument and demonstration, that is an assurance, whereby the
mind, being convinced by divine testimonies, does most steadfastly embrace the
divine promises.

But by the words (...) which are hoped for, and (...) which are not seen is
understood the Gospel; and those things which, are offered in the Gospel;
namely, fellowship with Christ, forgiveness of sins, justification,
Resurrection and life eternal. For these are the things we hope for, and which
do not appear, and of themselves are not conformable unto our reason, and so
are they the mysteries of salvation in themselves, and in their own nature
invisible. But those things which we see with our mind, and in hope, we do
behold them in the word of God, and do account them as if they were done and
accomplished and present before us.

How many sorts of Faith are there?
Not many sorts, but only one faith. Ephe. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism. Now faith is one, not in respect of the subjects, for after that sort
there are as many faiths, that is to say, gifts of faith, as there are
believers, but faith is and always has been one in Specie, that is, in
respect of the thing believed, and of the object whereupon it rests. And this
is the only object of faith, namely the grace and mercy purposed, and ordained
for all believers in Christ, from the beginning of the world.

What is the efficient cause of Faith?
God himsefe, working freely, and giving faith to whom he will, even of his
own free good will. John. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe in
him whom he has sent. Act. 16.14. God opened the heart of Lydia, so that she
attended unto the things which Paul spoke. Romans 12.3. God has dealt to every
man the measure of faith. Phil. 1.29. It is freely given unto you for Christ's
cause, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake.

The causes together with God the father, are the son and the holy Ghost, for
(as it is said in another place) The works of the Trinity without are
divided. Luke 24.32. Christ opened the mind of his disciples, that they might
understand the Scriptures. And Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith. 2. Cor. 4 13. We have the spirit of faith, that is to
say, we have faith by the inspiration and gift of the same holy spirit.

The workmen together with God, are the ministers of the word. 1. Cor. 3.5.
Who is Apollo and who is Paul, but the Ministers by whom, that is by whose
preaching ye believed?

The isntrumental cause of faith, is the hearing of the word of God, by the
which word the holy Ghost utters his power, To. 10.17. Faith is by hearing,
hearing by the word of God. Esa. 57.19, And Act. 10.44. While Peter spoke
these words, the holy Ghost fell on alll them, which heard the word.
Furthermore, another isntrumental cause is, the beholding, and use of the
Sacraments. And to this end God ordained a ministry in his Church, yet so as
no force is to be attributed either to the Ministers that speak, or unto the
words themselves, or to the Sacraments; forasmuch as they have no other effect,
but only to represent unto our minds those things for the declaring whereof
they are applied by the ordinance of God, but the force and power of them Mark,
16 20 1 Cor, 12, 6
comes only from God, and there is but one and the same installer of man
into life eternal, who was the Creator of him unto this life temporal, 1.
Cor. 3.7. Neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he that waters, but
God which gives the increase. And Cha. 15.19. I have labored more then they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God, which is with me, or which was present
with me. And so the voice of the preacher outwardly serves, Christ speaks
unto us inwardly, by his holy spirit. Hence it is, that the Gospel is called
the power of God. Romans 1.16. And Esa. 53.1. The arm of God, that is to say,
the instrument of God, truly mighty, and powerful to sauation.

Cannot God by inward inspiration, beget faith in his servants without
preaching of the word, or the ministry of the Church?
He can do it, as he did in times past in Paul, but that is extraordinary
and very seldom, neither must we wish for that, or rashly admit it. But the
perpetual rule to discern faith, whether it be truly from god or no, is that
it must always agree with the words of the Prophets, and the writings of the
Apostles.

Does God create in our hearts full and perfect faith in one instant?
No, but by certain degrees and increasings, in what measure, and when it
pleases him, and by these means whereby he does plant the same in our
hearts, (as the Philosophers say, that we are, and are nourished of the self
same things, and as an infant is nourished and brought up by the same blood
whereof it is formed, the same being turned into milk) by the same means does
God cherish and strengthen our faith; namely, by the continual hearing of the
word of GOD. 1. Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. For says Chrysostom, Our faith is like a
burning Lamp which is easily put out, unless oil be still povvred into it:
Now the oil is the word of God.

2. Our faith is increased by the often use of the sacrament of the Supper,
according to Christ's commandment, Eat ye, and drink ye.

3. By daily and continual prayers, saying with David. Psalm 68.29. Stablish, O
God, that which thou have wrought in us. And with the Apostles, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith.

4. By the practice of holy life, and charity toward our neighbor. 1. Tim.
1.19. Keep faith and a good conscience. And 2. Pet. 1.10. By good works we
shall make our calling sure.

Is Faith given in one and the same measure to all believers?
No, but to some more, to some less Rom, 12, 3 6, Ephesians. 1, 16,
: yet no man has less given him then may suffice unto salvation, God so
ordaining the, matter that they that have more co^bats to undergo, in whom he
does set forth unto the world more tokens of his glory and power, to them he
gives a more abundant measure of faith, not that thereby they might attain
the greater salvation, but that they might serve for the more excellent
illustrating of his glory, and might be presidents and examples unto those
that are weaker then they.

Is not that the Object of faith, whatsoever the Church does command?
So do the Papists affirm, and yet in the mean while they do not set down
which be the lawful marks of that Church, but only delude men under this
glorious name, whereas there is no other Church, but that which Ioh. 10.3 and
5.57.
hears the voice of the bridegroom. Of the same opinion are those that do
commend an implicit faith, or the Colliers faith, which without inquiry or
knowledge, generally believes that which the Church believes, and never cares
for the understanding of the particulers which it does believe. But we deny
it, because faith, rightly so called, is the acknowledgement of the truth 1 Timothy 2.4. Tit. 1.1
, and (...) a demonstratiue and Heb. 11.1.
conuincing evidence. And therefore it is not an ignorance in reverence to the
Church, but an explicit and manifest knowledge of God, and of his favorable
goodwill toward us, and of Christ given unto us of his father, for
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, which knowledge is no where
taught, but in the word of God. Whereupon Paul Romans 1.17. describes faith to
be that which is revealed in the Gospel.

Seeing implicit faith is no faith, is it necessary that every man have that
faith, that is in all respects explicit and unfolded?
If that be true faith which is explicit, not of all the parts of the
Scripture in general, but yet of the chief heads, and those that are
needful to be known to salvation; then it follows that that is true faith
wherein there is a knowledge of the chief principles of Religion, and a desire
to profit from day to day.

But are there not still many things hidden and folded up in the Scriptures,
which notwithstanding we must believe?
Surely there be so, because we being still compassed about with many clouds
of ignorance, do not reach unto every thing; whereof we may observe many
examples in the Disciples of Christ not having yet obtained a full
illumination; and so also in them, who being only stirred up with Christ's
miracles went no farther then only the acknowledging of Christ to be the
promised Messiah. Io. 2.23. and 6.26. And likewise in them who are only
instructed in the first principles of religion, whose faith may yet be called
implicit faith. But to commend gross ignorance of divine matters, and (...)
senselessness, whereby a man does assent unto the judgment of the Church for
matters altogether unknown, to commend this I say as an implicit faith is a
very absurd thing. For as it is said, Romans 1.17. The just man shall live by
faith. And Romans 16.19. I would have you wise in that which is good, that is, in
the knowledge of the truth, and instructed also in wisdom, that you may
embrace that which is good, avoid that which is evil, and escape the sleights
and traps of the false Prophets, yea and openly withstand them, but contrarily
that ye be simple in that that is evil. And 1. Cor. 11.28. Let every man try
himself. and 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves whether you be in the faith. and
2. Pet. 1.5. With all manner of diligence join unto your faith, virtue to
your virtue, knowledge and understanding. By which places it appears that the
conceit of implicit faith is but a base and unsavory fiction.

Seeing it is said of Abraham, Romans 4.20. That he did not doubt, ought not we
therefore without all judgment and inquiry simply to believe all things which
are delivered unto us, to be spoken by God?
1 It is certain that Abraham did very well understand the promise which he
did believe.

2 There is one judgment which is merely humane and proper to the
understanding of the flesh, which judgment appears in a natural man, and
this surely in the matter of faith is not to be admitted, but there is another
judgment of a spiritual man who discerns all things, that is, he
understands and perceives them by the power and inspiration of the holy
spirit, but he himself is judged of no man. 1. Cor. 2.14.15. I say of no man,
for even then when the Prophets do judge of the Prophets. 1. Cor. 2.14.29. It
is not the judgment of man, but of the holy Ghost, such is the excellency of
the Gospel.

3 Of those things which are reported as spoken by God, some are so indeed, but
some other are fained like unto them, by those that do foolishly understand
the Scripture. When therefore God does directly affirm a thing we must simply
believe him, but when men speak we must not without all judgment and inquiry
believe every thing, bur rather try all things, and examine them according to
the analogy of faith, Romans 12.6. and keep that which is good (now good and
true are all one) 1. These. 5.21.

What is the subject of faith wherein it is?
The soul of a man, and that both in the mind a knowledge or understanding
luke 24.45 Ephesians. 4.23
and a judgment, and consent, resting in the word and promise of God, and
likewise also in the will and heart an apprehension or embracing of the same.
Act. 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia that she should attend the
things which Paul spoke, and Romans 10.10. With the heart, man believes unto
righteousness.

What is the subject of faith, to whom faith is given?
Not all, for all men do not hear the Gospel act. 17.30
, neither do all that hear it receive it with a pure heart, as it is in the
parable of the sower. Math. 13.3. Neither do all obey the Gospel Romans 10.17
, for the Prophet Esaias. 53.1. says, who has believed our report? Faith
therefore belongs not to all, but only to the elect 2. These, 3 2
. John. 8.47. He that is of God hears Gods word, you therefore hear not,
because you are not of God. and Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed. 2. Tim. 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ according
to the faith of the elect of God. From whence we gather that faith is unto us
an undoubted argument of our election. And therefore the reprobate although
they do sometimes seem and are said to believe in Christ, as those
Temporizers, Luc. 8.13. and Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. yea are endued with a
temporary taste of hauenly gifts, Heb. 6.4.
yet they have not a lively and saving faith, in as much as they have not the
spirit of adoption bestowed upon them, that so they might with open mouth, and
a full confidence cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. But they have only an
hypocritical and temporary faith.

Have infants actual faith?
No indeed, not that faith which comes by hearing, seeing to them the Gospel
is not preached. For it is plain that those little ones which believe, Math.
18.6. Are so described by Christ, not in respect of their age, but of their
small understanding, forasmuch as he disputes of them, who may be offended in
word or in deed, which thing cannot befall unto infants being as yet of no
understanding. Although it must not be denied that they are governed by a
certain peculier providence of God, and that there is a certain seed of
faith infused into the infants elected.

Is there one faith without form and another formed?
So certain schoolmen will have it, who call faith without form such an
assent, whereby every man even he that despises God, does receive that which
is delivered out of the Scripture without any godly affection of the heart. And
they call faith formed when to that assent there is added a godly affection of
the heart, namely Charity, but this is but foolish. For faith rather belongs
to the heart then to the brain. Romans 10.10. With the heart a man believes unto
righteousness.

2 Seeing faith proceeds from the spirit of adoption, it embraces Christ,
not only unto righteousness, but to sanctification also, and a fountain of
living waters, John, 4, 14
.

3 Charity or the affection of Godliness does no less accompany faith, then
the light does accompany the Sun, And as Gregory says: Look how much we
believe, so much we love. And therefore faith is not without form, neither can
be any way severed from Godly affection, unless it be hypocritical, which is
not to be called faith, unless it be (...), by aequiuocation, and (...) by
abusion, but rather a shadow and likeness of faith.

But seeing it is said, Gal. 5.6. Faith working by Charity, is not Charity
the forms of faith?
No more then the body is the form of the soul, in that the soul works by
the body. And this is but fondly spoken inasmuch as one quality is not the
form of another quality.

And if it were, yet Charity does not form faith, but on the contrary faith
forms Charity, for that Charity is an effect of faith. For Charity
fetches his offspring from faith, and not on the contrary faith from charity.
1. Tim. 1, 5. Charity out of a pure heart, a good conscience and faith
unfeigned. Now the cause is not said to be formed by the effect. And therefore by
that speech true and lively faith is distinguished from a dead, counterfeit,
and barren faith, by the mark and effect thereof. namely that it is an
effectual working and fruitful faith which brings forth good works. And
faith. James. 2.22. is not called perfect, whereunto nothing is wanting (for as
long as Abraham lived, he carried about him flesh: and therefore stood in need of
that prayer, Lord increase my faith) but it is said to be perfected by works,
as the first act is said by the Philosophers to be perfected by the second act,
namely, because by working it does show and manifest it self, which before it
began to work, lay hid, as if the goodness of a tree should be said to be
perfected when it brings forth some excellent fruit. For inasmuch as by the
effects we judge of the cause, therefore by the proportion of the effects, the
force of the cause does seem after a sort to be increased or diminished.

What is the form of justifying faith?
Trust in the mercy of God through Christ, or (...) a firm confidence, and
(...) a full persuasion of the grace of God the father toward us, whereby any
man does as it were with a full course, strive toward the mark.

Which be the adjuncts or properties of faith.
1 That it be certain and without doubting.

2 That it be continual and never fail.

3 That it be lively effectual and working.

How prove you that certainty belongs unto faith?
1 John. 3.2. The faithful know themselves to be the sons of God, but being
rather confirmed in the persuasion of the truth of God by the holy Ghost, then
taught by any demonstration of reason.

2 By the consideration of the truth of the promises and power of God. For
Psalm. 18.31. The word of the Lord is a tried shield to all that trust in him.
And Romans 4.20. Abraham did not doubt of the promise of God through unbelief,
but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God being fully assured
that he which had promised was also able to do it.

3 (...) is always atrributed to faith in the Scriptures, which sets before
us the goodness of God most manifestly without all manner of doubting Romans 4.2^
: so also is (...) and (...) Ephesians. 3.12. By faith we have (...) boldness or
freedom, and entrance (...) with confidence by faith in him.

In brief, there is no man faithful, but he who being persuaded that God is
favorable unto him, is so assured of his salvation as that he does boldly
insult over the devil and death, after the example of Paul. Romans 8.38. I am
persuaded, says he, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come can separate
us from the love of God. And verse. 16. The spirit of God witnesses with our
spirits that we are the sons of God.

Is not then the faith of the Elect aslauted with any uncertainty
unquietness and distrust?
Yes surely, for David Psalm. 31.23. I said in my have I am cast out of thy
sight. And never will it be so well with us in the course of this present life,
that we shall be cured of this disease of distrust, but rather shall be wholly
replenished therewithal. But this uncertainty, or unquietness, faith has
not of it self, but from our infirmity. Again we do not therefore say that
the elect do fall away from that sure confidence which they had conceived of
the mercy of God. For this cause David himself Psalm. 42.6. why art thou cast
down my Soul and unquiet within me? wait on God. For faith truly gets the
upper hand that it may set it self against all manner of burdens and lift up
it self and never suffer the confidence of Gods mercy to be shaken from it.
And therefore Job. 13. Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him. And
Psalm. 23.4. If I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet will I fear
no evil, for thou art with me.

And therefore there is no hinderance but that the faithful at one and the
same time may be terrified casting their eyes upon their own unworthiness and
vanity; and may also at the same time enjoy most assured Comfort calling to
mind the goodness truth and power of God.

Cannot that faith fail?
As faith receives increase according to that Luke 15.5. Lord increase our
faith. So it may also receive decrease and may suffer as it were a backsliding,
so as sometimes by the storms of diverse temptations it may be shaken, obscured,
overwhelmed and wax faint, yea even in the Saints: like as reason in dronken
men, and infants is laid a sleep and buried, as in David when he committed
adultery, and in Peter when he thrice denied Christ, but yet it is never quite
shaken off, or extinguished. For the purpose of our election is sure, and
therefore it is necessary that faith which follows election, should have the
gift of perseverance to accompany it, for the gift of God (and fath is among
them) and the calling of GOD are without repentance. Romans 11.29. And Christ
himself did pray unto his father, surely no less for the rest of the elect,
that their faith might never fail them, then he prayed for the faith of
Peter. Luc. 22.32c

Moreover Paul Ephesians. 1.13.14. says: That we after we believed, were sealed
with the holy Spirit of promise, and that this spirit is the earnest of our
inheritance until the redemption of the possession purchased. And Phil. 1.6.
What good work God begins in his elect, the same he will perform until the
day of Jesus Christ. And therefore how small and weak soever faith be in the
elect, yet because the spirit of God is a pledge and seal unto them of their
adoption, the print thereof can never be blotted out of their hearts.

Lastly, seeing that the faith of the elect is opposed to temporary faith it
follows therefore that it is perpetual.

But shall not faith once have an end?
In respect of the object, namely Christ as he is offered in the word and
sacraments faith shall vanish away at that time when we shall have Christ
present in heaven as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 13.8.10. Prophecyings shall be
abolished, and knowledge shall vanish away, when that which is perfect, is come
then that which is in part shall be abolished. For there will be no use of
faith, when those things are performed, and indeed fully exhibited, which we
do in this life believe and hope shall be given unto us.

But if we speak absolutely of Christ, without the integuments of the word
and Sacraments, then faith in him, or, if ye had rather so term it, the thing
it self called by that name, that is to say, the knowledge and apprehension of
Christ shall never cease, but shall be most perfect in heaven: not now any more
by the ministry of the word, but by the beholding and contemplation of Christ
himself. The knowledge it self I say shall not be abolished, nay it shall be
perfected, but the manner of knowing shall yield and give place unto the
beholding of God himself. For this is that which the Apostle called perfect.
1. Cor. 13.10. After that which is perfect is come.

But is a faint faith in Christ a true faith?
Yea indeed. For more and less do not change the kinds of things, and it is
referred unto one and the same Christ, neither does it swerve form him: and
therefore as touching reconciliation with God, Remission of sins, and life
eternal it obtains no less then the most strong faith though it do it not
so strongly, and with less fruit. And therefore Esaias, 42.3. Christ will not
break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: That is to say, those
that are weak in faith he will mercifully advise, those that are staggering
and wavering in faith, he will confirm and strengthen, and those that have any
spark of the truth, though it be as it were dying, he will cherish and
maintain. Romans 14.1.3. Him that is weak in the faith God has received. And
2. Cor. 12.9. The power of God is made perfect through weakness.

Which is the third adiunct of faith?
That it is lively and effectual in the elect.

Whence is it that it is called lively and effectual?
First from the affections, and secondly from the actions which it produces in
the believers. The affections are those which are stirred up in the heart of
the believers by the apprehending of Christ with his benefits by faith.

1 A lively and assured feeling of Gods love toward us, diffused in our hearts
Romans 5.5.
.

2 An assured hope and expectation of life eternal Ibidem.
.

3 A filial love and fear or reverence, whereby the faithful do endeavor to
please God, and do very carefully fear and beware to offend him, also a love
of Christ, and a delight in him. For the love of God is not of the essence and
nature of faith, but a necessary effect of the same, for seeing faith is a
certain taste, perceiving, and supping down as it were of that sweetenes
which is in God (1. Pet. 2.3. If so be that ye have tasted how bountiful the
Lord is) it follows that the love of God is an effect which proceeds of
that sweet apprehension, and as it were taste, of the goodness of God.

4 Comfort, peace of conscience, in regard of the remission of sins, Phil,
1.25. Romans 14.17.
gladness and spiritual joy proceeding from the same taste of the favor of
God. 1. Pet. 1.8. Believing in Christ ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious.

5 The sighs of the spirit not to be expressed. Romans 8.26. and that confidence
that cries Abba Father. Gal. 4.6,

6 Patience in adversity, yea more a Rom, 8.35.38,
rejoicing in afflictions.

7 Contempt of the world.

8 A spiritual assurance of the grace and friendship of God.

9 An affection to our neighbor, and that for Gods sake, as namely Charity
and love of our neighbor, courtesy, bounty, gentleness, and delight in the
Saints. Psalm. 16.3. To the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent
all my delight is in them.

The actions that proceed from faith, are those which break forth out of those
inward affections, as godliness, justice, thanksgiving, prayer, Rom, 8.15 and.
10.14
confession, that is to say, a sincere and open Romans 10.9. 2. Cor. 4.13.
profession of Christ, which is made with the mind, tongue, and life, peace and
concord with all men in the Lord, weldoing toward all, even our enemies, and
so a new obedience: for a good tree bears good fruit Mat, 7.17.
: Lastly a good conscience, a holy care faithfulness, and diligence in our
vocation and calling, and a mind To. 12.7.8 Phil. 4.11 romans 11.24. Gal. 2.20
, contented with with his own portion.

What be the effects and fruits of faith?
They are manifold. For first it ingrafts us into Christ Ephs, 17.
, and makes Christ to dwell in the hearts of the faithful, and that they may
be in him, and may have fellowship and communion with him.

2 It makes us the sons of God, Gal. 3, 26
it obtaines remission of sins Act. 10.43
, it iustifyeth us Genesis 15.6 Abac. 2.4. Act. 13.39 Romans 3. and 5 Chapter.
, it causes us not to be ashameth Romans 9.32
: it gives us entrance to God Ephesians. 3.12.
, it regenerateth our understanding and our will, and purifieth the act. 15.9
heart. I saves Luke 7.50
, it obtains what it will of God Mat. 8, 13 1 Ioh. 5*14.
, now it wills only that that tends to the glory of God, it works all
things Mark. 9.23. All things are possible to them that believe. It
overcomes the world and Satan 1. Ioh. 5.4.
: It renounceth Satan and his works, in heart, in word, in life, and in manners
Ephesians. 5.11.
. Finally, it relyeth wholly upon God, and is delighted in his works and
commandments night and day Psalm. 1.2 Romans 4.1^
. And yet faith it self does not perform all these things, but he whom it
apprehends, namely Christ Jesus in whom we are able to do all things that are
necessary unto salvation. Phil. 4.13.

What is the end of faith?
It is twofold. 1 In respect of our selves, the salvation of our souls. 1.
Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith even the salvation of your souls.
And life eternal Io. 3.15, 16.18.36. and 20.31.
. Secondly in respect of God, Gods glory.

By what experiment is faith tried?
1 Inwardly, by the subtilties of the flesh, and by certain (...) beings
rising from thence in the minds of men, by reason of false Doctrines, devilish
arts Romans 4.20
, heresies, the Deuteronomy, 13.1
contentions of the teachers in the Church, treachery of brethren, impunitie
of wickedness 1. Cor. 11.19.
, prosperity of the wicked, the Ier. 12.1 Mal. 2.17 Psalm, 73.2.3
small number of believers the deformity and oppression of the Church, the
falling away of many from the faith, tentations, the delay of Gods promises,
the tokens of Gods wrath, the scoffs of the mockers, which ask where is the
promise of his coming, 2. Pet. 3.4. which things says Augustine, God
permits, that they which hear and see the same might be tried what faith
they bear toward God.

2 By the cross as Gold is tried in the fire, for patience under the cross
with calling upon God, and looking for deliverance is as it were a trial of
faith whether it be true or no (...) 1.7
, as we may see in Job. Job. 23, 19.
. Of this temptation Saint James speaks, Chap. 1. verse. 12. Blessed is the
man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown
of life.

What is the use of faith?
There is very great use of it in the whole course of our lives, for it is
that one thing that is necessary, Luke. 10.42. and Heb. 11.6. Without faith it
is impossible to please God. The use of it therefore is to make us in
prosperity not to be lifted up: in adversity, not to cast down our selves,
and in death to pass to life.

Are we called faithful of faith chiefly in regard of the working power of
faith, or passiuely in regard of our sufferance?
Although faith in the Scripture do sometimes signify constancy, and truth
in words, deeds and covenant keeping, and then is taken actiuely, and in that
sense they are also called faithful which keep their faith once plighted, or
do faithfully perform their duty; as Luke. 12.42. Who is a faithful and
wise steward? And Luke. 16.10. He that is faithful in a little, will also be
faithful in much. And also passiuely they are called faithful men that do
well deserve to be believed, and so we use to say a faithful word, and a
faithful man 2. Tim. 2, ^ 11.
, yet notwithstanding when the matter of Justification is in hand, men are
called faithful passiuely, who embrace by faith Christ the Savior, as Ephe.
1.1. The faithful in Christ Jesus, and Act. 10.45. The faithful which were of
the Circumcision.

What things have affinity with faith?
Hope and Charity, which are also themselves the gift of the holy Ghost. 1.
Cor. 12.

What do they differ from faith?
Faith is the knowledge and apprehension of Christ, being exhibited, and after
a sort present in the word and Sacraments: hope is an expectation of Christ
hereafter to be fully revealed with all his benefits. Or, hope is the
expectation of those things which faith believes to be truly promised by God,
so faith believes God to be true, hope expects that he should always carry
himself so toward us. Faith believes that life eternal is given unto us,
hope expects till it be revealed, faith is the foundation where upon hope
rests, hope nourishes and sust^ineth faith, and thereupon by reason of this
communion and affinity, the terms of faith and hope are taken one for the
other 1. Pet. 1.5. Romans 8.24.
. And as Luther says, faith beholds the word of the matter, and hope looks
unto the matter of the word.

Moreover faith receives, Charity gives and bestows, Charity is begotten
of faith, and not on the contrary, faith makes us the sons of God Gal. 3.26.
, charity tries us 1. Ioh. 4.7 John. 13.35
, whether we be the sons of God. The object of faith is Christ offered in the
Gospel with all his benefits, the object of Charity, is God and our neighbor
Mat. 22, 37 39
. Furthermore faith endures in this world, and shall pass into a perfect
knowledge in the other world, but Charity shall flourish most of all in the
world to come. 1. Cor. 13 13. The chief of those three virtues is Love, In
respect of the use, namely toward our neighbor, whereas the other two go no
farther then the person of the believer and hoper.

What are the contraries of faith?
1 (...) Infidelity, the unbelief of all infidels, who say in their heart.
There is no God. Psalm. 14.1.

2 (...) that difficulty to believe of the Christians, which hear the word,
and do not believe it, and which conceive a faith of God, not according to the
Scriptures, but according to the imaginations of their own hearts.

3 Security of the flesh and contempt of Gods Justice, whereby sins are
punished.

4 The Jews confidence in the flesh Phil. 3.3.
.

5 Presumption and confidence of our own strength, works, merits,
righteousness and worthiness, such as was in the pharisees. Luke. 18.11.12

6 Confidence and trust in the help of man Esa. 30.2
.

7 That Academicall distrust and doubting of God, of the certainty of Gods
word, of the grace of God, or the forgiveness of sins, that so, that selling
of works of supererogation and suffrages for the dead, may the more easily be
retained.

8 Desperation.

9 The errrour of the Papists which say that faith is not only of those things
that are revealed in the Scripture, but likewise also of those that are
delivered by hand without writing. Also that there is a beginning or bringing
cause of all other virtues, for the which we are justified. That there is a
habit formed by Charity unto righteousness. Moreover that faith and doubting
are not opposites, and that we can no otherwise determine of the favor of God
toward us then by moral conjecture. Besides, what the Church believes, that
is, the Catholic truth, That faith may remain in the wicked, and that
therefore it does not justify* then which nothing can be said more slanderous
against saving faith of which Christ says: He that believes in him shall not
perish, but shall have eternal life. John. 6.40.

Furthermore, that faith is occupied only in general propositions, as, He
that keeps the commandments shall enter into life. And He that believes
and shall be baptized shall be saved. But not in these Particulars, I shall
enter into life, I shall be saved, or My sins are forgiven me. For it were a
vain confidence for hope to apply those general sentences unto particulars
and seueralles which yet may be deceived, whereas Paul says directly
contrary. Romans 5.5. Hope makes not ashamed. Lastly, they account it
impudency or presumption to hope any thing without desert.

10 The madness of certain fanaticke persons, who do sever the internal
word as they call it, from the ministration of the outward word. And finally
the madness of the Anabaptists who dream of the perfection of faith.

The thirtieth common place. Of Repentance, where of Regeneration.
From whence is Repentance derived?
THE Latin word poenitentia, is derived from poena, punishment, because there
is a kind of punishment in those things which are shameful or loathsome unto
us. And therefore if we look unto the property of the Latin word, it rather
agrees with contrition or sorrows which are in our souls through the
acknowledgement of our sins, then it does with conversion unto God. In Hebrew
it is called (...), Teshuba, conversion or reuersion, turning back according
to that Ier. 4.1. If thou will return, unto me return says the Lord. By a
metaphore, borrowed from them that have strayed out of their way, and after
long wandering do return unto their first high way.

In Greek it is called (...) properly afterwit of (...), which signifies
after the deed done to be wise, to change our mind and purpose for the better,
to return unto a sound mind, and so to grieve for the error by past as to
amend it. Whereupon some will have it derived from (...) madness and folly,
and (...) afterward, as if it should be the correcting and amending of madness
and folly, for always with (...) is joined (...), soundness of mind. And the
matter it self well agrees with both these interpretations, the sum whereof
is this: That forsaking our selves we should turn unto God, and laying aside
the foolishness of sinning, we should put on a new mind, and become wiser. By
another Greek word it is called (...), in Latin poenitentia, of (...), after
a thing done to be sorry and grieved, for which the Latins properly say
poenitere. So 2. Cor. 7.8. (...) signfyeth, to take grief for any thing that
is done: Although I made you sorry by a letter ((...)) I do not repent, though
I did repent. And Romans 11.29. The gifts of God are called (...). i. Such as
can never displease him, seeing once they did please him. Also it is taken in
ill part, as it is written of Judas, (...) grieuing, not (...) repenting (...),
he brought again. Math. 27.3. signifying sorrow and grief wherewithal he
was swallowed up. For every man does not repent, that is sorrowful, and
grieved, but oftentimes falls into a worse case then he was before, whereas
(...) in the holy Scriptures is always taken in good part, and signifies
saving amendment. Notwithstanding the Latin interpreter has translated both
the Greek words by the word Poenitentia.

How many ways is the term of Repentance used?
Four ways. 1 Synecdochially.

2 Generally for the whole turning and conversion of man to God.

3 Specially for Regeneration.

4 For the outward profession of Repentance.

What is repentance taken Synecdochically?
It is (...), the sting of sin, or the prick of conscience, and it is (...) a
displeasing which the Greek Divines call (...) because it wounds the soul,
commonly we call it Contrition. And they make it double, or of two sorts,
Legal, by the preaching of the Law, whereby the sinner being wounded with the
searing Iron of sin, and being affrighted with the terror of Gods wrath,
sticks so fast in that trouble of mind, that he cannot wind himself out of
it. This they call the accusation of sin which comes by the law, Romans
3.20. The Apostle, 2. Cor. 17.7. calls it worldly sorrow, and sorrow unto
death, whereby a man grieueth and sorroweth for his sins, and being terrified
with the fear of the punishment hanging over his head, which is the certain
and direct way to desperation, unless the Lord put to his helping hand.
Examples hereof are Cain Genesis 4.13
. Saul 1 Samuel 15 30. and, 31.4
, Achitophell. 2. Sam. 17.23. and Judas Mat. 27.3 4.5.
. But in the elect it is a kind of preparation to the repentance of the
Gospel.

Now the contrition of the Gospel is that whereby the sinner being grievously
afflicted within himself, yet rises higher, and through the preaching of the
Gospel does apprehend Christ the salve for his sore, the comfor of his fear,
and the haven for his misery. This is called (...) sorrow according to God, or
godly sorrow, which proceeds from the spirit of God, and is acceptable unto
God, and proper unto that man that sorroweth for his sins, not for fear of
any punishment, but in that he takes this exceeding grievously, that he has
offended God a most gentle father, and it causes (...) Repentance, as the
Apostle declares. 2 Cor. 7.10

Examples there are of Ezekiah Esa. 38.13. He brake all my bones like a Lion,
of David 2. Sam. 12 13. and 24.10
, of Peter, who wept bitterly, but left not of hoping. Matthew. 26.75. And of
them that were pricked in their heart, at the preaching of Peter, but yet,
trusting in the goodness of God, they added further, Men and brethren what
shall we do? Act. 2.37. of this Repentance the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.8. says,
Let the bones which thou have broken rejoice. and verse, 17. The Sacrifice of
God is a contrite Spirit, a broken heart O God thou will not despise. And Esaias.
57 15. God dwells with the contrite and humble spirit: also chap. 66.2. To
whom should I look but to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my words? And Christ says, Math. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit. i. the humble, who do of their own accord submit themselves unto God,
being touched with a feeling of their sins, and void of all pride in
themselves.

What signifies this word Repentance secundarily.
It signifies generally the whole conversion of man unto God, as Luke. 15.7.
There is more joy in heaven among the Angels for one sinner that repents then
for 99. just men which need not amendment of life. Which must be understood
(...), namely in respect of them that are utterly turned away from God. And
Act. 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you etc. And thus they define
it. Repentance is a true sorrow for our offense toward God, with a desire and
hope of pardon, and a will and especial endeavor from henceforth to avoid all
sin, and to approve all our life unto God.

How many are the parts of this general Repentance?
Three. 1 Contrition, whereby a man acknowledges his sin, and that he has
deserved the just wrath of God, and his curse for sin, and does earnestly
lament for the sin committed and loatheth the same: under which are
comprehended Humility and Modesty: such as was in Peter, who being touched
with a consideration of the divine power in Christ fell at his knees crying, Go
from me Lord for I am a sinful man. Luke 5.8. And in David who using daily to
shed tears made account that he had need of a multitude of mercies. Psalm. 6.7.
and 51.3.

2 Faith, which acknowledges Christ the mediator and intercessor with his
father, and holds that sin is forgiven for the mediators sake, and that the
righteousness of the mediator is imputed unto him.

3 New obedience, which consists of just dealing toward our neighbor,
holiness and purity in the whole course of our lives, and diligence in
performing the duties of our calling. Of which parts we have an example, Luke
7.37. In the woman that was a sinner, whose tears were a witness of her
contrition. i. of her fear and grief of conscience according to God in regard
of sin, her coming to Christ was a testimony of the confidence which she
had conceived of him, and her obedience that she yeeldes unto Christ in washing
his feet with her tears, wiping them with the hairs of her head, and kissing
them, did testify her new obedience which is a fruit of faith.

What think you of this Division?
I hold it to be true, but, to speak properly, faith is no part of Repentance,
but the mother, and fountain thereof. For faith must needs shine before
Repentance, and such faith, such repentance. For no man, says Ambrose, can
repent, but he that hops for pardon. And therefore, the cause of Repenting
is drawn from the very promise of salvation. Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the
kingdom of God is at hand, as if he should say. Because the kingdom of God is
at hand, therefore repent. And Psalm. 130.4. With thee is mercy that thou may
be feared.

Moreover, the Scripture does not make mention of faith, as under Repentance,
that is to say, not as if repentance should be the genus or general, and
Faith the Species or special; but reckons them as two diverse things,
Repentance and Faith. Mark. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel. Luke 24.47.
Preach, in my name, repentance and forgiveness of sins. And Paul, Act.
20.21. says. That he had witnessed both to Jews and Graecians the repentance
toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Not that true repentance can
stand without faith (for they are inseperable in the saints) but because
although they cannot be separated, yet they ought to be distinguished, as hope
and faith are, as in the sinful woman, the thief, David, Manasseh, and other
repentant sinners.

Finally new life or new obedience, to speak properly, is not a part of
repentance, but an effect and fruit thereof. Mat. 3.8. John Baptist says,
Bring forth fruits worthy repentance. So Act. 26.20. Paul showed unto the
Gentiles, That they should repent and turn to God, and do works worthy
amendment of life, which are called the fruits and works of sanctification.

Whether of these goes before, Faith or repentance?
Whereas we have said before, that repentance is sometimes used by a
Synecdoche, for that which they call Contrition, and have showed that
contrition is legal or evangelical, we have placed faith, as it were in the
middle between the former of those sorrows which comes of the
acknowledgement of our sins, and the accusations of the conscience, or which
proceeds from the Law, and the latter, which proceeds from the Gospel. For
godly sorrow is an effect of faith, as well as joy and gladness of conscience.

Which is the third signification of Repentance?
The most proper signification of all, which answers to the true exposition
of the Hebrew word, and is more rightly called Resipiscentia aftervvit, then
poenitentia forethinking.

What manner of thing is it?
It is a true conversion of our life unto God, proceeding from a sincere and
serious fear of God, whereby the sinner, leaving the foolishness of sinning,
returns to himself, or rather to GOD, and changes the former opinion of his
mind for the better.

What call you conversion or turning to God?
The transformation or renewing of the soul it self, not touching the
essence, as Illyricus dreamed, but concerning the qualities inherent in the
same; whereby, putting off the oldnesse thereof, it brings forth fruits of
works answerable to the renewing of it, which they call regeneration, or
spiritual renouation, whereby the image of God, being defiled in us by sin,
and wanting nothing, but the utter blotting out, is again reformed and
fashioned anew in us. Ephesians. 4.2^. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds and
put ye on the new man, which after God is made, that is after the example
and image of God, and created in righteousness and true holiness. Col. 3.9.10.
Put ye of the old man with his works, and put on the new man which is
renewed in the knowledge of God, after the image of him that created him.

Also the Scripture calls it the circumcision of the heart Ier. 4.4. Break
up your fallovv ground, and sovv not among the thorns. And, Be circumcised to
the Lord, and take away the foreskinnes of your hearts. And Eze. 18.30.31. Be
converted and repent of all your iniquities, and make you a nevve heart and a
new spirit.

What is the efficient cause of Repentance?
It is God himself. Lament. 5.21. Turn thou us, O Lord, and we shall be
turned, and shall be saved. Ier. 31.18. Turn me, O Lord, and I shall be
turned: for after I converted, I repented. Eze. 36.26. I will give you a new
heart, and I will put a nevve spirit within you.

Act. 11.18. The Church praises the goodness of God, because he had given
repentance to the Gentiles unto salvation. And Paul 2. Timoth. 2.25.26.
commanding the Ministers to be patient toward unbelievers says, If at any
time GOD will give them repentance, whereby they may come to amendment of
life out of the snare of the devil.

And Ephe. 2.10. we are said, in respect of Regeneration, The vvorkmanshippe
of God created unto good works, which he has prepared that we should
walk therein. For he treats here of grace, and not of nature, against
Pelagius, and against the Semipelagians who feign, that nature only weakened,
is helped by grace.

2. The Holy Ghost, who affects and moves the hearts Act. 15.18.
. Whereupon also he is called the spirit of regeneration and sanctification.
Tit. 3.5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost, that is, which the Holy Ghost bestows and
effects.

3. The administering or fellow working causes, are the ministers of the word.
Act. 26.17. I send thee (says Christ to Paul) to the Gentiles, that thou
may open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light. And. 1.
Cor. 4.15. in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

4. The instruments are, the Word and Sacraments. Ier. 23.29. Is not my word
even like a fire, says the Lord, and like an hammer that breaks the stone.

Is Repentance the effect of the preaching of the Law, or of the Gospel?
We must distinguish between the accusation of sin, and the preaching of
repentance; for the former appertains unto the Law, and makes a preparation
for the latter, and the latter is proper to the Gospel, for remission of sins.

But which is the Antecedent, inward, immediate, and nearest cause of
repentance?
It is the fear of God, through the meditation of Gods judgment to come,
before which we must all appear. Act. 17.30. God admonishes all men every
where to repent, because he has appointed a day, in which he will judge
the world in righteousness.

2. Also by the punishments already inflicted or present, whereby sinners are
admonished, that worser punishments do hang over their heads unless they repent
betimes, as it is said. 1. Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastised of
the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world. And Luke 3.9. The
axe is now laid to the root of the trees; Every tree therefore, that brings
not forth good fruit is cut down and cast into the fire.

3. But chiefly the feeling and consideration of the goodness of God, does
stir up in us that sorrow which the Apostle calls sorrow according to God,
or godly sorrow. 2. Cor. 7.10. Which sorrow breeds repentance unto salvation,
whereby we abhor, not only the punishment, but even the sin it self,
whereby we understand, that we displease God. A notable example, whereof are the
tears of David, every where set down in the Psalms.

Which are the principal causes of repentance. i. what things ought to
provoke us to the hastening of our repentance?
1. Their certainty of our life: we must therefore watch and pray, because we
know neither that hour nor that day, least we be suddenly overwhelmed with
Gods just judgment. Matthew. 25.13.

2. By the dangerous delaying of repentance, there is gathered together a
storehouse or heap of our manifold sins, and of the wrath of God, and of
punishments. Romans 2, 5. Thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot
repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God.

3. The offense of the Angels: for as they rejoice at the repentance of
sinners. Luc. 15.7.10. So, without doubt, they are grieved for their
impenitencie.

4. The dangerous alienation from God, and finally, induration; for the longer
repentance is deferred, the more difficult it becomes. Pro. 22.6. A young man
walking according to his way, even when he is old, will not depart from it. And
late repentance is seldom true repentance.

5. An evil conscience, then which, nothing is more grievous, nothing more
miserable.

6. The stumbling block we lay befoe others, and the guilt of their sin. Hence
is that commination of Christ. Luk 17.1. We be to the man by whom offense
comes.

7. The deprivation of the joys of the holy Ghost, and of spiritual comforts.

8. The delights of Satan: For the sins of men (as one of the ancient
writers has said) are the delicates or dainties of the Devil.

9. The thinking of the tragical examples upon the impenitent, as, the Angels
that fell, the Sodomites, the Egyptians, the Jews, the Churches of the East,
and other impenitent sinners.

How many parts are there of repentance, or regeneration?
The Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.11. reckons seven. 1. Care, namely of amendment.

2. Defense, or excuse, or clearing our selves from other men's guilt.

3. Indignation of the sinner, namely, against himself.

4. Fear, namely of the offending of God.

5. Vehement desire, namely, of approving himself to God.

6. Zeal, to take heed of offending God.

7. Revenge or punishment of our selves, whereof. 1. Cor. 11.31. If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.

But indeed, these are rather effects or adjuncts, or signs of repentance,
then parts.

We say then, that the essential parts of regeneration, or repentance, are
two: mortification of the flesh, or of sin, or the destruction of the old man,
or the denying of our selves, and Vivification, or the renewing of the spirit
of righteousness, or of the new man. Which division we gather.

1. First, out of the Prophets, as Psalm. 34.15. Cease from evil, and do
Good. And Esai: 1.16. Cease to do evil, learn to do well.

2. Out of Romans 6.4. We are buried with Christ by Baptism, into his death,
that as he was raised from the dead, into the glory of his father: So we also
should walk in nevvnesse of life. And the same, To. 7.4. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24.
Colloss. ^.5.8.9.10


Mortification, is the destroying of our natural corruption, proceeding from
the holy Ghost, and arising from the participation of Christ himself; for if
we do truly communicate with Christ's death, by the power thereof, our old man
is crucified, and the body of sin dies by little and little.

Vivification, or new birth, is that power of the holy Ghost, proceeding from
the resurrection of Christ, which following after the destroying of our
natural corruption, by little and little (as the day succedeth the remoouing
of the darkness) causes us (the will of God being known and approved) to
begin to will and to do well; for being made partakers of the resurrection of
Christ we are thereby raised unto newness of life, which may answer the
justice of God. Romans 6.6.

Is it finished in any short space?
No, but it is extended even to the last instant of our life, that the
faithful may exercise themselves therein all their lives, and may the better
also learn their own weakness. For that which is said. Ephe. 5.26.27. That
God does purge his Church from all sin, is referred rather to the guilt, then
to the very matter of sin it self: and sin, in those that are regenerate,
does only cease to reign, but it leaves not to dwell in them. Romans 7.17.
Whereupon also verse. 24. Who (not has delivered me, but) shall deliver me
from this body of death? for the combat lasts till it be ended by death.

Which is the subject, to whom repentance belongs, or, Whose is repentance?
There is a repentance of the heathen, who either for wearisomnesse, do give
over their vices, or else by the judgment of reason do cease to sin, and
that either for fear of punishment, or for love of virtue.

There is also a repentance, and that an earnest repentance, of the wicked, but
it is but temporary, only for a time, as in Esau. Genesis 27.38 Heb. 12.17
and Achab. 1. Kings. 21, 27.29
, which is nothing else, but a worldly sorrow, which causes death, whom,
notwithstanding God spares for a time, and does temporally bless them, that
by that clemency he might provoke his own children to sincere repentance.

There is also a repentance of hypocrites, fained and Pharisaicall, which
consists only in the outward form, against which Ioell cries out, Chap. 2.
verse. 13. and the rest of the Prophets do the like.

But sincere repentance is only belonging to the elect, whom God will deliver
from destruction, for it depends of the spirit of regeneration, and is
inseparable from faith, and the mercy of God, as witnesses the Prophet Esai.
59.20. The Redeemer shall come unto Syon, and unto them that turn from
iniquity in Jacob. And Heb. 6.6. the Apostle minding to exclude the Apostates
from the hope of salvation, brings this reason, that, It is impossible that
they who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
have been partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of
God, and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall away, should be
renewed again by repentance, because they crucify again the son of God,
and make a mock of him. Because indeed, God renewing those whom he will not
have to perish, shows them a token of his fatherly love and favor, and on
the contrary, he stricketh the reprobate, with hardness of heart, whose
iniquity is unpardonable.

Does repentance befall God himself?
Not to speak properly. 1. Sam. 15.29. For he is not as a man that he should
repent, yet it is attributed to God Genesis 6.6. Ier. 18.8
, but by a Metonimie, by reason of the effect: for as wrath in GOD signifies
the very effect of his wrath, namely, punishment: so repentance does signify
the sudden change of his disposing of matters. Whereupon Augustine says, The
repentance of God, is said to be in alteration to looked for of men, of
things within his power, De Ciuit. dei Lib. 17. cap. 7. (...).
the presence of God remaining unchangeable. And the golden rule of Athanasius,
is to be observed.

Those things are spoken after the manner of men, but understood as they may
beseem God. For God submitting himself unto our capacity, does set forth
himself unto us, not as he is in himself, but as he is by us supposed to be.

What is the subject of Repentance, wherein it is?
The whole man, for he is wholly renewed in mind and in will. Ephe. 4.23.

What is the object vvhereabout repentance is conversant.
1. In respect of the beginning, from whence it is, or the Terminus a quo,
sin is the object, about the reforming whereof it consulteth: for of a good
work there is no repentance, such had Ecebolius, Julian, and the Apostataes,
which though it be called repentance, yet it is evil and wicked.

2. In respect of the Terminus adquem, that thereunto it tends, virtue is the
object thereof, about the practice whereof repentance studieth; or, the law is
the object of repentance properly taken.

Which is the fourth signification of repentance?
It is improper, and is used not so much for the inward conversion unto God, as
for the profession thereof, which consists in the confession of the fault,
and the desire of pardon, for the punishment and guilt thereof.

Of how many sorts is this repentance?
Of two sorts; Ordinary or common, and to be used every day; and
extraordinary or special, and commanded unto repentant sinners, at a
certain season.

Which is that which is Ordinary?
That whereunto all Christians even the Saints, as long as they live here, Tu
remisisti iniquitatem cordis mei. the hebrewe is (...) the english The
punishment of my nue.
must endeavor themselves throughout the whole course of their lives, by
reason of the remainder of their natural corruption. For, 1. John. 1.8. If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. And Pro. 24.16. The righteous man falls seven times a day. And it is
(...) with contrition, or with an inward and true sorrow of mind, and confession
of sins before God, either privately, every man by himself, such as was the
Publicane Luke 18.14.
, or publicly and jointly in the Church, the minister going before Leuit 6.21
. Now, seeing God alone is offended, and it belongs to God only to forgive
sins, therefore their confession ought to be directed only to God, not as
ignorant thereof, but as the searcher of the hearts and raines. Psalm. 32.5. I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, says David, and did not hide mine iniquity;
I said I will confess against my self, my wickedness to the Lord, and thou
forgauest the iniquity of my heart. And 1. John. 1.9. If we acknovvledge our
sins, the Lord is faithful to forgive us our sins. And therefore
Chrysostom, Homil. 2. upon Psalm. 50. says. I do not say that thou should
confess thy sins to thy fellow servant, who may vpbraid thee, but to God
that may heal thee.

And whereas James. 5.6. wills that we should confess our sins, not to
the Priests, but one to another; it must be understood both of the private
disclosing of our infirmities, for mutual advise, and to receive comfort, as
also of reconciliation, and by pardoning of offenses, to pacify our neighbor,
which Christ commends unto us Mat. 5.23.24. If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled unto thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Where he applies his speech to the
estate of his own times, he does not teach us that we must now have altars,
or that we must use such kind of offerings, but charity must so be made up
again, which by our fault has broke asunder, namely by the acknowledging our
fault and craving pardon for it.

Yet this hinders not, but any private man may advise with his Pastor and may
open unto him the secret grief of his mind, and may expect from him the
comfort of the Gospel. Moreover the sheep may set themselves before the
sheepeheard, as often as they will partake of the holy Supper, that so they may
receive comfort or instruction, or admonition privately applied unto
themselves, so that tyranny and superstition Mat. 3.6
be not used therein. For it is the office of the Pastor publicly and
privately to teach Act. 20.20
, and comfort the people of God, with the doctrine of the Gospel: hereof we
have the example of David, when he dealt with Nathan. 2. Sam, 12.13.

Are we to reckon up all our sins?
No indeed, neither can it be done, For David cries out Ps. 19.12. Who can
understand his faults? Cleanse me from my secret sins. And Psalm. 38.5. My
iniquities have gone over my head. And the Publican. Luke 18.13. was content
to say, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Eze. 18.21. As often as a sinner
shall repent him of his sins, I will remember his iniquities no more, says
the Lord.

Which is special or extraordinary repentance?
That which draws from us a public confession of our sins and an entreating
of the grace of God.

Of how many sorts is it?
It is also of two sorts: private, of one alone or of some few, and common, or
of some whole Church.

What is meant by common extraordinary repentance?
When a whole assembly or Church, perceiving the plagues of God present or
imminent, by reason of the public offenses of the greater part, appointing a
solemn profession of Repentance, the same being commanded by the magistrates
or governors of the Church with weeping, mourning, and fasting, does pray
against the wrath of god Joel 2.12
, whereunto in old time the Church of the Jews did add the renting of their
clothes, ashes, and sackcloth, as tokens of their guiltines Ier. 6.26
. Such was the repentance of the Ninevites Jonas. 3, 5.
, and of Nehemiah set down Nehem. 1.4. and of the Israelites Ester, 4, 3
.

What is private extraordinary repentance?
It was a part of the Ecclesiastical discipline, which was in use, when any
man, after he was received into the society of the citizens of the Church,
had grossly fallen, and had given over himself to sin with unbridled
licentiousness, or after a kind of falling away had cast off the yoke of god,
and so by his ill behavior had offended the Church, so that the Ecclesiastical
consistory was compelled to exclude him out of the Ecclesiastical assembly
Mat. 18.15.16.17
: for then there were required of him public tokens of his repentance, as
namely, extraordinary sorrow, mourning, confession, and desiring of pardon;
whereby he was to satisfy the Church, and by which, the Church might gather,
that he that had offended, did intend a true and serious repentance, and so he
was again received.

After this manner was that Corinthian received into the fellowshippe of the
Saints, when he had showed himself obedient unto correction 2. Cor. 2, 6
.

What were the parts of this Repentance?
Three. Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.

What was contrition?
In the ancient Church, when it was in most purity, it was not a kind of
satisfaction for sin before God, for so that should have been transferred
unto men, which is proper unto Christ alone; but it was a continual and
manifest sorrow of one excluded, from the Ecclesiastical assembly for his
offense, which sorrow was manifested by the tears of the repentant sinner
desiring to come into favor again with the Church, an example whereof we have
in the same incestuous Corinthian 2. Cor, 2.7
.

What was confession?
Not an auricular reckoning up of secret sins in the ear of the Priest, but
only of that fault or offense, of which, he that was excluded, was reproved,
in old time an acknowledgement and detestation of some sin before the Church,
or before all the brethren; afterward before the Ecclesiastical Senate, and
at length (especially in the Roman Church, by reason of the Nouatians) before
the Priest that was chosen for the purpose to hear the confession of the
repentant sinners in the behalf of the whole Church, that so they might be the
less ashamed. But this was taken away again by Nectarius bishop of the
Church of Constantinople in the time of Theodosius the great, by reason of a
Deacon, who under color thereof, had defloured a matron. Socrates
Ecclesiastical History, l. 5. Cha. 19. whose sentence his successor
Chrysostom did approve and follow.

What was Satisfaction?
Not the undergoing of punishment, or the compensation of sins, to deserve
pardon for them at Gods hands; for with God there is free remission of sins for
Christ's sake Isa. 43.25 act. 10.43.
, not only as touching the fault, but likewise also, as concerning the
punishment. Ier. 31.34. The Lord will remember your iniquities no more. Also,
He will put them away like a cloud, he will drown your sins in the bottom
of the sea. Isa. 44.22. He will not impute the^. Ps. 32.2. The chastisment of
our peace was upon him. Esa. 53.5. He will remember our iniquities no more.
Ier. 31.34. Therefore he will not call the^ to account to punish the^. And Paul
writes 1. Tim. 26. that Christ has given himself a ransom for us, And what
recompense or compensation the Lord receives of us; the Prophet Osee teaches
where he says chap. 14 verse 3. Thou shall take away all iniquity O Lord, and
we will render the Calves of our lips. or the sacrifice of praise, i. great
thanks which in times past were figured by sacrifices, or the fruit of the
lips of those that confess the name of God as the Apostle interprets it.
Heb. 13.15.

But it was the public testification whereby those that were excommunicated,
for the denying of the faith in persecution, or for committing of some grievous
crimes, as whoredom or such like, when they desired to be received into the
fellowshippe of the saints, were first by the Pastor, or the Presbiterie
chastised by rebuke, or by words 2. Cor. 2.6
, for the example of others; after that there were enjoined unto them certain
fasts, and other things, as adjuncts of their repentance, by which they might
prove themselves to be weary of their former life, and then they remained
apart in the Church, they heard the Sermons, and thereupon were called hearers;
afterward, a certain time being accomplished, they came and were present at
the prayers, and thereupon were called Prayers, but when they came to the
administration of the Sacraments, they went their way.

At last, they did truly and with tears humbly entreat pardon of the Church
which they had offended. And so they were said to have satisfied not God for
their sins, but the Church for their offense given, that is to say, they were
accounted to have done so much, as to the Church against which they had
offended, did seem sufficient. And in the end by the laying on of the hands of
the Bishop, as the sign of their absolution, they were admitted to the
Communion of the Lords Supper. Cyprian. lib. Epist. 3. Epistle 14. Which
public chastisments of the penitent offenders, the ancient writers call (...)
corrections, the Latins called them Satisfactions. And surely such discipline
were very profitable at this day, whereby the sinner, who had polluted
himself with any grievous offense, should not be received into the fellowship
of the faithful, unless he had first satisfied the Church, so that it were
done without superstitious rigor, ostentations, hypocrisy, and opinion of
merit.

There was also a politic satisfaction, whereby that which had bin taken away,
was restored, and the neighbor was satisfied, who had bin hurt by the offender:
of which S. Augustine says. Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.
The offense is not remitted unless that was taken away, be restored. Yea even
that place. Mat. 3.8. Bring forth fruit worthy of repentance. Chrisostom and
Ierom in the Comentaries do expound it of Satisfaction.

Is not Nebucadnezer in Daniel. 4.24. commanded to redeem his sins by
righteousness, and by mercy toward the poor?
Yes indeed, he is so commanded, but that Redeeming is referred rather unto men
then God, and the cause of pardon is not there described (for there was never
any other redemption then the blood of Christ Ephe. 1.7. Colos. 1.14.
) but rather the manner of Nebucandezers conversion is there set forth. So
charity couers a multitude of sins Pro. 16.6
not with God but with men only.

Are not the sufferings of the godly, satisfactions and recompenses for sin?
No, for they are not suffered without sin, and the obedience of Christ is
the only satisfaction for sin Heb. 9 12.26.10.11.12
. Neither indeed, are they punishments, but fatherly chasticements, or trials,
and admonitions, rather respecting the time to come, then the time past, to the
end that hereafter sin might not reign in their body, and that they might
not perish with the world, that knows not how to repent. 1. Cor. 11.32. When
we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned
with the world.

What is the end of Repentance?
That sinners might acknowledge themselves and all they have to be condemned
before the Lord, to the end they might endeavor the mortification of the
flesh, and might labor by all means, to lead a new life in the spirit, that
they might glorify God by their new life, and so might hold on the way unto
Gods kingdom.

What are the fruits or effects of repentance?
Some are inward, perpetual, and necessary; some outward: the inward are the
duties of piety toward God, charity toward our neighbor, and throughout our
whole life, holiness and purity, but proceeding from the inward affection of
the heart.

The outward fruits are certain exercises of the body, which we use privately
to humble our selves, and to tame our flesh; 2. Cor. 7.11
publicly for the testifying of our repentance, as to lie in heaviness,
mourning and weeping, to bar our selves from all delights, and to betake our
selves unto fasting; so that in these things we be not too rigorous, neither
make these exercises the principal part of our repentance. And therefore Joel.
2.13. says, Rent your hearts and not your garments. And James. 4.8. Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minded.

What is the use of repentance?
Even this, that as by diligent reading over a writing, we correct the faults
thereof, so by repentance we should amend the errors of our lives.

What things are contrary to repentance?
The error of the Nouatians, and Catharists or Puritans justly so called, who
deny repentance, and coming again to the Communion of the Church to those
that did fall from the faith in time of persecution, or after baptism did fall
into open wickedness. Contrary to that Ierem. 3.1. Thou have played the harlot
with many lovers, yet turn again to me says the Lord, and I will receive
thee; and contrary to the example of Peter, who after his denial, was
received into favor and to the execution of his Apostleshippe John 21.15 16.17
; and contrary to the example of the incestuous man at Corinth, who when he
repented, was received of Paul 2. Cor. 2.7
; and contrary to the speech of Christ, who will have us to forgive our
brethren till seventy times seven times, that is, how often soever he shall
repent. Mat. 18.22. And to the speech of Chrysostom, He that repents a
thousand times receive him. And to the action of Christ, who leaving ninety
nine sheep that were whole, sought out that which was gone astray and was
tired, and when she was found, carried her home upon his shoulders. Mat. 18.12.
2. That foolish iangling of the P^pists, who teach. First, that Repentance is a
work of free will, or of man's power, whereas an ill tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Mat. 7.18. 2. That Repentance is a Sacrament, and that the action
of the man repenting, is the matter of this Sacrament, whereas indeed,
Baptism is the Sacrament of Repentance Mark. 1.4 Luk, 3, 3 Acts. 2, 38
. And they add moreover that it is after shipwreck a second board, to swim
out, whereby the sinners after baptism received, do come again into favor
with God. 3. (Which is their greatest lie of all) they apply the ceremonies of
the public or Ecclesiastical and disciplinarie Repentance, which is made
before the Church, namely Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, unto the
general doctrine of repentance, which is made before God, and they allege
them to be parts thereof. 4. That contrition of the heart is a sorrow
voluntarily taken upon them for sins, which does deserve the mercy of God.
5. That auricular confession of the mouth, that is to say, an exact reckoning
up of al our sins, laying open also the circumstances of every one of them in
the ears of our own parish Priest is commanded by the law of God, to be
performed of all men upon pain of excommunication, and is necessary for the
obtaining of remission of sins, and that the neglect thereof is deadly. But
of all other that confession that is made in the time of Lent is most of al
pleasing, and acceptable unto God; Contrary to the express doctrine of Paul.
To. 14.5.6. Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.10.11. Sixthly, that it is not enough for him that
repents to abstain frrm the evil course of his life past, and to change his
manners for the better, unless he do satisfy God for the things he has
done, and this they call specially Penance; whereupon is that vulgar Phrase, to
do Penance. Now this satisfaction for sins, and for the punishment of
sins, at least for the pains of Purgatory, they say is made unto God,
either by works, of Supererogation, that are more then duty, that is to say,
such as are not commanded in the word of God, as by building of Churches, by a
certain number of prayers, by pilgrimages to this or that Sepulcre, tapers,
hoodes, sleeping upon the ground, alms deeds, buying of Masses, pardons and
such like; or else by punishments enjoined by the Priests, or by the sufferings
which godly men suffer; all which are merely contrary to the free satisfaction
of Christ, who by the power of his death and obedience has taken away the
guilt and punishment due to our sins Isa. 44, 4.5. 1. John, 1,
.

3. The endeavor of hypocrites, who do indeed, go about an outward
repentance, after an external manner: but in the mean time do not dissolve the
internal bands of wickedness within.

Lastly, the error of the Anabaptists, and Perfectists, who dream they have
attained a perfect degree of regeneration; contrary to that perpetual combat
of the flesh and the spirit, which the Saints do feel in this life. Gal. 5.17.

The one and thirtieth common place. Of the justification of Man before God.
What is the meaning of this word, Justifying?
IN the original of the Latin, it signifies indeed to make just, that is to
say, to renew and change the heart which is proper only to God; as also this
word Sanctifying, is of a profane man to make him holy. In which signification,
the Apostle may seem to have used it. 1. Cor. 6.11. And such were some of
you, but now, ye are vvashed, now ye are sanctified, now ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, that is to say, of
unclean, ye are made clean, of profane ye are made holy, of unjust ye are
made just, by the holy Ghost, for Christ's sake, in whom ye believe. Which
signification, some of the Fathers have followed, and especially Augustine
(observing rather the composition of the latin word, then the phrase of the
holy Ghost) so that to be justified, is with them* nothing else, but of unjust
to be made just by the grace of God for Christ's sake, as Augustine in his 105.
Epistle to Sixtus, and in many other places (who notwithstanding, uses
Remission of Sins, for that which we call with Saint Paul, Iustication)
takes justification for regeneration or sanctification, whereby the Iusticiarie
Schoolmen have taken occasion for their error. And yet the some Augustine is
of the same opinion with us, whilst he uses Remission of sins, for that
which we with Paul, call justification, even as David also says, Paul
expounding him, That the man is blessed to whom God imputes righteousness
without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, Psalm.
32.2. Roman. 4.7

For The righteousness of the Saints says Augustine, in this world does more
consist in remission of sins then in perfection of virtue. Where that
particle more is to be taken exclusiuely for rather, as in that speech. Act.
5.29. We ought more to obey God then men. i. rather. And John. 12. They loved
the praise of men more then the praise of God, that is, rather.

2 It is used in the Scripture for a word of law, and signifies to impute
Justice, by imputation, to account a man righteous, to repute a man to be just,
to absolve and acquit a man from the crimes objected against him, to discharge
a man, or by sentence to pronounce him just, to make and acknowledge a man to
be just, which signification the Hebrew word (...) Hitsdicke, agrees with, and
is every where in the Scripture opposed to the word of condemning, as also the
Greek word (...), is taken in this signification in the use of law, which
Suidas expounds (...) that is to say, to account just. As Proverb. 17.15. He
that justifies the wicked, or condemns the just, they both are an
abomination unto the Lord. In which place this word Justify, does not
signify to infuse justice, for to do so is no abomination. And Mat. 12.31.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned,
So Luke. 7.29. The publicans did justify God, that is, they did acknowledge
and confess him to be just. And Luke 16.15. you justify your selves before
men, that is you will be accounted just. In this sense, they are pronounced
just before men (by the later) which do justly, as James. 2.12. Abraham is
said to be justified, that is, to be pronounced just before men by the effects.

3 It signifies, to provoke and stir up others unto righteousness, by
teaching and instructing them, as Dan. 12.3. They that justify others, that
is, do instruct them unto righteousness, or by their teaching and instruction
do make them just, shall be as the stars in the firmament. And Apoc. 22.11 He
that is just, let him be more just, that is, let him profit in well doing.

In which signification did Paul use this word in the doctrine of the
Justification of a man before God?
Not in the first sense, nor in the third, but in the second, which is plainly
appertaining to law. For by being justified, the Apostle means that a man is
accounted just, being, by the sentence of the heavenly Judge, acquitted from
condemnation and guiltines. Which appears by the opposition of Justification
and Condemnation, which Paul sets down, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods children? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? Justification therefore according to the meaning of Saint Paul, is a
certain pronouncing of sentence, and, as I may so say, indeed rather a
pronouncing just then a making just.

How many ways is a man said by Saint Paul to be justified?
Only two ways Romans 10.3 4.5
, either by his own righteousness, that is to say, by works, or by the law as
Romans 2.13. The doers of the law (if there be any, must be understood) shall
be justified, which is called Legal justice, or the righteousness of the law.
Or else by faith, or by the righteousness of another, namely Christ, that is
to say, by faith, Romans 5.19. We are justified by faith, which is called
Evangelical justice, or the righteousness of the Gospel.

What does this signify to be justified by works?
Not as some think to get a habit of righteousness by just works, or to be
made just by works, but to be judged and pronounced just by reason of
obedience yielded unto the law. Or he is said to be justified, in whose life
there is found that purity and holiness which deserves the testimony of
righteousness before the throne of God, after which sort Paul teaches that
no mortal man is justified, Romans 3.20. By the works of the law no flesh is
justified, that is to say, By the act whereby the law is performed, or by the
performance of the law no flesh shall be justified. Which sentence though in
Greek and Latin it be particular, yet in Hebrew it is universal, because the
negative particle does not agree with the Note or universal sign none but
with the verb.

What does this signify, to be justified by faith?
To be justified by faith, is to be acquitted from sin for Christ's sake,
apprehended by faith: Or he is said to be justified by faith, who being
excluded in regard of his own righteousness, that is the righteousness of
works, does by faith apprehend another righteousness, that is the
righteousness of Christ, wherewithal being clothed, he does appear before
God not as a sinner, but as a just and righteous man Gal. 3.27 Ephesians. 5.17
Apoc. 7.14
.

What is justification?
It is not the giving of the holy Ghost, regeneration, or the infusion of a new
quality, or the preaching of Justice, or if we shall speak Philosophically
not (...) mutation, or a motion toward the attayning of righteousness: but it
is the sentence of the heavenly Judge, whereby he does in respect of the merit
of Christ, of his own mere grace and favor, not impute unto the sinner his
sin unto death, but imputes the righteousness of Christ offered in the
Gospel to his own glory, and life eternal. Or, it is a free discharge from
sin and death, both at once, and an imputation of righteousness unto life
eternal, and to the glory of God, and that for Christ's sake, and his
righteousness, with both which being clothed we appear before the tribunal
seat of God holy and unblameable.

What be the parts of Justification?
Two: The former part is Remisson or Absolution, and that twofold, first from
sin, secondly, from death. For first God from his tribunal seat pronounces
us free from sin, for although sin be in us in deed, yet because all that
sin; how much soever it be, is covered with the righteousness of Christ, and
therefore is not set before the eyes of God the Judge, God does pronounce us to
be so freed from the same, as if there were none at all in us. And then
secondly after he has acquitted us from the cause of death, namely sin, he
does also acquit us from the punishment, and death it self which is the wages
of sin. Romans 6.23.

The later part of Justification is Imputation, whereby the heavenly Judge does
judge us to be just by the merit of another: and does adiudge us unto life
eternal for th merit of another: And this later is a kind of effect of the
former, for he that is judged just, it must of necessity follow that he be
adjudged unto life: The Prophet David 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thine holy City, to finish the wickedness to seal up
the sins, to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness. And Paul, Romans. 3.4.5. By the first part our debt is taken
away, and by the later our want is provided for.

Also Remission heals the guilt of sin, the imputation of the righousnesse of
Christ heals the corruption and evil it self, wherewithal the nature of
mankind labors, and is laden.

What is the efficient cause of Justification?
Not man, either from himself or from any other conferring any thing, for that
in the act of justification, man does only behave himself as a subject and
sufferer, but God is the efficient cause, who accompteth the obedience of
Christ as if it were received from us. For that saying of the Lord stands
firm. Esa, 43.25. I even I am he that take away thy iniquities for mine own
sake, and I will remember thy sins no more. Which principle of Divinity the
Jewish Scribes did also acknowledge as true, Mark. 2.7. Who can forgive
sins but God alone? and Romans 4.5. But believes in God that justifies the
ungodly, that is to say, him, that in himself is wicked, he accompteth
righteous in Christ. And Romans 8, 33. God is he that justifies, who is it that
condemns? And hereupon it is that it is called the righteousness of God.
Romans 1.17. and 3.21.22. Not that essential justice of God, whereby he is just
in himself, neither yet that communicatiue iustich which he does communicate
to his elect by the holy spirit, but it is so called of the efficient cause
namely, because God does freely impute or account the same unto us: and partly
also from the object, because it alone is able to bear the rigor of Gods
judgment, and to stand before his tribunal seat, and therefore it is called
everlasting. Dan. 9.24. because it was decreed by him from everlasting.

What is the cause of justification working together with God.
Christ, who by his merit and obedience has purchased. Justification for us.
Romans 5, 9. We are justified by his blood: and 2. Cor. 5.18. We are reconciled
by Christ.

What is the precedent cause?
Not the foreseeing of good works to come, or of faith, nor the estimation of
works present, but only the grace of God, not that which is freely given or
infused, whither it be faith, or whether it be charity, but grace freely
giving, that is to say, the good will of God, or the good pleasure of God
Ephesians. 1, 9
, and his love toward us men Tit. 3.4,
: And therefore Romans 3.24. they are justified freely, that is to say excluding
all workrs, not only works going be-before faith: but also those that follow
faith, or of Gods free gift and mere liberality: By his grace, by the
redemption made by Jesus Christ: and Romans 4.16. Therefore the inheritance is by
faith, that it might be by grace, that it might be sure. And Romans 11.6. If it
be by grace, then it is no more by works, or else grace were no grace. And
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves it
is the gift of God. And therefore our Justification is altogether free even as
are also those things that go before it, our Election, and Vocation, and that
that follows it, namely, sanctification. For even Christ himself also with
his satisfaction is the free gift of God, and it is of Gods grace and favor
that he will justify us for another sake, and for the righteousness of
another, and so faith it self, and likewise that by the coming between of
faith, we are justified it is the gift God. Finally, that remission of sins is
free, Christ teaches us both in many other places and also Luke. 7.41. by way
of parable, where he sets down the representation of the creditor, and the
debtor.

What is the meritorious or material cause of our iustificacation, that is to
say, for the which we are justified?
Not faith, nor charity, nor works, nor our merits, nor the merits of the
Saints, nor sufferings nor Sacraments, but Christ with his righteousness, and
that not only principally, and every man's own works or merits less
principally, but Christ alone altogether, and that as far as he is
apprehended by faith. Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by the redemption,
that is in Jesus Christ, And 1. Pet. 1.18. knowing that you are not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold from your vain conversation
received by the tradition of the fathers, (namely of those of whom it is
spoken. Ezech. 20.18. Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither
observe their manners) but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
undefiled and without spot.

What do you understand by the name of Christ's righteousness.
Not that essential righteousness of the very divinity of Christ
distributed among men, or Christ himself as he is God stirring us up to do
that which is righteous, as Osiander conceived, for this is to play the
Manichee, that is to say, to feign a diffusion of Gods substance through all
manner of things; and to confound God himself with his effects, that he
works in us.

Neither do we understand by Christ's righteousness that inchoated
righteousness which is only begun in this world, which Christ works in
the regenerate by his spirit, for that were to confound Justification and
Sanctification together. But we understand both that most high and perfect
purity, and integrity or Sanctification, wherewithal Christ was endued in
his humanity from the very moment of his conception by the holy Ghost, which
they call Habitual or Original righteousness, and Paul calls it, The law
of the spirit of life in Christ, which is opposed to our original
unrighteousness, or to our natural corruption Romans 8.1.2
, and is imputed unto us, as also his actual obedience, proceeding from that
habitual righteousness, whereby he did in the very act most perfectly obey
the law of God which is opposed to our disobedience. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by one man's obedience many shall be
made righteous. Romans 5.19.

How many kinds are there of Christ's obedience?
It is of two sorts. Active and Passive. The Active obedience of Christ is his
perfect fulfilling of the law which Christ did so fully and perfectly
perform, as that loving God with all his heart, and his neighbor more then
himself, he did satisfy even the uttermost title of the law, of which, Math.
3.15. It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. And, Math. 5.17. I came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. John. 8.29. I do always those
things that please the Father. And, Phil. 2.8. He submitted himself being made
obedient even to the death of the cross,

The Passive obedience of Christ is his oblation or passion, for, seeing the
reward of our sins is everlasting death, Christ alone who was only able to
unloose the bond of so many debts, did indeed suffer death fo us, and by his
death did break the bonds of eternal death, and so having paid the ransom,
did set men, that were the debtors, at liberty with God their creator. By
reason here of he is called, The price Gal, 1, 4 Coll. 1, 14 1 Timothy, 2, 6 1 Pet,
1, 18
of our Redemption a Savior, a Reconciler, and a Propitiation for our sins,
in whom, and by whom, we recover all that we had lost in Adam,

Tell me whether beside this Passive righteousness, the Active obedience of
Christ also, whereby he did fulfill the law, be imputed unto us by God for
righteousness, that is to say, whether are we justified for the obedience that
he performed unto the law? Or whether is our salvation only to be ascribed to
the death and passion of Christ, or else to his active life, and to his
inherent holiness also?
Yes indeed. 1 Because the actual disobedience of Adam had made us sinners:
And therefore by the contrary the Actual obedience of Christ has made us
righteous, Romans 5.19. And verse 10. If when we were enemies, we were reconciled
by the death of the son, much more being reconciled shall we be saved by his
life.

2 Because we did not only stand in need of a satisfaction for sin for the
taking away of death, but also of the gift of righteousness to obtain eternal
life, according to the precept and demand of the law, This do and thou shall
live. And therefore Christ is not only called the price of our redemption, but
the end also, and perfection of the law to salvation, to every one that
believes. Romans 10.4. And hereupon says Ambrose: He that believes in Christ
has the perfection of the law.

3 Because Christ did not only offer himself to death for us, but did also
sanctify himself for us, that we also might be sanctified through the truth.
John. 17.19. And he is said, To be made unto us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.

4 Because the Passive obedience of Christ was not merely and purely passive,
but his Active obedience did challenge unto it self the prehemine^ce in the
same. Ps. 40.7.8. In the volume of the book it is written of me that I should
do thy will O my God, and I said lo I come. And, He was therefore offered
because he would. Esai. 53.7 And as our priest he did offer himself an oblation
for sin; and by his once offering has he consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified. Heb. 10.7.14. the holiness of Christ his sacrifice being imputed
unto them as the Apostle declares verse. 10 By the which will we are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made.

5 Because whole Christ was given unto us with his benefits; otherwise if his
passive obedience only had been imputed unto us, it would follow that only
half Christ was given us, namely a suffering Christ and not he that did those
things that were pleasing to his father, a Christ that only takes away sins
and death, and not a Christ Isa. 9.6
that brings righteousness. But he is said to be borne and given not for
himself but for us, that he might bestow his whole self upon us, and might
do those things that were to be done for us and might also suffer what was to
be suffered for us.

Why then is Christ said to be set forth of god a reconciliation through faith
in his blood. Romans 3.25. and we said to be justified by the blood of Christ?
Romans 5.9. and by it to be cleansed from all sin? 1. John. 1, 7.
Because in these kind of speeches by a Synedoche and (...) the chief part
is used for the whole in regard of the most near affinity of the passion,
and the active righteousness of Christ, which also appears by that that is
set down Romans 4.25. Justification is ascribed to the resurrection (which is a
matter active) because Christ by his resurrection did give testimony that he
had by his death fully satisfied for all our sins, for indeed our sins had
not been purged by his death if death had the upper hand in the combat.

How are we said to be Justified freely if we be Justified for the merit of
Christ?
Because the decree of God the father for our redemption is free and we pay
nothing again to God of our own. And therefore by that particle Freely our
merits are excluded, but not Christ's, and therefore we are said to be
redeemed by Christ with a great price 1. Cor, 6 20, 1. Pet. 1, 19
, so that we may may well say we are justified by merits and by works, because
we are justified by Christ's merits, and by his works.

What is the subject of Justification?
Christ himself is (...)
the receiving subject, or the matter in which is contained that righteousness
for the which we are justified, which dwells and abides in him as in the
subject, and does never go out of that subject, and threfore we are said to be
made Righteousness in him 2. Cor. 5.20*
, and Paul says, That he did find righteousness in him, Phil. 3.9. But of
justification, that is, of that sentence whereby God pronounces us just, we
our selves are the matter and subject, first indeed not prepared or bringing
any merits, but sinners and wicked. Romans 4.5. He that justifies the wicked.
Afterward believing, Romans 3.22. The righteousness of God is made manifest in,
and upon all that believe.

Seeing God forbids to justify the ungodly, Pro. 17.15. Is he said to do
that well which himself forbids?
Yes very well, because he is above all Law, and not accomptable, wherefore it
is lawful for him by justifying the ungodly to declare his own justice,
seeing his will is the rule of justice.

2 Paul calls him wicked, in respect of nature, who in respect of grace
accepting him, is the elect child of God.

3 In justification wickedness is taken away, and faith succeeds, even as
the blind man is enlightened, who having his bindnesse removed, receives his
sight.

Besides Paul calls him wicked, not in that he does actually persevere in
wickedness, Dan, 9.7 psalm. 32.6
but because he brings no merits of his own, neither respects his own
qualities, or actions, or virtues, but him whom his former life makes guilty
of wickedness, and yet lamenteth his own iniquity, and flies to the throne
of grace, and desires to be pardoned, as Daniel does saying, To thee only
btlongeth righteous^csse, but to us confusion of face. And David, for remission
of sins, (and therefore also of wickedness) every one that is Godly shall
make prayer unto thee.

Does the justification of those that do already believe, and are regenerate
differ nothing from the justification of those that are not yet regenerate.
It does something differ, if ye consider the subjects, because in those that
are unregenerate, God finds nothing but a horrible sink of evils and
mischiefs; but in the regenerate God embraces and entertaineth his own gifts
withal, but yet he iustifyeth them both after one, and the self same manner.

Who are they that are justified?
Only those that were elected before the foundation of the world. Romans 8.30.
Whom he did predestinate them also he called, and whom he called them also
he justified: And verse 3.3. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect?

Are all justified after one and the same manner?
Yes indeed, all after one sort: and therefore Paul Romans 4.3.9.10. When he had
reasoned from the example of Abraham the father of the faithful, he adds:
Verse 23. Neither is this written only for him, that it was imputed unto
him, but even also for us to whom it shall be imputed, namely, to them that
believe in him, which raised the Lord Jesus from the dead.

What is the form of Justification?
Not (...) mutation, or any motion of alteration, whereby righteousness is
attained, by the shunning of evil, and endeavoring to do good, for this is
proper to sanctification. Neither is it charity, nor good works, nor our
fulfilling of the law; to conclude, it is not a quality infused or inherent,
no nor faith it self, but the remission of sins purchased by the blood of
Christ, and the imputation of the obedience, and most perfect righteousness of
Christ, and the acquiring of us, whereby it comes to pass that the believers
are accounted righteous before GOD at his tribunal seat, and do obtain ^he
interest of eternal life: Or, the form of justification is, the
righteousness of Christ imputed, so far forth as it is imputed of God.
Which the Apostle confirms: Romans 4.6. saying; David declares the man to be
blessed to whom God imputes righteousness without works; whereby the form
of justification is set down to be, not inherent righteousness but
righteousness imputed so far forth as it is imputed. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgeuen and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Gen, 15.6. Abraham believed God and
it was reputed unto him for righteousness. Romans 5.19. By one man's obedience
many are made righteous. And 2. Cor. 5.21. Him that knew noe sin God made
sin for us, not in himself but by imputing unto him the guilt of all our
sins that we might be made the righteousness of God, that is to say, Just
before God in him. And this is our righteousness imputed, not that we are the
cause thereof in any sort, but because it is reckoned and imputed unto us of
God.

What signifies this word, Impute?
Not to give, or to infuse, or to ingraft, but to esteem and decree, to
account, to determine, to number to acknowledge, to allow and receive in
account; for so in Genesis 15.6, Abraham believed, and according to the Hebrew
phrase, it was esteemed or decreed unto him, who before was guilty, for
righteousness. For so is the word (...) chashab usually taken, that is to say
to impute as Genesis 50.20. you thought upon evil, but God disposed or imputed it
unto good. And 2. Sam. 19.19. Lord impute not this sin unto m^, that is to
say do not think of it or dispose of me to be punished. So Romans 5.13. Sin
is not imputed while there is no law, So Romans 8.36. We are accounted as sheep
for the slaughter. And Romans 9.8 The children of the promise are compted for the
seed. And, Mark. 15.28. He was numbered among the wicked. 2. Tim 4.16. all
men forsook me, I pray God it be not laid to their charge or imputed unto
them. Philem. verse. 18. If he has hurt thee or owes thee ought, that put on
my accomptes, or impute it to me.

How many kinds of Imputation are there?
Two; one Real, when that is really and indeed given or accounted, which is
admitted upon the reckoning: as when the debtor, which is to pay money, does
indeed pay the money unto the Creditor, and the same being allowed upon the
reckoning of receipts, the debtor is really acquitted and discharged.

There is also another imputation, (...), or of free gift, when that which was
owing by the debtor, who is notable to pay, is not really paid, but is
accounted as if it were paid, so that the debtor is no more called upon by the
Creditor, but is acquitted by his acceptance, of which sort is that of the
unjust Steward. Luke. 16.6. who in the writing, that is, in the instrument of
the obligation, in the place of a hundredth would have fifty to be written
down, and by that means discharges his masters debtors from a part of
payment of the due sum, which in deed and truth they had not paid.

Seeing we do owe unto God the punishment of our sins, and are guilty of
everlasting death, by which imputation are we discharged, by that that is
real, or by that that is free?
By that that is free, for seeing we are not able to pay the utmost farthing,
to discharge our souls, it is certain that we can indeed give nothing unto
the Lord our God, but seeing his justice must needs be satisfied, a surety came
between us, who for our cause paid the debr, and his payment was accounted as
if we had paid it: that surety is Christ, the merit of whose obedience and
passion is no otherwise imputed unto the believers, then if it were inherent in
themselves.

This is proved. I Because Christ has given his life for the ransom of many:
Math. 20.28. Besides, 2. Cor. 5.21. Him that knew no sin God made sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, for in regard he
took upon him our person, he was made in our names as it were guilty, and was
iudgged and accounted as a sinner, not for his own faults, but for ours, so
we are righteous in him, not for our own righteousness, but for his. And
therefore says Augustine* He sin, and we righteousness, and not ours, but
the righteousness of God, and not in us, but in him: even as he sin, not his
own, but ours, nor in himself, but in us; so therefore are we the
righteousness of GOD in him, as he is sin in us, namely by imputation. And
Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience of one man (Adam) many are made sinners, so
by the obedience of one (Christ) many shall be made righteous. To this purpose
is that excellent saying of Saint Augustine: He made our sins, his sins,
that he might make his righteousness our rigteousnes. For we being clothed
therewithal do no otherwise come before the presence of God, and obtain the
right of Eternal life; then Jacob in old time being clothed with the precious
garments of his eldest brother Esau, coming unto his father Isaacke, August.
in Enchirid. Cap. 41
and being taken in the place of Esau, did obtain the blessing Ge^* 27.12


Will not justification by this means fall out to be a kind of imaginary
matter, or a fiction of law?
God forbid, for imputation is not an idle conceit, but an effectual
relation, referting or applying of the foundation to the end, that is to say,
the effectual consideration of God, disposing the righteousness and
satisfaction of Christ to the believer. More over as they speak in schools,
although Relation be a thing least in being, yet it is greatest in efficacy.
As therefore damnation, though it be a relation yet, it is not altogether
nothing, or a fiction of law, or an idle conceit, but signifies an effectual
ordaining to everlasting pains, so the imputation of righteousness, or
Justification, which is a divine relation, is not a fiction of law, or an idle
conceit (as some speak very irreligiously) but it is the effectual decree
of God, the good will and pleasure of God, or such an ordination, whereby the
man that is guilty, and with an earnest repentance believes in Christ, is by
God acquitted from the guilt, and the righteousness of Christ the surety imputed
unto him.

But, is it not an absurd thing to say that we are justified by another man's
righteousness, even as to live by another man's life, or to be white by another
man's vvhitenes is a thing impossible?
No, for there is not the same reason, for another man's life is simply another
man's, but the righteousness of Christ is another inasmuch as it is without us,
and remains in another subject, namely in Christ; but it is not another, as
it is ordained to and for us, even as the payment of our debt is another man's
payment, inasmuch as it is done by another subject; it is ours inasmuch as it
is imputed unto us: and the righteousness is also ours, inasmuch as the very
subject thereof, namely, Christ is ours, and therefore by faith spiritually he
is made one with us, not by an actual trrasfusion, or running of the body and
soul of Christ within us, or by pouring out, transfusion or essential or
actual conjunction of any quality inherent in Christ, but by the
communication which we have by the bond of the holy Ghost with him which is our
head, Hom, 3, par, qu, 48, tr^^ 2, and qu 49 art. 1*
and of whom we also are member, Ephe. 5.30. Hereupon Aquinas says very
well, The head and the members are as it were one mystical person and
therefore the satisfaction of Christ belongs to all the faithful as to his
members. So the^ that righteousness is indeed the righteousness of another in
regard of the place of abode wherein it is, but it is ours by application.

Furthermore, Justification is not referred to a quality, but to the relation
which consists in a flowing out and respect, rather then in the place of
abode. And besides, it is now so imputed unto us, as hereafter living with
Christ in heaven, we shall really be clothed with the righteousness of Christ,
and shall live by that life of Christ which is now only begun in us, and
shall be perfected hereafter.

How does the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness of the Gospel
differ?
Not in matter or form, but in the efficient, the subject and the end. Not in
matter, because both of them are obedience performed unto God. Not in form,
because the rule of both is the law of God: for God acknowledges no other
righteousness, but that that agrees with this law. And therefore Romans 3.30.
The law is established by faith: both because the righteousness of Christ is the
full performance of the law, as also because we are by faith clothed with the
spirit of Christ, which working in us, we do begin to will and to do things
appertaining to God, and so by him the obedience of the law is begun in us, and
Romans 8.3.4. God sent his son in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
law. i. that very thing which the law requires, namely, the fulfilling of
righteousness, and the perfect integrity of our ability (all which we do
freely attain by Christ apprehended by faith) might be fulfilled in us, that
is to say, indeed in himself, and as I may so say, by application, for by
faith he and his righteousness are made ours, and Gal. 4.4. Christ was made
under the law, that is subject unto the law (both by doing and suffering) that
he might redeem those that were under the law. i. which were subject unto the
law.

But they differ in the subject and efficient, because the righteousness of
the law is performed in and by that man, who by the same is accounted
righteous, of which sort there is none but Christ himself. The righteousness
of the Gospel is a perfect fullfilling of the law performed not in or by that
man who is thereby accounted righteous, but by another namely Christ, which
performance notwithstanding is accounted to come from the man himself. And
therefore Rom* 10.5. etc. The righteousness which is by the Law stands
thus; The man that does these things shall live in them. Leuit. 18.5. But the
righteousness that is of faith promises free salvation If thou shall believe in
thy heart and confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and that the Father has
raised him from the dead thou shall be saved.

They differ also in the end; for the end of the righteousness of the Gospel
is the glory of the mercy and justice of God; but the end of the
righteousness of the Law is rather the glory of men, Romans 3.26 27 and 4.12
Ephesians. 1.6
because man should have whereof to boast himself

What thing is there agreeable unto Justification. or of the like nature with
it?
Regeneration or the giving of the holy Ghost, or Sanctification; Vivification,
Renouation, or the infusion of grace by little and little, decaying and
altering our corrupt nature, either also inherent righteousness which being
communicated unto us by the holy Ghost, does show it self outwardly by works,
and whereby we are just not before God, but before men, and are by him
acknowledged and accounted for just, and it appears by the mortification of
sin, or the old man, and renouation of the new. i. by the hatred of sin,
and love of righteousness, and zeal of good works; and it is usually called
inchoated or begun obedience.

Whereof 1. John. 3.7. He that does righteousness is righteous: and Apoc. 22.11.
He that is righteous, let him be more righteous.

Can Regeneration be separated from Justification?
No, but yet they may be distinguished, neither are the two benefits of
Justification and Sanctification ever to be confounded, as of Justification he
says, Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and of
renouation he adds, And in whose spirit there is no guile. For as in
orignall sin which we have from Adam there are two things, namely the guilt,
and imputation of that sin, and disobedience (as it is said, Romans 5.12. In
whom (namely in Adam) we have all sinned, and that which followed that,
namely the privation of righteousness. So if the opposition be true between
Christ and Adam as contrary causes; and then between sin and righteousness
as contrary effects (for after the like and self same manner righteousness
is by Christ, as sin was by Adam) it must needs be that we must have both
the imputed and the inherent righteousness. But in the former consists the
true Justification of us before God, because that only is perfect, and makes
a quiet conscience; Romans 5.1
in the other consists our Innovation wherein we must of necessity daily
profit, but yet not rest upon it before, God seeing it is but imperfect. Romans
7.18


Do Justification and sanctification agree in nothing.
They agree. 1. in the efficient cause. For God is the author of both through
the merit of Jesus Christ. 2. in the isntrumental cause which is faith, the
instrument of Justification by receiving it, the instrument of sanctification
not by effecting it. 1. Tim. 1.5


3 In the scope and end; for they both tend to one end, Justification as the
cause, sanctification as the way, Ephesians. 2.10, we are created in Christ to
good works, which God has prepared that we should walk in them,

Is there any difference between Justification, and the giving of the holy
Ghost?
Yes: even as Luke 15.20. the prodigal son is reconciled to his father only
of his mere mercy, wherewithal his Fatherly heart is inflamed, not for all
the ornaments which are bestowed upon the party reconciled.

Which is the difference between Justification and Renouation?
They differ in being,

1. In form, for Justification is the remission of sins, (...).
and imputation of righteousness, or acceptance of the person to life
eternal of Gods mercy, for the lamb of Gods sake, that takes away the
sins of the world. But Renouation is by the Holy Ghost, dwelling in the
hearts of those that are justified and kindling new motions agreeable unto the
will of God, and reducing them from impure qualities unto pure qualities. So
that the giving of the holy Ghost, is not a part of justification, but an
appendice or part of this so great benefit, and a sealing up and testifying of
justification, received for the Mediators sake according to that Ephe. 1.13.14.
In whom vvhilest ye believe, ye are sealed with the Holy spirit of
promise, who is the pledge of our inheritance.

2. In subject. For the subject of righteousness is not in us, but in Christ;
but the subject of sanctification is the mind, will, affection, and all the
outward members Romans 6.19 Colloss. 3, 5
.

3. In the Object. For justification respects the perfect obedience of
Christ; but our sanctification has the Law for his object.

4. In the nearest efficient cause. Justification has not the cause in us,
because it dwells not in us; Sanctification has the will which is the
beginning of all humane actions, for the beginning of action is deliberation,
of deliberation, will and reason. And in respect of the persons efficient; for
Tit. 3.5 Regeneration and Renouation are attributed unto the Holy Ghost, as to
the efficient. But justification is wholly ascribed unto Christ. In thy seed
shall all nations be blessed. Genesis 22.18.

5. In effects. Justification absolueth and acquiteth us before Gods Judgment
Seat, Sanctification does not so.

6. Justification is an act inseperable; but Regeneration is an act separable,
because it is not perfected in an instant, but by a certain order or
successively and by degrees, according to the good pleasure of God, and it is
here begun, and shall be perfectted in the life to come. Moreover
Justification is a matter of mere gift; but regeneration is a matter of our
obedience.

7. Paul does notably express the difference of him that is to be justified,
and him that is to be regenerate; for he that is to be justified, lamentably
cries out of his inherent righteousness Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? But flying to imputed
righteousness which is grounded only upon mercy he does exceedingly rejoice,
and with a full confidence tryumpheth over life and death and al adversities
whatsoever. Romans 8.33.34. etc.

What are the instruments or means of justification?
The isntrumental cause, outwardly showing and offering the benefit of
justification, is the voice of the Gospel; Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power
of God to salvation to all that believe; that is to say, it is the instrument
of God, truly powerful and effectual to save: For the righteousness of God
is thereby revealed from faith to faith; Hereupon it is called the word of
belief Act. 5.20.
; the word of salvation Act. 13.26
; the word and ministry of reconciliation 2. Cor. 5.19
. The administering causes and witnesses of this blessing (but not the sellers
thereof) are the ministers of the Gospel, according to that John. 20.23. Whose
sins ye remit they shall be remitted, and whose sins ye retain they
shall be retained. And 1. Tim. 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto
Doctrine, continue therein; for in doing this thou shall both save thy self,
and those that hear thee, namely, because faith is by hearing, and hearing is
by preaching.

The isntrumental cause inwardly is also twofold. 1. The instrument given by
God, or the hand apprehending and receiving the grace of Iustifycation offered,
is saving faith, infused into the believers by the Holy Ghost, Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the law. So every where, By faith Gal. 2,6.
, Through faith Ephesians, 2.8.
, of faith Rom, 3, 28
, (for these are all of one signifycation) but in no place are we said to be
justified or saved for faith. Romans 10.8. This is the word of faith which we
preach. And hereupon it is called righteousness of faith in regard it is
apprehended by faith, when the Gospel is believed.

2. The inward sealing cause is the holy ghost, who seals Justification in
our hearts, so as we cannot doubt thereof. Ephesians. 1.13. Wherein also after that
ye believed ye were sealed with the Holy spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance. And 1. Cor. 6.11. You are justified by the spirit
of God in the name of our Lord Jesus. Christ.

3. The outward sealing causes are the Sacraments, the one of initiation or
entrance, the other of Redemption, Romans 4.11. He received the Circumcision as
the seal of righteousness, which is by Faith. Also. 1. Cor. 11.23. and Tit.
3.5. He has saved us by the washing of the new birth and renewing of the holy
Ghost.

In what sense then are we said to be justified by faith?
Not by any inward dignity or merit of faith it self, not as it is a work or
new quality in us, not by any force or efficacy of Justifying taken from
Charity, nor because it has charity adjoined to it, or works by it; not
because faith does participate of the spirit of Christ, to the end the believer
may be made righteous, for that we are commanded to seek righteousness not
in our selves but in Christ 2. Cor, 5, 2^
; But we are justified by faith in regard it does receive and embrace the
righteousness that is offered in the Gospel. Romans 1.16.17. The righteousness
of Christ, is reueiled from faith to faith. For as to justification, faith is a
thing merely passive, bringing nothing of our own to procure us favor with
God, but receiving that from Christ which is wanting in, and toe our selves.

How then is faith said to be imputed for Righteousness?
Not absolutely but by Relation; namely when it is understood not to be alone,
but with his object Christ crucified. as Romans 3.22 The righteousness of God by
the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. And verse, 25.
through faith in Christ's blood. In which places by the word faith (by a
metonymie of the thing co^taining for the thing contained) Christ crucified is
understood, but as he is apprehended by faith. In this sense, Faith was imputed
to Abraham unto righteousness or for righteousness. Romans 4.9. And faith is
imputed for righteousness unto every one that believes, that is to say,
Christ crucified apprehended by faith, is accounted our righteousness. It is
accounted (I say) of god pronouncing from his tribunal seat the sentence of
righteousness.

Even as therefore the hand that receives a treasure that is given does not
enrich us, but the treasure, that is it that enricheth; so neither does the
work or action of faith justify us, but Christ himself, whom we apprehend by
faith. And this is that that the sound Divines say, that we are justified by
faith Correlatiuely, and that faith is imputed for righteousness, by reason of
the object, which assertion is plainly proved by that of Paul. Romans 3.27.28.
Gal. 2.16. Where this sentence, We are made righteous by faith, is opposed unto
this proposition, We are justified by works, as being contradictories.
Wherefore it is manifest by the nature of contradiction, that no man is
justified by faith, as it is a work, either our work or Gods work in us, but
as it includes the merit of Christ.

To speak properly and simply, incredulity is repugnant unto faith; and to
the works of the Law, not working or the intermission of good works, is
opposite; but in respect of Justification faith which rests upon the merit of
Christ, and works which rest upon the merits of Christ are contraries.
Hereupon also it is, that Paul does oppose the righteousness of the law, and
the righteousness of faith as contraries between themselves, when Phil. 3.9.
He renounceth his own righteousness, which is by the Law, and rests upon
the righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, or from God by faith.

Why is the exclusive particle (alone) added in this proposition; We are
justified by faith alone?
That it might be understood, that the promise of salvation, is received by
faith alone, and does not depend upon any worthiness or merit of our work.

Can this exclusive particle (alone) be proved by Scripture?
Yes, it may, for Mar. 5.36. it is in express words, where Christ comforting
Iairus, says unto him, Fear not, only believe. In which words Christ does
plainly declare, that he looks for nothing but faith alone, without which
it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.

2. There is as much in effect, Gal. 2.16, Where Paul says that men are not
justified but by faith (adding expressly) and not by works; R^. 3.28. without
works: for he that takes away righteousness from works, does soundly enough
ascribe it unto faith alone. The same thing the word freely. Romans 3.24.
confirms. For this word excludes all manner of merit, and desert from him to
whom is done, either good or evil, as Ps. 35.19. They hated me freely
without a cause, that is without any cause of hatred proceeding from me.

3. The Apostle Romans 10.3. pronounces, that the Jews were therefore not
subject to the righteousness Gal. 3, 2. and
of God, because they would establish their own righteousness together with the
righteousness of faith. And Phil. 3.7.8. he affirms that although he were
unrebukable concerning the Law before men, yet he did account it as dung that
he might obtain that righteousness which is of God through faith; showing
that it is not posible that faith and works should be set together as parts or
causes of righteousness.

4. The necessity of maintaining the honor of Christ, and of comforting an
afflicted conscience in the combat, does require the exclusive particle (only).

5. To the Scripture may be added the opinion of the fathers, for Gennadius
the interpreter of Paul says, In his exposition upon the 3. chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans
For righteousness is even to believe only. And Ambrose, They are justified
freely because working nothing neither doing as much again, they are justified
by faith alone.

What then is it, that the particle (only or alone) does exclude in that
sentence, wherein we are said to be justified only by faith, or by faith alone?
Not the causes concurring, which are without us, but only the causes of the
same kind and rank with it self, which are within us, that is to say, not
the grace or mercy of God that justifies, nor the merit of Christ's death,
which is imputed unto us, for righteousness; but only the works or qualities
of us our selves and of the saints. Well, therefore is it said, that faith alone
justifies, because it is the only instrument, and sole faculty in us, by
which we receive the righteousness of Christ. So God justifies as the
efficient cause; Christ by his obedience, as the meritorious cause, faith alone
as the isntrumental cause.

But why does Paul add. Romans 4.6. Without the works of the Law?
Not because he would not have them persuaded, but as denying them to be
causes of man's Justification.

But what works are they that Paul does here exclude?
1. Not only ceremonial works (as our adversaries would have it) but even
moral works also, as appears by those sentences which he alleges for the
proof of his assertion; By the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified,
because by the Law came the knowledge of sin. Romans 3.20. and therefore not
righteousness. And. Romans 4.15. The Law causes wrath, inasmuch as no man is
able to perform it, and therefore it causes not righteousness. And Romans 7.7.
out of the Decalogue or moral Law, he cites the tenth commandment. I had
not known lust to be sin, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not lust. Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that abides not in all things that are written in
the book of the Law to do them. And verse. 12. The man which does these things
shall live in them.

2. The Apostle does not only exclude those moral works (as the same our
adversaries would make us believe) which men as yet not regenerate, do perform
literally, or by the mere light of nature, without the grace of Christ;
inasmuch as the man unregenerate (being out of Christ) can never do any thing
well; but the Apostle excludes also even the good works of the very regenerate
men, or the works of grace, or those that proceed from faith. For Abraham, who
is registered, as an universal pattern of all Justified men, was both
justified and regenerate, when he performed those good works, for the which he
obtained praise with men. But with God he was not justified, but when he had
many years excelled in holiness of life, God imputed only his faith unto him
for righteousness. Romans 4.2.3. Neither does the Prophet Habacuck speak of the
faithles, but of the faithful, when he says Chap. 2. verse. 4. The just shall
live by his faith. And David, after he was regenerate, cries out of himself,
and of other godly men. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven. And Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Yea; and the Apostle
himself. 1. Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified. And no marvel, for that indeed good works are the effects of
Justification, and not the causes thereof.

3. Our good works are few, imperfect, and always polluted, and stained with
some blemishes, and spots, that they receive from us. Esaias. 64.6. And 1. King.
8.46. There is no just man which does good, and sins not. For seeing the
form of inherent righteousness is not thoroughly let in (because after the
sense of our adversaries, Justification consists in motion) it follows that
the contrary quality, which is sin is not thoroughly let out, and shaken
off, and so in that which is imperfect, the relics of sin do still remain.

And whereas Bellarmine makes inherent righteousness to be perfect in respect
of the habit, and imperfect in respect of the action: it is but a fond devise
of his own brain; for in truth the perfection, and imperfection of the
action, depends upon the perfection and imperfection of the habit; according
to that of the Philosopher The best habit has the best action. Yea even our
former righteousness is put out of remembrance by our later sins* Ezekiel.
18.24.

4 Saint James says Chap. 2. verse. 10. He that fails in one point is
guilty of all; that is to say, he is justly and worthily condemned of the
breach of the law in general, for that he that breaks one title, has
offended against the Majesty of the law giver. Whereupon comes this rule,
The whole law is one copulative, and that the breach of one commandment
draws with it the neglect and contempt of both tables, yea and of the
lawgiuer himself; because there is but one and the same lawgiuer of all the
precepts, and the body of the law is entire and inseparable.

5 The person is not accepted and taken into Gods favor for the works sake,
but on the contrary the works do then please god, when the person has first
found grace and favor in Gods sight. And for this cause it is that it is
written. Genesis 4.4. that god had respect unto Abell and his sacrifice. And
Hebrew, 11.4. By faith Abell offered unto God a greater Sacrifice then Cain.

6 Saint Paul. 2. Cor. 5.18. testifies that the preaching of free
reconciliation with god, is perpetual in the Church; so that the faithful to
the end of this life have no other righteousness then that which is there
described.

Why then does Saint James Chap. 2 verse. 21. say that Abraham was Justified
by works?
Because he speaks not there of the cause, but of the effect whereby
justification may be discerned. For when Abraham had offered Isack his son
upon the alter, he was Justified through works (says he:) that is, he was
found to be justified even before that time by faith, and that by his works, as
testimonies of his justification. And so a man is justified by works, that is,
by the holiness of his life he is approved to be such a person as is justified
by the obedience of Christ; which holiness does follow justification as an
effect therefore, and is also a testimony and witness of the same After this
sort also god is said at the latter day, that he will justify his elect by
their works. For whereas there are two beginnings of things, one of existence,
the other of knowledge; Faith, as the beginning of Existence, causes us to be
just; and works, as the beginning of knowledge, make us to be known to be
just. And therefore the Lord at the last day, will propound the beginning of
knowledge of the righteousness by faith, which shall appear in the eyes of
all creatures. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my father, etc. For I was an
hungered and ye gave me meat, etc.

What was the state of the Question, concerning Justification in Saint Paul's
time; or whereof was the controversy in old time?
Of the efficient and meritorious cause of Justification; namely whether it
were the satisfaction of Christ apprehended by faith, or else our works; And
the relics of that controversy remain, yet in popery. For although the
subtiller sort of Papists do ascribe the beginning of justification, that is,
the first justification, as they call it, only to the merit of Christ, yet the
progress and proceeding in justification (which they call the second
justification) that they attribute to the merit of works.

But now, by the subtlety of the diuill, the whole nature of justification is
called into question. For indeed, in the Apostles time, the question was not,
whether justification were a natural motion, as it were from inherent
unrighteousness to inheren^ righteousness; or whether iustifycation were
seated in the sentence of the Judge pronounced, which is the question at this
day; but the state of the question the^ was, whether iustifycation placed in
the sentence of the judge pronounced upon the guilty person, were in regard of
works, or by reason of Christ.

By what arguments or reasons does the Apostle Paul take away from works
the cause of Justification?
1. Because we are all sinners, and from an impure nature it cannot be, that
there should proceed pure and perfect obedience toward God, to whom nothing is
acceptable, unless it be every way sound and absolute, and not spotted or
stained with any corruption, which never yet could, nor ever shall be found in
any man.

2. Because the Scripture pronounces, that there is no man righteous by the
works of the Law, no not one. And this sentence remains ever firm and
steadfast; Cursed is every one that abides not in all things that are written
in the book of the Law to do them. Gal. 3.10. But there is no man, no not the
holiest man that ever was, that could satisfy the whole law of God, as
appears by the complaint of the Apostle Paul. Romans 7.

3. Because, if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ dyed in vain. Gal.
2.21. and. 5.2.

4. Because God will have no man to glory in himself, Least any man should
boast. Ephesians. 2.8.9. Romans 3.26.27.

5. Because by the Law came the knowledge of sin, and the Law causes wrath;
that is to say, it denounces death and Judgment against them, that do not
perform perfect obedience in their works and actions Romans 4.15
.

6. Bec use the law was given after the promise of justification, and life
eternal Gal. 3.17
.

7. Because the inheritance, or life everlasting, is of free gift, and not of
merit To. 6, 23 Gal. 3.18. Ephesians. 2, 8,
.

8. Because all our sufferings are not worthy of the glory which shall be
revealed, and showed unto us, and therefore our actions are not worthy of it.
Romans 8.18. And 2. Cor. 4.20. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal weight of glory.

By what arguments does the Apostle confirm the righousnesse of faith.
1. Because it alone has the witness of the Law and Prophets To. 3, 21 Gen,
3.15, 22, 28
; and the end of the Law was Christ. To. 10.4. Circumcision was the Seal of
the righteousness of Faith. To, 4.11. The Sacrifices and Ceremonies did
prefigure Christ* and the righteousness which is by faith. Haba. 2.4. The just
shall live by his Faith. Psa. 32.1. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven. And on the contrary. Psalm. 132.2. In thy sight shall no flesh be
justified, namely, by the obedience of the Law. Act. 10.43. To Christ give all
the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe in him shall
receive remission of sins.

2. From the comparison of like and equal things, because Abraham the father
of the faithful (in the example and excellency of faith) was justified by
faith Gen, 15, 6. To. 4.13 14.
, and not by the Law. Now God is always like himself, and the case is always
alike of the believing father, and the believing children.

3. Because salvation is not promised unto him that fulfilleth the Law (for
that were a vain promise, and so our salvation always doubtful and
uncertain, because no man does fulfill the law, and we our selves should be
also uncertain, whether we had sufficient good works for the attaining of
this righteousness) but it is promised to the believer. Therefore the
inheritance is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise might be
sure, as relying wholly upon mercy; for that which proceeds from the grace
and favor of God through Christ, is firm and steadfast; but so is not that
which proceeds from us and from our works. Romans 4.16.

4. By an argument of the like in contraries, for as by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of Christ many are made righteous.
Romans 5.19.

5. By the effect; because from justification by faith alone, arises peace
with God, that is to say, security and tranquillity of conscience, or that
joy which comes from a conscience, excusing and acquiting us from sin and
death, peace toward God, confidence and hope of the glory of god that is, of
life eternal Romans 1.5, 8 35. Tit. 3, 7. 1. Ioh. 3.21.
.

6. Because the glory both of the exceeding justice, and mercy of God cannot
stand safe and fyrme, nor the merit of Christ remain whole and sound, unless
we be justified only by faith in Christ Jesus, and not by works; or if we
should be justified partly by faith, and partly by works Romans 3.19.25.26.27.
.

What is the end of our Justification?
The first and chief end in respect of God, is his glory. Ephesians. 1.6. To the
praise of the glory of his grace; and to the praise of his glory, namely,
that the praise thereof might not be given to any man, but might redound wholly
and absolutely to god alone, so that he alone might be acknowledged to be
just and merciful, and to be the iustifyer of him, which is of the faith of
Jesus. To. 3.26. In which place there is mention made of a double or twofolde
glory of GOD, the one which proceeds from his justice, that he might be
just, the second, that which proceeds from his mercy, And justifying him
which is of the faith of Jesus. For from the alone benefit of Justification
arises the manifestation of that admirable temperament of the justice and
mercy of God; and from thence Gods glory, both of his justice toward his
son in punishing of sin (who spared not his own son being made sin for
us) and likewise of his mercy toward us, imputing unto us that believe in
Christ, though we be wicked and unrighteous by nature, our faith for
righteousness.

2. The declaration of his goodness 1. Pet. 2.9. That ye should show forth the
virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.

The next end in respect of us, is that we, being made righteous by
imputation, might be accepted of God, and just, that is, might be set free
from the guilt, and excelling through the gift of Christ's righteousness.
Furthermore, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, and
that we might enjoy the fruit of righteousness which is life eternal. Romans
8.7. Tit. 3.7. That being justified, we might be made heirs of everlasting
life. Lastly, that we our selves might be bettered and made righteous. Gal.
2.17. If then while we seek to be made righteous by Christ, we our selves
are found sinners, is Christ therefore the minister of sin? God forbid. For
to this end are we justified by faith through Christ, that the old man being
abolished by the power and efficacy of Christ crucified, Christ might live in
us, and that we should by our study and labor, endeavor to bring forth good
works, show our selves thankful to god for so great a benefit. And therefore
it is that the Apostle Paul almost in all his Epistles, deriueth the Doctrine
of sanctifycation, or good works, from the Doctrine of faith or iustifycation,
as the cause from the effect, or the necessary consequent from the antecedent.

What are the adjuncts of Justification?
If you respect the actions of God therein, election and effectual vocation
do go before it Romans 8, 31
; but if ye respect man, surely not works foreseen, neither merits of
congruitie or condignity. (For says Augustine, good works do follow a man
already justified, and do not go before a man that is to be justified; as
good fruits are not before a good tree) but sins and wickedness, and the
works of the flesh To. 3, 23 and 4.5
.

The works accompanying or following it, are peace of conscience or
tranquillity and quiet of mind and conscience. Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover the
adopting of us to be sons of God, our sanctification or newness of life,
the fruits whereof are described. Gal. 5.22. For they that are made partakers
of Christ through faith, they do with him receive the holy Ghost, the author
of all holiness; from whence it is, that these two benefits are indeed
distinguished one from another, but yet so linked together by an inseperable
bond that they can never be plucked asunder; and the latter is the testimony
of the former, both in the soul of the faithful man himself, and to other
men also.

What is the effect of Justification?
Free entrance and access to God Romans 5, 2.
, our glorification To 6.22.23.20.
, which is begun in this life, and perfected in the life to come.

Is our Justification perfected in this life?
In Justification, as we are judged and accounted righteous by God, so we are
adjudged unto life eternal. So that in respect of Gods decree, and of the
sentence it self, of life eternal pronounced by God the Judge; also in
respect of righteousness, which the heavenly Judge imputes unto us; our
Justification is already perfected in this life, saving that in the life to
come, this imputed righteousness is to be revealed and made more manifest, and
to be more nearly applied and appropriated unto us. But yet our whole
justification is perfected in this life, in which a man may be said to be
fully and perfectly justified. We are the sons of God (therefore iust^fied)
but it does not yet appear what we shall be. 1. John. 3.2.

But, if you respect the execution of Gods decree, and look unto the life and
glory which is adjudged unto us, and which is to cleave and stick unto us,
because that in this life is not perfected in us, our justification therefore
may be accounted also imperfect in this life.

Can the benefis of justification perish by reason of our sins.
No, by no means, for the purpose of god cannot be deprived of his end. And
1. Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of GOD sins not (that is not unto death)
because his seed (that is the holy Ghost) abides in him. Besides the gifts
and callings of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29.

When is the use and necessity of the Doctrine of justification felt and
perceived?
1. In the serious examination of the conscience, when a man presents
himself as guilty, not before an earthly, but the heavenly Judge; for then,
being careful and pensive for his deliverance, he does willingly prostrate and
make himself of no reputation; having first considered the great majesty, and
justice of God, before which, nothing is accepted, unless it be every way
perfect and absolute Esa. 4, 5
.

2. In the imperfection of his own righteousness. Job, 4.7:18. Behold they that
serve him are not faithful, and he has found iniquity in his Angels, how
much more in them which dwell in houses of clay?

3. In the multitude and greatness of his own sins. Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord
straightly markest our iniquities, who shall be able to abide it? For being
thus seriously cast down, and humbled with the sense and feeling of our own
misery and want, and being dejected and discomforted in our selves, we do
then thirst after the grace of Christ, and fly thereunto for succor. For to
this end he says, he was sent. Esaias. 61.1. That he might preach glad tidings
to the poor, bind up the broken hearted, preach liberty to the captives, and
to them that are bound the opening of the prison; Comfort to those that mourn,
that he might give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness; and he calls none to be
partakers of his bounty, but only those that labor and are heavy laden.
Mat. 11.28. And chap. 9.13. I came not (says he) to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance. Examples whereof we have in the Publicane and the
Pharisee. Luke 18.10. and so forward.

What things are there repugnant and contrary to this Doctrine of
justification by faith?
1. The error of the Papists, who, first, teach that works of congruitie, that
is, works preparatorie, are the efficient, impulsive cause of Justification.
Secondly, that Sacraments do justify ex opere operato, by the very work
wrought. Thirdly, that we are not justified by faith alone, because, say they,
it is common to many wicked men; but yet it does justify, as it it guided by
charity, and that only as in respect of the beginning of Justification 4.
that charity is the form of righteousness. 5. That the doctrine of free
justification by faith gives liberty to sin, and weakeneth the desire of
well doing. 6. That we must stand in doubt of the forgiveness of our sins.
7. That men may satisfy the Justice of God by gay shows of there own works.
8. Distrusting the merits of Christ they fly unto the merits of good works,
and the help and succor of the saints. 9. They attribute unto the virgin
Marie the authority and power of justifying.. 10. They ascribe unto the Pope
power to sell forgiveness of sins. 11. the gift of the righteousness of
Christ imputed through faith they make a mock of. 12. They teach that a man is
justified principally for Christ's sake, and less principally for every man's
own works and merits, 13, that we are justified by an Evangelical faith,
which commands, do this and ye shall live. Luke 10.28. by the fulfilling of
the law, the ministry and absolution of the Priests, and the observation of
men's traditions. 14. That christian righteousness consists of faith and
works together. 15. That Christ has satisfied only for the fault and
offense, and not for the punishment due unto our sins. 16. that men
regenerate do in this life by their own obedience fully satisfy the law,
that they may oppose their works before Gods Judgment seat, and that they may
do many works of supererogation more then duty and more then the law
requires of them.

2 The error also of the iustitiaries who hold. 1. that Justification is not
only the pardoning and forgiving of sins, but also the sanctifying and
renewing of the inner man. 2. that Justification according to Aristotle, is a
motion toward the atteyning of righteousness. 3. that to Justify is nothing
else but to power into a man inherent righteousness or newness of life; the
former, whereby believers are endued with charity, and other virtues; the
later, whereby a man, being furnished with these qualities, does merit and
deserve more and more righteousness, and everlasting life, and that
justification is consummated and perfected by good works. 4. that Christ by his
death o^^ained this of his father that we should be endued with inherent
righteousness, and charity by the merit whereof we do obtain life and
salvation. Fifthly, they confound as one, sanctification with justification.

3. The error of Osiander, who affirms that men are made just by the
essential justice of God, that is, by that justice which is the v^rie divine
essence.

4. The error of the Libertines who teach carnal security, as if any thing
were lawful for a man to do, who is justified freely by grace.

The two and thirtieth common place. Of good works.
What are works properly?
EIther the accomplishing of actions, that is, the effects of actions ordained
for some special end, (...).
as an house is the work of him that builds it: or else the very actions
themselves, as the building of the house, calling upon god, love of our
neighbor, giving of alms etc.

To omit sundry distinctions of works, what is a good work?
To speak according to the word of god (not Philosophically or ciuilie, it is
an action whether outward, or inward, conformable to the law, and will of god.
Mat. 19.17. If you will enter into life keep the commandments. And Romans
12.2. Prove ye what that good, acceptable, and perfect will of God is.

By what names are they called?
Of the efficient or working cause, the fruits of the Spirit, of the
isntrumental; the fruits of faith: from the form, the works of the law:
of their qualities good works and good fruits.

Why does the Scripture oftener use the title of good works, then of virtue?
Because the name of virtue is very glorious among the Philosophers; whereby
they understand a voluntary habit, and a great and strong inclination, and a
natural disposition to do well: but the name of good works, is more clear,
because it signifies not only external actions, but also the inward of the
will agreeable to the word of god, although the inclinatio^s be very weak

How many kinds of good works are there?
Two: one which requires our duty toward God. Another which requires our
duty toward our neighbor.

What is the efficient cause of good works?
The proper efficient cause of them is the Holy Ghost, in respect of Christ
laid hold on by faith, working in us understanding, and will, and by the word
illuminating, changing renewing, and bowing our members which are clean turned
away from God, to the end that we may obey the will of God made known unto us.
For he works in us both to will and to do; Philip. 2.13. And without me ye
can do nothing says Christ. John. 15.5. whereupon David, Psalm. 51.12. Says
create in me a clean heart o God, and renew a constant spirit in my bowels:
hence they are called the fruits, of the spirit not of free will, unless it
be so far forth as it is made free by grace. Gal. 5.22.
The nearest efficient, or the immediate cause, and the beginning of good
works, are the humane, and natural powers of the soul, the understanding,
will and affections, but yet so far as they are in part, or in some measure
regenerate, or become spiritual. For neither the spirit, that is the new
quality begun by the inspiration of the holy ghost, which is called the
Spirit of Christ; nor the flesh (that is whatsoever relics of corruption
remains in us), or the new and the old man, have indeed either their distinct
seats in our soul, or several operations, but are mingled together one with
another in all those faculties: neither yet do these qualities so contrary
one to another, so well agree together, that with mutual consent they should
produce a mixed work, but do so wrestle together in one and the self same work
striving one against another, that one penetrating the other, then proceeds a
mixed action from them both, from their mutual not consent, but conflict, which
of the quality prevailing is accounted either the fruit of the spirit or of
the flesh.

The isntrumental cause is faith, not by her own virtue, efficacy, or
operation, but so far forth as she does, as an, instrument, apprehend that
her object, to which she is carried, namely Christ, in respect of whom alone,
the holy Ghost does renew us, creating in us both the will and the deed: and
therefore whereas faith is termed the mother, or the fountain of good works,
by a Metonymie; that is attributed to the isntrumental cause, which does
properly belong to the principal efficient cause, (as Romans 1.16. The Gospel,
that is, the preaching of the doctrine of the Gospel, is called, The power of
God to salvation) that is spoken, both because of the inseperable conjunction,
and common dependence of faith and good works. For without faith it is
impossible to please God, Hebr. 11.6. And, Whatsoever is not done of faith is
sin, Rom* 14.23. Therefore Hebr. 11.4. and so forward, all the worthy acts
in th Old Testament are ascribed to faith. By faith Abell, etc.

What is the matter of good works?
The things themselves where about such works are conversant, and which the
moral law of God does entreat of, and prescribes: Whatsoever things are true,
honest, just, pure, to be loved, of good report, if there be any virtue, If
there be any praise, think of such things. Phil. 4.8.

What is the form of good works?
As the essence and form of sin, and an evil work is Anomie, and (...)
swaruing from the law; so conformity of our actions unto the commandment of
God, is the form of a good work. And therefore not the traditions, or
commandments of the Church, but the word of God, (whereunto to add any thing,
or to detract is an horrible sin) is the only square and rule of good
works. psa. 119.4 Deuteronomy. 4.2
Neither are any of those things to be esteemed in the number of good works, in
the sight of God, which are grounded on the bare will of man. Math. 15.9. In
vain do they worship me with the doctrines of men. And Ezech. 20.18. Walk
ye not in the precepts of your fathers, but in my precepts walk ye.

Whether is it sufficient, that some work should be good and agreeable to the
law of God, if that it be done according to the law of God, in outward show?
No, but 1. There is also required the inward synceritie of the mind which
proceeds from faith, whereby the heart is purified Act. 15.9
.

2 That we be certainly persuaded in our minds out of his word, that that
which we do pleases God. For Romans 14.23. whatsoever is done without faith,
(that is whatsoever we take in hand, with a doubting conscience, whether it
please God, and therefore whether it be commanded of God, or not) it is a sin.

3 It is required that we have respect unto god, and to his glory alone, as
the chief end of a good work. For the pharisaicall Hypocrite gives alms,
the publican not justified gives also: but his is abominable in the sight of
God, because he desires to be seen of men. mat. 6.1.
. But this man's alms is a good work not only because it is commanded, but
also because it is done with sinceritye of the heart, and in faith, to the
glory of God. And therefore virtues are to be discerned from vices not so much
by the skill moving them, as by the ends.

What then are good works?
Such as are done in true faith according to the law of god, and are referred
to his glory alone. Tim 1.5. Deuteronomy. 4.2 1. Cor. 10.31 Colos. 3.17
.

Who are they that do good works?
Only the Regenerate: For whereas the law of God does especially require that
fountain of syncerity in the heart Mat. 3.33
, and from thence the respect of Gods glory, truly the work of the
unregenerate, although it appear very glorious, yet cannot simply and
properly be called by the name of a good work, because that which is good is
not well done of them, that is in faith to the glory of God. And therefore the
work is not living, but dead, as a fig leaf, Genesis 3.7
covering only the inward vices: for an evil tree, cannot bring forth good
fruit Math. 7.18. and Cap, 12.33. whatsoever is done by the impure is impure
Job. 14, 4 Tit. 1.15
yet it may be called good, but in use, not in worship. But a man now already
regenerate to wit, who has recovered some part of the synceritie of his heart
by faith, according to the measure of integrity and sincerity of his heart
which he has recovered, is fit in part to perform good works.

Are not Cornelius his works praised before he was baptized, and believed in
Christ. Act. 10.4.
He is called a devout man, and one that feared God, verse 22, Therefore now,
before he received the Sacrament of Baptism, he was converted unto the
acknowledging of the true God, neither was he utterly without faith in the
Messiah. Besides he is said to pray continually, and his alms were accepted,
and his prayers are said to be heard of God. But it is impossible for any man,
or for any man's work to please God without faith. Heb. 11.6. Therefore he had
the beginnings of faith in Christ, and therefore was now justified and
regenerate, although as yet, he was not instructed in the full and clear
knowledge of Christ, and yet knew not that he was come. For which cause Peter
was sent unto him, who should more fully teach him.

Are the good works of the regenerate pure, and perfectly good, and blemished
with no fault?
No, 1 Because the Scripture speaks to the contrary Esa. 64.5 Ia. 3.2
.

2 That any work be pure and in every respect good, it is not sufficient, that
that which is done, be not done without the holy Ghost, and without faith, but
also it is further required, that the first beginnings, of a good work in man,
to wit, the understanding, will, and affections, do most fully obey the spirit
of God; which is granted to no mortal man, Christ alone excepted: But there
does ever remain in us, and in every faculty of our soul, the new and and
the old man, spirit, and flesh, the law of the mind, as it is renewed by the
spirit of GOD, not as it is of nature, and the law of sin: and the inner man
is renewed daily, and the flesh strives against the spirit, so long as we
carry this mortal body about us, as the Apostle witnesses. Romans 7.23. I see
another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind.

Therefore seeing the natural faculties of our soul, which are the nearest
causes of humane actions, are not altogether spiritual, and regenerate:
neither the flesh that is the corruption of nature is not fully wiped away of
them, neither is the faith perfect, neither the spirit, and the flesh (although
distinct yet) have their several seats and abode in us, or work a sunder
severally, but mixtly.

It follows that there is no work of any regenerate man, though never so
excellent, which is fully pure, or in every part thereof is pure from all
defilement of the flesh, and in some other part altogether vicious, and is not
wholly mixed with something of the flesh: although comparatively it be to be
judged a good work, wherein the spirit resisting the flesh does prevail, as
they are evil works wherein the flesh does overcome: whereupon Paul says of
himself being regenerate, I do not the good that I would, but the evil
which I would not, that I do. Romans 7.19.

How then are they said to be perfect Genesis 6.9. Psalm. 7.9 Luk 1.6
. And easy to all that be borne anew? mat. 11.30
.
Not because of the perfection of degrees, that is, the extreme rigor of the
law, requiring perfect fulfilling thereof in the highest degree; but first for
the perfection of the parties, that is, the integrity of obedience conformed
according to all the commandments of God, and not some only. 2 Because of the
synceritie of the heart, being void of counterfaiting and hypocrisy. 3 Because
of the presence of Christ's spirit, wherewith the regenerate are led Romans 8.1.2
. 4 Also by grace, whereby they be delivered from the curse of the law. 5
Lastly, because of faith, whereby all that is borne of God overcomes the
world. 1. John. 5.4.5.

Seeing that which is good only in part, cannot satisfy the law of God, and
therefore that cannot please God, which has the least imperfection in it, how
then do the good works of the regenerate please God?
Not by reason of the worthiness of the work in it self, or for the
excellency, order, or condition of the man: for they are altogether unworthy
in themselves to appear in the sight of God, because they are not the
fulfilling of the law. But 1 by means of the person by faith reconciled,
accepted and pleasing God, and just through Christ: even as Genesis 4.4. The Lord
had respect to Abell and to his sacrifice, but to Cain and his sacrifice he had
no regard. And, Hebr. 11.5. The person of Enoch pleased God, and therefore his
works also, and because the person pleases GOD by faith, they are imputed unto
righteousness, that is, they are esteemed as just, as it is written of the
zeal of Phinebes, when he thrust through the fornicators. ps. 106.33.
.

2 They please God, because they are brought into light, into the sight of God,
with the covering and veil of the merit, and most perfect righteousness of
Christ, applied by faith wherewith the blemishes, and defects of our good works
are covered.

3 Because God does mercifully approve, and crown them, not as they are in
themselves, but as the works of his own spirit in us, and as the testimonies
of our faith.

4 So far forth as he does consider them, not as they are in themselves, (but
as they are presented in the obedience of Christ our Mediator) in whom being
most severely punished, and in his blood purged, he beholds all those things
which did make discord between us and him.

5 Our obedience being but begun does please God, as it were in the children of
obedience, not of themselves, or their own worthiness, but through Christ
according to that, 1. Pet. 2.5. Offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God through Christ. For which cause also the regenerate are sometimes called
perfect. genesis 17, 1
Saints and undefiled in the way. psa, 119.1
Just, without rebuke, unblameable, unreprovable. Luke 1.6
.

1 Not legally, but euangelically, not simply and absolutely, but by way of
comparison, or comparatively, namely so as perfect are opposed to rude.

2 By imputation, because the person is accounted just, holy, unblameable,
perfect before God through Christ.

3 Also inchoatiuely, because the new life is begun in them.

4 In affection, not in action: I say in affection unto godliness, not in the
perfect action of godliness in the sight God, unless it be by imputation.

What are the Adjuncts, or the appurtenances of works?
There be two, merit and recompense, or reward.

What is merit?
In general it is an accident of works, which respects either the reward of
a good deed, or the punishment of an evil deed.

How manifold is merit.
Two fold, the merit of punishment, which is usually called the guiltiness or
binding over to punishment: and the merit of reward, which retayneth the
general name of merit, and it is a duty or good turn, not due, and
profitable for him to whom it is performed, and which does respect a just
recompense, or reward To,. 47
.

What is recompense?
It is the fruit which is given to him that works for his work, and
respects the desert, and by another name it is called wages: and it is
double, either reward or punishment.

What is the proper adiunct of wages?
Due or debt for wages properly is nothing else but that which is given of due
or debt: for that which is given is general; but it is restrained as it were
by these differences, Grace, and debt. For that which is given, is given either
of favor, and is a free gift: or else it is given of debt, and is wages
properly so called, but in general, wages is used for that which is given,
whether it be given of favor, or of debt. And so there is a double reward or
wages, one is due, the other is not due, or freely given, as it appears, Romans
4.4. To him that works the wages is counted not of favor, but of debt.
Whereby it is gathered that by the name of wages is signified, in the
Scriptures, even a free gift. For that which is called, Math. 5.46. Wages.
Luke, 6.32. is called favor or free gift. So as the schoolmen do vainly
dream of a mutual relation between merit and wages out of Math. 6.1. For
that reward alone which is due of debt, does put on the merit of works, but
that which is not due debt, or free does not. And we do freely confess the
good works of just men have a most liberal remuneration or recompense both in
this life, and also in the life to come, but by favor, not of debt.

What is debt?
It is that which a man is bound to pay: and it is double; debt by order of
justice, for the payment whereof a man is bound, by reason of the excellency
and worthiness of the benefit bestowed upon him, and this properly is called
debt. But improperly that is called debt which is due by covenant, and free
promise, or because it is so couenanted and agreed upon. Out of all which it
follows, that that properly is a merit or a meritorious work, whereunto by
reason of the excellency thereof something is due by order of justice.

What then, are the good works of men meritorious in the sight of God?
If you speak of evil works, we affirm that they are meritorious, taking
the name of merit properly, and punishment is due unto them, taking the name
of debt properly, for the wages of sin is death. Romans 6, 23. But if we
speak of good works, we deny out of the promises, that any good work, no
not of the most most excellent creature, does merit at the hands of GOD,
because the scripture expressly teaches it, Romans 4.4. To him that works,
etc. And Chap. 11.6. If it be of works, then not of grace Ephesians. 2.8.9
.

2 Because Christ has sufficiently by his own merit deserved eternal life
for us Mat, 20.28 Ioh, 16, 2 1 Ti. 1.10 Heb 9, 12
.

3 Because all our boasting must be taken away Ephesians. 2, 9 1 Cor, 4.4
,

4 Because the nature and condition of a merit, does require these three
things.

1 That that work whereby we merit be free, not due from us to him, to whom
we do perform that work of ours. But whatsoever good we do, it is only
some part of our duty toward God, which we owe unto him Luk, 17.9 10. etc
To. 8.12
, and who has given to the Lord first, and it shall be restored to him again.
Romans 11.35.

2 That the self same work of ours, and gift which is offered be profitable
and commodious for him, of whom we merit, but no action of ours brings any
profit to God. Psalm. 16.2. My good doing reaches not unto thee. Job. 22.2.
For the Lord has no need of any thing of ours, Psalm. 50, 11.12.

3 It is required that the thing we offer be proportionable; and in price and
worthiness equal to that thing which we do receive of another, and
wherewith another does recompense us To. 1, 27
. But no good works of ours are worthy, that is proportionable to salvation
and life eternal, which we receive of GOD, because there is no proportion
between our good works and life eternal.

Rom, 8, 18
Therefore to conclude; our good works merit nothing at the hands of God, and
for this cause eternal life is called the free or gracious gift of God. Rom,
6.23.

Further we deny that simply God owes any thing to a good work, if the name
of debt or wages be taken properly: for neither is there any such excellency
of any good work whatsoever, that god should be indebted to it by the order of
justice. Luke 17.9
does the Lord thank that servant because he did those things that were
commanded him? I trow not. Although it cannot be denied that reward is due to
good works by covenant and free promise, to wit if they be perfect. Romans 4.4.
to him which works namely to him that perfectly fulfilleth the law, reward
is counted to him of debt: and in the law, showing mercy to thousands of them
that keep his commandments etc. Exodus 20.

Is there any thing then due to the good works of the regenerate, at least by
covenant and promise?
No. 1. Because we live not under that legal covenant of works, wherein God
couenanteth with man under condition of the works of the law. but we are
under the couenante of grace, wherein god makes a couenante with man, under
condition of Christ's merit to be laid hold on by our faith.

2 Because though we grant that we are still under the couenante of the law,
yet according to that covenant and promise made therein, God owes not any
thing to our works, but death: for our works, even in the state of
regeneration are imperfect, neither can they endure to be examined according to
that rule of the law of god, unless you would make that law of God, so holy
and so perfect, a leaden rule, as the papists do at this day.

Are there not also in the Gospel every where promised many blessings both
temporal and eternal to our good works?
In deed they are promised as Psalm. 84.12. He will not deprive them of good
things that walk in innocence. 1. Timoth. 4.8. godliness has the promise of
this life and of that that is to come. Math. 5.12. your reward is great in
heaven. Luc. 6.38, Give, and it shall be given, unto you. Math. 25.29. to him
that has it shall be given, and the faithful servant shall have rule over
many things. And. Cap 10.42. he that shall give a cup of cold water in my name
shall not lose his reward, And Cap. 19.29. he that shall leave house, brethren
sisters etc.: for my sake shall receive an hundred fold in this life and shall
inherit eternal life. Reuela. 22.14. Blessed are they that keep his
commandments, that they may have right unto the tree of life, and may enter
by the gates into the City. But yet not under condition of works which should
procure those benefits unto us: but as they do manifestly show unto us, and
prove as effects better known to us, that we are pertakers of that condition
which is in the couenante of grace, whereby alone it being fulfilled, those
benefits are procured: neither are they bestowed on us, as of debt, but as free
rewards.

How do the promises which are made in the gospel with condition of works,
differ from the Legal promises?
1 All the promises which are to be found in the gospel with condition of
works are made in Christ, and for Christ's sake and for his merit sake.

2 They be altogether frank and free, therefore the reward is not given of
debt or by couenante, because we have fulfilled the condition of works, but of
mere grace and mercy, and for Christ's sake and his merit.

But the Legal promises are not made for Christ's sake, nether is reward given
to them of mere grace, but for the condition of works performed, and observed,
which is impossible to man.

What then, are the Legal promises concerning the reward of good works to
no purpose?
Truly they are, for they perform nothing, unless the condition of perfect
obedience be performed, do this and thou shall live. Yet they are performed and
become profitable through the gos- in them that believe, not because they
fulfill the law but because they believing through Christ are reconciled unto
god, and the law through faith is established. Romans 3.31. both because he has
perfection which believes in Christ, says Ambrose: as also Romans 10.4. Christ
is the end and fulfilling of the law to every one that believes: hence. 2.
Cor. 1.10. All the promises in Christ are yea and amen; that is to say, in
Christ alone they are propounded to be exhibited, and to be performed.

Does not the merit of Christ at the least give the virtue and efficacy
thereof to our works, that they may merit and deserve the grace and favor of
God?
Christ has merited for us Justification, Regeneration, and life eternal; but
that we our selves should merit even any the least benefit, much less those
special benefits, he has not merited. For then there should be some thing
detracted from the mere grace of God, and Christ's merit, if we should in any
part come into participation of merit with him. Therefore Paul, Romans 4.4. does
so sever works and grace, thar granting works, he denies grace. To him that
works, says he, reward is not imputed of grace. And Romans 11.6. he shows
such a disagreement between works, which those men call meritorious, and
grace, that the one of them being granted, the other must needs be denied. But
if it be of grace, then not of works, else grace should be no grace. The same
is to be said of Christ's merit: for seeing that the merit of Christ, and grace
do necessarily stand together, Christ's merit and ours can by no means agree
together.

Does not Paul in those places speak of works done by mere natural men
before regeneration?
Nay, but rather he speaks of good works which cannot be done without faith
To. 14.23
. And of the works of Abraham the father of the faithful To. 4.2.3 23.
. And there was never yet any question of the works of the unregenerate,
seeing they are all sins, though some be more heinous then others. For Ephesians.
2.3. By nature we are all the children of wrath, to wit passiuely, that is, in
danger of the judgment of God, being angry with us, and Hebr. 11.6. It is
impossible without faith to please God.

Seeing the Scripture does commend unto us this rule of the judgment to come
in these words, God will give every man according to his works, Psalm. 62.15.
Math. 16.27. Romans 12.6. Rev. 22.12. shall sentence be given according to works,
as causes deserving the recompense either of life or of death?
If you speak of the works of the Reprobate, it cannot be denied, but they
shall be the cause of the sentence of death which shall be given. But if we
speak of the works of the elect, then we affirm that God will give sentence
of life eternal, and that he will reward the elect according to their works,
yet, not as causes of life and reward, but as certain effects
demonstrations, and tokens testifying of the causes themselves.

But the true and only causes are, the decree of God from all eternity: also
vocation and justification in time, as that place proves, Math. 25.34. wherein
we have the express form, and manner of the judgment to come. Come says
he, ye blessed of my father, take possession of the kingdom prepared for you
before the foundations of the world were laid. For this calling of them by
name, and putting them in possession of the kingdom of heaven, does
sufficiently show the cause why the elect are put in possession of the kingdom
of heaven, to wit, because they be, blessed with all spiritual blessing in
Christ, Ephesians. 1, 1.2. being freed from the curse of the law Gal, 3, 14
, they are the heirs, and sons of God by his free promise, and therefore
called and justified. For adoption, vocation, and justification are parts of
that blessing of God in time. Whereupon those whom before, verse 34. he had
called the blessed of his father, verse 37. he calls just, and calls the
very kingdom of heaven it self an inheritance.

2 They prove the cause of salvation to be laid in the eternal decree of God,
because before the foundation of the world, there was prepared for those
blessed ones, that is, which were called and justified in time, that kingdom,
into possession whereof he will put them.

3 That particle, according, or even as, in those sayings, does not signify
the cause, but the conformity: as in that, 1. Corin. 13.12. That I may know,
according to that, that is, even as I am known. So, GOD shall give to every
one according to his works, that is, even as he has done good or evil.

But the causes of death whereunto the reprobate shall be adjudged are placed out
of themselves, to wit the malediction of God, and the decree of God (for the
king shall say Math. 25.41. get ye hence ye cursed into everlasting fire:) and
yet they let not, but that their works also be the cause of damnation. Are not
then besides those causes of the benediction and decree of God, the good
works of the elect in like manner the causes of salvation?
There is not the like reason of evil works and of good works: For evil
works are our own, and merit unto us: but good works are not our own, but
works of the holy ghost in us, and such as we owe unto God. Luke 17.10


Besides, evil works are perfectly evil, and even the least evil that can
be, deserves death: but good works are imperfectly good: and there is nothing
but that which is in every respect absolute and perfect can procure life, and
that also by promise: Therefore good works cannot be numbered among the causes
(of salvation.)

Add moreover that the Apostle does manifestly attribute the sentence of life
to faith embracing the gospel. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. when he shall come (says he) to
be made glorious in his saints, and to be made wonderful in them that believe
(because faith is esteemed as our witness in that day.)

Whether is there in those words, Come ye blessed only a calling and adiudging
them to life: and then after follows the cause taken from their works, for I
was hungry and ye gave me to eat?
Yea the compellation or calling, and the proposition does co^taine the cause
of the sentence: and the reason is added after from the effects, proving that
cause, and testifieng of it, as though he should say thus, Enter ye into
heaven, because ye are blessed, and ordained unto the kingdom of heaven: For
by your good works ye have declared that ye are blessed, and from all eternity
ordained to the kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore will he give sentence according to works?
Because works are better known to us, as the effects which be better known
then the causes themselves: now it is the will of GOD that in that Judgment all
things should be visible, and perceived by sense; that judgment may be given
of true and lively faith by her natural properties and true effects, least we
should boast of the visard of faith, or the shadow of it in stead of true faith.

Again, not to show the cause of salvation, but to the intent we should be
stirred up to the study of good works, for so much as we are certain we
shall not lose our labor.

In what respect then is life eternal called a reward?
In a general signification, and according to the proper phrase of the
Scripture, whereby wage does signify not by relation, but absolutely the
extreme part or the end of any thing. Also reward, yet free, yea a gift, as
Paul declares, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. Not as a cause but as a consequence, because that though eternal life be
given for another cause, to wit, for the merit of Christ apprehended by faith,
yet it is given also as an appurtenance in recompense of the labors and
miseries which the godly suffer in this life as Christ says Mat. 19.29.
Whosoever forsakes houses, or brethren etc. For my name sake, shall receive an
hundred fold and shall inherit eternal life: even as the inheritance is given
to the son, not fot doing his duty, but because he is a son according to
that common saying, As soon as the son is borne the portion is due. as also
in recompense of his obedience.

And why does God promise reward to the good works of his children?
Because they believe: now they which believe are righteous through the
righteousness of Christ imputed unto them, and to the just, life is promised and
abundance of all good things.

To what purpose does he thus promise?
1. That they might be spurred on to do their duty more cherefully.

2. That they might be testimonies of Gods providence, because the goods of
this life come from him, and are distributed at his pleasure according to the
saying in the Proverbs: Pro. 10, 20.
The blessing of the Lord makes rich: and that he will preserve his Church in
this life, and provide for his: wherefore Christ says, Seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and other things shall be added unto
you. Math. 6.33.

3 That God might stir up his to believe, to call upon him, to hope, and
giving of thanks, according to that Psalm. 50.15. I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.

4 That they might be remembrances, and pledges of the promise of grace, for
which they are bestowed upon us.

What causes ought to provoke us to live well?
1 The commandment of God, whereunto all creatures should obey. 1 Thessalonians.
4.3. This is the will of God even your sanctificaiton.

2 Our duty which we owe, that we may declare our thankfulness toward him.
Romans 8.12. We are debtors to God, and not to the flesh: neither are we our own
men, but his who has elected us to holiness of life. Luke. 17.10. he has
redeemed us from all iniquity, and cleansed us in the blood of Christ, that we
might be made followers of good works Luke 1.74, 75. 1 Cor, 16.19 20.
.

3 The necessity of order, of the cause and the effect, for a good tree
brings forth good fruit. Math. 7.17. and they that are lead by the spirit of
God are the sons of God. Romans 8.14. 1. John. 3.9. Every one that is borne of
God does not commit sin, that is, by affirming the contrary, he endeavors
after holiness, because the seed of God abides in him, that is, the holy Ghost,
so called by the effect, because by his virtue, as it were by a certain seed
we are made new men.

4 Faith which cannot be kept, where we go on in sin against conscience. 1.
Tim. 1.19. Fight the good fight, having faith and good conscience, which being
put away, some have made shipwreck of faith.

5 The excellency of good works, because through Christ they are that worship
which pleases God, or sacrifices of thanksgiving seasoned with faith, as it
were with salt, kindled with the holy Ghost, as it were with fire from heaven,
and sanctified by the merit of Christ, and accepted of God through Christ. 1.
Pet. 2.5.

6 Our own dignity: For being justified we are the sons of God, the holy
Temple of GOD, Kings and Priests anointed of the holy Ghost, wherewith being
clothed we ought to publish the righteousness of God, in thought, word, and
deed, and the praises of God by confession.

7 The promises of Gods blessings as well corporal as spiritual. Leuit.
26.34. Deuteronomy. 28. Esa. 1.19
If ye will walk in my precepts, I will give you rain in due season; and
the free reward of our patience and obedience toward God, as Moses Heb. 11.26.
is said, to have respect to the recompense of revvard, because, 1. Timoth. 4.8.
Godliness has the promises of this life, and that which is to come.

8 The good that comes by them, for we must do good works, to further our
neighbor by our godliness, to glorify GOD, and to stop the mouth of the
adversaries Luk, 6.7. 1 Pet. 2.12 14. etc. Titus. 2.8.
.

9 That by the fruits of faith we may be made more certain of our election,
and vocation, and being made new creatures, may nourish in our selves the hope
of life eternal. 2. Peter. 1.10. James. 2.17.

Why must we avoid evil works?
1 Because they displease God, Psalm. 5.5. Thou art not a God that delightest
in iniquity, neither shall the wicked dvvell with thee: and they provoke him
to anger, thou hate all those which work wickedness. verse. 6.

2 They do dishonor the profession of the Gospel, and the glory of God,
Romans 2, 24. For your sakes is the name of God evil spoken of, among the
Gentiles: as Nathan says to David. 2. Sam. 12.14. Thou have caused the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme by this means.

3 Because they draw down upon us punishments, both public and private,
wars, famine, pestilence, etc. Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc. If thou vvilt not hear the
voice of the Lord thy God, Leuit. 26.3 14. etc.
thou shall be cursed when thou go forth into the field. etc. Again, Thou
do chastise the sons of men for their iniquities. Psalm. 90.8.

4 Because there follows the tyranny of Satan, into whose power the
reprobate are delivered up, in whose snares they are taken captives, and do
his whole pleasure. 2. Tim. 3.26.

5 Because by ill doing all spiritual exercises are hindered, faith is
weakened, the conscience wounded, calling one God disturbed, and ceased, the
holy ghost grieved. Ephesians. 4.30. do not ye grieve that holy spirit of God
wherewith ye are sealed.

6 They deserve eternal damnation as Paul witnesses, they that do such
things have noe part in the kingdom of god, neither shall they possess it,
Galat. 5.21. and 1. Cor. 6.10.

Are good works necessary to salvation.
The question is ambiguous, for if it be taken in this sense, that our good
works are so necessary to salvation that they are the cause or merit of
righteousness, salvation and life eternal; it is false. But if it be
understood, that new obedience is necessary, so as it be a duty which we owe,
and an effect necessarily following reconciliation, it is true.

2 Because god will save noe man without repentance: and the gift of the holy
ghost is necessary to life eternal, as Christ says. John. 3.3. unless a man
be borne again etc.

3 Because faith without which it is impossible for any man to be saved, cannot
be without good works, and faith has charity ever joined with her, though
not in action, yet in possibility. Gal. 5.6


4 Because Bernard says good works are the way to the kingdom, not the cause
of reigning Neither can any man attain to life eternal but by the way of good
works, which God has prepared that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 1.4. and.
2.10.

What is to be observed in the sayings of the Scriptures wherein
justification, salvation, and life eternal is ascribed to works?
1 Legal sentences are to be understood of perfect good works, such as none
can be found in no creature: But evangelical sentences do always include
faith in our works. And we must understand that by faith in the first place,
justification is received, and acceptance to life eternal: afterward in the
second place and by consequence, works are accepted as the fruits of fairh,
and life eternal is promised to these for Christ's sake.

2 In such sayings there are not brought forth arguments from the cause, why
the person is made partaker of eternal life, but it is showed from the effects
or the adjuncts, what person is partaker of remission of sins and life
eternal, So Luke 7.47. Christ plainly proves in way of resolution by this
argument, that the woman's sins were pardoned, because she loved much. But
twoe diverse questions are at no hand to be confounded. The one to whom life
eternal is given, the other for what cause it is given. To them that do well
and meditate in the law of God, is happiness and life eternal promised Psalm.
1.13 and. 119.1.2 Math. 25.3
, but yet it is given freely for Christ's sake. psalm. 32, 1


3 In this question we must remember to observe a rule of the Rabbines
concerning the holy Scriptures. In every place wherein thou lightest on an
objection for an heretics, thou find a medicine in the side thereof. So the
scripture, wheresoever it ascribes eternal life to works as a reward,
calls it an inheritance. math. 25 35. Colloss. 3.24


4 When as diverse effects do depend alike of one and the self same cause, the
consequence from one effect avails to another because of their common
dependence as. Luke 7.47. the consequence from love auailes (to prove) the
remission of sins: because each of them depends on faith.

5 Where there is a subject there is his propriety, and on the contrary where
there is a propriety there is his subject. So where there is faith there be
works, and where there be good works there is faith.

6 Seeing good works do spring from faith, whatsoever is attributed to them,
must needs be ascribed to the root (i. faith whence they spring)

What is the end and use of good works?
It is three fold. 1. The glory of God, namely that by them we should glorify
God before men. Mat. 5.16


2 The testification of our true faith that we may make our calling and
election sure to our selves in our own consciences. 2. Pet. 1.10. And also
that we may live suitable to the gospel and our calling. Ephesians. 4.1. I beseech
you walk worthy of the calling wherewith you are called.

3 The edification of our neighbor, 2 Cor, 9
which is done whilst that we further him by our works, or provoke him to do
the like. 11. 12. 13 Act. 3.14
.

What is contrary to this doctrine?
1 Evil works.

2 The error of the papists, who teach that good works may be done without
faith, as also of them that think they are perfect, which boast of the
perfection and purity of works, and securely rest in them. Also their error
who brag of their merits of congruity and condignity, and boast of the works
of supererogation which teach that their wilworships, Numb. 15.39. Ezekiel, 20.18
19 Mat. 15.19
that is worships of there own devising are acceptable to god. Which account
these for good works which are done with good intent, and lean only on the
will and tradition of men: which imagine that the violating of these is more
heinous then of the commandments of God. As for that which is said that we
must hear the guides even as Christ himself Luke 10.16, Heb. 13.17
, it must be understood only of the true pastors of the Church which watch for
the salvation of the souls committed to their charge: And the error of them
who affirm that man is justified before God by works, as causes: and sclander
us that we contemn good works, as though this were in controversy between us
and them, whether good works are to be done, whereas we do more carefully urge
this then they do

3 Of the Epicures or libertines, which neglect good works as unprofitable,

The three and thirtieth common place. Of Christian liberty.
What do you understand by this name Christian liberty?
NOT looseness, or in general simply every liberty, but in some respect
restrained to some certain kind, and certain degrees. For this Epithet, or
title, Christian or spiritual, puts a difference, whereby this special kind of
liberty is discerned from civil, and bodily liberty, and from the
counterfeit liberty of other sects. Neither yet is it contrary to bodily and
civil liberty Ephesians, 6.5 1 Cor. 7, 22
, or to that service, that we owe to God, and to justice 1 pet. 2.16 and: Romans
6.18
. 1. Cor. 7.22. He that is called being free, is the servant of Christ, that
is, he ought to serve Christ.

Again, whereas we speak of Christian liberty, we must put difference
between the liberty of the will, whereof we have spoken in the common place
of freewill: and the liberty of the person whereof here we are to entreat.

In Greek it is called (...) 2. Cor. 3.17. for where the spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty.. In Latin it is called libertas, liberty, or setting
free; not that it it is done by force, as in old time, when the Lord delivered
the people from Pharaoh, unless it be in respect of Satan, whose power and
kingdom Christ has destroyed: neither is it obtained with the leave of our
enemies, as when the people returned out of Babylon, but by the full price paid
not to Satan, but to God, (...)
which the Apostle calls, the price of our redemption, whereby we are made
free.

How manifold is personal liberty?
Paul sets it down to be twofold, not in the kinds, but in respect of the
degrees, one whereby Christ having paid that endless price, namely his blood,
we are redeemed, that we might be set free from the slavery of sin, death,
and the Law Ephe. 1.7. Romans 7.6.
, which for instruction sake we may call the Redemption of liberty. Whereof
the Apostle makes mention, Romans 6.22. Now are we made free from sin, but
are the servants of God, and 8.2, Christ has set me free from the law of
sin and death.

The other whereby we shall be wholly redeemed into full and perfect liberty
Epb, 1, 14.
. And this is called the redemption of liberty that is, freedom of liberty,
or of deliverance. And Romans 8.21, The glorious liberty of the sons of God.
Luke 21.28
. And the redemption of our bodies. Romans 8.23. We may term that, only
begun, this perfect. For though we be made free by the first kind of liberty,
yet in some part we are held in some slavery, by the power of sin, so as we
cannot do that we would Gal. 5.17.
. And the servitude of corruption, yea even death it self, does hold us
fettered in her chains, until that day of redemption Ephesians. 4.30
, when Christ shall by his power, set us free, being redeemed by himself. For
we are only saved by hope, Romans 8.24. and 1. John. 3.2. Now are we the sons
of God, and free indeed Mat 5.17.25.
, but it has not yet appeared what we shall be, but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like unto him, even as he is.

Like unto this shall that our deliverance be, or the restoration of the
creature, not of the Angels, or of every particular man, but of the frame of
the heavens, and of the elements, whereby it shall be delivered from the bondage
of corruption, whereunto now it is subject, into the liberty of the glory of
the sons of god, that is into that happy estate of incorruption, which shall be
made manifest when the sons of God shall be exalted into glory. For there shall
be new heavens and a new earth. 2. Pet. 3.13. 2, pet. 3.21, To. 8, 19.20, 21
now in this place we do especially speak of the first kind of liberty.

What is christian liberty?
It is a spiritual liberty, whereby we that truly believe are freed, and set
at liberty by the blood of Christ: from the slavery of sin, and the tyranny
of the devil.

2 From the accusation, burden and curse of the law, the weight of Gods
anger, Damnation and eternal death.

3 And being endued with the spirit of adoption, of liberty and illumination,
we are delivered from the veil of the heart, that is from the miserable
blindenes of error, and the bondage of darkness which was brought upon us by
Adams sin, lastly from the yoke of the ceremonies of the law, of meats,
drink, days, of apparel of the body, and from such necessary observing of
d^fference, in things indifferent, and so from all humane traditions; to the
end that we might willingly and cheerfully as well in soul as in body serve
God in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. Romans 4.12.13.14.
1. Cor. 9.27. Gal, 3.45. Tit. 2.11, 12
.

What is the cause of this liberty?
The chief efficient cause is god, the meritorious is Christ alone the
deliverer, as. Ioh. 8.36. It is expressly said If the son make you free you
shall be free indeed. And. Gal. 5.1. stand fast in that liberty whereby christ
has made you free. For he has purchased this liberty for us with his own
precious blood. Col. 1.14 1. Pet. 1.18
. The cooperator is the holy Ghost, 2. Cor. 3.17. where the spirit of the Lord
is there is liberty, who is also both the earnest, and witnesser of the same.

There be two isntrumental causes namely the truth or the gospel, wherein
this liberty is propounded Ier. 34.15. Behold I preach liberty. John. 8.32.
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free And faith, whereby
it is embraced. Romans 5.2. By faith are we brought into this grace wherein we
stand; the subject is every one that believes, whether Grecian or Jew, whether
male or female, whether bond or free. 1. Cor. 7.22. Gal. 3.28.


The manner or form of this spiritual liberty is not perceived by the sense
of man, but it is wrought secretly whilst that the souls of the faithful are
besprinkled, and washed in the blood of the son of God, and are reformed by
the holy ghost, and their consciences purified by faith from dead works, to
serve the living god, Heb. 9.14. By which means it comes to pass, that this
liberty wheresoever it is has these accidents or properties, righteousness,
peace, a good conscience. and joy in the holy ghost. Romans 14.17 1. Ti. 3.3
And therefore Joseph inioyeth this liberty although a slave and bound in
prison. Genesis 39, 20.21.
Daniell sitting amongst the lions. Dan. 6.17 23.
Lazarus full of botches and boiles. Luke 16.20 22.


In what things does it consist, or how many parts has it, or how many
degrees be there of this liberty?
Four. 1. The first is a deliverance from sin and death which is wrought by
the remission of sin that it be not imputed, by the mortifieng of the flesh
least it prevail: and by freeing us from the second death according to the
saying of Paul. Romans 8 1.2. there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ: For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus that is the
spirit of Christ, or the grace of regeneration, has freed me from the law,
the authority and force of sin and death, and therefore this is called, the
liberty of righteousness, Col, 1, 14, Heb. 9.15
and of life, and the remission of sins Ephesians. 1.7.
and transgressions g. the law of the spirit of life, that is Christ's
holiness, inherent in Christ which is in Christ Jesus himself, has freed me
from the law of sin and of death.

How are we said to be freed from sin, seeing it does always dwell in us,
and. John. 1.8. If ye say we have no sin we deceive our selves and the truth
is not in us?
We must distinguish between sin reigning, and sin subdued: Romans 6, 6. etc.
so also between the matter and the form of sin: For we are freed from the
reigning and dominion of sin which dwells in us, also from the form or the
guilt of sin: whereupon is that. 1. John. 3.6. we read, whosoever abides in
him sins not, that is, greedily, with desire to obey it, slavishly and
without all resisting of it a, that is to say, he that is truly partaker of
Christ does not give himself over to sin. Again verse. the. 9. every one
that is borne of god sins not, that is he does not sin with full purpose.
And we do not deny that sin is in the faithful, or dwells in them, but
that it reigns not Romans 6, 12
. And touching the guilte. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputes no sin. But of sin subdued and the matter of it Eccle. 7.20. it is
written: there is no man just upon earth which does good, and sins not.

What is the use of this part?
It is double. 1. For comfort, that we are freed from the dominion of sin
which makes us strangers from God

The other for instruction that we should be thankful to him that has
delivered us, and with all care to take heed we do not again entangle our
selves in the snares of sin, least the later end be worse then the beginning
2 pet. 2.20
that is least our last estate be more miserable then our former Mat. 12, 15.
. Therefore. Romans 6.14. Paul reasons thus, sin ought not to reign in us,
because we are not under the law, which makes us guilty and provoke us to
sin, for which cause it is called the power of sin 1. Cor, 15.56
: but under grace that is endued with the spirit of Christ, by virtue whereof
we do subdue the relics of sin. Gal. 5.13.14.

What is the second part?
Freedom from the moral law, not in regard of obedience but in regard of
justification and condemnation, that is from the dominion, rigor, extreme
justice, the importunate exaction and justification of the law, or from the
necessity of perfect fulfilling of the law to attain to righteousness.

Again from the binding over to punishment, and therefore from the care and
fear of the anger and curse of God, or of eternal death for breaking the law,
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us, that is he sustained the curse inflicted by the law, that we might
escape the same, and that we might obtain the blessing of Abraham in Jesus
Christ, and that we might receive the promise of the spirit by faith. Hence
Paul says Romans 6.14. we are not under the law, because we are not under the
curse nor under compulsion.

And that the law is not given for the Just, to wit in regard of the burden
of the curse, and compulsion.

Why are not we freed through Christ from the first death, as well as from the
second death, seeing both of them are the wages of sin, and depend upon that
threatening Genesis 2.17, whenever thou sinnest, thou shall die?
Because the kingdom of Christ is not of this world John. 18.36,

Though he has not clean taken away the first death, yet to the faithful he
has changed the nature of it. So as it is the utter abolishing of the relics
of sin, and a gate unto eternal life: according to the rule. Romans 8, 27. to
them that love god all things are a furtherance for their good: which David
means. Psalm. 116.15. precious in the sight of the lord is the death of his
saints. And Paul. Philip. 1, 21. death is to me advantage. And verse. 23. I
desire to remove from hence, and to be with Christ. And. Eccle. 7.2. the day
of death is better then the day of ones birth And Cyprian says, death is the
gate to life, the victory of war, the haven of the sea.

3 We must put a difference between the times of the Kingdom of grace, and
the glory of Christ, and the distinct times of the benefits of God; the soul
of the believer is regenerate in this life, but the body must of necessity
first die before it be regenerate. 1. Cor. 15.36. and. 43. That which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it first dye; now says he, verse. 44. it is
sown a natural body, but it rises a spiritual body (not in substance but in
quality) for he calls that a natural body which lives by the soul alone,
and a spiritual which together with the soul is quickened with the spirit of
God.

4 For the exercising of the faith, hope, invocation, and of the duties of
charity of the faithful in the conflict.

5 Because the death of the flesh according to the saying of Paul. 1. Cor.
15.26. is the last enemy, which must at length be abolished by a glorious
resurrection.

What is the use or effect of this liberty?
That the believers have a quiet conscience, they do no more tremble at the
law, but are delighted with it a They believe that their obedience though
imperfect is acceptable to god as to a father. b

What is the third part of Christian lihertie?
The giving of the holy ghost, which is the invisible and inward sealing up of
the former, Romans 8.15.16.18. ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear, but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry abba Father. And. Verse. 16.
And, he testifies with our spirit that we are the sonns of God: now if we be
sons then heirs also, even the heirs of God, and fellow heirs with Christ

He does also take away the veil of our heart, that is that miserable slavery
of blindness, and the yoke of darkness whereunto we are subject by reason of
sin, and does enlighten the heart, conuerteth it to the Lord, and makes us
fit, to behold the light of the Gospel, that we may be delivered from this
slavery of blindness, into the liberty of light. Therefore 2. Cor. 3.17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, that is, quickening, or
illumination, through the holy Ghost, by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby
that veil of ignorance, darkness, and weakness is taken from our hearts,
that we might be able to behold the glorious face of Christ: and lastly it
causes us to obey the law, not by constraint but willingly and chearefully.
Psalm. 51.14.

What is the fourth part of Christian liberty?
Freedom from the rites of Moses his Law, or from the ceremonial Law, and
much more from the traditions and inventions of men, which are ordained for the
worshipp of God: and first from the sacrifices and sacraments commanded of God
to the people of the Jews, which because they were but types and shadows of
the truth, ought to cease after the truth was revealed, as now being fulfilled
and having obtained their end, for which they were ordained, as the Apostle
teaches in the whole Epistle to the Hebrews: concerning which we must observe
this rule, All the ceremonies of Moses before, at, or after the coming of
Christ in the flesh, are abolished, so as he which will observe them, falls
from the liberty which we have in Christ. Gal. 2.4.5. and chapt.. 3.25. After
that faith came, Ep. 2.15, Ga, 2.14.16
we are no longer under the Schoolemaister,

Further from the necessity of observing certain legal things concerning
things indifferent, as of the choice and eating of certain meats, observing of
days, and such like, of both which parts of liberty. Gal. 5.1.2.13. a.

What call you things indifferent?
Basil calls them such things as be in our power and indifferent. (...)
Nazianzene, such things as be placed in the mean. Chrysostom upon the Romans
calls them things indifferent. So then things indifferent are works or
actions which of themselves, (...)
and in their own nature are neither good nor evil, but are judged good or
evil by the circumstances of the use of them. Or else those things or actions
are said to be indifferent, which by the law or word of God, are neither
precisely commanded, neither expressly forbidden to be done: As to eat
flesh, or this kind of meat, this day, or that day, or not to eat, to wear
garments of this fashion or color, or not to wear them.

For such things which are either expressly commanded in the word of God, or
are manifestly contrary to the word of God, as to be present at Mass, to be
partaker in superstitions contrary to the word of God, and repugnant to the
benefit of Christ, or else such as be impious, by reason of the opinon of merit
or worship joined with them, are not middle things, and indifferent.

Is it lawful without all respect and indifferently to use things that be
middle and indifferent?
No, but these cautions are to be observed.

1. Concerning faith, to wit, that we never enterprise or dare to do any thing
with a doubting conscience (which causes a scruple, as whether it be lawful
for us to use this thing; to do that thing with a good conscience or not): But
that we be thereby persuaded out of the word of God, what is lawful for us,
what is commanded, what is forbidden, according to that. Romans 14.5. Let every
man be fully persuaded in his own mind, and verse. 14. There is nothing
unclean of it self, but to him that thinks any thing to be unclean, to him
it is unclean. And verse 22. and 23. Blessed is he that does not condemn
himself in that thing which he allows, etc.

2 In the use of things indifferent three sorts of men are to be considered:
For some be weak in faith, that is, less exercised in the Doctrine of faith,
and not knowing their Christian liberty: some be obstinate, some in deed be
stong, and have learned what Christian liberty is. Concerning the first, we
must beware that we use not those things which we have learned out of Gods
word to be indifferent, either to satisfy our own lust, or rashly and
unseasonably with the offense of our brother that is yet weak in faith but
that we should moderate the use of those things for the edification of our
brother as yet weak through ignorance, and but a Nouice in the school of
Christ, and that so long till those simple ones may be instructed Romans 14.2
.

One man (such an one as has well profited in the knowledge of the Gospel,
and knows, what that means, whatsoever GOD has created is good, and
nothing is to be refused, if it be received with giving of thanks. 1. Timoth.
4.4. So that all things are pure to the pure, but to the polluted, and
unbelieving nothing is pure, but their mind and conscience is defiled. Titus.
1.15.) Thinks he may lawfully eat any thing; But another, being weak in
faith, eats herbs; he that eats, namely knowing his liberty, let him not
esteem as nothing, him that eats not, that is, let him not proudely despise
him; and he which eats not, let him not condemnd him that eats, that is,
Let him not condemn that he understands not. So 1. Corinthians. 8.11. Do not
thou destroy him with thy meat, for whom Christ died: Wherefore if meat
offend my brother, I will not eat flesh while the world endures, least I
should offend my brother.

And to the second kind of men, this rule does appertain. The obstinate
superstitious, or such as maliciously seek to ensnare our liberty, are at no
hand to be confirmed by our abstinence in the abuse of liberty, in their
wicked opinion.

We must yield unto the weak for their edification. But to the Pharisees,
that is, such as be obstinate, and maliciously seek to entangle our liberty,
we must yield nothing at all, that our Christian liberty may be maintained
safe and sound: Whereupon Christ, Math. 15.24. Let them alone. So Paul
permitted Timothy to be circumcised, having regard of the infirmity of the
believing amongst the Jews Act. 16.3
. But would not suffer Titus to be circumcised, because it was needful for
him to defend the christian Liberty against the obstinate, and such as creept
in priuilye, (...) Gal. 2.4
Or lay in wait b.

4 Our liberty is not to be dissembled or neglected: but to be used to the
edification and confirmation of those which are already strong, and are well
instructed in the word. So Paul. Gal. 2.11. writes, that he did very
sharply reprove Peter, because to please the Jews he had withdrawn himself
from the Gentiles, least he should offend them: whereby he did embolden the
obstinate Jews to judge the Gentiles for ever to be unclean

5 Those which be ignorant, and frowardly weak, must not condemn that they
know not, but must leave their power and liberty to those which be stronger
then themselves To. 14.13
. Neither let any Church condemn another, because of their diverse manner of
observing of things indifferent; as it fell out with no small danger in the
primitive Church about the feast of Easter, and fasting.

What should we think of the tradions of men, which are not ordained of God?
We must have respect to the written word of God alone, in whatsoever
concerns his worship, and not unto the traditions of men: For God has
revealed unto us the manner how he will be both known and worshipped. And
therefore there is no obedience due to constitutions which concern doctrine,
or the spiritual government, which are either directly, or indirectly
contrary to the word of God, and do draw men from Christ: or else to such
rites and ceremonies, whereof some be foolish vain, and very toys: others
either in themselves, or by some other accident superstitious: other some
impious and wicked, as the selling of Masses, praying to Saints, vows of
single life, the differences of meats, the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome,
the making of Idols, and the crosses, the opinions of freewill, of merits, and
of Indulgences, of transubstantiation, of the Chrisme, of fasting in Lent, of
holy water, of the consecration of Altars, the determinations of Councils,
monastical vows, prayers for the dead, the dream of Purgatory, the
worshipping of relics. Math. 16.6. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees: and
15.9. In vain do they worship me with commandments of men. And Ezech.
20.18.19. Walk ye in my precepts, and not in the precepts of your Fathers.
We ought rather to obey God, then men, Act. 5.29. If any man preach another
Gospel let him be accursed, Gal. 1.9.

But lawful ceremonies ordained by an Ecclesiastical Synod, without all
opinion of worship, and of necessity, but that all things might be done in the
Church comely, and according to order. 1. Cor. 14.40. although not of
themselves, yet by the law of charity ought to be observed. So as he which
does contemn them, and obstinately refuse them with offense, is guilty before
God, of violating order, and breaking the bond of charity. But where there is
no scandal, not obstinate disobedience, they do not sin which omit such
ceremonies.

Furthermore some humane rites are not in themselves impious, but yet little,
or nothing auailing to edification, which it were good if they were clean
taken away. In the using of these, or in the omitting of them, we must have
regard of offense.

Does this speech of Christ Math. 23.2. the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
chair, whatsoever they say do ye, allow of traditions or opinions contrary
to the word of God?
No, in no case, but of Moses his constitutions and manner of government which
were by the ordinance of God, for here indeed they were to be heard, howsoever
in other things they did wickedly. Thus much the metaphor, or borrowed speech
of the Chair, does import, which they did occupy as the Teachers of Moses
Law. And he that bids to hear the Pharisees, if they teach out of Moses, else
where warns his disciples to beware of their Leaven; Math. 16.6. so neither
ought that saying. Luke. 10 16. He which hears you, hears me, to be
applied to opinions contrary to the Gospel.

What should we think of good intents as they call them?
That there is no good intent, which does appoint any thing in the worship of
God even without all reason against the word of God, by the only rule of man's
reason. See that ye do not every man what seems him right in his own
eyes, but whatsoever things I command you. Deuter. 12.8. and 11.8.

When Paul does command, Romans 13, 5. to obey the Magistrate not only for
anger, that is, fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake, does he
mean that it is lawful for the magistrate to impose a law on men's consciences?
No, seeing he does every where extol the worship of God, and the spiritual
rule of living well, above all the devises of men whatsoever: But his meaning
is only this, that we are to obey the magistrate commanding honest and lawful
things, that is, so far as we may by the word of God, because God does
enioine us this obedience, whose commandment no man can refuse with good
conscience in the sight of God. Therefore he does not subject the conscience
to men's laws, but to the ordinance of God, so far forth as he does command
us to obey the laws of men, which are not repugnant to the laws of God.

What are we to think of ceremonies ordained by Christ?
They must be observed, because of the commandment and authority of him that
ordains them, but yet so as by the observing of them, men are not justified
in the sight of God.

Again in the case of necessity that men are excused if they do not observe
them, as if any man being by necessity hindered, do abstain from the use of
the Sacraments, so that there be no contempt, according to the saying of
Bernard, not the want of sacrament, but the contempt is damnable.

What is the end and fruit of this part of Christian liberty?
1 That we may use the gifts of GOD with a quiet conscience, for which
purpose he has bestowed them upon us, yet so as we must moderate this use, by
the edification of our neighbor.

2 That we may know that our consciences are at liberty from the power of
all men, 1. Corinthians. 3.21. and 7.23. ye are bought with a price, be ye not
the servants of men.

3 That we should not condemn our brethren which are yet but simple, for they
stand or fall to the Lord. Romans 14.4.

Lastly, that we might serve God, and not Creatures with true worship, that
is, with spiritual worship, neither tha we should sooth our selves, or other
men in evil.

What things make against this?
Not the service of the body which is of the inferiors toward the superiors:
nor that service which is of the spirit toward God, or of the body to the
spirit, of which, 1. Cor. 9.27. But the slavery of sin, error, and of the
ignorance of the law, and of the constitutions of men.

2 The Jews who dream of the earthly kingdom of the Messiah.

The Paradoxe, or odd opinion of the Stoics which attribute liberty to none,
but only to the wise men of the world.

4 The bands of humane laws, and traditions wherewith the consciences of men
are burdened.

5 The error of those who boast that they are freed by the preaching of the
Gospel from all bodily debts, and therefore deny all duties which they owe
unto their masters, creditors, and magistrates. As also of the Libertines, and
Anabaptists which under a color of Christian liberty bring in liberty of
sinning, abusing the saying of Paul, Romans 7.25. I my self, in my mind serve
the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin: For hereupon they say, that
they do in the flesh only commit adultery, are drunken, live impurely, but
in mind and spirit that they are pure and serve the law of God, whereas our
liberty does rather respect this, that we should be servants of sin no
more: for he that commits sin, is the servant of sin. John. 8.34. And
Paul, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall all die.

So then the words of Paul are the words of one who wrastleth against sin,
neither are they to be understood of voluntary and outward actions, but of the
sinful affections which do spring forth, from which, not the most holy men can
be wholly freed, so long as they carry about them this mortal body.

6 Of the Millenaries, concerning the kingdom of the saints in this whole,
which shall last a thousand years before the last day.

7 The error of the same Anabaptists, who under the color of spiritual
liberty, take away the Magistrate, freedom from the duties of Magistrates,
and civil subjection, where there is nothing hinders, but a man may be free in
mind, and servant in his body. Therefore Paul says. 1. Cor. 7.21. Art thou
called being a servant? let it not trouble thee, as though this calling was
unworthy of Christ. And, Ephesians. 6.5. ye servants obey your bodily masters as
the Lord.

8 The rashness of those who abuse things indifferent unseasonably, or
intemperately, or without all difference, having no regard at all of their
weak brethren, but rashly offend them. Romans 14.15.16. 1. Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.
2. Cor. 11.12.

The four and thirtieth common place. Of Offenses.
What is the signification of the word?
THE Grecians call it (...) Math. 18 7
, a Scandal, (...) an offense 1. Cor. 8.9
, and (...) a stumbling block 1. Cor, 9, 12
; and this word Scandal is derived either of (...), signifying to halt, so as
a scandal is an offense or stumbling block whereat he that stumbleth,
falls, or staggereth, or is so hurt that he begins to halt: or else of a word
that signifies some crooked thing, as we say acrooked thing will never be
straight. So then a scandal does most properly signify the cross beam in a
trappe wherewith mise, foxes or wolves are taken. Whereupon the Church has
borrowed the name of scandal to signify layings in wait, wherewith men are
intrapped, even as beasts in the gins Esa. 8.14 15.
.

(...) is properly when something in the way hinders the feet, whereupon a man
lighting does stumble, derived of the verb (...) which signifies to stumble.
Romans 14.13. to put a stumbling block or scandal before his brother: hence it
is called the stone of stumbling Romans 9.32 33 1 Pet 2.8
. For evil examples of sins are like unto certain stones on which men
lighting do stumble, yea do fall down flatt. Whereupon is that. 1. Cor.
10.12. he that stands let him take heed least he fall.

And (...) or (...) derived of the verb (...), which signifies to hitte
against a thing, to disturb or break of, it is the very offense it self, or
the dashing against any thing, in latin they call offense; when in the way
there lies some stone or logge against which men as they walk do stumble, so
as they hurt their feet, or else fall down headlong, whereupon Leuit. 19.14
it is said, put not a stumbling block before the blind.

Now this word scandal is in the perdicament of relation whereby it comes to
pass that it signifies sometimes the matter, that is to say the very object
or impediment, offending any man: and sometimes the manner or form, that is
the very offense it self.

What is the scandal?
Whatsoever is the cause or occasion to any man of offense, whether it be word,
deed, or example or counsel, whereby our neighbor is either grieved, or
troubled, or offended so as he is either hindered in the straight course of
salvation, or turned out of the way, or is induced to any error or sin, Romans
14.15. 1 Cor 8.9.
or else is confirmed in some evil. a

How many are the kinds of Scandalls.
Bernard, makes two, Inward and outward: Inward is when the old man gives
offense to the new man, touching which Mat. 5.20. If thy right eye offend thee
pluck it out and cast it from thee, where by the ey, hand, and foot, he
understands the lusts of the flesh, or of the old man which do often annoy
the new man; and all impediments although never so dear which hinder a man, so
as he cannot walk in the continual obedience of the law of god. Outward,
which comes from without, and gives any man the cause or the occasion of fall.

This external scandal how many fold is it?
Threefold: Active, either given or afforded: passive or taken; and mixed of
them both.

What is a scandal given?
Whose fault proceeds from the author of the thing, or action it self,
either when a man does give another an effectual cause of falling, or else
some word or deed, that is evil in it self, because it is repugnant to the
love of God and our neighbor: and therefore such a thing as of it own nature,
and of it self does either confirm the liberty of sinning in others, or else
either greiueth the godly, or does carry them into error and sin Math. 18.6, 7
. whereof Christ speaks to Peter. Math. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan,
thou art an offense unto me; For though Christ himself did not stumble, yet
there was noe let in Peter, but that Christ, being astonished with thinking of
the cross, should have broken off the course of his calling, and Peter's speech
in very deed did grieve him, and might have given an occasion of falling to the
weak.

How manifold is a Scandal given?
Double, by dividing the subject into the accidents, private and public:
Private, which may, also be called Domestical, whereby one, or some few are
offended, as children, servants, husbands and wives, as when the child,
servant, Husband or wife, see the parents, Masters, wives or husbands abstain
from the worship of God, hear them swear, to do any thing, or to speak
unchastly, whereby it presently comes to pass that they are either grieved
or else ready to imitate their examples.

Against which Christ speaks, whosoever shall offend one of these little ones
which believe in me, it had been good for him rather that a Millstone should be
hanged about his neck and he should be cast into the sea. Mark. 9.4. Public
is whereby some whole multitude is offended, or else that which gives an
occasion of falling to many weak ones; as coueteous men do, whoremaisters,
drunkards, and such like which by their bad manners offend the Church and do
cast both themselves, and many others headlong into ruin.

2 A scandal given is distinguished by the distribution of it, from the
adjuncts, or from the difference of the persons that cause it: and hereby it
comes to pass, that one is far more grievous and pernicious then another, for
that which is given by a person placed in some great dignity, is more
dangerous, and his example hurts more then that which is given by some
private person, or otherways obscure. So the adultery of David the king is
more grievous Sam. 12, 12. etc.
, then of some obscure Citizen: and therefore a scandal is more severely
punished, both in regad of the person himself who does disgrace that place
into which he is exalted by god, as also in respect of other men to whom he
has given a more effectual cause of falling by his evil example. So that
scandal is most grievous which is given of the ministers of the Churches, and
the students of divinity, when they either by false doctrine, or impure living
give occasion to many to speak ill of the gospel.

As the sin of the sons of Helie is said to be exceeding grievous, in the
sight of the Lord 1, Sam. 2 17
. And they sin more hainously which be in the communion of the Church then
they which be without. So the governor of a family being a drunkard, sins
much more grievously then a servant.

What is the cause of offense given?
The remote cause is the judgment of God. 1. Against the wicked, as was the
scandal and impediment which the wise men of Egypt gave unto Pharoh. Exodus, 7 22
. And the false prophets, in whom was the lying spirit, gave to King Achab 1.
King 22 22
. and the lying signs of Antichriste wherewith those which received not the
love of the truth were deceived d. 2 Thessalonians, 9 10.11
2. The judgment of God for the godly or the good of the elect, whereof. 1.
Cor. 11.19. There must be deuisions that those which are approved, that is
whom experience has showed to be of faith unfeigned and sincere piety, might
be made manifest.

The nearest cause is Satan, who moves men to all evil.

The helping cause is the naughtiness and corruption of man's nature, false
teachers, the vnskillfullnesse, pride, coueteousnesse, impatiency of teachers.
In respect of which causes Christ says. Math. 18.7. It must needs be that
offenses come, that is by necessity, not by compulsion, nor by this necessity
proceeding from God, but from the voluntary corruption of man: for no man is an
offense to another against his will, or through inconsideration but of purpose
with deliberation. Therefore though it be necessary that offenses come, yet woe
unto the world because of offenses.

What are the joint causes, or by how many means is an offense given?
Four.

First By false doctrine and false worship, such be heresies, errors,
worshipping of idols, superstitions, the traditions of men whereby the weak
are withdrawn from the simplicity of the word

2 By word or speech and that either filthy, cursed, or blasphemous.

3 By life and behauiours repugnant to the law of god, such are filthy
gestures, heinous offenses, and evil examples in the abuse of Christian
liberty, whereby the weak are discouraged from christianity, but for the most
part the offenses given by doctrine do more harm, then the offenses by
manners, because they work more closely, and presently assault the faith: but
these other do sooner appear and do less hinder our faith; as in the
beginning, the devil gave Eve a deadly wound, putting into her a false
perswatio^ Genesis 3.2.
. And Solomon's idolatry, brought forth the worshipping of idols, for a long
time after.

What punishment is appointed for the authors of this scandal.
Christ. Math. 18.17. does threaten that lamentable sentence or horrible woe
against them, woe be unto the world because of offenses, and. verse. 6. he
pronounces, that it is better for that man by whom the offense is given, that
a millstone being hanged about his neck he should be cast into the bottom of
the sea.

What is an offense taken?
That which men take unto themselves from the doeings or sayings of other men,
either from true doctrine and the outward form of the Church, or else in
general from any other things whatsoever. But in special some speech of ours,
purpose or deed which is godly, just, and of it self honest, or at least not
done wickedly and unseasonably: By means whereof notwithstanding some man does
judge ill of us, but without cause, either of some frowardness, ill will, or a
certain sinister spitefulness of the mind; or else upon error, and takes it
as an occasion of offense.

How manifold is an offense taken?
Double, either from man, or from the devil, from man, which also, by division
of Accidents into the subjects, is double, of the wicked, and of the godly. The
scandal of the wicked is of worldly men as of the wise men of this world, and
of hypocrites, who are offended. 1. at the poor estate, humility, and cross
of Christ in our flesh assumed.

2 At the absurdity imprudently conceived, of the nouelty, and simplicity of
the doctrine of the gospel, and preaching of grace (whereby we are taught that
all men being by nature sinners and subject to the wrath of god are justified,
and saved through grace, or by faith alone in Jesus Christ:) and by the article
of election and predestination, and the mortifying of the old man.

3 By the life and actions of the godly whereby they imagine themselves to be
controlled in the free use, of the things of the world.

4 Lastly by the crosses and persecutions, which go hand in hand with the
profession of the gospel, which offense because it springs from the malice of
them that are offended and from their spite it is called the offense of the
Pharisees, of which Math. 15.12. The discples said to Christ, do thou not know
that the pharisees are offended hearing this speech of thine. So Christ and the
gospel were to the Jews an offense taken, and to the Grecians foolishness.
1. Cor. 1.23. And the stone of offense, And the rock of offense to the twoe
houses of Israel Esa. 8.19. Luke 2.34 1 Pet. 2.7.8
. to wit by accident and priuatiuely: as Christ being despised and rejected is
the author of just condemnation, whereas in truth and by himself (but to the
elect) he is the way, the truth, and the life, and the fountain of all good.
Concerning this we must observe the warning of Christ, Blessed is he that is
not offended in me. Math. 11.5. So the sermon of Christ concerning the eating
of his flesh, was a scandal to the Capernaites Ioh 6.41 57, 60,
, So the Jews were offended with Peter's going in to the Gentiles gal, 2.12.
. So the righteous actions of the godly are an offense to the wicked Psalm. 56.6
7
. So the disciples of Christ pulling the ears of corn, are an offense to the
Pharisees Math. 12.2
. So many are offended by reason of the iarres which follow the preaching of
the Gospel to condemn it.

What are the causes of this offense taken?
The principal efficient cause is the just providence of God, which does
decree and execute this, although men stumble through their own malice: as it
is written, Behold I put in Sion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense. The
second cause is, Satan who provoke the wicked to take all things in the worst
part.

The instrumental cause are the men themselves who are offended at the
godliness of others. The causes assisting are the blindness of man's reason, the
corrupt judgment of the world, the affections of the flesh, envy, malice, rash
curiosity, the neglect of the holy scripture, bad opinions conceived, the
persuasion of a man's own righteousness, the desire of gain and keeping
credit, hating to be instructed: occasions, are the confessing and preaching
of sound doctrine, the behauiours, life, deeds and crosses of the godly, the
condition of the truth.

As for the form or manner it is expressed in diverse examples.

Is this kind of Scandal to be avoided?
No, but not to be regarded, according to the commandment of god. Deuteronomy. 33.9.
He that shall say to his father or to his mother, I know you not, he that shall
not acknowledge his brethren and his sons these do keep thy law, o Lord. And
according to the rule of Christ concerning the Pharisees which were offended at
his word. Math 15.14. Let them alone, they are blind, and the leaders of the
blind. that is neglect them, neither take care for offending them: and of the
Apostles Acts. 5, 29. we must obey god rather then men. And of Bernard, It is
better an offense should come, then that the truth should be forsaken. Besides
we must prefer the first and second commandment before all the duties to
men, according to the example of Elias against Achab 1. King. 18 18
. and of Paul against Peter. and those which played the Jews Gal. 2, 3.4 5
11.14
.

What is the offense of the Godly taken?
Which is taken only of such as be yet weak in the Church or not wicked, but
is greedily taken of them that be more malicious, that they may make the
doctrine of the gospel doubtful and uncertain to the simple sort, either by
the calamities of the church, the punishments of the innocents, the heresies,
and dissentions, which trouble the church, or else by the multitude, power, and
authority of the adversaries of our doctrine, and by the flourishing estate of
the wicked, and the prosperous success of all things. whereupon the prophet
says, my feet were almost moved, because I burned with zeal as concerning
the wicked, beholding the prosperity of the ungodly Psalm. 73.2.

What remedy have the weak against this Scandal?
If we call to mind the condition of the ancient Church and kingdom of
Christ, if we meditate upon the heavenly doctrine, and mark the ruin of the
wicked, and the blessed end of the godly: this the Prophet teaches us, in that
same. Psalm. v. 16. I mused (says he) that I might understand this, but it was
hard for me until I came into the sanctuary of God, and considered their
latter end. So Job contemning the prosperity of wicked men in the midst of
his afflictions, burst forth into this speech. Job. 19.25. I know that my
redeemer lives and that I shall rise again at the last day.

What is that offense taken which comes from the Devil?
When men do wretchedly abuse the faults and sins of the saints to
encourage them to sin; as Cham the drunkenesse of his Father Genesis 9.2,
, orhers the incest of Lot Genesis 19.30 31.
, David's adultery and murder 2 Samuel 12 2.3, 15
, the perjury of Peter Math, 26.72.74
, Zacheus his extortion Luke 13.8
, and such like, that they may without shame give themselves to all kind of
wickedness. And it is well called, Diabolical of the quality and not of the
subject, because it is used maliciously to the disgrace of the Fathers, and the
reproaching of God, and therefore ought above all the rest to be taken heed of,

What is the third kind of offense?
You may call it a mixed kind of offense, that is partly given and partly
taken, to wit when a man does use his christian liberty unseasonably: or else
when a man dallieth with the enemies of the truth, yet this kind of offense
seems to be more like to that which is given, then that which is taken. For
the avoiding whereof this rule is to be observed, we must do nothing without
faith and against charity. Therefore Paul. 1. Cor. 6.12. And. 10.23. says All
things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: And the saying of
Clement they which do whatsoever is lawful for them, do quickly come to do
that which is not lawful.

What is the end of offenses?
The purpose of Satan who stirs up scandalls, is to draw men from the truth, to
stablish errors, to corrupt good manners, to waste the Church, to increase his
kingdom, to hinder the glory of God, to harden and to destroy men.

But the purpose of god, who decrees them, is to prove his own, to manifest
the reprobates: that there might be made a manifest difference between the
true worshippers of God and hypocrites 1 Cor. 11.9
.

What is the use of this doctrine?
That our minds being confirmed by the word of god against offenses, and our
affections brought into order according to the direction of the law of god, we
might be sincere and without offense unto the day of Christ, full of the
fruits of righteousness, which are to the glory and praise of god through
Christ Jesus.

What things are contrary to an offense given?
Honest examples, speeches and deeds, which inuit others to imitate them,
according to the commandemente. Math. 5.16. let your light so shine before men
that they seeing your good works may glorify your father which is in heaven.

The five and thirtieth common place. Of Prayer.
What mean you by the word Prayer?
NOT after the manner of Rhetoricians, an order of speech thoroughly labored by
art which the Grecians call (...), but according to divinity, a holy speech or
talk with God, not so much of the mouth as of the heart, which also in other
terms we call (...), to call upon, to request, which is properly spoken of
him, who being in danger desires, the help of God with a crying out. Hereupon
by a Synecdoche, it is taken for the whole worship of God Acts, 2 21. 1 Cor, 1,
2 2 timothy 2, 22
, also (...), prayer or entreating, (...), suplication.

The Scripture also Allegorically or Metaphorically calls it, the calves and
fruit of the lips, a sacrifice of praise, incense and a sweet smell. Ose, 14, 3
Psalm, 116.17 and. 141.2 Heb, 13, 15 Malach, 1.11 (...)


What is Prayer?
The Greecians do thus define it, Damasc. (...), that is, Prayer is an
ascending of the mind toward God, and a request of things convenient of him.
By a translation taken from burnt offerings unto prayers. Act. 10.4. Thy
prayers and thy alms Acts, 2 21. 1 Cor, 1, 2 2 timothy 2, 22
are come up into remembrance before God.

Or, prayer is a holy meditation of things pertaining to the glory of God, and
our safety, and an earnest wishing and desiring of the same, proceeding from a
filial or sunnelike trust in God: to the which, for the most part
thanksgiving is wont to be added of holy men for benefits received from God.

Or, it is an ardent affection mounting up to God, whereby we do both ask and
expect, from God alone, for Christ's sake, gifts spiritual and corporal,
according to his commandment and promises, and also do give him thanks for
gifts received.

Or, it is an ardent and earnest laying open of our heart before God, whereby
from faith in Christ, we do either request, or entreat for any thing, or do
give thanks for benefits received, whether this be done with words or without
words, as with groans and fighs alone.

Whereby it is gathered, that the ten commandments, the Angels salutation, and
the rehearsing of the Creed are no prayers, because in these, nothing is asked
of God. Though simple people use those as prayers.

Of how many sorts is prayer?
Twofold, in regard of circumstances: Public or Solemn, which is made in a
public and Ecclesiastical assembly, and for the most part is wont to be
vocal, and it is the 2 part of the ministry 1 King, 8.41 Esr. 7, 23 and. 3.1
. And Private which every one do use privately, either at home, or abroad, in
secret corners of the heart, as Christ prays in the mountain Mark, 6.46,
Acts. 10.9
, Peter in the upper part of the house. Izack in the field, Daniel in the den,
and Paul at the shore.

How many are the parts, or kinds of prayer.
vel, precamur, vel deprecamur aliquid. (...).
Paul. 1. Ti. 2.1 does recko^ up 4 which are, (...), is a deprecation, whereby
we desire the turning away of some evil, which either troubles us already, or
hangs over our heads, of the verb (...), which is to ask, to pray, as Luke
22.32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And Heb. 5.7. Christ
is said to have offered up prayers and svpplications, with strong crying, and
tears unto him, that was able to save him from death. (...), which is Fear: as
when Paul 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. desires them to pray for him that he may be
delivered from vnreasonahle and evil men: and when we desire remission of
sins, and deliverance from evil.

(...)
(...), is a precation or petition wherein we desire those things which make to
the glory of god himself, or some benefit: as the kingdom of christ to come, the
name of God to be hallowed, his will to be done, and daily bread to be given us
daily, and the holy ghost to be sent, (...)
as Act. 1.14. al continued with one accord in prayer and supplication.

(...), is an interpellation or intercession, or postulation made for another.
Therefore To. 8.26. the holy ghost is said, to make request for us, and ver. 34.
Christ the mediator (...), that is, makes request for us, as when one prays
for another, or all do pray one for another, and for the Church, as Act. 12.5.
The Church makes intercession for Peter, or, it is an interpellation wherein we
complain to God of the^ which do hurt us, as David sometimes in the Psalms.

(...), is a giving of thanks, wherein we give thanks to God either for benefits
bestowed upon us, and others, whereby we set forth his fatherly chasticement
Job 1.21.
, or for evils taken away from us or others, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me, I will take the cup of salvation.
etc. But the scripture does not always observe the differences of those three
kinds. Therefore we may restrain them unto two, that is to wit, invocation of
Gods name, and thanksgiving: like as David restrained them, Psa. 50.15 Call upon
me in the time of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

What are the causes of prayer.
The efficient inward cause is the holy ghost. Romans 8.26. For we know not what
to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us with sighs,
which cannot be expressed. Not that he in very deed does either pray, or sigh,
but because he stirs us up to prayers, and does inwardly teach us words and
sighs. So he is said to cry, Gal. 4.6. Because he causes us to cry:
whereupon Zachary 12.10. he is called the spirit of grace and of prayer. And
the Apostle bids us pray in the holy Ghost Jude. 20. 1 Cor. 14.16
, that is, by the instinct of the holy Ghost.

The isntrumental inward cause is Faith Romans 10.14
.

The principal cause which moves us to pray is manifold.

1 The commandment of God, whereby he requires of us service of invocation,
which is chief in the Church of God, Deu, 6.13. Thou shall vvatch thy Lord,
and serve him alone, and Psalm. 50.15. Call. upon me. Mat. 7.7. ask, seek,
knock. 2 The promise of hearing, and I will hear thee, Psalm. 50.15. and
145.18. The Lord is near unto all that call upon him: and Pro. 18.10. The name
of the Lord is a strong tower, the weaponlesse man flying unto it shall be safe
and sure. Hither do belong the allureme^ts, wherewith Christ does allure us to
pray, Mat, 7.7. it shall be given you, ye shall find, it shall be opened, (...)
and Luke 11.13. if ye which are evil can give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that
desire him. Ps. 65.3. thou O God which hear my prayer, unto thee shall all
all flesh come. And Esaias. 65.24. ye shall call upon me, and I will hear yea
bef re ye cry, vvil I answer you, for our heavenly father knows that we
have need of all these things before we pray, Mat. 6.32. 3 The feeling of our
poverty, and of the want of others, spiritual and corporal, and the desire of
Gods kingdom, and glory, seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and the rest shall be cast unto you, Math. 6.33.

4 Dangers and troubles of all sorts which do compass us about, miseries,
diverse tentations, the fault and guiltiness of our sins, and the snares of
the most grievous, and watchful adversary the devil: Who walks about as a
Lion. 1. Pet. 5.8. seeking whom he may devour. Whereupon Christ says, Math.
26.41. VVatch and pray, that ye enter not into tentation.

5 Exercise of piety, faith and hope, which from hence do take increase.

6 The nature and property of love, wherewith the godly are affected toward
God: for it comes to pass that he which loves is greatly delighted with the
communication of him that is loved, and he desires nothing more, then that he
may pour out into his bosom those things wherewith he is affected. Hereunto
is added, that love is more and more kindled by the talk of the party loved.

7 The example of Christ, and of all the Saints, whose chief care was in their
life time to call earnestly upon God.

8 The utility of prayer: for by it we obtain necessary benefits, as well
corporal as spiritual, Iam. 5.6. The fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. But the bountiful largess of Gods benefits and gifts as well
corporal as spiritual, and his so great miracles, which are seen which way
soever you look, ought of right to provoke us to the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. Therefore David having perceived the Lords liberality does show
openly that a new song is put into his mouth. Psalm. 40.3.

What is the object of prayer, or who is to be called upon?
That one, and eternal God, who is the father, and the son, and the holy
Ghost: for in true invocation none of the three persons of the Godhead is
omitted, although they be not always distinctly named, because they are one
God.

1 But, he alone, 1 Because he is the searcher of all men's hearts. Act. 1.24.
the searcher of the hearts and reins, (...)
that is, viewer of the thoughts and affections, or the knower of all things
Psalm, 79, and, 33, 15 and 44, 21
.

2 Because, Invocation is the chiefest part of the worship of God, and
therefore is due to God alone, according to his commandment Deuteronomy. 9, 13 Math.
4, 10
. And Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me (says the Lord), and Christ, Mat. 6.9. after
this manner therefore pray ye, Our father, etc.

3 Because he is the alone author of all good things, alone omnipotent, the
knower of all things, full of compassion, who knows, wills, and can hear,
heal, deliver all in all places that call upon him, therefore the faithful
say, Esaias. 63.16. Thou Lord art ur father, Abraham knows us not, and Israel
is ignorant of us.

4 Because we must believe in him alone, Romans 10.14. How shall they call on
him, in whom they do not believe? But we do not believe in Angels, and holy
men.

5 Because the saints are read to have called upon none at any time besides
God. Wherefore the invocation of Creatures is wicked and sacrilegious, because
it takes away from God his glory, is established without faith in the word,
yea rather is contrary to the same. Which also Epiphanius does stir against.
Page 448. (...) that is to say, the old error shall not rule over us, to
forsake the living, and to worship one fashioned of him.

What need is there to pour forth our prayers unto God, when as he loves us,
and knows already before hand what things we need, what is expedient for us,
neither has need of an informer, but rather has decreed that he will give
the^. Esaias 65.24. and Mat. 6.32.
1 Because as God has appointed this order, that he will nourish us with meat
and drink, although he could do it without these means: so it is his will
that we should obtain by prayers (which proceed from faith) the good things
which belong both to our salvation, and also to the sustaining of this life
Iam. 1, 6.
, and Christ says. Luke. 11.13. Your heavenly Father will give the holy Ghost
to them that desire him: not to them that are idle.

2 Because he will have his own right to be given to himself, Petentibus non
otiantibus
and us to be admonished from whence succor is to be sought; from whom good
things do come unto us, and to whom things received are to be ascribed, and
also what is our need.

3 That he is the ouerseer of our matters, as it is said, Psalm. 34.15. The eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his eyes are open to their cry: and
that, as a most gentle father he will bestow upon his beseeching children those
things which they desire, according to his will, and be near unto all that call
upon his name in truth Psalm. 145 18
.

4 That we may receive his benefits with true tha^kfulnes of mind, which by our
prayers we do testify to happen unto us from his hand. 5 That we may more
earnestly miditat upon the bou^teousnes of god

6 Finally he will have our faith, in petition and expectation of his benefits,
to be exercised, by fervent prayer to be kindled, and our heart continually to
be inflamed with a desire of seeking, of loving, of worshipping him.

Are we vnworthier, or greater sinners, then that we may presume to pray?
But we must set the commandment of God against our unworthiness, and his
promises, and kind allurings, and also the most sweet name of a Father, which
he vouchsafes to suggest unto us. Finally, the righteousness and intercession
of the Mediator, against the sense of our sins: for it is written, Call upon
me in the day of trouble: and Joel. 2.32. Whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved. And Math. 7.7. Ask (says our master,) and ye shall
receive, knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

Seeing there is none which man present himself unto God, and come into his
sight, by whom is God to be inuocated of us, or who is our mediator with the
heavenly Father?
By him who is given unto us of the father himself, a Mediator, Advocate, and
Priest 1 Timothy 2.5 1 Ioh. 2 1
, Wherefore he himself says, John 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the
life. No man comes unto the Father but by me. And verse. 13. as also chap.
16.23. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.

In this regard God had appointed in the law, that the priest alone going into
the Sanctuary, Exodus 28 9 and. 39, 7. and 14.
should bear upon his shoulders the names of the Tribes of Israel, and so
many most precious stones before his breast, but the people should stand a far
off in the court, and from thence should join together prayers with the Priest.

And whereas Christ bids his Disciples fly to his intercession after he had
ascended into heaven, saying. John. 16.26. A^ that day shall ye ask in my
name, he denies not that God was appeased with the intercession from the
beginning of the world, but he does rather commend unto us this benefit as now
more clear after the Ascension of Christ, as the Apostle says, Hebr. 10.20.
That a new way is prepared for us into the most holy place.

Mark. 10.47 Acts, 7.59
Therefore Christ is to be inuocated by a double name. 1 As God the author of all
good things, with the father and the holy ghost b. 2 being mediator and
intercessor, that we may be heard by him. Therefore he is called a priest for
ever. Psa. 110.4. and To. 8.34.3 Who is at the right hand of God, and makes
request for us, that it may be evident that he is a perpetual mediator, not
only of redemption, but also of intercession, and Heb. 7.25. Wherefore, he is
able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, ever living to make
intercession for them.

Not by any gesture, or prayers as though being fallen down at his fathers
knees, he did humbly pray for us: but both by the merit, and virtue of his
death, and price of redemption, which is always fresh before God, and upon
which the father looking, does hear those that be his: and also by offering
unto him our prayers. And this is that which is, Zachary 1. verse. 12. The
Angel is ready to pray fot the people of God: and to offer the prayers of the
Saints. Apoc. 8.3. To wit, that Angel which delivered Jacob from all evil
Genesis 28.16
. And which went before the tents of the Israelites in the wilderness, and
brought them into the land of Canaan Exodus 23 20
, that is, the Son of God Jesus Christ, God and man, the only mediator
between God and men.

Wherefore not trusting in our own worthiness or merits, we come into Gods
presence, not as the Pharisee Luke 18.11
, Or as Agamemnon, who thought that he should be heard for his sacrifice of a
hundred beasts: and Chryses for his merits: but by the protection of Christ
alone. And from hence is to be sought a difference between a christian prayer,
and the prayer of al other men: for faith alone in Christ does make a
difference between the invocation of Christians and of other men.

But must not we go unto God by Saints, as we go to the king, and the prince
by Earls and Counselors?
This is a wretched excuse, says Ambrose: for therefore do men go to the king
by tribunes and Earls, because the king likewise is a man, and knows not to
whom he ought to commit the commonwealth. But to get any thing at the hands of
god (from whom nothing is hid) there is no need of a helper, but of a devout
mind. And Christ upon earth heard neither the Apostles making intercession for
the Cananite Mat. 15 24.
. Nor Marie his mother for the new married couple, but roughly put her back from
him Ioh. 2.4
. For seeing he himself is sufficiently careful of our safety, he needs not
intermessengers

Are there not also in the mean time left to the saints in this life their
intercessors, whereby among themselves they do commend one another safety unto
God?
Yes doublesse 1 Timothy 2.1.
, proceeding from charity, but which do depend upon that only intercession of
Christ, and are made in his name, and are directed to it. Whereupon rightly
Augustine. If thou seek for a priest, he is above the heavens, where he makes
request for thee, who died for thee upon earth.

Does the intercession of Saints departed, follow upon that, because men which
live upon earth are commanded to pray likewise one for another? Iam. 5.16.
In no wise, because they which live here, do this, for the maintaining of
charity, according to the Lords precept, neither are they destitute of a
promise: which reasons are far from the dead, whom the Lord has removed from
our company and conversation. Eccle. 9.5.6. The dead know us not, and therefore
he would have them to be estranged from the knowledge of our affairs: for that
which some say concerning the looking glass of the Trinity, wherein they may
from aloft epsy the conditions of men, it is a feigned fable.

What is the subject of prayer, wherein it is?
Not the mouth, not the tongue, not the lips, not the throat it self Esaias. 29,
13 Math. 15.8 (...)
, but the soul it self, or mind of the faithful: for prayer is the talk of
the soul, and properly of the inward affection of the heart, which is powered
out unto God the searcher of hearts Math, 6, 6 and Ioh. 4.24
: God is a Spirit, therefore he is to be worshipped and adored in Spirit. And I
will pray with the Spirit, and with the understanding, says Paul. 2. Cor.
14.15.

What is the matter of prayer, that is, what things are to be asked of God?
Not all things whatsoever, but things promised and commanded of God, and which
can conveniently be given of God, and according to his will declared to us in
his word: Therefore we must not ask unprofitable, foolish, hurtful, unjust
things, but those things which are lawful Luk 1, 6.13. and, 12, 13, and Math,
20.24.22
. And this is the assurance that we have toward him, that he hears us, if we
ask any thing according to his will. 1. John. 5.14. Neither let us desire one
thing which he may not grant. For, true prayer ought to rest upon the promises
of God Exodus 32 23 Deuteronomy. 9.17
.

1 But the things that are to be prayed for, are threefold.

1 Before all things, those which concern the glory of God, and which make
for the advancing of it Math, 5 33
.

2 Those which belong to the salvation of our souls, as are the gifts of the
Spirit, faith, remission of sins, patience in adversity, perseverance in
piety, etc.

3 (...), that is, those things which serve for the use of this life.

Contrariwise, three sorts of things are to be prayed against. 1. whatsoever
hinders the glory of God. 2. whatsoever is contrary to our salvation 3.
Whatsoever in this life is hurtful unto us. The matter of all things to be
asked and to be prayed against, Christ has briefly gathered into the number
of six things generally.

But how are these things to be asked or prayed against?
The good things of the first and second sort, that is, which concern the
glory of god, and which make for our salvation, (...)
are to be prayed for absolutely, simply and without condition, because
simply, absolutely, and without condition they are promised to us in the
word. Joel. 2.32. And. Romans 10.13, whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved: and because we cannot but use them well. But the good
things of the third kind (which we may use both well and ill) we must pray
for, (...)
and the evil things (which may be a help for us unto that which is good) we
must pray against, with condition that Gods glory be not lessned, or our
salvation hindered. So peace, health, riches, succession of children, and other
things which belong to this life, are to be asked of the Lord: Sickness and
pouettie are to be prayed against, because they are promised unto us, with a
condition, if according to the judgment of our best Father they be deemed
profitable for us. For as Augustine says. Quod vtile est aegroto, magis nouit
medicus quam aegrotus, 1, that which is profitable for the sick, the Physician
rather knows then the sick.

Moreover, the manner is not to be prescribed unto God, but to be left to his
will: for he knows best at what time, after what manner to do any thing, how
he oughto set forth his glory, and to help us: which thing is confirmed by
innumerable examples of godly men praying.

But does not a prayer made with these conditions, if it makes to the glory
of God, if it be wholesome for us, disagree with the words of James, Chap. 1.6.
who bids us to ask without wavering?
Noe; for it is one thing to ask with wavering, which James forbids,
because it is contrary to faith; and another thing with a condition. For a
faithful man doubts not but that god hears his prayers, when as he has a
certain promise of God Ioh, 16, 23
, because if he gives not that which is asked, truly he bestows that which
is better: whereupon Bernard, vnum e duobus sperare indubitanter possumus,
quoniam aut dabit quod petimus, aut quod nobis nouerit esse vtilius, that is to
say; one of the two, we may undoubtedly hope for, because he will either give
that which we ask, or that which he knows to be more profitable for us. And
this thing the name of Father, most good, most wise, omnipotent does declare.

Because the Lord speaks generally John. 16.23. whatsoever ye shall ask the
father in my name, (...)
he will give it you, whether therefore are all things to be asked and expected
of God?
Noe, but the general particle whatsoever in this speech is to be restrained
to a certain kind, that is to say, whatsoever is profitable for you, Math. 9
38 Coll. 4, 3 Romans 15 30 2 Thessalonians, 3.1,
not in your, but in the judgment of my Father. After which manner. 1, John. 5,
14. this kind is restrained, if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us.

For whom ought we to pray?
Not only for our selves, but for all men. 1. For magistrates and subjects. 1.
Tim. 2.1. I exhort that first of all supplications be made for all men, For
kings, and for all that are in aucthority. 2. For the ministers of the word,
and teachers of the church.

3 For friends, brethren, and the whole church 1 Cor, 1, 2
one for another Ier, 42.2 20, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 15 Iam. 5, 16 2 Cor, 1, 11
. 4 For enemies Numb. 16 22. Math, 5, 44 Acts. 7.60
.

5 For sinners and unbelievers, as Abraham for the Sodomites Genesis 18 23.24
, Lot also for zoar Chap. 19 20, 21
, Moses for the people when they had most grievously sinned setting up a calfe
Exodus, 32 11
, so Samuel for Saul. 1. Namely that of enemies he would make them friends,
that he would convert them and frustrate their attempts.

6 For the afflicted and sick, but for these, whiles they live with us in this
life,

1. Sam. 15 35
How must we pray for our enemies?
Iam, 5.13 15 2 Samuel 12 16.
If they be adversaries to a just cause, as to true doctrine, we must pray that
god would maintain his own cause, and either convert them if they be curable,
or confound them if incurable, if we have wronged them, we must ask them
forgiveness, and requite them; if we never hurt them, we must pray that they
may become our ftiends, or freed ftom the enemies both to a good cause, and our
person; by Christ's example, we may pray for such as are curable, and for
vengence upon the desperate.

For whom must we not pray?

1 For the dead. 1. because whatsoever is done without faith is sin. Romans
14.23. But of that matter in the canonical scriptures, we have neither
commandment, nor example, and therefore is not of faith. For that which is
reported of Judas Machabeus. 2. Machab. 12.40. sending to Jerusalem an offering
for the slain Jews, which had privily taken things consecrate to the idols
of the Iamnites; it is not canonical but Apocriphall, and of suspected credit,
seeing that the author of the discourse does crave pardon in the end of the
book: which thing agrees not to the scriptures inspired of god 2, Tim. 3 16
, nor to the writers which have written as they were moved by the holy ghost 2
Pet. 2, 21.
; and noe such sacrifice was commanded of God to be done, yea rather it was
done against the law, which did forbid sacrifices to be done for them who had
polluted themselves with an excomunicate thing.

2 Because such prayers are unprofitable: For whosoever do depart from hence,
either they depart in faith and are blessed, and therefore have no need of
prayers: or do want faith, and are damned Ioh, 3.18, 36 1 Ioh. 5, 16 1 Samuel,
16, 1,
, and therefore cannot be helped.

2 Nor for the indurate enemies of God, or them whom the lord as it were with
the finger has showed us, to sin against the holy ghost d: but against them
rather: 1 That they may not make a proceeding, but that they may be let and
stopped 2 Samuel 15 31 Acts, 4.29.
(which is a point of charity) 2. That they may be cut of, if with a deuilish
fury they go forward to resist god, the Church and the truth, and are
incurable: which thing belongs not to private revenge, but comes of a
singular zeal of god. So David Psalm, 5, 10 Psalm, 59, 5 Psalm. 14, 13 and. psalm.
110.9 10.11
, And Paul 2. Tim. 4, 14. Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much evil, the
lord reward him according to his works. So Moses against Korah Dathan and
Abiram, Number. 16.15.

What is the form of invocation?
Although there be many forms of praying, as are the psalms of David, and the
prayers of other holy men, both old and new, written well and profitablie by
the spirit of Christ: yet notwithstanding the short form which God of his
great goodness prescribed unto us Mat, 6, 9 Luk, 9, 11 2
; which is called the Lords prayer, is to be preferred before all the rest:
both for the majesty of the author, the order of the things to be requested,
and also because it contains in brief, all things which belong to the glory
of god, and our good and what we may ask of the best god, whatsoever is
needful to desire, and what he will graciously bestow upon us, whereupon
great fruit of comfort does redound unto us, because we who do in a manner
ask out of his mouth, know to ask nothing absurd, nothing unmeet, or
unseasonable, unto him,

Yet, we are not tied to every word of this form; but it is lawful to take no
other matter of prayers, and all the prayers of the faithful ought to accord
(in respect of the sense) to this most perfect and truly lawful pattern: but
they which go further, do add of there own, to the wisdom of God, and do
despise his will, and ever obtain nothing, seeing that they pray without faith.

What are the conditions of prayer, or the adjuncts and circumstances?
Some are inward, proper, and perpetual: but others are outward, indifferent,
and changeable,

Which are inward?
1 A mind well ordered, that a man being about to pray may come with a mind
void of other cares, and of fleshly and wandering thoughts, wherewith it may
be carried about hither and thither, or pressed down from heaven toward the
earth, and with convenient attention and reverence toward the majesty of that
god, to whose conference he does go dan, 9, 3.4 5 Math, 14, 23
.

2 The sincerity of the heart, or a pure heart 2, Tim, 2.22, of Daniell.
, that he which is about to pray may lay aside all opinion of worthiness and
merit, and may feel not feignedly but truly his own want, after the example
of Jacob. Genesis 32, 10. I am less then the least of Gods mercies, of Daniel
Chap. 9.18 we do not present our supplications before thee, for our own
righteousness but for thy great tender mercies of, David Psalm, 14 32 Esaias, 64,
6
, and of the publcan Luke 18, 13
, I am not worthy to lift up my eyes to heaven.

3 A misliking and humiliation of a man's self, that he may prostrate himself
before God with an humble and free confession of his sins and requesting of
pardon Dan. 9 4.5 Psalm. 51.5 1. Ioh. 1.9
.

4 True repentance and a godly purpose, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash mine hands in
innocence O lord, and compass thine altar. For god hears not sinners Ioh.
9.31. Psalm. 109 7
. Esaias. 1.15. When ye shall make many prayers, I will not hear you, because
your hands are full of blood, Romans 10 14 Heb. 10.22. Iam. 1.6 1 Ioh. 5.14
Contrariwise. If we shall ask any thing, we shall receive it of him, because
we keep his commandments. 1. John. 5.22. And if any man be a worshiper of
God, and does his will, him hears he, John. 9.37.

5 A steadfast trust of mercy, and of the favor of God for Christ's sake, and a
sure hope of audience, that he will liberally and freely help them which
ask, according to that, Math. 21.22. whatsoever ye shall ask, if ye believe
ye shall receive it: For it is wondrous how god is provoked by our distrust, if
we crave of him pardon which we do not look for: And indeed faith does stay
1. upon the promise or power and truth of the promiser. 2, upon the fatherly
affection of God in Christ's merit which is infinite. 6 Understanding, for
prayer without understanding of the things and words, no less then without
affection, is hipocriticall, and without fruit 1 Cor. 14 15.16
.

7 Unanimity and brotherly agreement, and pardoning of offenses that is,
remission of anger and of hatred, of revenge, laying aside affection and
forgetting of injuries. 1. Tim. 2, 8
Esaias, 43 25
(for remission of anger and of the fault belongs to God alone) and mutual
reconciliation, as Acts. 1.14. The apostles continued in prayer (...) that is
with one accord. So Math. 5, 23.24. the party disagreeing, (the speech being
fitted to the manner of that time) is commanded to go from the altar, and
first to be reconciled to his brother, before he offers sacrifice to god.
vnanimes


8 Perseverance, if we be not wearied with praying, if we give not place to
afflictions or evils, as they do which are quite out of heart Luk, 11 9 and
Luke 18, 2 and 21, 36 Rom, 12.12. Ephesians, 6, 18 1 Thesse, 3 10, and, 5.17 Act,, 6,
4 Act, 10, 2
, Habacuck. 2, 3. Though the lord tarry, wait for him, for coming he will
come, and shall not stay. Yet the former conditions are not so required with
extreme rigor, but that god here does tolerate many infirmities in those
that be his, and) so that the godly do lament, and chastise themselves and by
and by come to themselves, strive and endeavor whither they do not eftsoons
reach) does forgive them; as is showed by the examples of David, Psalm. 39.13
Stay thine anger from me till before I go hence and be not. Psalm, 80.5. How
long will thou be angry at the prayer of thy servant, and of Jeremy, lament.
3.8, when I cry and shoute, he shuts out my prayer.

Which are the outward circumstances, or Accidents of prayer? Five, Time,
place, Gesture, speech, fasting. When must we pray?
Ephesians. 6.18. praying always. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. night and day praying
exceedingly Psalm. 119.62. For so great is our needinesse, we sin so often,
we are pressed with so many perplexities, so many temptations do insult over
us, so great is the heap of Gods benefits upon us, that there is cause enough
for all men why they should continually groan, and sigh unto God, crave his
help and prosecute him with thanksgiving and praises. Notwithstanding the
auntients had set hours of praying, as the morning, noone, and evening not for
superstition but for order sake.

But in the new testament their is no certain prescript time, but it depends
upon the quality of affections and causes of praying, howbeit to uphold our
weakness and to stir up our dullness, it is profitable that every one of us
should appoint to himself hours of praying as it were ordinary, namely when
we rise in the morning, when we go about work, when we sit down to meat,
when we are fed with gods blessings, when we betake our selves to rest, so that
this observing of hours want superstition. But especially we ought to pray
and give thanks, as often as either sorrowful or joyful things are offered
to us or to our brethren Exodus 15, 1 Judge. 5, 1 Psalm, 50.15 Ier. 6, 14
. But to have public prayers, it is meet that a certain time in every
church be appointed, so that there may be provision for the profit of all, and
all things may be done decently and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40.

Where must we pray?
God in times past, to one nation had appointed one place namely the Tabernacle
Exodus, 25, 8 and 40.2, and in other places often
, afterward the Temple of Solomon 1. Kings 6.4
, because they were the figure and type of the only mediator and appeaser of
god, Christ the true temple, by whom alone god will here us. But Christ the
truth of the temple, Dan. 6, 10 Luke 18.10 Acts. 8.27
by his coming took away the cerimonie of a holy place. Therefore it is
lawful for us to pray in any place (and yet arightly and orderly) so that it be
godly and religiously observed. Psalm. 103.22 praise the lord, all ye his
works, in all places of his dominion. John. 4.21.23. not in this mountain,
nor at Jerusalem, but the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth. 1. Tim. 2.8. The apostle will have men to pray every where as
need shall require, whether in the temple, or out of the temple, lifting up
pure hands unto god.

For not the quality of the place, but rather the piety of the party that
prays does sanctify the prayer: Esai. 56.7
yet notwithstanding, Christ allowed a public place appointed for common
prayers, and holy assemblies, when he says. Math. 18.20. where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And in
this respect, he called the temple the house of prayer. Math. 21.13, And the
Ancients, from their lawful use, called them Oratories: only we must take
heed least we account the temples to be the proper dwellings of God, (from
whence he does the nearer give ear unto us) or attribute unto them I know not
what secret sanctity, which may make the prayer more holy before god. For this
does Esaias reprove chap. 66.1. and god, Acts. 6.48. But seeing we are the
temples of God, if we will call upon God in his holy temple, we must pray
within our selves.

What is it therefore that the Lord says Math. 6.6 But when thou prayest,
enter into thy chamber: and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto thy father
which is in secret?
He does not simply condemn public prayers made in the assembly of the
Church, but by an Hebrew catalepsis, and respectively and comparatively, by
entering into the chamber, the corrupt affection of hypocrites, that is to say
that vain glory, which they did seek in prayers, whiles that goeing forth
into a public place, they did pray in cross ways, and in corners of streets
in double paths, and in places where three or four ways meet, where men are
wont to come together, rather seeking the great assemblies of men which might
see them praying, then a departing into some solitary place. And by that
manner of speaking he teaches that hypocrisy, that ambition, that vain
glory, that wandering of the mind (of it self too slippery) is to be
excluded from all prayer. And that a solitary place is to be sought, which may
so far help us, that being far from all kinds of cares, and tumults of
men we may descend, and thoroughly enter into our heart.

What ought to be the gesture of him that prays?
A diverse gesture is not prescribed, but yet is described in the scriptures.

The Jews in time past, did pray sometimes standing Math, 6.5 Mark. 11, 25
, but sometime with bowed knees, as Solomon 1 Kings. 8 54 Dan, 6, 10
, and Christ himself c kneeled down and prayed, as also Peter Luke 22, 4
Acts, 9.40
, and Stephen Act. 7.60
, Paul also used bowing of the knees, Ephesians. 3.14. For this cause (says he) I
bow my knees unto the father of our lord Jesus Christ, by which gesture, a
lowly subjection, and an empting of our selves before God is signified.

2 Moses lifts up his hands toward heaven: and Paul wills. 1. Tim. 2.8.
that pure hands should be lifted up unto God: which gesture belongs unto
children, who do reach their hand to the parents, when they will obtain any
thing, or are suppliant to them. But this cerimonie of lifting up of hands
does admonish us, that the heart and senses are to be lifted upon hie, least
they which desire to be heard of God, should abide in their dreggs, as David
interprets Psalm. 86.4.25.1. unto thee o Lord I lift up my soul.

Ioh, 11.41.
3 Jesus lifting up his eyes prayed: which is also a token of the heart lifting
up it self unto god with confidence of hearing: contrariwise, the letting
down of the eyes in the publican Luke 18.13
, was a sign of exceeding great demission of the mind.

4 Paul bids the man to pray with his head uncovered, to testify the
greater reverence of God: but the woman with her head covered, for subjection
and for modesty sake. 1. Cor. 11.4.

5. There beseems also the office of prayers, a voycc, or tongue, both in
speaking moderately, and also in singing, either privately, or in the church
assembly, so that it follows affection, 1. Cor, 14.15. I will sing with
the spirit: I will sing with the understanding also. And Ephesians. 5.19. And.
Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing your own selves, in hymns, psalms, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody with a grace in your hearts to the
Lord. So Christ after the supper instituted by himself, together with the
Apostles did sing a psalm Mat. 26.30
, And Pliny the second, in a certain Epistle to Traiane the Emperor, writes
that Christians accustomed to sing hymns to their Christ before break of day.
But we must take heed least that, the song be made only for sweetness and
the delight of the ears, least that the ears be more bent to the pleasant
tuning, then the affections to the spiritual meaning of the words, and that
neither merit nor the greater part of Gods worship be placed in singing.

Non vox sed votum, non musica cordula sed cor,
Non clamans sed amans cantat in aure dei.
For, Its not voice but vote; not musical harmony, but heart,
Not clamant, but amant, chaunts it in gods holy ear.
Otherwise, the tongue moves the senses, exercises and retains the mind in
thinking of God, and is made specially to declare and publish the praise of
God, according to that Affectus cordis, verbis excitatur orantis.

The affection of the heart is stirred up by the words of him that prays.

Yet it is not always necessary. For sometime the best prayers are without
voice, so Moses. Exodus 14.15. is said to have cried unto God, who yet is not
read to have opened his mouth. So the moving of the lips of Anna the mother of
Samuel is commended 1. Sam. 2.13
, whose speech notwithstanding was not heard, for (as Cyprian says) est Deus
non vocis, sed cordis auditor, that is, God is a hearer not of the voice but of
the heart. yet notwithstanding the principal use of the voice, is in public
prayers, for mutual edification and for the setting forth together of the
praise of god Coll. 3.16
.

What kind of language ought there to be of prayers?
Not outlandish or strange, but popular, which may be understood of the common
people and of all the assembly, to the edification of the whole church.
Therefore Paul. 1, Cor. 14 16.19 If thou blessest with the spirit, he that
occupies the room of the unlearned how shall he say amen, seeing he, knows
not what thou say. For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not
edified. But in the Church I had rather to speak five words with true
understanding, that I might instruct others, then ten thousand words in a
strange tongue. By the word spirit, signifying the singular gift of tongues
which some being endued therewith, did abuse, when they did take it away from
the chiefest part of the soul, that is, the understanding and there is no
doubt but that a language without understanding displeases God.

What is to be decreed concerning fasting?
That it was and is wont to be joined to prayers both private, and public, as
it were a preparatiue 1. Cor. 7.5
: only let it not be superstitious, nor in opinion meritorious Joel. 1.14 and
2.15.
. Mat. 17.21. and Mark. 9.29. There is a kind of devils (says Christ) which is
not cast out but by prayer and fasting. And Anna the prophetess Luke. 2.37
, is said to have served God with fastings and prayers: also Act. 13.3. After
fasting and praying, the Prophets and teachers of the Church that was at
Antiochia laid hands on Barnabas and Paul Act. 14.23
.

What is the end of prayer?
Twofol^; the chiefest, is the glory of God. The subordinate is our safety and
profit, for we pray to that end, that we may obtain those things by which we
may be blessed, and may honor God by this service. Mat. 4.10
.

What is the fruit or effect of prayer.
1 The custom of seeking, of loving, of worshipping God, and of flying to him
as it were to a holy anchor. 2 A pouring forth of the soul beore God. 3 A
preparation to thanksgiving. 4 A meditation of his benignity. 5 Experience of
his providence and ability.

6 An hearing or obtaining of spiritual and corporal good things asked of god,
yea more then we ask or think Ephesians. 3.20.
, and salvation Romans 10.13 (...).
. 7. Joy or the peace of God, which p^sseth all understanding. Phil. 4.6. In
all things let your requests be showed unto God in prayer, and supplication
with giving of thanks. And the peace of God, which passes all understanding,
shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. 8 Sanctification of the
good creatures of god, as of meats, of drinks and the lawful use of other
things necessary for this life, and co^ioined with the good favor of God, 1.
Tim. 4.5. Prayer joined to the word of God sanctifies the creature.

Whose prayers and petitions does God hear?
1 Of the pore, Psalm. 9.10. The Lord forgets not the cry of the poor: And
10.17. The Lord hears the desire of the poor

2 Of the afflicted. Psalm. 22.24. He despises not the affliction of the poor,
neither hides he his face from him, but when he calls unto him, he hears
him. 3 Of them that cry unto him Psalm. 107.13.
, of the repentant ^say. 1.17
, but yet faithful which do call upon him with a lively faith. Psalm. 145.19.
he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. For the promise is most
sure. Psa. 50.15 I will deliver thee. And Christ says, binding it with an
oath, (...), that is, for confirmation of things to be said, and for the
assurance of the hearers (says Basil) Verily, verily, I say unto you, what
soever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Ioh. 16.23.

But because they who pray oftentimes obtain not that which they ask is the
prayer in vain, or God to be said not to hear?
In no wise, because God sometime denies the things asked, not because he
despises our prayers: but because those things which we ask are not
profitable for us. Hitherto belongs that of James 4. verse. 3. ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your lusts.
Whereupon Augustine says, Saepe non exaudit ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat ad
salutem. That is, oftentimes he hears not according to our will, that he may
hear for our safety. In like manner he says, Si non dat ad horam, exercet
quaerentem, sed non contemnit petentem. That is, if he gives not after a
while, he does exercise him that seeks, but despises not him that asks.
And god deferreth to give those things which he will give. 1 That he may try
his own. 2 That he may the more kindle their faith. 3 That he may make his
gifts more acceptable. 4 Least the thing soon given should be of little
account 5 That we may keep the things given in his fear. 6 That we may be
inflamed more and more with a desire of praying. So he does hear, vvhiles he
seems not to hear. But there is besides with God a double manner of hearing,
outvvard and inward for sometime outwardly he shows manifest help, after
which manner he heard the three children Deu. 3.27.
: and Daniel Dan. 6.22. and in other places often. Esaias. 37.36
. Sometime, he assisteth by the virtue of his holy spirit, least being overcome
with evils we should faint. So he heard Stephen Act. 7.55.
, and infinite martyrs at all times. And to Paul complaining, that he besought
God thrice, it was answered, my grace is sufficient for the. 2. Cor. 12.9.
From hence a rule is to be made, that it is the grace of God, if God by and by
hears not the^ which pray devoutly. For the Lord gives to them which pray
devoutly something which is better, that is, the strength of the spirit, that
those things which do grieve the^ may turn to their good. Wherefore the hearing
of our prayers is to be measured not by sense but by faith

Which things are contrary to true prayer?
1 A Pharisaicall opinion of man's own merits.

2 The hindrances of prayers, as distrust, doubting, and double mindedness
Iam. 1.6.7.8.
, (...)
cruelty, pride Esaias, 1.15. 1, Pet. 37.
, also brawlings or hatreds, among which there is no place for invocation c,
surfeiting and drunkenness Luke 21 34 and 1. Cor. 7.5
, corrupt desires Iam 4.3.
. Impenitencie, according to that, God hears not sinners, John. 9. Ambition
and vain glory Mat. 6.5. and 23, 11.
, Hypocrisy, Battologie, or vain babbling, and repetition of short prayers.
Math. 6, 7. of which fault the breuiaries of the Romanists are guilty, the
hours (which they call) canonical, the rosaries and infinite things of like
sort.

3 The prayers of hypocrites, who in no measure are touched with the feeling of
their sins, or slightly do rehearse prayers for fashion, as if they should
pay a task to God, or yawning do mumble prayers, but coldlie without
meditation and consideration. And of them who account faith and hope in prayers
to God for an absurd thing.

4 The error of invocation or intercession of Saints, of prayers for the dead,
of outlandish and not vndestood speech to bev sed in prayers. 1. Cor. 14.15.

5 Falling down before Idols and Images, false opinion of merits and the
number of prayers: the superstition of them which do think that prayers made
by themseselues in a certain place, imagine in this or that chapel, or at
this or another time, are more effectual.

6 Superstitious rites of the dedication of Churches, the vain and false
distinction of religious adoration into (...), and (...): whenas (...) or (...)
is termed among the Grecians the same which also is (...). And Paul when he
had said, Romans 1.9 (...) (that is, to serve) chap. 16. verse. 18. used (...),
which signifies also to serve.

7 All superstitious, impious, unjust, curious rashly taken in hand,
unprofitable, much more hurtful prayers are contrary to the true invocation
of Gods name.

The six and thirtieth common place. Of Predestination.
For an entrance into this Treatise, what words must we consider?
THese especially, Providence, purpose, prescience, predestination, election,
reprobation and the book of life.

Explain therefore these words.
First the word providence is a general word co^prizing preordaining, (...)
disposing and ruling all and singular things in this world; predestination
respects specially the reasonable creature, and of such chiefly the
everlasting life, and death of man. To go further, Providence has her
direction to ends natural, Predestination to ends supernatural, as to be
adopted the children of God, to be regenerate, and in the end to be glorified.
Thus we say not that brute beasts are predestinate, because they are not
capable of this supernatural end. (...)


2 For purpose, Paul calls it Purpose, which God had appointed from eternity
with himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, Romans 8.28 9, 11.
Ephe. 3.21
, As for his decree that is in the word commonly called his eternal counsel
Act. 2.23. (...)
, the good pleasure of God, which he purposed in himself, the counsel of Gods
will. And this is nothing else, but as it were the judgment of the mind of God
either in general concerning all creatures, or in special of creatures
rational.

3 Prescience is that by which, in gross, (...)
God by his uncompounded understanding, foreknoweth all things created. Some
call this notitia or knowledge, but in truth Gods knowledge exte^deth further
then his foreknowledge. For his knowledge extends it self not only to things
past, present, and to come, but also to such things as never shall be, be they
possible, or impossible. But as for prescience, it is of such things as shall
be: And therefore prescience presupposes will to go in order before. For
nothing can be, unless God will have it to be, if he would not have it, he is
able to hinder it.

Therefore God foreknoweth what things he will shall come to pass, yet so that
to his knowledge nothing is either past or to come, but all things present.
Heb. 4.13.
There is not any creature that is not manifest in the sight of God, nay all
things are naked, and open to his eyes. This universal knowledge does not
infer a necessity of the effects. For neither is the very foreknowledge the
cause of things simply, as that because he foreknoweth them, therefore they
shall come to pass, but therefore he foreknoweth them, because he has decreed
that they shall be.

2 In kind and (...)
after an excellent manner it is wont to be taken for that (...) foreknowledge
which is of them by name who are Gods children, whom he knows with affection,
in that manner as one friend knows another. For this is a special
foreknowledge, not a simple knowing or foreseeing, but such as is joined with
love and (...)
good will. For god is said to know those whom he approves, whom he cares
for, and whom he vouchsafes his love, and not to know others, whom he
rejects, Exodus 33.17. Thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by
name Math. 7.27 (...),
. Also, God knows who are his. Psalm. 1.6. and 2. Tim. 2.19.

3 It is also taken for (...).
foreseeing: in which sense it may seem not to be derived from foreknowing,
but from praeordaining that is, from foredecreeing, as the judge is said (...).
that is to determine and the Magistrate or commonaltie to decree, that is to
establish: from whence is derived that which we call a law made by the
commonaltie, it may also be termed a foreknowing, and therefore it is often
usurped for (...). Act. 2.23 Romans 8.29 and 11 2. and. 1. Pet. 12.
1. A fore-determining: that hence it may appear that they do not well who
oppose them which are foreknowne to those that are praedistinated, as though
foreknowing should pertain to the reprobate only, praedistinarion only to
the elect: for that praedestination is subordinate to foreknowing, for so the
Apostle reckoning up the causes of the salvation of the elect, recounteth (...)
(which these interpret foreknowledge) in the first place. Romans 8.29.

5 Praedestination, (...), which some more generally apply as well to the
good as to the bad, others more strictly refer it to the elect only:
because it seems a hard point to them to think, any to be praedestinated to
death, seeing the case it self requires, that some being praedestinated to
life, the residue should be understood as destinated to death: and if those
which are predestinate to glory be called vessels of glory, the opposition of
them that affirm the contrary, does altogether require, that we should
interpret them which are predestinate to death, vessels of wrath.

2 Many understand predestination to be the Purpose or decree of God, in as
much as it is with God from eternity, before men are borne. Ier. 1.5. When I
had not yet fashioned thee in the womb, I knew thee of old: or an appointment
from the womb. Whereby Paul, Gal. 1.15. says: That he was put a part from
his mothers womb, long before he was converted. And Romans 9.11, 12.13. of the
twins, he says. Before they had done any good or evil, it was said, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

Others take predestination for a preparing of the means which tend to a
determined end as Augustine, Predestination, says he, is a preparing of the
benefits of God, whereby whosoever are delivered, are most certainly delivered.
To conclude others for the very execution, and manifesting of the Decree,
which in time comes to pass, as that Paul going to Damascus is converted to
Christ, and so in very deed, is severed from the unbelievers Act. 9.13. etc.
.

We after the manner of schools do at once generally under the name of
predestination understand these three points or degrees: Viz. An eternal
Decree which is in God: A disposition or determination: and the whole course of
the means, whereby God leads his children to the end. All which the Greek
word, (...) does properly signify, (...), that is, to determine and appoint
the end of a thing before hand. For (...) is the end or compass of a thing,
which is to predestinate so to somewhat as thou should also purpose all the
ends and limits thereof, as for example: the causes, all means, number, time,
afflictions, and such like, whereby he who is predestined may assuredly be
brought to attain the thing he was before appointed to. For Ephesians. 1.15.

We are said to be predestinate (...), that is to adoption, and Cap. 2.10.
to good works, and Romans 8.28.29. to bear the cross, or to be made like unto
Christ. And verse. 30. whom God has predestinate, he is said to call, to
justify, and to glorify them also: whereupon the Latin name of
Predestination is taken from a determined end. For to determine, is to purpose
somewhat in the mind, and with a firm decree of the mind to direct that, by
certain means some-whither. Hence to predestinate, is, before thing be done
to dispose the same to certain ends.

Election,
5 Election, (...), 1 Is sometimes taken generally for the choosing of some
nation to be a people, as when God generally chose the people of Israel
rejecting others, Deu. 4.39. and 32..8. When the most high God divided the
Nations, and separated the sons of Adam, his portion was the people of
Israll, the lot of his inheritance, and chap. 10.14. Behold, the heaven is the
Lords thy God, and the earth, with all that therein is: Notwithstanding the
Lord set his delight in thy fathers to love them, and did chose their seed
after them, even you above all people. And Psalm. 105.6. ye seed of Abraham his
servant, ye children of Jacob which are his elect. But this his election is
temporary in part, and not always firm and ratified in all, but only in a
remnant Rom, 11.5
, for many of the posterity of Abraham are cut of as rotten members verse. 20
.

2 Sometime it is taken for choosing to some office, as the 12 Apostles Luke, 6,
13
and Judas also is said to be elected John, 6, 70
namely to the Apostleship.

3 But specially it is taken for the electing of all those to salvation that
shall be saved, whom God by his decree has predestined to life ephesians. 1.4.5
, whereupon they are called the elect, not for any excellency of nature, as the
best gold is termed chosen, but because amongst other the like, they are chosen
to a peculiar use, by the special grace of God: as he loved Jacob, but hated
Esau Mala. 1.2
, and this election is very firm, effectual, and eternal.

6 Reprobation 6. Reprobation.
is contrary to election, whereupon the reprobate are so called, by a metaphor
taken either from cou^terfeit silver which is rejected Iere. 6.30.
, Heb. 6.8.
or from a barre^ soil, which is left untilled, as cursed of God. But it is to
be noted, that election and reprobation are taken two ways. In deed they are
properly referred to the condition of man already created, and through his
fall corrupted, that by election there might be signified a separation, which
in very deed might be in time through an effectual calling, Mat. 3.12. John.
17.6. Isay. 9.2. 1. Pet. 1.2
of certain men from amongst the castaway sort of mankind, and that from
darkness to light l. But by reprobation is signified a neglect or a casting
away of some, who being left to themselves and their corruption, are forsaken
of God. Isa. 6.9,
But they are often used metonimically for the very decree of Election and
Reprobation, which God has decreed in himself, as Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us in
himself before the foundations of the world were laid, that we might be
holy and blameless before him in love. The mystery whereof is hidden from us,
Although both of them are manifest to us in due time, by those causes, means
or effects, which God has expressed in his word.

7. The book of life 7. The book of life.
is twofold. The first, a material book, which is called the Bible, that is,
a book of holy things, penned by the Prophets and Apostles, teaching the way
of eternal life. The second metaphorical, which after the Hebrews manner (to
whom a Book signifies a Catalogue or reckoning up of certain men, as in
Genes. 51. Matthew. 11. appears) is attributed to God by a metaphor and
similitude or anthropopathy, and is often used for (...) that is, a foreknowing
or knowledge of God.

It is threefold. First, wherein he has written as it were in his book of
remembrance all men generally, not only by name, but also has foreknowne them
according to every ones birth, fort, quality, and death, before the framing of
the world: whereof David, Psalm. 139.16. In thy book all were written, when the
very days were framed.

The second, wherein are contained the deeds of them which are at any time
living, according whereunto they shall be judged: neither are their deeds only
rherein contained, but even also their banishments, tears, sorrows and
afflictions, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 56.9. Apoc. 20, 12. Dan.
7.10 and MalaC 3.19.
The third, in which are written as many as are appointed before hand to life:
and it is taken for the very election of those, on whom God has determined
freely to bestow life eternal, whose names are for that respect said to be
written in that book, Exodus 32 32.
which also is called the book of the living. Esai. 6.9 29.
And the Lambs book of life. Apoc, 20, 12. Phil. 4, 3.
And ((...)) excellently may it be termed a Book, Dan. 12.1 ezech, 139.
the writing of the house of Israel, and the closet of the Lord, also ((...))
the book of the Infranchisement of the Church, and city of God. But their
names are said to be written therein, whom God by electing has entitled, and
by intitling has elected, least any should think that he can hide from his
own conscience, those things which are evil. Moreover, least any should
suppose that god has no care over him, for god has as much care and knowledge
of the number of his children and servants, as any the best and wisest father
of a family: whereupon Luke 10.50. Rejoice says Christ, that your names are
written in the heavens.

Again in the like figure of speech, Iud. 4. the reprobate are said ((...))
to be prescribed of old to this condemnation, not with incke and paper: for
God needs no books, whereby to be put in remembrance, but through his
foreknowledge, judgment and divine predestination. and they that depart from
god, are said to be written in the earth, Iere. 17.13. as on the other side
Theophilact devoutly upon the 10. of Luke. ((...)) He has written our names
in the heavens, not as branded, but as in the remembrance and grace of God.

What is the order and process of these words?
Although in god who is the sincerest essence, and with whom all things are
present, they cannot be so distinguished, yet in the course of Nature, and in
respect of our selves, they may be so ranged successively, that the first may
be the knowledge, as also (...), or the general foreknowledge of god.

2. (...) or the purpose of god, which is also called (...) or his counsel and
decree. Act, 2.23 and Ephesians. 1.13
,

3. (...) Predestination. Rom 8.28, 29.
.

4. Election, which order thou have Ephesians. 1.4.5. he chose us in Christ, after
that he predestined us: but on the contrary Reprobation answers Election.
5. An effectual calling in time, which is subordinate to Election from
eternity; and a casting off in time, which is subordinate to reprobation.
Whereof To. 11.1. Has God then cast off his people? 6. Justification follows
Vocation. 7. and Glorification Justification, Romans 8.30.
. as impenitencie or hardness of heart does follow casting off, and
condemnation hardness of heart.

Whether is there Predestination or no?
That there is, it is proved, 1. by the testimonies of the Prophets, Exodus 33
34. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Ierem. 1.5. before I
fashioned thee in the womb I knew thee Malach. 1.3. Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated.

2 By the testimony of Christ. John. 3.18. I know whom I have chose^ 3 Of the
Apostle. 2, Pet. 1.10. Give diligence that you may make your election and
calling sure (in you) Romans 8, 28 and. 9.15.98
. Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

4 By arguments, because it is meet that God ((...)) who is not to be called
to account should do with his own what shall please him, and the same God
being most wise and not subject to change, has ordained the creation of man to
a certain end, not to an uncertain event.

What is praedestination?
It is the eternal, immutable, and most wise purpose of God, going in order
before all the causes of salvation and damnation, by which he has decreed to
adopt of his mere grace in Christ some out of all mankind and those to call
effectually, to justify them through faith, and to glorify them: by his just
judgment to reprobate and put by others in Adam and themselves, and to punish
them for their sins whereinto they fall of their own inclination: that in
those the mercy of the creator, but in these his justice, in either his glory
might be declared. Or it is the aeternall purpose of god, whereby, according to
the good pleasure of his will before the foundations of the world were laid, he
has Act. i, 25 John. 17, 12 Apoc, 17, 8 Ephesians. 1.4 2. Tim. 1.9 Rom 1.9.2^ etc
determined to glorify himself by ordeining some men to grace and salvation,
others to displeasure and eternal destruction.

Is praedestination but of mankind only?
It is of Angels also: for Paul calls the Angels which stood steedfast in
their integrity, Elect ones, 1. Tim. 5.21. But if their steadfastness was
grounded in gods good pleasure, it argues that the fall of others was utterly
abandoned. Whereof their can no other cause be brought, but reprobation, which
is hid in the secret counsel of God.

But our purpose is in this place to speak of the praedestination of mankind.

How many degrees or parts of predestination are there?
Three. 1. the very decree in the wisdom of God for saving or casting men away.

2 The execution or proceeding of the very decree of that aeternall God by
outward means.

3 The most excellent end of the Master builder, namely the glory of God
himself, who does so lay open both his power, and mercy.

What is the decree of praedestination?
Whereby God determining to what end he would create men, before he created
them, has according to his power and mere goodwill decreed so to further his
own glory, that some of them should be vessels and examples of his goodness
and mercy; but others vessels and ((...)) matter for his wrath, that is, of
his power, and just revenge on sin Rom, 9.22
. 1. Pet. 2.8. (...), to which they were appointed. 1, (...), as it is said.
Romans 9.17. I have stirred thee up, says the Lord to Pharao, that I might show
my power upon thee. and (...), were fitted V. 22. And this decree is such as
that it disposes the causes of the execution and consists not of the^. But
because the Apostle treating of the vessels of mercy, uses the active verb
(...). To, 9.23. and speaking of the vessels of wrath or the reprobate, has
the passive participle (...) 1. fitted (...) prepared. does it therefore follow
that the reprobate are the cause of their own reprobation?

No: because Luke Act. 13, 48. treating also of the elect uses the passive
participle (...), appointed, who nevertheless are not ordained of themselves,
but rather of the mere grace of God. Moreover, if question be made of the
ordinary means, whereby the vessels of wrath, are carried to destruction,
they alone are the cause of their own utter decaie. But when we mention the
decree of election and Reprobation, the Reprobates can no more be said to have
cast away themselves then the elect to have elected themselves, no more I say,
then if one should say that a pott was not made by the potter, but of it self.

What is the primordiall efficient cause of this great decree?
((...)) The pleasure of God to do with his own what it shall please him Mat.
10 25.20.16
, For S. Paul says. Rom, 9.21. Has not the potter free power and authority?
how much more then the most just God and wisest workman over clay; that out of
the same lump, that is, out of a substance as yet unwrought, and only prepared
to a future work, he may make some vessels for honor, and others for dishonor:
Ier. 18.1.2 and 5.14. Isa. 64.8.
and the will of God or his good pleasure, because he brings all things most
wisely to pass after the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11. Ioh. 6.39.
Act. 2.23.
and Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

This one cause we know, that so the most merciful and most just lord will be
glorified: for the Scripture sets forth unto us no other cause besides this,
and faith bids us in this cause only to rest likewise on the Scripture, so
that to seek out the cause of this cause, why it so pleased him, were a point
of rash boldness, and ungodly curiosity. To. 9.20.14. and 11.33


When began this Decree?
Not only then after men were created, or began to sin, but before the
foundations of the world were laid, that is, God had this purpose from
eternity. Matt. 25.34. Ephe. 1.4.


What kind of Decree is this?
(...) The deep and wonderful gulf of his riches.

2. (...), Unsearchable. Roet 1.32 33.


3. Eternal in respect of the beginning. Ephesians. 1.4
but it is also eternal in regard of the end.

4. And therefore immovable, immutable, vnrepentable, and irreuocable, because
those whom the father has given to the Son, no man can pluck out of his
hand. Ioh. 10.28. and because it is the fathers will, that not one of these
little ones should perish. Math. 18.14. Here Paul cries out, that nothing is
able to separate us from the love of God, namely wherewith he has loved us in
Christ* Romans 8.35.

How many kinds are there of this Decree of Predestination.
Two: 1. The first is called an Election or Predestination to life.

2 The other is called a Reprobation, or Refusing, or Casting off, or Decree,
or Predestination to death: for some he chooses to eternal life, but
neglects and rejects others. Romans 9.13.18.21.22.
But these two kinds of Predestination do concur as well in the end, as in
the beginning: for God his decree is the beginning of each: now both the ways,
which are divided as it were from this beginn^ng, meet again together in the
extreme, namely in the glory of (...)

Whether Reprobation be also subject to God his Decree as Election is?
Yea verily: for he that chooses, takes not al, and because he chooses
somewhat among two or three, he is said necessarily to refuse those things which
he choseth not: therefore whom God does not receive, him he rejects; and who^
he neglects or chooses not, him he casts out of favor. 2. Reprobation is
understood in Election by the rule ((...)) of Relation; that if Reprobation be
nor, neither should there be Election. 3. The Scripture does manifestly
confirm God his Decree concerning reprobating, Romans 9.22 1. Pet. 2.8.
And the Apostle subiecteth both of the^ to the Decree of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9,
God has not (says he) appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain Salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Neither is it a harder speech to say some are
predestined to destruction, then that some are ((...)) ordained before of old
to this condemnatio, as Jude speaks verse. 4. Jude 4.
or ((...)) appointed unto wrath, as Paul speaks 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.

What is Election?
It is the Predestination of certain men in Christ to eternal life, namely,
whereby God willing to manifest the glory of his grace, has of his only goodness
and mercy determined, out of the whole race of mankind being subject to sin
and death, freely to adopt in Christ some certain men, to call them effectually,
and to justify them that through him they may be partakers of the heavenly
inheritance and of eternal life. And this Election is eternal in the purpose
of God, although in respect of our selves, we may the^ be said to be elected,
when God does execute his purpose in us. Or, election is the execution of Gods
will, or the act in separating from the rest of the world, through effectual
calling, Justification, and Sanctification those, on whom he has appointed
from the beginning to bestow everlasting life.

What is the principal cause of Election?
God is the principal cause: All that the father gives me, shall come unto
me. No man can come unto me, except the father draw him John. 6.37.44. and
17.9. I pray not for the world, but for these whom thou have given me, for
they are thine, Ephesians. 1.4. God has elected us. And Christ because he is the
same God with the father, says that he has chosen us. Ioh 15.16. And the
holy Ghost said Act. 13.2. Separate me Saul and Barnabas for the work wheru^to
I have called the^

What is the efficient inforciue or precedent cause thereof?
The inward cause is only in god that is to say his mere Charity and the only
goodness of the will of God. Ephesians. 1.4.5. He has chosen us says he, before the
foundations of the world were laid, according to the good pleasure of his will.
And his free love Ioh. 3.6. To. 9.13. In which place says he, Jacob have I
loved: the only grace and mercy and love of God, John. 4.10 19.
. 2, Tim. 1.9. he has called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but acording to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through
Christ Jesus before the world was. I say the mere good pleasure of god, only
respecting it self, but excluding al other outward cause which is or can be in
me^ Romans 9.16
. So then election is neither in him that wills nor in him that runs, but
in god that shows mercy: where he calls the thought and indeauor of the
mind a will, and the exercise of good works a race, and that by suppositio^:
for no man wills, or runs of himself: but it is god which works in you,
both to will and to do according to his own free goodwill. Phi. 2.13. So. Ephe.
1.9 According to the purpose of his good pleasure which he had purposed in
himself, as if it should be said, that god considered nothing without himself,
whereof he might have respect in determining or choosing and cap. 2. to Tit. 3.5.

Does our election consist of our own faith, holiness, worthiness, lineage or
works foreseen of God, or no?
In no wise. 1. because our sure and certain salvation is evidently in the
singular and freely bestowed grace of the merciful god acording to that; It is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in god that shows
mercy. To. 9.16. 2 Because the praise and glory of our election is wholly due
to god alone, he chose us to the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1.6.
Moreover, if works foreseen, faith or worthiness might move god to choose some,
the elect might have whereof they might boast. 3. Because god could foresee no
worthiness or good at all in men, but what he had determined now already
freely to bestow on the^ by the benefit of his election, who not by custom and
imitation, but by nature are the enemies of god Romans 5.10
, and sons of wrath Ephesians. 2.3
. dead in sin Romans 7.10. Ephesians. 2.1
. unapt even to think a good thought as of themselves 1. Cor. 3.5.
. Finally in whom by nature there is nothing but matter of eternal death and
damnation. Job. 15.16 Psalm. 14.3 Ierem. 10.23
7. Because then there should be no cause why the Apostle should say, O man
who art thou which pleadest against god? To. 9.20. For he might have
answered, that god foresaw the desert of the one and of the other, yet does he
not say so, but flies to the judgments and mercy of god: Neither the
exclamation of the same Apostle, To. 11.32. of the deapth etc. should take
place. For he might have declared in a word, that some are e^ected, others
rejected, for the works which he foresaw would be in either.

5 Because our salvation is more safe and sure by gods election, then by our
own works, which evermore have a doubt annexed to them Romans 4.16.
,

6 Because then it would follow that faith is of our selves not of god, or that
we first loved and chose god: which the scripture points out to be false and
absurd Ioh. 3.5. and 6.37. and 8.47. and 15.10.
ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

7 Because that place. Romans 9.11. For yer the children Esau and Jacob, were
borne, and when they had neither done good, nor evil (that the purpose of god
might remain according to election, not by works, but by him that calls) it
wat said, the elder shall serve the younger. Where the Apostle drawing forth the
reiection of Esau, For that he was condemned to be his brothers bond servant as
also the election of Jacob, because he was made lord over his brother, even
over the first borne: that Esau his servitude was joined with Gods hatred,
Jacobs rule with Gods love, out of Malachy the best interpreter of Moses, chap.
3. e. As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau: So that neither any
goodness in Jacob, nor any other thing in Esau may be accounted the cause either
of the choosing of the one, or rejecting of the other, does evidently impugn
this foresight of faith.

8. Because there can be no goodness in the world, unless God had placed and
ordained it.

9. Because naturally, the efficient cause cannot be after his effect: but
Election is the cause of faith and good works: for we are called Elect, that
we might be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and without blame, not contrary, because he
foresaw that we would be such: for these two are contrary, that the godly have
from their election, this, that they should be holy, and that they should
attain the same election by means of their works. And Paul writes plainly,
1. Corinthians. 7.25. that he had obtained mercy of the Lord, that he might be
faithful.

10. Because the Logicians rule is manifest, Whatsoever is the cause of the
cause, is also the cause of the thing caused. If then faith and works
foreseen were the cause of Election, they should also be the cause of Vocation
and Justification, which are the effects of Election. Romans 8.30
But the Scripture teaches the contrary, 2. Tim. 1.9
To Titus 3.5. He has called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his purpose. and Romans 4.6 God imputes righteousness
without works.

Is the Election of all men common or general, that is, does God ordeine all
men to Salvation?
No, but special, because all are not elected nor blessed in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.4.
neither have all men faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.


2. Because he which receives all, makes no choice. But all election either
of some one or some few, must needs be out of a number of some remaining, nay,
it is an unsavory contradiction, and (...)) a monstrous speech, to say the
Election of all men were general.

3. The Scripture declares that there is a certain crew of Reprobates: both
John 6.44. No man comes unto me, but whom the father shall draw. And Romans
9.18. Whom he will he receives to mercy, and whom he will he hardens. And
11.7. The Elect have obtained it, but the rest have been blinded.

Of what sort of men is Election?
Of such as are unclean and ungodly in the sight of God. For he has chosen
us, that we might be holy and without blame, Ephesians. 1.4. But whereas he chose us
before the world was made, it is effected, that God set before his eyes all men
that ever should be, and for as much as they would be ungodly and accursed, he
likewise so considered them, and so chose some out of the common lump and
filth of men, and those freely, according to the good pleasure of his will,
leaving others in their sin and curse.

Wherefore has not God elected all?
Let us not be too curious in enquiring, if we be unwilling to fall into
error, says Augustine. Nevertheless we must not doubt that the reasons of
this his secret counsel are most sufficient, although they are unsearchable.
To. 11.33
.

Is not Christ the Redeemer of all men?
No: for he is a Redeemer neither to Pharao, nor Judas, neither unto Caiphas,
nor Herod, neither unto Julian, nor in brief to all those that are damned or
without hope, for whom neither he died.

Died not Christ for all men?
His death was sufficient for all, say the Schoolmen, but effectual only for
the Elect and them that are faithful. If we respect the virtue and force of
Christ's blood, it is sufficient for the redemption of all: but if we look upon
the purpose and eternal counsel of God, and the good will of the Mediator, he
died for the elect only, Ioh. 10.15. I lay down my life for my sheep, says
Christ, and 17.9. I pray not for the world, but I pray for them whom thou have
given me. Therefore he neither offered sacrifice for it, neither did he
redeem it. And verse. 19. For their sakes who believe, and whom the father has
given me, sanctify I my self. And Matthew. 26.28. My blood which is shed for
many for the remission of sins,

Is not the calling and promise general. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye
that are weary and laden?
It is indefinite rather, and that truly in respect of certain circumstances,
as of nation, and condition, of age, sex, and the like, whereby God is moved
not to choose some one.

Moreover, neither does God generally call all outwardly by the preaching of
the Gospel, for that it has never been known unto many, much less does he
call all inwardly by an effectual calling.

And although the voice of the Gospel speak to all men generally, yet faith
is rare and singular, because the arm of the Lord is not revealed unto all,
Isa. 53.1. Ioh. 12.13


How does it then accord, that God calls them to him, whom he knows will
not come?
Austen answers out of the Apostles words, Sermon, 11. Will thou dispute with
me? Marvel with me and cry out, O the depth! Let us both agree in fear, least
we perish in error.

But so the kingdom of grace shall not be very large.
Yea, very large, simply in respect of the citizens, members and parts of that
kingdom: though in regard of them that are let pass, and of those that refuse
the Gospel, many are said to be called, but few chosen, Matthew. 22.14.

By this means then shall not God be an accepter of Persons?
Not at all, for else the fault ((...)) of having respect of Persons would be
in every benefit, wherein one is preferred before an other, which is false,
for we may benefit whom we will with our own, this man rather then that:
Moreover, respect of Persons is committed, when we bestow somewhat, or give our
judgment being thereunto moved by circumstances and conditions inherent in any
person, which make not to the cause: as if of two men alike offenders, the
Judge does free the one, because he is rich, or because he is his kinseman or
countryman: which thing cannot fall out in God: for he finds no such
conditions in men, but sets down what he will himself.

But God would have ((...)) all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth. 1. Tim. 2.4.
He lets them not, for this is meant of all sorts of men, but not of all of
every sort. God therefore would have some of every sort and order of men to be
saved, namely those who come to the knowledge of truth, that is to say, all
which believe on the Son of God. Mark. 16 16 Ioh. 3.18.
.

2. General experience it self, whereunto the will of God agrees,
conuinceth, that faithful men only are saved.

3. All that the Lord would have done, that does he. Psalm. 115.3
. But he saves not all men, but only his faithful servants: Therefore
without question, he would not have all men to be saved.

4. Of like things, a like judgment: But in these words, concerning them that
shall be saved, the general experience is restrained to the faithful, John
3.15.16. That every one which believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And cap. 1.16. Of his fullness have all we received, 1. Cor.
15.22, In Christ shall all be made alive. And verse. 28, God shall be all in
all. And chap. 10.13. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient. And verse. 33. I please all men in all things. 1. Tim, 4.10. We
trust in the living God, which is the Savior of all men, specially of them
that believe. In like sort therefore in saying, Who would have all men to be
saved, let us understand all believers, as well Jews, as Graecians, private
men, as magistrates, both men and women, both bondmen and free, as well those
that are guilty of many sins, as those that are guilty of few, but yet not
all men altogether. So he would not have any to perish. but would have all men
come to repentance, that is, the elect: to who^ Peter joins himself, when he
declares, that God is patient toward us, deferring his coming only until
the number of the Elect were fulfilled, and that all might have opportunity to
convert themselves unto God.

What is the execution of predestination?
It is the disposing, use, and application of all second causes, or means,
whereby as it were by degrees, God does pass to the end of his highest decree.

Of how many sorts are those means?
Of two; some are common as well to the Elect, as the Reprobate, wherein the
Elect and the Reprobate are made equal: others proper and special to either,
wherein the elect are discerned from the reprobate.

Those that are common are threefold, namely the Creation of man, male and
female in the upright state, that is, in righteousness and holiness, Genesis
1.26. Eccles. 7.29
but changeable. For God alone is unchangeable.

2, The Fall of man, whereby he defiled himself with sin most foully, b.
which could not have happened without both the ordinance and will of God, that
man's wretchedness might give place to God his mercy, and the transgression of
man to Gods justice (neither yet can any thing be said to fall out without the
knowledge of god, or God being against it and unwilling, or unadvisedly, from
whose will and pleasure not the little sparrowes are excepted, Matthew. 11.29.)
Nevertheless the fall of man was from his own accord, and of his own will:
and therefore the fall of Adam sticks as a fault in his free, and uncompelled
will, wherewith he obeyed the serpent rather then god, and not in the only
bare will of god: whereupon it was very well said of Prudentius, Nemo nocens,
si fata regunt, quod viuitur et fit:
Imo nocens, quicunque volens, non quod licet audet.
No man is bad if fate does rule, and cause men live in ill,
Yea he is bad, who lawless lives, and lives so with his will,


3. The spreading of that sin, that is of the guilt and punishment from Adam
over all men: for no clean thing can be bred of an unclean: Job. 14.4.
from whence it comes that all men by nature, not by imitation and custom
are the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. For seeing that God, before he created
mankind, had determined both to show a notable token of his mercy, even in the
salvation of the Elect, and also to declare his just judgment, it was
necessary that either should be included under sin, namely, that he might
have mercy on them that believed, and again, that he might find argument of
just condemnation in those, to whom it is given neither to believe, nor to
understand the mysteries of God, Matthew. 13.11.

By these ruins of mankind therefore, God all-wise decreed to separate some to
himself, to choose them, and to bring them to life as vessels of his mercy:
and to leave others in their corruption, and to reserve them unto punishment,
as vessels of his wrath against sin: and that with such wisdom, that all
the praise of the salvation of the Elect should wholly be referred to the mercy
of God: and the whole fault of the condemnation of the Reprobate should remain
in themselves.

How many are the proper and peculiar means ordained by God for the Elect?
They are six, which being referred to Election, or the Predestination of the
Elect, are properly the effects thereof: but compared one with an other, and
to the end of Election, may be called both the causes and effects. And three
are like mediate causes, the other three like the effects.

The first means is Christ, not as the word is singly, ((...)) consubstantiall
and equal with the father in all points (for so is he the first cause of our
Election together with the father and the holy Ghost, and not the second, John
13.18. I know whom I have chosen.) but as he is the Mediator, in whom the
father might choose, according to that saying of the Apostle, In him we were
chosen, before the foundations of the world were laid, Ephesians. 1.4. and through
whom, being applied to the Elect, God would both remit sins, as also impute
perfect righteousness: by which name Christ himself being defined, ((...))
is called a man as it were appointed, Act. 17.31. and which was ordained before
the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last times for our sakes,
1. Pet. 1.20. Therefore the Father has ordained his Son, that he might
assume an humane nature into the unity of his Person, who suffered and was
dead for the satisfaction of the Elect, that he might redeem them from
iniquity, and might rise again for their justification. Romans 4.25
Finally, who to the Elect, which apply him to themselves through faith, might
be Wisdom, and righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30.
In choosing and appointing which mean, all these miracles of God, says
Bernard, do at once concur. 1. Gods justice, his mercy toward his Elect,
as also his justice in punishing their sins in his beloved one. 2. In one and
the self same person of Christ, God and man. 3. One and the same woman, a
mother and a virgin. 4. One and the same Son, ((...)) without father, without
mother. 5. And the same Christ, our Judge and Advocate.

The second mean is Vocation, effectual unto true repentance, and
acknowledging of Christ, through the inspiration of the holy Ghost, Romans 8.30
ad Tit. 2.14. and. 3.7.
Ordinary in them that are of years, through the preaching of the Gospel:
Extraordinary also, as in Infants that are elected, as namely John Baptist in
his mothers womb, Luke 1.44.
and in some that are deaf, the mean thereof being unknown unto us.

The third mean is faith in Christ, or the applying of Christ by faith,
whereupon our most straight conjunction with him, our union, our incorporation,
or society, and ingrafting into him follows. John. 15.5 and 17.21. Gal.
3.27.28. Ephesians. 3.6. 1. John 1.3 Romans 11.17.


From these follow three effects, Justification before God, which consists in
the imputation of Christ's righteousness: Justification, by which the Elect
having the holy Ghost freely bestowed on them are renewed in the spirit of
their mind, and are made new men, which by them also works good works,
which are pleasing and acceptable to God for Christ's sake: and Glorification
through the same Christ: which very means, Gods Predestination ordained from
the beginning; these and every of them, God of his mere grace applies to
every of the Elect by the effectual preaching of the Gospel, whenever he
pleases, sometime sooner, sometime later, even as God himself does will, and
decerne most wisely and most mercifully.

And this is the true golden chain of Salvation; and indissoluble knot, which
leads from the supreme cause, thorough means ordained and applied to the
last effect. The end therefore cannot be hoped for, without the means
thereof, neither ought th end to be separated from the means, neither may we,
omitting the means, run from one end to another.

What is the proper end of Election?
The remote and farthest end in respect of God that electeth, is his glory or
praise, and the declaring of his mercy, Romans 9.23. That he might make known
the riches, that is exceeding greatness, of hss glory toward the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, Ephesians. 1.9. He has elected us to
the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us freely
accepted in his beloved And verse 11. That we should be unto the praise of
his glory.

But in regard of us, that is nigh at hand or successiue, that we should be
holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.10. We are his workmanship created unto good works,
which God has ordained, thst we should walk in them. And Romans 8.29. That we
might be made like to the image of God. The last is, our Salvation, Life, and
Glorification Col. 1.12.13. 1 These, 13.14 Act. 13.48 Romans 9.23.
.

What are the marks of Election?
There are many marks, whereof true faith in Christ, effectual through
Charity is the spring: whereby a spiritual life is certainly discerned, and
thereby our Election is perceived, as the life of the body is by sense and
motion.

What is Reprobation?
A certain execution of Gods will, in casting off and refusing them which are
predestinate unto death. Or it is a Predestination whereby God from the
beginning, without any injustice, has determined not to have mercy on some
that were corrupted in Adam, and in his eternal judgment to adiudge them unto
death, for their sins, being left to themselves, that in these as in the
vessels of shame appointed to destruction (which is spoken not in respect of
the event, but of the purpose, for that the particle ((...)) does not only
declare the event, but the scope and purpose) he might make known the glory
both of his justice and power, Exodus 9.16
Pro. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea, even the wicked
for the day of evil.

Romans 9.17 21.22. 1. Pet. 7.8 Judith. 4 Apoc. 17.8. and. 20.15. (...) or (...)
What is the efficient cause of Reprobation
God, who as he has elected us according to the good pleasure of his will; so
has he rejected the reprobate, according to his just will or purpose, which
in order goes before all: for as he takes mercy on whom he will, so whom
he will he hardens. For the same verb ((...)) is not otherwise to be
expounded, either in the former or latter part of the sentence; but because
contraries are the consequents of contraries, if it be godly and truly spoken
of God, (which no man denies) he has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
Exodus 33.19. without doubt Paul spoke truly and godly; but whom he will he
hardens. And Ephesians. 1.11. God does all things after the purpose of his will.
The word of Election does approve the very same thing. For, in whose power it
is to elect some, in his power also it is not to elect others, but to pass by
them, or to reject them: for neither can the Election of some be granted
without a reiection or neglecting: nor a reiection or neglecting without the
election of others. And whereas it is said, Ezech. 18.23. I will not the death
of a sinner, but that he return from his ways and live. It appears to be an
indefinite Proposition, which differs very much from an universal, and is to
be restrained to them, to whom is given the grace of repentance. Which also
Christ says, Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have gathered thy sons, and
thou would not, he speaks of the outward ministry, and as far as he
himself was generally promised for the salvation of this nation, and as he was
also careful of it in special.

Are not some sins, as Incredulity, etc. the causes of the Decree, why some
one is rejected?
No: for if sins were the cause of Reprobation, there should not one be
elected, because God has foreseen that all men are sinners. But only the
purpose and will of God, which in every work of his, is both just and the
only rule of all justice. Therefore can it neither be justly blamed, or
accused by us. a. For in these sayings. Ioh, 3.18. He that believes not, is
judged already. And 16.9. The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin,
because they believe not in me. And Mark. 16.16. He that has not believed
shall be condemned. Christ has not appointed incredulity the cause of the
decree of reprobation, but of execution thereof, or of condemnation and
judgment.

Is not God tainted with the note of injustice, if his will only be
determined the cause of Reprobation?
In no sort: for when we entreat of this supreme will of God, which ordains
the causes of all things, we must not say, there must have be^ne somewhat just
before God willed it, but contrary, God must first have willed somewhat,
before it could be just. For so is the will of God, the principal rule of
justice, that whatsoever he will ought to be accounted just, even because it is
his will: but there is a deeper reason of Gods justice, then that it can be
measured by any means of man, Romans 11.13. Romans 5.20.21
or can be comprehended by the slenderness of man's wit b. And as he has
chief and free power by his proper right over all creatures, So likewise over
man as the potter over the clay c. That neither God should have been unjust, if
he predestined none to salvation, seeing he is debtor to no man, and we are
all borne the sons of wrath.

2 Between the decree, of that secret, and unblameable will of God in
rejecting some, and the corruption of mankind, which is the true and first
original of the condemnation of the reprobate, the will of the first man
comes, which being created good, of it own accord corrupted it self, and
thereupon made open passage for the just judgment of God to destroy them, to
whom he vouchafeth not his mercy.

Moreover, although no man be condemned, but whom the Lord has rejected, yet
no man is condemned, but he that is for certain found to have in himself just
causes of damnation. Therefore it is manifest that this decree is most just, by
the means and degrees as well general as special, whereby the Reprobate in
going on, are the cause of most just comdemnation to themselves, so as they can
accuse none but themselves. For there is one cause of Reprobation, and an other
of the condemnation of man. albeit then that sins are not the causes of
reprobation, which was from the beginning but the just will of God is the
cause, yet are they the cause of the damnation, which will follow in the last
time.

Neither are the Reprobate condemned simply for their reprobation, but for
their impiety and incredulity; that is, that decree of God is not the cause of
the damnation to them that perish, but their own natural corruption, and the
fruit of that corruption, from whom it pleases God to exempt his only
predestined to salvation: very fondly do they then, who confound the decree
of reprobation with damnation, seeing sin is the manifest cause or the later:
but the will of God only of the former. Neither also does God for that cause
make them wicked, who^ he rejects, of pour out his malice on them, but in
his most just, though hidden and unsearchable judgment he does not bestow on
them the mercy, which he gives to the elect. But they are punished
voluntarily, and of their own malice, according to that. O Israll thy
destruction is of thy self, but thy salvation is of me. Osey. 13.9

What are the common means of Reprobation?
The very same whereof we spoke before, namely Creation in integrity and
righteousness. For God did not create man in sin. For so should he be the
author of sin, which God forbid.

2 Man's fall, who fell away of their own accord and most freewill, by which
falling away they offended God.

3 Man's corruption, they corrupted themselves, and so they drew upon themselves
through their own fault, judgment and destruction Pro. 2.22 Eccle. 7.30.
.

What are the particular means of the execution of Gods decree for the
rejecting some men?
Six, likewise in number, 1 An infinite increase of actual sins.

2 ((...)) Infidelity, or an alienation and separation from Christ.

3 A forsaking, or an ineffectual calling, or no calling at all by the
preaching of the word, or no inward consent to vocation: for neither has the
Gospel been preached to all men, nor in every age, nor now also is it
preached all the world thorough, neither is it granted unto all to believe.
Math. 11.25. but in verse 28. all are called which labor and are heavy
laden, that is, are weary v der the burden of their sins, which only is
meet for them who acknowledge themselves to be sinners and fly unto Christ.

4 Stubbornness, or hardness, and blindness in sin.

5 Hence comes a perpetual turning away, and contempt of God, and proceeding
from sin to sin.

6 At length thereby follows their most just condemnation: Just therefore is
the Lord, and all his judgments upright. Exodus 7.3.22.23. Exodus 8.15. and.
9.34. 2. Par. 36.13 Act. 7.12.51. and. 13.46


Is the execution of reprobation, or the appointing of wicked means subject
to the decree of God, as faith and other means of salvation is to the decree
of Election?
It is, and it is not: because the decree of God is said to be twofold, simple
in some respect: the decree is called simple, (...).
when God wills and approoueth somewhat simply, whereof himself is truly,
properly, and principally the efficient cause in his own time: from whence
also the decree may be called effectiue, (...),
of which sort is the decree of the salvation of the Elect, and of all good
means which tend to salvation, as of Creation, effectual calling, faith,
justification, and sanctification. Whereupon God, Ose. 13.9. Thy salvation is
of me. Moreover God is the Author and cause of the substance (that I may so
speak) of all actions and qualities, both good and evil. For the action is
one thing by it self, the fault or faulty quality of the action is another.

But the decree in respect is when God decerneth, and will permit somewhat to
be done, and that also in his due time: (...).
but he does not truly effect it himself, but suffers it to be done of
wicked instruments, not as though he beheld the affairs of men negligently and
from a far, but as the ruler of all. For Paul affirms that God provoked
Pharaoh, and whom he will he can harden, Romans 9.17.18. for God is not a
negligent God, neither were God omnipotent, if against his will he should
suffer any thing. Whereupon also this may be called a Decree of permission, of
government, or of dispensation. And of this sort is the Decree of all evil
means, which tend to destruction, as of the fall of man, his hardening, and
the like: for they come not to pass without the will and knowledge of God,
because by this means Atheism or Epicurisme must necessarily follow, but of
all these man's will is chief, purchasing Gods wrath, hereupon is that rightly
said. Thy destruction is of thy self O Israel. Ose. 13.9. And nevertheless
they are subject to the Decree, because though not by the decree, yet for the
decree, and not without the decree they come to pass, and whereof the
deficient, but not the efficient cause is surely purposed in God. For as God
creates faith in them that believe; so, when God left the wlll, sin came
upon mankind. As the Sun makes the day of it self, and with his own light,
when it rises and shines, and the night likewise, but by the retyring of his
light and the shadow of the earth. Furthermore it is no decree of a sufferance
of malice, in that it is malice, but in that it has a purpose of goodness. For
if we consider the decree of God, the very evil (though bred in it self)
has a purpose of good: for what God has determined to suffer, and what he
permits, he does it for some good end, as for the evidence of his glory and
justice. Wherefore in respect of God, who in determining to suffer, and in
permitting does always behold a good end, the darkness helps forward the
light, and the malice which proceeds wholly from the evil instrument is
converted into good, as the punishment of sin, and the mean of Gods glory,
as that Paradox of Augustine might be verified. That it is good also there
should be evils, for else God would not suffer evils to be: but he suffers
them not as against his will, but as willing, and as the same father says
truly and wisely: That which is contrary to the will of God, comes not to
pass against his will.

What is the end of Reprobation?
Surely the just condemnation of the Reprobate. But in respect of God, the
declaring of his glory, justice, and power Exodus 9.16 Romans 9.17. and 22.
.

After what manner is the administration and application of the doctrine of
Predestination to be taken in hand either of Pastors, or of all men in private?
1 We must take heed that we run not out from one extreem to another, as from
the decree to salvation, or damnation, or on the contrary, neglecting the means
and neearer causes of salvation or destruction. 2. As God descending unto us
from his most excellent and eternal decree by the middle degrees, or the means,
which are the effects of that decree, does lay open his glory and mercy: so we
returning by those same degrees and effects (keeping the order of the effects)
do ascend to the certainty of our election, which we shall find most firmly
founded in the only mercy of God.

What ought to be the order of Application?
Analyticall, namely that every one who seeks the declaration of his
election, should not begin at that most excellent degree, that is, at the very
secret purpose of God, without Christ and the voice of the gospel crying out
in the Church: for so will it fall out, that he cannot at all endure that
immensurable right of God in a contrary course, but let him so begin at the
lowest degrees as at the effects, namely, let him make his beginning at the
calling through Christ, and the hearing of him, according as Romans 8.30. Those
whom he has elected, he has called: so he may by little and little come to
that principal part of our salvation: where at last having found a firm and
substantial remedy against all tempests, he may rest as it were in harbor,
in this wise.

Let him search diligently, if he hear the word of God with a good heart, and
therewith be well affected, both to Godward, and toward his neighbor (for
this is an effect of Regeneration and Sanctification): from thence to faith,
whether he feel himself to be in Christ by faith, or whether he does believe
on Christ. From faith to justification, from justification let him go on to
effectual calling. By which graces of God, if they be in us, every faithful
man may most assuredly judge of his own election John. 1.12 Ephesians. 1. v, 4, 5 1.
Pet. 1.20, 21.22.23.
. For sense and motion are not more certain proofs of an animal life, then
Faith, Hope, and Charity are arguments of our election. Besides in the
children of God there is a singular testimony of the holy Ghost testifying to
our spirit that we are the sons of God, by which spirit we cry boldly Abba
Father. Romans 8. ver. 14.15. Gal. 4.6. But if sons, then heirs with God, and
fellovv heirs with Christ, and so from the last to the first praedestinate to
life. Hereunto belong also certain outward things, as annexed to them. viz.
harkening to the word of God, and signing of the Sacraments, whereto we
attribute the second place.

But what if any shall not as yet feel these effects of faith of the holy
Ghost, and of regeneration, or shall feel them vveake, shall he therefore make
account that he is of the number of the reprobate, or shall he despair of his
salvation?
By no means, but let him rather fly to the word and will of God therein
revealed, that by obeying it he may obtain salvation Romans 10.8 14.15 1. Cor.
11.24.25
, neither ought any to despair of the mercy of God, as long as he does not
sin against the holy ghost: for some are effectually called of God later then
others, as that famous example of the thief hanging on the cross, shows
Luke 23 40.41.42
.

Is there a certain number as well of the Elect, as of the Reprobate?
Surely with God there is, but not with us, John. 13.18. I know whom I have
chosen, and 2. Tim. 2.19. the Lord knows who are his, and by consequent who
are not his.

But are there few that shall be saved, Luke. 13.23. or is there a greater
number of the Elect, then of the Reprobate?
Seeing there are few, which find the way of life Mat. 8.13 14.
, and it is but a fourth sort of them neither, which receive the word of God
with an honest and pure heart, surely the number of them is great, if it be
considered by it self. But comparatively, if the number of them that shall be
saved, be laid unto the number of them that perish, then surely, Christ being
Judge, the number of these is the greater Math. 20.26
.

May the regenerate assuredly by faith make mention of their Election, and may
they glory thereof in the Lord?
They may and ought so to do.

1 Because they shall glory to the Lord that they are Christ's chosen people,
and peculiers, Isa. 44.5.

2 Those that are foreknowne, predestined, and elected, the same are called,
justified, and sanctified, neither can they be separated from the love of God,
Romans 8.29.30.31.35.38.

3 Because God confirms, annoynteth, and seals us, with others partakers of
the faith, into Christ, through the holy Ghost.

4 Because the son casts forth none that are his. John. 6.31. Nor suffers
one sheep to be taken from him. John, 10.28.

5 Because we must certainly and constantly believe in God the father, in
Jesus Christ, and in the holy ghost, that there is a holy Catholic Church, a
communion of Saints, that our sins are forgiven us through Jesus Christ, and
for his sake, and that the raising up again of the flesh, and life everlasting
is assuredly promised.

6 Because Gods decree cannot be made void. Hence our comfort is. 1. John.
3.14. We know that we are translated from death to life, and verse. 21. If our
heart condemn us not we have boldness with God. And chap. 5.19.20. We know
that we are of God, we know that the son of God is come, and has given us
a mind to know him which is true.

May the Elect perish?
No, neither be seduced finally Mat. 24.24
. I Because they are the blessed of the Father for whom is prepared the
kingdom before the foundations of the world were laid. Mat. 25.34.

2 And it is the fathers will, that they which are given to the son perish not.
Ioh. 6.39.

3 They are committed to the son, Ioh. 17.12.

4 They are kept by the power of GOD through faith. 1. Pet. 1.5.

5 And to them is given faith and perseverance to the end, Act. 13.48. Phil.
1.6.

6 Last of all, Gods purpose is unchangeable.

But many seem possible to he blotted out of the book of life, by the place
in Exodus 32.32. Blot me out of the book of life, and Psalm. 69.29. Let them be
blotted out of the Book of life.
It is the fallacy of a figure of speech. For Moses saying is partly
Hyperbolicall and Exstaticall, of a mind only bent upon salvation of the
chosen people: partly hypotheticall, namely if it might be possible, as is that
speech of Paul, Romans 9.3. I would vvish my self to be separate from Christ
for my brethrens sake. Such account did they make of the glory of God, and
such was their love toward their brethren. And Psalm. 69. the Prophet by
speaking figuratively does desire nothing but that Hypocrites, who seemed in
the error of themselves and others the sons of the kingdom, and are called
the unwritten, might be manifested, that they belong not to the company of
the elect, and therefore he adds: Let them not be written with the just. Of
whom, 1. John. 2.19. They went from among us, but they were not of us: For had
they been of us, they would in like sort have remained with us, but this
came to pass, that it might appear that all are not of us.

But what, does it follovv of the doctrine of praedestination that it skilleth
not how any man live, seeing the elect can no more fall away, whatsoever
they do, neither can the rest be saved
God forbid: for God in calling does so call, that he turns the will also of
the elect to repentance by the spirit of regeneration, and gives and bestows
on them true faith and perseverance, and passes by the reprobate so, as they
themselves also are otherwise unwilling.

Besides it is contrary to the nature of the elect, to abuse the decree of
their election to the desire of sinning, nay unless they live godly, they
boast of their election in vain: because as God has predestined us to life
eternal, so has he predestined us to good works. Ephesians. 2.10. And that we
might lead a holy and blameless life. Ephesians. 1.4. But it neither happens to
the reprobate to live godly: which if it might, they should not be of the
number of the reprobate, but of the elect, because the love of an innocent and
honest life cannot be seen but by election.

What is the use and fruit of this doctrine?
1 It is available for the confirmation of our faith in God, for he knows
not God aright, who does not acknowledge him to be most wise, omniscient,
almighty, and unchangeable in ordering his creatures.

2 It helps the assurance and sound confidence of our salvation, because it
depends not on us, or of any variable cause, but of the eternal and
immutable good pleasure of God Romans. 8 21. and fol. 2. Tim. 2.19
.

3 It profits us touching our comfort against the furies of the children of
this world, and the fewness of believers, as Christ says, Mat. 11.26. and
cap. 13.14 John. 12.39
. And therefore could not they believe, because says Esaias, he blinded their
eyes, not as though God does spread a blindness on them, but for that as a
just Judge he delivers them being deprived of his grace to be more and more
blinded by Satan, and their own desires, and Paul Romans 11.12 does often use
this doctrine.

4 It avails against temptation and all the fiery darts of Satan, by making
certain account that no creature can separate us from the love of God. Romans
8.38. And against all affliction, because all things as well adversity as
prosperity make for their good who are called according to the purpose of God,
Romans 2.8.4

3 It makes for our instruction, viz. 1 To acknowledge Gods singular goodness
toward us, who vouchsafed to elect us unworthy ones out of the company of
wicked, and to ordain us for heavenly glory. Rom 1.25.2. For stirring up an
humility and godly sorrow in us. 3 For our thankfulness, that we attribute
the glory of our salvation to God only, and that we celebrate his infinite
benignity toward us, in heart, word, and work, who of his mere grace in his
son Christ would save us being in our selves past recovery Ephesians. 1.3.5.9
. 4 And that we strive to make our vocation and election sure by good works. 2.
Pet. 1.5. He is just that works righteousness, and he that is justified is
called also, because righteousness is by faith: but faith by hearing. Moreover
he that is called, Is chosen according to the purpose of God. Verse. 10. Also,
He has chosen us in Christ. Ephesians. 1.4. That we might be holy and blameless
before God, and so the vessels sanctified to honor and prepared to every good
work, that is, The Elect are to cleanse them selves by the power of the spirit
of Regeneration with which they are endewed Tim. 2.21
.

What is contrary to this doctrine?
1 The error of the Pelagians, and Semipelagians, who teach an universal
grace, and so that there are none Elect, and that it is in the power of man to
believe, or not to believe, feigning the causes of salvation to be in men
themselves without God, also they teach that the elect may perish and fall away
from the grace of the mercy of God.

2 The error of Thomas Aquinas, who thought the number of the Elect in deed to
be certain, but the number of the reprobate uncertain.

3 The error of certain Vbiquitaries, who 1 teach that the fall of Adam
happened without the decree of God, and without any ordinance of his, contrary
to that is spoken, Prou. 16.4. Esaias 45.7. Iam. 3, 37 Amos 3.6 Ioh, 12.39
2 That no decree of God concerning the saving of the godly, or casting of the
reprobate consists of his simple will, against the places. Romans 8.28. and
9.11. 3 That God without doubt would not the reprobation of any, against the
places. 1 Samuel 2.25. Romans 9.19. He hardens whom he will, and by consequence
takes vengeance on those whom he will have to be hardened. 4. Also that the
reprobate may be converted and saved, contrary to the places, Iere. 6.30. and
13.23. Ioh. 12.39. and. 17.9.12 19. Rom, 9, 22,
Luke. 22.20. This is my blood, which is shed for you, etc. Math. 26.28. For
many (not for all) to the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 5.25. Christ offered
himself for the Church: Hebr. 10.26. 1. Pet. 2.7.5. That it is the purpose and
will of God simply, that all should be saved, and that the general promises
are to be understood without restraint, against the places of Scripture which
restrain the effect of them to the Elect Col, 1, 20 25 2 Timothy 2, 19, Heb. 10,
14.
.

4 The error of the Papists, who make faith foreseen, or good works, or a
foreknowledge of merits the precedent cause of Election: and that the
predestinate cannot be certain of their predestination, unless it be
revealed, and that by some notable privilege, and the Elect may doubt of their
Election.

5 The error of them, who subject Election to the eternal decree of God, but
not reprobation, for that it is necessary that two opposites should be
reckoned under one kind.

6 The error of them who would not have predestination to be taught in the
Church, against the saying of Theodoret.

(...) we ought not search out those things that are hidden, neither to be
utterly ignorant of those that are manifest.

7 The error of them, who not distinguishing reprobation from damnation, do
think that as God has reprobated some of purpose only, so he condemns them
of the same purpose, when notwithstanding sin is the cause of their damnation.

8 The error of the Libertines, who dream that Christians may be saved without
the mediation of the middle causes.

9 The error of profane persons, who wickedly abuse this doctrine to the
licenciousnesse of sinning.

The seven and thirtieth common place. Of the last Resurrection.
What does Resurrection signify?
PRoperly, a certain standing again, which the Greeks call (...), as it were
(...), a second standing of him that fell: (...), which in composition
signifies again. But specially it signifies the returning or restoring of
bodies from death to life.

Figuratively. 1. It signifies Metonimically an immortal life Phil. 4.11.
.

2 Metaphorically, a deliverance from dangers, unto which by the like figure
death is attributed 2 Cor. 1 10.11. and. 4.14
. 2 The souls new birth, which is when we rise ftom sin, that we may live
unto righteousness, which is, also called a Repentance, and spiritual
Resurrection: Whereof Paul, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
that are above. Colloss. 3.1. and Reuellat. 20.5.

It is called The first Resurrection wherein they that have their part, the
second death shall have no power over them. verse 6. to which there is a later.
Revel. 20.13. which is called The resurrection of the flesh, and is also called
of Christ, a new birth, Matthew. 19.28. (...),
whereby all the Elect indeed shall begin to live a new life, and by
Analogy an awakening or raising up, chap. 27.53. (...), of the Greek word
that signifies, to raise up, or to awaken, whereof here we must entreat.

What is resurrection?
It is the restoring of the same humane body to life, in the same substance,
taking away the mortality, which by the mighty power of God shall be in the
last day to the glory of God. Or, It is a certain new birth, or second union,
and insoluble coupling of humane bodies, and souls, which before by death were
severed one from another, as, death being overcome, men in all points made
immortal may be preserved, and may live for ever, some in glory, some in
pain, after the course of their life before led.

How manifold is Resurrection?
Twofold: General or final which none shall escape, which is reserved until
the last day Job, 15, 12
: which we confess in the Creed, I believe the Resurrection of the flesh.

Particular or going before, whereof there are singular examples in the
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament. As 1. Of the widows son of
Sarepta raised up of Elias 1, Kings, 17 22
.

2 of the Shunamitih woman's son, which Elizaus raised up 2, Kings, 4 33
.

3 Of a certain man at the touching of Elizaeus bones lying in the Sepulcher
Cap. 13 21
.

4 Of Iairus daughter Math, 9, 25
.

5 Of the only son of a widow in Naim Luk, 7, 15
.

6 Of Lazarus the Bethanian Ioh. 11, 43,
.

7 Of Christ himself, which obtains the chief place Math, 28 6
.

8 Of some Saints, whose Sepulchers though (when the stones cleft at the death
of Christ) they were opened, yet they went out of their graves after Christ's
resurrection. 1. Not that they might converse amongst men any more to die
again, as Lazarus and others, but rather that they might accompany Christ
into life eternal, by whose power they had risen, that they might be undoubted
testimonies of Christ's quickening power.

Math, 27 52, 53.
9 Of Tabitha the woman of Ioppa at the word of Peter Act, 9, 40,
.

10 Of Eutychus railed by Paul Cap, 20, 10
.

May the general Resurrection be declared by Phylosophicall arguments?
No: for to the Philosophers it always seemed ridiculous, strange and hard to
be believed Act. 17 18 20
: and to Festus the President, madness cap. 26, 24
.

2 Because if we consider the efficient cause and means, it is a supernatural
action, which exceeds the whole power of nature.

Neither are the principles thereof first, and by themselves known in nature.

4 And those things which are believed, cannot be known by nature, for faith
is the evidence of things not seen. Hebr. 11.1. Lib. de Resur, carnis,
Whereupon Tertullian says: The hope of Christians is the Resurrection of the
dead. Moreover there are many arguments effectual apparently enough. But if
they be diligently sifted, they are probable arguments only, and not
necessary, if we consider natural things.

On what foundations then does the faith of the Resurrection consist?
1 On the will of God, that is in the will of god laid open in the w^itten word
or on the infallible and immoouable certainty of the whole Scripture, albeit
common sense and reason, and nature likewise be altogether contrary thereunto
that is, by the manifest testimonies of Scripture, such as among many other,
these are.

1 Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, that is,
shall destroy the works of the devil. 1. John. 3.8. And therefore shall
abolish sin, and the wages of sin, which is death, which could not be, if
the dead were not raised up.

2 Job. 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand on the earth
in the last day, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet
shall I see God in flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and none other for me: that is, I my self shall rise again in the
quality of my person, and in the verity of either substance.

3 Esaias. 26.19. Thy dead shall live, and thy slain shall rise again, etc

4 Ezech. 37.12. Behold my people I will open your graves, and cause you to come
out of your Sepulchers, and will put my spirit in you, and ye shall live: for
although figuratively, under the resemblance of the resurrection, he describes
the restoring of the people out of the habitacles of captivity, yet even
thereby does he prove the Resurrection. For that must needs first be to it
self, that is compared to another: For a similitude of that which it vvast
and idle fitteth not; a parable of no body does not accord; of nothing there
is no metaphor and allegory, says Tertullian.

3 Dan. 12.2. Many of of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt,
that is, All indeed shall rise, but many of them to life, many to eternal
death: or, the Prophet speaks so, because all of us shall not die, but we
shall be all chang^d. But Christ that is privy to the will of God, and the
interpreter thereof, proves it by a firm argument, Math. 22.32. That God was
not, as though they now were not, but is even yet, and for ever, the God of
Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob, and that truly of the whole person, not of the one
part thereof, viz. the soul only: for so does he assure those that are his,
that we will save both body and soul, and will not give them an half, but a
full and perfect salvation. Therefore do they live, and God has care over
them, and they shall live.

For though God be not the God of the dead, according to the Sadduces argument
(who thought that their bodies should never rise again because he cannot be
called a God, in respect of them, who neither are, nor ever shall be) yet God
is Lord over the dead. Romans 14.9. according to the argument of Paul, namely,
for that dead bodies are not quite brought to nothing: And Christ in his due
time shall quicken them again for ever, being joined again to their souls,
that he may be true in the covenant made with those Fathers. For how are they
happy says Tertull. If in either part they shall perish. And John. 5.28.
Christ says The hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves,
shall hear his voice, and they shall come forth, that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
condemnation.

Moreover Paul inspired with Gods spirit, by these reasons does confirm the
Article of Resurrection (as far as concerns the faithful) viz. 1. By the
preaching of the Gospel.

2 By the similitude, example, communion, power, and certainty of Christ's
resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.1.4.5.11.12.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. For if Christ be risen
again, the dead also shall rise. For where the head is, there shall the
members be also, and even our flesh, which we yet carry about us, is already
raised up in Christ, as in the first fruits, wherein the rest of the fruits
remaining was justified 1 Co. 15, 20 Col. 1.18
.

3 By comparison. 1. Cor. 15.21.22. For as by the sin of the former Adam, death
entered into the world, from whence by natural generation death spread over his
posterity: so by the merit and power of the later Adam, by a spiritual
engrafting into him, life everlasting comes to his members.

4 By the power of Christ the Savior Philip. 3.21
.

5 By the dwelling and pledge of the holy ghost in the godly. To, 8.11 Ephesians.
1.14.


6 By the generality of Christ's kingdom, or from the whole to the part, all
subdued enemies shall be subject to Christ, and by consequent, the dead shall
rise again 1, Cor. 15 25.26.27


7 By arguments leading to absurdities. If there be no resurrection, then the
preaching of the Gospel is in vain. verse. 14. Our faith is in vain, in the
same verse. And the Apostles are false witnesses, also verse. 15. Christians are
of all men the most wretched, verse. 19. In vain are many baptized ((...)) over
the dead, over the carcases of the dead laid in their graves. Foolish also is
Paul, who is in danger so often for it v. 30.31 32 Act. 13, 6 and cap. 24.21
. The saying of the Epicures shall have place who say: Play, drink, and eat
while ye have breath, there is no pleasure after death.

But these are absurdities among Christians: therefore there shall be a general
resurrection. 11. The faith of the resurrection consists on Gods
omnipotency, with whom is possible, that which with men is impossible. Luke.
1.37. Who calls those things which are not, 11. On Gods omnipotency
as though they were Romans 4.17. with whom nothing is impossible, Luke 1.37. and
because he that promised, can also perform. Romans 4.21. which saying we must
oppose, as a shield, against our own sense and reason, and subtilties of all
men: for he that promised us a life after this, is able to keep promise, and
to give us again that we have committed unto him, 2, Tim. 1.12, and 4.8. God
could make all things of nothing, and man of the slime of the earth, why then
can he not restore a dead man to life? He that made us is as able to make us
again, says Tertullian, why wonder we? why do we not believe? it is God
that does this. Consider the author, and take away the doubt says Augustine.

And this is a most firm argument taken from the power of God, (because God
could do many things else which he does not) when it is joined with a most
sure testimony of his will, which we have also placed in the former place.

3 On Gods justice: for because he is just, 3, on gods justice
he must needs reward godliness, and punish ungodliness: which does not fall
out in this life. For therefore does he defer it, that the testimony in
Resurrection might be apparent Romans 2.5.6, 7.
. And again, It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble the godly: but to the godly, which are troubled, rest. 2.
Thessalonians. 1.6.7. So that it must needs be that both the good and bad
rise again, and stand before the tribunal seat of Christ, That every one may
receive a reward according to that he has done in the flesh, be it good or
evil. 2. Cor. 5.10. And that that which is just, may be added to the flesh in
recompense of the service, according to the protection, that it has given to
the soul, says Damascen:

4 On gods wisdom
4 On Gods wisdom, for seeing it is a wise man's part, not to lose the end of
his work, and God is most wise, who has not made man rashly, but according to
his own Image, and so even to the partaking of his goodness, wisdom, justice,
and immortality, and to the perpetual service of God, to the performance
whereof a perpetuity of life is requisite, neither is repentance seen in God
at all; that God then may fulfill his purpose begone at the first concerning
us, we must necessarily be restored to incorruption, which cannot be without
the resurrection of the dead.

But by what arguments is the faith of the Resurrection confirmed?
1 By fore-warnings and miracles, which were as Praeludia, and examples of the
Resurrection: such as was the translating of Enoch, and the taking up of Elias
into heaven Genesis 5.28. Heb. 11.5 and. 2. Reg. 1.11
: also the casting up of Jonas whole, out of the belly of the fish Ion. 2.11
, a particular raising up of the dead, as of the Damsel. Math. 9.25. and
others.

2 By the sign and vision given to Ezechiell, of the field full of dry bones,
which the Lord commanded to receive flesh and sinews EZech. 37.7
.

3 By the Sacraments, for Baptism is a seal of our double resurrection Col.
2.12.
, namely, of the soul from sin, and of the body from the dust, or grave: as
also the Lords Supper is a most certain seal of spiritual grace, and of a
perpetual life to be heareafter obtained in Christ.

4 By signs and similies expressed in nature, but first above all other in the
Phoenix a bird of Arabia, of whom it is written, that waxing old, and being
laid as it were on a funerally pile, built of the young twigs of Frankencense
and Cinnamon, wherewith she has filled her nest, albeit she is consumed into
ashes, shortly after being watered from heaven, she becomes alive.

2 In many small birds, who in the Winter time lie hidd in deep fennes, and
other places, as it were buried and dead: but in the spring time they come
forth again alive. 3. In trees and plants, which as it were dead in the winter,
loosing all their bravery, revive again in Summer. Ioh. 14.7
. 4. In the seed, that is cast into the earth, and dies, and afterward
reuiueth. 1. Cor. 15.36
. Whereupon says Augustine, He that quickens the dead and rotten grains of
seed, whereby thou live in this world, much more shall raise thee up, that
thou may live for ever. 5. In the intercourse of things, the setting and
rising of one and the same sun, sleep and waking, labor and rest night and
day, the day is dead in the night, and yet it with his brightness is renewed
to the whole word, says. Tert. l. de Resur. carnis. Hereupon Job. 17.12. After
darkness I hope for light. 5. The Resurrection is also proved by natural
arguments, An imperfect thing is not capable of perfect happiness: The soul
loosed from the body, is as it were lame and maimed: Therefore it ought again
to be joined to it own body in regard of happiness. 2. That is not
perpetual, which is against nature: but for the soul to be separated from the
humane body, is against the nature thereof, because it is the beauty and
subsisting (...) the perfection of man's body, and which preserves the
personage or (...) subsistence of man departed, and gladly desires to put on
it own body again: Therefore, the soul shall not for ever be separated
from the body.

6. By the handwriting of God written in the hearts of men, that is, by the
testimony of the conscience, of the reward of the good, and punishment of the
bad: which is most of all felt even at the point of death, as well of the
ungodly, whose conscience is then more tormented with the thought of their life
wickedly led, as of the godly, who rejoice in the spirit vehemently, that at
length they are come to the desired haven.

7 By the consent of al saints, before and after Christ exhibited in the flesh.
For the holy fathers being as it were strangers here, thereupon confessed that
they sought for a city to come Heb. 11.13
. And being so earnestly careful of burial, professed that a new life was
prepared for their bodies laid in grave Genesis 2^.4 19. and. 47.3^.
. Also the martyrs would never have sustained most grievous torments with so
stout a courage, if they had not hoped for the rewards of their confession,
their bodies being raised up in the life to come.

What is the efficient cause of Resurrection?
1. The almighty God himself, who has determined that he will raise up the
dead.

2. The son (...), working with the Father, Ioh. 5.21. As the Father raises
the dead, so the Son quickneth whom he will also. And Chap. 11.25. he says, I
am the Resurrection and the life. Moreover Christ is the Author of Resurrection
partly (...), that is, by the virtue of his Resurrection, Romans 6.4 1 Cor. 15.20
, partly by the power of his Divinity, whereby he can subject all things unto
himself These. 4.14 1 Philip. 3.21
, partly by his most mighty voice and beck, Ioh. 5.28. They which are in their
graves, shall hear the voice of the son of God, and shall come forth.

3. The holy Ghost, Romans 8.11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you.

But although the Angels shall be (...) the ministers of Resurrection, (for
they shall gather the Elect from the winds) yet by no means can they be the
causes of it Math, 24.31, and 25.32,
.

What are they that shall rise again?
All of what sex or age soever, that have died from the beginning of the world
to the end, as well the godly as the ungodly, but after an unequal condition,
Ioh. 5.28. All that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the son of
God, and shall come forth, they which have done good, unto the Resurrection of
life: they which have done evil, unto the Resurrection of condemnation. Mat.
25.32. All nations shall be gathered together before him. Act. 24.15. Paul
does hope that there shall be a resurrection of the just and unjust.

Whence springs a double Resurrection, one which is called the Resurrection
of life, which eternal life shall follow, as you would say a lively
Resurrection, the other of Judgment, or condemnation, that is, a Resurrection
which condemns Dan, 12.2
. And because they are truly judged to rise again, which rise unto life
eternal, they are properly (...), and by way of excellency called the sons
of the Resurrection Luke 20.36
. Although it is manifest also that the wicked shall rise again, that they may
receive eternal destruction, which verily is not called life but death:
because a life so unhappy, ought not properly be called a life.

Whereas Romans 8.20.21. the creature is said to be subject to vanity, under
hope, because it also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, does it follow, that the brute
creatures shall also rise again?
In no wise, because neither are they created to immortality, nor do their
souls outliue their bodies, but die in their very bodies. But under the name
(...), the frame of the world, consisting of an heavenly and Elementarie
region, and not the inhabitants thereof is signified, which frame subjected by
God to a frail and wavering condition for the sin of man, and by a
Prosopopeia it is said to expect a repairing with an earnest desire, which
repairing shall be manifested, when the sons of God shall be carried into
glory. Whereof also there is mention made, Act. 3.22. 2. Pet. 3.13.

Why is the Resurrection, which is Christ's singular blessing, granted to the
wicked?
Because they shall indeed rise again, but by the benefit, virtue and
efficacy of Christ's Resurrection, which always is to salvation, and is
insinuated in his members only Romans 6.8
. But by the necessi^ie and efficacy of that decree of God, which is Genesis
2.17. For in what day soever thou shall eat of that fruit you shall die the
death. Which decree, for that it comprehends either death, and indeed
specially the second, that is death eternal, it must needs be that the
Infidels arise also: but unto their greater condemnation, that they may suffer
eternal punishments in their bodies also, because it were but a small
punishment, to be taken away by the first death; for an infinite goodness
violated, requires an infinite punishment. (...).


What is the subject of Resurrection?
Surely the whole man wholly and generally considered, but not the whole
substance of every man particulerly, for 1. Indeed the body only, as it dyed
properly, so also does it arise properly, but because the soul is immortal,
it is not said to rise again but Metaphorically through Ephesians. 2.1 Col, 2.13.
Regeneration, from the bondage of sin, wherein it is dead.

2. The souls of the godly that die in the Lord are received into heaven by
Christ luke 23.43 Act 7.59 Heb. 12, 23,
: but the souls of the ungodly departing from their bodies, are thrust down
into the bottomless pit: for as Lazarus was carried by the conduct of Angels
into Abraham's bosom: so was the rich man thrust down into hell luk, 16.23.
, and therefore the souls can not be said to rise again either from death, or
sleep. In this respect do we confess in the Creed the Resurrection of the
flesh only. Yet because the soul returns to quicken, and govern the body,
and there is no resurrection without the soul, it may be said to rise again
by accident.

Shall the same bodies in number, or shall new bodies rise again?
1. The very self same in number, and those truly without defect, because
Psalm. 34.21. The Lord keeps all the bones of the Saints, there shall not one
of them be broken. And there shall not a heir of your head perish, Luke 21.18.

2. Because every one shall bear in his body, that he has done, be it good
or evil. 2. Cor. 5.10.

3. Because God has consecrated the bodies of the faithful, to be Temples
unto himself 1. Cor, 3, 16.17. and. 6 15, 19
.

4. Because this corruptible body, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.53. must put
on incorruption (pointing with the finger a like quantity, and the very same
essence in number, says Tertul,) For he could not speak more expressly, unless
he should apprehend with his hands his own skin.

5. Because the bodies of the wicked are subject to the torment of hell Math.
10 28,
.

6. Because all that are in their graves, shall hear the voice of God, Ioh.
5.28. Men therefore shall not rise again out of the four Elements, as if
they were made of a new matter: as though the being the same again could not
be in the matter of an human body, but only in the form thereof, to wit,
in the soul, (as some unconstant spirits would have it) and therefore man may
be said to rise again the same in number, Alber. oration de Resurr.
for the form's sake, namely the soul: for although when a print is made in
wax, and marred again, the same form remains not, and therefore if it be
again made in the same wax, it cannot be called the same print in number, yet
the very same wax remains: so although the substantial figure of man's body
be confounded in the grave, yet the body shall rise again the same in number,
because the self same matter with the properties making one and the same
Indiuiduum, indivisible body shall be restored by the commandment of God.
Ioh. 2.18
.

7. Because Christ, whose members we are, and to whose body our bodies shall
be conformed, received again that body which he had carried about with him
Ioh. 2.19.
.

8. Because it were absurd that Paul should be deprived of the reward of the
Crown in his body, wherein he carried the marks of Christ. So that, even as
if a garment be ripped into pieces, and afterward be again sowed together, it
makes all one garment, and no other in number: or, if the small wheel of a
firelock be taken in sunder: afterward the joints thereof also made clean, be
joined and set together again, it is the same in number: So shall the essence
be all one of man's body, which, though dissolved, shall again be joined
together by God, and shall rise again, the infirmities and accidents being
taken away, which may be wanting without destroying the essence. And because
God has all the Elements ready at his beck, no difficulty shall hinder him,
that he may not command both earth, and water, and air and fire, to restore
that which seems to be consumed by them.

What shall be the form or manner of the Resurrection?
When the last day shall appear, Christ on a sudden and unawares in the same
visible form, wherein he ascended to heaven, shall come in the clouds with
Angels and thousands of his Saints. Iud. 14. with the cheerful voice of an
Archangell, and with the trumpet of God, when at the voice, and so at the sound
of the trumpet, Mat. 24.31. (as in mount Sinai, when the Law was promulged
Exodus 19.16
.) they shall be raised up, and shall take again their own bodies, who sleep in
the dust, to whom, the act of coupling the soul and body together a new after
death, or the returning of the soul at the commandment of God into her own
body, shall be the form of Resurrection: but they who shall be found living
and remaining afterward in his coming, shall be changed in a moment, and in
the twinkling of an eye, 1. Cor. 15 52. 1 These. 4 15 16
and this sudden change, not of the substance, but of the quality of their
bodies, shall be unto them in the steed both of death, as also of resurrection,
that it might be true which is written, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men
that they shall once die.

When shall the Resurrection be?
Christ answers, But of that day and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels
of heaven, but my father only. Mat. 24.16.

What shall be the conditions and qualities of the bodies that rise again?
Six especially are recited 1. Cor. 15 32.43.53
.

1. Immortality, for of mortal, such as they are now, they shall be made
immortal.

2. Incorruption, of corruptible they shall become incorruptible, it is sown a
body subject to corruption, it is raised in uncorruption.

3. Spiritualnesse, for of living creatures, that is of such as are quickened
with an humane soul, and are maintained in this natural and frail life with
outward succors, as meats, and other means ordained of God, they shall be made
Genesis 1.29.40 1 Timothy 4.3
spiritual, not in essence, but in condition or quality, and by partaking of
the gifts of the spirit. 1. Because they shall be altogether ruled by the holy
spirit. 2. Because they have wholly given themselves to the government of the
same spirit. 3. Because being vpheld by the power of God they have no need of
meats, or other helps, because they shall be endewed with an exquisite, fine,
and sharp intelligence of the senses, it is sown a natural body, it is raised
up a spiritual body.

4. Strength: for of being weak, and subject to sundry calamities, sickness
and sorrows, they shall be made firm, strong, not subject to any
perturbation, and able: for it is sown in weakness, but shall rise in strength,
and the soul shall so perfectly rule over the body, that heaviness and
weight shall be no hinderance thereto, whereby it shall come to pass, that we
shall be rapt with such a nimble motion of our bodies, to meet the lord in the
air. 1. Th. 4.17 5. Perfection: for of being deformed, altogether full of
uncleanness, lame, and filthy to behold, they shall rise very beautiful,
comely to behold, very seemly, wanting no limme, not young as children, nor
decrepit with years, but of a full age, ripe and strong as also the bodies of
Infants that die in their mothers womb shall by that wonderful work of God
receive (as Austin witnesses) such a body as in time they should have had, Lib
12. Cap. 13. de. ciuit. Dei
and that of a perfect stature, without use, but not without difference of
Sexes Math. 22.30
, namely such as were the bodies of the first man and woman before the fall,
without any blemish or deformity Genesis 225 and. 3.7
: (for seeing the resurrection is a certain new creation, or reformation, it
is meet, that it should be conformable to the former, and therefore very good,
that is perfect in it kind) and chiefly such as is the body of Christ, to who^
the bodies of the godly shall be made like, but not equal 1. Cor. 15.40
.

6. Clearness, brightness, and glory, or excellency and beauty: for the
bodies of the just shall be clothed with heavenly glory, and divine beauty, as
with a robe, although by distinct degrees, as it is said. 1. Cor. 15.40 The
glory of the heavenly bodies is one, and the glory of the earthly bodies is
another, etc. and Dan. 12.3. and by the words of Christ. Mat. 13.43. comparing
them to the brightness of the Sun, and affirming that the Saints shall be like
the Angels, (...)
Mat. 22.30. it is concluded, that they shall be bright or clear, yet without
prejudice to their substance, and quantity, (...).
which is a continual accident to a bodily nature.

But the bodies of the unjust shall rise again immortal, and incorruptible
indeed, and yet subject to suffer: because they shall be vexed with
unmeasurable torments and sorrows, and shall continually remain on live
without food and other helps, that besides their intent, they may suffer due
punishment (says Hierome) in hell, in eternal reproach, and without light
holden under infernal darkness, bound hand and foot in weeping and wailing.
Yet must we not dispute curiously of the manner and form of the resurrection,
beyond the word of God.

What shall be the state of the Godly souls.
The glorious image of God shall shine in them. 1. Their mind or understanding
shall be full of wisdom and the knowledge of God, which God shall immediately
reveal unto them, by no service of men or Angels, because God shall be all in
all. 1. Cor. 15.28. that is, he shall work in all the elect all those things,
which appertain to their full and perfect blessedness, but yet in that
measure, whereunto every one was appointed by God 1, Cor, 13.12 Ephesians. 4.14, 23
Col. 1.10.
.

2. Their will shall be full of justice, holiness and the perfect love of God and
their neighbor, and shall be most ready and earnest to perform obedience unto
God Ezech, 11.19
.

3. All their affections shall be most pure, not gross nor muddy, nor shall they
disquiet their minds: finally there shall be a perfect (...) or comlye
disposition of all the faculties of the soul; For then, says Bernard, God
will fulfill the rational soul of the godly with the light of wisdom: the
irrational part of the soul, with reasonableness, the angry part, with
perfect quietness.

What is the end of Resurrection?
That all mankind entirely might be judged at the tribunal seat of God, and
so the rewards of obedience given to the godly, and to the ungodly their
deserved punishments 2, Cor, 5 10 Ioh, 5, 29
, that is, that those wholly in soul and body, may enjoy a blessed and
perpetual happiness wirh Christ their head: and these wholly may be delivered
to eternal torments with Satan their head, and his wicked Angels: and so that
Christ may reign truly and perfectly for ever. To be short, that the Church
might triumph gladly with Christ her Spouse for ever: and the enemies of Christ
might for ever lie prostrate and subdued under his feet.

What is the use of the Doctrine of Resurrection?
1. It is a common comfort.

1. Against all calamities, persecutions, sicknesses, and despights wherewith
our bodies are molested in this life Ioh. 19, 25
.

2. Against our sorrow for the death of friends 1, These. 4 13
.

3. Against the terror of death approaching Revel, 14.13
.

2. It is a bridle, whereby we are withdrawn from sin, and as a spur,
wherewith we keep our bodies holy and pure, unto immortal glory, and by
which we are stirred up to go on forward in true godliness, and holiness.
Whereupon, says Hierome, Whether I eat, or drink, or do any thing else,
always that terrible voice sounds in mine ears, Arise ye dead, come unto
judgment.

3. It warns us that we honor the bodies of the Saints, that we bury them
honorably, and that we keep clean those places, wherein the bodies of the
Saints, as it were brought a sleep, do lie hid, until they shall be raised
up by the trumpet of the Archangell.

What is the contrary hereunto?
The error of the Atheists, who call death the last end of all things, and the
destruction of the whole man, which was also the error of the Sadduces, who
professed that there was no Resurrection of bodies, and that there was a
mortality of the Souls.

2. The (...), Regeneration, and transmigration of the soul from one body to
another, an error of the Pythagoreans, who affirm that Euphorbus was turned
into Pythagoras, and Homer into a Peacock. The error also of the Chiliasts,
who abusing that place. Revel, chap. 20, ve. 5. (by which, a certain number,
for an indefinite is signified the time, wherein we remain now under the
protection of Christ in his kingdom, which is the church) Imagine that Christ
shall reign on the earth a thousand years together with the Saints in great
delights, and exceeding pleasantness of body, when on the other side the
Scripture affirms, that Christ's kingdom shall be eternal, and that there
shall be no end to the blessedness of the elect, nor to the torment of the
reprobate.

3. The errors of such as are curious, whereof some dream that the souls
shall rise with the bodies, as though man dyed wholly: others, as the Maniches,
that the souls shall put on new bodies, in steed of the former (by that
means making a creation of new bodies, not a resurrection of the same) others
also, that the souls being separated from their bodies do sleep, and shall
be raised up with the bodies.

4. The opinion of Hymenaeus, and Philetus, who not discerning the spiritual
resurrection from the bodily, said the resurrection was past already 2. Tim.
2, 18
.

5. Their Error, who teach that by the resurrection, bodies shall be
essentially changed into the nature of spirits.

6. The doting opinion of Origin, who taught that an Ayrie or divine body
should rise again, but not a fleshie.

7. The error of the Mahumedists, and Saracens, who imagine that meats and
drink shall in very great abundance be ministered to the blessed, and that
they shall have plenteous exercise of carnal pleasure: moreover also that the
bruit beasts shall be raised from the dead.

The eight and thirtieth common place. Of the last Judgment.
What is signified in the Scriptures, by the word, Judgment?
1 COmmonly to judge, is to deem and to think: and judgment is taken for the
opinion or meaning of the mind.

2 It may be known what it is, by the contrary thereof: for to judge, and to
save are contrary: as therefore to save is to free one from destruction, and to
give life: so (...) to judge, is (...) to condemn, to destroy, and to give
cause of comdemnation. In which sense it is used, Ioh. 3.17. God sent not his
son into the world, that he should judge the world, that is that he should
condemn, or rather be the cause of condemnation, but that the world might be
saved through him: Whereupon judgment is used for the cause of condemnation,
verse. 19. This is the condemnation, that that light came into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then that light. And for (...) condemnation. Ioh. 5,
24. He that believes in me, has life eternal, and shall not come into
condemnation.

3 To judge, is to rule and govern, as Iud. 3.10. and in other chapters, where
judgment is taken for Rule, and for the mind of the judge, and for equity,
or for that which is just and right luke 11.42.
. And the judge for the Magistrate Exodus 2, 14 and all through,
. And first, surely when judgment is attribured to God, it is taken for the
full Rule, universal government and administration, wherewith the whole world
stands sure, is preserved and governed Ioh. 5, 22 27, 30 Genesis 18.25
. 2. For the government, and well ordered state of the Church, whereby the
father manifests the Gospel through the son, maintains the ministry,
bestows the holy Ghost, quickens the dead, by the word, even from the
beginning to this day, prepares a kingdom for the son, that is, the Church,
Mat. 12, 18, Behold my servant whom I have chosen, I will put my spirit on
him, and he shall show judgment to the Gentiles. 3. For Gods vengeance and
punishment on sin, and sinners 1, Pet, 4, 17
. 4. For Gods preceps or commandments Psalm. 19.9. and, 119, 13 30, and,
throughout,
.

5 To judge, does signify to reprehend others faults by the example of ones
own virtue Math, 12, 27, 41, 42. etc, 19.28.
. Luke 22, 30. The Apostles shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel, that is
the Apostles faith and Doctrine shall take all excuse away from the Israelites.
So To. 2.27

6. To judge, does properly belong to the Judge, when he gives sentence,
whereby either he condemns or justifies one, that is, he does indeed
condemn by pronouncing him guilty of the fault, and by adiudging him to
punishment: but he does justify, when he freeth any one from the crime, and
punishments due to the crime. And in this sense, judgment is the Lords ce^sure
freeing the elect and pronouncing them heirs of eternal life, but co^demning
the reprobate.

How manifold is the Lords judgment?
Twofold, Particular or Antecedent, temporal and hidden, which is either of
many or of every one (in the time of every ones life or death) for that the
Lord either in this life does defend those that are his, according to his
promise The gates of hell shall not overcome it, Mat. 16.18, or chastises them
when they err with war, famine, pestilence, or with some other kind of
punishments, that they may not be condemned with this world 1. Cor, 11, 32
. Whereupon 1. Pet. 4.10. Judgment begins at the house of God: or finally
receives their souls into heaven: and on the contrary, keeps down the
wicked, and punishes their sins diverse ways, and at length delivers
their souls to Satan to be tormented Luke 16, 22, 29
.

2 Universal, extreme, manifest, final, absolute, and eternal, is that,
which shall be in the last day when the bodies are raised up, of which we must
principally here entreat.

By what arguments is it declared, that the judgment shall be universal and
extreme?
1. Because judgment and Resurrection are so necessarily joined the one to the
other, and it cannot be, that God can judge of all men which are dead,
unless he raise them from the dead, nor can resurrection be assigned to any
other end, then that God might judge all men, and might separate the sheep
from the goats, the corn from the chafe, the godly from the ungodly Mat. 25,
13
.

2. It is declared by a remarkable principle in nature, which teaeth that God
i^ just, and therefore it must needs be well with the good, and evil with the
wicked for ever: which because in this life it cannot be (for that there are so
many wicked men and Atheists, who commit all kind of wickedness, whom
nevertheless God does not take vengeance on in this life: again, for that
there are godly men, and some that worship God sincerly, who live a most
troublesome life, so far is God from rewarding them in this life b)
necessary is it that there should be a certain and infallible judgment
remaining afterward, wherein the wicked might be punished, and the good may
receive the reward of piety. Cor, 15, 19


3. Bur far more certainly is it showed by testimonies of holy Scripture,
Psalm. 9.8. The Lord has prepared his throne for judgment, and shall judge the
world in righteousness, and 50.1. The God of Gods has spoken, and called the
earth from the rising of up the sun, unto the going down thereof, our God
shall come, and shall not keep silence, that he may judge all men. Isa. 66.15.
Behold the Lord shall come in fire. Mat. 25.31. and so following, all the whole
act of judgment is described. Luke 8.17, There is not any thing hid, that
shall not be evident. Ioh. 12, 48. The word that I have spoken shall judge him
in the last day. Romans 2, 16. God shall judge the secrets. 1, Cor. 3, 13. Every
man's work shall be made manifest. Heb. 9, 27. It is appointed unto men that
they shall once die, and after that comes the Judgment. Iud. 14 15, ver. Enoch
the seventh from Adam prophesied of such, saying: Behold, the Lord comes
with thowsands of his Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke
all the ungodly among them of all their wicked deeds. Therefore must their
needs be a Judgment.

4. We confess in the Apostles Creed, that Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead.

What is the last judgment?
It is the act of Judgment, whereby Christ in the last day shall presently
after the resurrection of the dead, pronounce sentence upon all men, with
great majesty and glory, separating the elect from the reprobate, and
adiudging them to eternal life, but the reprobate to unquenchable fire.

What are the efficient causes of the judgment to come?
1. The eternal God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost inseparably, for as much as
there belongs to the judicial power, dominion over all things, authority of
judging, and even the decree it self, Dan. 7.9.10. The ancient of days did
sit, and he sat in judgment and the books were opened, and John. 16.8. When
the holy Ghost comes, he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment.

2. The urgent cause, in unbelieving men, is original and actual sin
against the law of god, also the contempt of the gospel: but in god most
upright justice, being an auenger of iniquity, and a maintainer of piety,
according to the eternal decree of god himself.

3. But as concerning the manner or exercise of the judgment, the Efficient
cause and helper of judgment, or the Judge that shall be, is Christ the son
of God, as he is man, or the son of man. For truly even he shall judge, who
was judged himself, that the wicked may behold his glory, whose meekness
they despised. Ioh. 5.22. The father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the son. And ver. 27. To him he has given power to execute
judgment, in that he is the son of man. Act. 10, 42. He commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify, that even Christ is ordained of God a
Judge of quick and dead, And chap. 17, 31, God has appointed a day in the
which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has
appointed, To. 2, 16, There shall be a day wherein God shall judge the secrets
of men by Jesus Christ and 2 Timothy 4, 1. Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and
dead in that his glorious coming in his kingdom.

4. (...), The Angels shall be ministers, who shall be present to serve Christ
in the execution of his judgment: for they shall gather before him all people,
they shall separate the elect from the reprobate, they shall carry the elect to
meet Christ in the air, they shall cast of the reprobate with the devil and
his Angels into everlasting fire Math. 25.31
,

Shall then the son, without the father and the holy spirit be the judge, and
execute that judgment?
Not simply, but after a sort, that is, according to the arguments and reasons,
which in this separate him from the father, because the father judges no man,
namely a part, as the Jews thought, but has committed all judgment to the
son, that is to say, that he might judge and govern all things by the son,
Ioh. 5.22. Or because the son is wisdom and truth begotten and proceeding
from the father, and representing him perfectly, and judgment ought to be
performed in wisdom and truth: therefore is the power of judgment given to
the son of God by a certain appropriation, that as the father works all
things by the son. Ioh. 1.3. for as much as he is the cunning of the father,
says Augustine lib. 6. de Trinit. So likewise does he judge all things by the
son, for as much as he is the wisdom and truth of the father: which is
signified Dan. 7.9, 13, where first it is said, that the ancient of days did
sit, and after is added, that the son of man came even to the ancient of
days, who gave him dominion and honor and a kingdom: whereby is given us to
understand, that the authority of judging is in the father, from whom the
son receives power to judge.

Therefore is not the father said to judge in that day, for in the judgment to
come the father shall not appear in visible form, but the son shall in the
form of a servant, which truly is not the form of the father, but of the
son, says Augustine: neither is it that form of the son, wherein he is
equal with the Father, but wherein he is less then the father, that in
judgment he may be clearly perceived of the good, and bad, and may perform
those parts which belong to a Judge. Math. 24.30.

Does the power of judging accord in Christ, as he is man, and not as he is
God only?
It does because the father has given him power to execute judgment, in that
he is the son of man, not truly for the condemnation of humane nature: for
nothing could let all men to be judges, but for the glorious condition, which
follows the personal union of the divine and humane nature because in his
humane nature, he is head of the whole Church Ephesians. 1.12 Col. 1, 18,
, and God has subdued all things under his feet, 1. Cor. 15.27. and because of
the intercourse of the Divinity to the soul of Christ, it is meet for him to
knowee and judge the secrets of all hearts.

Therefore the judicial power accords in Christ not only as he is God
together with the father, but also according to his humane nature, for the
agreeableness and affinity between men and him: moreover they that are to be
judged, shall behold him their judge.

Who shall sit in company with Christ the Judge?
The Apostles and the rest of the Saints, Mat. 19.28. luke 22.30
I appoint unto you a Kingdom, says Christ, that ye may sit on seats,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And 1. Cor. 6.2. Know yet not, that the
Saints shall judge the world? that is, the route of the ungodly: and that we
shall judge the Angels, (meaning the wicked Iud. 14 Reave. 20.4
?) which is said therefore to be.

1 In as much as the Saints are the members of Christ the judge.

2 Because God has ordained to gather all his adversaries, before himself,
and before the assembly of the Church Joel. 3.2
.

3 Because the Apostles shall judge the world by their doctrine which they have
preached, and shall approve the sentence pronounced by Christ, and to his
judgment shall all the godly subscribe.

4 The godly also shall judge the wicked by the example of Faith and
repentance: by which means the Apostles faith shall take away all excuse from
the Jews: for as Christ says of the Queen of the South, and of the
Ninevites. Luk 11, 31. that they shall rise in judgment, and shall condemn
that generation, which was not moved at his preaching.

Who are they which shall be judged?
All men without exception, as many as have bin since the creation of the word,
as it is in the Creed, he shall come and judge the quick: namely whom he shall
find remaining on live at his coming, (who shall be changed in a moment, that
is, they shall be translated from a mortal condition to an immortal) and all
the dead: that is, which are departed this life before the last day, whom he
will raise up from death Romans 14.12.
, 2, Cor. 5, 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

2 And the Angels which sinned and kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day. 2. Pet. 2.4. Iud. 6.

3 The man of sin himself especially, that son of Perdition Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2, 8 Revel. 20.10
, whom the Lord at that time chiefly will destroy with the spirit of his
mouth, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel and after utterly abolish in his
glorious coming, that is, when he shall return in glory unto judgment,
which the Epithet, glorious coming, shows.

4. The unreasonable creatures also, the heaven and earth, and whatsoever is
contained in them, shall be judged in their manner: For 2. Pet. 3.7.10.11.12.
The heavens and earth are reserved unto fire against the day of condemnation,
and of the destruction of ungodly men and the heavens shall pass away with a
noise, that is, from mutabilitie to immutabilitie and (...), incorruption, and
the Elements shall melt with heat, and be dissolved, and the earth with the
works that are therein shall be burnt up: but not as touching the Essence, as
if this most goodly frame of the world were to be brought to nothing, for then
where should Christ execute his judgment? but that, it is to be restored to a
better and more excellent form as touching the corruptible qualities, all
those things being taken away which are imperfect and transitory, certain
filthiness and dregs of mortality being put away, and purged by fire, as it
were (...) having the virtue of cleansing, as gold in the furnace: as it is
said 1. Cor. 7.31. The fashion of the word goes away, not the property. And
Romans 8.22. We know that the whole world groneth with us also, and
trauaileth in pain together under hope, that it also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: So
Act. 1.21. a restoration of all things is promised. So Ps. 102.72.28. The
heavens shall perish, and they shall all wax old as a garment, and as a garment
shall thou fold them, and they shall be changed, namely, to the better. And
Revel. 21, 1. I saw a new heaven. So Isaiah, 65, 17. and 66.22. New heaven and
a new earth, that is, renewed are promised. Therefore Peter adds verse 13, We
look for new heavens and a new earth according to his promise, wherein dwells
righteousness: but it is not revealed in the Scriptures, what manner of
restoration this shall be.

For what things shall judgment be given?
For the faith and unbelief of every one, according to the effects of either
Math. 12.36.37
: for every idle word, how much more for grievous sin shall there an account
be given in the day of judgment, even of them that do not embrace the
satisfaction of Christ, Romans 2.16. The Lord will judge the secrets of men. And
chap. 14.12. Every one shall give an account for himself unto God. 2. Cor.
5.13. Every ones work shall be manifest, for the day will declare it, and the
fire will try every man's work, what it is, (although this day may be better
understood of the light of truth, driving away the darkness of ignorance, and
shining in our minds as fire:) And 2. Cor. 5.10. All must be made manifest,
that every one may receive according to what he has done, be it good or
evil. The like Reave. 20.12. Whereupon says Augustine, In what facts every man
shall be found, when he departs from his body, in the same shall he be
judged.

What shall the form of this judgment be?
It cannot be declared, but yet the Scripture shadoweth it under the figure of
a most just and royal judgment Math. ^4 30.31. and 25.31. and 50. follow.
Math 13, 26 1, These, ^, 4
. And it does consist in preparation, sentence, and execution of the sentence
given.

The preparation shall be on this wise. 1 As a thief comes in the night, so
shall Christ on a sudden come visibly from heaven, from whence we are bidden
to look for him, in his majesty, that is, in divine power, in heavenly
brightnsse, in glorification of body, in authority to judge, and in the guard
or company of all his Angels, and armed with flaming fire 2 These. 1.8
. Psalm. 50.3. A fire shall go before him, he shall not then come alone,
humble, despised, neither unto affliction, as in the first coming Math. 11.29
Isa. 53.5.
.

2 He shall sit on the throne of the glorious majesty Math, 19.28
, but what the throne may be, no man must enquire: yet for certain it shall
appear corporally and visibly in the clouds of heaven, apparent to the eyes of
all men. Act. 1.11. and Reave. 1.7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every
eye shall see him, yea, even they which pierced him through.

3 He shall gather together by the ministry of the Angels all nations before
him, so that not any how wicked and mighty soever, can withdraw himself, or
be absent, escape, fly from, or resist thar appearance.

4 He shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd does sever the
sheep from the goats, and he will set the sheep, that is, those who have
heard his voice, and have embraced his sheep like innocence, on his right
hand: but the goats, that is, those who despising their shepherd, have
followed their own wantonness, and lust like goats, on his lest.

5 He shall give a double definitive sentence, and that in order. The first
shall be most earnestly wished for of all the Elects: for the King shall say to
them that shall be on his right hand, with a singular affection of favor and
love, commending and setting forth the grace God, and his free adoption, his
Election from the beginning, and blessing in Christ, not their merits, Come ye
blessed of my father, and possess for your inheritance the kingdom prepared
for you since the foundations of the world were laid. Whereunto he will add a
reason of the cause taken from the fruits of faith, declaring the cause, that
is, from the works of mercy performed unto him in his members: For I was an
hungry, and ye gave me to eat, etc. The second shall be most fearful. For
turning unto them that shall be on his left hand, he will say unto them, depart
from me ye cursed into hell fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
Angels. Whereunto in like sort he will add the reason of the cause, for I was
an hungry, and ye gave me not to eat, etc.

6 The execution of the sentence shall presently follow the sentence. For the
reprobates being expulsed by the Angels from the Lords presence, shall, will
they, nill they, be compelled by his glorious strength to go into eternal
torment 2 Thessalonians 1.8 9
, but the godly shall be taken into the air to meet the Lord, that they may
enjoy eternal life, and blessed immortality with Christ 1 Thessalonians. 4 17,
.

After what law will Christ give sentence?
Although the godly shall be freed also from the word of the law, in as much as
Christ has fulfilled it for them, and by the same law, which appoints every
sinner to eternal punishments shall the wicked be condemned: yet the last
judgment shall not so much be squared by the word of the Law, as of the
Gospel, which the Apostles have preached: according to that Ioh. 3.36. He that
believes in the son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the
son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides him. And chap. 12.48.
The word that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last day. And Romans 2.16.
The Lord shall judge the secrets of men, according to my Gospel, by Jesus
Christ. For the sentence in that general judgment shall be nothing else but a
manifesting or declaring or the sentence now before uttered in this life, by
the ministry of the word, as concerning the justification and condemnation of
all.

What are the noats or properties and Epithites of the last judgment?
The Apostle, Romans 2.5. reckons up three. 1. for he calls it the day of
wrath, that is of vengeance, because vengeance shall be taken on all who in
this life have not believed the Gospel. So Sophoniah. 1.15. That day shall be
a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and
desolation, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blacknes, so
called indeed in respect of the wicked, which day shall be a day of rejoicing
to the godly.

2 The day of Revelation, because here things are hid: but there the thoughts,
words and deeds, of all the reprobates how secret soever, shall by the divine
and omnipotent power of the Judge be laid open. Revel. 20.12. And I saw the
dead both great and small stand before God: and the books were opened, and
another book was opened which is, the book of life, and the dead were judged
of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works. But of the Elect the Lord speaks. Ier. 31.33. and Heb. 10.17. Their
sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

3 He calls it a day of just and upright judgment, least any should think
(says Chrysostom) that the judgment of God shoud proceed from an angry mind,
and that none might think that the Judge will take vengeance, otherwise then
justice does sway the judgment. It is called also by way of excellency. The
day of the Lord, and of Christ, wherein he shall come with his glory and
majesty ^uk. 17.34 1 Cor, 5, 5, Philip, 1.6.
. And day of judgment Mat. 10, 15 and. 12, 36.
. And, the last day, (...) that is, the uttermost and last day Ioh. 6.39.40
by a signification taken from time because those which fall out at the last,
are most strange unto us

What are the forewarnings of the judgment to come. Deuteronomy, 27.26 Gal. 3.15

1 The sentence of death pronounced against transgressors before the fall of
our first parents Gen, 2, 17
.

2 The same sentence repeated in the law, by the voice of God.

3 The handwriting of God in the consciences of men, their consciences bearing
witness unto them, and their thoughts mutually accusing and excusing
themselves in the day wherein the Lord shall judge the secrets of men. Romans
2.15.16.

4 The examples of God severity, such as was the deluge, in which the whole
world perished, Noe and his family excepted Genesis 7.^1
: The burning of Sodom, out of which just Lot was saved Gen, 19.24, 25
. The destruction of the City of Jerusalem, the baseness and overthrow of the
Jewish civil government.

5 Calamities both public and private, to be short, the death also of the
body, are the beginning and resemblances of the judgment to come.

What are the signs and tokens thereof?
They are manifold; some going before, others joined nigh thereunto, and of
precedent signs, some are happened long since, which are far distant from
the end, as 1. The publishing of the Gospel in all the habitable earth, or
amongst all nations Math. 24 14
.

2 That security and gluttony long ago waxing strong: as it was in the days
of Noah, which were before the Deluge Moth, 24 37.38
.

3 Apostacy from wholesome doctrine, whereof 1. Tim. 4.1. The spirit speaks
evidently, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith, and shall
give heed unto spirits of error.

4 General corruption of manners 2. Tim, 3 1.2.3
.

5 The revealing and coming of Antichrist. 2. These. 2.3. The day of Christ
shall not come, except the man of sin be disclosed, and 1. John. 2.18. Little
children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists: whereby we know that it is the last time.

6 Persecution and betraying of the Godly for the name of Christ.

7 Pulicke offenses math, 24 10
.

8 False Christ's, and many false Prophets, saying, I am Christ, that is,
usurping the name of Christ, or faining that they are sent of Christ, math.
24.9 Luk, 21, 1.
that they are that which Christ is, and showing signs and miracles to seduce
the very elect, if it were possible luk, 21.8 Math. 24, 11
.

9 Neglect of charity, verse. 12. and want of faith.

Others going next before, which notwithstanding, the end shall not presently
ensue. and that in heaven, Mark. 13.3. The sunnne shall be darkened, that is,
there shall be Eclipses of the sun often: The moon shall not give her wonted
light. The stars shall fall from heaven, that is, seem to fall. The powers
of heaven shall be shaken: for these things are to be understood properly not
in a borrowed sense. 2 In the earth, great Earthquakes, troubles, and tumults:
For Nation shall rise up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. Luke.
21 9.10. Nor shall there be any place free from wars, there shall be hunger
and pestilence, and fearful things, and people shall be in anguish, and at
their wits end, with desperation Mark. 13 7.8,
, and in the Sea there shall be fearful noises and tumults, or inundations of
the Sea and waters Luk, 21.25
. 4 In the air, fearful and terrible tempests. In a word, the heaven and
earth, and even all the Elements shall in a sort resemble the countenance of an
angry Judge, that sinners being admonished, may repent, unless they desire
suddenly to perish. 5 Unto these is also added the conversion, or gathering
together of Israel, that is, of the whole Nation in general, unto the Church
of Christ, after that the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in: Isay. 29.20.
Romans 11, 25.26. which nevertheless, after what sort, and when it shall be, is
not known: The signs adjoining thereunto, are wailing and sorrowing of all
the kinreds of the earth, and the sign of the son of man which shall be seen
in the heaven, when the Lord comes in the clouds Math. 24.30
, which some interpret to be the figure of the Cross, others great glory and
majesty, which shall testify that Christ is at hand.

When shall the judgment be?
This is importunately asked (says Augustine): seeing the Lord says, Math.
24.26. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven,
but my father only, and Mark adds 13.32. nor the Son. And Act. 1.7. It is
not for you to know the times or seasons, and points of times, which the father
has put in his own power: And it is said that the Lords coming shall be
unlooked for, and like the coming of a thief in the night Math. 24, 44 1 Thessalonians. 5, 2 2 Pet. 3.7
.

But although rhat hour is uncertain, that it cannot, nor ought to be
searched after by us, yet have we proof sufficient that Christ's day cannot be
far off, by the former signs, whereby we daily see many such like things so
fall out, by the impiety and corruption of manners, which is now come to a
full height 1 Pet. 3.7 Iam. 5.8
. (In like sort as the buds and blossoms of trees, signify summer to be nigh
at hand Math. 24.32.
. And when the corn waxes yealow, the husbandman gathers, that harvest is
not far off) and they are as so many criers, by whose voice men are cited to
appear at the tribunal seat of Christ, albeit they can know nothing of the
very year, month, day, hour, or moment, because it is not revealed in the
Scriptures. For as the last age of man, says Augustine, that is, his old age,
cannot be defined in a certain number of years, as the rest of man's ages may,
as his childhood, his youth, his flower and vigor of age: So the worlds last
age cannot be determined in a certainty of years. And as we do not call
(says Chrysostom, Homil. 33. in Ioh) the very last day in the year, the end
of the year, but the last month as well also being the space of thirty
days: so if we call the end of so many year, although 400. years and more,
we shall not mistake.

Seeing 1. Pet 4.7. it is expressly said, the end of all things is at hand: and
James. 5.8. The coming of the Lord draws near does not Paul make a
proposition contradictorie unto these, when 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. he denies the Lords
day to be at hand?
No, because neither are the selfsame things spoken of by them, nor in the
same respect, and same time. Paul denies that the Lords day is nigh at hand
in his age, and that while he lives, against false Prophets, who prefixed a
certain time not far off then: but he denies not that the coming of the
Lord draws on, or that those were the last times, in respect of former ages,
and of the time of the Messiah exhibited, in that there shall not any other
time follow, nor shall this have so long a continuance, as was from the
beginning of the world, until the coming of Christ. Last of all that day is
at hand, in respect of God, with whom a thousand years, are but as one day.
Psalm. 90.4. and 2. Pet. 3.8.

How is the son, Mark. 13.32. said not to know of the day of judgment?
Not that he knows it not to himself, says Augustine, but that he knows
it not to us, that is, he makes us not know, that is, he shows it not unto
us, for whom it is not expedient to know it: or, as concerning his humane
nature, which in an ordinary and natural condition knows nothing of this
thing, but what is showed unto it by the divine nature: or as touching the
state of humility, and in as much as being settled therein, he accustomed to
attribute works most commonly to the father, as he says John 5.30 and 7.16.
that he cannot do any thing of himself, and that his doctrine is not his but
the fathers.

Why has God hidden that last day?
Because he will have us look for him every day and hour, to watch least that
day come upon us suddenly, we being unprepared, and to bridle our curiosity in
prying into the secrets of God.

Why does the Lord defer the last judgment?
That the number of the elect may be fulfilled, whom god has foreknowne from
the beginning, and determined to call, and that those who yet remain uncalled,
might be called through the gospel, and might be gathered to the rest, that
have been already called from the beginning of the world, and are at rest
partly in the heavens, and partly in the earth. 2. Pet. 3.9 Reave, 6.11.


2 That he might prove our hope, patience, our calling on him for help, and our
faith, and that he might stir us up to repentance.

3 That he might make the wicked more and more excuseles, who despise the long
suffering and lenity of God, and the space freely granted them to repent. Romans
2.4, 5 2 Pet. 3.8.9.

Which shall be the place of the judgment to come?
The Jews appoint the valley of Iosaphat, (which was situate nigh to
Jerusalem, at the east gate of the temple. and was so called, of a famous
victory granted to King Iosaphat, against the Ammonites, and Moabites, 2
Cron. 20, 26.
) out of Joel. 3.2. I will gather all nations, and will bring the^ down into
the valley of Iehosaphat, for there will I sit, says the Lord to judge all the
heathen round about. But they affirm this rashly: for as God would have the
time known to himself only: so will he provide himself a placc also fit to
judge this company.

What is the end of the last judgment?
1 In respect of me^, that every one may receive the things which are done in
his body, according to that he has done in this world, whether it be good or
evil 2. Cor. 5.10
.

2 But in regard of God, that he may give a final and perpetual ^e^te^ce on
all mankind, and that his glory may appear and be declared unto al eternity,
for the justice, which he shall observe in judgment.

3 The fulfilling of Christ's office: for then will Christ deliver his ^ingdome
to god the father, that is Satan and all the wicked being ^^ed and put to
flight at once, and death it self destroyed, and the elect ^eco^ciled, he will
deliver the^ to his father to be crouned with eter^al glory, and the^ both his
civil and ecclesiastical government also ceasing, he shall appear to have most
absolutely discharged the office he received of his father 1. Cor. 15.24.
: yet so as he may reign with the father for ever, and the father may also
triumph in his son being conqueror.

4 The freeing of the creature from the bondage of corruption Romans 8.20
.

What is the use of this doctrine?
1 It serves for instruction, for it puts us in mind of a perpetual
Repentance, and stirs us to prayer, watchfulness, piety, justice, and to
embrace sobriety Luke 21.24 Tit 2.12.13. 2 Pet, 3.11.12.
.

2 It comfort the godly, for that they believe that the troubles of this
world shall have an end, and that Christ shall come again to vanquish and take
vengeance on his and our enemies, and to deliver us out of their hands, and
that he shall be our Judge, whose brethren we are, and the members of his
body, who is a most loving Jesus, that is, a Savior, Patron, Advocate,
Redeemer, and Intercessor for us, who laid down his life for us, and who has
solemnly promised everlasting life to all them that believe in him. Romans 8.32.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that makes intercession: Whereupon we have
good cause to wish for that day, according to the saying of Christ, When these
things begin to come to pass, then look up, for your redemption draws
near. Luke. 21.28. So that it is a merueile, which Tertullian in his
Apolegetic. cap. 38. writes, that Christians were wont to pray for the
deferring of the end, seeing we daily desire the coming of Gods kingdom.

3 It terrifieth the wicked, because him whom now they refuse for their
Savior, they shall find to be their judge, who shall adiudge them to eternal
torments.

What is contrary hereunto?
1 The heathens opinions of the worlds eternity.

2 The Decree of Origin, and the Chiliasts, that at length a thousand years
after the Resurrection all shall be saved.

3 The error of them, who, beside the judgment that ensues presently at the
first separation of soul and body, think there does not an other universal
judgment remain. And of others, who think that the souls of the godly, are
not rewarded in heaven, nor the souls of the ungodly punished in hell, before
the day of judgment.

4 The wicked opinion of those mockers, who deny or contemning that judgment,
or scoffingly asking, when that shall be, which is so long deferred. 2. Pet.
3.3. who so soon as they hear that the last judgment shall be, cavil: As
the Epicures and Stoics cauilled, Act. 17.32. following Manilius, who says.

The fathers savv no other, neither shall posterity beheld any other.
4 The curiosity of them, who either upon some fained Revelation, as the
Circuncellions, the Anabaptists, the Enthusiasts, who were wont to spread their
prophecies amongst the common sort, and to set down the very certain year,
month, and day of judgment, or upon some position and aspect of the Stars,
or on some imaginary supputations of numbers and times, or on Arithmeticall
calculations, as this Platonists, or are given to iucidiall Astrology: or on
common prophecies, or on humane authority dare define that time, as they who
repeat I know not what Rabbines dream, as if it were a divine Oracle
pronounced by E^ias, Six thousand years the world shall last, two thousand
years before the Law, two thousand under the Law, two thousand after the
Law, and then shall the end be, which saying may by the History it self be
confuted as vain, because there was two thousand, five hundred, and thirty
years before the Law, and fewer by many then two thousand years under the
Law: and it is manifestly contrary to the saying of Christ. Act. 1.7. For the
end of the world does depend neither on the Law of nature, or on course, or any
other cause, but on the pleasure and secret will of God only.

The nine and thirtieth common Place. Of Eternal life.
How many kinds or differences of life do the Divines make?
THree. 1 There is a life of nature, which the Apostle calls an Animal life,
of the natural soul being the better part of man 1. Cor. 2.17. and 15, 47
, whereby the good and bad do in this world one among another live, are
quickened, do perceive and understand: which may also be called, a Bodily,
Temporal, Natural, and Present life. Whereunto the first or natural death,
which is a dissolution of the body and the soul, is opposed.

2 There is a life of grace, which Gods children only in the spiritual
kingdom of Christ do enjoy in this world, which by way of excellency is
called The life of God, not so much for that it is from God, as all the other
three kinds of life also are, as because God lives in them that are his, and
that this life he shows and approoueth Ephe. 4.18
: and it is called for the same respect, The life of Christ, because Christ
lives in his through a supernatural faith and spirit: and they live unto God,
and conform their life unto his will, Gal. 2.20.
, and it is called a new life, a Christian life, and a Renewing of the mind,
will, and affections, and it is also called a new creature, a new man,
supernatural and spiritual, which is opposed to death in sin, and to the
old man.

Col. 3.3
3 There is a life of glory, whereby the soul being joined again to her own
body, shall lead a life, which the Apostle calls spiritual, not in respect
of the substance, but of the qualities. 1. Corinthians. 15.44. whereby the
faithful shall live for ever, and it is laid up in Christ, and in the end of
the world shall be disclosed a and which is opposed to the second death, and is
called eternal, whereof only here we are to entreat,

But how many ways is aeternall life taken?
Two ways. 1. Metonymically, both for the way, that is in the means and
manner of coming to the inheritance of heaven. John. 3.36. He which believes
on the son, has aeternall life. And Cap. 17.3. This is eternal life, that
they acknowledge thee to be the only true god, and whom thou have sent Christ
Jesus (where by the way we may note. Thee and whom thou have sent Christ
Jesus, to be the subjects in this proposition, and the only true God, the
praedicates of either subject) Also for Christ himself. 1. John. 5 20. This is
the true God, and life eternal. Efficiently indeed, as he is God, but as he is
man and died for us, in part materially, because sin, which is the cause of
death, was purged in his flesh: in part also efficiently, but by a secondarie
means namely by his intercession, good will and virtue of his sacrifice, by
the communication of his flesh with us, and of forgiveness of sins, and of
life eternal, which is therein partly also instrumentally because the deity
quickens us by reason of the substantial vnio^ through the flesh. And after
this sense is life aeternall begun in the faithful in this life.

2 Properly for the estate of the blessed after this life, whereof John in the
same. 3. chapter. 16. verse. whosoever belieueth on the son, can not perish,
but has everlasting life. And. 3.7. to Tit. 9. We are heirs, according to the
hope of eternal life.

By what arguments do we prove that there is a life eternal?
1 From the nature of God, for seeing there is a god, and the same is living
and eternal; it follows necessarily that there is a life eternal, whereby
god lives and is eternal.

2 From the condition of the soul: for seeing that it is immortal, it
follows that there does remain an other life after this, wherein the soul
lives by it self, though separated from the body, and in which life she
acknowledges and praises god highly.

3 From the resurrection of bodies: for there would be no need of the rising
again of the bodies of the faithful, if there were not a life whereunto they
should rise. Moreover the articles concerning GOD, of Christ, of the Providence
and of the Justice of GOD, of the souls Immort^^^^e, of the resurection of
bodies, of the last judgment, could not stand unless this article of life
eternal be annexed unto them.

4 From the handwriting of God written in the soul of every one, for the soul
it self often teaches us, there remains a judgment, with the fear whereof
they are vexed, who live wickedly, and they are renewed in hope, who love
godliness.

5 From an Argument tending to absurdity, because if only in this life, that
is, if we hope in Christ for this life sake only, so that our faith has
respect to nothing else beyond this life, we were the most miserable of all
men. 1. Cor. 15.19.

6 From the testimonies of Scripture, Dan. 12.2. some shall awake unto
everlasting life. Math. 25.46. The just shall go unto life eternal. John.
10.28. I give unto my sheep eternal life. Hebr. 13.14. Here we have no
continuing City, but we seek one to come. 1. John. 25. This is the peomise
that he has promised us, even eternal life.

7 From examples, for Enoch, being translated here into, and afterward Elias
were as an earnest penie thereof Genesis 7, 24. Heb, 11, 8 2 Kings, 2, 11
: So was Christ also ascending into the heaven, whose pleasure is that where he
himself is, we should be with him likewise. John. 14.3. and 17.24.

8 This an article of our fath, I believe that life everlasting.

What are the Epithites, whereby it is commended in Scripture?
1 In commendation it is called the kingdom. 1 of God. 2 of the father. 3 of
heaven. Math. 7, 21
.

2 Metaphorically Abraham's bosom Luke 16, 22
, by a Metaphor taken from the bosom of parents, woe are said to have and carry
their little children in their bosom, because the faithful like dearly
beloved children being recovered out of this miserable world, are cherished and
refreshed in the embracing of the father of all the faithful, and are safe and
free from all the perilous storms of this life: And there is a place wherein
Christ has prepared us a mansion, as himself declares. Math. 8.11. Many
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham
and Isaac and Iacoh in the kingdom of heaven. Augustine, though where it
should be, Epist. 99, ad Evodion. confese, Lib. 9, 3,
confesses he knows not, yet defines it to be an habitation of secret
rest, and affirms that therein li^^ the spirits of the blessed, and there
they enjoy the gladsome presence of God.

3 Analogically, or by proportion Paradise, or a place of delight and
pleasantness luke 23.43.
, by allusion to that garden planted in Eden, of the situation whereof it is
fond to dispute, seeing it is manifest that the universal earth was made waste
by the Deluge.

4 The house of the father Ioh. 14.2.
.

5 Metonymically, the fullness of joys Psalm. 16.11
.

6 The Lords joy Math. 25.21
.

7 The new, holy, and durable Jerusalem that shall be Heb. 13.14 Revel. 21.10
.

8 An inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and that withers not, reserved in
heaven 1. Pet. 1.4
.

9 The glory of God, because that eternal life consists in the
communication of Gods glory, Romans 3.23. All have sinned and are destitute of
the glory of God.

10 Our glory, for this is that alone, wherein we may rest safely. 1. Cor.
2.7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom, which
God had determined before the world unto our glory.

11 Rest 2 Thessalonians, 1.7
.

12 Refreshing Act. 3.19
.

13 Peace Luke 1, 79,
.

14 So great happiness, as cannot be contained neither in the eyes, nor ears,
nor mind of any man Psalm, 31, 20 Isai. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2.9
.

But why is it called eternal?
Because it shall neither be temporary, or determined in any certain limits,
neither is it short, vain, or subject to any change, as this our life is Genesis
3, 19, Ioh 14 5.
, and although it have a beginning, yet shall it never be taken away from them,
to whom it shall once be given Math. 25, 34
, but shall last for ever without end.

What is life eternal?
It is a glorious estate, wherein the elect being most perfectly joined unto
Christ their head, after the Resurrection that shall be of the dead, Romans 8 29
1 C^r. 15.49 Phil. 3.21. Reve. 2, 31
shall know God with his Angels in heaven after such a manner, that we are not
worthy yet to speak of, and shall enjoy his presence, and praise him for
ever, having obtained the sovereign good that Christ has purchased for us,
and shall be conformable unto his likeness in body and soul as he is man.

Or, it is the state of the blessed after this life, wherein shall be a
perpetual acknowledgement of God, perpetual righteousness, without sin and
death, continual joy, free from trouble, grief, heaviness and mourning. Ioh.
17.13 24 Isa. 25 8. Reve 7.16 17 and. 21.4
. In a word,, eternal life shall be a certain perfection of souls and
bodies, wherein there shall be nothing blame-worthie, but according to the
pleasure of God all things shall perfectly serve the will of Christ, the
Creator and Redeemer.

What are the causes of everlasting life?
The principal cause is God, who of his mercy and free goodness gives and
bestows it on us, through and for Christ our mediator luke 12 32 Romans 6, 23.
Ephesians. 1.5. and 2.5 luke 12.32
, John. 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees
the son, and believes in him should have everlasting life, and 1. John. 5.11.

The meritorious and very efficient cause, is Christ only, John. 14.6. I am
(says he) that way, and that truth, and that life.

The isntrumental, offering and revealing is the Gospel Romans 1.16, 17
.

The isntrumental receiving cause, is faith. 1. Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of
your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

The sealing cause, is the holy Ghost Ephesians. 1.13 14.
, but good works and afflictions, are not the cause of receiving, but the way
of the kingdom, says Bernard. And Act. 14.22. Through many tribulations must
we enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Why is the gate called strait, and the way narrow which leads unto life.
Math, 7.14.
1 Because it was utterly unknown, and not to be found out by humane reason,
but Christ has revealed it unto us.

2 Because there is one only passage unto life through Christ, not many.

3 Because few enter in thereat, if we compare them with the fashions of the
world: as the way of virtue compared to the ways of vices is narrow, for that
it has but few that travel therein.

4 Because it is unpleasant and hard to flesh, by reason of the cross, and
denial of our selves, which are our companions in the way. It is not therefore
generally streit, but in respect, for unto the Elect it is wide and broad
enough.

What is the object of eternal life?
Surely the material object is very God: but the formal object is, as far
as we are capable thereof, the knowledge, seeing, enjoying, comprehension, and
adoption of God. For, albeit we shall most sweetly enjoy the company, sight,
and conference of Angels and all the blessed Mat. 8.11
, yet shall we not take pleasure in the joyful sight, benevolence, and
company of them, but in the delightful beholding and favorable enjoying of
God only through Christ: Math, 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. And 1. John. 3.2, We shall see him as he is. As also the Angels
felicity consists in the same fruition and contemplation of God only Mat.
18, 20
, Even as the felicity of a Courtier in the Kings Court, is, if his King look
upon him, with a gracious countenance, if he love him, seek to have his
company, long for him especially. And in like sort shall we acknowledge Christ
the author of so great a Benefit, that we shall follow him whither-soeuer he
goes Reve. 14, 4
, and we shall cleave unto him, and shall never depart from his side.

But, do not we enjoy God already, and see him in this earth?
Yea truly: (by which reckoning eternal life is even already begun in us)
but only obscurely, and by means, that is, by creatures set before us, as it
were by a certain veil between, but not by clear sight indeed: whereupon 1.
Tim. 6.16. Noe man ever saw God, or can see him.

Therefore we do see God. 1 By a natural vision in the creatures as in a
glass, wherein a certain brightness of the Divinity shines clearly rom,
1.20,
.

2 By a specular or mystical vision, through resemblances and marks of his
Divine glory: whereof Esaias. 6.1 I saw the Lord sitting upon an high throne, and
lifted up, and the lower parts thereof filled the Temple, and the Seraphins
stood about him. After which manner Moses is said to have seen the back
parts, but not the face of God, that is, not the very majesty of God, Exodus
33.23.

3 By the vision of faith, wherein by the doctrine and doings of the Son, we
know the fathers good will toward us: whereof Christ says, John. 14.9. He
that sees me, sees the father also. Then also when our bodies are raised up
in glory, we shall see God by himself as he is, whom now we cannot any way
comprehend. 1 John. 3.2. not indeed as he is in quantity, but in quality,
having no veiles between us, and far more plainly then MOSES saw him in
the mountain face to face. Exodus 31.11. And after a better manner then our
first Parents saw God before their fall. Reave. 22.3. His servants shall serve
him, and see his face.

Shall men know one another in this eternal life.
Yea verily, for they shall be full of the holy spirit, and of wisdom, as Adam
before his fall, keeping as then the integrity of Gods Image, acknowledged
Eve, whom he had never seen, and whence she was, being told of no man, Genesis
2.23. As Peter on the mountain, receiving only a certain taste of life
eternal in his mortal body, knew by inward revelation Moses and Elias whom
he never saw, Math. 17.3.4. yet this shall not be a carnal, but a spiritual
knowledge.

For whom is eternal life ordained?
For any one of what nation soever, Math, 8 11
but not confusedly, but according to that saying, Romans 11.7. The elect have
obtained it, and the rest have been hardened. Life eternal therefore is
ordained for the fathers blessed only, or the Elect, and consequently for them
that believe in Christ, Io. 3.16 and 6.40
and do according to his fathers will Mat. 7, 21
, and witnessing their faith by their works Math, 25 34. andc.
, as well men as women as heirs together of the life of grace, 1. Pet. 3.7.

What shall the Quality or Condition of eternal life be?
This surely we cannot in thought attain unto in this dimnesse of our
understanding Isa. 64, 4 1 Cor. 2 9
, but the perfect knowledge thereof is deferred unto eternal life: for it has
not yet appeared what we shall be, 1. Ioh. 3.2. yet we learn by the proper
adjuncts, which the Scripture gives to everlasting life, as much as is here
convenient for us, what, of what manner, how great, that is, how excellent the
condition thereof shall be.

And first surely the Office and action of the parts and faculties of our body
and soul shall be most perfect. For there shall be all manner abolishing of
sin both in soul and body Isa, 60.15 16. etc
, and freedom from deah, and all troubles, there shall be no death nor
mourning, nor crying out, nor sorrow any more g, and moreover all weakness,
sickness, grief, heaviness, old age, corruption, defect, and needines shall be
wanting h, for there shall be healthful eternity, and eternal health, says
Bernard, because the just shall live for ever, and their salvation shall be
from the Lord. Psalm. 37.29. Again the office and action of the parts and
faculties of our body and soul shall be most quick, for that either part of
us shall receive from the holy spirit whatsoever shall be and is necessary
unto life, and it own action. 1. Therefore there shall be a perfect knowledge
of all things, 1, Cor. 15.23
for we shall be conversant in the eternal light of the father of lights, and
the very wisdom of God shall show it self unto us.

2 It shall have a full sufficiency of a blessed life; for it shall need none
of the helps of this life, as meat, drink, apparel, light or heat of the
Sun, or cold of the Moon, rest, or other like succors beside it self,
whereby it may be sustained, cherished, or perform it actions Psa. 121.6 Rom
14.17 Rev, 21 23 and, 22.5
. For even God himself Schaddai, shall then be all in all, and shall fill all
things with all manner goodness. 1. Cor. 15.28. For the grace of God shall be
sufficient for us, we shall live to God, and of God, we shall be filled with
the plenty of Gods glory, and God shall give us to drink of a river of
pleasure psalm. 17, 5 and. 36, 9
.

3. It shall be most holy, for it shall respect nothing else, but the glory
and solemn service of the only true God Isa. 43 7 Ephesians. 1, 6,
. And because we shall be holy, as God is holy, for we shall be like,
although not equal, unto him. 1. Io. 3.2. And there shall be a Church without
wrinkle and without spot, holy and altogether blameless. Ephe. 5.27. reve.
21.27


4. It shall be most delectable, because the elect shall enjoy al their
desires: ( for whatsoever, says Bernard, shall be delightful, will there be
present, and there shall be nothing to be wished for, that shall be wanting
there) and they shall feel most excellent and sincere pleasure, both in soul
and body by the presence of Christ, and daily heholding of God. Psalm. 16.11.
Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness of joy, and
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And 17.15. When I awake
(from the dead) I shall be satisfied with thine image. For how great will the
delight be in the beholding of that sovereign good, which is the storehouse of
all good things and of all joys! Hence proceeds that eternal gladness, or
perpetual and unspeakable joy, which the holy Ghost shall stir up in the
Elect, and which none shall take from us. Ioh. 16.22.5. A participation of
Divine nature, that is, not a pouring out of the divine essence, but of divine
qualities into us, that is, a communication of Gods immortality, glory,
virtue, wisdom, justice, and image 2, Pet. 14,
, which shall be those white garments of the Saints, the long white robes, and
garments of pure fine linen and shining, wherewith the elect shall be clothed
Reave. 3.4.5. and, 6.11 and 1.13. and 19.8
.

6. There shall be also a clarifying of bodies, excellent beauty, and majesty,
wherein they shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21.
and the just men shall shine as the sun Math. 13.43
, and they shall glister as the brightness of the firmament. Dan. 12, 3. And
they shall be as the Angels of God Luke 20, 36
.

7 There shall be the Triumph of the elect over the Devil, Death, and Hell Rom,
16.20 Revel. 20.10 14
, Fellowship with all the blessed, conversation with the holy Angels, perfect
Love of God and our neighbor, Concord and exceeding quietness of all things:
for there they shall be all of one mind, because their will shall be none
other but the will of God: so that whatsoever they desire, shall come to pass:
Melody, for there we shall sing with quiers of Angels praising god without
end for ever. Last of all there shall be all the good gifts of body and soul,
such as neither the eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart of man
imagined. 1, Cor. 2, 9. who then would not desire to pass through thither with
Christ by death.

Shall the glory of everlasting life be commune to all the elect after an
equal measure?
No, but as God bestows his gift on the elect in this life, not alike
unequally: so will he crown those gifts of his in the elect with an unequal
measure of glory in heaven. For that saying of Christ is proper to the
Apostles, Ye shall sit judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat, 19, 28. And
Paul doubts not but that there is a peculier crown laid up in store for
him according to the proportion of his labors, 1. These. 2.19. and so Dan.
12.3. The wise, says he, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and
ever. And the Scripture, does not only promise life eternal to the faithful,
but in the same a special reward to every of them Math, 19 29 2 Timothy 4.8
. This is probably perceived by the reason of the contrary Math, 11, 22.24,
. Hither may be also alluded that saying of Paul. 1, Cor. 15, 41, For one
star differs from another star in glory.

When shall eternal life take beginning?
It is begun in the minds of the faithful in this life already, when the holy
spirit by the preaching of the word, does endue their minds with the true
knowledge of God, and bends their will to a ready obedience of his
commandments: yea they feel an earnest penny thereof, and have a most true taste
of it, Ephesians. 1.4. whence flows that hope, which cannot fail the faithful, To
5.2.5. We greatly rejoice under the hope of the glory of God: And hope makes
not ashamed. Finally we have passed already from death to life, by faith in
Christ Ioh, 5.24 1 Ioh. 3.14.
, because what we possess through hope, we know shall be as certainly, as if it
were in very deed, already bestowed on us. Yet shall we attain the full
possession and consummation thereof afterward in the time that God has
ordained, in which, after the number of those that shall be saved is fulfilled.
Christ our redeemer will appear unto us from heaven.

Do the souls of the godly already separated from their bodies, enjoy a
perfect and absolute happiness?
It is sufficient for us to know, that presently after the departure from the
body, the spirit returns unto God which gave it, Eccl. 12.7. and after the
dissolution or vncoupling of the soul from the body it is with Christ Phil.
1.23
, In Paradise Luke 23.43
, in peace wisd. 3.3
, in rest Heb, 4.11.
, in comfort Luke 16.25
, in refreshing or ease Wisd 4.7
, in security Ioh. 11.15 18,
, in the hand of God, that no anguish at all may touch it so much as slightly
Wisd. 3.1.
, in glorifying of the name of God. Yet because they look for a resurrection
of their bodies, and a most plentiful fruition of all good things, which God
has promised to all that love him, they cannot be said to be in a perfect and
absolute, but in an imperfect happiness. 2, Tim, 4, 8. There is a crown of
righteousness laid up for me, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me
at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love that his
glorious appearing, And Reave. 6.9. I saw under the Altar the souls of the^
that were killed for the word of God: and they cried with a loud voice, saying.
How long Lord, which are holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our
blood on the^ that dwell on the earth? Then long white robes were delivered
unto every one, and it was said unto them, that they should rest for a little,
until their fellow servants and their brethren that should be killed even as
they were, were fulfilled. On the contrary. 2. Pet. 2.9, says that the unjust
are so punished, either with the loss of this life, or with other punishments,
as that they are nevertheless reserved against the day of judgment to be
tormented with far sharper torments, namely eternal punishments both in body
and soul.

What is the place of eternal life?
Not this earth, or aerie or Elementarie Region, which as yet, death, horror,
and sin, the power of darkness, and wicked spirits do inhabit Job. 10.22
Ephesians. 6.12. and 2 8
, and which at length shall be dissolved 2 pet. 3.10
. But the heaven of heavens, or the highest heaven, whereinto Christ, as he was
man, ascended, being made higher then the visible heavens Heb. 7.262
, or that third heaven into which Paul was rapt, which by Interpretation he
calls Paradise. 2. Cor. 12.2.4. But after the Judgment and restoring of all
things, eternal life, or the seat and place of the blessed, shall be not
only in the heavens, but in the earth also: For we look for new heavens and
a new earth according to his promise, wherein dwells righteousness, that is,
which are the mansion place of the righteous. Isa. 65.16. 2. Pet. 3.13. Revel.
21.1.

What is the end of eternal life?
1. That God may make good in very deed and fact his grace toward the elect.

2. That the godly may enjoy the fruit of Christ's death and passion.

3. That they may receive rewards meet for their labors Tim: 4.2
.

4. That they may acknowledge Gods bottomless mercy. That they may see him
for ever, which is the end of all their desires, and that they may praise him
continually without tediousness.

What are the effects of eternal life?
1. Our being like unto the Angels, that is, not as touching the substance, but
as concerning the proper conditions of this life Math. 22 30
.

2. Our participation of the dignity of the man Christ: for the^ he will make
us verily Kings, Priests, and Prophets with himself rev. 1 6
, but with this condition, that himself be vnspeakeablie above all in dignity.

What is the use of the Doctrine, of life eternal?
1. It is a comfort in calamities and injuries, whereunto we are subject in
this life.

2 It mitigateth the sorrow, which we take for them that are dead.

3 It lesseneth the fear of death, when we believe that a better life shall
follow after this death, and when we think upon that saying, Revel. 14.13.
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord.

4 It makes us earnest and cheerful to perform our duty to God, and
charity to our neighbors, with whom we shall have a perpetual conversation
hereafter in heaven.

What are the Opinions disagreeing thereunto?
1 The absurd opinions of Democritus, Epicurus, Pliny, Galene, and others who
jest at the question of eternal life, and think that all parts perish with the
body.

2 The curious questions and determinations of the Papists, concerning the
degrees of the Saints in eternal life, as of a thirtieth fold pofite to
married folk that live chastely, to them that keep themselves widows
sixtiefold, and to Virgins a hundredth fold to be recompensed. And of them
also, who before the time desire to know what is done in heaven, and take no
care, which way to go to heaven.

4 The opinions of some Fathers, as Irenaus, Tertullian, and others, who did
not think that the souls of the godly went unto heaven, until after the
resurrection, but were in a temporary storehouse, receptacle, or Region,
though not in an heavenly one, yet in an higher then hell, where they might
have a refreshing even until the resurrection. The error of Pope John the
twentieth, who thought that fowls did not see God face to face, until the
last day of resurrection.

6 Especially eternal death does directly thwart eternal life, and so
likewise does lamentation, fear, crying out, mourning, cold, weariness,
sleep, sickness, death, hunger, thirst, poverty, the snares and temptations
of Satan, torment, fear of hell, etc.

The fortieth common place. Of eternal Death.
From whence is death derived?
MAny take it in a good sense to be derived from the Greek word (...), as it
were (...), taken upward unto God: and (...), to consider diligently, those
things which are above, because it brings us back again to God. It is also
called (...), as it were (...), an entrance into eternal life. In Latin Death
seems to be derived from tarrying, because death tarrieth or stays for us,
and it comes stealing on us with a still foot, or because it esteems the
condition of none.

How manifold is death?
Fourefolde.

1. A corporal death which is also called temporary, and it is either
natural, or accidental, and it is either violent, or a voluntary separation
of the soul from the body, common both to the good and bad, inflicted on all
through the malice of Satan by the just judgment of God for the sin of
Adam: Genesis 2, 17, Ioh. 8.44, To, 5.12.17 and 6.23. 1, Co. 15.21. Heb, 9.27.
and it is called by John, the first death in respect of the wicked, Reu. 20,
14. And surely the godly do not escape it likewise, albeit their sins be
forgiven them.

1. That thereby they might learn to hate sin.

2. That they might acknowledge the severity of Gods anger for sin.

3. That they might lay away the remnants of sin, together with the miseries
that cleave unto them by reason of sin.

4. That they might try the power of God in raising the dead, and so their
death and infirmity might serve for their own good and for Gods glory. And
for that respect should it be desired of them, after the example of Paul, I
desire to be dissolved. Phil. 1.23. Not for that they are weary of life, or
for their ownselues (because this desire is contrary to natural reason) but
for another end, namely, because it is a deliverance from sin wholly, as also
from the miseries of this life, and a passage unto the bright presence of God,
a returning and remoouing from banishment, not unto a ruinous, but unto a new
and most delectable dwelling 2. Co. 5.^0
. Because it is an advantage Phil. 1.12
, a passage to the father Ioh. 5.24, and 13, 1.
, and therefore not to be feared, because Christ has overcome it Ose. 13, 14
, and it is such unto us as he has made it He. 2, 4.3
(and the very hour thereof is appointed unto every one by God) but it should
be desired by the desire of faith: yet so, that we continue in this earthly
house, as long as it shall seem good to the Lord: for the godly do rather wish
to live unto the glory of Christ, then for their own benefit.

2 A spiritual death, and it is either of believers or unbelievers and that of
the believers is threefolde.

1. Of sin, as concerning the strength, that is, the force or life of sin,
which is called mortification, Romans 6.2.8. We are dead unto sin (in the
dative case) how shall we live yet therein?

2. Of the Law, but in part, as far as the Law is the power of sin. 1.
Because it accounts them which are in Christ, guilty no more. 2. Neither
does it provoke men to sin, Romans 7.4. Ye are dead to the Law, by the body
of Christ. And Gal. 2 16 19. I am dead to the law, that I may live unto God:
for Christ makes us dead to the Law, because by justifying us, he takes
away those terrors of conscience, which the Law does cast into us: and by
sanctifying us, he makes that our concupiscence is mortified and that it
takes not occasion to sin by the forbidding of the Law, as before it was
wont To. 7.5, 6, 8, 9.
.

3 Death of the world, by which the world is dead unto the godly, and that
actiuely, not unto them who enter into cloisters and profession of a monastical
life, but unto those who for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, despise
all things which the world esteems and is in love with. 2. And who renounce
the works of the world, as whoaring, dicing, and whatsoever is a work of the
flesh. 3. And who are not carried away with the delight of the world: Again the
world is passiuely dead unto those, who in like for^ are despised of the
world, for otherwise the world oftentimes were nevertheless dead unto them,
who notwithstanding, are dead unto the world. Therefore Gal. 6.14. Through
Christ, the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, And Phil. 3.8. I
account all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ. But
the spiritual death of the unbelievers, or of natural men is that which may be
called the death of faith, or the souls death, namely, by which they being
without Christ, and his spirit, being also void of faith, are dead in their
sins (in the ablative case) Ephe. 2.5. and yet they live in sin; nor do they
earnestly desire forgiveness, and so living, they are dead, Mat. 8.22 1 Timothy
5.6 Rev. 3.1
and are said to walk in the shadow death Esa. 9.1.
.

3. And eternal death, is a perpetual infelicitie and misery of the whole
man, and it is called the second death Rev, 2 11 and. 21.8
: of which is said, The death of sinners is the worst death Psalm. 34.22. I
desire not the death of a sinner, but that the sinner turn from his ways, and
live. Ezech. 33.9.4. A civil death: Among Lawyers it is meant of them whose
estate is altered, that is, who have fallen from some degrees of honor and
liberty, and have not kept the reputation of an honest man. But at this time we
entreat of the third kind of death.

What is eternal death?
It is the unspeakable, most wretched, most fearful, and endless condition
of the Reprobate, ordained by God: not in that the soul may again be
separated from the body, or that the body, or soul dies, and that they
cease either to be, to live, to have sense (for they shall be, and shall live
continually:) but in that they shall be for ever shut out both in soul and
body; not only from all favor and beholding the presence of God, but also
that they shall be adjudged most justly to an horrible endless and deserved
curse, by reason of their sin Isa. 66.24 Math. 25.41 46 2 Thessalonians. 1.9
. For as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. 1.
Cor. 2.9. So also neither can the greatness of the pains and torments, which
are prepared for the damned, be plainly understood in this life, much less be
expressed in words.

If the soul and body of the Reprobates shall have a being, and shall live for
ever. Why is their future estate, not called a life, but a death?
Because such an estate and condition of life as theirs is, every way most
miserable, deserves to be called a death and not a life.

What are the Epithites of eternal death?
That the greeueousnesse of the punishment might in some sort be pouretraied,
it is called in scripture by terms taken from the punishments of this life, as
Confusion, Shame, eternal reproach, The worm that ever gnaweth, the lake of
fire and brimstone, Hell, mourning, weeping and gnashing of teeth, A fiery
fournace, an eternal devouring, and unquenchable fire, extreme darkness, out
of the kingdom of light, the worm that dies not, eternal torment and the
like Isa. 30.33. and 66.24. Math. 8.12. and 22, 13. and 25, 46. Mark, 9.43.47.
Reave. 19.20 and 20.10, 14 15.
In which Epithites is shadowed as it were the form, what and how great the
punishments of eternal death shall be.

what be the causes of eternal death?
God the most just Judge is the cause a far of Math. 25.41. Rom, 2, 8 2 Thessalonians.
1, 5 6, 8, 9,
. The nearest cause is Satan the seducer unto sin, and a murderer even from
the very beginning of the worlds creation, for that he slew man thorough sin
John. 8, 44
.

The subministring isntrumental cause, is man himself consenting unto Satan:
lastly sin, whereby man departed from the law of God, Gen, 2.17. In the day
that thou eatest of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die
the death, either death, as well temporary as eternal: And Romans 5.12. Through
sin, death entered into the world. And, 6.23. The wages of sin is death.
And. 1. Cor. 15, 21. By man came death.

For whom is eternal death prepared?
For the cursed, or Reprobates, for the workers of iniquity, for ungodly
sinners, horrible murderers, whoremongers, witches, for Idolaters, and all
liers Re. 21, 8,
: and to speak in one word, for unbelievers, that is for those, who have not
known God, nor hearkened unto the Gospel 2 Thessalonians, 1, 8,
that in body and soul they may be punished punished, because they have
sinned in body and soul, Math 10.28. Fear him which can destroy the body and
soul in hell, namely with eternal torments, and therefore the substance of
neither shall perish.

What place is ordained for eternal death?
That which the Hebrews call Tophet, of noise and confusion and Gehenna of a
place nigh to Jerusalem situated in the field of a certain man called Hinnon,
wherein the Israelites offered their sons to the Idol Moloch Joshua. 15, 8
Isa. 30.33 2. Kings. ^3.13. 2. Chro. 28.3, Ierem. 7.31
which the Greeks interpret (...) that is (...), a dark place, a house
without sunlight, and Tartarum (...) because it frighteth all: which place the
Latins expound Inferos of the situation a nethermost place, Hell, as also
Abyssum, that is a gulf of unmeasurable deapth or (...) a bottomeles place
Luke 8.31 Reu. 9, 20
,

What is Hell?
It is a certain hidden and horrible place appointed by God unto eternal
torment for the damned men, and evil Angels Number, 16 30.33, Esa, ^0, 33 Math.
^, 12 and 25, 41 2 Thessalonians, 1, 9
.

Where is Hell?
It is hard to judge. and it becomes us not to be inquisitiue herein, but to
endeavor, that we take heed that we one day prove not by experience where it
is. Yet is it somewhere, nor any upper but a nether (because it is below) and
therefore fardest of from the highest heaven which is the seat of the blessed.
For the Scripture Luk, 16.26. places (...) a broad and large gulf ((...) that
is to gape or cleave in sunder) between the godly and the wicked, And the rich
man when he was tormented in hell, lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham a far
of, and Lazarus in his bosom. And they which are cast into that place are said
to be thrust down thereinto, as it were into some nethermost place in respect
of heaven and of us here on earth. Reave. 9.11 and 20, 8
And Revel. 17.8. The beast is said to ascend out of the bottomless pit into
the earth. As also. Number. 16.30.33. Chore, Dathan, and Abiron are said to have
descended quick into the pit of hell, not into the grave simply as the word
sometime is wont to be usurped Gen 42.38, Psalm. 16, 10 Act. 2.31,
. Neither does that make against this, where Satan is said to fall down from
heaven, when his power was abolished at the voice of the Gospel, Luke 10.18.
And to be busy in this air, Luke 8.31. Ephesians, 2.^ and 6, 12
for he is hear busy only for a time to exercise the faith of the Godly and
to execute the just judgments of God upon men; otherwise the Devils are said
to be thrust down into Hell, and to be kept bound in chains of Darkness, 2,
Pet. 2.4. Iud. 6. but there is an evident description of hell. Isa. 30.33. Hell
is prepared for the King of Babylon by God, who has made it low, that is has
placed it in the lower parts, and has enlarged it, that is has made it deep
and large: the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord,
like a river of brimstone does kindle it,

When shall the punishments of hell begin?
Some begin in this life, like preambles, in some wicked ones: so is it hell,
to feel the wrath of God, and to be accursed, and as it were rejected of God,
which things are even fealt by some of the godly also sometimes, but it is
only for their trial in this life. Psalm. 18, ^
But the chief punishments are deferred until the last day, yet the souls of
the wicked as soon as they die, do undergo punishment and damnation, Luc, 16
22.23.
and are reserved unto the day of judgment, when taking on them their bodies
again they shall be tormented for ever.

Shall the torments of the damned be perpetual?
Yea because so does the rule of gods Justice require: for Gods infinite
majesty is offended: and because the happiness of the Elect is eternal,
therefore must the misery of the reprobate be eternal. And so does the
scripture witness. Isa. 66, 24. Dan. 12.2. Some shall awake unto eternal
reproach. And Math. 25, 41 Go ye cursed into everlasting, and unquenchable
fire, In which the damned shall abide for ever, to endure those torments; For
as much as the Salamander also is not consumed in the midst of fire. And Mark.
3.29. The Blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven.

Shall the condition of the Damned be alike, as touching the very measure of
eternal torments?
In no wise: which is gathered by these sayings. Mat. 10.25. It shall be more
easy for Sodom then for thee (that is, for the city that despises the
Gospel. And 11.22.24. It shall be easier for Tire and Sydon in the day of
judgment. And 23, 14. Christ says to the hypocrites, For this shall ye
receive a greater damnation. And Luke 12.47. The servant that knows his
masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: but he that
knows it not, and does those things that are worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few.

To what end is Hell?
A second end is, that the wicked may be afflicted with deserved punishmens.
But the chief end is, that God might appear the just God of all the world in
punishing them, and that by this means he might declare his justice and wrath
toward the reprobate and his exceeding goodness, grace and clemency toward the
vessels of mercy, which he has chosen of his mere grace, that he might
preserve them for ever,

What is the use of this Doctrine?
It avails to stir up in us a continual desire of true piety and
repentance. Math. 3.8, 10. Bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life. For
the axe is put to the root of the trees, therefore every tree which brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. Hereupon
Chrysostom Homil. 13. Romans says, I wish hell were disputed of every where, for
the remembrance of hell will not suffer a man to fall into hell.

Who are they resist this Doctrine?
1 The Epicures. who deny the immortality of souls, and so the punishments
ordained for the wicked, whom not only the word of god, but even common sense
it self refuteth.

2 The Origenists, sometime, called the pittiefull Doctors who dreamed there
would come a day wherein mankind all and singular, yea even the wicked, and the
devils themselves being discharged from those punishments should be released.

3 Many whose opinion is, that there is no particular place appointed for
Hell, but that whatsoever seuereth us from God, and as Hierome says,
Whatsoever makes division among brethren, is Hell.

4. The error, which Hierome attributes to Origin, Epist. ad Amitum; That
hell is nothing but the horror of conscience.

The one and fortieth common place. Of the Church.
Whence is the word Ecclesia, that is Church derived?
PAr t kkalen, which is to call: for (...), was called of the Greeks, An
assembly of the citizens, called from home by the voice of a crier, to hear
the judgment of the Senate: (whereupon (...), to make an Oration, to an
assembly: And (...) a Preacher) which is also called (...), that is a gathering
together, (...) to gather together, to bring together, and to assemble
together. But because the Jews called their assemblies and places ordained for
the reading of the law and Prophets, Synagogues: the Christians, that by the
very name they might distinguish their assemblies from the Jewish, have
usurped and kept the better word of Church, for the congregation of them which
profess Christ, (for which Church many do wrongfully use the name of city
and common wealth) Although James 2 2. uses the word (...). If there come
(...) into your company a man with a gold ring, etc. And Heb. 10.25. not
forsaking (...), the fellowship that we have among our selves.

And the word church, is not absolute, but relative, so called in respect of
God, who calls men out of the world into the kingdom of his son, by the
preachers of his word. And they which obey their calling, and come unto the
church, are called (...), as it were (...), called by name, as may be seen in
the salutations of Paul's Epistles, because no man does truly join himself
unto the church of his own motion and instinct, but all, how many soever do
come, are called of God.

How many ways is the name of church usurped in the scriptures?
1 Largely, or politiquely for every civil company of men as Act. 19.32.
There was (...) a confused assembly: and Verse, 39 (...) a lawful or comely
assembly which is not only contrary (...) to a seditious and tumultuous
congregation, but also (...) to an assembly solemnly proclaimed.

2 Spiritually, and. 1. strictly, for the multitude of the Godly alone, who do
all, and in several cleave fast to the true god by true faith Act. 20.17 28.
and, 1. Tim, 3, 15
2. more strictly for an ecclesiastical synod or council, because it is
gathered together in the name of the whole church, whereof it has charge: and
it is called by Paul a presbytery 1, Tim, 4 14.
3, Math, 18 17
most strictly, for a little Church, that is the faithful servants of some
family Rom, 16.^
.

3 Commonly for an holy multitude, either of one province, or of the belieuers
dispersed through the world, wherein truly the godly and the hypocrites are
mixed in this earth 1. Cor, 11, 18 22,
.

4 For (...), that is a place wherein the faithful do assemble together to
hear or to preach the word of God 1. Cor. 14 34,
.

5 It is abusedly taken for the false church, which is called the malignant
church Psalm. 26.5
, which is a conuenticle and conspiracy against Christ and his truth.

what is a church?
It is a multitude of men Elect, and effectually called from the world by the
preaching of the gospel, and so of Christians or such as believe in Christ,
and depend on him as on their only head, and do openly profess their belief
on him, and do know and worship God by their belief and by his word,
reckoning also those that are newly instructed, and the children of the Elect,
(and sometimes also of hypocrites) although by reason of their young years,
they are not capable of vocation or of the Sacraments To. 10.14 Act. 2.39. 1
Cor. 7.14
. Or it is a company of men dwelling every where, called by God from the
corruption of all mankind into the spiritual kingdom of Christ, by the voice
of the Gospel, severed and distinguished from other companies of men, by the
hearing of Gods word, by faith, by the sacraments, by invocation, by holiness of
life, and by profession, which is grounded on Christ the corner stone; that God
may dwell therein and may be therein worshipped according to the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles for ever. John. 10.4.5. My sheep hear my voice, not
the voice of another.

The definition is clear by the example of Abraham, who with his family being
called out of Hur of the Chaldees, and from amongst the Idolaters, obeyed the
voice of God, and sequestered himself by his obedience toward God and the
profession of his faith, from the prophanenes of the world Genesis 12.1 and 13.18
and 15.6, and 17 23. Acts. 7.3 Romans 4 13, etc.
.

Or in a word, 2. Cor. 2 14.
a church is a communion or society of men through faith, which is by hearing,
of such as are justified and sanctified in Christ Jesus through the holy Ghost:
and not such a society as consists in a Platonicall, Monastical.
Anabaptisticall communion of substance or possessions, but in spirit, Doctrine,
Faith, hope, bountiefullnes, and in other exercises of Piety: In the outward
company whereof nevertheless there are many hypocrites.

How maniefold is the church?
It is one only, because there is but one body of Christ, compacted of diverse
members, as there is one god the Father, and father of all, one Christ the
mediator, and one only head of this mystical body, one faith, and one hope
through the holy spirit, (both these are one not in number, but in kind) last
of all there is one eternal life. It is said to this whole church. Gal. 3.28.
All ye are one in Christ Jesus, that is as one man, to signify a most excelent
conjunction. And. Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body of Christ, one spirit of life,
even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation: And. Cant. 6.8. My done is
one and undefiled prefigured in Noah's one Arc Genesis 6.14 1 Pet. 3 20
. And John. 10.16. There is one sheepefolde: and one shepherd.

Moreover there is one by consent of doctrine, by a conformable interpretation
of the places of scripture unto the Analogy of faith, by a pure administration
of the sacraments: One by the author and head of salvation, by the
subministration of one spirit, and by the bond of the same spirit, lastly by
conjunction of minds Act. 4.32.
: though diverse be called thereunto at diverse times and in diverse places.

But is not that one only church divided?
Yes, and that diversely. 1. In respect of the Essence: for there is one, called
a church (...) and (...): simply and of the same signification an other (...)
in part, and aequiuocally. The church simply and of the same signification, is
whereunto that former definition of the essential church does agree, namely
that it is a company of men, which knows and worshipeth the only God in
Christ according to his written word, and obeys him sincerely in all things,
and yet after a sundry measure: which also is called the Orthodoxe, pure and
well advised Church. But that is called a church after a sort which departs
from that knowledge of God, and from performing the worship of him according to
his word, which is wont to be called a straying, erring, heretical, or
schismatic church, be it in faith, or charity, or in both. So the company
of christian men, which are now in Greece under the Turkish Empire, so the crew
of Anabaptists, or heretics, that have not utterly fallen away from the
doctrine of the Gospel, so the rabble of papists likewise (...) and (...)
aequiuocallie and after a sort are churches: as a man polluted with the
leprosy, and madd, cease not to be a man. Whereupon Tertull. lib. 4. contra
Marcion. The waspes make coambes, and the Marcionites make churches also. But
among these companies, which are, and are called churches in part only and
equiuocally or (...), those who retain more of that definition, are also more
rightly named a church, and those who come short of that definition, are more
improperly, and less truly called a church.

2 A church is divided in respect of degrees: for one is called a perfect,
another an imperfect church. The perfect is that, which firmly consists on
these two parts, namely, on the full knowledge of Gods word, by his word, and
on the full obedience to his revealed will John. 1.14. and. 17.23. Ephesians,
^.13.32. Col. 3.4
which is begun in this life, and shall be perfected in the other Philip.
3.12.13.14.
The imperfect church is, wherein the one of these two parts is altogether
wanting, or is less forcible. So the company of the Corinthians, who denied
the resurrection to come: the company of the Galathians, who affirmed that
Christ's merit only was not sufficient for our Justification before God, are by
Paul called Churches, but imperfect, as a building, or a body that is
imperfect in some parts or limbs, is not a body or building so absolutely, as
that which has all the parts it should have.

3 In respect of age and condition. The church of Israel, which was under the
law like a pupil under his tutor, until it increased in age, that is until
the coming of Christ, and the Christian church now at full grows after
Christ's coming, wherein that Tutorship of the law ended, are divided:
Although both be one, if we consider not the enjoying, but the law of liberty
it self Gal. 4.1.2.3,
.

4 In respect of the subject, one is called a particular church, gathered
together out of the people of the Jews only before the coming of Christ,
which is called the Israelitish, and Jewish church likewise: an other is called
Catholic, that is the universal church, mentioned in the Apostles creedd.

Why is it called the Catholic church?
1 Because it is the church of all ages and worlds, and has always bin, is,
and shall be one and the same, and for ever. 2. Because the partition wall
being broken down, which was placed between the Jews and Gentiles, it is
cloased again into one body, and is ever gathered from among all kind of men
and people, neither is it tied to any one certain people or place, as to the
lineage of Jacob, or to Jerusalem Math. 28.19 Gal. 3.28 Ephesians, 2.14. Reu. 21.13
Romans 9.10. 11. Chapter.
. 3. By reason of one and the same faith which is common to all belieuers and
therefore according to the sincere profession thereof, the fathers have judged
Churches either catholic (...) or heretical, and schismatic, opposing the
word catholic not only to heretical, but to scismaticall: as appears by
their disputation, against the Nouatians, and Donatists, who challenged the
name of a church to themselves only.

How is the catholic church again divided?
1 In respect of places or of parts: for there is one Catholic Church in
heaven, another in earth: that ever perfect, absolute, glorious, and pure,
undefiled, not having spot or wrincle, holy and blameless, whereof Reu. 7.9.
Heb. 12.22 23. Ephe. 5.27
This ever imperfect, as touching the knowledge of God and faith, and as
touching sanctity of manners, not without wrincle and spot, through fault of
the members of the same Church. 1. Cor. 13.9. We know only but in part.
Whereupon that which is in heaven is called Triumphant, which consists on the
faithful departed, who have gotten the victory over all their enemies, and
do triumph in Christ, but after the Resurrection they shall have a full
triumph. And that which is on earth, is called the Church militant, which
consists of the faithful yet living, who as yet strive and wrestle with
Satan, the relickes of the flesh, and with the world, and is subject to the
Cross: whose complete armor is described. Ephe. 6.13.

2 In respect of the adjuncts, the Catholic Church is invisible which
contains the true members of Christ only, or the Elect, or whole number of
them who belong to Christ. Therefore called invisible, only in regard of men.
1 Because true faith (which is the conclusiue difference of a Church, and
whereby a Church is that which it is) has his being in the heart, and so is
invisible: neither can it certainly be discerned but by God, the searcher of
the heart, and by them in whom he is, who is endued with true faith To. 2.20
Act. 1.^4
. 1. Cor. 2.11. No man knows what things are in a man, but the spirit of man
that is in him. 2. Tim. 2.9. The Lord knows who are his. 2 And seeing it
consists of the Elect, it must needs be invisible, because no man's Election
is manifest, albeit we may probably conjecture, that, this or that man is
endued with Faith or Charity. 3. Because the greater part of the Church
triumphant is in heaven, invisible to mortal men. But the Church taken
Synecdochycally, that is, in part of it self, or a particular Church, is
visible, which is judged by the notes of outward profession, which come in the
eyes and sight of men, without any difference between the faithful and the
Hypocrites yet unknown, but yet openly professing, though not believing the
doctrine of the Church. Luke 3.17
And the visible Church on earth is compared to a net cast into the Sea,
wherein are contained fishes good and badd. Mat. 13.47
. And to a flower in which there is mingled wheat and chafe. Hence is it that
many are said to be of the visible Church, who are not of the invisible Church.
1. John. 2.19, And many are said to be in the house, which are not of the
house, and again, many out of the house, who nevertheless are of the house.
Aug. in John. Homil. 45.

3 In respect of the course of times: There is on ancient Catholic Church, or
of the Old Testament, which was from the beginning until Christ was
exhibited, and that either without the Law, or under the Law. An other new of
the new Testament, or under grace, which is since Christ was exhibited,
especially since his Ascension into heaven, and is gathered together of diverse
nations. and since Christ was exhibited, it is called by way of excellency,
the Christian Church, Ephesians, 2.13 Act 11.26
:

Which again in regard of times is called either the Primitive, (...) 2. The.
2 13.
, which was ordained by the Apostles, and their Disciples: or the Successiue
Church, which succeeded that Primitive, and the same has lain long buried in
Popery: but in this age from the year 1517. it is called the Reformed,
Church, or the Church that is gone out of the mudde of Popery.

4 In respect of places on earth, the Catholic Church is divided into Dioces,
and particular Churches gathered together in diverse parts of the world: and
into Parishes, and household assemblies, which are parts of that Universal
Church, according to which it has diverse names Reu. 2.18 1. Cor. 1, 8 Romans
16.5 1. Cor. 16.19 Math. 18.20 Phil. 2
, which particulers do make one body of the Church. For as in a Pomegranate
many grains inwardly divided as it were, by celles are united under one bark
outwardly: So the holy Church contains an innumerable number of people that
profess Christ, whom the unity of faith covers: As also it is but one sea,
which takes diverse names by the distinction of diverse Regions.

5 Again, the Visible Church is either in the multitude, as Act. 15.3.4. and
in the Ecclesiastical assembly made by the people, where in all, one among
another, do meet religiously to perform the service of God a; or in the
Pastors and Ecclesiastical assembly, which consists of the principal and
sit members of the Church, and is gathered together in the name of the whole
Church, whereof it has charge, to consult of Church matters: in which sense
Christ says, say unto the Church. Math. 18.18. etc.

But is there any visible Church, seeing we say in the Creed, I believe the
Church, and faith is of things which are not seen. Heb. 11.2. 2. Cor. 5.7. and
Augustine says, it is an action of faith to believe what thou see not: for
if thou see it is not faith?
That which is said in the Creed, is not meant of any one Church this or that;
but of the Catholic Church, that is of the whole body of the Church, at what
time soever it has been on the earth: which, for that it consists of the
godly and Elect, which have been heretofore from the beginning of the world,
which are at this present, and which shall be hereafter until the worlds end,
being gathered together at once, whom no man in this life can ever behold with
his eyes, surely there is a Church believed, and not seen, because it is not
of the fashion, that it may be here wholly seen, but only in part. 1 Because
the glory of the Catholic Church is inward. Psalm. 45.13. The Kings daughter
is all glorious within. 2 Because it comes not, with observation. Luk, 17, 20
. 3 Because it worshippeth God in spirit and truth Ioh. 4, 23
. 4 Because the sense cannot judge surely, who they be that belong to the
Catholic Church. 5 Because the principallest and greatest part thereof is in
Heaven. 6 Because it is a spiritual house. 1. Pet. 2, 5
.

But the Church taken Synecdochically, that is, The particular Churches are
visible. 1 Because the men, whereof they consist, are visible. 2 Because the
outward form of them is visible: and concerning the particular Church, or the
Pastors thereof it is said. Math. 5. Verse. 14. A City that is set on a hill,
cannot be hid, but it ought to be well known, and excellent for piety and
life, least it be an offense, but at length after the resurrection, all the
whole Church shall be seen in heaven, where she shall be knit together with
her head, Revel. 14.4.

Is there, or has there been always a glorious visible state of Gods Church
on Earth, among all men, and all the world over?
No surely, for that being sometime oppressed by tyranny (as in the time of
the ten persecutions) and after that under Antichrist it was hid in heresies
and errors, as a spark under the ashes (as in the time of Arrius, when as
Jerome says, the whole world mourned exceedingly, and wondered that it self
was turned Arrian) and it may often come to pass through the just judgment of
God, that there be none assembly of men apparent, which worship God publicly
and visibly, according to his word only Psalm. 74.3 Isa. 49.21.
, as happened in the time of Elias the Prophet, 1 King. 19.10. when he said, I
only am left, that is, not only not a Prophet more, but even not one that
worshippeth God, and God answered, I have reserved unto me seven thousand men
that have not bowed their knees to Baall. And Revel. 12.6. when the Church of
God is said to have fled into the wilderness, that is, to have lurked or lain
hid from the sight of men, by reason of the furies of Antichrist. Therefore the
state of the Church is at sometime more visible, at sometime less, neither is
it visible unto all, nor always after one fashion.

The invisible Church does either openly profess the faith, or not profess it
at all: If she profess it, then is she not the invisible Church; if she do
not, then is she not the true Church because she confesses not the faith.
It is not requisite, that we should always and every where confess our
faith: for that were to betray our selves unto our enemies: but when the cause,
occasion, time, and Gods glory do require: Neither did Elias make any such
argument, when God answered him: I have reserved unto me seven thousand men
which have not bowed their knees to Baall, though they were unknown to him.

But where and how was the Church so many ages past in Popery, seeing Popery is
not the Church?
In that manner it was, as John foretold it should be, Revel. 12.6 namely in
the wilderness, and in that manner as the Church of Israel was after the
falling away of Jeroboam, especially in the days of Achab, in the Apostaticall
and false Church, which worshipped Calves in Dan and Bethel: whereunto the
popish Church is altogether like. As then Elias, Elizaeus, and seven thousand
men, which bent not their knees to Baall, were, and lay hid in the wilderness:
so also even many in the time of Popery bent not their knees to Antichrist:
which very argument Paul applies to the Church of the Jews in his time.
Romans 11.3.

May the Catholic Church fall away?
By no means, because there shall be no end of Christ's kingdom Luke, 1.33
, because the Catholic Church is builded on a rock, And the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. Math. 16.18. But some particular Church may fall
away, and fall away in such sort, that where there was a true Church, there may
appear no true Church at all, but a false: and Satan may prevail against it:
as many examples teach, to wit, the Churches of the Ephesians, Galathians, and
the like, which have ceased utterly to be: nay particular Churches may be
brought to that smallnes, that there may not be any particular Christian
visible Church on the Earth publicly known. And there is ever some number on
Earth, which worship Christ with an honest affection, but this number is not
ever visible, full of people, glorious, established in some visible place, seat,
or succession, but scattered here and there, obscure, and unknown to men: as
Isaiah says. 1.9. and 10.20.21. The Lord has reserved to himself a seed and
remnant.

When began the Church to fall from the truth?
It is one thing for the Church to have failed in some points, and an other to
have fallen away so, as it should be utterly abolished; while the Apostles
lived, heretics began to sow darnell in the Lords field, to work the
mystery of iniquity, and many Antichrists began to he. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. 1.
John. 2, 18.

2 The holy Bishops after the Apostles times through lack of heed taking,
mingled many falsehoods with the truth, and left their errors to posterity,
neither did all fail at once, and at one time. This plague began by little and
little to creep far and wide, until at length it spread the whole world
over. But in the mean while the Church fell not utterly away, because God
reserved to himself a remnant of the Elect. And the holy Ghost foretold of a
general Apostacy from the faith 2. The. 2.3 1. Tim. 4, 1
, and Revel. 13.3.7. the whole earth followed the beast and wondered, and power
was given him over every kindred and nation, and all the inhabitants of the
earth, says John, worshipped him. All, says he, whose names were not written
in the book of life, that is, all, saving the Elect.

Where then was the Church?
Tertullian in his book de poeniten: says that the Church may be in one or
two. Wherefore if in those desperate times of the Church, there were but one or
two faithful servants of God, it suffices that it may be called a Church.
Therefore it is not our part to determine at what certain time the Church
began to fall away, but to labor rather, by what means it may be freed from
this calamity.

What are the causes of a Church?
The principal cause is God the Father, who has chosen a church, and at length
calls and gathers it unto himself, Ephe. 1.4. John. 1.13: The faithful
are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God. And 6.44. No man comes to me, except the father draw him Exodus
13.21. Mat, 18.18.
.

The second, or helping cause, is the son of God himself, John. 14.6. No man
comes to the father, but by me, who also has purchased a Church with his
own blood. Act. 20.28.

The fellow laborers are the preachers of the word, the Prophets, and
Apostles, and their true successors, who are therefore called builders To, 15,
20 1. Pet. 2.7
, and master builders 1, Cor: 3.10
, but in respect of the ministry only.

The outward isntrumental cause, is the preaching of the word, whereby God
gathers himself a Church.

The inward, and very efficient cause, is the holy Spirit.

The formal cause, is the sincere profession, both of faith, and of true
Doctrine likewise.

The Material cause whereof, are men chosen out of the whole world, according
to the commandment of Christ, Go into all the world, Preach ye the Gospel
to every Creature. Mark. 16.15, 16.

Are not the blessed Angels likewise a Material part of the true Church?
They are surely, and so are the souls of the blessed, and that the most
beautifullest part Psalm. 103 20.
. Hebr. 1.6.7. and 12.23. The Apostle acknowledges a company of innumerable
Angels, and an assembly, and congregation (or Church) of the spirits or
souls. And Christ also as he is man, is head and Lord of every creature, and
so of the Angels also. Col. 1.17.18.
.

But we speak of the Church, insomuch as God has purchased it by his blood,
and does gather it together by his word, but God redeemed not the blessed
Angels, who never fell, as neither did he take their nature on him, Hebr. 2.16.
Neither does he call them to the communion of this Church by the ministry of
his word but only established them in their first blessed beginning: Therefore
we affirm, that the Church is to be reckoned of men only, according to the
promise of the father made to the son, Psa. 2.8.

Has the Church an head?
Seeing the Church is a body, not natural, or mathematical but mystical 1,
Cor. 10, 17. and 12.12. Col. 1.18
it must needs have a head, of whom it may be governed, nourished, and
cherished, and of whom it may depend: for every living body has it head, to
which it is subjected by the Creator himself, and from whom it draws life.
The Church therefore has her head, not many heads but one only, for it is not
(...): headless: nor (...), a beast of many heads, succeeding one another by
deaths prevention, because it must have died as often, as it should be deprived
of it head by death, and must have revived as often, as it got any new head,
which were altogether monstrous: but it has one only head, to wit Christ, who
is the head of his Church, as the man is of the woman Ephesians. 5, 27 and 1, 23.


1 By perfection, because he is the only true God, and very man, that in all
things he may have the pre-eminence. Col. 1.18. and 2.10.

2 By office, Because Christ only is King, Prophet, and High Priest, who has
rule, dominion, and excellency over the Church, as the head has over the
body Reave. 1.6
.

3 By efficacy, because he only inspireth vigor, sense, motion, spiritual
life, and all goodness into his members Ioh, 6, 5, 7 and 15, 1, 2
, and he only being fastened to the body, by the bond of the spirit, gives
to the whole Church his reedifying, conjunction, joining, or fastening
together, and communion, of the members between God and themselves 1. Ioh, 1,
3 Ioh, 17.22 Ephesians, 4, 12
, he alone, is never absent, but ever present with his Church by his spirit Mat
28, 20
: and he only gives life to the body Ephesians, 5, 24
, and never dies, Death shall have power over him no more. Romans 6.9. So that
he needs no head by deputation: as one Bride, receives not two heads, nor
two Bride-groomes.

4 By Decree, because he alone is the shepherd of one sheepfold Ioh. 10.16
, and the chief shepherd, as Peter himself affirms. 1. Pet. 5.4. Neither
is the condition of any of the Pastors of the Christian Church, equal to that
of the high Priest long ago under the Law: for that one high Priest, was a
true type of Christ Psalm. 101.4 Heb. 7.17 and 7.9.11
. but none of the Pastors of the christian Church, is a type of Christ. Besides
he had charge but over one small quarter, and but over one Temple, and over
one people by the ordinance of God, but none can have charge over the whole
world, through which the Church is dispersed, for this were to desire to
include the world in one City, says Hierome.

Therefore is not the Pope the Ministerial head of the Catholic Church,
because it cannot be proved by any testimony of Scripture: and seeing Christ's
kingdom is not of this world, he has no need of a Viceroy or Vicar, and the
Ecclesiastical ministry, which consists in the administration of the
Gospel, and Sacraments cannot be performed through the whole world by (...)
any one man. But concerning Constantines Donation made to Pope Syluester, that
voice which Syluester heard from heaven, This day is poison entered into the
Church, does sufficiently testify what we must think of it. Finally, he that
calls himself the Universal Bishop, Lib. 4. Epist. 76
is the most true forerunner of Antichrist (as witnesses Gregorius Magnus) who
was himself Bishop of Rome.

Has the Church any foundation?
Seeing it is a Spiritual house 1. pet. 2, 5
, it has a foundation which is twofolde. 1 Ministerial, in respect whereof
the Church is said, To be built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, to wit, even on Christ himself: or Metonymically and (...), in some
sort, namely, that which belongs to the publishing, open declaring and
testimony of Doctrine: or because the Prophetical and Apostolical Doctrine
only, whereunto the Prophets and Apostles give testimony, or both the Old
and New Testament, as says Ambrose, is the foundation of the Church. Hereupon
Gods City is said to have had not one, but twelve foundations, wherein were
written the Names of the Lambs twelve Apostles, Revel. 21.14. Hereupon James,
Peter, and John seem to be Pillars of the Church. Galat. 2.9. namely,
Metaphorically and after a sort, because they sustained the Church and
Religion, but Jesus himself being the corner stone, who alone sust^ineth the
whole building. Ephesians. 2.21.23.

A foundation of strength and power: in respect whereof the Church is said to
be built on Christ, God and man: which belongs to the Author, foundation, and
merit of salvation, the fountain and efficacy of doctrine, and the Church is
founded upon Christ, when he alone is accounted for Wisdom, Justice,
Sanctification, Redemption, Life, and Eternal glory of the faithful. For
this cause, 1. Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. And Isay. 28.16. Christ is called the foundation
stone: Which is so proper unto Christ, that it communicates in no
participation with any other.

But in Christ's words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, the Euanglist who interprets them says not, Thou art Petra (a Rock)
but thou art Petrus (Peter), neither does he say upon thee Peter, but upon this
Rock, distinguishing manifestly Peter who is a part of the building, from the
Rock whereon the building chiefly does stay, by changing of name and person,
and by different terms. Wherefore the Church is built upon Christ the Rock,
not on Peter the Apostle, who eftsoone and often erred: for the Rock was
Christ. 1. Cor. 10.4, which Peter confessed in the name of all the apostles
Mat. 16.16.18
And he gave the keys not of fullness of power, but of knowledge (which in
verse 19. he promised to al under the name of Peter, who answered for all) to
all the Apostles equaltie, and without difference Mat. 18.18 John 20.21
, and in the person of them, unto all the ministers of the Church.

That speech also Feed my sheep, being thrice enjoined vno Peter, for his
three denials together. John. 21. verse. 17. ordains him a Pastor indeed over
the flock, but not an universal Pastor: for it was also said unto others,
Teach ye all nations, Math. 28. verse. 19. and it was spoken alike to all, As
the Father has sent me, even so send I you. John. 20.21.

Finally, neither was Noe, who in the Arc was the head of his sons, a type
of the Bishop of Rome, but of Christ Genesis 7.13 1. Pet. 3.20
: like as Baptism is an Antitype of that deliverance, which befell unto the
Church in the Deluge.

What are the true and inward properties of the Church?
1 Consent of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

2 The inhabiting of God by the holy Spirit: whereupon, 2. Corinthians. 6.16. the
Church is called, the Temple of God: and they who are led by Gods Spirit, are
called the sons of God. Romans 8.14.

3 A right Faith, Hope, and Charity, True Religion according to Gods word,
Repentance, Confession, and a true calling upon the true God, all which do as
it were form a true Church.

The Apostles Creed is a token thereof, although when the outward and usual
Ministry of the word is often for a season interrupted, the Church is
extraordinarily nourished by God as it were in the wilderness, the same God
raising up teachers known unto his small flock, after such a sort, as
himself according to his unsearchable wisdom knows requisite and
necessary Reave. 12.6
. For as there may be a Church, and yet lie hid: so may there be teachers in a
Church, albeit not apparent to all.

What are the manifest tokens of a visible Church, whereunto we may safely
ioy^^ our selves?
They are two. The first and ch^efe note is the pure preaching and professing
of Gods word comprehended in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, because
wheresoever the word is truly preached, it is not without profit at all Isai.
55.11 Romans 1.16
.

2 A lawful administering of the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper,
according to Christ's institution, with pure preaching conjoined thereunto, as a
part thereof, if there shall be no just impediment to the contrary Iosu. 5.5
John. 10.4, 5 27. and 8.47 Act. 2.42 1 Cor, 11.20 23 Mat. 28.19 20 Mark. 16.15
Luke 16.29 Rom 10.14
, which notes do nevertheless admit a more, and a less, and do presuppose a
lawful calling of Pastors Rom, 10.15 Ephe. 4, 11.
.

And although holy discipline is also requisite in Gods Church, yet if the
Church governors fail of their duty, it must not presently be denied to be a
Church, as long as those two fundamental and essential notes of a visible
Church are remaining. Mat. 18.17 1, Cor. 5, 5
Neither is it material if other sects challenge to themselves these notes, but
we must search diligently whether they do so, truly or falsely. Also the
preaching of the word is a cause of the Church, and therefore by nature is more
excellent and more famous then the Church it self.

Whether are, 1. Antiquity, 2. Multitude of followers of some one doctrine. 3.
Succession in some one company of Bishops, chiefly of Rome. 4. Miracles. 5.
Continuance. 6. Unity and concord. 7. Efficacy of doctrine. 8. Holiness of
life in the Authors and Fathers of the religion. 9. The gift of prophesy. 10.
Temporal felicity. 11. The title of Church Apostolical, or that it is one,
holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church, these the notes of a true Church?
No, 1 Because the names without the substance are not of force.

2 From names proceed not a true and Apodeicticall, but a false, demonstration
of the matter.

3 These Notes are common unto Turks and Heretics also: for they may usurp
these titles, by which they may confirm that their rowts are and have been
the true Churches of God, which is absurd.

4 Neither have all those notes begun with the Church.

5 Neither are they perpetual and proper every way, nor, Essential, which
are always naturally in the thing it self, being unchangeable, and the causes
of that thing whereof they are notes; but the most part seperable accidents,
and these notes themselves ought to be examined according to the word of God.

Moreover. 1 The Church which now is ancient, in time past was new. And Ezech.
20.18.19. Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, I am the Lord,
walk in my Statutes. And Tertull. Lib. de praescriptionibus. Every first
thing truest. And Ignatius, (...). Christ is to me the old Church, whom not to
obey, is manifest destruction; and Cyprian, custom without truth, is the
antiquity of error.

2 The broad way leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat, Math. 7.13.

3 Hierome says, They are not the sons of the Saints, which possess their
places, but which do their works. And, succession avails not, where there
is no succession of faith and doctrine: neither is succession to be tied unto
one seat, unto one place, or unto one Church: for God can raise up Pastors
diverse ways, and in diverse places, as shall seem best to himself. Moreover
they succeed the Apostles, who being lawfully thereunto called, do discharge
their duty in the Church faithfully, although not in a continual succession
from the Apostles. Besides God is wont, when the Church is in a desperate
estate, to raise up ministers after an extraordinary manner. And Tertul. lib.
de praescriptionibus says, that faith ought not to be tried by the persons,
but the persons by faith. And Ambrose, de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 1. They have not
Peter's inheritance, which have not the faith of Peter.

4 Miracles are to be judged, by Doctrine, not Doctrine by miracles, also there
are some to be thrown into hell, which have wrought miracles in Christ name,
Math. 7.23.

5 Also the devil has a Church, even from Cain to the worlds end.

6 Neither is unity, of it self a note of the Church, except it be joined
with faith and true doctrine Ephesians. 4.3
, for as there is one Church of God, so is there one Babylon of the devils,
says Augustine: the godly also may in some points disagree Act. 11 2
.

7 The Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. says that Antichrist shall come by the
effectual working of Satan, and that God will send an effectual working of
error, to those that love not the truth, that they should believe lies.

8 Doctrine is the only witness of holinsse: Even Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light, and true holiness, flows from a true
faith. 2. Cor. 11.14. Act. 15.9. Although an Angel, or a Saint come down from
heaven, and bring not true Doctrine, he is to be rejected, Gal. 1.8. And that
saying of Christ, by their fruits ye shall know them, Math, 7.20. The fathers
will not have to be understood of manners, but of false opinions, and false
interpretations.

9 But the gife of prophesying is not perpetual in the Church: for that place
of Joel cap. 2.18. Does describe the state of the Church what it should be in
the time of the Apostles, and of the Primitive Church only, Act. 2.17.18. And
devils also, and false Prophets may foretell some things to come 1. Sam. 18 19
Deuteronomy. 13.2. Number. 33 7 and 24.3 Ioh. 11.51
.

10 Temporal felicity, was rather wont to be contrary unto the Church 2,
Tim. 3 12
.

11 True Doctrine is the cause that there is one holy Apostolic, and
Catholic Church.

12 Christ showed no sign of them, but said said expressly. My sheep hear my
voice, John. 10.27.

Does the Church cease to be a Church, by reason of some blemish or fault in
doctrine, and administration of Sacraments?
No, as long as it keeps the foundation, which is Christ, or salvation by
Christ, and the truth in the chief, especial, and principal articles of
faith 1. Cor. 3.11 12.13
. And the error, which a few in the Church do hold, is not the error of the
whole Church 1. Cor. 15 12
.

Is every one bound to join himself to the assembly of that Church which
has those true notes?
He is bound to this or that congregation, as far forth as lies in him, if
it be known to him, and if he can to adioine himself thereunto, and to profess
himself a member thereof indeed, and finally to reverence the holy communion
of it, and to love and frequent the meeting together thereof psa. 27.48 and
42.2.5 and 84.1 Esai. 60.8 Heb. 10.25 35:39 1. Cor. 11 21, 22.
. For such a meeting together is the School of the holy Ghost, wherein is
taught the word of God, which is the physic of the soul, a clear glass
wherein appears the face of God, the Epistle of Almighty God to his
Creature, wherein he has declared unto us his will. The means whereby the way
of salvation is known, by which salvation is obtained, faith is nourished and
kept: neither is it sufficient to have the Scripture at home and there to read
it; for when Paul Ephesians. 4.11. says, He gave some to be Apostles, some
Pastors, and some teachers, etc he says not, he left the Scripture, that
every one might read it privately, but he ordained a ministry whereby some
certain men, might teach others true religion.

But from other companies of men, wherein heresy, or manifest idolatry is
publicly received and taught and the foundation and principal point of
salvation is not maintained, namely Jesus Christ, a good man ought to separate
himself as he would fly from Babylon Isa. 48.20 Ier, 51.6, 45 Reu. 18.4 1,
Ioh. 5.21 John. 10.5
.

1 Because the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5.11. Forbids us to be consorted with
fornicatours, or idolatours, or covetous persons, with drunckards, or raylers,
or extortioners, so as that we must not so much as eat with them, much less
be partakers of their evil works.

2 Because there is no fellowship between Christ and Beliall, between light
and darkness. 2. Cor. 6.15.16.17.

3 Because the promises of God, and benefits of Christ do belong to Gods
Church only, chap. 7.1. and therefore without the Church there is no
salvation. But this is to be understood of the Catholic Church, because, that
we may obtain salvation, it is necessary that we be joined with Christ: but
the meaning is not, that those which are out of this or that particular Church,
cannot be saved. For although we live among Turks, yet are we the members of
Christ, and of the Catholic Church, if we have faith.

4 The same is confirmed by the example of the godly fathers, who sequestered
themselves from the congregation even of the Idolatrous Israelites, and
ordained congregations peculiar to themselves, where they might worship God
purelie Gen, 12.7 and 13, 18 and 26, 25. c. 33 20 1, King. 3.2 c. 18, 24 2.
King 4, 38 Psa. 16.4
. Hereupon says Nazianzen most sweetly, (...), I seek Noah's Arc, that I may
eschew the woeful destinies.

Can the Church err from the truth, or fall away there from?
If the Church be universally, and in that sort as we have before said,
considered as the invisible company of the Elect, triumphant in heaven, and
militant on earth, the Church triumphant surely without doubt cannot err,
because she is utterly freed from sin and error: the Church Militant also in
the Prophets and Apostles through a singular privilege in doctrine erred not:
and as long as she cleaves fast unto Christ her Savior and Teacher by faith,
and is governed by his Spirit, and as long as she hears the Bridegroomes
voice, and follows the written word of God, as a Lamp shining in a dark
place, and obeys the chief rule of the holy spirit. 2. Pet. 1.19. She can
never err in points absolutely necessary unto salvation, or from the truth
simply necessary, and that because truth dwells no where else in the world,
but in her only. For which cause so considered, Paul calls the Church, The
pillar and ground of truth, namely, in respect of other congregations, who are
buried in falsehood. 1. Tim. 3.15. (...)
So then not simply, but in some certain manner and condition, the Church
erreth not in matters necessary unto salvation, but in unnecessary things it
may err. John. 16.13. The holy Ghost will teach you all truth, that is, all
that is necessary unto salvation. And in this sense Christ prayed for his
Church, that it might be sanctified in the truth, not that it might not err
in no point, but that it might not err in necessary points John. 17, 17
. And surely the Church is to be heard, according to that saying of Christ,
Mat. 244,
Luke 10.16. He which hears you, hears me: but yet so that she hear
Christ, before she require that her self be heard of others.

But if the Church be not considered universally, or totally, but particulerly,
or according to the members thereof, surely it may and does come to pass, that
some particular visible Churches, yea many in number, by not understanding a
right, or by not firmly believing those things which are prescribed by God,
may err from the truth, either in part, while they fall into most grievous
errors, or else utterly may depart for ever. And this I grant does happen so
much the rather, if the bodies of particular Churches be respected severally,
by reason of the weakness of man's disposition, men consisting of flesh and
blood, of whom it is said, Romans 3.4. Every man is a lier; sin also being
still inherent in the Godly during this life, and God likewise often giving an
efficacy to the Spirit of error, men so deserving: yet so as the Elect may
not always persist in error, but being better instructed, may return into
the way again. Mat. 24.24
. Isay 42.19. The Lord says, Who is blind but my servant, and deaf, but my
messenger, whom I sent. Dan. 9.12. Speaking of the Church of the people of God,
says: All Israel have transgressed thy law. 1. Cor. 13.9. We know in part,
and we prophecy in part. The Prophet David Psalm. 25.7. says, Remember not O
Lord mine ignorance. The Church of the Jews erred, and the Apostles themselves
about the calling of the Gentiles. Therefore was Peter warned, that he should
go unto Cornelius, and doubt nothing Act. 10.20. and 11.2, 19.
, Peter himself erred concerning the observation of the ceremonial law, while
he still believed some meats to be unclean Act. 10.14 15.
, he erred also in playing the hypocrite with some other Jews Gal, 11 13.
: And again, the Jewish Church erred in being zealous for Moses law Act. 21.20
. So did the Church of the Galathians, which received Circumcision. And the
Corinthians, in the abuse of the Lords Supper, and because there were schisms
among them: Gal. 1, 16
And the Church at Constantinople erred: 1. Cor. 11.18
therefore why might not the Church of Rome err also? For Paul says, that
Antichrist shall shall sit in the Temple of God, and shall accomplish the
mystery of iniquity, 2. These. 2.4. In Lib. ad Solitariam vita^ agentes
And Liberius the Roman Bishop subscribed unto Arrianisme, as Athanasius
witnesses. For that which Christ spoke unto Peter, Luk, 22.32. I have prayed
for thee that thy faith should not fail.1. It belongs only unto Peter, who
was to be assailed with a most perilous tentation in regard of the rest, and
not unto his successors. And he means a justifying faith, of the heart, not
of the mouth, not an historical faith, which holds only a true opinion of
Doctrine. For if Christ requested this for all the Roman Bishops, namely that
they might not err, then has he not obtained that which he asked, for it is
manifest that many Roman Bishops have erred. 2. Also that saying nothing
appertains to the church of Rome: but that happily we say that herein it
agrees with Peter, in that it has denied Christ, unless it imitate Peter's
tears and repentance. Neither is it a fit reasoning from the faith of Peter,
which was a personal gift, to the faith of the church of Rome. Neither did
Christ himself pray for the Apostles only, but for all them, who through
their words shall believe on Christ, John. 17, 20. Although the Papists
affirm, The law shall not perish from the Priest, nor council from the wise,
nor the word from the Prophet. Ier. 18.18. yet Jeremiah. 7.4. heard the voice
of the lord saying. Trust not in lying words, saying, the Temple of the lord,
the Temple of the lord for this is the Nation which has not heard the voice of
their Lord: nor received his discipline. Zeph. 3.2.

May the Godly by reason of some men's vices, and evil manners, sever
themselves from the outward congregation of those that profess the doctrine of
Christ?
No, unless they be cast out of the greater part by force: for the Prophets
have ever had amongst their auditors some evil ones, yet have they not
departed from them. And Christ suffered Judas to the very uttermost in his own
company. Math. 13.29. The goodman of the house does not suffer the darnell or
cockell to be pulled up, least it hurt the wheat; and it is certain that there
will never be in this world, so sincere and perfect a church, but there may be
found chaff and tares mingled with the wheat. Verse. 24.47.

What are the conditions of the church?
1 The cross, is a certain mark or token, by which the Lord will have all
those that are his, to be marked, that they may be conformeable to the Image of
his son Rom, 8, 28 2 Timothy 3, 12
; yet is it not a perpetual mark of the church, but is rather to be termed a
condition thereof, then a note or mark.

2 That as long as it soiourneth in this world, it has some evil mingled
among many good and sincere men: which thing Christ teaches in the parables
of the tares and the drag-net Math. 13 24.47.
.

3 That although it be cleansed by the blood of Christ, so that it is without
spott or wrincle Ephesians, 5 27
, both by the imputation of Christ's merit, as also for the endeavor, whereby
it aspireth unto that state: yet is it still subject to many vices and
infirmities of the flesh remaining, whereunto all the faithful are apt and
prone, so that they have need perpetually of this prayer: Forgive us our
trespasses.

What Epithites are attributed to the church on earth?
1 It is called by a metaphor and similitude the Mother of the faithful, Gal.
4.26. because the church brings forth sons unto God, unites them to Christ,
and nourishes them by the preaching of the word, and by examples of true good
works 1. Cor. 4.15
, whereupon is that saying, that No man can have God for his father, who has
not the church for his mother.

2 The house of Christ, or of the living God, Psalm, 23.6 1, Tim. 3.15
and a family, Math. 24.45.
because God dwells in the midst of them, whom he has received for sons
through the grace of adoption: of which house of lively stones, are both
Pastors, and flocks also: 1. Pet. ^2, 5
and he has not only vessels of Gold, but even of wood and stone also, some
for honor and some for dishonor. 2. Tim, 2.20. Whereof the most excellent,
most gracious, most provident, most Mighty and most wise God is master. The
first begotten son of God, and Lord of his fathers house, is Christ, John, 8,
3
to whom is given all power. And they of the household are all the Elect, and
also the children and sons of GOD, who ought worthily and holilie to be
busied in this house. the Governors or stewards, are the ministers or
preachers of the Gospel. Math. 24.45,
the commons or food of that family, is the very word of God: out of this
house, the bondslaues of sin and unthriftiness, are at length to be cast
forth John. 8, 35
.

3 The city of God, psalm. 46 1. Isa. 1, 21 Ephesians. 2.19
the faithful city, that is the i holy city coming down from heaven Reave.
21.2 10.
which is the society of the faithful, who depend on the excellent governance
of God, as of the only lawgiuer, and are governed by his word and laws, and
do enjoy the very privileges and benefits of Christ. ps, 85, ^1
The wall and defender whereof is God, the tower, and Bulwark is the calling
upon the Lord. prou, 18 10
. the Arms, is goodness, faith, justice, and peace: in the gate and foundation
is Jesus: And they are the citizens, which are called Gods household servants
Ephesians, 2, 19,
.

4 The inheritance, (...) or lot of the Lord, not in respect of the Pastors
only, but of the sheep also Psalm. 2, 8, 1 Pet, 53
, because it is given unto Christ as his own substance, that is, a most
acceptable and most precious treasure.

5 The mystical body of Christ, the head and soul whereof is Christ, Romans 12 5
because it is quickened, cherished, and conserved by the spirit of Christ, and
is perfected by his fullnes, and is coupled with Christ the head by the same
spirit, as by a most close and strong chain, and the members thereof do by
virtue of the same spirit grow together. It is also called the fulness of Christ
ephesians, 27
, because although Christ works all in all (much less does he need the
supply of any one) yet such is his love toward the church, that he estemeth
himself as it were lame and maimed in his members, unless he have a church
adjoined unto himself like unto his body and members. Hence it comes that
sometime Christ is briefly taken for the whole church joined to her head 1.
Cor. 12, 12, 13 Gal, 3, 16
: so that the whole church is nothing else, but the body of Christ only,
because it is described an whole mystical body from the head. Hence is it much
more expresslie said, In Christ Romans 6, 2. and 8.1 Ephesians, 3.6,
, then with Christ. And hereupon Paul says that he lives in Christ, and
Christ in him, Gal. 2.20. Hereupon was that speech of Christ, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me Acts, 9.4. and that which is written, Col. 1, 4, Lastly
from hence proceeds all comfort.

6 The hill of the Lord, or the hill of Holiness psa. 2.6. and 3.5. and, 15.1.
and 24.3
, 1, because it always makes toward those things which are above, and
despises those that are beneath, 2, because there is no coming thereunto but
by ascending out of the dregs of this life in the cherfulness of the
spirit, 3, And for that the Doctrine thereof nether can nor ought to be hidd
Math. 5.14
,

7 It is called the Pillar and Foundation of truth, 1, Tim, 3, 15, Not that
truth does simply depend thereon: for it depends on the word, but because
being underpropped by Christ and borne up by truth it self, it gives a
testimony unto the truth, and does sustain, spread. and defend truth by it
office and service, and labors diligently that truth might have a being
among men: or else Chrysostom on this place, alters the proposition well; and
says, (...) Truth is the Pillar and foundation of the church.

8 The church is called a vineyard Psalm, 80.9 Esa. 5.2 Math, 21.23 John. 15.1
, because the lord has planted it, and does carefully trim and deck it with
his word, and with the gifts of his spirit, does account it precious, does
bestow exceeding great care and daily thought thereon, and does conserve it
wonderfully by his succor and comfort: And because they that are received
thereinto, ought to bring forth the fruit of faith and charity most acceptable
to God, wherewith his heart may be cheared.

9 The tabernacle of God psalm. 15.1
, because it has the Lord dwelling therein, and it has not a safe or firm
abiding in this life, but is now and then compelled to change her abiding,
until it be received into her true country. So likewise is it called the
temple of God 1. Cor. 3 19.
, because his holy spirit dwells in the hearts of the faithful, The Priests
wherein, are all christians. 1. Pet. 2.5. The propitiatory Sacrifice for
sin, is the only sacrifice of Christ once offered for sins; the sacrifice
of thanksgiving, is, 1, the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the preachers do
as it were with a sword kill the beastly affections of men Rom, 15 16. Phil.
7.17
, 2, the offering up of a man's own self, or the mortification of the flesh
Rom, 12, 2
, calling upon God as its Incense, Psalm. 141.2
faith and good works, the giving of thanks, Psalm. 50 14. Ose. 14.3.
or the calves of our lips, and mercy the sacrifice of prayer Ose. 6.6 2.
Cor 9.12 Phil. 4.18
.

10 The lover, sister, and spouse of Christ, Cantic. 4 5.7.8 Ephesians. 5.23
and the Queen, and daughter of the King Ps. 45.10
, because it is joined unto Christ by a spiritual and firm wedlock and
league, and by a most sure bond of the spirit, and by most chaste love, and is
exalted to the participation of his love, honor and of all his goodness; being
beautiful, and without spott throughout, because here it is spotless through
grace, in the world to come it shall be spotless through glory: here
imperfectly, there most perfectly. Therefore is it also called a pure or chaste
virgin 2. Cor. 2.11. 1 John 3.29
, of which marriage the bridemen, are the ministers of the word, the friends of
the bridegroom are they Iohu. 3.29
, that according to the world allure the bride, betroath her, and bring her
dressed and adorned unto the bridegroom 2. Cor, 2.11
. Exodus, 19, 6. Reu, 1.6 1 Pet. 2, 5, 9


11 The Elect stock: the royal Priesthood, the holy People, the People whom
God challenges as peculier to himself.

12 The communion of saints, by reason of the spiritual participation of
Christ and all his benefits, 1. Ioh, 1, 8 1, Cor, 1, 9, Ephesians, 4, 4, Romans 12,
5 13, Col, 3
and of the mutual communion of the gifts of the same Christ among the
faithful, being one heart and one soul Acts. 4, 32
.

13 A flock of sheep, and the sheepfold of Christ, because it hears and
follows his voice.

14 The world, taken in the better part, Luk 12, 32 John, 10, 16
because it is the most noblest part of the world, and that the whole state
thereof might be opposed to one people. John. 3, 16 1 John 2, 2, 2 Cor, 5 19


15 A floare, Luke 3, 17
because as in a floare the sheafes are gathered with the straw and chafe
together, and after the threshing, the wheat is discerned from the chafe in
the vanne: So there are as well godly men, as hypocrites assembled in the
outward society of the church; but straight way they are severed by the outward
preaching of the Gospel as with a vanne.

16 The new Jerusalem, Gal. 4, 26 Reu, 3, 12
and Sion, psalm, 2, 6
the kingdom of heaven, or of Christ, or of God, 1. Mat, 5, 19 20.
because it is governed by God after an heavenly manner, 2, because the
Citizens thereof, conteminng worldly things, aspire unto heavenly.

Last of all it is also compared to a Candlestick, Reu. 1.20
to a douehouse Esa. 60.8.
to a Dove Cant, 2, 2 14. and 6.8
, namely because these verses of the dove do fittly belong thereunto.

No gall she has, yet groneth much, nor hurts she with her bill,
Her tallents harmeles, and her crop, with clean corn does she fill.
To a small ship or boat. Luke, 8, 22
because while it is on earth, it is like to a boat, which one while is carried
on the sea with a calm and prosperous gale, by and by the winds rising, and
the waves swelling it is in danger: whose Pilot is Christ, whose waterme^ or
mariners are the ministers. To a field, Math. 13.24.
and to a Plowed Land, 1 Cor. 3.9
to a drag net containing fishes good and bad: math. 13 47.
to one singular man, Ephesians 4.13
to declare the unity thereof. Lastly to a glass, in beholding whereof the
very Angels do good, acknowledging the manifold wisdom of God in the
agreement; and repugnant concord of so manifold a multitude Ephesians, 3, 10
.

Why is it called an holy church?
1 Because it is redeemed, cleansed, justified, and sanctified by the blood of
Christ 1. John, 1, 7 Ephesians. 5.25 26. Heb, 91
.

2 Because receiving that benefit by faith through the holy Ghost it studieth
holiness and righteousness: by the which study the imperfect holiness thereof is
daily increased, but shall be perfected afterward in an other life. Rom, 8.1
Ephesians. 5, 26 27 Phil, 3.12
All which are attributed to the church for the Elects sake only Rom 1,7 and
8, 1. 1 Cor. 1.2 and 6.11.
.

What is the final cause of the church?
The true worship of God, for it is elected, chosen and ordained for the true
service of God, and to glorify god, both in this life, and in the life
eternal also. 1. Pet. 2, 9
But the end whereto the church endeavors, is God, in whose presence there
is fullnes of joys, namely that heavenly inheritance, which can neither
perish, nor be defiled, nor corrupted Psalm, 16.20 1, Pet, 1, 4
.

2 The very perfection and absolute finishing of the church, in that last day
when all the elect shall be gathered together from the four winds, and then
at last we shall all grow up in the unity of faith, and acknowledgment of the
son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the
fullnes of Christ Ephesians, 4.13.

What is the Effect or office of the church?
To hear the voice of her shepeheard, to fly from the voice of a stranger, to
believe gods word, and to obaie it, to use the sacraments lawfully, to
acknowledge, to receive, and to embrace, only Christ for the shephearde, for
the teacher, for the head, for the spouse, and for the savior: and lastly to
exercise the keys received from Christ, that is to keep diligently the
ministry of gods word. John. 10.5 1 Cor, 11, 23 mat, 16.19 and 18.18, John.
20.23 Heb. 13, 17


What is the fruit and use of the article of the church?
1 That we should desire nothing more, then to abide in it, without which there
is no salvation.

2 That we being assuredly persuaded we be the citizens thereof, should nothing
doubt of our salvation grounded in christ, from who^e we ca^ no more be plukt
the^ his members may be torn and re^t a su^der.

3 That we may perceive that those promises perteine unto us, salvation shall be
in Sion: God will for ever abide in the midst of Jerusalem, that is in the
church, whereof mount Sion and Jerusalem were tipes in times past, least at any
time it should be removed Joel. 2.32 Addi. 5.17 Psalm, 46.6
.

What be the contraries to this doctrine?
1 The enemies of the church which now and then from Sata^s ca^pe breaks out,
who like tyra^ts by manifest strengh, like Sophisters by corruption of
doctrine, like hipocrites by superstition, like Epicures by leudnes of life do
assault, and fight against the church.

2 The error of the prelates, which exclude from the church the^ that are newly
instructed, and infa^ts that are not yet entered in the sacraments. 2. which
transform the church into a civil kingdom, that requires a secular arm, and
into the greatest monarchy of the world, wherein the Pope is chief ruler and
governor over all persons: as well laymen, as clergymen, over Emperors and
Kings, who has authority in heaven and in earth, and who is the universal B.
of the whole world, 3. which teach that the church has many heads that Christ
indeed is the head of the church triu^pha^t, but the Pope of the church
militant. and which say that it is necessary to salvation to believe that the
Bishop of Rome is over all churches, or as it is in the article of Boniface
the. 8. The greatest lord over all. 4. which ty the catholic church not to the
word only, but to a certain place, namely to the city of Rome, to the Pope,
and to the Bishops, and which make personal succession to be an absolute and
sure mark of the church: by the church, they understand the pastors only, and
they call it heresy to refer the name of the church to the number of the
faithful, contrary to the saing of Christ. super hanc petram. i. upon my self
will I build my church, and contrary to the article of our creed, which
commands us to believe the catholic church. 5, which make the word of God
subject to the church, and not the church subject to the word of God. 6, which
make the doctrine and precepts of men the foundation, upon the which the church
is built. 7. which place the unity of the church not in faith, not in spirit,
but in the use and similitude of such ceremonies, and which teach, that
multitude, visibility, perpetuity, antiquity and such like, for the mark of
the true church.

3 The Roman clergy, or that rabblement of Monks and Priests, which deprave
the natural sense and meaning of the scripture, and do in very deed deny the
office of Christ, while they do attribute to the work of their own or other,
that the most proper and peculier unto Christ: and their sects, whereof some
are named after one teacher, some after another, whose rule they have made
choice of, to follow and to live thereafter:

4 The assembly of all infidels, which do persecute and reject the doctrine of
the prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself.

5 The error of those men, that are of opinion, that every one shall be saved in
his own religion, when, without that one alone catholic church their is no
salvation.

6 Of the Academicks which have brought into the church (...),
incomprehensibility.

7 Of the Platonicks which make the church to be altogether invisible: and on
the contrary, of them that think the church is, and has always bin visible
on earth.

8 Of donatists, Anabaptists, and schismatics, which because of the wicked,
make a departure from the true church, in which the true gospel is preached,
and the sacraments rightly administered: which as much as in them lies divide
the unity of Christ's body break the band of peace, that is Charity, wherewith
Christ knits the church to himself: these proudly contemn the church, and
endanger there own salvation, for he cannot have any communion with Christ,
which will not have communion with the church.

(...). schism: not such whereat a wicked unity is divided like as the unity
of the Jews who hearing of Christ raised adissention among themselves: whereby
their unity brake and was divided, John. ^ 16 and 10.9
neither such: by which good Men separate themselves from wicked men: but
factions, whereby the society of the faithful is divided into contrary parts
and studies, as when the Corinthians were divided into parts 1 Cor. 10 11.12.
and. 3 3
either when they did disagre one from the other, not only in opinion, and
will, but in the very community of holy things, and in rites and customs, so
that one another community and fellowship, they avoided as damnable: an
heresy declares properly some certain faction and sect about doctrine Act.
5.37.
: and so heretics are called, which in such sort depart from the true and
sound doctrine, that contemning the judgment of God, and the judgment of the
Church, continue in their opinions, and violate the concord and agreement of
the Church.

10 The contempt of Ecclesiastical assemblies, namely, of them which seem
unto themselves to know all things, or which keep themselves busied at home,
or which misliking the meandness of the preachers person, or finding some
other occasion of absence, neglect Sermons, or which for fear of the cross,
or for the favor of great men, or of their friends, contemn and set light by
them. Also the abuse of those men, which either through some foolish devotion,
or accustomed ostentation, or to beguile the tediousnes of time, frequent holy
assemblyes either seldom, or at them trifle the time away, or let their mind
raunge abroad, or else after they have heard a word or two, depart out: or in a
word, they hear indeed Sermos, but yet live wickedly.

The two and fortieth common Place. Of the Ministry.
Whence comes this word Ministry?
OF the Lattin word Ministre, to minister, or ferue. The greek name for
Ministry, is (...). derived of (...) signifying dust, whence is this word
(...) to serve, and (...) to minister, and (...) a Minister, (...).
or servant, who labors til he be as of a dusty sweat. Math. 20 26.27
hence is it, that in the new Testament this word is taken for any person
laboring Romans 16 11.
painfully and earnestly in any service, Romans 13.4
for the, commonwealth, family, or Church Mat. 22, 15
. And (...), is all one with this word Ministry, signifiing both the office
of Act. 6.4 2 Cor. 6, 3 Ephe. 4.12
^eaching, and also the performance of any Ecclesiastical function, There are
diversities of Ministeries, but the same Lord. 1. Cor. 16.

Not unlike to this is the word (...), Liturgia coming of (...), to do,
minister, or do ones duty: so it is used Acts. 13, 2. (...)
whilst they ministered, that is, as Chrysostom expounds it, preached, not
sacrificed, except, as the words Liturgia and sacrifice are used for the
public functions of the Church. As Phil. 2 17. Though I be offered up upon the
sacrifice, and service of your faith. And for this cause the Fathers called the
Lords Supper, a Liturgy and Sacrifice (whence came that execrable error of
such as will have the son of God daily in the Church to be offered and
sacrificed,) Hence also was it that public officers, both Romans 15.16.
ministers and Magistrates were called (...) Ministers and (...) Deaco^s. Romans
13.4. (...)
Yea, Heb. 1.7. Angels are called Ministers, and ministering spirits.

Hence also was the public service of the Church called a Leiturgie, as Luke
1.23. Yea, and the very execution of that service was so called, as if a man
should have given that name to the Leuiticall sacrifices. Heb. 10.11. every
high Priest stands daily to Minister; So that this action of his, were it of
preaching, (...)
or performing holy mysteries, might be called a Liturgy. Furthermore, this
name of Liturgy, Oblation, and sacrifice began to be given Metaphorically to
Alms Romans 15.27 (...)
. The Gentiles ought to Minister carnal things to the Saints at Jerusalem. By
the like reason all Christians may be called (...), Ministers, as Paul called
Epaphroditus Phil. 2.25. To conclude, in the Ecclesiastical story, certain
forms of service at the Church were called Liturgies, as the Liturgy of
Basil, Chrysostom etc.

Again, each professor of Christ has the name of Deacon or minister given
unto him. Ioh. 12.26. (...).
If any man will be my Minister let him follow me. But more specially this word
Diaconia, does signify provision for the poor, and that collection it self
is so called 2. Cor. 9. Diaconissa
: and properly, 1 To. 12.7.
men Deacons were such as were overseers for the poor: and women Deacons in
the Ecclesiastical History, who looked to the poor being sick, or who were
as the public hosts to entertain Christian strangers Romans 16.1. 1 Timothy 5.9
10.
.

But Christ he is called the minister of Circumcision. Romans 15.8. Not of
circumcision it self, or of the Law, which he by his coming did abrogate, or
rather fulfill, but of the Circumcised Jews, amongst whom, he only lived, so
long as he upon earth lived mat. 15 24.
. He is called the Apostle of our profession, that is of the Gospel Heb. 3.^
, as he who immediately ((...)) was himself sent from the Father. Now, in this
place we take the word Ministry as it generally signifies, for an
Ecclesiastical function.

Why do you call this Function a Ministry?
Because it is not a chiefdome, Dominion, Magistracy or imperious office: but
rather (...) care, and Diaconia service yea a painful service, and ministry.
Neither are the Ministers of the Church (as Ministers) such rulers or Lords as
may challenge to themselves dominion over either the Clergy, or man's
conscience, or the members of the Church, or unto ought to have power to make
laws, and translate kingdoms, but they are the servants and ministers of that
one Prince and Lord of Lords Christ Jesus. For after this sort to domineere,
Christ expressly forbids his Disciples both by word, and example; Rom, 1.1.
Phil. 1.1 Iac. 1.1. 2. Pet. 1.1 Jude. 1.
by word. Luke. 22.25.26. The kings of the Gentiles rule over them, it shall
not be so with you: and by example, verse. 27 and John: 13.4. and. 13. yea and
Peter himself exhorts all Pastors to be not as Lords, etc. but as ensamples
to the flock of Christ. This made Bernard writing to Eugenius the Pope, to say,
Dominion was plainly forbidden the Apostles, be not thou therefore bold to
Challenge to thy self either ruling Apostleship, or being Apostolic, rule:
Thou art quite forbidden both. If thou will needs have both together, in the
end thou shall loose both.

What is Ministry?
It is an Ecclesiastical function upon earth, assigned, to preach the word,
to administer the Sacraments: and to practice Christian Discipline, and things
which are called Ecclesiastical.

What is a Minister of the Church?
He is a person lawfully called to teach Gods word, administer the Sacraments,
Church government, and things ecclesiastical, according as they are prescribed
in the word of God.

How many sorts of Church Ministers are there in the scriptures?
Two, some of the old Testament, others of the new: and again the Ministers
of the Church of the Old Testament were some perpetual, and as it were
ordinary, as Patriarchs, Levites, Priests, Scribes: others, Temporary, and (as
I may say) extraordinary as the Prophets were. As for the Pharisees, and
Saduces, they were rather names of Sects, then public functions as
appears: Act. 23.9.

What were the Patriarckes?
The heads of Families, or heads of Fathers in their kinreds Exo. 6.13 2.
Chro. 8.10. Act 7.9.
: or they were men of the Old Testament, before and after the Deluge till
Moses, unto whom God revealed himself, by Angels, Visions in the night,
apparition by day, and by dreams Genesis 8, 16 6.13.14, 12.7.20.13.28 12.46, 2,
Number, 12.6
. And that by a voice perceptible to man, and framed to the speech usual
amongst men. And by these only in lively tradition, he taught their families
religion, they being in the families as Prophets and Priests. Thus Adam,
whilst he exp^unded to his wife and children the promise of that seed of the
woman, taught them a twofold service of God, and offered Sacrifices unto God
Genesis 4.4
. And Henoch the seventh from Adam, is thus said to have prophesied Genesis 5.22
Gen 14 ^
. And so Noah is called a Preacher of Repentance 1 Pet. 3.19 4.6. 2. Pet. 2.5
, Righteousness, the Gospel, and of Christ, because all those hundred and
twenty years before the flood be ceased not by words and works, to admonish
that wicked world, how great a measure of Gods wrath did hang over their head.
After this the chief in each family are said to have been teachers, and
Priests. So in the land of Canaan at Salem (which was after called Jerusalem)
Melchisedeck (who as some think was Sem) a Priest of the most high God, and
who was also King of Salem Genesis 14.18 Heb. 7.1
: so Abraham performed the office of a Doctor, and a Priest Genesis 13.18
17.23.20.17 22.10, 13
, and by faith is said to have offered sacrifice Heb. 11.7, Genesis ^3, 20 35.7
49.2
. After Abraham, Isaacke, after Isaacke, Jacob, who himself as a prophet
instructed his people, and at diverse places erected diverse Altars, and offered
sacrifices i.

At the length when it was now time, not to teach only private families, but
many people in the true knowledge of God, Moses being stirred up by God Exodus
3.2
, did establish a service and Church among the people: and to this purpose he
ordained Priests and Levites, to whom from God he prescribed certain Laws,
according to which God would have the people of Israel governed, not only by
lively voice, as before, but by writing, and at Gods commandment he delivered
the word of God. For before Moses, we read not of any Scripture, given by
inspiration from God.

What were priests?
They were men immediately called out of Aarons posterity (for they only were
Priests, and were called the sons of Aaron) and anointed with oil, and
consecrated in the sight of the people Exodus 41 29. Leuit. 8, 2
, that they might teach others the doctrine mediatly received from GOD, offer
sacrifices, bless the people, and might make intercession for themselves and
the people Leuit. 9, 7 16.6. Number. 17.6.24 2. Chron. 1.4 Mat. 2.4
: and these were superiors who ministered to the people in the Tabernacle:
among whom some were called High Priests 1. Chron. 1.
, these were the heads of their families. For the which cause they were called
Princes of the sanctuary, and divided into twenty four ordes or classes
Hebr. 5.6.
, all which were figures of Christ, but yet was there ever some one above the
rest, he was the eldest of Aarons sons and posterity, who was called the
high Priest, and was especially in his function a figure of Christ, the head of
his Church Heb. 6 and 5
, he alone might go into the Sanctuary Hebr. 9.11. Leuit. 16.2.
, and he alone might appear before God, having a covering on his head, in
which was granen, the holiness of God, that God might be pleased with them,
Exodus 28.6. Although it appears, and that by ancient institution. 1. Chron.
24.2.3. that there were two priests who in course did exercise the Priesthood:
yet so as one was chief, and the other next unto him, as it is plain out of
1. Kings. 25.18. and Luke. 3.2. note we here, that it was not unadvisedly
done, that the holy Ghost does never in the New Testament give the name of
Priest, or Priesthood peculiarly to the Ministers of the Gospel; for Christ
being made a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech by the oath
of God, Hebr. 7.21. has no companions of his Priesthood: neither left he to
his a Priesthood, but a Ministry: and that because there remained for us no
such propitiatory sacrifices, to be performed, as that was which was procured
by the Priests in the law: yet by a certain similitude, as they who preach the
Gospel, do kill with the spiritual sword, and consecrate men to God, they may
be called Priests: as also sometimes all the godlly are so called, to whom it
is said, If ye will keep all my commandments you shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, Exodus 19.6.

What are Levites?
Number. 8, 7,
They were inferior Priests, coming from, and called so of Leui Jacobs son
by Leah: of whom some served under the Priests in the Tabernacle, and after in
the Temple: and they being purified by a holy water and sacrifice before the
Church Number. 18 6.3.6
, did carry the Tabernacle, which was portable, and other things of use, and
did minister to the high Priests as they sacrificed, serving them in the whole
administation of sacrifices, but they had not authority to sacrifice Number. 18
6.3.6
, and they themselves did pay tithes of their tithes to the Priests Number. 16.26.
, for this cause the Deacons of the New Testament, properly so called, are (by
the ancient) compared with them. But of these afterward David appointed holy
Singers, Treasurers for holy things, Overseers, and Porters, and these from
twenty years til 50 killed the sacrifices 1. Chro. 23 35.
, but others being dispersed through diverse countries partly did service in the
Synagogues, and partly did sit in judgment with the elders in the gate EZec.
44.15
.

What were Scribes?
Of them there were three sorts: one which stood before Kings as 2. Kings.
12.10. another who did write private contracts and instruments such as we call
Notaries or Scriueners: such were Cinney 1 Chro. 2.55. Ierem. 32.1^ Psalm. 45.2.
, and in a word, they were called Scribes being more skillful then others in
Gods law, and they especially were of the Tribe of Leui Ioh. 1.18 Esd. 7.6
, who both in the Synagogues, and in the Temple did teach the law: for the
which cause they were called Lawyers and Teachers of the law Mat. 17.29.23.2
Mark. 12.18
, so also they were called Scribes, because they did write and interpret the
law, as it were keepers and teachers of the holy Tables Iere. 8.8
.

What were Prophets?
They were persons immediately, and extraordinarily called by God, who should
speak, Mat. 13.52. Hebr. 1.1.
by an extraordinary instinct of Gods alone Spirit, those things which they
did understand; that is, such as were extraordinarily raised up for the
government of the Church, to ask God upon present occasion concerning her
present calamities 1. Sam. 2, 27.
, as also in want of Priests to deliver to others doctrine immediately
received from God, to interpret the Law, to restore Gods worship, and as
often as the people fell away, to reprove with great zeal and sharpenes of
speech, the Priests and Kings, sinning or negligent in their office 2. Sam.
12.7. Exodus 22.21
, and so should instruct them, and stir them up to good works, foretell
certainly things to come, as the mutation of Empyres, punishment of sins,
special events, and deliverance to the glory of God, and good of the people;
and which was most principal to comfort the people, with the hope of the
Messiah to come, and therefore being moved by divine inspiration, they
prophesied in several provinces assigned them, of his Conception, Nativity,
Passion, Death, Resurrection, coming to judgment, and everlasting kingdom a.
These were called Prophets, of the Greek word (...) to foretell, to which
answers that Greek word (...), Isay. 1.6 er. 14. etc. Ez^ch. 1.2.3 1 Pet.
1.1 2. Pet. 1.21 Esai, 7.14 9 5.6 Mich. 5.2. Esai. 53. Luke. 24.27
Mantenesthai, yet so as this belonges to profane prophets, that to holy
prophets.

Yet this is also true that they also are called prophets, but distinguished
from these, who were ordinary teachers, and brought up in the doctrine of the
Law by men Ier. 26.11.29.1.
; whence it is, that Paul sometime uses the word Prophecy for the
interpretation of prophecies, even without the Spirit of fore telling things to
come Ier. 26.11.29.1.
But by way of excellency Christ, the head of all Prophets, is called that
Prophet. Deuteronomy. 18.15. John. 1.45 Acts. 3.12. 1. Cor. 14.29


How were true Prophets made to prophecy?
Either by Visions and figures, or Images offered to their mind or eyes. Number.
12.6.
Whereupon they were called Seers 1. Sam. 9.9
. Thus Jeremy saw an Almonde tree, and a seething pot Ier. 1.11.13.
, Ezechiell four beasts, and so many wheels Eze, 1.
, Daniell the handwriting on the wall, Dan. 5.24 25.
, Zachary a man riding upon a red horse, betwixt the Myr^le trees, and four
horns Zach. 1.8.20.
: or by Dreams sent from GOD: or by inward inspiration of Gods Spirit 2. Pet.
1.21.
: or by express word, by the apparition of an Angel, representing GOD Genesis
18.13
, or by God himself, speaking face to face with them, that is, familiarlie, as
he did with Moses Number. 12. and 16.20.20.
.

How did prophets differ from priests?
1 Priests were ever of the tribe of Leui: but prophets also of other trybes
Esa. 1.1 20.2. Dan. 1.3. Amos, 7.14.
, 2. The Priests duty was not only to pray and teach, but also to perform
holy rites, which prophets did not; for in that Elias sacrificed, and that out
of that place chosen by God, 1. King, 18 38.
it was extraordinary, because he was moved by a private inspiration from God,
contrary to the general law, as Augustine says in his 56 question upon
Leuiticus. The lawgiuer when he commands any thing contrary to his laws,
his commandment is to be reputed as a Law. 3. Priests were chosen only by
succession, and had an ordinary ministry, but prophets were sent by god at his
pleasure, after an extraordinary sort, and inspired by his spirit without
respect had even of sex. Iud. 4.4 2. King. 2.15
. fourthlie priests might err as Aaron did: but true prophets, to wit
inspired by god, as they were prophets, did not err.

How many kinds or sorts of ministry are there of the new Testament?
Paul, Romans 12.6 7, makes two, to wit Prophecy and ministry, under the name
of prophecy comprehending their office who labor in teaching and exhorting,
whether it be in speech as pastors, or instruction as Doctors 1 Timo. 5 17
. But under the name of ministry he understands their office who had
another service, as distribution of alms, censure of manners, provision for
the poor, or other ecclesiastical offices from which the Apostles exempted
them selves. Act. 6.2.3, 4.


The like distribution he has. Philip. 1.1. Tim. 3.2.8. calling them Bishops
whom Romans 12, 6.7. He calls prophets, namely to whom is committed the
ministry of teaching, understanding the rest by the name of deacons. So
Peter. 1, pet. 4.11. says if any man speak, let him speak as the words of
God, if any man minister etc. So then of them that bear Ecclesiastical
office, some are teachers, others are ministers.

How many orders of teachers are there?
The same Paul. Ephesians. 4.11. Numbreth five, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Doctors. Of whom Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists had a
temporary and extraordinary calling, and therefore are now ceased; but
pastors and doctors, which are ordinary callings are to continue for ever, to
the coming of Christ for prophecy and knowledge, that is the gifts of
teaching and prophesying, being instituted of God for the collecting of a
church and nourishing it in this life, are therefore said to be abolished, and
of no use, 1. Cor. 13.8. because god by himself thorough an inward power,
shall effect that in the life to come, which he has begun in us in some
sort by his ministers in this life.

What were Apostles?
Peculiarly and by way of excellency those that were called the first
Apostles, as also those eleven elected and called out of the world, not by men,
or from men, but immediately by Christ living yet upon earth before his
manyfestation, that as hearalds they might stir up only their own nation, and
being sent prepare them to harken to Christ. Math. 10.6.7.
. And in the end after his resurrection, being confirmed by him to the same
apostleship, they might publish the doctrine committed to them through the
whole world Mat 28 19.20 Mark. 16.15 John. 20.21.
.

But because he commanded them to stay at Jerusalem till they were endued with
virtue from above, Act. 1.24
after his ascension in the same place, and at the same time, to wit on the day
of Pentecost, they were by the visible gift of the holy Ghost, as it were by a
solemn inauguration, Mathias being joined with the^, before the whole people
of Israel, confirmed in their appostleship, and declared to be the apostles of
Christ. in which respect they are said then to be given of Christ, from heaven
Act. 2.1. etc. Ephesians. 4.11
.

By this it appears that this solemn sending of the holy Ghost, did
appertain to none other but to those twelve, destined by so peculiar
abundance of Gods spirit to plant churches through the whole world: even as to
them properly and peculiarly the promise was made Luke 24.49 Mat. 28, 19, 20.
, and as the Apostleship was proper to them. Act. 2.22.
, To these add we, those two called by Christ after his ascension, Matthias by
lot, Act. 1.16.
, and Paul from heaven. Act. 9.3. Gal. 2, 1.
. Al which as builders and founders of the future edifices of the church, and
as it were patriarchs were sent, not to teach only in certain places, but to
plant churches through the whole world: when also they were called apostles, as
it were the lords legates, who also being inspired by God did deliver the
doctrine of the gospel both by word and in writing, so as their doctrine is
the canon and rule of all christian religion, which must be showed to the end
of the world: and being endued by Christ with virtue of doing miracles, they
confirmed their doctrine by miracles and sealed it by the administration of the
sacraments. Math. 28.19.
and which was principal in them, they alone in the infancy of the church; by
a visible sign of Imposition of hands gave the holy Ghost: and who all and each
of them were all of equal power and dignity ecclesiastical amongst them
selves, in a primary and principal, but yet a spiritual power, but not in
regard of the gifts of the spirit, for although the same talent was given to
all, yet it was doubled upon some, and tripled upon others: so as one excelled
an other in labor and eminency of grace 1 Cor. 15 20,


This office after they had well discharged, together with the^, that
apostolical function ceased, not in regard of their doctrine to which the
church is perpetually obliged, nor in regard of their ministry to preach the
gospel, and administer the sacraments. But in regard of apostolical
excellency, plenary authority, for it self to be believed, (so as he that
should resist their doctrine, did not resist man but God) and that it was not
circumscribed within any confines of the world, but to be diuulged through the
whole earth, as also to found and plant churches, and to confer the gifts of
the holy ghost by Imposition of hands, to constitute perpetual functions in the
church, and in a word to prescribe rules for church government; for thus their
office was temporary: for that of Christ at this departure. John. 20.21. as my
father sent me, so I send you, is to be restrained to their apostleship only:
and they were as we may say, successers of the prophets: but the prophets were
Sovvers; the Apostles reapers, John. 4.35
^ct 11.28 2^.10.
they preached Christ to come, these Christ already come.

Who were called prophets?
Specially they who about the beginning of the gospel preached and excelled in
a singular gift of revelation and wisdom by the instinct of Gods spirit, and
were sometimes able to foretell matters of great moment concerning the Church,
or such as should be tide some of the faith full, whom GOD adjoined to the
Apostles, though they also were endued with the spirit of prophecy, c that by
this supernatural grace of the spirit, he might also confirm the Apostles
preaching: by which grace it pleased him to adorn and confirm that then
breeding church, such a prophet was Agabus, and the four daughters of Philip
theuangelist. 1. Cor. 14, 29.31.
hence to prophecy, is to interpret prophecies. 1. Cor. 11.4.5. And the spirit
of prophets. 1, Cor. 14.32. Is for the doctrine which prophets endued with gods
spirit do bring; notwithstanding in general they were called prophets who had a
singular gift in interpreting scriptures, such are now adays, the learned
interpreters of scriptures,

Who are Evangelists?
1 Companions, fellow laborers, and fellow ministers of the Apostles, not
chosen by Christ himself, that is without man's ministry, but by the
Apostles delected as associates, to perform their office, in watering their
plantings, building upon their foundations, perfecting their work: and were in
preaching the gospel, sometimes in one, sometimes in another place, as it were
subsidiarie, and certain secundarie apostles, not in one only, but in many
churches, and who should have power and authority to set pastors, and orders in
particular churches, to which they were sent, and that till such time as they
were recalled by the Apostles Tit. 1.4
: such were Timothy Act. 16.3
, Luke, Mark, Tichicus 2. Tim. 4.11 12
, and Titus, 2. Cor. 8 23.
Philip Act. 21.8
and others, whether they were called out of those 70 disciples whom Christ
appointed besides the 12. Luke 20, 12
or from among others.

2 In a more strict signification those four penmen of the holy Ghost, whose
labor the Lord used to publish the Evangelical history of Christ, and to
describe the beginnings of the christian church, are called Evangelists: of
these two, Mark and Luke were companions of the apostles and Evangelists: The
other two Matthew, and John, were Apostles, and Evangelists,

May not other pastors and doctors of the church be called Apostles Prophets
and Evangelists?
No, but abusiuely, for concerning the appellation of an Apostle, Andronicus,
and Innias, are said to be famous among the Apostles, that is of note with
those ancient Apostles, but yet they are not called Apostles. Ro^, 16, 17
, besides the name of an Apostle is given to Titus his two companions 2 Cor.
8.23
, yet not simply but with addition, as they were sent by certain Churches to
collect alms. And Epaphroditus is not simply called an Apostle of Christ, but
of the Philippians, sent by them to relieve Paul, Phil. ^.25.
thus that great name was so peculiar simply to those chosen Apostles, that
Paul says not without advise, All are not Apostles, 2. Cor. 12.29.

As for Evangelists, to preach is proper indeed to all, 1, Cor. 12.
but the appellation of the Evangelists belongs to none but them whom the
Apostles joined unto them; as occasion served in watering those Churches which
they had planted, and whom they appointed not over one Church, but over
Provinces and that only for a time.

But the name of a Prophet is sometime generally given to all the interpreters
of Gods word, as Romans 12.6. 1. Corinthians. 14.29. sometime it does distinguish
them peculiarly from Doctors, as when difference is made betwixt doctrine and
Revelation. 1. Corinthians. 14.16. and also when Doctors are distinguished from
Pastors by Doctrine and Exhortation, as Romans 12.7.8.

Who are are called Pastors?
Surely they who may be called (...) Romans 12.8
exhorters, that is, who being lawfully called, do preach Gods word, and in
preaching do not simply explain it, but by teaching, admonishing,
reproouing, correcting, informing, exhorting, and comforting, do publicly, 1.
Pet, 5, 2
and privately apply it to the use of the Church Act. 14, 13 1. Cor, 11, 18 1.
Tim. 3.16 Tit, 1, 5.9
, and besides do labor in the administration of the Sacraments, conceiving
public prayers, and are watchful to take away offenses, and to govern the
Church Romans 12.7
. These by a general name are called Elders, and Deacons, 1, Cor, 13, 5 Col,
1, 7
such as are over us. 1, These. 5
And Hebr. 13. Guides: to conclude the chiefest of them were called Episcopi,
Bishops of a Greek word, which signifies to look into, that nothing be
wanting to the people of their Diocese, because it is the duty of Pastors as
it were spies to look narrowly into the doctrine and manners of the flock
committed unto them:

What were Doctors?
Who only applied themselves to the faithful and plain interpretation of the
scriptures, and to rule ecclesiastical scooles, to the end that sincere
doctrine might be keept in the Church: or they who only explained the word of
God, to deliver true doctrine and confute false. Such were Catechizers as
Origin in the Church of Alexandria, and Clemens, and the like.

Are not Doctors and pastors all one, as Augustine thought?
No, because Paul gives them diverse names. Ephesians. 4.11. And Romans 12.7. he
distinguishes teachers from Exhorters, and speech from knowledge it self of
holy things; or he thus distinguishes Pastors from doctors.

What degres were substituted unto these?
Rather for exercise then for office sake. 1. Porters, who kept the gates of
the Church, that they might let in penitentiaries, and keep out wicked men
from the Church, and such as were excommunicated from the Sacraments.

2 Acoluthoi, followers, attendants and as it were, pages of Bishops, being
witnesses and imitators of all their speeches, and withal most ready servants
unto them.

3 Lectores, or Readers, Ministers of Pastors and Doctors, reading so the
Scriptures out of some high place, that within one year all the books of the
Bible, for the more familier knowledge of the Scripture, might be read over.

4 We read also in very ancient writers of Exorcists who using the name of God,
and having the gift of miracles, by calling upon Christ, and imposition of
hands, cast out devils Act. 19.23. But this office is ceased with the gift of
miracles. In (...):


5 In the Scriptures they are called the Clergy who are the congregation of
the faithful, and flocks of sheep, or the members of the Church, 1, Cor,
14.39
because they are the portion and inheritance of the Lord, 1. Pet. 5.3 but
afterward the ancient fathers, did translate the name of Clergy to the
College of Ecclesiastical ministers, so as all students were called Clergy
men, who are maintained of their parents, or the Churches cost to become
ministers.

How do Pastors and doctors differ from Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists?
Nothing at all in respect of the Essential parts of the Ministry, which are
the sincere preaching of the word, the administration of the Sacraments, and
correction of manners: but in respect of things peculier to the calling of
Apostles they differ much: for 1. Cor. 12. the Apostle Paul having divided the
ministry of the word, into the word of wisdom, and the word of knowledge; to
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists he does attribute wisdom, to wit, that
more excellent, and without al controversy, greater knowledge of the mysteries
of God, Act. 11.27.6 21.10
that has with it the greatest authority, and is given by the peculier
inspiration of the holy Ghost, namely by Revelation and as a for knowledge,
which is the understanding of the Gospel, that is gotten by hearing and
reading of the holy Scriptures, that is to say, by studying and learning, that
he referres to ordinary Pastors and Doctors.

But the personal gifts of the Apostles, that is, 1. Cor. 12.9 10. Act 5.5.10
and. 8.20. and 13.10.11. 2. Cor. 10.6
such as were given properly to the Apostles alone. as 1 prophecy by singular
revelation:

2 Discerning of spirits, the gifts of tongues, and of doing of special
miracles the gift of bestowing the free gifts of the holy spirit by laying on
their hands, and of most sever reue^ging of co^tumacy by extraordinary
punishments as it appeared in Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.5.10 and 8.20 and
13.10, 11 2. Cor, 10, 6
and Elimas. The sorcerer.

3 The testimony of the holy spirit, that they should not e^re.

4 The verse authority of their Apostolical office, superior to all others,
not only in order, but in degree also and in power; and their charge, that was
extended over the whole earth, and not tied to one flock alone, or to one
Church, as it appears, Math. 28.19. Mar. 16.15
These personal gifts I say, and this Apostolical authority was not passed
over neither unto Pastors nor yet unto Doctors of the Church, but ceased with
these men of the first time.

What be the orders of them that minister?
There be 2. orders of them, the one of Elders, the other of Deacons. Act. 1.8.
2. cor. 11.21.
The elders are of two sorts: Some are Pastors and Doctors, which ought to
spend their time in the word and Doctrine; others whose office is to govern.
1. Tim. 5.17. The Elders which rule well, are worthy of double honor: but most
of all they which labor in the word and in Doctrine. Elders properly so
called, rather of manners, then of age as far forth as they are distinguished
from Pastors, and do not preach the word of God, are men of approved
godliness, appointed to every Church, in the peculiar censure of manners, and
government of the Church, to observe diligently the manners of the flock over
which they are appointed, and constantly to admonish every one out of the word
of God, if they shall espy any fault or offense, either in doctrine or in life:
of whom Act. 14, 23. Whom Paul. 1. Cor. 12, 28. Terms by their peculiar name
Governments, in the abstract for Governors in the concrete, distinguished from
Pastors and Doctors properly so called; (...).
and also (...) Rulers. Romans 12.8.

Sometime they are called by the general name of watchmen and Bishopps that is
overseers, whom we may call the Censors of manners, (...) 1. Tim. 4, 14.
unto whom also was committed the cure of ecclesiastical discipline.

Which be the deacons?
The stewards of the house of God, lawfully chosen out of the common assembly
of the Church, (...).
were properly called Deacons, which had the charge of the Ecclesiastical
treasure or the office of assistance, that is, who were set over the receipts,
and also the orderly laying our, and distributing of the holy alms and
collections, and other goods of the Church which were to be administered, as
themselves, the Pastors, and the Elders should think good, and to the relief
of the poor, the Orphans and Widow, and Strangers, but especially of such
as were of the household of faith, and to other holy uses Act, 6.1, 2 Gal. 6
16. Phil, 1, 1 1 Timothy, 3.8 12, and 18
, unto whom it is therefore thus commanded, Romans 12.8. He that distributeth,
let him do it in simplicity, that is, in sincerity of heart and without
respect of persons. And in veery deed they took the name of Deacons from their
serving at tables, because upon them was laid the laboursome charg of gathering
and disposing the Collections and Offerings, whereof the Love feasts were made,
which consisted partly in receiving of common meat Act 2, 46 and 20 7 1 Cor
11.20 Iud. 6.12
, but especially in the celebration of the Lords Supper, and partly in holy
speeches and the conferences at, and after meat: Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 39.

And when these Love feasts were grown out of use, yet there remained the
same charge of Deacons still in the administration of the Sacraments, but
chiefly in the giving about of the Cup, But they were neither Pastors nor
Doctors, because the Apostles themselves professed, that they were not able to
attend, both serving at tales, and preaching, Act. 6, 2.

And Paul would have Pastors, to be apt to teach 1 Timothy 3.12.9 Luke 4.7 Act.
13 15
: but in Deacons he only requires, that they hold the mystery of the faith.
And Stephen, Act. 6, 8, Because he was a Deacon only, he is not said to have
taught in the Church, but in the Synagogue of the Jews, where every one might
speak as it appears, Luke. 2.46, Act. 8 5 and 21.8
, And Philip being no longer a Deacon of the Church of Jerusalem, but of a
Deacon made an Evangelist preached the Gospel, yet if such be found to be fit
for the Ministry of the word, we must not deny, but that they are to be
preferred before others, of whom there is not so good proof. Furthermore,
since the Censuring and Judgment of manners is not a daily function, it cannot
be denied, but that these two offices of Eldership and Deaconship may easily
be executed.

Further, the Church has always had a public stock, collected justly and
certainly among the people, for the retayning of the holy exercises of
Religion and faith. Hence it came that there was a treasury in the temple Luk,
20, 1,
, and God in times past appointed a tax to be raised upon the people, for the
repayring of the Tabernacle, and the temple Exo. 30, 13
. And the tithes he commanded to be paid to the Priest, Deuteronomy. 14.28. yea and
the Apostles themselves had a care to constitute a common treasury of the
Church, for the relief of the poor, and for other necessities of the Church.
Heerupon Paul appointed, that Collection should be made upon the Lords day 1.
Cor. 16 Mat, 10.10 1 Cor. 9.19
, and afterward Churches waxed rich by the liberality of diverse Godly people:
And lastly the paying of Tithes was again restored. And these riches of the
Church are honest and just; considering that they are given of such, as had
right to give, them and whom the fear of God stirred up to bestow them.

Further, Ecclesiastical goods were divided into four parts: One part was
distributed to the Clergy, that is, to those which gave themselves to the
service of the Church, as well in learning as in teaching. 2 Another part was
given to the relief of the poor, who are members of the same body with us
under Christ our head. 3 A third part to the keeping of the buildings and
vessels of the Church. A fourth part went to the Bishop, or to the Ruler,
that therewith they might entertain poor strangers, and also comfort their
brethren that were in Captivity Act. 6.1. and 1 Timothy 5, 9 10
.

Unto these Deacons there were adioned Deaconesses, or Widows of three score
years old, appointed espetially to look to the sick, to receive travelers
that were brethren, and for the necessities of others, unto whom it is
commanded, Romans 12.8 thus, He that shows mercy, let him do it with
cheerfulness. The use of which office, if for the weakness of that sex, and
other discommodities and inconveniences, it may not well be restored, yet it
may be supplied by the bounty and godly care of holy women toward the poor,
whether they be Noble, or of meaner estate.

Do you deny that the Pastors had any care of the poor imposed upon them?
In no wise: For this care is twofold. The former consisted in the charge of
gathering and distributing the holy beneuole^ce, which is proper to deacons. 2
The other was only both in exhorting of the Churches to show themselves
bountiful to the poor; and also in the ouerlooking of the Deacons, which
things did only pertain to the Pastors 1 Cor. 16.2 2 Cor. 9.1 23
.

Who is the Author of the Ministry?
The principal cause is God himself, who first immediately preached unto our
first parents in Paradise, giving the promise of the blessed seed Genesis 3.15
, which promise it was his pleasure should be propagated successively by the
Patriarchs Genesis 18.18 19 (...)
. Afterward he instituted Priests among the people of Israel, choosing the
Tribe of Leui for that office, yea further it is God which both calls himself
the Lord of the harvest, and also thrusts forth laborers into his harvest
Mat. 9.38. (...)
. And 1. Cor. 12.28. God has ordained some in the Church, as first Apostles,
secondly, Prophets, thirdly, Teachers.

2 The helping cause is Christ, as being the Son, and Lord of his Fathers
house by full right, who also called Apostles and set them over the
Ecclasiasticall ministry. John. 20.21. As the Father has sent me, so send I
you also. And Mark. 16.15. Go says he, into all the world, preach the
Gospel to every creature, and baptize them. And Ephe. 4.11. And he (Christ)
gave some to be Apostles, others to be Prophets etc. Gave I say not only in
in that he chose them, Athanasius
but also in that he made them to be such as they ought to be.

3 The holy Ghost in respect of his necessary gifts for the happy execution
of the Ministry. 1. Cor. 12.11. All these things works and anh the same
Spirit, distributing unto every one as he pleases. For all things ate common
to the holy and blessed Trinity.

And is not the ministry of teaching taken away in the church of the new
testament by the saying of Jeremy chap. 31.34. A man shall not any more teach
his neighbor, Ioh, 6, 45 (...).
but all shall be taught of God?
No. 1. because Oratione Ecliptica, by this defective speech (as is that also.
Genesis 32.28. Not Jacob shall thy name be called, but Israel) is signified, that
the Elect shall not only be taught outwardly by the ministry of the word
spoken, but also inwardly of God by the holy ghost, as it is said. 1. John.
2.27. Ye have noe need that any should teach you, but the anointing, that is
the holy spirit does teach you all things, Non (...) sed Comparate
to wit by Pastors and Doctors.

2 Because the prophet speaks not simply, but by way of comparison. For in the
old Testament, by Moses and the prophets were most things propounded obscurely,
and under shadows and Types, and according to the letter only, so that it was
needful to demand, what those Ceremonies meant, and when Christ shall come.

But in the new testament Christ being already exhibited, is plainly preached,
and the veil of the temple being rent, and the way into the holiest of all
being opened, all these tipycall things are made manifest. Heb. 9.8. And they
that have the spirit of Christ do know all things, insomuch that now a child
of ten years old, to whom it is given to here and learn, does more clearly
understand those things, then many priests did in times past, because the earth
is full of the knowledge of the lord. Isa. 11, 9

What is the form of the ministry?
A lawful calling, and also a faithful execution of the function.

What does calling signify?
Not actiuely, the very action of calling, but passiuely that kind of life and
function, as well private as public, unto which any one is appointed of God,
because in the Hebrew phrase he is said to call those, whom he makes to be:
and in like sort they are said to be called of the Lord, Adipsam (...)
who do begin to be, whether that be referred to the very substance and
subsistence Romans 4 11
, or to the manifestation of the thing already being luke. 1.32.35.
, or to the public and real nomination which agrees with the thing it self
Mat. 5.9 1. John. 3.1
, or to the quality and attributes or conditions of life 1. Cor. 7 20.21.22.
, or unto the gracious adoption, or unto the public declaration of the
eternal counsel of God, whereby when when we are ordained to a certain
office, and as it were a scope or mark in this world, we are put inro the
possession thereof.

This borrowed speech comes I from hence, that when any one begins to be, then
he receives his name, and when he puts on a new quality, then also he takes a
new surname. Secondly from Princes, who call such unto them, whose service they
purpose to use, unto whom it is enough only to have commanded.

How manifold is Vocation or Calling?
Twofold. The one General, which is done commonly by the outward preaching of
the word: And this is either Effectual, of which Romans 8.30. or ineffectuall by
men's fault, which will not hear the word of God, of which Mat. 22.24. The
other Special, which respects a peculiar function, and it is either
Ecclesiastical, or political, or Domestical.

Is the Calling to the Ministry necessary?
Yes verily. 1 For the glory of God, the honor of the Ministry, the
security and comfort of the consciences of the Ministers: and also to the end
that the people may know, that they have lawful Ministers, and that they may
obey their Minister.

2 Because none must thrust in, or choose himself to the Ecclesiastical
ministry, but ought to be called of another that has power to call him. For
none must usurp unto himself that honor, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was Hebr. 5.5. And he that has either no calling at all in the Church,
or no lawful calling, cannot execute any Ecclesiastical office in the Church
lawfully with a good conscience. Therefore says Paul. Romans 10 14. How shall
they preach unless they be sent. And the Lord himself stands against such as
were not sent of himself Ierem. 23.21 They did run and I had not sent them.
And for this end Paul, that he might approve his Apostleship, does so often in
his Epistles allege his calling. And whereas it is said. 1. Cor. 16.15. That
the family of Stephana, and Fortunatus ordained them selves for the Ministry
of the Saints (whereupon Ecclesiastical callings began to be called Orders) It
is not meant, that they did of their own minds call themselves, and so began
to serve in the Ministry, but that after they were lawfully called, then they
did willingly give themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, whether by
preaching, or by helping.

What is lawful calling?
That which is done by Right and Law, that is, which is done by such a one
which has power to call, and to constitute another in a place and office, as is
the Lord of that place, or he that has right and power from him to make
choice. But God alone is the Lord of his true Church, Isa. 54.5
as also Christ alone is the head 1. Cor. 11.1 Ep. 1, 22 and, 5 23
, and redeemer or defender thereof. Wherefore it belongs to God alone and to
Christ, to set Ministers over his Church. And therefore they only that are
called of him, are to be accounted lawful, but whosoever are not called of
him, are all unlawful.

How many sorts are there of lawful calling?
Two: The one Internal, or secret, which is done by the holy Ghost, and of
this every Minister ought to be privy to himself before God, that neither
Ambition, Avarice, or any other sinful desire, but the sincere fear of God,
and endeavor to edify his Church, moved him to enter into this Office
offered unto him. The other External, and solemn, which belongs to public
order, which again is twofold, Mediate, which is also called Ordinary, and
Immediate, which is termed Extraordinary and Special.

Which is the Mediate or Ordinary Calling?
Ordinary is said to be two ways: either properly, and then it signifies that
which is done by lawful course and order, and which has his dependence of
God: or else (...)
abusedly, as that which consists in fashion, use and custom. After the
first manner therefore, Ordinary Calling is that, which is administered of God
by man, that is, whereby any man according to the order instituted of Christ,
after he has been exactly examined, and approved both for life and doctrine,
is chosen by the voices of the godly, whom God commands to be used herein,
after due invocation of the name of God, with all simplicity and synceritie,
as it were by the voice of the holy Ghost himself speaking by the mouth of the
godly, and also confirmed and ordained, to exercise Ecclesiastical Office in
some certain place, and is accepted of the flock unto which he is appointed,
and behaues himself in his place, as it is prescribed in the word of God.

What manner of men are to be called and Elected?
Bishops or Pastors, and also Doctors, which are first of sound doctrine, or
sound in the faith, (...).
and which firmly hold that faithful word, which makes for doctrine, that
they may be able both to exhort with sound doctrine, and also to convince the
gainesayers.

2 Of irreprehensible life, that is, not notorious for any fault, that may
either diminish their authority, or be a blot to their Ministry thereby.
(...).


3 Which are meet and apt to teach, and which have knowledge rightly to divide
the word of Truth 1. Tim. 3.2.3.4.6. Tit. 1.6.7.8. 2 Timothy 2.15.
.

Deacons also and Elders in like sort, who are not only adorned with holy
life, but also do hold the Mystery of faith, and are furnished with wisdom
necessary for the execution of their office Act. 6.5. 1 Timothy 3.8 9


How, or after what manner are they to be chosen?
With a religious fear, which the faithful in times past did testify by
laying aside all private affections, with fasting and prayers, in which they
desired of God the Spirit of Council and discretion Act. 1.22. and. 6.6. and.
13 2.3. and. 14.23.
, and with examination aforehand of their life and doctrine.

Of whom ought they to be chosen? Of the Bishop and governors of the Church.
1 And first they ought to be examined not of all and singular the inhabitants
of the Church, for the which he is to be provided, for the avoiding of
confusion and ambition, but of the Doctors, and Pastors of the Church
adjoining, to wit, both leaders of the flock, and also in all probability of
more grave judgment in discerning of Doctrine. And whereas in the beginning the
whole congregation was called together, and their voices also taken Act, 6, 6
, that was accidental, namely because that then was the order of Deacons first
constituted in the Church, and it was expedient that the cause thereof should
be once jointly understood of all: and because that otherwise that murmuring of
the Greeks against the Hebrews could hardly have been pacified by any other
course.

2 They ought to be approved of the chief men, which do excel others both in
piety and in dignity in the Church, as of the Magistrate, if he be godly,
Christian, or an allower of the Christian Religion: yet not excluding the
consent of the people, but giving them power, if they have any reason to
dissent, to declare the causes of their lawful refusal, so that none be
admitted to Ecclesiastical functions without the priuity, open notice given,
and the acceptance of the whole Church. (...)
So Paul and Barnabas are said to have appointed Elders in the Churches, not
according to their own private pleasures, but by aduisement of the people,
first by wholesome counsel, and yet the people declaring their voices or
consent by holding up of their hands. And when they had ordained them Elders by
voices, (or holding up of hands) in the Church says Luke Act. 14.23. And. 2.
Cor. 8.19. Luke himself is said to have been chosen by voices of the Churches
to be a fellow to S. Paul in his journey. 1. Tim. 4.14 and 2. Tim. 1.6


And the laying on of hands (by which the whole election is signified) was not
done of one, but of many. So upon those seven men whom we call the first
deacons, not one only of the Apostles, but all the Apostles laid their hands.
Act. 6, 6. So the governors of the Church of Antioch laid their hands upon
Paul and Barnabas. Act. 13.3. So not Paul alone, but also the company of
Elders laid their hands upon Timothy. And in this sense. Tit. 1 5. For this
cause (says he) have I left thee in Creta, that thou might ordain Elders
in every town, as I have commanded thee. And. I. Tim. 5.22. Tripart. Histor
lib. 7. cap. 8
Lay hands suddenly on no man. In the person of Timothy he admonishes all
Ecclesiastical governors, that they ordain only such, as far as lies in
them, which are fit for so great an office, as near as may be, but yet always
making the Election with the consent of the Church. So in the Election of
Ambrose, respect is had first of the people that desired him unto whose
judgment the Emperor Valentinianus yielded, as also the Bishops that were
present. And the people, says Cyprian have power especially, either of
electing worthy Priests, or rejecting unworthy; Lib. 1. Ephesians. 4.
for they best know the life and manners of every one.

And Theodoret when he reports how Peter was of Athanatius nominated his
successor, he adds by and by that, The Sacerdotall order ratified it: The
Magistrate, the chief men, and all the people, with their acclamation approved
it. Yet when as afterward the people did seditiously desire oftentimes evil
and unworthy men; It was decreed in the Counsel of Laodicea Canon. 13. That
the multitude should not have power to make election, not because the peoples
consent should be excluded, or any thrust upon them against their minds,
Epist. 17
which was forbidden in the Counsel of Antioch, but that the chief men of the
church might by wise provision repress the foolishness of the people. And
this order Leo also sets down The wishes of the Citezens, the witnesses of the
people, the pleasures of the honorable, the election of the Clergy are to be
stayed for. And there is, says he, no reason it should be otherwise.

And at Rome, in times past so powerful was the authority of the Emperor in
creating of the Bishop, that Gregory Epist. 5. lib. 1 says That himself
was constituted in the Government of the Church by the commandment of the
Emperor, when as yet after the solemn manner he was desired of the people.
Otherways there are decrees extant in Gratian, that the king shall not at his
own pleasure constitute a Bishope, taking a way the Canonical election, and
that such a one shall not be consecrated of the metropolitans which shall be
promoted by such violent command.

With what right or ceremony are Ministers to be ordained or consecrated, and
put into possession of their office?
In time past under the Law, laying on of hands was used, First in consectating
of sacrifices unto God Leu. 1.4.
. Secondly, in prayers and private blessings Genesis 4.14.
. Thirdly, In the consecrating of Magistrates, Levites, and Priests Number. 8.10
, Christ also, adding prosperous prayers, used the same Mat. 19.15
. The Apostles therefore, and Apostolical men, whether one as the chief, in
the name of the Eldershippe, or more did ordain Ministers after they were
elected, by solemn prayers, and laying on of hands, and did, as it were, offer
and consecrate them unto God. Whereupon the Latins called this solemn
ordination, and consecration. The Greeks of the Ceremony did name it Laying on
of hands, observed of the Apostles Act. 6.6. and. 13.3 1 Timothy 4 14 and 5.22. 2 Timothy 1, 6
, where there is no mention made of Chrisme, shauing, wax-candles and such like
toys. Yea, further the Apostles used also a miraculous laying on of hands both
in curing of the sick, of which Christ speaks, They shall lay hands upon the
sick, and they shall recover. Mar. 16.18. Act, 28.8,
and also in bestowing the visible gifts of the holy ghost Act, 8, 16 17, and,
9, 17 and. 19, 6.
, the use whereof together with other miracles has now ceased.

Yet it is thought good, that the former sort of laying on of hands should
still be used, not only for decency, but that by the symbol or token of such
blessing, both the dignity of the Ministry may be commended to the people,
and also that he who is so ordained and put into possession of his office, may
be better assured of his vocation and put in mind. First that he is not now his
own, but adjudged to the service of God and his Church. Secondly, that a great
charge is laid upon him, and therefore that he ought diligently to call upon
God, that he may be able to discharge his duty. Thirdly that he ought to ask
and expect from God blessing, help, defense perseverance, patience, counsel,
comfort, more full understanding of the Scriptures, and other gifts of the
spirit. 4. That he is offered unto God for a clean, pure, and chaste sacrifice,
and therefore that he ought to endeavor to be pure both in body and soul.

But far be all conceit of necessity and worship, for the avoiding of which,
many had rather use in stead of laying on of hands, the holding up of hands, or
giving of hands in token of faith, love society, and consent in doctrine after
the example of the Apostles which gave unto Paul and Barnabas, the right hand
of fellowship.

How long must we observe the visible and ordinary calling and succession of
pastors?
As long as order, and the lawful state of the Church shall stand and be
evident, so that it is not lawful for every one rashly and without lawful and
ordinary calling to thrust himself into the Ecclesiastical Ministry. But
when as that same order and state is fallen and broken, God does himself
extraordinarily, or rather besides the wonted fashon, restore the order of the
Church by those whom in his unsearchable counsel, he does choose and stir up
for the performance of that work.

What is extraordinary calling?
That which is done by God himself, or the son of God immediately without the
work, and ministry of man: or whereby God does of himself call any to any
Ecclesiastical office, which is done three ways. 1. Without using any man's
service or suffrage, but his own voice only, of this sort was the calling of
Abraham, Moses, the Prophets under the Law, of John Baptist, and the Apostles
Gal. 1.1
.

2. When God uses some, but yet as messengers only, showing the calling and
commandment of God, as Aaron and the tribe of Leui, by Moses the messenger
between, Ex. 4.14 and. 28.1
and Elizeus by Elias sent unto him: After which sort we do not read that any
was called of Christ, as unto the function of the ministry, but only in
respect of some other certain work, as Philip was called by the message of
the Angel, to Baptize the Eunuch Act. 8
, Ananias sent to Baptize and comfort Paul the Apostle, ordained by God to be
an Apostle. Act. 9.10.11. And so also were Barnabas and Paul by the
denunciation of the Prophets, not unto the Apostleship, but unto that first
journey out of Antioch Act. 13
.

3. By his inward inspiration he sends hither and thither: of this kind was the
journey of Philip before that time a Deacon only, into the city of Samaria,
without the priuity of the Apostles, after the scattering abroad of the Church
of Jerusalem Act. 8.4.5 14
: of this sort also was the calling of those men out of the said scattering,
who first preached the Gospel in Phoenicia and Cyprus, and did happily begin
the Church of Antioch without the knowledge of the Apostles Act. 11 20 21 22
, and of this manner, and sort also was the calling of many in France, and the
low contries, whose calling the crown of Marterdom has confirmed.

What if any do brag that he has an extraordinary calling by the inward
inspiration of God alone, is he therefore, presently to be heard?
No: but that we may discern that true and lawful extraordinary calling from
the counterfeit, three rules are to be observed.

1. First, that there only it must have place, where there is no using of
lawful ordinary vocation, which any such teacher may seem to have contemned.

The second, that the spirit of such a man be proved, before it be admitted 1.
John. 4.1
. that is, that both his doctrine be tried by the rule of gods word, as near
as may be, which Christ commanded to be done in himself John. 5.39
and which is commended in them of Beraea act. 17.10
, and also that his manners and disposition be diligently looked into, as
Christ admonishes. Mat. 7, 20. And that they be not such as are described.
Romans 16.18. which by fair speech and flattering do deceive the hearts of the
simple. and 1. Tim. 6.3.4.5. and 2. Tim. 3 6. 2. Pet. 2.14 Iud. 12.
.

3 The third that being thus tried, they be lawfully ordained of that church,
of which themselves have laid the foundation. And within these lists do we
enclose that extraordinary calling, and otherwise must we never approve it.

What, when ordinary calling cease, ought every christian, that has skill
in the scriptures to impugn false doctrine, and to deliver the true, for that
cause go up into the Pulpit?
God forbid, for this were to open a door to every one every where, which
esteems himself a wise man, under pretense (true or false) of withstanding
corrupt doctrine, to have private conuenticles: which is the practice of the
Anabaptists, and Libertines following the bad example of them, which privily
crept in and made so great stirs first at Antioch, and after that in Galatia,
and elsewhere of whom the Apostles write thus. We have heard that certain
which departed from us have troubled you with words, and combred your minds,
commanding you to be circumcised, and to keep the law, to whom we gave no
such commandment. Act. 15.24.

Which be the testimonies or notes of extraordinary calling?
Not the gift of miracles. For John Baptist being extraordinarily called did no
miracle John. 10.41
, for although he was the son of a Priest, yet in the Temple did he not
exercise the priesthood, but his prophetical office without the temple. So
also neither Oseas nor Zephany, nor Aggeus nor other prophets albeit they were
extraordinarily called of God, were ever famous for miracles. Neither is it
necessary that a vocation or succession extraordinary, in respect of the order
publicly received, should be confirmed with miracles. For Antichrist is not to
be killed with miracles, but with the spirit of Christ, that is, with the voice
of the Gospel. 2, These. 2.8. And as for the faith which we teach, Christ and
his Apostles did sufficently confirm it by miracles, because they were sent by
a new order instituted of God, to change the government of the Church.

Neither do we now bring forth any other books or any other writings then of
the law, of the Prophets, and of the Apostles. And Christ has told us that
false teachers must be discerned from true ones, not by miracles, but by their
fruits, to wit, of learning, and of life Mat. 7.16.

But these three are the signs of lawful extraordinary calling.

1. That he that does allege it, do plainly preach the word of God Ier. 23.21
22.27.28. and 27. and. 29 9
.

2. That he who is sent of God extraordinarily, have the necessary, and
manifest extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost for the execution of that his
office: as first of all, the gift of the true wisdom of God, and the knowledge
of his heavenly Doctrine. Secondly, the gift of speaking and teaching. Thirdly
the gift of undaunted constancy in the true Doctrine of the true God, after the
example of Esaias Is. 3.8, and 5.8. and. 6.1, 2.3
, of Christ Mat 7.29 Luke 4.18.22
and of Paul Ephesians. 4.9
.

3 Gods incredible, unexpected, and right marvelous blessing of the labors of
such a calling, the manifest success, fruit, and effect of it, shining in the
miraculous reformation of life, the most plentiful profit of the Churches, and
the propagation thereof increasing daily, although the Devil and the whole
world do set themselves against it Ier. 1.8.10 19. Luke 21.15 Romans 15.18 19.
2. Cor. 3, 3.10.3. and 8 1 These. 1.5.
.

May not they that are sent extraordinarily of God, err and slide in their
doctrine.
They may: for Aaron erred Ex. 32.4 21 and. Number 12.1.
, and Peter in the beginning did not know that there should be a calling of the
Gentiles, but was to be taught this same by a heavenly vision Act. 10, 11
.

Of what sort is the calling of the Preachers of the Gospel in our age?
The calling of the first reformers of the Church, if we take the order (...),
for the common manner and use, was ordinary. For they were Doctors, Pastos,
and Elders from the institution of the Church of Rome: But when the filthiness
of that Church, was wipt away: it was also lawful, although extraordinary, as
might easily be gathered from the former rules, and signs, namely excellency,
and might, and also example of right Christian life. And because their Pastors
were both acknowledged and ordained of their people, of their flocks, and of
the lawful Magistrate, therefore were they lawful Pastors.

The calling of the later men, and of such who have and do succeed the former
is also of God and lawful, but yet ordinary, because they are called by the
ordinary way, and that same manner, which is prescribed in the word of God, and
are received of those congregations, which, as is apparent by manifest signs,
are the true Churches of God, which have the right of choosing Pastors.
Therefore the Antichristians, who when they cannot convince the Doctrine of the
Gospel, restored of our men, of any falsehood, do ask us of our calling, are
by the example of Christ Luke 20.2
to be sent back again of us to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

What if the Romish Bishops should free themselves, and their Churches from
the Tyranny of the Pope, and should purge them from all Idolatry, and would
purely, preach the word of God in their Churches, thus reformed, have they need
of any other calling, save that which they have already?
Yea verily, because the Papisticall Ordinations, in which there was no
examination first used either of life or learning, neither any conditions
observed in their elections, which are prescribed out of the heavenly law, and
in which moreuer, all pure Canons have been violated, are nothing else but
most filthy profanations. And if any shall truly detest Popery from his heart,
verily he will renounce his most disorderly Ordination, neither will he from
the right thereof challenge unto himself any authority. Neither yet do I deny,
but that of the false bishops, if they are such as be learned, godly and meet,
new Pastors may be lawfully ordained; provided always that that commaudement
of the Apostle concerning young plants be observed, which is in 1. Tim. 3.6.7.

Are there any certain testimonies in the Scriptures, that after the coming
of Christ there should be extraordinary callings for the restoring of the
Church?
There are: For first John, Revel. 11.3. and 14.16. entreating of the general
corruption of the Church, which should come after, does foretell that God will
st^rre up witnesses, which may prophecy against the corruptions of the Church,
and the Beast ascending out of the deep; and Angels, that is some holy men,
which shall preach the Gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, that they may
give glory to God alone, utterly rejecting all Babilonish errors.

And Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.8. after he had foretold that there should come a
general Apostasy or falling away, he adds that it shall come to pass, that
the Lord shall consume that Son of perdition, with the breath of his mouth,
that is with the pure preaching of the word of God, which seeing it is not with
him, which has corrupted the Church, it follows that the Pastors and
Preachers thereof shall be raised up of the Lord extraordinarily. For the
very word of God, or the very preaching of the gospel do infer an
Ecclesiastical Ministry. Therefore there are express places for
extraordinary vocations to ground upon.

Why does not the Lord rather teach by himself, or by Angels, then by men?
1 He prouides for our infirmity, while he chooses to speak unto us by
interpreters, after the manner of men, and so allure us unto himself, rather
than to drive us away by putting on his Majesty or thundering from the heavens.

2 That he may make trial of our obedience, when we do hear his ministers,
who are like unto our selves, and sometimes inferior, no otherwise then if he
himself did speak unto us.

3 That he may declare his favor toward us, when he consecrates the mouths
and tongues of men to himself, that in them his very voice may found out unto
us.

4 Least without the outward word, we should expect the hidden revelations of
the spirit, or the preaching of Angels from the heavens, but that we may be
content with the Gospel, which is preached by men, which is so certain, that
we ought not to believe an Angel preaching any other Doctrine. Gal. 1, 4.^
.

Lastly we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power thereof may be of God, and not from our selves 2. Cor. 4.7.


Are there or ought there to be degrees among ministers?
Ye^ doubtless, for the Apostle makes a Bishop a degree above Presbiters or
other ordinary Elders.

And for order and policy among us unto whom the office of teaching is
joined, teaches that one may go before others, who ought to be the chiefest
among his fellows, And so the Elders, who were both pastors and doctors, did
in every City choose one president to whom they gave the special title of a
bishop, and the honor of the first place in their holy assemblies that he
should have the right of governing the common action, or be as it were
moderator, or president of the Eldership, and conue^t of the Pastors, who also
himself should be directed by the assembly of his brethren and fellows,
according to that general and most true Apostolical rule, which appointes,
that all things should be done in order in the house of the Lord. 1. Cor.
14.40. Unto whom afterward the council of Nice gave (...) that is, as
P^utarch witneseth, properly primacie, by reason of his time or age (which is
that honor of prioritie, which uses to be given to old men) in honor of their
age, because counsel belongs to old me^) which afterward grew to be taken more
largely for that honor which is given to any one for some dignity, and which
he is honored with, that he may have precedencie and worship. And which the
general council of Ephesus in the year. 435. calls that due which every one
ought, to have And so we hold that Peter went before his fellows in order
act. 15.5 and 12.4. and. 8.14 Gal. 2.21.24
.

But we do deny a^y tiranizing degree of dignity and power, or Ge^ il. like
eminency to be among ministers as they are ministers, 1. because christ does
purposely fight against such primacie. Luke 22.25 John. 13.3. And he that will
be great, let him be your servant, says he, Math. 20.26.2, because the same
right and power is granted by Christ unto all Mat. 28.18 Ioh 10.21, ^2 23.
. And Paul attributes equally unto Ministers the Ministry of reconciling men
unto God 2. Cor, 5.18 19.20
and when he recko^s up the ministers, Ep, 4, 11
he setts down no monarchy among ministers, 3. because by the bringing in of
superiority, (...)
first the government of few and straight ways tyranny by false bishops, and
false Patriarchs overthrew all Ecclesiastical good order, and lastly the
Church it self.

We do verily confess that there is and has been among the holy orders
imparity, and not only a simple order or rank, but degrees. For it is
certain that Pastors have their charges over peculiar Churches, are eminent
both above Deacons, and also above their flock, and also teachers above their
Scholars. But we deny that there has been or is any superior degree between
Colleagues of the same function, as of an Apostle over his fellow Apostles, of
an Evangelist above his fellow-Euangelists, of a Doctor above other Doctors, of
an Elder over his fellow Elders, of a Bishop over his fellow-Bishoppes, and of
a Pastor over his fellow Pastors whether they be of the same town or
Province. For the Apostles are called the master builders of the city of God,
as Preachers and Ambassadors of that only Emperor, not over their Colleagues,
but over the flocks committed unto them.

Did our Savior Christ, when he added 70. other Disciples to the twelve
Apostles, Luke 10, 1. ordain two orders of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
divide them into two Classes or forms, differing in dignity and authority?
No verily. For even that first emission of the twelve Apostoles mentioned.
Mark. 10.1.5, and Luke 9.1. was not properly and peculiarly called
Apostolical. For those twelve were as yet unapt for it, but it was after
instituted, both before the ascension of Christ Ioh. 20 21
, and especially on the day of Pentecost. As for the seauentie Disciples, that
they were immediately sent by Christ, after his ascension, to preach the Gospel
with the twelve Apostles, it cannot be proved by any testimony of Scripture;
notwithstandid that the Apostles by the eminency of their own function, were
preferred before the rest, we do not deny.

Wherefore that Peter is termed by the Fathers, Prince of the Apostles, Bishop,
and prince of priests, it is spoken by a dangerous Catachresis; yet by latin
signification, whereby he is in the Latin phrase so called, who is first in
order, though not superior in degree.

With what titles are the ministers of the word adorned in the Scriptures?
With many and sundry, whereby they are admonished of the dignity and duty of
their charge, for they are called.

1. Angels Malach. 2.7, and. 3.1 Reu. 1.20
, because being sent unto us by God, they declare unto us the will of God.

2. Seers 1 Samuel 9.9
and Prophets, because they foretell of things to come, concerning the
salvation of the believers, and the damnation of the reprobates: they expound
unto us the Oracles of God, propound nothing of their own, but only that that
God has spoken unto them.

3. Bishops or overseers and watchmen Ezeh. 3.17 and. 33.7. act. 20, 28
, because they are set as Sentinels and scoutwatches, that they may watch for
the salvation of the people.

4. Ambassadors 2. Cor. 5, 20
, because they ought only to deliver those things which they have in
commandment from God and not their own.

5. The servants of God Titus. 1.1,
, and servants of Jesus Christ Romans 1.1
, because they must regard and do those things that are Gods, and not their
own.

Luk 12.42,
6. Gods witnesses Ioh 15.27 Act. 1^8
, because they have been unto God truly, undoubtedly, conscionably, and
faithfully, a sure witness, approved by the word of God, and that not in words
only, but in life and death, yea and with their blood if need be.

7. Preachers Mar. 3.14.
, because they preach and proclaim the Gospel, concealing nothing thereof.

Mat. 16.19
8. Faithful disposers and Stewards of the mysteries of God, because they give
every one their portion in due season, and 1 Cor. 4.1,
dispose all things according to the will of their Lord: that which the Lord
has committed unto them they deliver from hand to hand; And because they have
received the keys from the Lord, whereby they open the kingdom of heaven to
the believers, and shut it to the unbelievers l.

9. The light of the worle Mat. 5.14
, because they should shine before others in doctrine and manners.

10. The salt of the earth n, because they should not be themselves foolish and
unsavory, but ought to season others with the salt of Doctrine and life.

11. Husbandmen Mat. 12.2 1 Cor. 3.9
and sowers Isa. 32.20 Mat. 13 32,
, and planters, and reapers, because they should Mat. 9.37 Ioh, 4, 38
plow up the hearts of men by the preaching of the law, and fit them for the
receiving of the seed of Gods word, and throw this seed into men's hearts, the
force and increase whereof is only from God alone.

12. Leaders, and Ioh. 10.2
Sheepheards of souls, because they must feed nourish, and refresh the flock
of Christ with heavenly food, govern them with the sheepehooke of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and take care that the sheep be not devoured of
the wolves, nor infected with the poison of perverse Doctrine, nor with the
contagion of evil manners.

13. Priests, (...), not in that they offer unto God either Christ or any other
propitiatory sacrifice, but because by the ministry of the Gospel they
withdraw men from the profaneness of the world, and offer and present them
before God, and set them upon the Altar Christ Jesus, by whose obedience they
are justified, and by whose spirit they are sanctified, to the end, their
oblation may be made holy and acceptable before God through Christ. Romans 15.16.

14. Begetters and Fathers 2. King. 6.21 1 Cor. 4.15 Galat. 4.19
, for honors sake, in respect of them whom they teach, and Saviors Obadia.
verse. 21 1 Timothy 4.16.
, in which sense they are said to remit sins, which otherwise is proper to
God alone Mar. 2, 17
: but instrumentally, because the spirit of God in the preaching of the word is
powerful in the regenerating 1 pet. 1.3, 23
of the elect.

15. (...) fellow workers with God, ministers, and 1 Cor 3, 9.10
builders.

16 The trumpet Isa. 58.1
of God, because they must proclaim perpetual war to the wicked, and must
stir men up to war against the devil and sin.

17. The voice of God Mar. 1.3
.

18. Fishers of men Mat. 4.19
.

19. The feet of those that bring the glad tidings of peace and good things
Rom, 10.15
.

20. Presbyters, that is to say, Elders, because they must avoid youthful
inconstancy and lightness, and embrace and use such gravity, as may procure
them authority, and credit among the people.

21. Lastly, Christ could no way more honorably set fourth his ministers, then
when he says of them. Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me; he that
despises you despises me. And Paul 2. Cor. 3.8. could attribute nothing more
glorious and excellent unto the ministry, then when he said, That it is the
ministry of the spirit, of righteousness, of life eternal, and of
reconciliation. 2. Cor. 3.8.9.

What is the office of pastors?
Ioh. 21.15
To speak in the name of God, or to feed the flock of Christ, with the pure
(that is) the only word of God, and that learnedly, faithfully, sincerely,
constantly, freely, without respect of persons, or any evil affection of the
mind Ier. 1.7
, teaching modestly 2. Cor. 10 13 14.
, defending the truth, reproving Tit, 1.9
errors, not with scoffs, but with arguments, rebuking offenses, admonishing
all and singular, of the calamities and tribulations to come, which accompany
or follow the preaching of the Gospel. By the example of Christ Ioh. 15.18
, and of Paul 1 Thessalonians. 3 ^
, comforting the heavy hearted, confirming those that are ready to fall,
provoking those that are sloathfull, often to beat upon righteousness, faith,
hope, charity, and good works, both in public, and in private.

2. To administer the Sacraments according to Christ's institution.

3. To govern his flock with spiritual discipline.

4. To pray for the flock.

5. To have a care of the poor.

6. To be themselves the pattern of the flock, in Doctrine, in life, and in
the cross; and to beware, that they do not pull down that with their evil
manners, whith they build up with sincere and wholesome Doctrine, or as the
proverb is, that they build not heaven with their words, and hell with their
works; and that they be not like the Carpenters, which built the Ark of Noah;
for they preparing an Arc for others, whereby they should be freed from the
Deluge, perished themselves in the midst of the flood 1. Tim. 1.3 18, 19 1 Timothy
4.12 2 Pet. 5.3
.

What is the cause that should move the pastors to such an earnest desire of
feeding the sheep of Christ?
The love of the Prince of Pastors, our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself
for his sheep; for he Ioh. 21.15. says to Peter, Love thou me? and he
making answer, I love thee, he adds again, Feed my sheep; and so again,
and so the third time; signifying that no man is fit to feed Christ's sheep,
but he that is led with the love of Christ.

2. Moreover the glory of God, which is to be preferred before all the things
of this world, and likewise the salvation of the sheep.

Is it lawful for the Pastor in the time of persecution to fly and to forsake
his flock?
There is an example of such flight in Christ himself Ioh. 7.1
, in David 1. Sam. 19 10
, in Paul Act. 9.21 and. 17, 14.
, and Christ teaches it to be in some respect necessary, Mat. 10.23. When
they persecute you in one city, fly into another; although Christ in that
place speaks rather of their perseverance, and swiftness in executing their
office, then of the avoiding of persecution. But Augustine prescribes this
moderation to Honoratus; Let no man cowardly leaving his place, either
traitorously spoil his flock, or give an example of sloathfulnesse. And yet
let no man unadvisedly cast himself headlong into danger. If either the whole
Church be set upon, or any part of the Church be sought to be put to death,
the Pastor shall preposterously withdraw himself, unless the flock fly: for
it were his part to lay down his life for every paaticuler Ioh. 10 11.
. epist. 80.
But it may sometimes happen that (the flock not desiring one over them) he by
his absence appeasing the rage of the enemy, may so much the better provide
for the Church.

But he that winketh at false Doctrine, he that does not oppose himself
against sin, by reproouing and correcting it, he that dares not with the
Prophets and other true Pastors rebuke offenders to their faces; he that dares
not offend any man, for fear of procuring the hatred of men, although he do
not change his place, yet in mind he is a fugitive. Because thou heldest thy
peace (says Augustine) thou stedst, thou heldst thy peace, because thou wast
afraid. But he that flies from place to place, either to augment his
substance, or by reason of weariness, or for men's unthankfulness, that man
surely is a hireling.

Is it lawful to seek an Ecclesiastical function?
It is lawful for him that has gifts, but yet not rashly, but circumspectly,
and moderately, and with a mind prepared to advance the Church of God, when and
where it shall seem good unto God, and with this condition, that he do not
ambitiously seek, or by force occupy the Calling, that he do not hinder the
judgment, but leave it freely to those to whom it belongs: for this is
nothing else, but to offer his pains unto the Church, that the talent
committed unto him may not be buried; for the gifts of the spirit are given
for the edification of the Church Mat. 25.14 15
. And 1. Tim. 3.1. If any man desire a Bishopric, he desires a worthy work.
And 1. Cor. 14, 1. Desire spiritual gifts, and rather that ye may prophecy,
that is, that for the time ye may teach the Church.

May hyre be lawfully required and received of godly Pastors, seeing that
John. 10.10. hirelings are reprehended?
Saint Paul makes answer 1, Cor. 9.14. So has the Lord ordained, that they
that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel that is to say, by the
preaching of the Gospel. Mat. 10.10. Galath. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the
words, make him that has taught him, partaker of all his goods. So that godly
Pastors are not reprehended, who require the wages ap-apointed for them, but
those only, who look unto the reward as the scope and end of their labors, and
fly or keep themselves silent, or change their notc, when the wolf comes,
that so they may provide for their own lives; and seek their own, and not
the things that are Jesus Christ's. Phil. 2.21.

What is the end and use of the holy Ministry?
1. That the goodness of God may be revealed, in saving men by the free
covenant in Christ.

2. That the pure word of God may be preached, and being preached, and
understood of the hearers, may be put in practice.

3. That it may be as the sheepheards Crook, whereby the sheep that are
scattered may be gathered unto their sheepeheard Christ Jesus, and so
refreshed and nourished with the food of the word Psa. 23.4
.

4. That those that believe might be saved, the kingdom of Christ might be
enlarged, and the Church preserved Ioh. 20, 23


5 For the gathering together of the Saints, for the edification of the body
of Christ, till we all meet together, in the unity of faith and knowledge of
the son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.12.13. and that we may increase in that eternal
and spiritual life, til we grow ripe in Christ, and Christ in us. Neither is
the light or heat of the sun, or meat and drink so necessary, for the
maintenance and sustentation of this present life, as is the Pastoral function
necessary for the conservation of the Church upon earth.

What end ought the Minister to propound unto himself?
The glory of GOD, and the edification and salvation of the Church.

What are the things disagreeing hereunto?
1 The error of the Swinkfeldians, who call the outward ministry of teaching
a dead letter, and therefore say, that inward revelations of the spirit are
required also.

2 Of the Donatists, who deny, that the ministry of wicked Ministers is
powerful in the administration of the Sacraments, according to Christ's
institution. And of the Anabaptists who hold that all who of themselves will,
of what estate soever they be, without any sending, ordination, examination,
choice, and testimony of a lawful calling, even women if they be learned, may
teach, either by word or writing, after the example of Holda, Deborah, and the
four daughters of Philip, which did Prophecy; whereas this nothing touches
the ordinary function of teachers in the Church.

3 Of those which either go about utterly to put down the ministry, or else
make light of it, as not very necessary.

4 False Prophets, which preach the fancies of their own brain and not the
word of God.

5 Hirelings, who run, never looking for a lawful calling, and enter in by
the window, seek their belly, and the things that are their own, and not
the things that are Christ's, which strive to get into the ministry, not with
a sincere love of Christ and his flock, but in a desire of their own private
commodity; and insinuate themselves, not only with Simoniacall subtlety, but
with base obsequies, and in servile manner flatter all men by whose help they
think they may be advanced.

6 The contempt of the ministry in them, which do not maintain with their
convenient charge, the teachers and learners of the word of God; And which
despise the ministers, and give not that honor unto the holy and sacred
ministry that is meet.

7 The Symony of the Papists, and their buying and selling of holy orders, all
neglect of law Divine and Ecclesiastical in the popish elections, as namely,
that they have no regard of learning or life, but promote rude asses, and those
of most filthy and wicked life. They use vain ceremonies of anointing,
shauing, wax candles and such toys: they attribute that to the ministry of
men, which is only the work of God alone, they transform the ordination of
ministers into a sacrament. They do no more think of feeding the flock then a
cobbler does of ploughing.

8 In conclusion, all the popish hierarchy and the primacie of the Pope of
Rome, contrary to the word of God. First, that from the authority of saint
Paul, they make Peter the Bishop of Rome. Secondly, the Roman Bishops, which
would be thought to be the successors of Peter, call themselves indeed the
servants of servants, yet are not saluted by any other name, then our most holy
Lords, they translate Empyres and Kingdoms, and finally, they usurp unto
themselves all government, pure and mixed, they domineere in manner of Kings,
they boast of the patrimony of Peter, usurp a double sword, spiritual and
temporal (and yet have neither of both) and challenge unto themselves power, to
draw all men to hell without cause, and cause even Kings to kiss their feet.
3 They allege, that the Priests of Moses law were a figure of the Pastors of
the Church of Christ, and their Mass Priests, they term by a false name of
Presbyters or Priests

9 All those proud and arrogant titles of the Antichristian counterfeit
Clergy, of Patriarchs, Princes, and such like.

10 The error of them which make an equality between the Ministers of the
Gospel. In holy functions they make no difference between those that are
temporary, and those that are perpetual, they that acknowledge no Priests,
but those that have charge to teach publicly.

11 Those that usurp that authority in the Church, which was peculiar to the
Apostles; for this is that which the Apostle a complains to be then done by
some, who boasted themselves as if they were Apostles.

12 The conceit of Morellius concerning the bringing again into the Church of
the Democraticke policy.

13 The subversion of the christian ministry, the confusion of
Ecclesiastical offices, the robbing of the Ecclesiastical possessions, the
end whereof what it is like to be, the history of b Achan teaches us.

14 The sin of those who make no difference, between the distribution of the
Churches stock, and the disposing of our public goods, which is a thing
merely civil, but confound these two treasuries, the naming of all which
things, is the confuting of them.

The three and fortieth common place. Of the power and authority of the
Church, as also of Synods.
Is there any power of the Church?
YES there is 1. Because no family, no honest society, no commonwealth, (and
therefore not the Church, which is the most excellent society of all) can long
stand or continue without policy and government.

2 Because God has prescribed laws to his Church, therefore he has given
power also to judge according to those laws.

3 Because in ancient time the Priests and Levites bare rule over
Ecclesiastical matters Leuit. 14.3 Deuteronomy. 24.8.
, and the Synedry or Counsel for the administering of Gods behests was
compacted of the Priests, Levites, Lawyers, or Scribes, and the heads of
families, or the elders of the people 2. Cro. 19.8 9.10.11. Mat. 5, 22.
.

Mat. 18.19.
4 Because in the place of that Synedry or Counsel of the Synagogue, Christ did
ordain c in the Christian Church an Ecclesiastical Senate, and the Apostles
have diligently retained the same 1 Timothy 4.14
, so as the Church has always had the like.

5 Because the power of the keys is committed unto the Church.

6 Because the preaching of the word would be altogether unprofitable, unless
the Church had power to bridle the contemners of the same.

7 Because as we must give to Caesar, that that is Caesar's, so to the Church
that which is the Churches must be yielded. Mat. 22.21.

By what name is it called?
Power, authority, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. Mat. 16.19. I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. So
called by a Metaphore, whereby is signified the power of a Steward in admitting
in, and keeping from coming into the house, whom his master pleases Esa.
20.22.
, because the kingdom of heaven (which is the Church) is administered, that is
to say, is opened to the believer, and shut to the unbeliever by the preaching
of the Gospel, yea even heaven it self is propounded unto us as a mansion
house, unto the which there is only one entrance by Christ Jesus. And to
Christ faith only leads us, which the holy ghost does create in us, by the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, which ministry, because it is committed
unto the Pastors, therefore they are said to bear the keys of the kingdom of
heaven.

What is the Ecclesiastical power?
It is that power that is given to the Church, to be exercised by those that
are set over the Church, to establish and preserve the purity of the doctrine,
and of the worship of God, decency, order, holiness of manners and honesty,
as well public as private, in the Church and the members thereof, and that not
of any liberty to command every thing, or at pleasure: but by the prescript
rule, and according to the meaning of the written word of God, for the
salvation and edification of the Church.

Whence or from whom is this power?
From God by Jesus Christ, for if you look unto men by whom this power is
administered, it is only a mere ministry, But if ye look unto Christ, it is
a most high authority, then which there is upon earth none greater, more
profitable, or more excellent. But the efficacy of it is from the holy Ghost,
which works in the ministry of the word, John. 20.22. Receive the holy
Ghost, etc.

Does this Ecclesiastical authority differ from the civil authority?
Yes indeed: witness Christ himself, Luke. 12.14. and 22.15 26. 2 Co. 10.4
They do agree indeed in the cause efficient, for the author of both is God But
they differ first in the matter. For the matter of civil authority is, a
society of men, and the preservation thereof, for the leading of this corporal
life, under one and the same magistrate. But the matter of Ecclesiastical
authority is, a company of Christian men, so far forth as they are called of
God, and consecrated to lead a spiritual life, in the true obedience of God.
Moreover civil authority has reference unto (...), that is to say things
earthly and transitory, which belong to the use of this life 1. Cor. 6.3
; Ecclesiastical authority is referred unto things spiritual, and those which
appertain to the worship of God 2. Cor. 10.1 6
.

2 They differ in the proper end. For the end of the magistrate is, that he
may keep the society of men in peace and quietness, instruct them by good
laws, preserve and keep safe the bodies and goods of his Citizens, and
maintain and defend their lives, namely, so far forth as they are
inhabitants of this world, and do live upon this earth Romans 13.2.5 1 Timothy, 2 2
, albeit even by him God will have that same (...) of Religion to be preserved,
as 2. Chron. 15.13. King Asa made a law on this manner: If any man seek not
the Lord God of Israel, let him die. But the direct end of the Pastors, is
that they may build up, govern, instruct, and teach the consciences of the
Citizens of the Church, by the word of God, so far forth as they are freemen
of the kingdom of heaven, and are in time to be gathered together in heaven
Ephesians. 1^.8 Phil. 3.20 Coloss. 3.2.3
: whence it is, that the Ecclesiastical authority is called Ius poli, or the
law of heaven, and the civil authority is called Ius Soli, or the law of the
land or soil.

3 They differ in form, for civil authority for the most part is (...) and
Arbitrarie, and therefore Praetory, or Dictatory consting in the pleasure of
those upon whom it is bestowed, for they have power of life and death, and
authority to make laws. But the government Ecclesiastical is only (...)
Ministratorie, bounded within certain limits and laws, by God himself the
onele lawgiuer. For the Church has received laws of believing, but she makes
no laws, neither can she alter those laws she has, but must preserve and
keep them, and has no power but as a Deputy or Vicegerent, and that at the
will of the Lord, and does only (as an Echo) resound and deliver that unto
others, which it has heard God speaking in the scriptures Malach. 2 6.7 Ezech.
3.17, Ier. 23.28 Mat. 28.20
.

4 They differ in the manner, both of their judgment and execution. For the
Magistrate judges according to the laws of man made by himself, he himself
weaueth the judgment webb, he condemns the offender against his will, yea
though he deny that fact, yet by the mouth of witnesses he condemns him as
truly guilty Deuteronomy, 19 15. Mat. 18.16,
. But the Ecclesiastical authority, judges only according to the written
word of God, it weaueth not the webb of judgment, but summarily knows the
whole matter through Charity, and by the mouth of the sinner himself, and
then when he has confessed the matter, then does he know him as guilty, and
exhorts him to repentance Mat. 15.25 16 1 Cor, 5.4.5 2 Cor. 2.7. and 7.11
. Moreover the civil authority executes judgment with the carnal sword,
with fine, with imprisonment, marshall force, with death it self; the
Ecclesiastical government executes her decrees with the sword of the spirit,
that is, the word of God, namely with censures, reproof suspension, and lastly
excommunication 2, These. 3, 14 1 Timothy 1.20
. For that the Apostles did sometimes use corporal punishment Act. 5.5 and.
13.11.
, it was a matter extraordinary, when the Magistrate was a wicked man. So that
the one does not take away the other, but establishes it.

Of how many sorts is the Ecclesiastical authority or government?
Of three sorts, the authority of Ministry, of Order, and of Reproof, or
Ecclesiastical government, whereof hereafter in his proper place.

What is the power of Ministry?
It is the authority, or power of teaching in the Church, not every thing,
but that alone, which the Lord has prescribed by his Prophets and Apostles,
and of administering those Sacraments which he has instituted, according to his
ordinance; and of blessing of marriages, according to the perpetual use of the
Church, which power does belong only to the Pastors, though oftentimes Deacons
in these things have supplied the Pastors rooms. And this is that, that is
specially meant by the terms of the keys, and of opening and shutting Mat.
16.19
: And it is the former part of the keys, for the later part belongs unto the
discipline of excommunication.

What is the first part of these keys?
Nothing else but the preaching of the Gospel, committed unto the ministers,
whereby is pronounced unto the believers free remission of sins through
Christ, and to the unbelievers is denounced the reteining of their sins. For
that which Christ said unto Peter. Math. 16.19. I will give thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou shall bind or loose upon earth, shall
be ratified in heaven: Saint John thus properly expounds it, John. 20.23.
Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted, and
whose sins ye retain, they shall be retained in heaven.

How many Keys are there?
Although there be but one ministry of the word, whereby sins are loosed and
bound, and therefore there is but one key, to open and shut the kingdom of
heaven, yet notwithstanding, in regard of the diverse objects and effects, the
Key is accounted to be two fold, one loosing or opening, the other binding or
shutting, inasmuch as the same Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to
every one that believes. To. 1.16. and the savor of death unto death, to
every one that does not believe. 2. Cor. 2.16.

The loosing key is that part of the ministry, whereby remission of sins,
or absolution from sins in the name of Christ is pronounced unto the
believers, according to the word of God, sometime publicly, and sometime
privately: And so heaven is opened, and the believer is loosed, and set at
liberty, by the preaching of the gospel, from the bonds of sin, which hold
us in captivity, yea from death, and everlasting damnation, and is declared to
be an heir of life eternal Luke 1.77, Act. 2.38. Ioh. 20.23.


The binding key, is the other part of the Ministry, whereby the retention of
their sins is denounced unto the unbelievers, and disobedient, and so heaven
is shut unto them, and they are bound, that is, they remain captiued in the
chains of sin, and are adjudged unto death and damnation, unless Repentance
follow.

And those keys are of such weight and efficacy, that whatsoever is opened or
remitted, and likewse whatsoever is shut or retained in earth, by the preaching
of the Gospel, is said also to be opened, loosed, and remitted, and contrarily
to be shut bound, and retained in heaven, according to that, Luke. 10.16. He
that hears you hears me, he that despises you, despises me. And Ioh.
7.18.36. He that believes shall be saved, he that believes not is already
condemned. So that indeed, the key of the ministry is but one, but in use
double. But he that believes the gospel by the power of the holy ghost,
brings also faith, which is as it were another key of the kingdom of heaven.

Whereon depends this power.
Not upon the person or worthiness of the ministers, (for indeed they cannot
properly either bind or loose any man, or open or shut the kingdom of heaven
unto any man at their pleasure) but it depends upon their lawful ministry,
or rather upon God himself, who by the holy ghost is powerful in the
ministry of the word, as often as the minister does duly execute his office
heb. 4.12
. In which sense those sayings Mark. 2.7. Who can forgive sins but God
alone, (namely in his own right, and by his own authority:) and that John.
20, 23. Whose sins ye remit (namely instrume^tally, or by preaching in the
name of Christ) they are remitted, must be reconciled.

To whom are these keys given.
Not to Peter alone, but equally to all the Apostles, and to the faithful
Pastors of all ages, to whom Christ says, Receive the holy Ghost, if you remit
the sins of any, they are remitted unto them, if you retain the sins of
any, they are retained. John. 20.23.

Which is the other part of Ecclesiastical power
It is called the power of Order, because it has a certain and set rule,
namely the word of God, which it must always follow. And it is rhar power of
the Church, whereby it is occupied, both about doctrine, and the principles of
faith, and is callled (...) Doctrinall, and also about the making of laws in
the Church, for the outward government thereof, and is specially called (...)
that is, ordained or appointed.

What is the power of the Church concerning Doctrine?
It is of two sorts. Common, and Special, Common is the common right belonging
to the whole Church, not to the Pastors only, but to every member thereof. 1
To keep and preserve the scriptures with very great faithfulness, like a
Notarie or Register; diligently to read them, and not by way of authority to
judge of the scriptures, for the Church it self is subject to the scriptures,
but to judge according to the scriptures, and to distinguish and discern like
a Moderator, the true, natural, and right scriptures, from the false,
imaginary, and counterfeit, the spirit of God being their guide, for the
sheep know the voice of the shepherd, John. 10.4 2. To know, admit, and
approve, true Doctrine out of the scriptures. John. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures. And to reprove false doctrine. Mat, 7.15 Beware of false Prophets.
And Luke, 12.1. Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees. And Galat. 1.8. If
any man teach another doctrine, let him be accursed. Whereupon Augustine lib.
11. Contra Faustum, cap. 5. The scripture is set in a seat on high, whereunto
every faithful and godly understanding must stoop. And in another place,
lib. de Religione, cap. 31. It is lawful with pure hearts to know the eternal
Law, but to judge it is altogether unlawful and wicked.

Special power the Church has none to frame new Articles of faith, or to
teach any thing beside the word of God written, but, like a Crier, to publish
and preach the scriptures, to propound only the word of the Prophets and
Apostles, to omit nothing, (...) alter nothing, to add or invent nothing of
their own Deuteronomy. 4.2 and 12, 32 Reave. 22.18 19
, and to refer all things (according to the word) to Gods glory, and the
edification of the Church: Furthermore, so to expound and prove the Principles
out of the Canonical scriptures, and to interptete the same Scriptures not out
of any preiudicate opinion, or the private sense of any one man, but out of the
fountains and originals, by examination of every several word, by
observation of the style, and phrase of the scripture, by consideration of the
state of the question and matter in hand, and of the things going before and
coming after, and by conference of one scripture with another, that they may
agree with the Analogy, rule, and square of faith, briefly comprehended in the
Apostles Creed Mat. 23.8, and. 28.20. Romans 12.6 1 Pet. 4.11
. Lastly, to take away all ordinances, or rather fantasies of all men, of what
degree soever they be, that the decrees of God alone may remain firm and
established. 2. Cor. 4.7. These are those spiritual weapons, mighty 2 Cor. 10
4.5
through God to cast down strong holds, whereby the faithful soldiers of God
may cast down the imaginations, and every high thing, which is exalted
against the knowledge of God; whereby they may build the house of Christ,
overthrow Satan, feed the sheep, drive away the Wolves, instruct them that are
apt to learn, to prove them that are stubborn and froward; lastly whereby
they may lighten, and if need be thunder; and resting themselves upon the
power of Christ, may rule and govern all, from the highest to the lowest; but
all things according to the word of God, and so, as no man must take unto
himself any authority to teach in the Church, either by writing, or word,
without a lawful calling, where indeed Order prevails, which no man with a
good conscience can despise, (for this were to open a window to the
Anabaptistical fury) and that The Spirits of the Prophets may be subject to
the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14.30.31. Albeit that all Christians ought mutually to
teach, exhort, reprehend, and comfort one another in the Lord: and that all
households should so be governed of the masters and mistresses of the family,
that they should bear a representation of so many private Churches, no man
will deny.

Are we simply to hear the voice of the Church, to receive whatsoever it
teaches
No, but whatsoever it is taught of God, and commanded to teach, and is able
to approve by the authority of the word of God.

Is it in the Churches power to consigne the Canon of Scripture?
The Church cannot make Books not Canonical to be Canonical, but only is a
means that such Books be received as Canonical which in truth, and of
themselves are such. The Church, I say, does not make Scripture to be
Authentical, but declares it to be so. For that only is called Authentical,
which is of it self sufficient, which commends, supporteth and proves it
self and from it self has credit and authority.

May not yet the Church be a means to believe that there is a word written,
and other things which pertain to salvation?
It is indeed a means, not a principal means, but only an external, and
ministerial means: but the, principal cause of believing, is the spirit of
God: and the Church is a less principal instrument, that is by which not for
which we believe; Paul does plant, and Apollo does water, but God gives the
increase. 1 Cor. 3.6 The church has no efficacy to reveal without the
spirit, neither can the Church make, that true things in themselves be
believed of us for true, but by the testimony of the holy Ghost, she does
commend the Scripture which is her chief office.

Truly the Church sometimes may compel men by her authority and perpetual
testimony, that they may be persuaded, and that they may know the Scriptures
to be Canonical: (neither should we have believed the Scriptures, except the
Church had proposed them, and recommended them unto us,) but that in private
and internally men may be persuaded in their hearts of their verity, none can
effect that, but the spirit of God. For neither faith is the gift of the
Church, neither is our faith resolved into the voice and judgment of the
Church, but in the word of God comprised in the canonical Scriptures

Whether has the Church authority, and full power to interpret the
scriptures?
No, but it has his power from the holy Ghost, speaking publicly and
manifestly in the scriptures, and also secretly testifying the same in our
hearts, and also in the authority of the Scripture, so that the sense of the
scripture is to be taken only out of the scripture, and the holy Ghost; and
the scripture is to be interpreted by scripture. because faith alone does
proceed from the scripture.

2 Because they are to be expounded and understood by the same spirit,
wherewith they are written according to that of Ioh. 2 10. The anointing
teaches you of all things Isa. 50, 16.
.

3 Because the Church has not equal authority with the scripture Gal. 1.18
.

4 Because those of Berea are commended, for that they did examine Paul's
doctrine by the scriptures. Act. 17.11


5 Because the Church may err.

6 Because he alone has the greatest authority in expounding the law, which
made the law: so we read, Nehem. 8, 8. he read plainly the law unto the people,
and expounding the meaning; he made it plain by the scripture it self: yet
notwithstanding we deny not, but that the Church has power to interpret the
scripture, and that only in the Church this gift of interpretation does
remain: but we deny that the interpretation of the scripture is tied to any
certain seat and succession of men, and that the Pope ought to challenge to
himself such power over the scripture. For Moses verily did sit as chief
Judge in matters controuersall Ep. 18.13 26
, but he was a Prophet endued with singular wisdom, adorned with
extraordinary gifts of God, commended by divine testimonies from God, and sent
immediately from God himself: but the Pope has no such power. And Deuteronomy. 17.8.
and in the verses following, all are commanded to obey the decree of the
chief Judge, but with this condition, If that be judge according to the law of
God, and Mal. 1.7. It is commanded, that the priests lips, shall keep
knowledge, and that they shall require the law out of his mouth: but they have
no promise that they shall al^aies do so: for it follows, but you have
declined out of the way, and have caused many so to do.

Neither do the keys of the kingdom of heaven committed to Peter Mat. 16.19
, signify authority of interpreting the scriptures, but of preaching the
Gospel, which was not soly given to Peter, but also to the rest of the
Apostles, Mat. 20.18 Ioh. 20.21
, and Mat. 18.17. Christ commands the Chuch to be heard, but that is the true
Church, and then only when she does command those things which Christ does
approve and command, so the Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard Mat. 23, 2
, so long as sitting in Moses chair they did follow Moses in his teaching:
otherwise Christ gave his disciples a caveat to take heed of the leaven of the
Pharisees Mat. 16.6
.

7 In councils many great things have been defined, yet notwithstanding we
see it has been determined not according to the council, but by the
authority of the scriptures. Act. 15.6.15.

What power has the Church in traditions, or making laws?
It is Constitutiue: (...)
not for that it has any power to impose laws upon the conscience, or that
they should prescribe what is just, or what is unjust, which is not lawful for
the Angels to do a, for our only Master and Lawgiuer is the son of God, b,
our spouse Ephesians. 5.30,
, Lord 1. Cor. 8.6,
, the interpreter, of his fathers will Ioh 1.18.
, the head of the Church Ephesians. 5.15.
, and alone Doctor: of whom alone absolutely was spoken, Gal. 1.8 Iam. 4.11
hear him Mat. 17.7
, who alone has power and authority over our consciences, who also most fully
in his word has comprised and plainly declared all the counsel of our
salvation, and the whole sum of true righteousness, and all the parts of the
worship of his name, unto which either to add or detract were abominable: but
because it is lawful for the Pastors and gouernous of the Church, in external
and indifferent things to establish or abrogate certain rules, Canons, or
laws, for the government, order, and decency, as also certain rites for the
maintenance of honesty, and for the better maintaining of a consent in all the
members of the Church in this outward worship, so far forth as either the
necessity or profit of the Church shall think requisite: neither are such
Canons for the most part universal or perpetual. Col. 2.5.

For all things in the Church ought to be done decently and orderly, which is
the house of God 1 Cor. 14.40 1 Timothy 3.15
, by the example of the Apostles in the first Synod holden at Jerusalem, and
of Paul 1 Cor. 11.4.7.34
: of these rules the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. says, Hold the traditions which
you have learned either by word, or by our Epistle: Except we will understand
by doctrine delivered, not an other, which partly by word, and partly by
Epistle was delivered; but the same, which both by word, as also by Paul's
Epistle they were taught 2 Thessalonians. 3.6
, But the spirit the teacher of all truth, Act. 15.24
being especially promised to the Apostles Ioh. 14. and 16.
, taught them no new thing, but declared and brought to their memories, that
which before they had heard: and although all the words are not written word
for word, but only in substance, yet notwithstanding all things necessary are
written. John. 20.31.

Show some examples of those laws which were appointed, or those traditions
which were to be made by the Church, or these Ecclesiastical constitutions
delivered by word of mouth
Such as these, that the Supper of the Lord must be received of those which are
fasting: that we must pray kneeling and bare-headed: that the Sacraments must
be administered not basely, but with some reverence and dignity: that in
burying the dead, and in matrimony some decorum shall be observed: to appoint
days, hours, certain places, concent of songs, solemn order in prayers, and
sermons, in Providing Catechismes, and destine them all to mystical actions,
and other such like: which according to their genus or kind, that is, such a
decency commanded to us all, are divine, but according to their special
form, chey are humane and changeable.

What Cautions or to be used and observed in writing those laws and humane
traditions?
1 That they be not repugnant to the analogy of faith, or that they lead us not
from Christ, or be superstitious: of which sort for the most part the popish
rites are: neither must our consciences be entangled, as though those laws of
order and decency be for that cause only brought in, as if they were parts of
divine worship.

2 That they be not preferred before the heavenly doctrine which the Apostles
receiving from God have delivered: nei^^^^ must those laws be eternal or
immutable, but as necessity shall require, mutable.

3 That those things which are unprofitable, ridiculous, foolish, and
parasitical and operative, should not be appointed for a grave, honest, and
profitable order: such as those which the Papacy does command of Auricular
confession, the difference of meats, days, and apparel, vowed peregrination
and the like.

4 That the Church be not burdened with the multitude of those precepts, as is
done in popery, and the true and pure worship of God be oppressed, as it was
once done of the Pharisees Mat. 23.4.
: and so the commandments of God be made void in respect of men Mat 15.3.
Mar. 7.13. Act. 15.10.
.

That they do not degenerate into superstition or impiety: that there be no
merit ascribed to them, or worship or necessity: that is, they may not be
accounted necessary to salvation, or a part of Gods worship; and that of
themselves, by the work done, as they speak: which if it come to pass, let
them presently be reformed, or altogether abolished, by the example of
Ezechias, which brake in pieces the brazen Serpent 2. Reg. 18, 4
: and lastly we must beware least through a pretense of indifferency, they
offer poison, and hide a deadly hook under a honey bayte.

Who can ratify or abolish those laws?
In particular Churches the Pastors by the sage judgment of the Consistory,
and the authority of the Christian magistrate, his consent being thereunto
adjoined; lastly the flock being certified thereof, and approouing the same,
who verily ought not rashly to forsake the opinion of their Pastors, and
superintendents, being confirmed by the word of God, and sound reasons: but in
provincial Churches, it is the office of the Synods, being lawfully called in
the Lord, to constitute such kind of laws.

What is a lawful Synod?
It is an assembly or meeting, and council, either of certain places (and that
is, named A provincial Synod:) or else of the whole Church (and so it is
called Oecumenicall or universal) represented by certain choice persons of
her self, for a certain time, as Pastors and governors, being removed as
well from all popular government, as from small government, and especially from
Antichristian ^yrannie, that they may expel the wolves, and compose all
controversies which are raised in the Church, out of the word of God, provided
that it be always their rule: that they may maintain pure doctrine, and
appoint such an outward cutaxie and goood order, as seems most expedient for
the whole Church Act 15.2.6 etc,
.

And of such Synods there is great profit. 1. Because that which is sought of
many, is with greater facility obtained. 2 Because errors, and heretics patrons
of errors are more easily repressed and condemned by common consent, and
judgment of many.

By whom are Synods to be called and appointed?
By the chief Magistrate if he be faithful, or at least if he tolerate the
Christian faith, who also either by himself, or by others whom he has made
choice of, ought to be president of the Synod. For it is the office of the
Magistrate, as the nurce of the Church, to preserve the peace and quiet
thereof: but so, that he does submit himself to the word explaned by the mouth
of the minister: but if he be an infidel, then it is the office of the
Pastors, to have regard as much as in them lies, that the Church of Christ be
no whit damnified, and mutually to stir up each other, that by a common
consent they may meet, in the name of the Church, without any prerogative of
places to choose those who are known to excel in doctrine, integrity of
life, and other gifts of the holy Ghost (the Laity being not excluded) as it
is manifest out of the Acts. Chap. 15.2, 22.23.25. but especially that as Chrst
did sit Luke 2.46.
, in the midst of the doctors, so now he must be present and bear rule in the
council of the doctors.

Are all things which Synods decree, to be accounted always for true and
undoubted?
They are not, as it is apparent by the second Nicene Council, which did
determine against the word of God, for the worshipping of Idols: and the second
Council holden at Ephesus, where the heresy of Eutiches prevailed: and the
Aphrican Councels, where Cyprian was, where it was established, that those
which were baptized by heretics should be rebaptized, for the Church on earth
may err, yea, being gathered together, as it is evident out of Esaias; 56.10.
Ier. 6.13. Exodus 22.25 1 Reg. 22.6 22 Mar 12.29 Ioh. 11.2 47 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.11
, the reason is, because the Church on earth is not composed of the blessed
Angesl, but of men, whose property it is to err, and to be deceived: for that
which is said, Psalm. 89.6. that the truth of God is in the congregation of his
saints. it is to be understood either of the holy Angels living in heaven, or
else of the church where the pure preaching of the gospel sou^deth.

Is there any authority of the Synods?
There is, but that which does depend on the word of God, namely which is of
Christ's promise, Mat. 18.2^. where two or three (so more) be gathered together
in my name, there am I in the the midst of them; neither is it to be doubted,
but that much more some universal company he does govern by his spirit Act.
15.2^ Cor. 5.4
. Therefore the judgments of Synods are not to be despised, especially of those
where Christ does sit in the midst, but withal observe by what condition
Christ is in the midst of a council, if it be gathered together in his name,
and the scripture be in the most eminent place, for then the definition of the
councils concerning that opinion which is controuersed, after lawful
examination, and just inquiry, has his waigh^: which notwithstanding it self
must be tried by the touchstone of the scripture: according to that, try all
things, keep that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Does not the Apostle command us to obey rulers and governors? He. 13.17
Yes verily: but both with an implicit condition, if they be true rulers, and
let not the word of God, the volume of the law depart from their mouths Ios.
1.7.8.
, if they sit in Moses chair, that is, they teach the doctrine of Moses
incorruptly Mat. 23.2
: and in those things which are peculier to their ministry, as in the word of
God, and lawful administration of the Sacraments. But yet the spirits are to
be tried, that is (by a Metonymy) those which say they are endued with the
spirit of god whether they be of God. 1. Ioh. 4.1. which cannot be done more
certainly by any thing then by the scripture, to which the Lord commands the
trial of spirits to be conformed Deuteronomy. 13.1 2.3, 4
, neither must we harken to the words of the false Prophets Ier. 23, 19
.

By what name were they wont to call the definitions of Synods?
Canons, which then especially have authority, and are as laws, and whosoever
contemns and violates them must undergo the politic punishment inflicted by
the magistrate, so soon as they are ratified and confirmed by the chief
magistrate, but before, they are not auailable by reason of political
punishment, although they be by reason of censure.

Do such constitutions bind the conscience before God?
No truly by themselves, for that they are humane and mutable, yet
notwitstanding, being once set down, to violate or contemn them with safe
conscience no man can, both in respect of scandalizing others, as also by
reason of contumacy: but every one is tied faithfully to observe them, and
that with a free conscience 1 Cor. 10.28, 29
: but so as it may be done without scandal, that is, so that the weaker
brethren be not offended, and when upon just causes we be hindered, sometimes
it is lawful to omit them, our consciences being not offended.

What is the end of this power?
In general the glory of God, and the edification of the Church, to us, says
Paul. 2. Cor. 10.8. and 13.10. is power given to edification, not to
destruction: but the end of Synods is the assertion of the pure doctrine of God
comprehended in his word against the heretics, and the constitution of
Ecclesiastical government, in respect of the diverse circumstances of time,
place, and persons.

What effect or use have they?
Order, and Decency 1. Co. 4.40
: Order, whereby the presidents and publishers of the gospel have a certain
rule in their actions, and do accustom their auditors to obedience, and in a
well governed estate of the Church, peace and concord is kept: Comelines
whereby we may be incited by those helps, to piety, and that gravity may
appear in the handling of piety.

What things are repugnant to this Doctrine?
1 The error, both of those which ascribe to much, and also of those which do
attribute too little to the Church.

2 The error of the Nouatians, or Catharists, who deny pardon to those which
are fallen, by their confession; or to those which are defiled with great
offenses.

3 The Monarchy of the Papacy and tyranny, which they have arrogated to
themselves, in translating the kingdoms of the world.

2 That tyrannical voice, that the Pope of Rome ought to be judged of no
mortal man, and that he is above the council.

3 That usurping and abusing the keys, and the power of remitting or retaining
sins at his pleasure.

4 That maioritie, and supreme power, which he has taken to himself, by
virtue of succession, and of the Church, when soever he please, in consigning
the Canon of Scripture, In interpreting the word of GOD, and giving the true
sense of the Scripture: in forging new Articles of our faith: in making laws,
and proposing traditions, and establishing wicked decrees; because as they say,
that the Bishop has all laws in the closet of his heart.

5. All Ceremonies, Popish rites, and will worship, repugnant to the word of
God.

6, That error, that the Church is the rule of all things which are to be
believed; when as on the contrary, the Scripture alone is the rule of faith.

7. A wicked and superstitious opinion of necessity, merit, and worship, in
the observation of humane ceremonies.

8. A foolish zeal of Moses law.

9. That Sacrilege, whereby they drive the laity from the reading of the word
of God, and do prohibit Bibles to be Printed in the vulgar tongue.

10. Furthermore, that Councils should be assembled and governed by the
authority of the Pope, and that such Councils cannot err.

11. That the Church ought to supply the defect of the word written, by written
traditions, which is to attribute more authority and power to the Church, then
is meet.

12, That the Church is eminent in general Councils, and that the truth
remains no where, but amongst their Pastors.

13. That the power of interpreting the Scriptures is in the Councils, and that
no man may appeal from them.

14. That the approbation of the Scripture to be either Canonical, or
Apocryphal, depends on the judgment of the Church.

15. The contempt of constitutions, simply for order and decency appointed in
the Church.

16. The error of those, who in Ecclesiastical controversies, resting on
their own private judgments and opinions, do disclaim Synods, and all
definitions delivered by Synods.

The four and fortieth common place. Of the Government and Jurisdiction of the
Church, where also of fasting.
What is the third part of Ecclesiastical power?
IVdiciarie, or Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, altogether to be distinguished
from civil, and is commonly called power, and it is another part or kind of
the power of the keys, distinguished from the former: for that the first,
whereof Mat. 16.19. and Ioh. 20.23. which is the office of teaching or of
preaching the Gospel committed to the Pastors, does properly appertain unto
them: but this does belong to the moral discipline of the Church, and
repressing of offencs, commended to the Church: which the Graecians call (...)
or (...), that is discipline, correction, institution, whereof Christ speaks
Mat. 18.17.18. If a brother do not hear the Church, let him be as a Heathen or
Publican unto thee: verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose, shall be loosed: for
the Church does bind whom she does excommunicate, and she does loose when she
again receives men into her society.

What is Ecclesiastical gouer^ment?
It is an Ecclesiastical Paedagogie, instituted by the authority of the word
of God, whereby men being received into the family of Christ, they are guided
to godliness, and compelled not to commit any thing unworthy the Christian
profession: but those which do offend, and are inordinate, are reproved,
chidden, and corrected, that they may return into the right way, and that
every one may do their duty according to the direction of the Gospel.

How manifold is Ecclesiastical government?
Twofold: Common, unto which all citizens of the Church ought equally to be
subject, and proper which is peculier to the Clergy, and does solely appertain
to the ministers of the Church, to retain them in their duty; and the common
again is twofold, ordinary and extraordinary, now that is ordinary, which
always has the word of God, and Apostolical tradition for his rule, and from
which it does never decline, and is always observed in the Church.

How many parts be there of ordinary government?
Two, the one in correcting those which fall, the other in exercising
Ecclesiastical censures.

How manyfold are these falls.
Twofold, either in Doctrine, or manners.

What is the fall touching Doctrine?
Error in Doctrine, or Dogmaticall opinion, which does arise either of sole
simple ignorance, or together with it impiety: but if they do so decline from
the wholesome received doctrine, that despising the judgment both of God, and
the Church, their opinion be obstinately and stubbornly defended, and the
concord of the Church violated, it is then named heresy.

What discipline is here to be used?
Ignorant men ought by little and little to be instructed 1 Cor. 3, 2 Romans 14.1
Ephesians. 4.2
, and yet malice to be reproved both by private and public admonitions, and
if occasion serve, they must be restrained by Ecclesiastical judgments
before the Consistory Act. 7.51. and. 13.10 Gal. 3.1
, but we must shun an heretic after one or two admonitions Tit. 3.10,
, reserving the magistrates office to himself.

What is the fall touching manners?
A sin, said or done, whereby our neighbor is wronged: and it is twofold,
private or hidden, and public or manifest: Mat. 18.15.16
that is hidden whereof one, or few are guilty, and it is not a public offense:
and again, it is committed either of malice, or ignorance, or humane weakness.

What kind of discipline ought here to be observed?
Private admonition is to be used, and that according to Christ his rule
prescribed: whereof yet are four degrees 1. That he which offends be
admonished, and privately censured of him, to whom alone that sin is known,
least that evil do grow on further, which we may redress by private remedy:
for the Greek word (...) does signify, to thee, or with thee, that is before
thee, or thou being privy to it. 2. that if he should despise this correction,
he be again admonished before one or two witnesses. 3. That if he shall
contemn their admonitions, he be admonished of the Church, that is, of the
Ecclesiastical Senate. 4. If that this way take no success, he be accounted
for an Ethnic and Publican, i. for a wicked and profane man, for an Ethnic
(by the old distinction of Israel from other people, which are called (...)
Gentiles and strangers among the Hebrews, and aliants from the common weal of
Israel, and from the Covenant of promise Ephe. 2.12.) is he which is profane
and altogether an aliant in religion: but Publicans, which amongst the Romans,
that is profane men, did wholly addict themselves to exaction of tributes, and
did lead their life with the uncircumcised, and were very infamous by reason
of their avarice, and they were reputed amongst the profane by all other Jews,
and they were called sinners or wicked men Mat. 9, 10 and 11.19. Luke 7.34.
and. 18.11
.

Yet notwithstanding this correction is wisely to be used: for if on be fallen
of ignorance, or infirmity, a mild admonition suffices, with an exhortation
that hereafter he should fear such a fall: but if he sin upon malice, even
a secret fault is more severely to be corrected: but a relapse is more sharply
to be handled, then once being fallen by humane frailty.

What is a public fall or sin?
Which is openly committed, or publicly known, manifest, and joined with a
public offense: and it is an offense, which is committed either by error, or
infirmity, or by an unexpected chance: or an heinous offense, as whoredom,
adultery, usury, drunkenness, theft, or stubbornness in despising admonitions,
and of these, some have seized upon the multitude, others upon few of the
multitude.

What kind of discipline is here to be used?
Paul's rule is to be followed. 1. Tim. 5.20. them that sin (that is with
public offense, so that no other inquiry need to be made, or else being
convinced in the Church by lawful witnesses) reprove before all, that others
may be afraid, and that example, wherein this precept, by reproving of Peter to
the face, is ratified Gal. 2.11.14
: but those which are more wicked and obstinate are to be repaired and
corrected in the common assembly of the convocation, or consistory.

But here take heed of excessive rigor, least that the remedy or medicine be
turned into poison: severity is to be exercised says Augustine, upon the
sins of few. But in offenses and errors which have invaded the multitude, the
rule of the same father is to be observed, in chastizing our brethren, let men
deal as merciful in correcting as he can: but that which he cannot, let him
patiently bear, and bewail and mourn for with love.

Who have this power of correction?
Secret faults are to be corrected of every private man, who is acquainted with
the fault: but public are to be reproved before all by the ministers of the
word, if it may be for the edifying of the Church, or else by Ecclesiastical
censures.

What is the Ecclesiastical censure?
It is when, 1 Cor, 5.3 4, 5
there is a lawful examination or notice is made in the Ecclesiastical Senate
of them who have fallen either into error or sin (those being called which
ought to be called) and both the guilty person, and also if occasion require,
lawful witnesses are patiently heard; then convenient punishment is to be
used, but so that the conscience of the offender, be not thereby either
cherished in his sin, or be overwhelmed with sorrow, and that a care be had to
the edification of the Church.

How many parts or degrees, be there of Ecclesiastical correction?
Three.

1. Increpation (...) or obiurgation (...) comonefaction, which is a censure in
respect of the sin, and fitted to the edification of an obstinate sinner, or
else of such of an one which does truly confess his sin, and repents for it
2. Cor. 2.
.

2. Exclusion, suspension, or keeping from the Lords Supper, for a time.

3 Excommunication, which is the sentence of the Church, lawful notice going
before, propounded in the name and authority of God, whereby a member of the
same Church, if he have offended the Church by any crime, or contumacie, and do
refuse to ^epent for the edification of the Church, is justly excluded out of
the fellowshippe of the Saints, or from the body of the Church, by Christ's
commandment.

Notwithstanding there has been a twofold kind of excommunication: The first
is called of the Hebrews Niddui, that is a seiunction or exclusion from the
common assembly: at this day it is called in the Church, the less
excommunication: if this avail not, another shall be pronounced against the
impenitent sinner, which the Hebrews call Cherem, that is Anathema, and at the
length Schamatha, which is the last deuouing, or execration, and that Paul
calls, To deliver to Satan, for the mortification of the flesh, that the
spirit may be safe. 1. Cor. 5.5. and 1. Tim. 1.20. But with this exception,
unless he repent. Now this to be delivered to Satan, is not in respect of
bodily affliction, as some do expound it, seeing Ecclesiastical censures do
not appertain to the body as civil do, but properly unto the soul: but
amongst the Jews there was casting out from the Synagogue Ioh. 9.22.
, and to be cut off from the people Genesis 17.14 Leuit. 7.2
, and to be reputed for an heathen and Publican, that is for profane and
altogether irreligious Mat. 18.17,
: but to be excommunicated amongst Christians, is to lose the right of a
Christian city, until he repent: and to be made a vassal of Satan, who
rules out of the Church.

Who are to be cited to this censure?
Not altogether aliants such as this day the Jews and Turks are, neither
Schismatics, heretics, and such as have made a secesssion altogether from the
Christian Church, or such as never did associate themselves to the true Church,
but those especially which yet are as conversant in the bosom of the Church,
and have not yet manifestly gone to them of a separation: the Apostle
testifying if any being named a brother, that is, which does profess himself
a member of the Church, be an Adulterer, a covetous person, or an Idolater, or
slanderer, or drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one eat not, nor have
any commerce with him: for what have I to do to judge of them without? do not
you judge those that are within? take away therefore the evil one, from
amongst you. 1. Cor. 5.11.8.

Who is the Author of the Ecclesiastical censure?
God himself, for always from the beginning of the world, this discipline was
used in the Church of God, whereby the Church in general was not only
discerned from men which were manifestly profane (as in times past before the
flood, the sons of God, that is, the godly which were derived from the
posterity of Seth, from the sons of men, that is, from the wicked of Caines
family Genesis 4.26 and, 6, 4
) but those which did misdemeane themselves, were cast out of the bosom of the
Church, in which sense the ancient fathers thought Caine to be cast out from
the presence of the Lord. And those which were of mature years, being
uncircumcised, if they did neglect circumcision, or being by their parents
neglected was approved of them, were cut off by the commandment of God from
his people, that is from the society of the Saints Genesis 17.14.
, and by the law of God diverse rites concerning pollution, as of the
leaprosie, and other seuerings, purgings and expiations Leuit. 5, 1.2 and.
13.2.40. and. 14.2. Numb. 5 2 6 and. 19.
were appointed to the consistorian Synagogue.

Lastly Christ himself has expressly appointed this order, being (as we have
learned) derived unto us from the Church of Israel: Mat. 18.18.
, and Paul himself at Corinth, and else where has commanded the same to be
kept 1, Cor. 5.1 2.3.4.5. etc. 1. Tim. 1.20
, and 2. These. 3.14. says, 1. Cor. 1.2.18.
if any harken not to our speech by Epistle, mark him, 1. Tim. 4.14
to wit with the note of excommunication.

Who ought to have the power of excommunication?
The Bishop and the Governors of the Church, which the Pastor ought to
denounce, as it is apparent. 1. Cor. 5.4. says Paul, being assembled with my
spirit; for the whole Church ought to have notice of the same: otherwise how
can she avoid the familiar society of the party excommunicated: for it is
manifest when Christ did dispute of this thing Mat. 18.17
, that he meant the consistory, or the Ecclesiastical Senate, applying his
speech to the custom of his times. And the power of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, was in their power, which were called the chief rulers of the
Synagogue Mar. 5.22
, who did also manage the affairs of particular Churches. Examples hereof we
have. Ioh. 9.22. and. 12.42. and 16.2.
. and Paul. 2. Cor. 16. says that it is sufficient that such a man, was
rebuked, not in private, not public, before the whole Church, but of many,
namely being done in the consistory. Whence it is manifest, that all the
excommunications of that Antichrist of Rome, and all his Hierarchy are in
truth none at all.

How far forth may a lawful convocation use this spiritual sword?
Not at their own arbitrament, or private authority: but. 1. By a precedent
lawful knowledge 2. Upon just causes. 3. By the prescript of Gods word 4. In
the fear of the Lord. 5. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is Gods
name being called on, as it beseems them, who do not regard theit own work,
but the Lords business, according to his word, and with the power of the Lord
1 Cor. 5.4.
. 6, with the spirit of meekness, and with especial clemency and charity Gal
6.9.
, for that which is unlawfully and wickedly acted on earth, cannot be ratified
in heaven.

Upon whom ought it to be exercised?
Upon blaspheemers, enemies of Gods glory and his truth, obstinate sinners,
heretics and seducers, worshippers of Idols, Schismatics or Sectaries,
perjured, or faithless, and on open malefactors, as rebels to the admonitions
of their superiors, murderers, whoremongers, usurers, railers, drunkards,
extortioners, inordinate livers, and such as are condemned in their own
conscience, and after their conscience has been convinced, do persevere in
their obstinacy, unbridled, incorrigible, despising all Christi^^ admonition:
but present, not absent Mat. 18.17 1 Cor. 5.11 2 Thessalonians. 3.1^. Tit. 3, 11.
.

From what things is the excommunicate person excluded?
Not only from the participation of the Sacraments: for this is only a
suspention: but from the whole body and benefit of the Church, and from the
ordinary conversation, speech, cohabitation and society of life with other
members of the Church: (...).
for we must have no voluntary, familiar, and for our mind sake, co^mixtion,
co^sociation or fellowship with any excommunicate person. Rom, 16.17
2. These. 3.14. couple not or consociate not your selves to him. 1. Cor. 5.11
But he must be as an Ethnic, and publican to us, as Christ does advertise us.
Mat. 18.17: neither must we eat with him, neither receive him into our house,
neither salute him 1. Cor. 5.11. 2. Ioh. 5.10
, but we must fly from him: and yet so as our children, wife, and subjects (in
respect of the magistrate) be not exempted from due reuetence, least there be a
confusion of all) neither must they for the offense of the master of the
family be accounted as excommunic te: provided, that they do not by their
conversation with him give any assent to his crime. As for others they must
avoid an excommunicate person.

Notwithstanding he is not to be deprived of the benefit of the 1, Cor. 14.2
word, by which means the offender may be reclaimed. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 14, if any
do not yield obedience to our speech, have no fellowship with him, yet says
the Apostle, Admonish him as a brother. We must not therefore cease from
admonition, from instruction, from correction, nor leave off to eat or drink
with him, if necessity shall constrain us, but we must try all means
whereby if it be possible he may be a new man. We must not, I say, sever
our selves in brotherly charity from him, who is seioyned from us in external
society: for this correction must be stretched no further then charity, and
other Divine precepts do permit. For excommunication is not a sword of an
enemy which goes about to kill us, but it is the sword of the Physician which
goes about to heal us, as the ancient have taught. As for denying them
burial, being dead, in the Churchyards, the Scripture does say nothing.

How long does excommunication last?
So long as the party excommunicate does estrange himself manifestly from the
Doctrine and life of Christ Romans 16.17
, but when he shall repent and show in his words and actions some testimony
of a better life, then forthwith he is to be received into the Church again:
for loosing and binding consists of contrary causes, and of the same
persons. 2. Cor. 2 5. etc.
. As then the Church has authority to cast out, semblably it has power to
receive sinners again, whose repentance is sufficiently detected.

What is the scope and end of excommunication?
1. That wicked men be corrected, scandals be taken away, and the Church kept
pure, as it is when the Sacraments, so far as possibly may be, remain
undefiled, and it is not defamed by the contumely of God, and the offense of
many, as if it were a receptacle of unclean persons. Mat. 7, 6 Romans 2.2.^4 1
Cor. 5, 12


2. That no contagion be derived to other citizens of the Church: for as it is
commonly said; Morbida facta pecus totum corrumpit ^uile,
Ne perdat reliquas, est separanda grege.
One scabbed sheep infects the rest,
Such to remove I think it best.
And a little leven does leven the whole lump. 1. Cor: 5.6. Gal. 5.9.

3. That the party excommunicated being, at the least somewhat ashamed, may
return home again, repent, and desist from evil, and to be saved. This Paul
calls, to deliver to Satan for the mortification of the flesh, that his
soul may be safe, that is this punishment being inflicted on him, such sorrow
and contrition, such a remorse and shame being begun in him, that the flesh or
old man, which led him headlong into this sin may be tamed, crucified, and
killed: and the soul, that is the inward man, or new man which altogether
seemed to yield in the combat, may revive, raise up it self, go on and
increase, and so be saved: that so the sin may die and the man may live,
says Augustine, Sermon 32. upon the words of the Apostle 1 Cor. 5.5 1 Timothy
1.20,
; according to the proverb, after correction insumeth amendment 2 Thessalonians. 3, 14,
: and so he that repents may be saved, as it is expounded 2. Tim. 2.25. 26.
that he recovering soundness of judgment, may pass out of the Devils snare,
wherein he was captiuated and 1. Pet. 4. that his flesh being mortified, he
may live unto God, that is in spirit, and may die to sin, and live to
righteousness.

4. That other citizens of the Church may fear, and be kept in order.

5. That the punishments which for the sins of the Church are threatened by
God, may be avoided.

What is the effect of Excommunication?
It is not a brutish thunder bolt, or a lightning out of a basen, as it is in
the Proverb, that is, it is not an idle scarcrowe, or bugbear to fear
children: for God has ratified that in heaven, the which for just causes is
truly bound on earth by his true Church Mat. 18.18 Ioh. 20.20
, but a judgment most fearful in Gods church: yet so as if those who are
censurers shall become Gods instruments, that is, if any one be condemned by the
lawful sentence of the true Church, out of the word of God: otherwise, it is
better to be secluded from the society of the wicked, then to be reputed as
one of them e, for an unjust excommunication is a blessing Genesis 12.3. Mat. 5.11
psa. 109, 28
.

Further, the party excommunicate, is delivered to Satan, that is, he is
effectually declared to be under the power and kingdom of Satan, and that he
has no title to Christ his kingdom, but is given over to destruction, until
such time as he has testified his true repentance 1 Cor. 5.4, 2 Cor. 2.6 7.8
: for during the time of of Excommunication, he is bound out of the Church,
who is delivered to Satan, whose bands are after loosed by repentance.

What examples have you of this Excommunication?
1. In Adam and Eve Gen, 3, 24 1^, 4, 11
, and Caine i.

2. In those leprous persons Nu. 5, 1.2.3
, and Miriam Moses sister, God himself being the author thereof, Leu. 5.2, 6
she being secluded seven days out of the tents, and afterward restored
again. In the separation of the unclean, till expiation were made: ^u^. 9, 6,
11 and, 12
In the prohibition of the polluted from the eating of the Sacrament, Chr. 30,
2.15
under pain of cutting off Leu, 7, 20.
. Whereupon we read that those who were defiled celebrated the Passover, not
the first month with the rest, but the month following their expiation.

3 In that incestuous Corinthian 1 Cor. 5.3.4, 6
. 4. In Hymeneus and Alexander 1 Timothy 1.20
, as also in the Emperor Theodosius, whom Ambrose did excommunicate for the
unjust slaughter committed at Thessalonica.

What is Anathema?
The Graecians so call things given, or dedicated for the benefit and treasure
of the Church, because they were wont to be consecrated and hanged on the
walls and pillars of the Temple. Whereupon the Temple of Jerusalem was said to
be adorned (...), with donations L^^. 21.5
, but the word Anathema, (...).
although it be derived from the same word, yet it has diverse significations,
and is all one with that which the Hebrews call Herem, that is execrable, or
devoted to perdition, as Romans 9.3.

In this other signification, Anathema is, when he who is incorrigible and
desperate, whether he be an heretic or blasphemer, or any other way
notoriously wicked, is addicted and devoted to perpetual death and
destruction. Gal. 1.8. If any preach unto you any other thing, then we have
preached, let him be accursed, Anathema: and 1. Cor. 16.22. If any do not
love, that is, if any do hate and persecute the name of Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha, which was the last execration: the reason whereof as we
hardly know: so the use of it ought to be very rare.

So in the old Testament Chore, Dathan, and Abiron were excommunicated, or
Anathematized, and as it were, bound to eternal destruction, being swallowed
up quick Numb. 16.26
: so was Achan Ios 7.7
: so in the New Testament, Alexander the coppersmith seems to be cursed by
Paul 2 Timothy 4
, according to that, Would to GOD they were cut off which trouble you. Galath.
5.12. so that R. Emperor Julian the Apostata, was cursed by the Church, in
such sort that afterward, prayers were not made for him, but against him.

But may excommunication and Ecclesiastical censures take place, where there
is a Christian Magistrate who does punish with the sword those who live
dissolutely?
Yea, if that Christ as head of the Church may be heard, seeing that we have
Christ his express word, and a perpetual custom of all ages, and that the
Magistrate ought to be the keeper of Divine constitutions: because Christ does
lay out unto us, not a temporal, but a perpetual order of the Church. Mat.
18.17. where following the custom even observed in the ancient Church of the
Jews, he has signified that the Church cannot want that spiritual
jurisdiction which was from the beginning.

Neither surely does that, tell the Church, signify to tell the Magistrate of
the people who has power to kill, but it appertains to the Ecclesiastical
Senate; neither does that, unless he hear the Church, let him be unto thee
as an Ethnic and publican, signify unless he hear the Magistrate who is of
the same religion with him, but if thou sue him before a profane Magistrate,
thou may sue him as if he were an Heathen or Publican, as though Christ spoke
only to the Jews of his time: for that promise, whatsoever ye bind on
earth, appertains not to one people, or to one year, or to few persons,
neither, to the Magistrate.

Secondly, this Ecclesiastical government did flourish under the Christian
Emperors, and they did submit themselves to it: neither without cause, for a
good Emperor is within the Church not above the Church: so Theodosius, for
murder committed at Thessalonica was deprived the society of the Church
until such time as he publicly deplored and bewailed his sin in the Church,
and desired pardon.

Were it not better to use means for the receiving of most into the Church,
then to expel them from it; and is it not more beneficial to inuit all men
to the Sacraments: which are incitements to piety, then for their sins to
expel them from them who before being baptized, do notwithstanding profess
Christian Religion?
Both is to be done, and the later of these by the mandate of Christ, speaking
not only of the enemies of the gospel, but of profane dispisers thereof. Mat.
7.6. Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast your pearls before
swine: and by the example of Paul, who 1. Cor. 5.2 commands the incestuous
person to be taken a way from amongst them, but not to kill him: for who would
have thought that Paul would give that authority which was peculier to the
magistrate, to the Ecclesiastical synod: neither did he deliver him to the
Devils to be tortured, and tormented with some disease, or killed some other
way, but to exile him from the company and society of the faithful: yet
notwithstanding all things are to be done to edification: and we must be
very careful to know what they are able to bear with whom we have to deal,
and we must take heed of Scisme, yet so as we may be found to serve God, and
not men.

What is the common extraordinary discipline?
Which is not tied to time, neither has any settled form prescribed out of the
word of God, but is left in the power of the pastors and governors of the
church, as the necessity of them shall require, as;

1. If any thing happen unexpected, to wit the delivery of some Church, or of
some great men out of danger, the happy success of the Church, and the
ministry of the word, the propagation of the Gospel in other nations; the
duty of the Pastors in this case is (but with the suffrages of the godly
Magistrate or some principal members of the Church) at some certain time to
call and inuit people to thanksgiving.

2 If any thing of great difficulty or importance be in hand either for the
good, or ruin of the Church.

3. If that war, famine, or pestilence shall begin to rage.

4. If any Church shall either be ruined or endangered.

5 If there be any crime publicly committed which is more capital, then the
people is to be assembled, exhortations to repentance, by fasting and prayers
to be made, as examples teach us Iud. 20.26 1. Sam. 7.6. 2. Par. 20.3. Ephesians. 4,
16 Neh. 9^1. Joel. 1.14. and 2.15.
, and Mat. 9.11. when the spouse is taken away, then they shall mourn in those
days.

6. By which places it is evident that fasting, although it be not of it self
a kind of Gods worship: (for the Kingdom of God consists not in meat and
drink, Romans 14 17. but only respectively or accidentally having relation to
some other thing, namely the true repentance, prayer and other godly exercises,
was Act. 13.3. and 14 23.
instituted not only by the tradition of man, but by the word of God.

What is fasting?
1. Not that which is imposed by God, neither that which is voluntarily chose^,
or by shutting up of the clouds, the earths hardening, or when every thing is
depopulated by military tumults, and insurrection, as it was in the times of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Elias Genesis 12.10 and. 41.53. 1 King, 19.2.
and it is called a famine, which to undergo and endure exceeding great faith
and repentance is required.

2. Neither is it such an hunger, or fast, which is upon necescity, for want
and penury of victuals, as Act. 27.21.33. when as Paul and his companions had
not tasted any meat for the space of fourteen days in the ship, by reason
of the tempests and feate of shipwreck; or as if any such thing happen, by
reason of diseases, people are said Hyperbolically, to have remained fasting:
this is not that fast which we speak of properly.

3. Neither that of Paul. Act. 9.9. who being amazed by a vi^ion for the space
of three days, he did neither see, eat, nor, drink.

4 Neither that fasting of Christ Mat. 4.4.2
, or of Moses, Ex. 24.18. and. 34.28. 1 Reg. 19.8
and Elias, who by virtue of one dinner did walk for the space of forty days
and nights unfed c; because it was miraculous, and a fast which cannot be
imitated of man for we must not imitate every fact of Christ, or his Prophets.

5. Neither is it simply, daily temperance, sobriety, frugality, and parsimony
in diet, or abstinence from too much meat and drink, and from unlawful
pleasures, forbidden in the Old law. Whereby the life of the godly, through
their whole course ought to be temperate, according to that, watch, and be
sober. 1. Pet 5.8. Genesis 1.29 1 Rom 13.14.


But it is a willing abstinence, not from flesh, eggs, or milk for certain
days, but from dinner, if it be to the evening: or from Supper, to the
dinner, of the next day following, or of both, as also from all other delights
and sports of the body, so far forth as man's nature is able to abstain,
either for one day or many: And if we must fast many days, and so some
refreshing is to be taken; yet it must be a very sparing, and slender diet,
without any dainties, only for necessity, not for pleasure, with a lowlines
of the mind simply seeking for the merciful clemency of God.

The Grecians call it (...), of a primative particle (...), that is not to eat
at all, or a fasting from meat, as Suidas does expound it Leuit. 16.29 3, 32 2 Samuel 1, 12 and 3.35
, Act. 10.30. I sat fasting until the evening at my house. Dan, 10, 2, 3, I
did mourn for the space of three weeks, I did eat no dayntie bread, neither
did I taste any wine or eat any meat.

How manifold is fasting?
Twofold: public which is commanded by authority of them who are governors
of the Church; and by reason of urgent necessity is celebrated by that Church
in some public place: of which sort were those fasts in the old Testament,
sometimes from one, sometimes from more meals until the evening, so that
sometimes the very creatures were denied food Ier. 37
: All which were celebrated either in the Tabernacle, or Temple, or
Eclesiasticall convocation Iud. 20.26 Ier. 3.6.9, Joel. 1.14 and 2.17
, or before the temple, or in any other public place, as in Mitspa, that is,
in the watchtower, which place was in the confines of the Beniamites, being
situate, Iud. 4.10
as it were in the midst of the country, appointed for places of meetings
Iud. 20.1 1 Samuel 7.5.6
: and in the New Testament. Act. 13.2. and 14, 27.

Private fasting is that which is performed by any private person at his own
discretion, whether he do it upon private, or public necessity, as when he
does acknowledge his sins, or feels Satan's temptations, or when he will
obtain any thing of God. 2. Sam. 12.16.17. Psalm: 35.13. I put on sackloth,
when they were sick, and I did humble my mind in fasting, and my prayer
returned into mine own bosom Dan. 9.3 Neh. 1.4. Luke 2.37 Act. 10.30 Mar. 2.18
. In observation of this fast the ancient did confess their sins, did weep,
and clothed themselves in sackcloaths, they went crooked Psa. 35.14.
, they did rend their garments, they wallowed in the dust Isa. 58.5
, and put ashes upon their heads Da^. 9.3 Hest. 4.1
; but these were but a party of the paedagicall institution of the Old
Testament Mat. 5.27
because Christ, has so abrogated those rites, that he has now left them
free.

What cautions are to be observed in fasting, for the avoiding of superstition?
First of all there is required a spiritual, or as some say, an allegorical
fast, which is the purifying of the heart by faith in Christ, abstinencie from
all the meat and leven of maliciousness, from unlawful desires, luxury,
envying, fraud, anger, malice, covetousness, etc. and from all offenses,
idolatry, theft, rapine, adultery, lying, strife, etc. as it is recorded. Ier,
14. When they fast I will not hear their prayers, because they cease not from
sin: we must rent our hearts and not our garments. Joel. 2.3. neither does
God greatly esteem fasting, yea it is rather hypocrisy and Pharisaicall
fasting, unless the inward affection of the heart be present, a true sorrow
for sin, and a displeasure with a man's own self, true humiliation, true
grief in the fear of God, and a true endeavor to practice righteousness and
charity Isa. 58.5.6 7
.

2. We must take heed that we do not think it a meritorious work,
pacificall, satisfactorie for sins, a satisfaction of our vow, or kind of
Divine worship, or a means to honor Saints Is. 58.3 Zech. 7.5 Luke 18.12.
.

3. That there be no superstition put in observation of times and days, or
meats, as of flesh, of white meats, and fishes Col. 2.2
. For the ancient in former times did eat nothing, Isa, 58.5
when they fasted, but spent the time wholly in mourning, in humility of mind,
and confession of their sins: and the law of a set fast, to wit, the tenth
day, of the seventh month to be celebrated Leu. 16.29 and. 23.27.5
, does not bind in the new Testament: Zech. 7.5 Este. 9.21
much less the fastings of the Jews instituted by humane tradition.

And Christ says, that when the cross and calamities, and persecutions do
come, they do demonstrate the time of fasting to the Disciples of the new
Testament. For, when the bridegroom shall be taken away, then (says he)
shall they mourn, and fast in mourning. Math. 9.15. but the godly now that the
worldly discipline of the Old Testament is abrogated, may use any meats, by
Gods leave, without offense to him, or scandal of conscience 1 Timothy 4.4 Every
creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused if it be received with
thanksgiving Mat. 15, 11, Romans 14.14 1 Cor. 10.25 Act. 10.15
, and Christ himself did eat roasted meat with his disciples, to wit the flesh
of the pascal lamb.

What is the end and use of lawful fasting?
1 It does macerate, aflict, bring under and correct the flesh, that it runn
not to riot; or else causes the flesh to be subject to the spirit least the
body, being as the beast of the soul, as the fathers speak, by overmuch
delicacie, being overmuch fatted do ouerwhelme the mind, and spurn against
the spirit, Deuteronomy. 31.15. 1. Esd. 8.21. I have published a fast, that we might
aflict our selves before the Lord. And as Paul speaks. 1. Cor, 9.27. I beat
down my body and bring it into subjection both of the mind and spirit. Psa.
109.24
But this must man so do, as he take heed that the body by overmuch fasting,
abstinence, or bad usage be not so weakened, that it being ill at ease, the
soul cannot execute her functions: such a kind of abstine^ce Paul does
condemn. Col. 2.23. and commands Timothy that he drink water no more, but
use a little wine, Joel. 1.14 Neh. 4
for his stomach sake and often infirmities. 1. Tim. 5.23.

2 That we may be better and more fervently fitted for prayers, and holy
meditations and exercises of repentance, because a full belly causes
security: whereupon these two, fasting and prayer are joined together in the
scriptures. Luke 2.37. Anna did not depart out of the Temple but did labor in
fasting and prayers. Math, 17.21 1. Cor. 7.5. that you may be given to fasting
and prayer.

3 That it may be a testimony of our mourning for sins 1 Samuel 7.6
, and of our submission and humiliation before God, whilst we will confess our
guilt before God, Psalm. 35.13. I did humble my soul in fasting. Hitherto of
the common discipline.

What is peculiar discipline?
It is proper to the clergy, or ministers of the church, whereby they are kept
in their duty, whereof there be three parts, the first is.

1 Prohibition, prescribed by the cannons, which the ancient Bishops have
imposed upon themselves, and to their order. such are. 1 that no clergy man
shall spend his time in hunting, dicing or bancketing: 2. that such shall not
be usurers or Merchants.

3 That they be not present at dauncings or such like: but in the church each
minister, shall by preaching, prayer, and the administration of the sacraments,
diligently do his duty.

The second is execution, which was especially committed to the Bishops, who
to that purpose did twice or oftener in the year call provincial synods, in
which as well Bishops themselves, as other clergy men were censured.

The third is the punishing of Ministers, whereof there were those degrees
Reprehension, Translation, deposition, and keeping from the communion.

What use is there of ecclesiastical government?
It is. 1. as a bridle to curb, and tame such as spurn against the doctrine
of Christ. 2 it is a spur to such as are dull. 3.

It is a rodd, wherewith they that have more grievously offended are in
compassion, and according to the mild spirit of Christ, chastised of the
church.

What is contrary to this doctrine?
1 The peeuishnes of the Donatists, and Anabaptists who under pretense of a
more austere, discipline, acknowledge no congregation of Christ, but such an
one as is each way conspicuous for Angelical prefection; for want whereof they
by an impious scisme do divide themselves from the flock of Christ.

2 The abuse of excommunication; an example whereof we have in Diotrephes, 3
Ioh, 12
who desired pre-eminence in the church, and cast out such as he liked not.

3 That Tirannicall authority which Popes, and papal prelates do challenge to
themselves, in their Jurisdiction, to wit a judgment to determine both of the
greater, and less excommunication, which is nothing else but a power to
excomunicate.

4 Their error, who either bring into the church an Oligarchie one the one
part, or an universality for the whole church on the other, by which they
would have this Jurisdiction executed, and think that with every thing the
whole church should be acquainted, abusing for this purpose. Math. 18.17. Tell
the church and. 1. Cor. 5.4. when ye are gathered etc,

5 That foolish and ridiculous excommunication used by Papists, of Locusts,
mise, Eeles, flees etc. To the apparent abuse of the churches power, as also
that they excommunicate men for the profession of Christ, not paying of debte,
contempt of the popes decrees, or legacies to monks.

6 Their error, who do attribute the parts of this government to the
christian magistrate, either in binding or loosing. As also their error, who
where there is a christian magistrate, will have him to have nothing to do
with those ecclesiastical censures: and with these, the neglect of such
governors, as punish not offenders.

7 Of the papists, which bring causes merely civil to the ecclesiastical
courts.

8 The superstitious, and toyish Popish fasts; whereas what days we shall fast
or not fast, as Augustine says, neither Christ nor his Apostles have
determined.

9 All laws for choice of meats, forbidding some, as flesh, butter, cheese,
eggs etc. Wherein consists the fast of papists. For in that the Apostle says
it is good not to eat flesh etc. Romans 14.21. and he that is weak eats
herbs, he speaks not this simply (for the^ should he contrary himself,
and Christ) but as it is used with offense to the weak.

He then speaks of such weak Jews, who for fear least they should in the
market light upon some such meat as Moses had forbidden, rather would eat
herbs then buy meat in the shambles: yet Christ would not have his disciples
to follow the austerecourse of John Baptists life and diet, but shows that it
belonged to the age of the old testament, and in no sort to be practiced in
the liberty of the new b. Mat. 9.15, 16


10 These sacrilegious opinions of meriting Gods favor, of appeasing his
wrath, satisfieing for sins, and deliverance from purgatory, by fastings
duly observed.

All which if they were true, doubtless Christ died in vain. Gal. 2.21. For
they grant indeed that man of himself can not render unto God any thing
equivalent for sins, but yet they urge that it with Gods acceptance, and by
communication, of Christ's merit, they may.

11 The decrees of the ancient heretics called Esses, made under color of
wisdom, worship and humility, that men should not taste certain meats; and
should use such immoderate abstinence as would hurt the body, contratie to
that, Coloss. 2, 21.

12 The Heresy of the Marcionites and the Tatians, of Encratites, in english
we may call them contine^ts, which taught men to despise the works of the
creator: and Carthusians, who will eat no flesh: The Seuerians who will drink
no wine: Montanus his Xerophagie that is eating of dry meat, to demerit gods
favor; to purg away original sin, increase in virtue, and to get a great
reward.

13 The error of such as allow no fasts at all, but (being led on by the
gourmandizing spirit of surfeiting and dronke^nes) become belly-gods.

14 The dissolute life of the Romish Clergy, all which to have repeated is a
sufficient refutation.

The five and fortieth common Place. Of Vows.
What is called a Vow?
SOme will have it called votum that is to say a vow a voluntate, that is from
the will, as it were proceeding from will, aduisednes, or purpose. It is called
of the Greecians (...) Act. 21.23. We have four men which have made (...)
that is a vow: And (...) that is, a promise of (...), that is to promise;
because he which makes a promise (says Eustathius) that is, he which has
vowed any thing, has laid a burden upon himself: so that a vow is some
voluntary thing which even upon a deliberate purpose or free will some man has
undertaken, (...).
as it were a burden upon himself. As every man wishes in his heart, so
let him give not grudginglie, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful
giver. 2 Cor. 9.7.

And so (...) signifies a vow, not only a prayer, and a desire of obtaining
something, but a promise of offering something to God; but yet let the vow be
agreeing with the prescript, or rule of the Law. For the scripture does call a
vow, not every promise which may be made to every man, but only that which
is made to God, and that willingly and religiously: therefore that which among
men is called a promise, in respect of god is termed a vow: for a promise made
to a man, has not the manner of a vow. Sometime metonymicallie it signifies a
thing promised with a vow, Psalm. 66, 13.
and by a Metaphor, thanksgiving, or celebration of the name of God Psalm. 50.14
is called a vow.

What is a vow?
It is an holy and religious promise wittingly and willingly made to God, to
do, or leave undone, something, which is manifest to be acceptable to and
allowable of him. In which definition, a promise has the place of the
general: holy and religious, of distinction: wittingly and willingly made,
belong to difference: the former of which excludes rash vows, the latter,
constrained: made to God, declares the end to whom: Lastly, to do or leave
undone something which is acceptable and allowable to God, notes out the
matter of vows.

Of how many sorts is a vow?
Doubled. General, which is termed both common and necessary: and special,
which may be called particular, personal, and willingly taken in hand.
General is, that which christians make in Baptism, where renouncing Satan and
all his works, they do vow themselves to Gods service that they may obey his
holy commandments, but not follow the crooked desires of their own flesh.
Hence. 1. Pet. 3.21. He calls baptism, the stipulation of a good conscience
toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. And Math. 28.19. The Apostles
are commanded to baptize in the name of the Father, of the son, and of the
holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, says
Christ, And Romans 6.17.18. being made free from sin, ye are made servants to
God, being delivered unto the form of the Apostles doctrine. And Ephesians.
5.26.27, it is said, that Christ does sanctify and cleanse the church by the
washing of water in the word, that he may make it glorious unto himself,
without spot or wrincle. Which common vow is confirmed by the catechism, and
taking of the holy Supper: For the more pure church had this custom, that
children, (that is to say they which were bapised in their infancy, after
that, they were instructed in the catechism, should be publicly brought
forth before the bishops and the church, and there should be asked questions
concerning the articles of the faith, and with their own voice should confirm
the vow made in their name in Baptism. Whereupon that catechisticall action
consisting 1. of examination. 2. of confirmation of the vow made in Baptism.
3. Of the Bishops prayers, and imposition of hands began, in part, to be
called confirmation. Therefore the godly are always bound to this vow:
wherefore they ought always to be mindful of it, that they may keep that
which in Baptism they sufficiently vowed, and afterward openly professed,
namely faith, and good conscience: also note that they shall have business
enough, who all their life long take heed to this vow.

A private or special vow is, that which any man, moved by peculiar reason,
does of his own accord promise to God. For although we owe unto God all that
is ours, without any obligation by vows; yet notwithstanding it may be
profitable to vow, to stir up our selves, to testify to others our faith
and the excellency of God. Neither do we cast upon our selves a new snare
which Paul. 1. Cor. 7, 35. says, he will not do; but rather a new incitation
to render those things which we did owe unto God before. Such was the vow of
thanksgiving of the patriarch Jacob Gen 28.20 and 31, 13
, such was the vow of the Nazarites Numb. 6.2.
, And. 1. Sam. 2.11. Anna, the mother of Samuel, by a vow bequeathed her son
to the service of God.

This special vow, is again twofolde, lawful, or godly and rash or
unlawful: (...)
a lawful vow, is that which is concerning lawful things, to a good end, and
of persons in their own liberty. An unlawful vow is that which is taken in
hand concerning unlawful things to an ill end, of persons also not in their
own liberty: such as theirs was which would kill Paul Act. 23.14
.

But, that the one may be rightly dist^nguished from the other, these four
things are to be considered. 1. Who he is to whom the vow is made, 2. Who we
are which do vow, 3. What that is which we vow. 4. with what mind and to
what end it is lawful for us to vow.

Who is he to whom the vow is made?
God alone, to whom we owe all, our selves and all ours, and who is the alone
searcher of the heart, and has authority to punish them which are guilty of a
vow broken Deuteronomy. 12.17.23.21, Psa. 50.14
; and, that a vow is a kind of religious invocation, and confession, which is
due to God alone. And he often cries out that he is worshipped in vain with
men's precepts. Math. 15.9. And walk in my ordinances (says he) not according
to the precepts of men. Leuit. 18.3. Whereupon this rule is to be received,
that it is lawful to vow nothing at all, unless the conscience does first
determine out of gods word, if it pleases god, to whom the vow is made, and
therefore unless it proceed from faith. Romans 14.23. it is sin.

Who, and what are we which do vow?
Men, but justified by faith (for otherwise if we be enemies unto god our gifts
or vows shall not be acceptable to him) and also free. Therefore Number.
30.4.6.7. Children under government of Parents, a wife, her husband being
alive, a servant not yet set at liberty, if they had vowed, their vows might
be broken:) Therefore Anna, but by the consent of her husband, or by a peculiar
inspiration from god, could not have been able to vow, that Samuel all his
life time should serve in the tabernacle of the Lord.

From whence we are admonished that a vow is to be fitted according to our
ability, that is to that which God has granted to us) and must be suitable
to our calling. Wherefore the vow of those forty murderers, who bound
themselves with an oath, saying that they would eat no meat, until they had
slain Paul, not only was rash, but wicked, because they would make subject to
their power, the life and death of a man Act. 23 12
So of Iephte vowing that he would offer to god for a burnt offering whatsoever
should come first out of the house, he undertook a Iud. 11.30 Leuit. 27.4
rash vow, or proceeding from ignorance of the law, concerning the redemption
of a vow.

What thing is it which we ought to vow?
Here we must observe 1. that it be not only possible and in our power, (for
it should be a vain and foolish thing to vow those things which are not in
our ability: such as that of the Jews concerning the taking away of Paul's
life, which was not in their power: such a vow also is of them, who vow
chastetie, when it is not a thing given unto them.) But if it be also lawful,
and allowable of God, according to the rule of the scriptures, or the word of
God, which always is agreeable to the scripture. For it is a detestable
heinous thing to promise, vow, or to offer to God, that which displeases him
or agrees not to his majesty. And when we are the Lords, we cannot tie our
selves to any thing, An example of such vows we have in our late Rebels.
which is contrary to his will.

2 That the special vow be included in the common vow. Therefore they sin
who vow obedience to an Abbot, or to a certain order, and do withdraw
themselves from the obedience of parents, of Magistrates, and of Christ
himself: often voweing against both Christ, and christian governors.

3 Let us not despise the creatures of God, as they do, who certain days, or
in the whole course of life do abjure these or those meats, the use whereof
God has granted unto us for our commodity with giving of thanks.

With what mind, and to what end is a vow to be made?
In general, to the glory of God, and profit of our neighbor. Therefore
unlawful was the vow of Michahs mother Iud 17.3
who vowed the money (first taken away from her by her son, and then restored
again) for religion sake to make an Idol at the siluersmiths. Such was the
oath of Herod Mat. 14.7
and also of them which vow poverty, and are fatted of that which is another
man's.

But in special, their are four ends, of a right or lawful vow, whereof the
two former do respect the time past: the other, the time to come, and the vows
of the former ends are exercises of tha^ksgiuing, but the vows of the latter
are exercises of repentance

Which is the first end of a lawful vow?
That we may testify our thankfulness toward God, for benefits received such
as was the vow of Jacob Genesis 28.2
and of the Israelites Josh. 6.19.
, and of Anna 1 Samuel 1.11
, such are all the vows of which mention is made in the Psalms, Psa. 22.26 and
56 13 and. 116.14.18.


Which is the second end?
That to turn away Gods wrath, we may punish our selves for offenses
committed, 1. Cor. 11, 31. for if we would judge our selves we should not be
judged.

Which is the third?
When as, by a vow we take from our selves the use (for a time) of a certain
thing otherwise indifferent, that we may be made the more circumspect, 1. Cor
6.12. I will not be brought under the power of any thing. And 9. chap. 27. I
beat down my body, and bring it into subjection, least by any means, after
that I have preached to others, I my self should be reproved.

Which is the fourth?
When we do bind our selves by a vow, that (as it were by that spur) we
may be stirred up to the duties of piety, and of our vocation: as when any
student, that he may drive away his sluggishnes, does tie himself by a vow to
certain hours of reading, and of prayers.

What caution is to be used in all these?
That in vows we be most sparing, because they which lightly leap unto them,
either do after a while repent them, or slauishlie and by consent, and not
without grief and yrkesomnes do break their task, and so do mar the grace
of the work. 2. That we do advisedly determine and that there be an
agreement of heart and tongue. 3. That the vow be made with condition, if the
Lord will Iam. 4.15
: neither let it be promised for ever, least that we cast snares upon our
selves by out rashness.

Are vows from the law, or of faith, that is to say, Legal or Evangelical,
enjoined to the ancient people only, or to Christians also?
Vows in time past were certain parts of the Ceremonial Law, whereby men in
dangers did flee unto God, and which they did undertake in time of war: such
was the vow of the Israelites, Numb. 21.2 Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord,
and said, if thou will deliver and give this people into my hand, then I will
utterly destroy the cities. So was Jericho devoted Ioh. 6.7
. So Agag with all his pride 1 Samuel 15 3
.

Moreover, they who were mindful of Gods benefits, either for benefits
received, or to be received, as for obtaining plenty of cattle, an ox or a
calfe out of the herds: or for offspring, they did dedicate a son or daughter
before he was conceived; or for health if any had fallen into a grievous
disease, or for deliverance from danger, they did offer to God gifts, and
voluntary sacrifices, or themselves, for a more strict service: that they
might show forth thankfulness. Such as was the vow of Jacob. Genesis 28.20. If
God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey, which I go, of all
thou shall give me, will I give the tenth unto thee. And of Anna a, vowing her
son unto God, and of David. Psalm. 132.2.

Or they did use vows for discipline sake, for the exercises of purity,
holiness, sobriety, and of other virtues. And therefore in the law, there were
precepts: Espcially such as were the vows of the Nazarites Numb. 6.3
, of not drinking wine, and strong drink, or of not cutting the hair, or of
not polluting himself at a funeral, by touching of a dead body, or by
mourning, that they might be taught to abstain from too much trimming or
decking of the body, and they might not be troubled in their head, and be
provoked unto lust, and that they might be free from more vehement affections,
suppose mourning or mirth, all which do greatly hinder spiritual thoughts.
Such was the vow of the Rechabites Ier. 35
, of not drinking wine, of not planting vineyards, and finally of living in
tents.

And these vows in respect of the form where either Categoricall or absolute,
and simply affirmative, which without exception or condition did dedicate
something to God freely: such are those which are spoken of Leuit. 27. And the
vows of the Nazatites: or Hypotheticall, which had a condition annexant: such
as were all almost pertaining to war: and of Jacob, if God will be with me.
And of Anna, If thou will give me a son.

But by the coming of Christ together with other ceremonies, the necessity of
vowing is taken away, nether is there any precept thereof extant in the New
Testament. Act. 18, 18 and. 21.26
For whereas Paul tied himself to a Nazaritish vow, it was done in regard of
the time, and other circumstances, namely that to the Jews, he might become a
Jew, and to the^ that are under the law, as though he were under the law, and
moreover that he might be made all things to al men. In respect of things
indifferent, that he might win all men unto Christ. 1. Co. 9.30.

Notwithstanding, although they are not enjoined to Christians, yet they are
not unlawful, whereby as it were with certain exercises they may confirm their
will to do well, and may restrain themselves from doing ill, so that in vowing
they observe the cautions before remembered.

Is it lawful to break vows?
Truly in old time under the law, it was needful that vows should be
ratified, especially seeing that, many things might be redeemed, not because
they did altogether please God, but least his holy name should be made a
mocking stock, and the people should accustom themselves to an ungodly
contempt thereof, if some deceiuer should without punishment deny that which he
had promised to God Deuteronomy. 23 21.22
. But as a solemn oath ought to be broken, being made unadvisedly, and
concerning a thing unlawful, although it be contrary to chatity: according to
that of Christ, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: for there can be no bond,
where God does abrogate that which man confirms, etc. A vow, either
unlawful, (which has not been made according to the rule of piety, and the
prescript of Gods word) or impossible, is worthily supposed nothing worth,
according to the saying of Isidore. In things ill promised revoke thy faith: In
a foolish vow change thy purpose: do not that which thou have unadvisedly
vowed: for it is a wicked promise, which is fulfilled with wickedness: neither
ought a vow to be a bond of iniquity, as the Canonist says. Wherefore it is
meet to imitate the example of David, who brake his vow rashly made concerning
the destroying of al which did belong to Nabal 1 Samuel 25 31 32
. But when the scripture says, vow and perform unto the Lord your God Psalm,
76.11. the saying is to be understood concerning godly vows, which have those
conditions which the manner of godly vows do require: because it is a sin,
to make void a promise through lightness and inconstancy of mind.

Which are the things disagreeing to this doctrine?
1 The vows of the Heathen made to Idols, and to the gods falsely so called,
to winds also, and to devils. 2 Of the Papists, who will have a vow to be a
certain service not due unto God, and yet they vow at their pleasure to Saints
departed, or to certain men which are no gods, as they which set up an Altar to
Christopher or Barbara: and do commonly according to their vow take in hand
pilgrimages to Saints, or to the Sepulcher of the Lord. When the hour is now
come, wherein the true worshippers every where without difference of places, may
worship Gtd in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.23. And Paul says. 1. Tim. 2.8. I
will that men pray every where, neither has Christ tied the benefit of his
merit to a certain place Mat. 24.26
. 3 The vows of the Monks, and Mass Priests, instituted without the
commandment of God, which do unadvisedly vow both things contrary to Gods
will as monkerie it self, and many ungodly worshipings, and other things
which are not in their power to perform as when they promise unto God
perpetual virginity, the gift whereof is not given to all Ma. 19.11 1 Cor.
7.7.
. For the gift of continency is a peculiar thing. And truly they do vow,
against the sayings, Increase and multiply, Genesis 2.28. To avoid fornication
let every man have his wife. therefore he which cannot contain, let him
marie. 1. Cor 7.9. And It is not good that the man should be alone. Genesis 2.18.
In like manner, also they vow abstinence in the whole course of their life: or
they forsake sleep and necessary helps of life, when as no gift can please
God, but that which he first has bestowed: and also those things which are
joined with manifest injury of their neighbor, as poverty, that they being
idle bellies may be fed with other men's labors: when as Paul says otherwise,
He that will not work let him not eat. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, Also Euangelical
poverty, which is not a forsaking of goods, but not to be covetous, or not to
trust in riches. Besides, they vow obedience to certain men against the mind
of the Apostle, saying, be not the servants of men. 1. Cor. 7.23. And do hinder
the obedience due to Magistrates and parents, and other duties due to
neighbors: Their vocation being despised, they seek freedom from exercising
public affairs, for which they were meet, and to which man is borne.

4. The dotings of the same Papists. 1. That a monastical life is Evangelical
perfection, that it deserves eternal life. And that a vow is a work of
Supererogation: when as, that saying, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all
that thou have, and give it to the poor, is not an universal commandment to
all, but singular, to that young man, boasting that he had kept the Law; and if
thou will be perfect, is all one, as sincere without hypocrisy 19. Mat. 21
. 2. That a fact with a vow is more meritorious then without a vow, which
thing is to tread under feet the blood of Christ.

3. That Matrimony is dissolved by a vow, which is to make the ordinance of God
of none effect in respect of the commandments of men. Math 15, 6
4. That a vow is a work of council, and not of precept, whenas no work is
accepted of God, unless it be comprehended in the law of God. Moreover that
all vows are to be kept without exception, because it is written, Thou shall
not be slack to pay that which is gone out of thy mouth. Deuteronomy. 23.21. Whenas,
lawful things are to be understood, and those things which are allowed of GOD,
otherwise it had been lawful to kill sons and daughters, to erect Altars
unto Idols, to vow a dog to be sacrificed, and so to ouerturne the whole law.

5 Contempt of the creatures of God, which God commands us to use with
giving of thanks. Therefore greatly do the Carthusians err, who do vow such
perpetual abstinencie from flesh, that they may not give it to them that are
giving up the Ghost.

6 The papisticall Sacrament of confirmation as they call it, consisting of
ointment and superstitious rehearsal of words.

7 The arrogancy of the pope, who dares to imitate God in redeeming vows,
because he cannot show that he is created a judge, and he speaks of redemption
without any warrant

8 The breaking of the common vow made of every christian in Baptism, and
also of the special lawful vow.

9 The sentence of Hierome saying, it is better to vow, then not to perform
the vow: for contrariwise, in evil vows, it is better not to perform.

The six and fortieth common place. Of the Sacraments in general, where it is
entreated of circumcision, and the paschall Lamb.
What does this word sacrament signify?
THis word Sacrament, is derived of a word that signifies holy or consecrated,
because it was performed with the adding of an holy or solemn oathe as Festus
says; And therefore signifies a solemn oath or bond, consecrated with an
oath coming between, and which was not taken but by some holy thing:
whereupon we say, to contend with another by an oath: And Tullie says that
the soldiers were bound by a military oath, because they were bound by an oath
to perform faithful service and obedience to the Emperor. 2. It signifies a
wager made in judgment, or before the high Priest, wherein either party of the
plaintifes did gage a piece of money, which the party forfaited, against whom
the Judge did pronounce sentence: whereupon Varro said, he which had the day,
had his pawn restored unto him again.

Now from the first signification, this word Sacrament, is borrowed to signify
holy things, ordained of God in the Church: which word notwithstanding has
sundry significations. For 1. (...)
generally both in the old Latin translation, as also in ancient divines, (...)
this word Sacrament, signifies, in his larger signification, the same thing
which the Grecians call a Mystery, that is hidden or secret: or as Clemens
Alexandrinus takes it, that he might deride the heathen sacrifices, of a
Greek word signifiing a most execrable thing, because indeed they were
abominable: or else they were called Mysteries of a word that signifies fables
or falsities, or else of another Greek word which signifies to initiate, (...)
or to enter into holy actions, or to consecrate, whereof comes (...) the
chief ruler of holy things: or else because they must be silent and kept it
secret: or as Suidas takes it, to shut the mouth, so that a Mystery is a
certain secret, and hid matter, of a sacred and holy thing; not every secret,
but an holy mystery, not to be committed or revealed to profane men, and such
a secret indeed, as is farthest removed from the common sense of men. In which
signification of a Sacrament or Mystery the word is used Math. 13.13. To you
it is given to know the Mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to them it is not
given: where he calls those things which Christ reuealeth to his Church alone
Mysteries, And the purpose of God concerning our redemption in Christ, is
called a Mystery, or a Sacrament, as the old Interpreter translateth it Ephesians.
1.9. Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.3. where also the calling of the Gentiles is called a
Mystery, and by the old Interpreter a Sacrament. And chap. 5.32. The
conjunction of Christ, and the Church is called a Mystery, or as the old
Translator has it a great Sacrament, which word has deceived many, to
conclude marriage to be a Sacrament, where as the Apostle speaks not of
marriage, but of the conjunction of Christ and the Church:

So the incarnation of the son of God is called, That great mystery of
godliness. 1. Tim. 3.16. And the secret work of our redemption, a mystery
hidden from the beginning of the world. Col. 1.26. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Antichrist is said to work the Mystery of iniquity.

2. Ecclesiastical writers do improperly and abusiuely refer the word
Sacrament unto external signs of holy things, of which sort there be many in
the word of God, namely many earthly things, which signify some invisible and
spiritual gift of God as the grain of mustard seed Mat, 13 31
, the seed v, 23
, the pearl v. 46
and such like, which set out unto us the word, and Kingdom of God. In which
signification there be almost infinite Sacraments: and the word Mystery and
Sacrament may in this signification be extended to the very sacrifices and
rites of the old Testament; and so also the conjunction of man and wife may be
called a Sacrament of the communion of Christ and the Church.

3. Strictly and specially in a more special signification and properly this
word Sacrament is referred to that sign of grace, whereby GOD does, as it
were, seal unto us the benefits of his promises; and in like manner, whereby
he does, as it were, consecrate, and bind us to the mutual testification of
our covenant made with him, and that Religion we owe unto him.

Whereupon, the word Sacrament, is derived of a verb that signifies to
consecrate, because we are, as it were, consecrated to GOD by the Sacraments,
to the end he might be our GOD, and we might be his Temple. Which therefore
are called mysteries, not that they be the effecting of miracles, but because
they be Ceremonies, wherein there is a visible representation appointed by
Gods ordinance of a secret, heavenly and spiritual thing altogether unknown to
the reason of man naturally, but yet revealed by God in the true Church: or
else as Augustine speaks, because they be the signs of things, being one
thing indeed, and signifying another.

In which signification the name of a Sacrament is not to be found in the
scripture: for the scripture does in no place call the supper of the lord, and
baptism mysteries, and sacraments.

And in this sense, again the word sacrament is used twoe manner of ways. 1.
By a Synecdoche for the sign it self, or for the outward action of the
sacrament only. 2. In the lawful use, a sacrament does comprehend the
representation or outward sign and also the thing signified, or the inward
benefit of grace: for no sacrament can fully be expressed or understood
without a trope, yet the trope must be in the words, not in the things or
matter. The greek Fathers call them Symboles or signs, and representations as
Peter also. (...)
1. Pet. 3.21. calls our baptism a representation that is an exampler
correspondent to that deliverance which came unto the church in the flood.

What is a sacrament?
Seeing that a sacrament is not some simple subject, not yet a compound, or
some whole thing consisting of form and matter, or bodily and material: or
else some third substance compounded of twoe substances; but a divine
institution, it must be defined by the scope, and the end wherefore, that is
mention being made of the end, wherefore the sacrament is instituted.

(...)
It is then, Paul being the definer of it, a sign or seal of the righteousness
which is of faith, that is to say, whereby the righteousness of faith, and the
communion of the faithful in Christ the head and with all the members of the
same mystical body, I say the communion, incorporation, conjunction, is not
only signified, but also sealed; to wit so far forth as the holy ghost does
perform that inwardly in deed, which the outward ceremony does represent.
For although we cannot rightly reason from the special to the general, but on
the contrary, yet notwithstanding that is rightly attributed to the general,
that is to say to a sacrament, which is common to all the specials, as namely
to circumcision, and to the other sacraments Romans 4.11 1 Cor. 10.16 (...) 12.13
.

Or else, it is an holy action, enjoined of God unto the church wherein as God,
by a fit proportion of the outward Elements, and the things signified, does as
it were offer by the hands of the minister the signs of things which belong to
our salvation in Christ, to the senses of the body: So he does offer and
apply these self same heavenly things to the mind by the Holy Ghost, to the
intent that they might be more and more spiritually sealed up in them, through
faith.

Or else, it is a visible sign of invisible and saving grace of God,
instituted of God, to seal and confirm that grace in us.

Or a Sacrament is a testimony of the grace of God toward us in Christ,
confirmed by a visible sign, with the mutual testification of our faith and
religion toward him Genesis 17, 7 10.11 1 Cor. 11, 23
.

Who is author of the Sacrament?
God alone: for as it belongs to God alone.

1. To promise and to give grace.

2. To make a covenant with the Church.

3. To bestow the gift of righteousness: So also it belongs to him alone to
institute a sign of grace, or of the covenant and remission of sins. 1. Cor.
11.23. I have received of the Lord, that which I have also delivered unto you.
Therefore may we not receive any other Sacrament into the Church, then those
which God has ordained to that use: neither yet is the form or manner of the
institution any manner of ways to be violated. For Thomas says well, The
ordaining of Sacraments is a note of the excellency, power and majesty of God.

Why did God add the Sacraments to the word?
1. To the intent that they might be visible Sermons of his promises applied to
our capacity, who be still carnal; whereupon Augustine says, that the Sacrament
is a visible, or a sensible word.

2. That they might be signs, whereby men, yea such as be most ignorant and
rude, might be stirred up to persuade themselves, that God does not mock men
when he promises his grace, and eternal life unto them: and that by such
signs, they might be led by the hand, unto the thing promised, as it were
present. For if thou had been spiritual, says Chrysostom, God would have
propounded his spiritual gifts spiritually unto thee: But now seeing the soul
is united to the body, he propounds his spiritual gifts unto thee by those
which are corporal.

3. That he might underprop, and confirm our faith in his promises: none
otherwise then civil contracts being subscribed by the Secretary, the Princes
seal is wont to be added, that so there may be a strong evidence, or
authentical instrument.

4. That by signs of his own institution, he might call us back to worship
him, might hold us therein, and might put a difference between us, and other
sects. Whereby it comes to pass that the first man (yea being pure and free
from sin) hereupon earth had need of Sacraments, because he was made
earthly and natural 1. Cor. 15.45
. But after that we shall be in heaven, heavenly and spiritual, and have once
obtained the promises, we shall then have no more need of them.

In what predicament is a Sacrament?
To wit, of Relation, so far forth as it is considered as a sign, or a thing
signifying, in respect of the end, or the scope whereunto it is ordained, for a
sign has relation to the thing signified. Therefore a Sacrament, (...)
is in the predicament of Relatiues, that is of those things which have
relation to others. For Relatiues are such whose essence is nothing else but
this, by some means to have relation or reference to another thing.

And it is also in the predicament of Action, so far, as being a visible
action, it is commanded to be done with a certain ceremony: For the water
simply taken by it self, is not the baptitisme, but the sprinkling of the
water in a convenient manner, together with the institution of Christ. Neither
are the bread and wine simply, and by themselves understood, the Supper of the
Lord, but the bread together with the breaking, distributing, taking and eating
of bread, and drinking of wine, as it is ordained by Christ, for the
remembrance of him.

What is the genus of a Sacrament?
A sign, because it signifies something. For every Sacrament is a sign, but
not every sign is a Sacrament, but a sign in lawful use, for that golden
rule is infallible, nothing has the nature of a Sacrament, out of the use
instituted of God. Now a sign, as Augustine defines it, ^ib. 2, doc^ Christ
is a thing, that besides that form which it offers unto the senses, makes
some other thing thereby to come into the mind. So Genesis 17.11. Circumcision is
called the sign of the covenant. And of signs some be natural, which
signify of their own nature, as the dawning of the day, is a sign of the
sun approaching: some be at the will of the Institutor, as the signs of
families: And these are such as either have some Analogy and likeness with
the thing they do signify: of which sort be the sacraments. Whereupon
Augustine says, If the sacraments should not have a certain likeness with
those things whereof they be sacraments, they should not be sacraments: or
else such as have no similitude with the thing signified, but do altogether
depend of the institution. In which sense, words are signs of things, and the
ringing of the bell, a sign there shall be a Sermon.

How many sorts of signs be propounded to be considered in the scriptures?
Three sorts: some of Doctrine, or of the word, as the extraordinary and
universal work of God, or miracles, which are seen with the eyes, where at
the minds of men do wonder, which give testimony of the infallible truth of
the word, unto the glory of God. As in the old Testament, Abraham's smoking
furnace, and burning firebrand, Gen 15.17
the bush burning and not consumed Exodus 3.2
, Epist 23.40 Bonif
Moses his rod Exodus 4.2 3
, the pillar of a cloud in the day, and that pillar of fire by night Cap. 13.20
, the drying up of the red sea Ca. 14.14
, water flowing out of the rock Cap. 17, 6
, the standing still of the Sun Iosu. 10.13
, the sign of the Prophet Jonah.

In the new, the healing of the sick, raising up of the dead, casting out of
Devils Mark. 16 17, 18
, etc.

Some of Anger: and those either threatening with some fell judgments to hang
over men's heads for their sins, as namely wonders in heaven, comets,
tempests, earthquakes, the sign of the son of man Mat, 24 30
: or else punishing, both temporal, as thunders, lightnings, famine,
pestilence, wars, evil beasts: as also spiritual, to wit, heresies,
corrupting of Doctrine, idolatry, schisms, which the Lord sends, that men
being admonished and corrected by these might repent, and there be signs which
God shall send before the day of Christ's coming Mat, 24, 4 5
.

Others be the signs of grace, which are added to the promises of God, and do
testify of the grace of God toward us. Wherefore they are not signs simply,
which serve to shadow out, and signify only the things with God promises, but
seals and pledges, because they seal up unto the believers the things
promised Genesis 9.22 and. 37.9.10
.

Of how many essential parts does a Sacrament consist?
Of three.

1. The word of the institution or the commandment, and the ordinance of God,
and the promise of grace; I say of grace, not of any of the gifts of God,
either corporal or spiritual, but of Justification, that is to say, of the
remission of sins, and life eternal: which is repeated in the Church, not
for consecration sake, neither that any virtue might be added to the Element,
but that the faithful might hear and believe it.

2. Of an outward sign and visible, which otherwise is called an Element,
because in the first Sacrament, that is in Baptism the sign is the element of
watet: by another name, by a visible form, because it is a bodily thing and
sensible, subject to the sight, and sense: otherwise a Symbol, because of the
proportion and resemblance unto the thing signified: and because it is as it
were a mark token of Gods promise. Both which Augustine comprehends in this
saying. Let the word, (to wit of the institution and of the promise of grace)
be added to the element, and there is a Sacrament.

3. Of the thing signified, which some call the matter of the sacrament, others
the invisible grace, or the wholesome gift. As in Circumcision there is the
apparent commandment of the Lord, Thou shall keep the covenant. Genesis 17. and
the promise is expressed, I will be thy God, the God of thy seed after thee;
the sign, the cutting off of the foreskin: lastly the thing signified, the
Circumcision of the heart, or of the old nature Deu. 10, 15 et. 30.6
.

What is the matter of the Sacrament?
It is double, one sensible, external or corporal, subject to the bodily
sense: the other intelligible, internal, spiritual, and heavenly, which is
perceived with the mind, and understanding, I say with the mind, endued with
that her fit instrument to receive it, namely faith.

What is tho outward matter?
It is double, both a bodily substance and not an accident, as water, bread,
wine, as also a ceremonial action or rite, which is performed by men in a
certain manner: as circumcision in a certain part of the body, the external
and corporal washing, eating, and drinking.

Wherefore did God choose such common things in the ordering of the Sacraments?
Least that in the use of them being therefore ordained that, they might lift up
our minds to heaven: we should on the contrary stick in the earthly things,
and admire them.

What is the inward matter?
It is the thing signified: and that in like manner, both the substance, and
the action. The substance is Christ, who is called the very marowe of all the
Sacraments, with all his riches which he has in himself: and either properly
is termed whole Christ: or else by a Synecdoche (a part for the whole) is
called the body of Christ delivered unto death, or his blood shed. The action
is proper to God alone, and it is either justification and washing, or
spiritual circumcision, or the communion of the body and blood of Christ.

What is the form common to all Sacraments?
If we consider the very essence of a Sacrament, his form, or at least the
special part of the essence, and the rule whereof it does depend, and has his
being, is the ordinance or institution of God, contained in the word. For
Sacraments are that which God does testify, by the word of his institution and
promise that he would have them to be: so that that very word must be as
it were the very life of the Sacrament, or the cause whereby a Sacrament is
that which it is.

But by the word understand not, that it which is conceived in a certain number
of syllables uttered without understanding and faith, has any force to
consecrate or transform the element, and to give any virtue to it.

For as the form of the letters can do nothing: so neither the pronouncing or
sound of the words: but that which being uttered by God, is preached and
published by the Minister, with a clear voice, does cause us to understand and
believe what the visible sign means. Whereupon Augustine says, not because
it is spoken, but because it is believed.

Furthermore, the goodly Analogy, or proportion of the sign with the thing
signified, and the mutual reference or relation, affection, and habit of the
one to the other, because the essence of a Sacrament is nothing else but to
have relation to the thing signified, and Sacramented, that is to say, the
thing signified.

Now the Analogy or proportion, which is the agreement, or conueniencie, of
one thing having relation to another, is in the proportion or likeness of the
actions or effects, as for example, as water washes away filth: even so the
blood of Christ washes away sins.

The relation is in the institution unto the thing signified, or in the mutual
respect of the one unto the other, as when together with the sign exhibited to
the senses, the thing signified is represented to the understanding.

To conclude, if we respect the use, the form of a Sacrament, is an action,
wherein an earthly thing is lawfully and rightly administered and used for that
end, whereunto it is appointed of God: or the manner of performing and
celebrating the Sacrament: for the form of the Action, is the manner wherein
it is done.

What manner of conjunction or union of the signs and the things signified is
in the Sacraments?
Not natural by the touching and knitting together of substances, or the
unity, and union of the accidents and subject, to make one and the same
indiuiduum, or local, without distance, or existing of one in the other.
Neither is it to be called spiritual, as if it should give life to the signs
themselves, which is against divinity: But such as has conueniencie and
relation, or Sacramental, and significatiue, whereby things invisible, in a
fit proportion are represented by visible, and in some sort are made one, for
the mutual respect which they have between themselves; as the Scepter, and
the Roman Empire. Such is this union, as is between the true Relative, and
his Correlatiue: as between the father and the son the union is not natural
and substantial, but of Relation, which consists not in transubstantiation,
or consubstantiation, not in converting, or including; but in the natural
respect, and affection one unto the other. So then as the father is therefore a
father, not because he is either converted to the son, or because he
contains his son in himself essentially, but because he has relation to
his son: even so it is a sign or Sacrament, not because it is converted in
to the thing signified, or contains it, as a sack does corn or a cup of
wine, but because the sign and the thing signified are united by the union of
relation, as the son with the father and the servant is joined with the
master: or else as the union is between the voice of the preaching of the
Gospel, and the thing promised in the Gospel, not real, but intelligible and
apprehended by faith.

But in respect of us, and of the things signified, the conjunction is not in
truth essential and personal but mystical. and yet in its kind real, to
wit spiritual by the power of the holy Ghost alone, who brings to pass,
that Jesus Christ, who now as he is man has his being in heaven, and yet is no
less truly given to us which are in earth, then the signs themselves, namely
so far forth as our faith beholding him in the Sacraments, does clime up into
the heavens, that we may more and more truly embrace him, and he may live and
abide in us. For the holy Ghost knows to join most nearely, together by the
bond of faith, those things which if you respect the distance of the place are
farthest asunder, which is done after a heavenly and spiritual manner, (and
not naturally: not by the joining and touching of substances) after which
manner the believers are most nerely joined together one with another: as also
the husband and the wife are knit together by the bond of marriage, although
they be far asunder, in regard of the distance of places.

Whether are both the things and the signs offered unto us of God jointly
together?
Yes jointly together in respect of God that promises truly, and without all
deceit. but yet distinctly notwithstanding, so as oftentimes he that takes
the signs, receives nothing less then the thing it self. Whereupon
Augustine says, upon Leuit 7 quest. 84
It nothing avails Simon Magus to have the visible Baptism, who wanted the
invisible sanctification.

What is the manner of receiving the signs and the things signified?
The manner of receiving the signs is natural or bodily, and the signs are
received both of the believers and also of the unbelievers after a natural
manner, although with contrary success. But the things themselves signified,
are communicated in respect of God, that gives them by the holy Ghost: and in
respect of us by faith, whereby alone Christ with all his benefits is
apprehended of us Ephesians. 3.17
. For a thing intelligible, and spiritually propounded, cannot be perceived
unless it be after a spiritual manner, that spiritual things, might answer
to spiritual things; corporal and visible, to corporal and visible 1 Cor.
1.13
.

In this Treatise what do these things signify, Really Substantially,
corporally, Sacramentally, Spiritually?
Really signifies properly, that the very thing it self is truly received,
to which these words, substantially, and essentially, are equivalent. So the
believers in the right use of the Sacrament, are said to receive Christ,
really, substantially, or essentially: also to take the holy elements, really,
substantially, and essentially. But, corporally and spiritually signify the
manner of receiving, only the signs are received corporally, but Christ
spiritually. And to receive, Sacramentally, is to receive the signs of the
body and blood of Christ.

Whether do all they enjoy the matter of the Sacraments, which use visible
signs.
No, but only the believers, unto whom the promise of grace does belong, and
for whose sake the same is ratified by certain seals: For what part or
fellowshippe has the believer with the unbeliever? 2. Cor. 6.15.

Is it possible for a man to be guilty by means of the thing signified, who
is not partaker of the same?
Yes he may, for the abusing of the signs, and for the contumelious reproach
against the thing signified: none otherwise then he which despises the
servants of Christ, is guilty of the contempt of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
his Father also Luke 10.16
.

Is faith of the Substance and essence of the Sacraments?
No, because faith makes not a Sacrament to be a Sacrament, but the
institution of God. Indeed faith is necessary, that we may receive the matter
of the Sacrament, for, by faith Christ dwells in our hearts Ephesians. 3.17.
. But whether a man believe, or whether he believe not, if the Sacrament be
rightly administered, he receives the true Sacrament, namely in respect of God.

Yet in respect of the Communicant, if a man believe not, he receives the bare
sign: because without faith, neither the word nor the Sacrament can do us any
good.

Whence is the consecration, or the sanctification and blessing of the
Sacraments?
Not by making the sign of the Cross, the repeating and secret murmuring of
any words, as Iuglers and Coniurers do repeat their charms in conceived words,
namely for example, of Jupiter that sends the thunder, or of bringing the Moon
out of Heaven, to wit, by the force and virtue of letters and syllables, if
they be repeated and uttered after a certain manner. But from the holy and
good will, choice, institution, or ordinance, blessing, consecration, work,
commandment, the ratification of the word, and the promise of God himself:
who for the good of men has made choice of water, bread and wine, and has
instituted and by his ordinance set the^ apart for some special purpose, and
because he has showed that it is his pleasure to have them for Sacraments, and
how he will have them celebrated.

Further by the holy use, which is performed by prayers: by the commemoration
of the benefits and promises of God, and giving of thanks.

When is such consecration made?
First indeed the Lord himself made it once, and together by himself in that
first institution, namely in that last Supper, and this being once made, does
consecrate and sanctify the Sacraments to the Church until the end of the
world: as that word once spoken, Increase and multiply, is perpetually
effectual. Genesis 1.28.

But now he does repeat the same by prayers and the word, whereby the whole
Institution and use of the external things is clearly unfolded by men, and
those not any whomsoever, but such as be lawfully called, that is to say,, by
his Pastors and Ministers. For otherwise it is no Sacrament, but a profanation
of the Sacrament.

Whether is there any change of the signs in the Sacraments?
Truly there is: not in the nature or substance, the natural quality, or
quantity of the Elements, the change, I say, is not of the essence and nature,
as says Theodoret: But only in respect of the end, office, condition, and use
for which they be propounded in the Church: namely, because they begin to
signify to us in truth, things altogether heavenly, and divine, and that not
of their own nature, but by the appointment of the son of God. As namely for
example sake, when water, btead, and wine are removed from the common use, and
by the commandment of God are made the signs of the body and blood of the
Lord, which thing certainly they have not by nature: For then every water
should be the sign of Christ's blood, but by the institution of the Lord
himself. Also the name of the signs are indeed changed, but not the matter,
namely to the intent that we might have a greater regard of the things
signified then of the signs, and that the mind might mount up from the
Elements unto Christ. Therefore Theodoret in (...) says that, Christ honored
the visible signs, by caling them his body and blood, not changing the nature
of the signs, but adding grace to the nature of the signs. Now that grace
added to nature is, that those Elements are made Sacraments, that is, means and
Instruments of the holy Ghost: to confirm, preserve, and increase the
Communion of Christ. Is this change perpetual?

No, because it has respect unto the use only, and that public too in the
Church. Wherefore out of the very action it self of the mysteries or the
administration of the Sacraments, there is no place for it. For nothing has
the nature of a Sacrament, out of the use which Christ instituted. How are the
Sacramental phrases or speeches to be expounded and understood?

All the places of Scripture are not to be understood according to the letter,
but according to the sense, having regard to the analogy of faith, and the
circumstances of those places. But specially the places which concern the
Sacraments, cannot be taken or understood according to the litter, by reason of
the nature of the sacraments, where in we do not consider one thing simply but
twain, to wit, the visible and external signs, and also the heavenly and
visible things signified by them. How many kinds of Sacraments be there?

In respect of the estate of men there be two: Some before the fall, in the
state of integrity and innocence of our first parents: others ordained of God
after the fall. And before the fall there were two Sacraments, one commanded, the
other forbidden. The former of immortality, which of the end is called the the
tree of life, not that it could give life, wherewith Adam was now already
indewed, but Sacramentally, because it was a pledge, sign and remembrance of
immortality to the^ which might eat of the fruit thereof. Another of trial,
which by a Metonimie was named the the tree of knowledge, or of experience, of
good and evil, of the event, or issue; to wit, because man after the eating
thereof should know and have experience, both what great good he had lost, and
into how great misery he had plunged himself. From the tasting whereof he should
have abstained, to declare unto God his due obedience Genesis 2.9 17 et. 3.3.22
, not that god would have man to wander up and down like a beast without
judgment and choice of things, for he had judgment given him whereby he might
discern between virtues and vices, but that he might not covet to know more
then was meet for him, and least trusting to his own sense, casting off gods
yoke, he should make himself arbitrator and judge of good and evil.

How manifold be the Sacraments after the fall?
Some of the old Testament, and some of the New. Those shadowed out the Messiah
to be exhibited, these do testify that he is exhibited. Again of those wherein
was shadowed out the Messiah to be exhibited, some were for a time accidental
and extrordinary, which god used only once, or for a certain time: some were
set and ordinary, which ought to be in ordinary use until the time of
reformation Heb. 9.18
, for those things are said to be reformed, which are truly directed to their
proper end: whereas these tended to the same, but yet thwartly not directly.
Temporary were the flood Genesis 7.6
. The passing through the red sea Exodus 14.22
, the staying under the cloud Exodus 13 22
, which three were as it were a certain baptism of the old Testament. Manna
sent from heaven Exodus 16.14.15 Ioh. 6.31
, and water out of the rock Exodus 17, 6
, were as the Eucharist, and spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10, 1.2:3. I would not
have you ignorant, that al our fathers were under the cloud, and al passed
through the sea, and al were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. From the
flood, the deliverance or escaping from the waters which befell Noe, and his
family, was a sign to him of the spiritual deliverance, and escaping of the
church out of the gulf of sin and death, and to a new life, whereof at this day
baptism is a type to us, and therefore is called (...), an exmplar or picture
corresponde^t to that deliverance which came to pass in the flood 1 Pet. 3, 21
.

There are therefore two types, but the former is the figure of shadow of the
latter h. And the latter the pattern of the former or the figure answering to
it. In which respect the Sacraments of the new Covenant, may be called the
patterns answering to them of the old. So the passing through the red Sea, and
that staying under the Cloud were shadows, and signs of washing from sins,
and a shadowing forth of the heavenly power of the spirit. But in respect of
us, they were types of our Baptism: and in like manner our baptism a pattern
of them; Whereupon the Apostle 1. Cor. 10 2. says the Fathers were Baptized in
the Cloud, and in the sea unto Moses, that is, not into the name of Moses, but
Moses being their guide.

2. So the M^nna from heaven, and water flowing out of the rock were in steed
of the Supper, and signified the spiritual food of Christ, and the meat and
drink to nourish our souls spiritually unto eternal life, and to the
believers did truly offer it by faith to be received spiritually. Whereupon
the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10.3. calls Manna (considering it as a Sacrament)
spiritual meat, that is says Augustine, meat signifying some spiritual
thing, to wit, Christ in his time to be exhibited, In Psalm. 77
but even then present and effectual to the godly, who did by faith lay hold
on him, who was to come. And verse. 4. in the same respect, he calls the
stone, or rock wherout the River which followed the Israelits, or went with
them, the spiritual drink, and Sacramentally, or by a Metonymie, Christ: For
they drank, says he of that spiritual rock that followed, and that rock was
Christ: Now our Supper is the pattern or resemblance of that Manna, and that
water.

What were the set and ordinary Sacraments?
1. One general, perpetual and common to all men, and for their sake and
profit to the brute beast, and so to every living soul: which also is called
Natural, because God would have it extant in a natural thing, when by his
word he marked out and consecrated the Raine-bowe, that is, the bow in the
Heavens, which rises of natural causes, for his Sovereignty which he has
over all creatures, and ordained it to Noe and all his posterity for a sign,
monument and pawn, that he has testified that he will not hereafter destroy
the earth with a flood, Genesis 9.9 10.13. I will put my bow in the Cloud and it
shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and the earth. Note that
such a bow was fashioned which was not before the Flood, but because it was
made known by the word of God to be engraven therein, which might give a sign
of the grace of God to men.

2. Two special ones, besides the order of nature, to wit Circumcision. Genesis
17.10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and
between thy seed after thee that every male child amongst you be
Circumcised. For as Covenants in old time were not only recorded in public
tables, but were wont to be engraven in brass, and carved in stones, to the
end their remembrance might be more known and famous. Even so God would have
his Covenant to be engraven and printed in the flesh of Abaham. And the
Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12 3, 21, 22
, both which notwithstanding sometimes were intermitted for a long season, God
otherwise not disalowing it, or at the least tollerating, and Moses winking at
it; as Circumcision whole forty years Ios. 5.5.7
, because for the space of forty years the children of Israel went through
the wilderness: other whiles by the carelessness of men as the Passover 2.
King. 23 22 1 Esd. 6.16
. But yet with no loss to the believers; For not the want, says Bernard, but
the contempt of the Sacraments it damnable.

How did those two set Sacraments differ?
Thus, that one was a sign of our incorporation, that is, our receiving into
the Church and covenant of God, which God would have once only administered to
all that be in the Covenant, as well them that be of years as infants. And
the other of our continuance in the Covenant, of our nourishment, confirmation,
and continual increase, and perpetual abiding in Christ, which was often
administered, but only to them of years, which are able to prove themselves.

What was Circumcision?
The Latins called it Praeputium the foreskinne, of a word that signifies to
cut off, because the Jews did prune off that skin, that is cut off, or loppe
off: Aristotle calls it (...), that is the uttermost little skin that covers
the privy member, and Paul somewhat changing the word, called it (...)
uncircumcision Rom, 2, 26
. Whereupon (...) is called as it were a cutting round about, of a word that
signifies to cut round about, to cut off, and to cut off that which is before:
which is also called external Circumcision, and Circumcision of the Letter, or
literal ver. 17
, which was committed to Letters by Moses, at Gods commandment, or else as it
is considered alone from the spiritual end thereof.

But as it is considered consisting of a sign and a thing signified it was a
Sacrament of the Old Testament, instituted by God, wherein by the visible sign
to wit, the outward cutting off of the foreskin in the males, which were
received into the society of the people of god, or of the Church, the thing
signified, namely. 1. Our fellowship in the Covenant of God. 2. Our acceptance
and adoption to be the people of God. 3. The inward Circumcision or spiritual
(which the Scripture calls the Circumcision, that is, the purifying of the
heart by the spirit Deuteronomy. 10 16. and 30.6 Ier. 4.4 Romans 2 29 Ier. 6.10
, and by a Synecdoche, and partly a Metonimie, of the ear which moderates the
hearing, Exodus 6.11
, and of the mouth or the lips which prescribes a mean to the speech h, but
Paul Col. 2.11. calls it the Circumcision of Christ, not made with hands,
whereby Christ does Circumcise us inwardly) that is the inward paring off of
the corruption of nature, or the cutting off of sins and vices by justification
and regeneration. 4. Our ingraffing into Christ also, and the communicating of
all his benefits: also the promise of Messiah, the blessed seed to come of the
posterity of Abraham: and the remission of sins through his blood; and so, by
the promise of the land of Canaan, the inheritance of the heavenly life was
signified, and was sealed up in the faithful, by this ingrauing as with a
seal. And further it was as a solemn obligation, whereby those which were
Circumcised were bound to perform the whole law Romans 4.11 Deuteronomy. 30.6 Genesis 17.13
. Ga. 5.3. I testify to every man that is Circumcised, that he is bound to
keep the Law, setting before their eyes the Ceremony of Circumcision, and the
punishment of cutting off Genesis 17.14
, if they committed the least sin against the Law Col. 2.16
. For which cause Circumcision by a Metonimy is called the covenant, and the
co^pact or condition. Ge. 17.10. Act. 7.8. And by a Synecdoche it is taken for
the whole law. Gal. 5.2. What were the causes of Circumcision? 1. The
Efficie^t, was God the Author thereof, who in his secret Counsel, by special
grace chose Abraham, and his stock, that he might renew the Covenant of
salvation with him, and might seal it with the sign of circumcision Gen 17.1
, whereby also it came to pass, that the people of Israel, as the flock of god,
were received into his own sheepfold: the rest of the Gentiles being strangers
from the Covenant, like wild beasts might wander in mountains, woods, or
deserts, until the publishing of the gospel: whereby the partition wall being
broken down, God made the Gentiles equal to the natural sons of Abraham Ephesians.
2.11 12.13
.

The matter wherein it was, or the subject of Circumcision, were all the males
Genesis 17.10 11
, and indeed none but they, for although the promise was given indifferently to
men and women, which was ratified by circumcision, yet notwithstanding did God
consecrate the whole people to himself in the one sex, because the women were
not capable of this sign. Again, because that seeing the man is the head of the
woman, of whom also the propagation does depend, in the male kind the female
was comprehended, and was also then at the same time sanctified: For the
covenant of God was engraven in the bodies of the males upon this condition,
that the women also might be made partakers, and companions of the same faith.
Ephesians. 5.25
For Sara is called the mother of believers, as Abraham is called their father.
1. Pet. 3.6. But after that the Gentiles also by spiritual regeneration were
adopted to be the sons of Abraham, that sign being changed, there was another
placed in the stead thereof, both more manifest and common to both sexes, and
that without blood, that thereby might be more fully expressed the benefit of
Christ, and this applying of him to all. 2. Circumcision was made in the member
of generation, that is, the cutting off of the skin, to signify that the seed
of man was altogether unclean, and that no clean thing could spring from the
unclean seed of man, but that whatsoever is begotten of man is vicious, and
therefore that the nature of man is infected with original sin and has need of
regeneration. Therefore Christ was borne of a virgin, and conceived by the holy
Ghost, to the end he might be free from al sin. Also, that it might be made
manifest, that salvation proceeds out of the blessed seed of Abraham, which
is Christ. 3. God would have Infants to be circumcised, to the end that being
once received into favor, through the Covenant, and being made copartners of
the Covenant, together with faithful Abraham, they might as it were, be sealed
up by the sign of the covenant even as their faithful Fathers were, according
to the promise, I will be thy God and of thy seed after thee Genesis 17.7. yet for
the beginning of the calling of the Gentiles, the Gentiles also were taken in
the fellowship of gods people, if they would so be circumcised.

Ought not such a Sacrament seem to be ridiculous?
No it ought not: For if it seem absurd to any man, that the sign of so
excellent and singular grace was given in that part of the body; he must
needs be ashamed also of his salvation, which issued out of the loins of
Abraham. And, The Cross of Christ was a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Gentiles. 1. Cor. 1.23. And Julian the Apostata, as also
Celsus made a scoff of this, that an apple was forbidden our first parents.
And Naaman the Syrian thought it a matter to be laughed at, to wash seven times
in Iordane 2 King 5 11
. But the word of God ought to be preferred before all the world. And the
foolishness of God, that is, that which mad men not without impiety call
foolishness, is wiser then all the wisdom of men. For although the Princes of
this world have their glorious seals, yet for all that their promises are
often broken. But God with his much baser marks, never deceived any man.

What was the manner of Circumcision?
That is to be seen in the Time, Ministers, Place, Instrument, and Adjuncts.
First then, the Infant of eight days old was circumcised, that is, when the
eight day was come, for circumcision was to be performed upon the eight day
precisely Genesis 17.12 Leuit. 12.3 Luke 1.59. et. 2.21
, that God might have regard of their tender age, and so might testify unto
the Jews his fatherly love unto their children: for then the age of the child
uses to become strong. 2. Because every child was unclean seven days, by
reason of the blood and the eight day was accounted pure, Exodus 22, 30 Leuit.
12 3 Lib 3 Epist. 10
. 3. Because this was a Sacrament of that eight day wherein Christ rose again
for our justification, after that he had condemned sin in the similitude of
flesh as Cyprian writes to Fidus.

4. As also to show that we are to think of the mortification of the flesh,
during the whole course of this present life, which is noted by seven days,
because it is finished by the continual revolution of weeks or of seven
days, but yet it is not accomplished save on the eight day, that is after the
end of it.

5. Least we should imagine that those are excluded from the Covenant which
cannot obtain the signs thereof, seeing many which not living to the eight
day prescribed, died without circumcision. Whereby also it appears that that
time prescribed was a part of that ruder kind of Government under which it
pleased GOD to keep the old people. For at this day there is permitted a
greater and larger liberty in the administration of Baptism, whereby we are
not bound unto a certain number of days. Neither did Abraham, Ismaell, and
the servants that were bought sin against the law, because they were not
circumcised the eight day, but when they were come to man's estate; because the
inioining of the eight day, was not imposed generally upon all, but especially
to infants alone.

2 Touching Ministers, although there is no law extant, yet it is probable by
the circumcision of John Luk, 1.59
, and Abraham's example Genesis 17, 23
, thy every family did administer it by themselves, not in the presence of two
or three, but in some form of an Ecclesiastical assembly, whereunto the
neighbors, and all the kinsfolk did come.

3 It was administered at home, in the house of the parents (to wit, because
circumcision could not be performed without exceeding pain unto the infant,
that so without delay there might be used a remedy for the wound.

4 The instrument of circumcision was a knife, either a sharp knife as some
take it, else a stone, or very sharp flint, as most men judge Exodus, 4, 25
Ios. 5, 3
. For men say that in the East country there be stones found which cut, as
sharp as any raysor. To signify that either with the knife of the law of God,
the flesh is to be mortifyed: or rather to be clean cut off by the Rock
Christ.

5 The adiunct of circumcision was the giving of the name.

6 That by the remembrance of their name, those which were circumcised, might
be put in mind of their duty.

Now the example of Zephera the wife of Moses, a woman of Madian, not
sufficiently instructed in the will of God, who to deliver her husband from
death, wherewith the Lord sought to slay him, for neglecting to circumcise his
son, and that in their journey, and in an Inn being disturbed with fear,
circumcised her son, and moreover did not go with her husband any further,
but sent back again by Moses to her father Exodus 18 2
, it is singular Exodus, 4.25
, and therefore may not be imitated.

Which were the uses and ends of Circumcision?
1 That it might be a covenant, and an agreement, that is, a sign of the
covenant of grace between God and the posterity of Abraham, whereby they might
confirm their faith, and might know that they were in the government of their
Lord, and possessor, against all their enemies: According to the promise, I
will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, namely in a special
manner, whereby I will make thee partaker of my spirit, of my righteousness,
of all good thing, and in one word of heavenly life Gen 7.7
.

2 That the people might be distinguished by that sign, and badge of their
profession from other nations and profane people, and that the people might be
discerned, of whom that promised Redeemer must be borne. Whereupon
circumcision, by a Metonymie, is put for the Jews circumcised Titus 1.10
, as also uncircumcision for the uncircumcised or the Gentiles Romans 2.26
. And Christ is called the Minister of circumcision Romans 15.8
, that is, not of the law, which he did abrogate by his coming, or rather
fulfilled, but of the Jews within whose bounds he contained himself so long
as he was conversant among men, as he testifies of himself. Math. 1.24. And
yet so, as he would have the Gospel also in his time appointed to be published
to the Gentiles Ioh. 10.16
. But especially by the spiritual and internal circumcision, the Jews were
both distinguished from them, and also among themselves one from another: For
by reason of the twofold circumcision, the one outward, the other inward, it
comes to pass that Paul makes two kinds of Jews. Romans 2.28
. And Stephen called the Jews men of uncircumcised hearts, and ears, which
yet stuck plunged in the vice of nature corrupted, and which would not endure
to hear the voice of God, as we are all by nature Act. 7.51
.

3 That the circumcised might be put in mind of their duty, know that the
good things promised did belong unto them, might stand to their covenant and
promise, and might confirm themselves in adversity by calling upon God, in
prosperity by the sign of the promises of GOD, 1 Samuel 17 26
and of the covenant, as we may see in the example of Jonathan, and David
encountering with Goliath, l. 4. That they might be instructed concerning the
corruption of nature, which could not be amended, but by the effusion of
blood, and also of the blessed seed which should come into the world.

5 That it might be a seal unto them that believe, of righteousness, and
faith, that is, of that righteousness, which is brought unto us, by faith in
Jesus Christ, Romans 4.11
.

6 That they might be put in mind of the spiritual circumcision of the
heart, mouth, ear, eyes, and of the rest of the members, nnd might labor for
it, and of the restipulation, and binding themselves to keep the law, and so
might be a Sacrament of Repentance.

7 Of the continual bearing of the Cross, and of the first fruits of our
blood to be offered to him, who should shed all his blood upon the Cross for
us.

Wherefore were those Infants to be cut off which were not circumcised the
eight day?
Either because as some think, in them being taken away out of this temporal
life by the sword, or by sickness, or by some other casualtie, or else as
others think, being excluded from the society of Gods people, their parents
migh the punished for their impiety, that is, for the neglect of the seal of
the covenant of God. For as God does in the person of the father adopt the
infant of the believers: So also when the father does contemn so great a
benefit, the infant is truly said to be barred out of the Church, which bears
not about him the mark and badge of adoption. Neither is there any cause why
we should complain of the severity of God, seeing all are borne the children
of wrath, and of condemnation Ephesians. 2.3
. Or else because if the Infants themselves, being come to age had neglected
circumcision, or else approved of the neglect of it by their parents, they
should be excluded from the communion of saints here, and in the world to come,
that all the Church might receive profit by such a judgment, as carries with
it a manifest testimony against all contemners of the Sacraments. For this
cause he would have slain Moses, because he took not order to have his son
Gerson circumcised Exodus 4.24
, so those which were borne in the wilderness under Moses, were not admitted
the inioying of the promised land, before that they were first circumcised Ios.
5.3
.

How long must it continue?
In deed the inward and spiritual Circumcision for ever, whereupon it is
called the covenant of the world, that is, perpetual Genesis 17.7 13
, as touching the substance of it to be continued for ever in Christ, although
in signs it may be changed. And the mystical, as concerning the external
use, until the first coming of Christ.

1 Because seeing Christ is the end of the law f, that continual time which
was prescribed to the Ceremonies of the law, as the Temple Psalm, 132, 14
, and the Sabbath Exodus 31 16
, at the time of Christ his appearing, and all the blood of the Ceremonies
ought to cease in the blood of Christ: and because that which was signified to
be exhibited by circumcision, was exhibited, namely the seed of the woman,
which is Christ the Lord borne of a most chaste virgin.

2 Because by him the truth of Circumcision was accomplished in the Cross, 1.
and that wall broken down, whereby Israel was divided from the Gentiles: so
that if any man be now circumcised, he denies Christ to be come, and makes him
unprofitable to himself. 1 Ioh, 1, 17
Gal. 5.2. Behold I Paul say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall do
you no good.

3 Because the Lord promised by Ieremias 31.31. To make a new covenant, not as
touching the substance, and the scope of it, for Christ is the substance, and
the scope of both the covenants, but in respect of the signs which are
changed. Lib. 32 Cap 9, contra Manich
Therefore that which the Jews say, Whatsoever is once well done, ought in no
case to be changed, is not true: For, the occasion of the time being changed,
that which was well done before, good advise often requires to be changed,
says Augustine.

The word Holam, does not always signify a time having none end, but either a
long time, or else a certain space of time, and limited for a certain
continuance. Therefore the Apostles A^t. 15.24
, determined that Circumcision was not to be imposed upon the Gentiles: Gal.
2.11 12
and Paul does ordain Baptism by name in the steed of Circumcision. Now in
that he himself did circumcise Timothy, he did it not of necessity, but of
favor to maintain peace and the better to further the course of the Gospel,
until the liberty which is brought by Christ, was better known Act. 16.3
.

Why was Christ who was conceived and borne without sin in whom also the
covenant of the promised seed was fulfilled, and who came also to abolish
circumcision, he himself that circumciseth other men's hearts, why was he
circumcised?
1 To the intent that he might testif^e that he was true man, of the stock
of Abraham, our brother and fellow of the same covenant with us: for which
cause it pleased him to be bound with the sign of the new covenant also, that
he might show that he was the keeper of both the Testaments.

2 That he might be made subject to the law, and we might be delivered from the
curse of the Law by him Gal. 4.4
.

3 That he might ratify and sanctify the Circumcision of the fathers in his
own flesh: as our Baptism receives virtue from his Baptism.

4 To commend unto us the discipline of the law, and the use of the Sacraments.

5 Because the truth of Circumcision, to wit, the taking away of the old birth,
was not fully complete in the birth of Christ, but in his passion and
resurrection: And therefore we need not carnal Circumcision in the flesh,
because as we died with him in his death: and rose again with him, when he
rose again: So also in him are we circumcised with circumcision not made with
hands, putting off the body of sin of the flesh by the circumcision of
Christ. Col. 1.11.

What does this word Pascha or Passover signify?
Phase, or Pesach, whereof comes Pascha (not of (...) as the unlearned think)
does signify a Passage, or a leaping over, a passing by, or a passing over.
And in a special manner. 1 The passing over not of the people as many have
thought, but especially of the Angel of God, that smote the first borne of the
Egyptians, and passed over the houses of the Israelites being made free by the
blood of the Lamb, according to the commandment of the Lord Exodus 12, 12
.

2 By a Metonymie of the adiunct, it signifies that solemn and yearly feast,
or the time of the year, when that Passover was kept, which the Lord
commanded to be celebrated in remembrance of so great a benefit) when the
Angel left the Israelites untouched, and also for a pattern of that benefit
which we shall have in Christ v. 14 Leuit, 23.14.
.

3 By a Metonymie, whereby the name of a thing is attributed to the sign, it
signifies the Lamb that was slain in that feast, and was eaten in every
house amongst the Jews, to admonish them of the passing over of the Angel
that smote the Egyptians, and spared the Elect, and defended them: Further
also admonishing them of the going forth, and deliverance of the people out of
the bondage of Egypt Exodus, 12, 11 Luk, 22, 7.8
: and mystically might shadow out the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the
world, and by his death reconciling his father unto us Ioh, 1, 29
, of whom Esaias. 53. As a Lamb he shall be led to the slaughter, and shall be
dumb before his shearer.

4 By a Metomymie, whereby the name of the sign is attributed to the thing,
Christ himself is called the Passover, to wit, as the truth answering to the
figure. 1. Cor. 5.7. Our Passover is sacrificed for us, namely Christ, but we
do use it here in the third signification.

What is the Passover, or the Paschall Lamb?
1 An ordinary Sacrament of the Old Testament, commanded of God both to man
and woman amongst the people of Israel: wherein by the killing of the Lamb at
the Temple, but the roasting and eating of it in every house once a year, and
that only of those which were circumcised, and of age, the thing signified,
namely, 1. Preservation from the Angel that destroyed.

2 The bodily deliverance from that most grievous bondage in Egypt,
deliverance unto liberty, the destruction of the enemies, and also the
spiritual deliverance which should be wrought by the blood of Christ from
sin, death, and the power of Satan.

3 Also the eating of Christ to come, that is, the continual and spiritual
conjunction with Christ to come, the nourishment, and quickening was signified,
called to mind, and was sealed up to them which by faith did eat this Lamb.
And these again on the other side did profess their thankfulness toward God,
their deliverer, and did resign themselves to be ruled by him. 1. Cor. 10.4,
5. They did all eat of the same spiritual meat, (that we do) and did all
drink the spiritual drink.

What was the manner of offering the Passover?
There were three manners, whereof two belonged to the yearly Passover, to be
observed in all ages, but the third did pertain to the first Passover
celebrated in Egypt. 1. That in the tenth day of the month Nisan, which is
called Abib Exodus, 13, 4
, that is of the straw with the ear of corn (for in that country barley was
wont at this time to shoot forth the ear) or else the month of new fruits, as
a sign of renouation wherein all things are wont to spring and revive again:
The Graecians call it (...) (signifying Yellowe) and it answers to part of
our March, and part of April, and it was among the Jews the first month of
every holy or Ecclesiastical and Legal year, that is, pertaining to the
manner of Gods worship, and feasts, and began at the Equinoctial of the
spring: For in respect of the Iubile when there was an intermission of the
land, of Rents, and civil affairs, that is, of the year Politic, the
beginning was from September, that is, the seventh month which is called of
the Chaldeans Tisri, or from the Equinoctial of the Autumn, when many think
the world was created, because presently after the Creation the earth being
perfect, brought forth fruits, that her maturitie might as it were be in her
perfect estate. Now the Hebrews reckon the beginnings of every month from
that time, when the new Moon does first appear, and describe the month by
the full revolution of the Circle of the Moon through the Zodiac. I say that
the tenth day of that first month the master of a family in every house of
Israel, by himself, should separate from the rest of the flock, a Lamb
Exodus, 12.3
, or in stead thereof a Kidd, perfect, without blemish, a male, of a year old
(which was not above a year old, although it was not precisely and fully a
year old) Exo, 23.19
: and see that it be killed for the family the fourteenth day, between the two
euenings, from the ninth hour (when the evening oblations began to be offered)
until night (for these were the two euenings, to wit, one of the day now
declining from nine of the clock: the other of the night approaching from the
last or twelfth hour of that same day, that is the last part of that day):
Further that he roast it all, with the head, feet, entrals, bones unbroken,
with fire.

2 That all of them eat the whole Lamb: with giving of thanks (taking also
unto them their neighbors if one house was not sufficient to eat the Lamb):
And that with sweet bread, that is, unleavened (because of their sudden
departure out of Egypt.) And with sower herbs, that they might be put in
mind of their old condition, and bitter servitude in Egypt.

3 That the Israelites should dip-bunches of Hyssope in the blood that was
received into a vessel, and might so besprinkle the upper threshold, and both
the posts, that when the Lord should smite Egypt, beholding that blood he
might pass over that door, and not suffer the destroyer to enter in to
destroy them. Also that they should eat it in haste, there coats girt, their
feet shod, they leaning upon their staves, and as it were ready to take their
journey: and if any thing was left of it that they should burn it with fire:
And that they should not go out of the door of their house until morning,
least they should mingle themselue with the Egyptians, but that they should
rest quiet, and safe under the blood Exodus 12.2 and Leuit. 23 5 Numb. 9.2
.

But we must know: that the Ceremony or commandment touching the sprinkling
of the posts, and upper threshold with blood, and of eating the Lamb
standing, shod, and now prepared for the journey in haste, and of not departing
out of the house till morning; was singular, and pertained only to that one
night, when the people departed out of Egypt, wherein the Israelites were to
remove with all speed out of Egypt, that is, it belonged to that Passover
only which they did celebrate in Egypt. Therefore in the institution of the
yearly Passover, these cer^monies are not repeated Exodus 12 14. and Numb. 9.2
etc.
. And therefore it is clear that Christ when he sat at the celebration of the
Passover, and after the eating of it went into the garden (as the Evangelists
report) did not against the law. Also it is to be marked that after they
possessed the land of Canaan, the Lamb was not killed in their houses as it
was in Egypt: but before the Arc in the Temple by the Levites 1 Cor. 35.36
, and in their private houses, it was eaten by their company with keeping a
feast.

To what purpose and use are all these things which have been spoken of the
Paschall Lamb?
1 That they might be a remembrance of the thing past, namely the blessing of
God, whereby the Israelites were saved that night in Egypt, when the Angel of
God slew all the first borne of Egypt, passing over the houses of the
Israelites, which were besprinkled with the blood of the Lamb that was slain.

2 That they might be patterns and types of a thing to come, namely, that
Christ should be sent in the time appointed (which Paul calls the fullness of
time) God required a perfect Lamb, without spot, severed from the rest of the
flock, that they might understand that to appease the anger of God, there was
required a more excellent prise, then could possibly be found in all mankind.
And that he might single out the innocent Lamb, separate from sinners,
obedient to the father, perfectly fulfilling the law, and endued with heavenly
purity, and therefore conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin,
that he might take away the sins of other men.

2 A Male, to show that that Lamb should be mighty, and endued with great
power, in regard of his person, to take away the sins of the world, and to
destroy the kingdom of sin, and to deliver us from the bondage of sin and
Satan, etc. As it is said, Esaias. 53.10, He shall divide the spoils of the
mighty. And Psalm. 63.13. He shall ascend up on high, and lead captiuitiue
captive, and shall receive gifts for men. Yet but a year old, that is tender,
weak and knowing infirmity Esa. 53.3
, In regard of his humane nature, because it was meet he should be taken
from the company of his brethren, and be like unto us in all things excepting
sin. Heb. 4.15.

3 He would have it kept in their custody four days, to wit, from the tenth
day of the first month until the Evening of the fourteenth day: to show that
Christ should not be delivered unto death presently as soon as he was borne,
but that he should discharge the public ministry of the Gospel for a
certain time time appointed by the father.

4 He would have it slain between the Euenings, to declare that this Lamb
should be slain at length in the Evening of days, that is, in the fullness of
times Gal. 4.8
, or in the last time, for all the mul-titude, of mankind, that is, for the
whole body of them which are written in the book of life.

5 He would have posts besprinkeled with the blood thereof, to signify that
the hearts of the believers are sprinkeled, washed, marked, purged, and
sanctified by the blood of this Lamb alone, through faith relying upon his
merit. This sprinkling, being made with a bunch of Hyssope, that is, by the
purging power of the Spirit, whereof that is spoken, Psalm. 51.9. thou shall
sprinckle me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean. And 1. Pet. 1, 2. through
sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and spinckling of the blood of
Jesus: and verse. 18. ye are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without spot. Moreover, by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the doors
of our heart is signified, that the destroyer is turned away, we are defended
from the anger of God, and by the blood of his Cross, all things whether in
the earth, or in the heavens are reconciled. Col. 1.20.

6 By the rest of the Ceremonies he showed that this Lamb must be eaten by
faith, and conceived in the mind whole with the head, feet and intrals, (and
not rent in sunder, or divided into gobbets, and pieces): As he says, My flesh
is meat indeed, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, John. 6.55.56.

7 That it must be eaten in common with their neighbors, that is, the
Gentiles, that is to say, the Gentiles must be called, by the voice of the
Gospel, unto the communion of Christ.

8 That it must be eaten not raw, neither sodd in water, but as it were roasted
in the fire of Gods judgment, and tried in the heat of the Cross, and
afflictions: both to the casting of of hypocrisy, the scandal of the Cross,
carnal security; as also the opinions of men, concerning the matters of God,
and that which cannot be known, must by the fire of faith be consumed.

9 That it must be eat. 1. With the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth
as it is said. 1. Cor. 5.8. Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump, for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the
feast with unleavened bread of synceritie, and truth, namely without leaven,
not of the kingdom of heaven (of which it is spoken. Mat. 13.33. the kingdom
of heaven is like leaven) but of the old leaven of malitiousnesse and
naughtiness, the subtlety of Herod, of an evil conscience, of the opinions
of the Pharisees, of false doctrine, whereof the Lord speaks: Take heed of
the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod, Mat. 16.6.11.12. Lastly, without the
leaven of wicked life, whereof the Apostle, mingle not your selves with
fornicatours etc. For a little leaven, leaueneth the whole lump. 1. Cor. 5.6.
Gal. 5.9. 2. With bitter hearts, that is, with the renouncing of the bitter
slavery of sin, and the rest of our enemies, wherewith we have been
oppressed, and with bitterness and compunction of heart, or with earnest
repentance and sorrow, mourning for our sins, with mortifying of the relics
of the old Adam, and with a fervent appetite, and desire of the grace of Christ.

10 He would teach them that did eat the Lamb, that they must be atttried
after the habit and manner of travelers, who having their loins girded with
the belt or girdle of verity, as the Apostle calls it. Ephe. 6.14. may be
ready to enter into the way of Gods commandments, and who may with the
girdle of faith and righteousness restrain and suppress the wisdom of the
flesh, lust and wicked concupiscences striving against the spirit: also they
must be shod or booted with the preparation of the gospel, and prepared to
make great increasings in the Gospel, or prepared by the knowledge of the
Gospel of peace to undertake the combats, to sustain the dangers, and to
avoid the occasions of falling, and offenses, wherewith as it were with
brambles, thorns, or serpents, the feet of the godly are often wounded.
Further leaning upon the spiritual staff of the promises of Gods word, they
may guide their steps in their journey, and raise themselves being fallen,
whereof. Psalm. 23.4. Thy rod, and thy staff have comforted me.

11 Also they must eat the Lamb 1. standing, 2 In haste, that is, such as do
not tire in the course of this mortal life, do not linger still in spiritual
Egypt, or Babylon, but do with all speed renounce the kingdom of Satan,
and as it becomes holy travelers, do with all earnestness desire to be
gonne out of the prison of this life, unto that pomp and manner of life which
shall be in the heavenly country.

12 It must be eaten in one house, that is, he would have the spiritual
communion of the fullness in one body and head Christ, to be ratified, and
preserved by this means.

13 God would have no bone of that Lamb to be broken, mystically to show what
he would perform in his son, and he having none of his bones broken. Ioh. 19.33.
might be made famous as it were by a visible mark, that might prove him to be
the true Passover.

Why did Christ appoint the Supper of the Lord in stead of the Sacrament of the
Paschall Lamb?
To show that he had fulfilled those things which were prefigured in the shadow
of the Jewish Passover. For in the old Passover there was the body and
blood of the Pascall Lamb being a beast: and in that feast was yearly
iterated the remembrance of the preservation of the first borne of Israll by
the blood, and of their deliverance out of Egypt, as a provocation to
thankfulness, and a sign of their redemption which Christ should work: but
in the new Testament the body of the true and only Lamb of God, being slain
and offered upon the Altar of the Cross, and his blood shed for remission of
sins, does procure unto us far more excellent things, then was the
deliverance out of Egypt to the people of the Jews.

And the Supper of the Lord was instituted to this end, that by the receiving
of the body and blood of the Lamb of God, there might be made not a yearly
only, but a perpetual communication, commemoration, and celebration of the
most chief and eternal benefits, as of salvation purchased, and other more
procured by the death of Christ: according to Christ's commandment, Do this in
remembrance of me. Luke 22.19. As also the Lord says of the Passover. This
day shall be unto you for a memorial. Exodus 12.14.

Furthermore, as it was said touching the Passover, No stranger or
uncircumcised shall eat thereof, but such as be borne at home, and come to
years, who had learned the mystery by way of Catechizing: so also because in
the supper our covenant made with God is renewed, it is to be communicated to
none but to them that are of circumcised hearts, and by Baptism are made the
household servants of God, and partners of the covenant, but at no hand to the
profane or unclean, and ignorant, but only to the faithful being purified
by faith, after that they had given their names to Christ, and have been
instructed in the mystery of his death. And as the Paschall Lamb was eaten
with giving of thanks: so ought we also to receive the Supper of the Lord with
thanksgiving. Lastly, as it was a thing much to be desired to eat the
Paschall Lamb, so it is a sweet thing to the believers to eat the bread of
the Lord.

Seeing there was only one Lamb offered as a sacrifice for the redemption of
the Church, why did God command a Lamb to be killed in every house, as
though every one of them should have had their sacrifices peculiar by
themselves?
Because, although they were all delivered from destruction by the selfsame
blood, yet he would have each family privately admonished, by special
application, that they might the more sensibly perceive the grace bestowed upon
them. As at this day, the self same thing is Baptism unto us, whereby we are
in common ingrafted into the body of Christ; yet every one has his own
Baptism performed to him, to the end that they might more certainly know that
they are partakers of the adoption, and so the members of the Church.

Why is Jesus Christ called the Lamb slain even from the beginning of the
world. Apoc. 13.8. seeing Paul says, Now once in the latter end of the world
was he made manifest to abolish sin by offering up of himself? Heb. 9.26.
1 Because of the effect of his death, whereunto although there was a certain
time prefixed: yet the merit and efficacy thereof did no less benefit the
fathers in old time, and was applied unto their Justification, and
Sanctification, then now it benefits us, and is applied to us.

2 Because, he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
and by his oblation has consecrated for ever those that be sanctified. Hebr.
10.14.

3 Because, he was slain for sin, which was committed even from the
beginning of the world.

4 Because, even presently from the very foundations of the world, he was
appointed to be slain.

5 Because there is not salvation in any other whatsoever. Act. 4.12.

6 Because Jesus Christ is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever. Heb. 11.1.

7 Because that which was not as yet in the order of nature, nevertheless was
extant ever by the virtue and efficacy of faith: For faith is that which
makes those things to be present which are hoped for, and does demonstrate
those things which are not seen. Heb. 11.1.

8 Because as the same Christ is the head of the whole universal Church, so
also he is the Author of Election in him, of all the faithful, both of the old
and new Testament of their vocation, Justification, sanctifycation, and
glorifycation.

Why was not the blood of the Paschall Lamb drunken or eaten, but only the
posts were besprinkled with it?
Because it was abomination to eat or drink the blood, not only of man, but
of any living creature from Noes time Genesis 9.4
. The use whereof was granted by the coming of Christ, although for the
infirmity and weakness of the brethren forbidden for a time Act. 15.20 29
.

Were there no more Sacraments of the old Testament?
Yes indeed there were, as the Sabbaths, the Arc of the Covenant, washings,
and such like: yet they are rather to be called Types then Sacraments, if we
will speak properly, because they are never compared with the Sacraments of
the new Covenant. But especially because they served rather to illustrate the
promise of grace, then to seal it by the application of them made to every one.

For the legal Sabbath, which was so called, because of the rest, besides that
it was ordained that that day should be employed in the worship God, that is,
in holy prayers, preaching, Sacrifices, and charitable collections for the
poor, to nourish the peoples faith Luk 4.16 12
, and that the Israelites should not weary themselves, or those that belonged
to them with continual labor Exodus 22.
, and to the end they might continually remember the works of God in the
Creation Genesis 2.1.12
, of their deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt, and redemption by Christ:
It was further a sign and testimony of sanctification, which did signify
that the Lord above does sanctify his by his Spirit. Exodus 31.13, 27. The
Sabbath shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that it is I
the Lord that sanctify you. Which thing also Paul shows to be done by
Christ, he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one.
Hebr. 2.11. As also of the spiritual and everlasting Sabbath, wherein we must
rest from every servile work, that is, from sins, and our own will, and
suffer God to work his own works in us, and to rejoice in God through Christ.
It was also a shadow of the heavenly Sabbath (that is, of eternal rest in
God) which we shall obtain through faith; when being delivered from the flesh,
and the trouble thereof, we shall rest in God, when there shall be Sabbath
after Sabbath, and Sabbath without any night. Esaias. 66.23.

The Arc of the Covenant did teach.

1. Christ the Author of the Covenant between God and the Elect.

2 It was a visible testimony of the presence of God. Exo. 25.10 22. I will
(says the lord unto Moses) Declare my self unto the there and will talk with
thee from the cover of the mercy seat between the two Cherubins, which is
above the Arc of the testimony, what things soever I will command thee to
show unto the children of Israel. Whereupon also by the Figure Metonymie
usual to types and Sacraments, it is called the King of glory psalm. 47.5.7
. And Jehovah, as when the Arc removed, Moses said: Psalm. 68.1 2 and 2.13.1, 8
Arise O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let all that hate thee,
fly away from thy presence. And when it stood still he said, Return O Lord
unto the ten thousand thousands of Israel. Numb. 10.35.

3 It was a type of Christ, in whom are contained all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. Surely the wood Cettim, or Cedar which is not subject to
rotting, out of which flowed a clear and most odoriferous liquour which
(because it preserves dead bodies from putrefying) is called (...) quickening
that which is dead, it did represent the virtue and merit of the blood of
Christ.

Now these are the things that were joined to the Arc, and partly put into it.

1 The golden pot, having Manna in it, did shadow out Christ, who is the bread
of life Exodus 16.33 Ioh. 6.35 Heb. 9.4
.

2 Aarons rod, which had budded, was a type of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ,
whose priestly scepter, whereas it had been as it were withered in the world,
after his death and resurrection it began to flourish, to fructify, and to
bring forth the sweet fruits of the holy Gospel among the Gentiles Numb. 17 8
.

3 The Tables of the Covenant, wherein was engraven by the finger of God the
ten Commandments, Deuteronomy. 10.5 (...)
which did signify Christ the fulfilling of the law.

4 The Golden board or cover, which was above, which was called the
propitiatory of the Graecians, the cover of the mercy seat it did signify
Christ the mediator, who is the propitiation for our sins, and that cover
whereby we are covered against the anger, and horrible judgment of God Rom
3.24 Ioh. 2 2 Exodus 25.32
.

5 The Promise annexed, signified that God would thence as out of his throne
speak his Oracles, and that there Christ would hear us, who is indeed the
throne and seat of God, and the word of the father, by whom he speaks to us,
and for whose sake he hears us, As it is written: Whatsoever ye shall ask
the father in my name he will give it you. John. 15.16. And the two Cherubins,
seat^d upon the cover of the Arc, joining their wings together, and with face
to face, looking toward the Arc it self; did declare the consent of the
Prophets and Apostles in doctrine; and the stouping down, that is, the earnest
desire of the blessed Angels, to know the whole mystery of salvation. 1 Pet.
1.12


(...)
The exhibiting also whereof, even presently so soon as Christ was borne, they
declared to the Church.

6 Also the Arc of the covenant, was a type of the company of the Elect, which
is fed with the heavenly Manna, is governed with the Scepter of that Priest
according to the royal order of Melchisedech: it has the law of God, engraven
in the tables of their hearts, and is the keeper of the books of the
prophecies, and of the Apostles. And as the Gold mingled with Brass did
resemble the hypocrites, so the pure and perfect tried Gold, wherewith the
Arc was covered on every side, did represent the faithful, who are tried in
the fire of afflictions 1 Pet. 1^7
. And those men which are indeed like unto Gold, are worthily preferred before
such as be like unto lead, and are profane men.

7. The bars, and staves did signify the Ministers, Doctors, and schoolmen
which do perform their message for Christ's sake.

Moreover the washings did signify that the sins of them that believe should
be washed away in the blood of Christ, and that they are daily washed, and
purified by the holy Ghost Leu. 14.8, 7
.

Now the third was Chanaan, a certain pawn and pledge of the promise of
Christ, and the heavenly inheritance. So, 1. The sacrificing of Isaac Genesis 22.10
, did signify the offering up of Christ.

2. The blessing of Ephraim and Manasses, made by laying Jacobs arms and hands
cross upon them did signify the unlike condition of their posterity Genesis 48.14
.

3. The brazen Serpent Numb. 2.8 Ioh. 3.14.15
: the truth as touching the lifting up of the banner of Christ crucified.

4. The wood cast into the bitter waters, whereby they were made sweet Exodus
18.25
, signified, the branch of the stock of Isaie comforting all those which be
weary and heavy laden.

5. The going about or compassing of Jericho seven days by the Israelites
Ios. 6.5
, that the strongholds of this world shall be cast down by the sound of the
trumpets of the Gospel: whereof the Prophet speaks Psalm. 19.5. their sound
is gone forth into the whole world 2 Cor. 10.4
.

6. The cleansing of Naaman by washing himself seven times in Jordan 2 King.
5 10
, the washing away of sin, or of the spiritual leprosy by the blood of
Christ 1 Ioh. 1.7
.

7. The touching of Esaies mouth with a burning coal, which one of the
Seraphins had taken with the tongues from the Altar, that the Prophet was to be
purged with the sign of the holy Ghost, and the word of the Lord must be put
in his mouth m.

8. Ezechiell eating the book, did foresignifie that the Oracles of God must
be hid in the bottom of our hearts n. As afterward the medicinable
anointing, yet not without a miracle by the Apostles and other Saints in the
Primitive Church for to heal the sick, together with prayers used sometimes by
faith, o testifying the presence, and healthful working of the spirit, whereby
God does heal us. The p man borne blind, whose eyes Christ did anoint with
clay, and washing them in the poole of Siloah; had his sight restored p,
signifying that the eyes of our minds, are to be enlightened with the light of
Christ. And such like (which because they were enjoined and granted to some
few only, and for a time) are rather to be called mystical actions, then
Sacraments. For in Sacraments the sign does represent that which God does in
truth offer, and faith receive. But in types, things to come, or past already
are shadowed out, and as it were, painted out before our eyes in a table.

Wherein do Sacrifices and Sacraments both agree and differ?
1. They have this common to them both, that they are ordained of God, and had
a Symbolicall signification: for the killing of a beast does signify, that the
nature of man is become like the nature of the beast through sin Psalm. 49.10 21
, and guilty of death, neither could be delivered from death, but by a
sacrifice. Again, the offering of the beast upon the Altar, signified that
Christ the true Sacrifice, should be offered upon the alter of the Cross for
our sins.

2. They differ also in the end, or in the respect of the thing received, and
of the thing given. For the purpose of the Sacrament is not that we should
offer any thing to God, but that something be offered to us, and that we should
receive something from God: But the intent of a Sacrifice is that we should
give something to God, or offer something according to his own appointment.
Whereupon they are called oblations.

Further, there were two kinds in the manner of Sacrificing Heb. 5.18, 5
,

1. Gifts, They were oblations of things without life Psalm. 49.10 21
, as of fine flower, Levit. 2
cakes, first fruits, tithes, which must be distinguished from the oblations,
or consecrations of the firstborne, whereof Exodus, 13.12, and 22.29.

(...).
2. Oblations, which were sacrifices of beasts which were slain from among the
herds, as an ox, or a calfe: from the flock of sheep or of goats, as a
Ram, a Got, a Kid: or else of birds, as Turtles, young Pigeons, Sparrowes
Leuit. 1.3.14
.

Now, although some of the legal Sacraments, were in their kind also
external sacrifices, as the Paschall Lamb, which by name is termed an
Oblation: Yet we may not judge so of the Sacraments of the Christian Church,
because that only, and that most perfect sacrifice of Christ has abrogated all
external Sacrifyces.

Again, Sacraments differ from sacrifices in the external form or action: for
certain sacrifices were burnt with fire, either wholly, and that either upon
the Altar, as the holocaust or whole burnt offering, or without the camp, or
city Leuit. 16.5
, or else in part, and were properly called Sacrifices, whereof some part went
to the Priests, with the use of fire, added, to note out the purity of Christ's
Sacrifices, and that eternal spirit, by whom he was offered to God Heb. 9.14
.

As for those which were either eaten, or imprinted, and applied to the body,
they were Sacraments so properly called. Therefore an Altar was appointed to
the Sacrifices: but not for the Sacraments which are eaten at a table.
Whereupon the Apostle 1. Cor. 10.2. says, Ye cannot be partakers of the table
of the Lord, and of the table of the Devils. Whereby it is apparent, that
altars were unknown to those ancient Churches. For that Heb. 13, 10. we have
an Altar, signifies not a material Altar, but figuratively Christ.

Again, Sacrifices were some propitiatory, which were made, either for the
high Priests sin, or the whole peoples, or the Princes Leuit. 4.13 22.27
, or else for some fault Exodus 28.41. et. 29.1 Leuit. 8.2 1 Leuit. 3.1 et.
7.11.6
And they were a type of the true propitiatory and expiatorie sacrifice of
Christ for our sins before God. Some were for Consecration, or perfection,
whereby the Priests were consecrated.

1. Othersome were for thanksgiving, as the sacrifice of Peace Offerings, or of
health: whose kinds were gratulatorie, votarie, and voluntary. Therefore the
Sacraments being lawfully used with prayers and thanksgiving, in some sort may
be called Sacrifices, but Eucharisticall only (that is, for thanksgiving) not
expiatorie or to satisfy for sin (unbloody) of which sort there remains none
now to be offered; because now there remains no more remission of sins; but
that only sacrifice which is already offered, must be laid hold on by faith
Heb. 10.18
. But yet the Apostle says. Heb. 13.15. that there be left unto us two kinds
of Eucharisticall Sacrifices, namely, the one of praise or thanksgiving, the
other of liberality, or communion, wherewith God is well pleased, as it were
with the fruits of Christ dwelling in us by faith. To which he adds the
Sacrificing of a man's self, (...).
which in a borrowed speech he calls a living Sacrifice, holy acceptable to
God, and our reasonable, that is spiritual worship Romans 12.1
, As also the sacrifice of Martyrdom, and Sacrifices of faith, and of good
works, and of preaching the Gospel Phil. 2.17 and 4.18 1 pet. 2.5
, so far as with the spiritual sword thereof, men are sacrificed and
consecrated unto God Romans 15.16
.

And yet, although in the holy works of Christians, as in giving of alms and
such like, there is some outward thing: yet they are called Sacrifices, not by
reason of that which is external, but for the inward affection of the mind:
and therefore they are not called external, but spiritual Sacrifices, by
means whereof all the faithful are called Priests 1 Pet. 2.5
.

Whether is Christ now to be Sacrificed, that his Sacrifice once made upon the
Cross, might be applied unto us?
No, in no case.

1. For the explication of the Sacrifice, inferres the Sacrifice made before.
Now it is most contrary that the same should be both done already, and also
should be done hereafter.

2. By the like reason Christ should take our flesh again, dye again, and
rise again, that the fruit of his incarnation, death, and resurrection might
be applied to us.

3. The applying of the Sacrifice is not the Sacrifice it self.

4. The virtue of the Sacrifice it self is applied unto us inwardly by the
effectual working of the Holy Ghost; and outwardly by the Preaching of the
word, and by the Sacraments ordained of Christ Romans 6.4 et. Col. 2.12
. For so often as the Gospel is Preached, the Sacraments be administered
according to Christ his institution, so often is Christ offered, not to God,
but to us, that we might embrace him, being received by a true faith with all
our souls. But after the exhibiting of Christ, and his sacrifyce finished,
there remains no more external and real sacrifice.

1. Because Christ dies no more, death has no more Dominion over him. Romans
6.9.

2. Because by his one oblation he has consecrated for ever those which are
sanctified, and we are sanctified by the offering up of Jesus Christ once
made. Heb. 10.14. And he has once entered into the holy place, having obtained
eternal Redemption. Heb. 9.12.

3. Because Christ has said; It is accomplished Ioh. 19.30.

Why were there so many Sacraments and Sacrifices instituted, seeing there is
but one only Christ?
To the intent that without wearisomnesse (as Augustine says) both they that
were wise might be more and more put in mind of Christ to come: and also the
ruder sort might in so great a number of signs at the least find one, whereby
they might understand that thing should come to pass which was promised.

But what is the reason our forefathers had more Sacraments then we have?
Because then the Church was in her paedagogicall rudiments, neither knew she
so many things concerning Christ, as now are revealed to us, after that Christ
has come into the world, and fynished that sacrifice so long expected.

What manner of signs, be Sacraments?
Not only signs of remembrance, that is, signs which bring to mind things
done long before, as the death and passion of Christ: Neither yet foretelling,
or fore-shewing only, that is, such signs as do foreshewe things to come, as
the resurrection, and the glory to come, and things to be fulfilled in us: But
also significatiue, signifying the things and gifts present, which we do now in
truth enjoy, and are the very pawnes and seals of the same. Romans 4.11.

What are the Sacraments of the New Covenant?
Mystical signs, commanded and instituted of God, and annexed to the
Gospel, whereby the New Covenant ratifyed in the blood of Christ, or the
promise of grace, or of the faith of righteousness is signified and sealed up
in Christ the Mediator, now exhibited, for ever till the coming of Christ Mat.
28.16 1 Cor. 11.26
: and further the remembrance of all these duties is renewed, which we are
bound to perform to God and to our neighbor 1 Cor. 5.7.8.9.10, 17
.

How many Sacraments are thereof the Christian Church?
Two, and no more, one of our entering, or ingraffing and regeneration, to wit
Baptism, which succeeded Circumcision, and the rest of the legal purifyings:
The other of our nourishing, or our feeding, namely the Supper of the Lord,
which was shadowed out by the Paschall Lamb.

1. Because the Lord Jesus did institute these two and do more Mat. 3.11 and
21.25. and 26.26
.

2. Because he gave commandments to the Ministers of the New Testament
touching the right administration of these two and no more Mat. 28.91 1 Cor.
11.23
.

3. Because only baptism and the Eucharist do seal up the righteousness of
faith Col. 2.11 12 1 Cor. 5.7
.

4. Because there are no more pledges of our Communion with Christ the head
repeated by Paul. 1. Co. 12.13. By one spirit we have all been baptized into
one body, and have all drunk of one drink.

5. Neither does the practice of the Primitive and Apostolic Church commend
any more unto us Ac. 2.38 41
.

6. Because Jesus Christ was made partaker of them, and no more Mat. 3.31 and
26.26
.

7. For as touching that washing of the feet, whereof Ioh. 13.5. and that
anointing of the sick, whereof Mar. 6.13. Iam. 5.14. neither did Christ command
them for the perpetual use of the Church, neither are they Sacraments according
to the definition of a true Sacrament, because by none of them is the
righteousness of faith sealed up in us. And indeed that anointing which the
Apostles and other godly men did freely use in old time, is most unlike that
which now adays some use, when they come to men at the point of death. For
that was a sure sign of health and life to be recovered: but this of
unrecoverable sickness and of death.

Much less that Matrimony, order, or, duties, or Ecclesiastical degree,
penance, Confirmation which was performed with the use of the chrysme, and
other things and ceremonies should be Sacraments: which neither have signs,
nor things signified determined and distinguished, from Christ.

2. Neither do they testify any Communion of the Saints among themselves
under Christ the head: which notwithstanding is the principal end of
sacraments.

3. And Christ was made partaker of none of them.

4. Neither are they commended by the institution of God, or the use of the
Church in the apostles time.

But in particular, penance, is no sacrament, because it wants both the sign
appointed by God, as also the promise of grace. But baptism it self is the
Sacrament of Repentance. Mar. 2.4. Luc. 3.3.

Neither is order, because it is not annexed to the promise of the Gospel.

As for the Chrisme, there is no mention of it. For the place. 1. Ioh. 2.20. Ye
have an anointing which proceeds from the holy Ghost, and know all things,
must not be understood of Popish greasing, but of the grace of the holy Ghost.

And that matrimony is no Sacrament it is manifest.

1. Because it was ordained before the fall, not that it should be a seal of
the righteousness of faith, but that it might serve for the lawful
propagation of men.

2. Because it has been common as well to the hypocrites, as the faithful:
yea even to the heathens themselves, both to them of the old and new Testament,
and so shall be to the end of the world.

3. Because the Lord Jesus abstained from it.

Why were there diverse Sacraments under the law, from these which be now under
the Gospel?
Because the Priesthood being changed, the law is changed too, that is, the
ceremonial worship, and of the contrary as it is, Heb. 7.12. Again, for the
diverse condition of the times, Cont. Faus. tum l, 19. c, 16
the Church was to be instructed otherwise then, and after another manner now
in the promises of God. For even we our selves (as Augustine says) do one way
signify things that shall be done, and another way pronounce things done
already. As he that shall suffer, and he that has suffered sound not alike.
And therefore there were other manner of Sacraments under the law, whereby were
foreshewed things to come: other under the Gospel, whereby are signified those
things are done which went before in Christ. Neither is therefore any change in
God, as there is none in the father of a family, who commands not the same
things in summer, and in winter.

How do the Sacraments of the old and new Testament agree?
In the Author, the end, the general parts, in the thing signified in manner
of Phrase. For God is one and the same Author of the Sacraments of each
Covenant Heb. 1, ^
.

There is the same end, that they should be signs of the favor of God toward
the Church.

There be the same parts: for the Sacraments both of the new as also of the
Old Testament, do consist of a sign and a thing signified: and in them both
the sign is one thing, the thing signified another.

The thing signified, or the substance is alone and the same Christ and the
self same benefits of his, namely remission of sins, justification,
regeneration, and spiritual nourishment. Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign
of the righteousness which he had received in his foreskin 1. Cor. 10.2, 3.4
All were baptized under Moses in the cloud, and did all eat the meat (to wit
that we do) and did all drink of the same spiritual drink. And cap. 12.13.
For by one spirit we have all been baptized into one body, both Jews and
Gentiles, both bond and free: and we have all drunk into one spirit. For the
same thing which Circumcision did signify, does our baptism now signify: that
which the lamb did, does the Supper. And therefore the fathers under the Law,
were partakers by faith of the same Christ, and of the same gifts of his, that
we be now under the Gospel, they believed in the self same Christ, and had
the very same promises Heb. 11, 2 etc.
. And Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day and for ever. Heb. 13.8. And the
Lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world. Re. 13.8 And Augustine
says, Whosoever did conceive Christ in the Manna, did eat the same spiritual
meat that we do.

Lastly the manner of speech in them both is the same, to wit Sacramental,
that is fytting, and well agreeing to that argument.

Of what sort be the Sacramental speeches?
Sometime they be proper, to wit, when that which belongs to the sign is
attributed to the sign: or that which belongs to the thing signified, is
ascribed to the thing distinctly: or else when the use and office is plainly
expressed. As Circumcision is the sign of the Covenant between me and you.
Genesis 17, 11. The blood of the Lamb shall be a sign to you of the Passover.
Exodus 12.13. Abraham received the sign of Circumcision and the seal of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4, 11. Baptism is that whereby the filth of the
flesh is washed away. 1. Pet. 3.21. But for the most part they are figurative,
when the names and effects of the things signified are attributed to the
signs. And on the contrary, when the names of the signs and their effects,
are attributed to the thing signified, by a Mutonimie, or changing of the names.

And such phrases are in indeed usual in the holy Scripture, and so be placed
in the common use of the Church, and yet figurative, which may be understood by
the nature, conference of the words and things whereof the words speak, or by
the coherence of the parts. Yet clear, because eloquent, and manifest types do
not obscure, but illustrate an oration.

Now they are such, because the nature and essence of a Sacracrament, does
require the same, which commonly is defined to be a visible sign of sacred
things. And therefore if the words in the Sacraments be understood nakedly,
without a trope, and simply, they shall be no longer Sacraments, because they
shall be no longer signs, but the things themselves. Now they are of the
number of those which have relation to another thing. Therefore the trope is not
in the things, but in the words.

1. Because of the analogy, proportion, and relation of the sign unto the
thing signified.

2. Because of the similitude and comparison of the effects. Whereupon
Augustine says, that Sacraments from the likeness of those things whereof
they are Sacraments, do for the most part borow the names of the things
themselves. Quest upon Leuit. 17


Whereupon also that Rule is to be kept, the use whereof is usual and much in
the Scriptures. The names and properties of things which be most diverse,
because of some proportion, similitude and likeness of the effects, are
oftentimes changed, and affirmed mutually one of another, for instruction and
admonition sake. So, Christ and a vine, be the names of diverse things: yet
Christ does term himself a Vine Ioh. 15.1
, for the likeness of the effects. Again because of the pawn and certainty
of the promise of God added to the signs: as the Rainebowe, or the bow in the
clouds is the Covenant of God Genesis 9.9
. Circumcision is the Covenant Genesis 17 10
. The Lamb is the passover, or the passing over of the Lord Exodus, 12 11.27
. So Baptism is the lauer of Regeneration Tit. 3, 5
and the stipulation of a good conscience 1 Pet. 3.21
.

The like speeches are used in the types and shadows, as Gal. 4.24, those two
mothers, Agar and Sara are two Testaments. In the holy Supper, the bread
broken is the body of Christ, the wine, the blood of Christ. The cup is the
New Testament in the blood of Christ. Not because of the cha^ging of the sign
into another thing, as our Transubstantiaries would have it. Or the including
of another thing in the sign, as the Consubstantiaries say. Not properly, and
of themselves, but because by a Metonimie, or changing of the name, they are
signs and testimonies, pawnes, yea even means or instruments of the Holy
Ghost; in the lawful use whereof there is wrought through the free operation
of the holy Ghost, a true and not an imaginary communication of the things
which are promised in the word being added to the Sacraments, no less
certainly then the Minister of the Church does certainly exhibit the sacred
signs which are called Sacraments.

This Rule is also perpetual in the nature of things, that, in the affirmation
of things that be diverse one from another, and affirming of one of them of
another, the speech must needs be ever tropicall or figurative, in any kind
of things, and never proper. For as often as in any proposition, the verb
Substantive, est does join together things that be diverse, which differ in
their special forms: then the affirmation is not proper, but figurative. As,
so often as the first substance or this singular Indiuiduum, existing truly
and actually without the mind is affirmed of another first substance, such an
affirmation is figurative.

But yet these figurative speeches must be reduced to proper, and be
explained by them: as, Circumcision is the Covenant, that is to say, it is the
sign of the Covenant, whereby God does testify that he does truly receive
the believers into his Covenant.

How do the Sacraments of the old and new Testament differ?
1. By outward adjuncts, and the circumstance of time: For those continued
until the time of Restitution (for those things are said to be (...), right,
which pass not with a certain crooked and turning course, but are directed
straight unto their mark: but these must endure until the end of the world,
or until the state of glory, in which all truth shall clearly and perfectly
be made manifest, and therefore there shall be no need of Sacraments. Heb.
9.19
.

2. In the manner or condition of their signifying, for the Sacraments of the
old Testament foretold Christ as it were to come: but the New declare him as
it were exhibited. And ^^erefore they cannot possibly both stand together,
seeing the time to come can never be the time past, and the time past can
never make the time to come to be more ancient Heb. 8.13
.

3. In the diversity or quality of the signs, or in the signs and
ceremonies which differ much: for there be some signs of the Old, and other
of the New Testament.

4. In the number, measure of signifying, virtue, and easiness.

1, For ours, says Augustine, are fewer in number, whereas in the Old
Testament the signs were more in number, because the people of Israel, were,
as yet under the government of the Law; and therefore, as children use to be,
were kept under more figures and rites.

2. Ours were better in regard of the profit.

3. More excellent or manifest not in outward show, or worldly pomp, but in
the understanding and signification of heavenly and divine things.

4. Ours are greater in force, that is of greater efficacy to confirm our
faith.

5. More easy to be done: for there is nothing in Baptism or the Supper of
the Lord which is hard, troublesome or bloody. But Circumcision and the
Sacrifices were more troublesome, bloody, and required greater pains. Yet all
this makes not, that our Sacraments, and the sacraments of the ancient fathers
should not be the same in substance.

What? Do not the Sacraments of the old Testament differ from ours in the
effect, because those did only shadow forth and signify grace, which these
offer present unto us?
No: because in either testament, there is the same grace of Christ, yea the
same Christ propounded. And the Apostle testifies that the old Fathers did
eat the same spiritual meat with us, and drink the same spiritual drink. 1.
Cor. 10.3. (I say the same with us, not as some expound it, only amongst
themselves, which is understood by the purpose of the Apostle, the tenor of
the text, the name of Christ, and the word baptizing there used) and received
the seal of the righteousness which is of faith; and therefore that they were
made pa^takers of Christ, which is righteousness to all that believe, in all
ages. Romans 4.11. And yet I grant that the sacraments of the fathers were
figures, pictures, and shadows of ours, not in regard of the things
themselves, but in as much as they shadowed things, more darkly and obscurely
signified by them. 1 Cor. 10.6
In which respect they may be called types of ours, but types not without
truth.

Why then does Paul say, Gal. 4.9. that the Sacraments of the Fathers were
weak, and beggarly, and carnal Elements which were not able to sanctify the
conscience, because of their weakness and unprofitableness? Heb. 7.19. and
9.10.
1. Because he speaks of them not simply, as that they were naked elements
which could offer or seal no grace, but in some respect, as now abrogated by
Christ.

2. He speaks of them: as he saw them received of the Jews, severed from
Christ, and his promise, that is, as they are considered in themselves, and by
themselves, severed from the things signified in cogitation, and as bare
signs: because the sanctification depends not of the signs, either old or
new, but wholly and only of the virtue of the holy Ghost.

Did the Fathers eat the flesh of Christ, seeing that as yet it had no being
actually and corporally in the nature of things?
Yes, because although it was not extant simply, or actually in regard of his
bodily substance; yet in some respect, namely, as it was to be given for the
life of the world, it was that spiritual meat, which might no less be eaten
of them, then that Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world, is
eaten now of us by faith Reu. 13.8
.

2. Because Jesus Christ is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever Heb. 13.8.
one and the same Savior of both Testaments, In whom alone it pleased the
Father to gather together all things Ephe. 1.10.

3. Because those Fathers were endued with faith, which makes those things to
be which are hoped for, and does demonstrate those things which are not seen.
Heb. 11.1.

And therefore, although in those ancient times, the humane nature was not
assumed of the word, yet it was present to the faith of the godly in former
times, which did conioyne them then with Christ that should be borne. So that,
that which had no being as yet in the order of nature, yet nevertheless, had
ever a being by the force and efficacy of faith. Therefore Christ says;
Abraham saw my day and rejoiced. Ioh. 8, 56. But they did eat the flesh of
Christ which should be given for them: we eat it being already given for us.
The times are changed, says Augustine, but faith is not: shall be given and
is given, shall come, and is come; in Ioh, tract. 4
these words differ, says he, but yet Christ is one and the same.

Do the Sacraments give remission of sins, and do they confer or contain
grace, and are they ordained to justify and to regenerate, or, whether is
grace tied to the Sacraments?
No.

1. Because they are the signs, not the causes of grace.

2. That which is proper to God, ought not to be bestowed on the creature.

3. The subject of grace is not the body, but the spirit.

4. No bodily thing does work upon spiritual things.

Again, not by the work done, or as an efficient cause by them selves, or
their own virtue working any thing, or flowing from their essence, as they
speak in the schools: but ministerially, or Instrumentally; yet effectually,
so far forth as they support and nourish our faith.

Not by any inward power or virtue of their own, but by virtue of the
principal agent or worker: in that sense that Paul affirms the Gospel to be
the virtue and power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. Romans
1.16. and 1. Tim. 4.16. he says, that the remedy of the holy Scripture, does
save a man: not that there is any magical virtue in the letters, syllables or
sound of the words: for the Apostle says Heb. 4.2, The word profited not them,
being not mingled with faith, but because it uses these means, helps, and
instruments to work our salvation. In which sense the Church is said to be
sanctified and washed in the lauer of water thorough the word. Ephe. 5.16. Tit.
3.5. Baptism is called the Lauer of Regeneration and Renonation. And Act.
22.16. Be baptized and washed from thy sins, in calling upon his name. Hereupon
Augustine has this saying, whence comes this virtue to the water, that it
should touch the body, in Ioh. Trac. 80
and wash the heart? but that the word causes it, not because it is spoken,
but because it is believed.

And, that the grace of God ought not to be tied to the outward signs, Peter
teaches, speaking thus of Baptism. 1, Pet. 3.21. It saves us, not that
Baptism, whereby the filthiness of the flesh is cast away, but whereby it
comes to pass that a good conscience makes request to God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Cornelius received grace before Baptism Act. 10.5
. For God uses means and instruments to work our salvation, but yet so as
he works by his own proper and inward virtue most freely, when, how, and in
whom he will: and does not yield up his power and virtue to the outward
signs. As also, in that seven times washing of Naaman the Syrian in Jordan,
was not placed the purging of him from his Leprosy, which then the power of
GOD alone wrought in him 2. King. 9 ^4
. Hence it comes to pass, that some receive grace without the Sacrament, as
Abraham was justified before Circumcision; and the Thief on the Cross without
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Some receive the Sacraments and not grace,
because they want faith, as Judas, of whom Augustine says; He received the
bread of the Lord, but not that bread which was the Lord. Others receive both
together, as it were by a certain conjunction of the thing with the signs, as
the faithful, who take the Supper worthily.

Whether do the Sacraments imprint any stamp, or any spiritual work in
soul, and that such as cannot be blotted out?
Not of themselves, or their own power, nor yet by any supernatural verture
inherent in them, not by a real and essential imprinting of some sign, as
the printing of a picture or sign is made in wax or money: For the Scripture
allows none such. But yet God does, as it were, mark out and seal up his,
Sacramentally and spiritually by them as instruments, giving the pledge of his
spirit, and the light of faith, whereby they are made conformable to Christ,
and discerned from infidels, and are marked out unto the profession of Christ.

And this note, in the purpose of God, is such as cannot be blotted out. 2.
Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God is sure, having this seal, The Lord knows
who are his. And 2. Cor. 1.21. He which has anointed us is God and who has
sealed us, and given us the pledge of his spirit. And Ephe, 1.13. In whom also
ye believing, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of the Inheritance. And Chap. 4.30. Do not ye grieve the holy spirit
of God by whom ye are sealed. And Ezech. 9.4. The marks of the letter Tau, is
said to be made in the forehead of those men which sigh and mourn. And Revel.
7.3. The servants of God are marked in their foreheads; as on the contrary,
the children of perdition are said to be marked with the mark of the beast,
Revel. 13.16.17.

To whom does it belong to administer the Sacraments?
To them only to whom it is permitted to exercise the office of Preaching the
Gospel According to that saying, Go ye forth and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, son, and Holy Ghost. Math. 28.28. and
1. Cor. 4.1. For the Sacraments be the appurtenances of the Ministry of the
word of God, and the seals of Gods promises, which cannot lawfully be set too,
without the unfolding of this word of God. For neiher can their be an
accessorie unless their be a principal. And it belongs to the same man, as
the Chancellor using the Kings authority, to write the tables of the Testament
faithfully, and to seal them with his seal.

Whence do the Sacraments receive their power and excellency?
From the institution of God, so that that form be observed which he has
prescribed, and that by a public person, either rightly called, or at the
least by a common error, using the public function: and not of the manners,
merit, and excellency of the person, working and administering. Phil. 1.

But whether do the Ministers to whom is committed the lawful administration
of the Sacraments, and are called Gods fellow-morkers, deliver also with their
hands the matter of the Sacrament?
No: but they do outwardly give the earthly signs, and do only perform the
outward duties: and God does inwardly confer the heavenly gifts represented
by them, and gives increase; because God alone does Circumcise the heart Deuteronomy.
30
. And therefore this Circumcision is said to be made without hands Col, 2, 11
. And John the Baptist confessed, that he indeed baptized them with water,
but the Lord Jesus did baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, Math.
3.11. And only the heavenly father gives that bread, which is indeed
heavenly. John. 6.32. Otherwise, sometimes that is ascribed to the Ministers of
the word, which belongs to God alone. For, that is the nature of words which
belong to one thing, that, that is attributed to the instrument which belongs
to the principal efficient cause.

Where and when ought the Sacraments to be admininistred?
In the assembly of the Church, and usually no where else, to wit, when the
whole Church is gathered together, or a great part thereof, not out of the
assembly of the Church,

Which ought to be the form and manner of administration?
That those signs should be used without change which Christ himself has
prescribed. And that the words of the institution, then also of the Lords
promise be recited and explaned, not in a strange, but in a known speech,
before the Sacrament be administered, and deluered Act, 19.3 4.5 1 Cor. 11, 23
. For the Apostle does expressly forbid, 1. Cor. 14.19. to use a strange
language in the Church.

And such ceremonies ought to be used which are not humane, and received, but
appointed and commanded by the authority of the son of God, as also prayers,
and thanksgiuings: After the example of Christ who commanded the Church to do
this. Do ye this. And Act. 22.16. Be thou baptized, and be thou washed from
thy sins, in calling upon the name of Jesus. Now the comelines and dignity
of the Sacrament is to be esteemed by the word of God. Also the multitude and
pomp of humane rites does occupy the senses and the minds, and does
ouerturne the Ceremonies appointed by God.

To whom are the Sacraments to be administered?
The Sacraments indeed are common to the godly and ungodly: and also other
outward things in the Church 1 Cor. 11 27.29
. As for example, Abraham and his household Genesis 17 23
. Absalon, Achitophel, and the people Sam. 15.12
Judas Luke 22.21
. Simon Magus Act. 8.13
. But they belong to the^ only for who^ they are appointed, and such as be
contained in the covenant of God, according to his words. But not to them that
be without, which do not profess the name of Christ: and to such too, as be
living and present, but not to the dead, and such as be absent.

Wherein do the word and Sacraments agree?
In the Efficient cause, for the same person is the Author of the promise of
grace, and of the Sacraments, to wit, the son of God, the head, King, Doctor,
and Priest of the Church: and in the isntrumental causes, for the self same
ministers of the word be also the disposers of the Sacraments Mat. 28.1 1 Cor.
4.19
.

2 In the matter intelligible, or the principal subject: for the same thing is
promised in the word, and the lawful use of the Sacraments, the same Christ
with his benefits of salvation. Therefore as the Gospel testifies, those which
turn to God are washed, and sanctified by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6.11. And that they are begotten by the Gospel,
and borne anewe by the word of the living God. 1. Corinthians. 4.15. 1 Pet 1.23 1
Romans 6.3 Tit 3.5
. And that Jesus Christ is that bread of life. John. 6.35. So the sacraments
do testify that those which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into
his death, Ioh. 3.33 36 R^^. ^4, 23 He^. 11, 6 Habac, 2, 4
and are saved by the washing of the new birth. 1. And the bread which we
break is the communion of the body of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16.

3 In the form, manner and Instrument whereby we receive the thing to salvation
for the word and sacraments profit none but those which have, or shall have
faith Ioh. 3.33 36
.

4 In the end common to them both. For both the word and the sacraments are
means, whereby the son of God does teach, and gather the Church unto
himself, and does in this life communicate himself, and all his benefits to
them that shall be saved: yet so, as he is able without either of them to work
in the hearts of the godly, so often and when it pleases him.

5 In the effects: For as the word of life is to the godly the savor of life
unto life, to the ungodly the savor of death unto death. 2. Cor. 2.16. So the
Sacraments in themselves are to salvation to them that believe, but unto the
unbelievers they turn into judgment, and condemnation 1. Cor. 11.29.
. Even as a sweet ointment is healthful to the dove, but it is present death
to the fly. And as the seed of the word preached: so the use of the sacrament,
does not presently bring forth his fruit, but in that time which is appointed
of God.

6 Lastly, as the holy Ghost does begin and strengthen faith by the word: so
also by the sacraments he does stir up, and confirm the same. Out of all
which follows that there is such a conjunction, and agreement of the outward
and inward word, as there is of the earthly signs, and heavenly things.

Wherein do the word and Sacraments differ.
1 In nature: Because the word of the Gospel does in express words declare,
to wit, that we by faith are made partakers of Christ Jesus, and of all his
merits: the sacraments do represent them by signs: or that doctrine which the
word does deliver clear and more manifest, the Sacraments do propound the
same in a mystery, and not so expressly.

2 In the instruments. The word is delivered with the mouth, and received with
the ears: but the rites of the sacraments are administered with the hands: and
they are subject to the eyes, and the other senses, and do lead us as it were
unto the thing present: as though we should now in some sort touch Christ
himself with our hands, see him with our eyes, perceive him with our taste,
and feel him with our whole heart.

3 In the subject to whom. The promises of the word are generally, and in
common pronounced to all alike, as well to the unbelievers as to the believers.
For the word must be preached even to the unbelievers. But the sacraments are
to be communicated severally to them which be probably known to be members of
the Church: and they do apply and restrain the promises in a special manner
to every one that does rightly use these rites: that, as certainly as thou
do use the visible Ceremony, according to Christ his institution: So
certainly thou may, and ought to conclude, that Christ also and all his
benefits do belong unto thee.

4 In the measure of signifying: for the word does especially teach; but the
special office of the Sacraments is to seal: and further the word does
signify, and apply spiritual things, but the Sacraments do rather, and more
especially represent and apply.

5 In order: for whereas the Sacraments are the appendices of the word, which
do confirm faith, it is meet that in such as be of years, the preaching of
the word should go before, to begin, and to increase faith, together with a
manifest profession of faith, before they be rightly administered to any.

6 The word is auailable even without the sacraments, as may be seen in
Cornelius Act. 10.2 3.4.44.45
. But sacraments without the word are of no force. For a seal without a
Charter is nothing worth.

7 The preaching of the word, and that effectual, is required in those that be
of years, that they may be saved. For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. Romans 10.17. Except it please GOD extraordinarily to work in
their hearts. But the Sacraments are not altogether expressly nor absolutely so
necessary, that without exception, whosoever inioyes them not, should
therefore despair of the certain hope of salvation. For that saying of
Bernard is most true: Not the want; but the contempt of the Sacraments is
damnable.

8 Lastly, the word considered by it self alone, if it be compared with the
sacrament considered by it self alone, is better and more excellent then it.
Although if the sacrament be added to it, it does yet become more excellent
and powerful, and more effectual for the confirmation of faith. Therefore we
may not ascribe the greater honor to the sacraments then to the preaching of
the gospel, that is to say we may not attribute more to the seals, then to
the written Testament of Jesus Christ.

What ought they to do, who are deprived of liberty to come to the holy
assemblies of the Church, wherein the ordinary dispensation of the word and
sacraments is performed?
They ought to inquire for them: but if they cannot find them, they must then
exercise themselves in daily meditation at home, both because the kingdom of
God is within us Luk 17.21 Romans 14.16
, as also because the Gospel even without the sacraments is the power of God
to salvation to all that believe. Romans 1.17. as also lastly, because the
faithful are never deprived of the matter of the Sacraments although they are
constrained to want those visible signs.

How do Sacraments differ from Miracles^s
1 In nature or definition. For true miracles are strange works, being the same
thing which they show, and exhibiting the things themselves, at the sight
whereof the minds of men do wonder, done for the confirmation of general
doctrine to the unbelievers c, and bring authority to them that teach. Now
sacraments be usual works, 1. Cor. 14.8
taken from daily use, which bring no wonder with them, being one thing indeed,
signifying another, for the confirmation of the faith of the believers, and
promise of grace.

2 In time. For miracles are extraordinary which endure but for a time in the
Church. But Sacraments be ordinary works, which are to be used until the
end of the world.

What is the end of Sacraments?
1 The first and most principal, which does good unto the consciences in
respect of God, that they should be not only figures, Emblemes, manifest
resemblances and pictures, Gal. 3.
, or looking glasses and signs which should declare, and as it were paint
before our eyes, and teach what Jesus Christ has performed, and does perform
for us: but also that they might be seals and pledges of Gods promise embraced
by faith, or of the righteousness which is of faith, or of our incorporation,
o^ communion with Christ: therefore they are confirmations of our faith. Romans
6.3 Gal. 3.24
1. Corinthians. 10.16. As many of us as be baptized, we are baptized unto his
death: the bread which we break, etc.

2 The subordinate ends, in respect of us 1. That they might be signs of
confession, and badges of the profession of true religion, whereby we might be
discerned from other sects, as soldiers are discerned by their military
liueries. 2. That they might preserve the memory of the benefits of Christ.
Ex. 12.1^. This day shall be unto you for a remembrance. And 13.9. It shall be
a sign in thy hand, and as a thing hanged up for remembrance between thine
eyes, Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me. 3 That they might be
testifycations of our thankfulness. 4 To be admonitions of our duty toward
God, when as thereby we do openly profess, we desire to be accounted among
the people of God, and that we desire to worship the true God alone, who has
revealed himself to his people, as well in his undoubted word written by his
Prophets and Apostles, as also by these Sacraments, and do bind our selves to
him, unto the study of obedience, piety, and innonencie. 5 That they might be
as sinews of public assemblies, and of the communion of the Church: lastly
to be the bands of mutual love and concord, between the members of the Church
under one head Christ Act. 10.45 1 Cor. 10.7 Ephesians. 4.5
. Which ends are comprehended in the other part of the Covenant.

Which is the right use of the Sacraments?
1 That they be used according to the prescript rule of God, without mayming or
deprauing them.

2 That they be used of those for whom they were appointed, that is, such as be
of the household of Christ.

3 For that end, for which they were ordained, the which use does require faith
in the receiver, to apprehend the thing signified, that is, the promise of
grace and remission of sins, otherwise the promise is unprofitable, unless
it be embraced by faith. Acts. 8.37. If thou beleeuest with all thnie heart,
thou may be baptized. Math. 3.7. John baptized them, confessing their sins.

What be the effects of the Sacraments?
The moving or stirring of the heart to believe, and the confirmation of faith:
For as the audible word entering into the cars strikes the heart: even so, the
Sacrament, as a visible word, entering into the eyes, stirs up the heart to
believe, by the inward working of the holy Ghost: whence comes the applying
of Christ and his benefits then there follows the increase and strengthening
of faith, and every day a more near growing up with Christ, that he might live
in us, and we in him, Gal. 2.20.

What punishment does remain for contemners of the Sacraments?
A grievous punishment: not that God stands upon the ceremonies, but because
he would have honor given to the pledges of his grace, because of that great
good which is reaped of them. For this cause he thought to have punished the
negligence of Moses, because he had omitted the circumcising of his son, not
only by forgetfulness or carelessness, but because he knew very well that it
was an odious thing either to his wife, or else to his father in law Exodus 4.21
. So amongst the Corinthians when the holy Supper was profaned, the plague was
spread among them, because it was a monstrous sin to make so light account of
so precious a treasure 1 Cor, 11.18.30
.

What is contrary to this dostrine?
1 The error of all those which either devise new sacraments, or else do add
or detract something from those which be instituted of God.

2 The error of the Anabaptists, who affirm that the sacraments are only an
outward badge of Christianity, and that they be only certain remembrances,
excluding the true giving and spiritual receiving of the things signified: and
lastly that in the sacraments are only contained figures and signs of the
moral commandments.

3 Of the Donatists, who hold that the Sacraments, being administered by evil
men, are of no efficacy or weight.

4 Of the Manichees, who taught that the signs being changed, the things were
changed.

5 Of the Ebionites, who would have the Jewish rites to be retained, with the
rites of Christians.

6 Of the schoolmen, who taught that the Sacraments of the old law did no
more but shadow out grace, but the sacraments of the new law do confer grace.

7 Of the Papists, who say. 1 That the Sacraments of the new Covenant do
contain, and by themselves confer or merit grace, and justify or pardon
sins; and sanctify by the very deed dove, yea without the good affection of
the party using them, that is, without faith. 2 They appoint seven
sacraments, as necessary, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance,
extreme unction: voluntary Orders, and Matrimony. 3 They think that by virtue
of the words, as by a magical charm, the natures of the things are changed,
and cease to be that they were before. 4. In the administration of the
Sacraments they use an unknown tongue. 5. They give the sacraments to things
without life.

8 The error of those who use the name of a Testament properlye for a
Sacrament; whereas this word (...) does signify the same that (...), that is,
a Covenant made between them that be at ods: which can be no more but one
alone, and an everlasting Covenant, to wit, the reconciling of the believers
unto God by the death of Christ. 2. Of them who tie the things signified to the
signs by any means, or such as make a real connection and coexistence of the
sign, and the things signified. 3. Which conclude, that the sacraments do
pertain to the unbelievers. 4. That the matter of the sacraments is
communicated all well to the faithles, as the faithful. 5. That will have no
figurative speeches in the sacraments. 6. Who give less honor to the word of
God, then to the sacraments, for that they imagine greater blessings are
offered to men in the sacraments then in the word.

9 Of those who not being content with the heavenly simplicity think that
they can adorn the excellency of the sacraments with their own ornaments.

10 Of many which live in the outward assembly of the Church, who being
content with the use of the outward signs, have no care at all of the work of
Regeneration, of then communion with Christ our head, but remain still in
their sins: contrary to that principle of Augustine: Not the Sacrament, but
faith in the Sacrament does justify.

11 Of the Papists who imagine without all warrant of the Scripture that there
is offered in the Mass a true real and outward, though not a bloody
sacrifice, whereby the Priests do offer unto God the body and blood of
Christ, under the kinds of bread and wine, which sacrifice is propitiatory
for the quick and dead. Of whom some hold that the oblation made in the Mass
is the selfsame with the oblation which was made upon the Cross, and differs
only in the means, and the manner: then which what can be spoken more
childish. And surely that oblation of Christ, of necessity including his
death, was so singular that it never could be iterated. But others say it is
in a remembrance, and representative: which opinion overcomes the former. For
that which is the remembrance of another thing, is not the thing it self.

The seven and fortieth common place. Of Baptism.
Whereof is it called Baptism?
PAr t tpein which is to dip, or to die, moysten, and consequently to wash:
whereof (...), which is to drench, to rince, and to cleanse, and (...) to be
dipped, or died, (which notwithstanding differs from the word (...) which is
to sink down to the bottom, and to be drowned) thereof is (...), that is an
immersion, tincture, so by consequent an ablution, and (...) as it were a
bathing font made of wood or stone, wherein we are dre^ched, because we would be
washed, and (...) he that dippeth, or as it were dies, where of comes (...)
one rebaptising, and (...), which is opposite to a Baptiser, or impugneth
baptism.

How many ways is the word Baptism taken in scripture?
Two ways, properly, and figuratively. properly, for simple clensing, and that
either legal or leuiticall, as Heb. 9.10. which stood, (...), with diverse
washings, which notwithstanding were types of our baptism; or superstitious,
as Mark. 7.4. The Pharisees coming from the market, (...), till they have
washed eat not, and many other things there are which they have received to
be observed, as the washing of cups, pots, and of beds, etc

2 Figuratively, and that diverse ways. 1 by an allegory, baptism is called,
that Deluge of waters, wherewith god punished the sins of the world, and saved
Noes family in the Arc (which was a figure of our baptism.) Also the passing
over the red sea, wherein Pharao and his people were drowned, but Israel was
saved, the abiding under the cloud, whereof mention is made. 1. Cor. 10.2. And
some by Allegory add also, the baptism of tears, and of Repentance, wherewith
they say that sinful woman was baptized, which washed Christ's feet with her
hairs 1 Pet. 3, 21
. Moreover the name of baptism is taken by a metaphor for the cross, or
bitter affliction, which is compared unto billows of waters, wherewith the
afflicted are overwhelmed. Can ye be baptized with the baptism wherewith I am
baptized? And hereof it was called by the fathers the baptism of blood, Mat.
20.22
when Christian martyrs did shed their blood for the Christian faith. 2 By the
figure Metalepsis, for the promise and pouring out of the spirit, or peculiar
gifts of the holy ghost, which are conferred upon the faithful sometimes before
the baptism of water, as by the history of Cornelius may appear, and sometime
after baptism, You shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. And here it is called
the baptism of fire, Act. 1.5
that is, the baptism of the spirit. 3. By a Synecdoche, for all the doctrine
of John, and all his ministry. The baptism of John was it from heaven, that
is, of God or of men? So Act. 19. VVherinto were ye baptized says Paul? that
is, with what doctrine were ye instructed and taught? Into the baptism of
John, that is, into the doctrine, which John declared and signed with the
Symbol of baptism. 4. By the figure Antonomafia, or in way of excellency, for
that ordinary Sacrament of the Church, whereby we publicly vow Christian
warfare, as soldiers to Christ our leader, and swear to follow his alone
colors. This they of old, termed the baptism of the flood, i. of water. In
which last signification we retain the name of baptism, Baptismus. Fluminis.
rather then the name of washing, and use the same as the Church does. But
Fanorinus (...) in way of praise expounds the name of Baptism thus, (...).
Baptism is that into which sin is cast, that is does fall. The Greeks also
call it (...), that is illumination, from the effect (...). Of that true light
which enlighteneth every man. For (...), in the ancient Church signified to be
gathered into the Church by baptism, and (...), baptized, were distinguished a
Catechumenis, from catechized Heb. 10.32
, whence afterward sprang that great number of wax light at Easter.

What is Baptism?
It is the first, or initiating sacrament of the new testament, or a sacred
action consisting of the washing with water, and the word, whereby, according to
the appointment and institution of Christ a christian man either of riper years
professing Christ, or an infant of the faithful, is drenched, washed or
sprinkled in simple clear water by the minister of the Church, calling upon
the name of the father, the Son, and the holy ghost. (The body washed with
clean water) as we read in Act. 8.19. was done by Philip, to represent the
shedding of Christ's blood upon the cross, and to confirm truly and
effectually through all our life the covenant of grace made long before, and to
exhibit, and seal to the believer, righteousness, or the washing away of his
sins obtained by Christ his blood: to testify his adoption into the covenant of
grace, his engrafting into Christ, the regeneration and renewing of his nature,
or repentance unto amendme^t by the grace of the holy ghost procured unto him
by the same blood: his communion or fellowship with Christ in all his goodness,
and heavenly inheritance: and joint free denization among the citizens of the
visible Church, and of the kingdom of heaven, to be held of them in the number
of the children of God, and to enjoy the same privileges which they do. To
witness also, that being in like manner baptized, he promises himself to be
willing, to be reckoned among the people of God, to defy Satan, sin, the
world, the flesh and al false sects, and promises and professes that he will
live to Christ to the glory of God. Or thus, baptism is a sacrament or seal
of the righteousness of faith, that is of our entrance, or beginning of our
incorporation with Christ, of the forgiveness of our sins, of the gift of the
holy ghost, and of regeneration, whereby we are seale^ unto Christ,
incorporated and buried with Christ, that we die unto sin by the power of the
death of Christ, and that we rise again to newness of life by the virtue of
his resurrection Romans 6.3, 4.5 1 Pet. 3.22.
, that we are bound to the true worship of God alone, to innocence of life, and
unity of the Church, wheof it is called the stipulation of a good conscience b,
that is, a mutual obligation of God, and of man baptized; of God, witnessing
that he receives the person baptized into grace, and of the person baptized
couenanting with God, that he will duly worship and love him, whereof it comes
that none are admitted to the holy supper of the Lord, but such as are first
baptized, because he must first be admitted into the church before he be
nourished in the same Mat. 28.19 Act. 2.41 Ioh. 4.1.2 Mat. 3.11 Ioh, 3.5, 7
Gal, 3, 27 1 Cor, 6, 11 10.2 Tit, 3.5 Ephesians, 5.26
.

How many fold is Baptismes
Baptism in specie or kind is one. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. But
seeing in baptism not the water and external actio^ is to be considered only,
but also the inward operation of God, in this respect Baptism is twofold,
External, which is also called the baptism of water, wherewith the minister of
the word does baptize, and Internal, which is also of the spirit, whereby Christ
only does cleanse our hearts by his blood, and gives his holy spirit, and yet
the one is not to be separated from the other. For the external is a testimony
of the internal, that is, the Baptism of water is a pledge of spiritual
baptism, and of inward washing and clensing, which is done by the blood and
spirit of Christ. And therefore Christ is said 1. John, 5.6. to come in water,
in the spirit, and in blood

Who is the author, or instituent cause of Baptism?
God the father, the son, and the holy ghost. 1. by the ministry of John
Baptist, for it is certain that John was called of God and sent to baptize,
and preach repentance amongst the Jews, and therefore, Christ says the
baptism of John, was (by a metonymie) from heaven, Luke 3.2.3 Ioh. 1.38
that is of God, and not of men.

2 Further Christ by his own example confirmed baptism, when he suffered
himself to be baptized of John Mat. 21.25 Mat. 3.15
, And the whole trinity with most plain and evident testimony allowed the
same, in the baptism of Christ.

3 Besides, Christ before his passion sent his disciples to baptize Ioh. 4.1.2
and again after his resurrection he instructed the same his disciples and
their successors how to teach and baptize among all nations, by this
commandment, Go thorough the world, preach the gospel to every creature,
baptizing them in the name of the father and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Mat. 28.19. whereby it appears how great the dignity of Baptism is,
and with what reverence it should be used.

What is the efficient cause?
The primarie, and true efficient cause, is Christ himself, for he indeed it
is, who baptiseth us properly and truly, into himself, into his death, and
resurrection. Ephesians. 5.18. It is Christ that cleanses his church with the
washing of water in his word. The secundary and isntrumental causes, are the
ministers; for so says John, I baptize you with water, Mat. 3, 11
and Christ commanded them saying baptize Mat. 28.19
.

Whether may ministers be truly said to baptize, that is, to cleanse from sin,
and to regenerate?
No doubt they may, for Christ did not restrain his commandment to the
washing of water, but in general terms said baptize them; and John. 20.23,
they are said to remit sins, and to beget again, or regenerat. 1 Cor. 4.15. I
have begotten you again in Christ by the Gospel. And 1. Cor. 3.6. the Apostle
says that he ministered unto them the spirit, not the Letter, but yet
sacramentally, that is, so far forth as he has administered those sacraments,
by which, as by instruments, Christ himself does wash and regenerate.

Whose office is it properly to administer Baptism?
Theirs to whom the Ministry of the word is commttted: for to whom Christ
said, Preach the Gospel, to them also he said Baptize: And Ephesians. 5.26. the
Apostle conioyneth the washing of water with the word of the Gospel. So John
Baptist, and the Disciples of Christ Baptized, who also preached the Gospel,

Whether may many Ministers baptize any one together?
They may not, for none is said perfectly to baptize, but he who uses these
words, saying, I baptize thee, and therefore that he may speak truly, the same
men must also administer water.

VVherin differ the Baptism of John Baptist, and of Christ or his Apostles, or
those Ministers that followed them?
Not in the Author, in substance, in doctrine, in sign, or ceremony, neither
yet in effect, or signification. For the same sacrament is instituted of God,
and the same forgiveness, of sins, and grace of the holy Ghost is signified,
offered, and sealed, whether it be John that administer, or the Apostles, or
the suceeding Ministers Luke and 1.3 2.3
.

The only difference is, touching the very circumstance, and manner of the
manifesting of Christ: for the same baptism ia called John's, because he
baptized first, and Christ's, because baptism has respect unto him. Again,
John baptized into him which came immediately after him, that is, into Christ,
who should shortly suffer, and rise again Act. 19.^
. But the Apostles, and after the^ all Minsters now baptize into Christ that
has suffered, and is risen again.

Why does John say then. Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water, and attributes
only unto Christ, that he baptiseth with the holy Ghost, and and fire?
Not that he denies that forgiveness of sins is given by his ministry, and
the holy Ghost also, for in the baptism of John, the holy Ghost came down upon
Christ in the likeness of a Dove, but that he might put a difference betwteen
his own person and the office of all Ministers, and the person, office,
spiritual efficacy, virtue, and strength of Christ himself, for John the
Apostles, and the rest of the Ministers themselves did not work the forgiveness
of sins, the holy Ghost, righteousness, and life everlasting, but Christ only
forgiueth the sins of the believers, and gives the holy Ghost by the order
appointed by himself.

2 He spoke of Baptism, and the gift of the holy Ghost, which began on the day
of Pentecost, in the likeness of fire Ac. 2.1. etc
.

3 John Baptist means none other thing, but even the same which Paul speaks
of his Ministry: I have planted, Apollo has watered, but God gives the
increase, neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. 1. Cor. 3.6.7.

Whether was it necessary to them who were baptized with John's baptism, that
they should afterward receive the baptism of Christ which was administered by
his Disciples?
Augustine thought so, because he held that the baptism of John was not the
same that Christ's baptism was: but Ambrose is against him, and that justly.
For Act. 18.25. Apollos only knew the baptism of John, and he is taken to the
Apostles, and more diligently instructed in the way of the Lord, but we read
not that he was baptized again with water. Neither do we read, that those
first Apostles baptized by John, were afterward baptized again: And we ought
to determine nothing without the word of God. Moreover if that opinion were
true, we should not have our baptism common with Christ, whereas
notwithstanding himself hallowed as well the circumcision of the fathers, by the
circumcision of his own flesh, as our baptism by being himself baptized.

If the Baptism of John, of the Apostles, and of the ensuing ministers be all
one, why does Paul. Act. 19.3.4.5. baptize the 12. Disciples which before had
been baptized by John, who being demanded whether they had received the holy
Ghost after they had believed, answered, that they never heard, If there were a
holy Ghost; and being again asked, Into what they were baptized, then they
said, In the baptism of John.
1 There are some that say, that those 12. were entered, and initiated into the
baptism that is, the doctrine and Ministry of John; But were not partakers
of his baptism, that is, of the washing of water, and so baptized; but
afterward, once only to have been baptized in the name of Jesus.

2 Others think that they were baptized with the baptism of John, and not
afterward dipped in water by Paul, but baptized in the name of Jesus, that is,
adorned with the wonderful gifts of the spirit, when Paul had laid his hands
upon them.

3 Ambrose is of opinion, that by a counterfeit baptism, under the name of the
baptism of John, they were rather defiled, than washed, or at lest wise not
rightly and duly baptized: In 3. ad. Gal.
seeing by their own confession, they knew not the holy ghost to be a distinct
person from the father, and the son, without which there can be no right faith
in christ. But being first well instructed by Paul, they were afterward baptized
in the name of christ, with the true form of baptism, but this is not, to be
baptized again, or make a repetition of baptism 4 Augustine, holds that
those 12. were baptized, 1. with the baptism of John, and yet afterward also
baptized by Paul; for he does hold the baptism of John one, and of Christ
another, yet he defends that his opinion, from Rebaptisation, for that, the
iterating of one and the same baptism, is Anabaptisme 5 Others judge, that
those baptismes were to be used, for the diverse manner of the signification,
that is, for the several articles, namely of Christ to come, and of Christ
already come, and yet it was not rebaptising, but (the error being amended) a
confirmation of the former. 6 But we must look into the Text, for first, it
says not that Paul baptized them who had been baptized by John, as the
Anabaptists do urge, but the words of Paul there are rightly to be
distinguished, from the words of the Evangelist setting down that history, for
these are the words of Paul. verse. 4.5. John indeed baptized with the baptism
of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe in him, which
should come after him, that is, in Christ Jesus, and when they heard (to wit
John) they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Thus far Paul, where
he says: those which heard, that is, those which heard (the ministry of John)
were baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus (namely by John) and afterward
verse. 6. the Evangelist in his own words adds this, When Paul had laid hands
upon them, the holy Ghost came upon them. Again, whereas those 12. deny that
they ever heard, if there were an holy ghost, it is to be understood, not of
the existence and hypostasis of the holy ghost (for then they had not bin
disciples (that is) Christians, for John had plainly preached of the holy Ghost
saying that Christ should baptize with the holy Ghost) but by a Metonymie, of
the visible manner of pouring forth the gifts of the holy ghost, which in the
beginning of the growth of the Church flourished very much. As John. 7.39. it is
said, The holy ghost was not yet, because Christ was not as yet glorified. And
therefore those 12. may be said to have been baptized in the name of Jesus, that
is, to have received not the ceremony of baptism, but those visible graces of
the holy Ghost by the laying on of Paul's hands, which are also by a translation
signified by the name of baptism. Act. 1.5. and 11.16. and Act. 8 12.14.15,
16.17. The Samaritans, when they had believed Philip teaching of Christ, are
set down in scripture, to be baptized of him. Afterward when Peter and John
came into Samaria, they prayed for them, that they might receive the holy
Ghost, for as yet (says the Evangelist) it had not fallen upon any of them,
but they had been only baptized in the name of Jesus, receiving forgiveness of
their sins. But when the Apostles laid their hands upon them, they received
the holy Ghost, namely, in a visible manner, not the gift of regeneration which
is offered to all in baptism, but those excellent and peculiar gifts, as, the
gift of tongues, the gift of working miracles, and the like.

Is there any allowance of woman's baptising in the Church?
In Panar.
No doubtless: For you shall not find in all the story of baptism one title
thereof: but that use was brought in by the heretic Marcion, as Epiphanius
witnesses. Again, whereas it is the same men's duty to preach the Gospel who
are to baptize Mat. 28.19
. Diverse diui^nes are of an other judgment Trial things and keep that which is
good 1 Thessalonians. 5.21 1 Cor. 14.34
And seeing the office of preaching is not permitted to women, as neither the
administration of the Lords Supper: Why should they take upon them to baptize?
Also the ancient Church appointed that baptism should only be celebrated in
the Church, or congregation of the faithful, in which place the Apostle
plainly charge women to be altogether silent, much less then would he that
they should administer the Sacraments. Therefore do they twice offend when they
administer baptism in that feined case of necessity: in that they baptize
without any commandment, nay against the commandment of God, and besides they
tie to the external action eternal salvation, which is to be sought in the
death of Christ, and that covenant of his grace only. As for that example of
Zephora, who circumcised her son, it is either to be held as a rash and
unlawful act of a foolish and angry woman, or as a singular action not to be
followed. For the Angel was well pleased that the child was circumcised, and
not because she did circumcise him.

The same may be judged, if any private or lay man (as they call it) should
take to himself the administration of Baptism Heb. 5.4. No man takes that
honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was. Neither do we
admit that case of necessity (if it compel us to violate the orders
prescribed of God) For we hold this Theoreme. Not the privation, but the
contempt of Baptism does condemn. Besides the baptism of weomen was not long
since absolutely condemned in the fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 100.
Neither is Augustine to be allowed in his writing, that; If a Lay man upon
urgent necessity, do baptize, it is either no sin at all, or a venial sin.

No doubt but care should be had, that the Infant may be baptized by the
lawful and fit Minister; but if that may not be obtained, it is to be
commended to God, that he may Baptize it with the baptism of his spirit. For
we must believe that the children of faithful Parents be already baptized
with the baptism of the Flaminis,
spirit, being within the Covenant.

Whether, forasmuch as Peter, Act, 10.34.48. preached the Gospel, to
Cornelius, but baptized him not; and Paul also did the same as we read. 1.
Cor. 1.16. Does it follow therefore that they whose help the Apostles used in
bapzing the faithful, were Lay men?
No indeed, but they were either Evangelists or Elders, or Deacons, whom for
the most part, the Apostles took with them, who sometimes also administered the
word, of whom at that time there was a great company. Moreover, they did it
not of themselves, but by the commandment of the Apostles: therefore it was
not they but the Apostles that baptized by their hands: For he that does any
thing by the ministry of others, may be said in a sort to do it himself.

And whereas Paul in the place before alleged, says that he was sent not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel, it is to be taken (...), or Comparatively.
For it signifies that he had not received of God peculiarly or principally
the office of baptizing, but of preaching the Gospel, which manner of
speaking, we find Ier. 7.22. I spoke not, etc. Neither does he extenuate the
dignity and fruit of baptism, that, whereas few had in Charge the office of
teaching, many might baptize, and many might be taught at once together, but
baptism could not be administered, but in order by one and one, therefore Paul
(who excelled in the gift of preaching) was instant, and intended upon the most
necessary work, leaving that to others, which they could more easily perform.

Whether may that baptism be allowed, which is administered by Heretics or
Papists?
If it be meant of such heretics as deny the principles of heavenly
Doctrine, and utterly corrupt the essential form of baptism (as the Arrians,
Somosatenians, Manichaeans, and Macedonians) which are not sincere in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, baptizing so in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, that they deny nevertheless, that the son and holy
Ghost are coeternall, coessentiall, and of equal honor with the Father, or
that the son of God did truly assume the humane nature; then such baptism
is not to he ratified, but to be accursed. For the essential form being once
taken away, the matter it self is also taken away. And therefore it is to be
thought that such are not so much to be rebaptised, but as that indeed they
should rather be first consecrated with true baptism, who being converted to
the knowledge of the truth, desire to be ingraffed into the Orthodoxall
Church. And this agrees with the decree of the Nicen Council.

But we must judge otherwise of the baptism of some other heretics; as the
Nouatians and Donatists, who delivered the true doctrine of the Trinity: or of
Papists (who are out of the way of truth in some part of doctrine, and who
possess the place of pastors, and use the public ministry, either by common
error, by long sufferance, or by force, though they be not to be accounted as
truly called.) Wherein although there be many things needless, and
superstitious, yet still Christ is retained and held, at least in title, to be
the matter it self, the chief head, and essential form of the institution,
and the native meaning (without idolatry) of the words of Baptism, I baptize
thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, is
retained. Moreover it pleased God, in mercy to conserve a remnant of his
Church in the midst of Popery it self, even as the Israelites continued the
use of Circumcision, though they embraced a false and impious service of God,
and the vows are made in the name of Christ, and not of Antichrist, or of any
Idol. Therefore that baptism is not void, but of value and force: for it is
the Ministry of those person, but of the Church as yet couerd or hidden in
popery.

They, I grant, did sprinkle the head or body, but Christ baptized inwardly.
And therefore such Baptism is neither to be annihilated, neither does it
require Anabaptisticall rebaptizing. But, forasmuch as they teach wickedly in
other matters, they give just cause why the faithful should necessarily depart
from them, as it is written. 1. John. 5.21, Fly Idols.

Whether may they that are truly instructed in Christian Religion with good
conscience bring their children to be baptized of Popish Priests?
No. 1. It is one thing, the validity of a thing received, and another thing
to seek that is falsely, and many ways superstitiously administered.

2. Because we should give no occasion by our example to approve and confirm
the corruptions both of the Doctrine and of the Sacraments, as also of the
superstitious worship of the false and unlawful calling of the Ministers of
Antichrist: for that we must abstain from all appearance of evil, and from
communicating with the sins of other men 1 These. 5 12. etc. 1 Timothy 1.22
.

3. Because whatsoever we take in hand, even in things indifferent, that is in
things mean, indifferent, and least matters, as meat, and drink, with a
doubting conscience, not being assured of the lawfulness thereof by the word of
God, it is sin. To. 14.5.23. We must not do evil that good may ensue thereof,
Romans 3.8. And it becomes us to to profess Christ, and not always to flatter
our own weakness too much.

4. Because we are bidden, to fly from the Temple of Idols, and to take heed of
Idols Isa. 52.11 2 Cor. 6, 14 15.16
, to hold accursed whosoever teach any other Gospel. Gal. 1.8. to hear the
voice of Christ, not to hear a strangers voice, but to fly from it Ioh.
10.3.4.5.27. 1 Ioh. 5.23
and finally to beware of the leaven, that is the pestilent Doctrine of the
Pharisees and Sadduces. Mat. 16.6.11.12. The Galathians, joining the observation
of ceremones to their profession of the Gospel, are said by the Apostle to have
forsaken the gospel, to have rejected Christ and to have received his grace in
vain, although they acknowledge him for their Savior.

5. Because that the administration of pure baptism should be of such
excellent estimation amongst godly men, that they should spare no labor nor
cost to obtain the same for their dear children and ofsping.

6. Because that if by reason of this godly purpose baptism being deferred
(which indeed ought to be done) the children in the mean time dye: yet
notwithstanding they are partakers of Gods covenant, and are heirs of eternal
salvation: For, not the privation, but the contempt of the Sacrament does
condemn.

What is the matter of Baptism?
It is twofold, external and internal; or sensible, and intelligible:
external or sensible, is first of all, as well a sign, which is of water,
true, pure, clean, and natural, and without difference, simple, usual, and
common, not first consecrated with peculiar exorcismes, not mixed, mingled, nor
made or distilled, nor any simple or vulgar liquor, not oil, nor blood, nor
fire, nor gravel, or any other element. For by the word of Institution in the
very action coming to the Element of Water, Baptism is consecrated, and
sanctified, to be the lauer of regeneration of the holy Ghost Mat. 3.11 Ephesians.
5.26 Heb 10, 13
, As also the ceremony or action it self, namely the external washing
performed by the minister of the Church with water, which consists of
dipping, abiding under the water, and as it were swimming of the body out of
the water, or sprinckling at least, and especially of the head, and each of
them either Trinall, to signify that Baptism is made in the name of the three
singular persons of the Trinity, or in one, to note the unity of the essence
in three persons. (...).
For it is all one, whether he that is to be baptized, be dipped all over in
the water, (as the ancient manner of old was in rivers, and fountains; whereof
came the lauer or fountain, that is a great vessel full of water used in the
Churches of the Christians) and the Apostle alludeth, Ioh. 3.13 Act. 1.31.19
to the rite of Baptizing, in the ancient Church, which was not a bare
aspersion, but, as I may say, an immersion of the naked body, which after was
clothed with new garments, to put such in mind of newenesse of life, in these
phrases. Gal. 3.27. All ye that have been baptized into Christ have put on
Christ. And Col. 5, 6.9. Ye have put off the old man with his works; or
whether he be dipped or sprinkled with water, as appears. Act. 2.41. as now
the manner is: for, to baptize, signifies not only to drench, but properly to
dippe and moysten.

So that the manner of wetting, Christ has leaft free to the Church,
notwithstanding the sprinkling of water is most agreeable and correspondent to
the true signification. For Peter says we are elected unto sa^ctification by
(...), that is the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 1. Pet. 1.2. which is
signified by external baptism Heb. 9.29. and was figured and shadowed forth
by the sprinkling of blood in the Law: neither does the virtue and force of
baptism depend upon the quantity of water used therein.

2. The clear, and intelligible rehearsal of the words of Institution, and
the promise: but especially invocation on the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. Therefore these three, namely, water, sprinkling, and the word, are the
external essential parts of baptism, although sprinkling and invocation in
the lawful use may be called also the formal cause, but the external, or
outward of Baptime.

Whether besides the Symbol of water, is it lawful to use in Baptism any
other visible sign and Element, as Salt, which is put into the mouth of the
baptized; Spittle, wherewith the ears and nose are touched, together with the
pronouncing of the word, Ephata, that is be opened: Milk and honey, whereby is
signified a right or title to eternal life, a figure whereof was the land of
Canaan, flowing with milk and honey; Chrisme, or holy oil, wherewith the
breast, shoulders, and forehead are anointed, to show that he is anointed or
Christened and armed with the oil of the spirit like a Champion; an hallowed
burning wax candle, Whereby is meant that he is translated out of the Kingdom
of darkness into the Kingdom of light; Exsufflation, or breathing on the face
of the body to be baptized; a white garment? etc.
No, for in Baptism, being instituted by God, of no less force than in the
rest of Gods commandments, should be that, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I
command you, keep the same to do it, you shall not add thereto nor diminish
therefrom. For whereas those things being of themselves not ill, and some of
them brought in by the ancients, as milk, honey, breathing, and white
garments, as may appear in Tertullian without warrant of the word of God,
instituted by men, D. Corona Militis
being now full of superstition, and are held as things necessary, they do
rather defile than adorn baptism, and therefore are to be taken away, by the
example of Ezeckias, who brake in sunder the brazen Serpent, (notwithstanding,
it had been fore-appointed by God) because that the Israelites began now to
abuse the same against the honor of God 2. Kings. 18 4
.

And whereas it is pretended, that many profitable things are signified and
taught by those rites, and traditions of men; It may be answered, that we
should not make our selves wiser then Jesus Christ, that types and figures
belong to the old Testament, but such things as Christ would have us learn in
the New Testament, he would that it should be declared by the light of his
word, and not by figures. And such rites as he would have to be used with his
word, himself has instituted.

2. The beauty and dignity of the Sacraments is to be gathered from the word
of God.

3. The multitude and pomp of humane rites has overthrown the ceremonies
ordained by God.

4. In those ceremonies, spiritual efficacy and operation, not bare
signification is used, without the word of God, as may appear by the
consecrations of ointments, salt, wax, etc.

5. They have degenerated into superstition and abuse.

6. They are falsely supposed and held to perteine to the integrity and truth
of Baptism.

What is the word in Baptism?
The word of the Gospel, the sum whereof Christ's institution contains,
being conjoined with the promise of eternal life, being in these words,
Baptize ye in the name of the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost,
whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mat. 28.19.

And the pronunciation of this form, plainly and clearly in our native
speech, that all may understand it, I Baptize thee in the name (or into the
name) of the father, and of the son, and of the Holy Ghost; which words in
the Schools are called the form of baptism; But we had rather call them the
form of words: therefore Dydimus says, that Baptism is imperfect if any of
the three persons be omitted.

For whereas in the Act. cap. 2.38. we read that the Apostles baptized in the
name, or into the name of the Lord and of Christ, it is either spoken by
Synecdoche (as Ambrose thinks) and is of the same sense with the aforesaid
form, because the father is in Christ, and the holy Ghost also, and whosoever
believes in the Son, believes likewise in the father, and in the holy Ghost
Io. 12.44 and 14.9.10.12
; or in the name of Christ, that is, through the name and commandment of
Christ, that is, as he had appointed and ordained, as name is often taken for
commandment, or the term to which, that is the end and scope, and effect of
baptism is signified, but not the form of Baptizing: so that the meaning is,
that he had baptized them into the name and profession, or even into the death
of Christ, and to have incorporated them into Christ by baptism, and to have
consecrated, and sealed them Christians unto him, as their Mediator, but with
the accustomed form of baptism.

What is it to be baptized in the name of the father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost?
By this phrase is signified, that by calling on the fathet, the son, and the
holy Ghost, he who is baptized, his sins being forgiven, is received into the
favor of that God, which is, the Father son and holy Ghost, and is adopted,
sealed, ingrafted, installed, received and consecrated, into the sheepefold,
family, inheritance, power, worship, league, favor, religion, faith, and
communion of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, that is, the true God
in nature and essence one, but in property of persons three, which is the
Author of salvation, that we might live after his pleasure. Therefore he says
not: In the names, but, in the name, least from hence occasion might be given
of making three Gods. In which sense this phrase is to be taken, as it is
plain by the words of Paul 1. Cor. 1.13. where he denies that he baptized any
in his own name.

So then by Baptism we are consecrated to GOD the Father, because in him, our
Adoption and regeneration, which follows after it, is established by the Holy
Ghost.

What is the internal matter of Baptism?
The thing signified, which is, both the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ,
which are correspondent to the water, and also the Ingrafting and incorporating
into Christ, by the holy Ghost, and consequently the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, the remission, or washing away of sins: the
Regeneration or spiritual second birth, the renewing, and sanctification of
that man which is baptized. The putting on of Christ, as it were of a garment,
wirh which we are covered Gal. 3.8 Ephe. 5.26 Tit. 3.5.
. Likewise the fruit, fellowship, and participation of the death, burial, and
resurrection of Christ Romans 6.4.5 Col. 2.1.3
. Lastly, our Adoption, and entrance into the Church of God, as it were an
admittance into the society of the Saints: which thing signified may be also
called the essential part, and internal form of Baptism.

What is then the form of Baptism?
Of outward Baptism, that holy, external, symbolical action which the
Minister of the word of God uses: which consists first in the reciting and
declaring of the institution, and of the divine promises anexed to baptism, or
in signifying the lawful, and wholesome use of baptism. Secondly, in the
confession of that faith, into the which baptism leads, or in Catechisticall
questions, and answers, or in stipulation, by which, those that were to be
baptized in times past did testify their Inward baptism, being then to be
confirmed with the outward, as Act. 8.31 1 Pet 3.21
. But first and especially in the sprinkling of water, in the name of the
Father the son and the Holy Ghost. And last of all in prayers, blessings and
giving of thanks: in a language known unto the people, that the congregation
may be able to say, Amen. 1. Co. 14.16. for all these things are commanded by
Scripture, and example, as, Preach the Gospel, he that believes, etc. Mat.
24.19. Act. 22.16, and, Be thou baptized, and wash away thy sins, by calling
on of the name of Jesus.

Now the Scripture has not prescribed a set form in certain words, concerning
those admonitions, and prayers, touching the institution and Doctrine of
baptism, which the word of God delivers: but has left that free, as
circumstances may require for the better edifying of the Church, so that the
foundation be kept.

But the form of inward baptism, is that inward action which is proper unto
Jesus Christ himself, working by the Holy Ghost.

What Analogy and agreement is there of the Sign, with the thing signified
in Baptism?
Very great: for even as the water does wash the body, and the filth thereof:
so the blood of Christ by his merit does wash away our sins, and spiritual
spots: for his spirit does sanctify us Romans 3, 25 Tit. 3, 5 1 John. 1, 7.
. And like as every generation consists of moist and watery matter (Whereupon
some Philosophers, as Thales, have said, that water, was the beginning of all
things) so our regeneration is by the holy Ghost in Baptism, who is often
signified by the name of water: for even as water prepares the earth to bring
forth fruit, and quenches thirst: So the holy Ghost, that same which sat upon
the waters Genesis 1.2
, makes us fit for good works, and quenches in us the thirsting after
terrene things, and hereof good works are called the fruits of the spirit
Gal. 5.22
, and Christ says; who so thirsts, let him come to me and drink, for he
that drinks shall never thirst; but this he spoke of the spirit which they
that believe should receive Esa, 51.1
. Secondly, the sprinkling with water does plainly note the sprinkling of the
blood of Christ for the remission of sins, Ioh. 7, 37
and imputation of righteousness: but the staying under the water, though but
a while, sets as it were before our eyes, the death, burial, and
mortification of our natural corruption, the old Adam (by the virtue of the
death and burial of Christ) which is the first part of our regeneration Rom
6.3, 4
. And the being taken out, the reviving of the new man, and newness of life,
yea, and proportionally, our resurrection to come Ibid. verse. 4.5.13
.

What change or conjunction is there of the sign and the thing signified in
Baptism?
Not any natural: for the outward sign is only the Ministers corporal
action, but the thing signified is spiritual, and Gods work, namely, to be
washed with Christ's blood, and regenerated with his spirit, which is not to
be sprinkled with Christ's blood, corporally, either visibly, or inuisibly; but
to be received into Gods favor by reason of his blood shead, that is, by
reason of Christ's whole obedience, and being grafted into his body to be
quickened by him, through the working of the holy Ghost, as it is said expressly
of Christ, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire Mat. 3.11
John. 3.33
. Notwithstanding for the fitness, reference and truth of the sign, and
thing signified, and also for the promise made to those that use them rightly,
there is a Sacramental and Relative copulation, by reason whereof the name and
properties both of the sign and thing signified are changed. Hereof Baptism
is called the Lauer of Regeneration, and the water, the blood and spirit of
Christ. Tit. 3.5. that is, not only the shadow, but a most certain
Testimony, that the baptized truly believing are cleansed with the blood of
Christ, and regenerated by the holy Ghost.

Is the same man always at one instant Baptized with water and the Holy Ghost?
No.

1. Because the promise of the spirit annexed to baptism is not absolute, but
conditional, requiring faith and obedience.

2. Because that God deals not in Baptism by natural reason, as when a
medicine being taken, works with thee, whether thou sleep or wakest, and
fire warmeth whether thou think of it or no. But as God is a most free
agent, sometimes the Baptism of water is without the baptism of the spirit,
as the Example of Simon Magus teaches, who although he had an Historical
faith, yet he was not regenerated, and the Act. 8, 12
baptism of the spirit sometime goes before, sometime accompanies, and
sometimes follows the baptism of water: for both men and women, when they
believed by Philips preaching, the things belonging unto the kingdom of God
and of Christ, as also the Eunuch, Cornelius and his friends, were baptized by
the Holy Ghost, before they were baptized with water, as appears by their
faith and conversion Act. 8.13
; but in infants to whom the kingdom of Heaven belongs (if we respect Gods
ordinance) both Baptism, and Justification, and Regeneration do concur out
of the nature of that Covenant, I will be thy GOD and the God of thy seed.
Genesis 17.7. but the effect hereof is truly declared afterward in his time. For
the seed of the word, and Sacraments lies as it were in the Earth, covered
and hid, as long as the Lord sees good to defer grace.

Is Christ present after one manner both in baptism, and in the Supper.
He is alike present in the lawful use, but yet the manner of his presence may
be after a sort discerned: for in baptism he is present as at the new birth:
In the Supper for the confirmation and nourishment of him that is new borne.
But understand this presence, in respect of him that takes it, for nothing
has the reason of a Sacrament, out of the use instituted.

What is the manner of receiving Baptism?
The manner of receiving the outward signs, is natural, but of the things
signified, spiritual; for the things themselves are effectually communicated
unto us, in respect of God that gives the holy Ghost, by the means of the
lawful administration of Baptism: But faith is that only gift of God, whereby
we apply the substance of the Sacrament peculiarly unto our selves. Touching
infantes, they have a singular privilege in respect of God.

Who are to be Baptized?
All men living, who are received or esteemed to be received into the Covenant
of God, without difference of sex or nation Act 10, 47 and, 11.17
, and those who are of years, which come unto the Church, and show their
assent to the doctrine of the Gospel, profess their faith in Christ, and
show forth the confession of their sins, or repentance, Mat. 3.6. and 28.19.
Baptizing them, (that is to say, those which have given their names to the
Gospel, and have professed themselves Disciples.) And Act. 2.41. They which
received his word, were baptized. And Christ said first, He that believes:
afterward, And is baptized. Mar, 16, 16. So Simon Magus was admitted, the
Eunuch and others Act. 8.13 37. and. 10 46.47
.

Or else the Infants of the faithful, Genesis 17.7 Luk, 18.16
and those which are begotten of Baptized parents (but not of Infidels, which
are not in the Church, and not the Children of the Baptized) because their seed
is contained in the covenant, but not these other. Act. 2.39. To you is the
promise made, and to your children. Neither is it material, whether the Infant
be borne of unequal matrimony, that is, whether one parent or both be
faithful and Christian: for the Apostle calls such children holy 1 Cor 7.14
, that is, pure and separated for the Lord, according to the form of the
Covenant. Neither does this hinder, because all that are borne of faithful
parents are not elected, for we are not to enquire into the secret judgments
of God, but probably we may duly conjecture, that all which are borne of
Christians, are elected.

Are persons of years, and infants to be admitted unto baptism all after one
sort?
No, but they which are of years are not to be baptized, before they be
instructed in the faith of Christ, as in the word, which enters the ignorant
in Christ, that is in the Rudimentes of Religion, in the principles of
Christianisme, which is called Catechism Heb, 6, 1
.

Secondly, when they are to be baptized, they ought to confess their faith
before the Church of Christ. Mat. 3.6. They were Baptized by John in Jordan
confessing their sins, that is, such as did testify, that they did earnestly
embrace the Doctrine of free remission of their sins. Such a confession was
required, in the ancient Church, of them which were able to be enstructed,
differing far from that Popish shrift consisting in a proditorious
enumeration of each even secret sins. Whereupon the Apostle, 1. Pet. 3.21,
calls baptism, the answering of a good conscience, having respect to the
Interrogations of Catechists, to which, those which were to be instructed in
the principal heads of Faith, and of the use of Baptism, Lib 1, de resur.
carnis
did answer, being demanded. Whereupon is that saying of Tertullian. The
soul is not established by washing, but by answering.

But when the Infants of the faithful are to be baptized, neither actual
faith, which is by hearing, nor confession of faith ought to be required of
them, which God himself neither demands of them, neither are they able to
have it or express it by reason of their age. Therefore these words, Do thou
believe? I believe. Do thou renounce? I renounce, are unfitly transformed
from the Baptism of them in years to the Baptism of children, if we
consider the Infants themselves.

Are Infidels of years requiring baptism to be baptized?
If the question be of Turks, or Pagans, or Jews, who sometimes for civil
Causes, and for lucre and gain, require baptism: because baptism ought to
be the Sacrament of Regeneration, not a veil or cover of hypocrisy and
filthy lucre, they are not to be therefore baptized: but if they testify
sincerely.

1. That they account not gain godliness.

2. That they renounce Mahumetisme, or false Iudaisme, or Paganism.

3. That they understand, embrace, and profess from the heart, the doctrine of
Christ, and believe in Jesus crucified: and in the mean time, their life and
says being well considered, they give good hope unto the Church, then at
length they may be baptized.

So Philip did answer the Eunuch requiring baptism, If thou beeleeuest with
all thy heart, thou may be Baptized: And he answering, said; I believe that
Jesus Christ is that Son of God: which words contain a manifest form of
confession, which in the Apostles times was drawn from them, who were baptized
when they were come to years of discretion. Act. 8.37.

Are the little children of Infidels manifestly strangers from Christ, straight
way to be baptized, if they be neglected of them, and taken up by Christians?
No: until they be of years, and well instructed in the Doctrine of Christ,
declaring a true confession of their faith, and do so testify, that they are
endewed from God with grace, and selected out of the world, and sanctified by
the right of Gods chidren: therefore in the ancient Church, all Infidels that
were of years were first catechized, before baptism, which being done,
baptism might not be denied them at any hand.

Are the children of those which are in the Church, but by the uncleanness of
their life, declare themselves indeed not to be of the Church, to be baptized?
They are, because the iniquity of the parents ought not to defraud the
children borne in the Church. Ezech. 18.4.20. The Son shall not bear the
iniquity of the Fathers.

2. Neither is the impiety of the next Parents to be considered so much, as
the piety of the Church in which they are borne, and which is, as it were their
mother: as likewise their ancestors, who lived godlily. Unto which appartaineth
that which Paul says, Romans 11.16. If the root be holy, that is, the first
parents, then the branches also, that is, the posterity. Therefore
Circumcision was not denied to the children of the wicked Jews.

Hence it is, that even they which are borne in adultery, although the Parents
repent not, Epist. 75 ad Aurilium. Episcopum
yet being offered to Baptism by others then their parents, are not to be
rejected of the Church, as Augustine teaches, where he concludes; If any be
borne of excommunicate persons, yet such a one cannot be partaker of the
excommunication, seeing he is not of the crime.

Are the children of Papists to be admitted to the Baptism of the true
Church?
They are.

1. Because it is presumed, and that rightly, that the Church, though hidden,
does yet continue under the dregs of the papacy (in regard of the elect, who
in their time get forth:) for 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. it is said, he which opposes
himself, that is, Antichrist, sits in the Temple of God, not in the Temple
at Jerusalem, which never shall be built again, as Christ witnesses, but in
the Church: according to that 2. Cor, 6, 16. You are the Temple of God: As also
because the earnest of Christianity, although blemished with many spots, is
notwithstanding retained in its substantial form: yea, and the very doctrine
of the foundation of Christianity (in that which belongs to the trinity, and
the person of Christ): yea, a residue of the Covenant continues there on Gods
part, as Paul speaks of the Jews, Romans 3.3.4. and. 11.25.
and it is said to beget children unto GOD, but such as she exposes to Moloch,
and defiles with false worshippes. As it is said of the Church of Samaria and
Israel which retained the sign of circumcision, and professed the Law, but in
title only, and withal observed Idolatrous worshippes of the Gentiles Eze^h.
16 10. and. 23.4
. Therefore the children of the Papists are not in my opinion, to be kept from
Baptism, if any of the parents require it, or if any be present which will
promise for their right education.

Are infantes always to be baptized, seeing it is no where commanded to
Baptize them?
They are: because it is no where forbidden; and although it be not commanded
expressly and literally, yet it is commanded by proportion, and good consequence.

1. Because (excepting the difference of the visible Ceremony) the Analogy,
or reason of Baptism and Circumcision is all one, the inward and spiritual
thing, and signification all one, that is to say, forgiveness of sins, and
mortification of the flesh. The thing figured, one and the same, to wit,
Regeneration: both of them a badge of the ingraffing and adoption into the
family of GOD, the same Christ promised in circumcision, and declared in
baptism, the same Covenant: also the same will of God continues ratified, for
the sealing of that Covenant: and baptism succeeded Circumcision, by which,
all male children were commanded to be circumcised upon the eight day Genesis
17.12 Col. 2.11.12
. Now the condition of Christian Infants, in as much as concerns their age,
is not made worse in the New Testament: for then it must needs be, that by
Christ's coming the grace of God is made more obscure, more straight, and less
manifest to us, then before it was to the Jews: which is contumelious against
Christ. Truly, if there was nothing in the commandment of God for
circumcising of Infants reprouable, neither can there be any absurdity noted
in the baptizing of Infants. But because that part of the Covenant which
concerns infants, was now known to the Apostles, by reason of Circumcision.
Therefore Christ was contented with a general commandment for Baptism: and
did not judge it needful to command any thing peculiarly for Infants.

2. Because they are in the Covenant, as were the children of Israel, to whom
was the promise of the Covenant, I will be thy God, that is, he that will
have mercy and save thee, and of thy seed after thee. (In which words is
contained a promise of the fatherly favor of GOD, of the forgiveness of
sins, and of eternal life Mat. 21.32 Genesis 7.7 Exodus 20.6
) the which being now apprehended of the Parents by faith, does not only
comprehend a spiritual and allegorical issue, but also the children which
they shall beget to a thousand generations b. The which surely does no less
appertain to Christians, then in times past to the people of the Jews. And
Act. 2, 38, Peter said; Let every one of you be baptized: for, to you and your
children is the promise made.

And Christ commands little children to be brought unto him that he might
touch them, not such as were of riper years, and able to go, but tender ones,
and children which did yet suck, which many brought unto him, and did not lead
them. And it is said that he took them in his arms and embraced them Luke
18.15
, and commended them unto his father by his prayer and blessing, and sanctified
them by the laying on of his hands, which cannot be taken otherwise, but that
he received them into favor Mark. 18 16
. And last of all, most clearly, he speaks of Infants, inuiting them to his
fellowship and society, Math. 19, 13. Suffer little children to come unto me
and forbid them not, because to such, that is as well Infants in age, as those
which are like them, appertains the kingdom of heaven: whom Peter calls 1.
Pet. 2.2. spiritual children, such as by the word of God are regenerated to
immortal life: like as Math. 18.4. Whosoever shall humble himself as this
child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

And in the 14. verse. It is not the pleasure of your heavenly father, that one
of these little ones should perish. For it is manifest that Christ approves
and receives little children, otherwise he would not allow those which were
like them.

And the Evangelist signifies that the kingdom of GOD appertained to those
children which were slain by Herod, reciting the place, Ier. 31.15. of the
holy Martyrs, the children of Rachel, or of their posterity, Mat. 2.16.17.

Now, unto whom appertains the promise of the Communion with Christ, and of
eternal life, which is signified in the word of Baptism, To the same
appertains also the sign, according to the divine determination proper to
every Sacrament. And there can be no other means to bring them unto Christ,
but that they by baptism be ingrafted into the Church, which is the body of
Christ, seeing they are not yet capable of Doctrine.

3 Because although hearing is an ordinary beginning of faith Ro^ 10.17
, yet because it is impossible that any should please God without faith. Hebr.
11.6. Infants must needs have in the place of faith, the seed, or budding of
faith, or the renewing of the spirit, although they are not yet endued with the
knowedge of good or evil: for Deuteronomy. 1.39
God holds them not for unclean, but adopteth them for his children, and
sanctifyeth them from the womb, as it is said. 1. Cor. 7.14. Your children are
holy: that is to say, by an hidden operation, and enlightening of the spirit
which makes in them new motions, and new inclinations to Godward, according to
their capacity, as far as we can guess, without the word, which is the only
seed of regeneration to them which are able to be taught. 1. Pet. 1.23. Romans
8.16
. for the Lord gave a taste in John Baptist, whom he sanctified in his mothers
womb, what he is able to do in the rest Luke 1.15:41
. And yet must the secret works, and judgments of God be left unto himself,
because the Church judges not of hidden things 1 Peter. 23
.

Neither are the prayers of the Church for the Infantes of the believers which
are baptized, in vain, over whom the name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, is called upon: but they obtain that which they ask, Mat. 18.19.
If not in each singular person, yet in the species or kind of each. Whereupon
it follows, that they are received into favor, and are endued with the holy
Ghost, and therefore are to be baptized Act. 10.47
.

4. Because though Infants have not sinned actually, as Adam did Romans 5.14. yet
they have sinned Originally in Adam, as included in his loins, verse. 12. and
are dead in him 1 Cor. 15.22
: Secondly being conceived in sin Psalm. 51.7
(contrary to the Pelagians opinion) they are by nature, the children of
wrath, Ioh. 3.6
and do daily die no less then men of riper years Ephesians. 2.3
: wherefore that they may please God, and may be admitted into his kingdom,
where no polluted thing enters. 1. Cor. 15.30. they have need of the spark
of some regeneration, the abundance whereof, they may afterward enjoy, which is
sealed unto them by Baptism Apo^ 21.27
. And therefore it is not to be denied them, for except a man be borne again
of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. John.
3.3.5.

5. Because the commandment concerning baptism is universal, and
comprehends the whole Church, whereof Infants are members, and a great part:
for Paul includes the whole Church where he says, that it is cleansed by the
washing of water in the word. Ephesians. 5.26. and Math. 28.19. Preach the Gospel
to every creature, and baptize them. It is not therefore particularly to be
applied to those of discretion only, but also to the children of the faithful.

6 Because though by reason of their years they understand not Gods word, nor
can believe in action, and profess their faith and repentance (whereof
Baptism is a Sacrament, as circumcision was in times past) and enter into
mutual obligation betwixt God and them, which belongs only to them of
discretion, notwithstanding it is unto the^ in steed of Act. 2.41 and 8.12.37
professing of faith: for that they are borne within the Church of the people
of God, and are not only within the covenant, but also are presented by them
which believe, and do promise and make answer for them. And therefore Saint
Augustine says, the Sacrament of faith makes children faithful, though they
have not yet that faith which consists in the will of believers to make them
faithful. Even as they do not know that they have the holy Ghost, though it
be in them, or a mind and life, though it cannot be denied that they have
both. And to conclude it suffices, that they are baptized and bound unto a
repentance and faith to come: Even as the infants of the Israelites were
circumcised into a faith and repentance that was to follow, although they
neither understood the word of God, nor the mystery of circumcision: and
Christ blessed little children and prayed for them, though they vndestood not
what he did for them.

7 Because that, which the institution of Baptism commands that they which
are to be baptized should first be taught Mat. 2.19
, as John is said to have preached the baptism of repentance Marc. 1.4
, whilst he taught these whom he was about to baptize (out of which places
the Anabaptists impugn childrens baptism) it is not precisely to be tied to
the order of words, but to be distinctly applied to those which may be taught,
or their children which are strangers from the covenant who must be first
instructed before they be baptized: but it is to be applied otherwise to
children that are within the covenant, who though they cannot hear the
Gospel, yet can and ought to be baptized, for that they are both borne in and
belong unto the Church, before they can be taught, and then it is time enough
to teach them, when they are capable of learning, howbeit in the Church of God,
the word is not there separated from childrens baptism.

Likewise also this: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he
that believes not (although he be baptized) shall be condemned, belongs not
to the children of the faithful, but to those which may hear the Gospel. As
likewise that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3, 10. He that labors not, let him
not eat, which being spoken unto men of years, ought not to be inferred upon
all indifferently: Nor follows it simply, that because all believers are to
be baptized, therefore all that are baptized ought to believe, or because a
universal affimatiue is not simply converted: neither are these terms
conuertible to be baptized, and believing: but to be baptized, and to be
acknowledged for the members of the Church.

8 For that Paul. 1. Cor. 10.2. witnesses that all the Israelites which
passed through the red sea were baptized, among whom, seeing no doubt there
were many children among so many thousands, no doubt, they likewise received
the type and figure of our baptism: It is therefore false which our
adversaries object that no place of Scripture testifies the baptism of Infants.

Likewise, though we read not that the Apostles baptized any Infants by name,
yet they baptized whole families, whereof children are not the smallest portion
Act. 16.15 and 18 8. 1 Cor. 1.6
, neither need we to use figures, when the words are plain. Neither can there
from these speeches, be collected any reason of such a Synecdoche, by which we
must understand portions of years only, and exclude children.

9 Because ancient writers testify, that the custom of baptising children
has continued from the very Apostles times till now, Origin faith: In 6. ad
ad Romans de Peccatorum meritis et remis l. 3 c. 6. et Contra Donat. l. 4. c. 13,
The Church received a tradition from the Apostles, to give baptism even to
Infantes. And Augustine says of the baptism of children. That which the
Universal Church holds, and was never decreed by Councils, but always has
been held, it may be verse well believed, that it was delivered no otherwise
but by Apostolic authority. Therefore it is false, which the Papists say,
That Baptism of children proceeded not so much from any apparent commandment
of the scripture, or from example, as from the decree of the Church.

Then, because to whomsoever the promise appertains, to them also belongs
the sign, as therefore Baptism is bestowed upon Infants, is likewise the
Supper of the Lord to be administered unto them?
Certain of the fathers have thought so, as Cyprian, sermon. 5. de lapsis, and
Augustine. lib. de Eccle. dogmat. c. 52. being moved by these words, John.
6.53. Except ye shall eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
you shall have no life in you. But we deny the consequent. For this place
speaks not of a sacramental eating, but of a spiritual eating, or of faith,
by which the faithful are quickened which are annexed unto Christ, who offered
his body, and shed his blood for us. And by this means the flesh of Christ is
made unto us meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed.

Secondly that. To whomsoever the promise appertains, to them also belongs
the sign, is true, but according to the divine determination, appropriated to
every sacrament: to wit, so that the Sacrament of Ingrafting be bestowed
as well upon Infants as those of years, but upon male children only, and that
not before the eight day, in the old Testament: but in the new, both to the
male and female without any prefixed time. But the Sacrament of nourishment to
them of years only, and that for a certain peculiar end, and the diversity
of the circumstance of the action.

So the Eucharist has his proper end, that the death of the Lord should be
declared in the public congregation in the using thereof. It is also
commanded, that every one which comes to the Lords Supper should examine
himself: yea and peculiar actions belong to the external rite, to wit, to
eat and to drink, which are not fit for little children. So under the old
Testament circumcision was appointed for infants but the Passover to them only
which by reason of their age were able to ask of the signification thereof
Exodus 12 62
. Hereupon came those vulgar verses: Ebrius, infamis, erroneus, atque furentes,
Cum pueris, Domini non debent sumere corpus.
To drunkards and thinfamous sort, to men misled and mad:
To children, Christ's body to give, it were an action bad,


Why would Christ be baptized at the age of thirty years. Luke 3.23. seeing
he needed neither remission of sins nor regeneration?
Christ himself answers it, at what time John refused to baptize him. Mat.
3.15. Let it be so now, for so it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness.
Which is to be understood distributiuely, to wit, thou in thy office, and I in
mine. But whereas he would at that time be subject to that Ministry, he did
it for diverse causes: First to show that he did approve of the doctrine,
baptism, and ministry of John, and commend unto us the use of the Sacraments
by his own example.

Secondly, that he might sanctify in his own body our baptism, having the
same common with us, as a most firm bond of union and fellowship which he
vouchsafed to enter with us at a time most fit, namely when he would give a
beginning to his own preaching, and to the new Testament: And also to testify
that the same things are inuisibly in our baptism which were visibly in his,
when the heavens were opened, and the spirit of God came down.

Thirdly to signifye that he was therefore sent to be baptized, namely to be
drenched in death, and to wash away our sins with his blood. Luke. 12.50. I
must be baptized with another baptism, and how am I grieved till it be
perfected?

Fourthly, that the truth might answer the type or figure: for as when the
high Priest was consecrated, first his whole body was washed with water, then
he was set before the people, clothed with the priestly garments, and then the
trumpets sounded whilst oil was powered upon his head Exodus 29 4.5.6 Number. 10.3
(which was also done at the kings Installing) so would Christ be baptized,
that he might begin a new the ministry of the Gospel, as being ordained and
confirmed by the public testimony of the whole Deity: for the voice of the
eternal father sounding from heaven, was in steed of a trumpet: the oil was
the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, covering Christ with his wings, and
resting on him. Also the fathers report of Christ, Math. 3.1. This is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased, fitly agrees with the inscription
which was written upon the fillet that was set on the high Priest his head:
Holiness to the Lord. Exodus 28.36.38.

When Paul says. 1. Cor. 15.19. What shall they do which are baptized for
the dead, if the dead are not raised: Does he either mean that the dead are to
be baptized (which custom dured a long time, as appears by the Carthaginian
Council) or that they are to be sprinkled with running water hallowed, (as
the Papists collect from hence) or that baptism does profit the dead (as the
papists say Mass for the dead, and sprinckle holy water upon their graves) or
to baptize any man living for one man that died unbaptized (as the Marcionites
did, whose perverse course Tertullian notes, as also they say, the Jews had a
custom, that if any man died before he enjoyed the legal washing, whereof
mention is made Number. 19.12. That then his next kindred should be besprinkled by
the priests in their steed) or that baptism was purposely deferred till the
hour of death: or that being ready to die, and now lying on their deathbeds
(for which custom thy were called Clinickes) they were then baptized, or
lastly, must they watch, lie upon the earth, fast, pray, voluntarily whip
themselves for the souls of the dead that are in Purgatory, and to satisfy
for their sins, as the Papists say?
None of all these, for all these expositions come by ignorance of a fallation
called Figura dictionis, the figure or phrase of speech. For neither does the
proposition (...), signify in stead, nor may we think that those superstitions
or afflictions for the dead, Clinici
nor that custom of the Clinicks was in use in the time of the Apostles (but
yet Epiphanius says, they were in use a while after) that any man after they
had been endewed with the knowledge and faith of Christ, should yet
nevertheless either for fear, or for some other cause defer their baptism,
until they were ready to die, and then require it, giving then first their
names, both unto Christ and his Church, least they should depart out of this
life without that public testimony of their salvation, which the Lord had
appointed all believers to be furnished with. Heereunto also was annexed this
superstition, that some purposely deferred their baptism till the hour of
death least after the receiving of it, they should fall again into sin, but
it is not likely that this was in Paul's time, for if it had, he would sure have
manifested the superstition which cleaued unto the same.

But he here alludeth unto a most ancient custom of certain Churches, who
were wont to be baptized either upon the dead carcasses of the dead in their
graves, or upon the Tombs or bones of the dead, to the end they might
profess, that they did both die unto sin with Christ, were ready to die for
Christ, and also believed the resurrection of the dead, which exposition is
indeed most simple, and does not strain the Apostles words: for the Greek
word (...), signifies properly a man's carkase, and (...) with a Genitive case,
upon, to note a place is very usual with the Greeks.

Or it declares the end as Theophilact will have it, namely, that they which
are baptized as dead men, may be baptized for dead men, that sin may be
quenched or die in them, or else in a sure hope of resurrection, and that they
may have a remedy against death: Seeing that baptism is the sign of the
remission of sins, of regeneration, and of the resurrection, or lastly it
notes the custom of the Jews in washing those which had touched Number, 19.12
Ecius. 34.10
a dead body, or the dead bodies themselves, which latter custom we read that
the Christians retained at the first: as also the custom of the Gentiles in
washing and annoynting their dead in their burials. Act. 9.37


The first did it in hope of the resurrection to come: but these in a false
Imitation, ambition, superstition, and vain diligence toward the dead: But
note the Lord remembereth that custom, not that he may approve it, though he
refute it not, but that he might confute them by their own proper rite or
act, wherewith they testified the hope of their resurrection. Therefore he
faith not, Why are we (to wit, true Christians) Baptized over the dead, but
discerning the superstitious from the faithful, but what shall they do?

Are also things without sense, as Bells and such like to be baptized?
In no wise, for we do not read that Baptism was ordained save only for men:
for whose sake also Christ was made man, and died: Secondly, because the
Sacrament of Regeneration pertains only to them that are capable of
Regeneration: but the sacrament belongs not to those things unto which the
righteousness of faith agrees not. But baptism in the presence of Godfathers,
and the giving of a man's name unto a Bell, and that in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, so taking Gods name in vain, suteth as well
with a Bell, as with an Ox, or an Ass.

Who are partakers of the thing signified in Baptism?
Only the Elect, and believers, who are the sons of God by adoption, and
brethren and fellow heirs of Jesus Christ, because this condition is added
unto all Christ's gifts, to be partakers of them, If we believe. And of those
only it is said, But year washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 6.11.

Shall we count it Superstition or Religion in Constantine the great, for that
he rather wished to be baptized in the river Jordan, where our Savior was
baptized, then any where else? and refused to be baptized till he was 65.
years old, and then being ready to die, he would needs be baptized on the
sudden by Eusebius an Arrian Bishop of Nicomedia? Tripart. hist Lib. 3. c. 12
Eusebius leo vita Constant. l. 4

Superstition: because the divine institution, and the thing signified, and not
the place do commend baptism: but yet it is more fit that baptism be
administered in those places where the assemblies meet, then in private houses:
both because the public prayers annexed unto the administration of baptism
are not without fruit: as also because it much concerns that all the Church
know who are the Saints, fellow Citizens, and of the household of God.

What time, or day, holy day, or working day is fitting for baptism?
In former times for that many beginners in religion came to the Church from
the heathen, and desired to be partakers of baptism, there were certain days
appointed for them, namely, Easter and VVhitsonday, which were therefore called
the days of baptism, and diverse other days, which customs by degree grew to
this habit, that because in their baptism they had new garments, and that such
did always appear in new garments, hence came the white shirt which Infants
wear in baptism, not only unprofitably but superstitiously also: But
although there were a certain day appointed for circumcision: yet seeing we
are not tied to any certain days, neither infants nor they which are of more
years, they may be baptized at any time when the assemblies come together to
the hearing of Gods word and public prayers, so it be done after Christ his
institution, holily, comelily, and orderly 1 Cor. 14 40
, least one day should seem better than an other for the exercises of
baptism, Galat 4.10. Ye observe days and months, and times and years, I
fear least I have taken pains amongst you in vain.

Is it lawful to rebaptise?
If any man have been baptized only in the name of GOD in general, not
unfolding the persons, or omitting any one: or by those heretics who deliver
not the true doctrine touching the Trinity as the Marcionites, Arrians, and
such like, if such a one should be again rightly baptized, (seeing the form
of Christ's baptism was not observed before) hear should be no Ilteration of
baptism, but he should be baptized with Christ's true baptism, who had not
been baptized according to Christ's institution, as is decreed in the Nicene
Council, chap. 19. But if baptism have been rightly administered, according
to Christ's institution, it may not be iterated, first because there is no
commandment for the reiterating of it, as there is of the Lords Supper As often
as ye shall receive. 1. Corinthians. 11.26. Neither do we read that it has been
iterated: Like as circumcision in times past was not to be iterated, in whose
place Baptism succeeded. And we must judge and censu^^ of Sacraments
according to the word of GOD. But on the contrary part, it is said. Ephesians.
4.5. One Lord, One faith, One Baptism.

2 Because the lawful Invocation of God being once performed in spirit and
truth, ought never after to be accounted frustrate.

3 Because Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration: it is sufficient to be
once regenerated, and ingraffed into the Church or Kingdom of God: for even as
he which is once carnally borne, cannot be borne again: so in like manner he
which is once spiritually borne of God, cannot be borne again. Aug. As carnal
generation is one: In Ioh. Tract 11.12
Even so spiritual regeneration is but one: So on the contrary part: The
Sacrament of the Supper is therefore often to be repeated, in which we are
nourished with the flesh and blood of Christ, because sustenance is often to be
used: yea and those whom God has once chosen and adopted for his children, he
never forsakes: for his gifts are without repentance. Romans 11.29. And
whosoever is once truly given unto Christ, although he sometimes slip out of the
way, shall never be cast forth. John, 6 37. And the unfaithfulness of men
cannot euacuate the faith of God. Romans 3.3. But as concerning Apostates which
universally fall from faith. It is impossible that they which once had been
enlightened, or baptized (that is to say, which after Cathechisme, have
professed Christianity; and annexed unto the Church by Baptism) If they fall
(that is, into a universal Apostasy from Christ) That they should be renewed to
repentance, and therefore the grace of renotion cannot be sealed again in them
by the Sacrament of baptism. Hebr. 6.4.6. as Damascen and other fathers gather
from hence.

4 Because the signification, force, use, and fruit of Baptism is not for any
certain moment, or for the time past only: but belongs also unto the time
to come, and contineweth for the whole life of the man baptized Romans 6.7 et.
seq,
: For that which Paul says, Romans 3.25. that Christ is made unto us a
Propitiator, for the forgiveness of sins that were before, is not spoken
exciusiuely, but it signifies that he is given of the father to miser^ble
sinners, which, wounded with the sting of Conscience sig^ for the Physician:
not to them which seek liberty, through ^mp^nitie.

And even as David had no need of a new circumcision after his fall, but only
of a remembrance thereof to work repentance: so there is no need to repeat
baptism to them which have fallen after baptism, but a remembrance thereof
unto an earnest repentance: because the baptism of repentance once received
for the forgiveness of sins, does continue a perpetual testimony and
pledge of the covenant made with God, and of that perpetual washing which we
have in the blood of Christ, Mar. 1.4 Luke 3.3.


And therefore it is often to be called to mind, that by it the confidence of
the forgiveness of our sins, may be confirmed more and more in our minds:
for the truth of the promise once made, continues for ever, whosoever shall
believe and is baptized, shall be saved: Christ will be ready to receive us
with stretched out arms when we return, and so he uses the future tence.

Did Ierom say well, that after the shipwreck of man's nature, two beards of
salvation were given unto men, baptism, and the first being lost, Repentance?
As Lawyers say, The sayings of Authors must be understood with a corn of
salt. So very well this ambiguous saying may be used against the Nouatians,
that after Baptism, Repentance is left for them which sorrow for their sins.
So John called back the young man which which was made a Captain of thieves
Eusebius. hist. Eccle. l 3. c. 32
: So he stirs the Churches of Asia to repentance, Apoc. 2.5.16. Et. 3.3.19
And Paul does call back the Galathians fallen after Baptism to the grace of
the promise of Baptism Gal 3.27.
, even as he does the Corinthians 1, Cor. 12 13.
.

But it is an absurd sentence, if it should be vndestood that the first Table,
that is to say, Baptism, or the grace and forgiveness of sins received in
Baptism, may be utterly lost as the Papists would have it, but by sufficient
contrition, Auricular confession and proper satisfaction it may be obtained
again: for on the contrary part the covenant of God is perpetual and
immutable. Esa. 54, 8.10. and Osee. 2.19. I will marry thee unto me for ever.
Whereof baptism once received is a testimony.

Is the use of external baptism free or indifferent, so that it may be used,
or else may be omitted securely and without hazard of salvation, or is it
necessary?
It is necessary to the Church of Christ, and the Infantes of Christians ought
to be baptized; but after a sort, because of the commandment of God, whilst
the liberty thereof is granted to him, which is not yet baptized: and if it
may not be given, yet at least it ought to be required, and procured by all
means possible: D^ nupt et Concu l, 2. c. 17 and. 18
yet is it not so simply, precisely, and absolutely necessary, that those
which depart out of this life without it, especially the Infants of Christians,
cannot be saved, as Augustine believed, and those also which make baptism the
first step of salvation: and therefore exclude from salvation all those which
want baptism, yea although there be no contempt of Baptism.

But we very openly confess, that this is not our opinion. Because so there
is great injury done unto the grace of God, and to the power of his covenant,
in which he promises, that he will be the GOD of the faithful, and of their
issue, and that he will show his mercy even unto a thousand generations. Exodus
20.6.

Secondly, because it would be absurd, that these Infants which in times past
died in great numbers before the eight day of circumcision, before which they
might not be circumcised according to the law of God: or those which were not
circumcised by the space of forty years in the wilderness: Or the Christian
Infants which died in times past before the feasts of Easter and Pentecost
without the baptism of water, by no fault of theirs (for at those Feasts
Baptism was administered in times past) both these and the other being under
the covenant, it would I say be absurd, to think them deprived of salvation
which cannot but be a great cross to the conscience of the parents, 3 Part.
9.68.4.2
if death should prevent their children baptism. Again, why should the
children bear the punishment of another fault? but this is the doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas, That children are nevertheless baptized with the baptism of
the spirit, though they want the outvvard sign.

Thirdly, Sacraments are not the cause, but the Testimonies and seals of our
salvation, and do not of themselves confer grace. Nor does the privation of
the holy sign defraude the child, but the parents contempt or negligence of
the same Exodus 412 Iosu. 5.3
.

Fourthly, The converted thief wanted the visible Baptism, but not the thing
signified, which may likewise be said of Infants unbaptized. For that in the
17. of Genesis, Let him that is not Circumcised be cut of from the people of
God: Was spoken of them of years, and the meaning was, he that would not be
circumcised, the same is also to be meant of the unbaptized. Likewise that in
the third of John. Except a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, Is not meant of Infants, which could
not receive it, as being prevented by death only, and not by any other fault:
but either of the ordinary means which may not be neglected when it may be
had, or of Baptism, which if it be not received indeed, is yet received in
desire, as Thomas expounds it. And as Ambrose says of Valentinian, that he
was baptized in desire and will, though he had never the outward ceremony:
For as he was coming to Ambrose to be baptized, he died in the way: Or else
it is to be understood of the living water which is the Spirit, that is, of
the virtue and efficacy of the holy Spirit which works that in the soul,
that water does in the body. And so the names of water and the Spirit may
mean one thing, as it in the third of Matthew. He that follows me, it is
he that baptiseth with the holy Ghost and with fire. That is, with the spirit
which has the office and nature of fire in regeneration: the Baptism of which
spirit is absolutely necessary to salvation. And thus Augustine expounds
this place.

Is Baptism to be administered without exorcisme or coniuring out of the
Devil, or blowing?
To exorcise is to adjure a man by holy things, as by God, or by Christ, to do
a thing which men commonly call, to conjure, as the 26. Math. The high Priest
says unto Christ. I Conjure the by the living God, to tell us if thou be
Christ. And the sons of Sceua in the 19. of Act. coniured the devil by
Jesus, whom Paul preached: Hence come Exorcistes, and true Exorcisme: which
gift was peculiar to the holy Ghost, by which the Apostles at the first, and
other faithful drove devils out of the possessed, as we read in the Acts, and
Christ says, They shall cast out Devils Mark 16. But yet without baptism as
Tertullian observes: Therefore it is not to be retained, first, because when
Christ instituted baptism, he did not command any to exorcise, secondly, for
that the devil is driven out by Christ even in baptism, for as Cyprian says,
like as Scorpions and Serpents, which are of force on dry land, can do no
hurt, being flung into the water, so an evil spirit can inhabit no longer in
whom the spirit of God begins to dwell after baptism and sanctifycation.

Thirdly, for that the Apostles administered it without exorcisme.

Fourthly, neither those that are possessed, or the heathen worshippers of
devils are to be baptized, but only they who are holy, and partakers of the
covenant of grace, and the members of Christ, and to say that such are subject
to the devils destroying power, were very absurd.

Fifthly, that gift of exorcising joined with the gift of miracles was but for
a time, as that also was when many sick people were healed by the anointing
of the ministers of the Church, and by invocation of the name of Christ Iam.
5.14
, till such time as Christian religion was spread over all the world.

Sixthly, for that exorcisme was never used at the circumcising of Infants.

But whereas the heathen did bring testimony unto the Church, before their
baptising, (as Tertullian witnesses) that they renounced the devil and his
Angels, this was a public testimony of repentance in them of years, as also
that blowing, with clapped hands, which he that was to be baptized performed,
did give the Church thereby to understand, that he renounced Satan and his
kingdom. But in the Papacy it is done by the baptizer even the face of Infant
to be baptized, and is therefore frivolous and to be rejected.

May Godfathers and Godmothers be used?
They may.

1 Because the original of it sprung from the Imitation of the baptising of
those which were young in faith in the Primitive Church, who before their
baptism did not only yield a reason of their faith, but also produced
Testators and witnesses of the same:

2 The Scripture is not against it.

3 It is a most ancient Ecclesiastical custom.

4 There is nothing in it that is evil or dishonest.

5 It proceeds from charity.

6 It tends so far to the Infants profit and salvation, that no man is the
worse for it.

7 It makes wholly for the edification of the Church.

8 As a midwife is used to make the birth easy in childbearing, so in this
spiritual birth of baptism some are admitted, who discharge the office of
Midwife, and instructor in things belonging unto faith and a Christian life,
but yet such witnesses are to be chosen as both know sufficiently, and can
probably perform that which they promise for the child's holy education, if
need require.

Why have children names given them in baptism?
Because it was also the manner in Circumcision, a secondly, that we may know,
that we then obtain name and fame at Gods hands, when we are borne again, and
are become new men, namely the sons of God, renouncing our former name,
whereby we were named the children of wrath. Thirdly, that as often as we
remember our name, we should likewise call to mind Gods covenant and promise,
our Baptism, and what it means, and further our duty, who being baptized
into the death of Christ, we may likewise die with him unto sin, and rise
again to newness of life, and lastly that being entertained into Christ's
service, we may fight valiantly under his Banner against his enemies.

What manner off names ought we to give?
They were first given either upon the event of things as Isaac, Jacob, or of
the Prophetical instinct to note some secret work of God, or in remembrance of
some thing past, as Adam, Israel, or something to come, as Eua, Abraham, John.
Now although it be in so great plenty of names, a thing of it self
indifferent, what name a man have given him, seeing the name furthereth not a
man's salvation at all: yet no man will deny, but that the faithful may make a
profitable choice in this case, in omitting such as belong nothing to their
profession and duty, profane and unknown names, and calling them by proper,
usual, known, and holy names, such as may bring with them some instruction
and admonition: as namely such whose godliness is published it the Scriptures,
and so stir up in us an Imitation of them: or else of our ancestors, or
others, whose names have not been polluted through Idolatry, but may put us
in mind of godliness, of innocence, and uprightness of life, or of Gods
benefits: and may not recall into our minds the remenbrance of any evil
example, or such as are taken from wicked and bloody men, which ought rather to
be forgotten amongst all godly men Luke 1.54 Psalm. 16.4
, then thus revived.

Is the Office of preaching the Gospel greater then his that baptiseth.
Yea: For Christ whose office was to teach never baptized Ioh. 4.2
, and Paul baptized very few, For the Lord sent me not, (says he) to
baptize, (to wit peculiarly and fully) but to preach the Gospel: 1. Cor. 1.10.
And Peter baptized not Cornelius his family whilst he was there present, but
gave order to have it done afterward A^ct. 10.48
: Though therefore the Sacraments be most holy, yet it is no wisdom to
attribute too much unto them.

Wherein do baptism and the Lords Supper agree, and wherein do they differ?
First they differ both in the signs, in the action, and in their nearest
ends. For in Baptism, water is used, and the spinckling thereof outwardly, and
the inward sprinckling of the blood of Christ inwardly. Also the nearest and
principal end thereof is the washing from sin, ct adoption, to be the sons of
God, or the ingrafting into Christ, and into his Church: but in the Supper is
used bread, which we break, and eat, and inwardly there is a pertaking of the
body of Christ: likewise there is a cup used out of which we drink, and also
a communion of the blood of Christ: lastly, the end of the Lords supper is the
spiritual food of the inner man: and this is a manifest difference between
Baptism and the Lords Svpper.

Secondly, they differ in use, for Baptism is not to be iterated, whereas the
often and religious use of the Lords Supper ought to serve for a Commemoration
of the Lords death.

Thirdly, they differ in subject, for Baptism properly belongs to children,
though the use thereof pertain properly to those of age, whereas the Lords
supper does only belong to them that are of years.

But in these things they both agree, they have both one genus, both one
Author, both consist of two parts, the one earthly, the other heavenly, both
one general end, both one signification, for both do signify the Communion
of Christ, both are seals of the Covenant, and of the promise of grace, the
dignity of both is equal and alike, for of baptism Paul testifies, that we
are ingrafted into Christ, and do put on Christ Romans 6.75 Gal. 3.27
, but the one propounds Christ our lauer under the sign of water, the other
our food, under the signs of bread and wine.

Is not one of these Sacraments better, and more worthy than the other?
No not in being, that is, not because in baptism we receive only the gifts or
graces of Christ, but not Christ himself: but in the Supper the body and blood
of Christ, although al do not receive his graces (as our adversaries will have
it): because they have both one end, to wit, our consociation and conjunction
with Christ, which as the form also of both, is sealed both in Baptism, and
the Lords Supper. But they differ only in some respect both of our original
beginning in Christ, and also of our increase and conservation in the same. For
by how much it is somewhat more to be begotten then to be nourished, by so much
the Sacrament of regeneration is to be preferred, before the Sacrament of our
norishme^t which is the Lords Supper: but by how much it is a more excellent
thing to be nourished and cherished to eternal life, that so thou may
never fail to be a man regenerate, in this respect the Supper is to be
preferred before baptism. But seeing that the dignity of both of them
depends upon the thing signified, namely, upon our Communion with Christ,
although Baptism does commend the same under the form of a Lauer, and the
Supper under the form of food, yet it is better to moderate this comparison
and so shall nothing be derogated from either of them. For the water of
Baptism in the Sacramental use is the blood of Christ no less than the wine
in the Super, 1 Pet. 1 2
nor is it any thing less in Baptism to be ingrafted into Christ, to be
crucified, dead, buried, and rise again with him, and to put on Christ: than
to eat his flesh and drink his blood in the Supper. And to conclude Christ is
propounded unto us in Baptism as a bath, as an entrance into the house of the
Lord, and as a garment. And in the Supper as meat and drink to be entertained
more and more by faith.

What are the ends of Baptism?
There are two.

1. That it may stand our faith in steed before God: the latter, that it may
manifest our confession before men, and that first because it sets forth
Christ's death, burial and resurrection, teaching the remission of sins, and
confirming the same as a Divine seal unto the believers Act. 2.38
.

Secondly, it is a document of mortification, and renewing of our nature, which
Christ witnesses that he both does, and will effect in us by his spirit, which
though it be imperfect in this life, yet it effects so much, that though sin
dwell, yet it reigns not in us, but rather is daily mortified more and more
by the grace of the same spirit Ephesians. 5, 26 Tit. 3.5 Romans 7.10
, The inner man is renewed daily. 2. Cor. 4.16.

Thirdly, it is the badge of our union and society with Christ, that we may
know that we are conjoined unto him, as members to the head, and therefore
that we are now made pertakers of his goods, and shall at the length be made
partakers of himself together with his inheritance. 1. Cor. 12.13. We are
baptized into one body, and hereof Paul proves that we are the sons of God,
because we have put on Christ in Baptism Gal. 3.26
that is, because that we are conjoined unto Christ the son of God, by the
Testimony of baptism.

Forthly, it is an instrument, whereby the plentiful effusion of the holy
spirit upon us is communicated, with his gifts of faith, hope, and charity, and
other virtues. Tit. 3.6. by the Bath and renewing of the holy spirit which he
has powered upon us plentifully: as Augustine says, we are made by Baptism
the members of Christ, and of his fullness we have all received. John. 1.16.

Fifthly, it admonishes us, since we shall become like unto the Image of the
son of God, who is our head, both in bearing the Cross, in his death, and
burial: as also in his setting of us free, his resurrection, and glory to
come Romans 8.29
.

Sixthly, it stirs us up to innocence, to charity toward the saints, to
perpetual mortifying of our selves, and repentance, and to frame our lives to
Gods glory Romans 6.4
.

Seauenthly, it serves as a full persuasion and confirmation of our faith,
likewise a consolation in tentations and trials, for that it is a Testimony
that God is well pleasedl with us in his son, into whom we are ingrafted by
baptism, whose merits and benefits do all belong unto us, in whom we are
adopted to be the sons of God, and that the father will govern us by his
spirit, deliver us from eternal death, and give us eternal life in the end.

Are all these benefits received by baptism, equally by all those which
receive the same?
No, for they are not alike: for the ingrafting into Christ, and the benefits
which follow it, are not bestowed upon the reprobate, although they be offered
them when they are baptized. For God calls and justifies, regenerateth, and
glorifieth effectually them whom he has elected and predestined to these
things Romans 8.3. but the elect, as well Infants, as they of years are equally
incorporated into Christ, either in, or before baptism, and are endewed with
the imputation of his righteousness, forgiveness of sins, and the right of
eternal life, for they are all alike the sons of GOD, but regeneration is
not wrought alike in all, nor are the gifts of the spirit, Faith, Hope, and
Charity given alike unto all, or received alike of all, but according to the
pleasure of God, as the parable of the Talents teaches Mat. 25 15
, and Ephesians, 4, 7. To every one is given grace according to the measure of the
gifts of Christ: and we do see that the effects of Regeneration are more and
greater in some, and in other some fewer and lesser.

What is the other end of Baptism?
That it may serve for our confession before men, and is as it were a
millitarie sign, or note whereby we profess openly before men and Angels that
we are incorporated into the visible Church of God, to serve therein under
Christ: namely, whilst we do protest that we do consent with all Christians
in one and the same worship of the true God, the Father, son and holy Ghost,
and in one and the same religion, and that we are strangers from all the
sects of the Gentiles (which do not truly worship God, as he has
manifested in his word) which confession of ours belongs unto Gods glory.

What is the effect of Baptism.
The sealing of the wholesome gifts of Christ, and of our righteousness before
God, and the stipulation of a good conscience with God, on Gods part, whilst
he offers and promises free salvation through Christ: and the conscience on
the other side answering and receiving through faith that promised grace:
whence arises tranquillity of conscience before God, in him whom he
accounts reconciled unto himself, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ 1
Pet. 3.21
. And lastly a sure hope of being received into the kingdom of heaven.

Does sin remain or is it all washed away in Baptism?
It remains in Act, by reason of the state of nature, if we respect the
disease or root of sin, and the matter it self: but it is taken away, by
reason of the state of the person, as touching the gilt or form which is not
imputed unto the faithful: for their is now no condemnation to them which are
in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. that is all sins, both original and actual are
pardoned in baptism Ezech. 36 75 Zach. 13.1 Marc. 1 4 1 Cor. 6.11 Heb. 10.2
Romans 11.1. Gloss. ad Ro^ 6
. Whence Ambrose says. The grace of God forgiueth all things freely in
Baptism, yea, concupiscence is taken away, not that it should cease to be, but
that it should cease to hurt.

Secondly, it is daily more and more mortified Non vt non sit, sed vt non obsit
till at length it be utterly extinguished and taken away in death.

They are therefore deceived which think that we are by baptism restored in
this life unto the same righteousness and purity of nature, which Adam had
before his fall. For sin is left to continue and dwell in him still, who has
yet obtained the remission of all his sins by baptism Romans 7, 17, 18
Yet not to reign, but that he that is borne again might afflict it as an
Enemy overcome and bound: And as we read of Adonibezeck Judge. 1, 6
overcome by the Israelites, he must cut off the hands and the feet of sin,
and so mortify it till it be quite dead.

Furthermore, the punishment of hell is taken away together with the
afflictions of this life, though they abide awhile for our exercise and our
greater glory, that sin dwelling in us may be mortified, and our faith and
piety exercised and increased, as it is said, Iud. 3.1. These are the Nations
which the Lord has reserved, that he might instruct Israel by them, and that
the members might not be unlike their head, whereunto they are incorporated.
Romans 8.17. for we suffer with him, that we may be together glorified with him.

What is the right and lawful use of Baptism?
If we refer it to those ends whereunto it was instituted of Christ, it has
this use, namely that in Christ alone we may seek, and by faith receive
remission of sins, the renewing of our nature, and a heavenly inheritance.

But let us receive baptism it self, as it were a divine testimony of those
benefits, which throughout our whole life may lift up our faith, may bear
witness this the promises of grace do belong unto us, and that our sins
being forgiven, we are received into favor, and also it may admonish or put
us in remembrance, that we are baptized upon that condition, that walking in
newness of life, we may go toward life eternal.

What fruit or profit comes of the Baptizing of Infants?
It serves for the Parents comfort, for the sign being committed to the child
(as by a printed seal) does confirm the promise made to the godly parent:
that the Lord, will be a God, not to him only, but to his seed also.) From
whence, his soul is besprinkled with no common gladness, and is inflamed to
publish the bounteousnes of God.

Moreover it serves for the instruction of the children them selves, after
they be grown to years, when they are thereby spurred forward to an earnest
desire of worshipping God, of whom by a solemn symbol, or token of adoption,
they have been received for sons, before that, by reason of tender age, they
could acknowledge him for their father.

What is contrary to this Doctrine?
1 To this Doctrine is repugnant (or contrary) the error of the Popish Clergy,
which do judge the baptism of John, to be diverse from the baptism of the
Apostles.

2 They do stain or infect the pure and plain institution of Christ with
their additions of oil, of honey, of blowing, of spittle, of burning lighted
tapers or wax candles.

3 They do confound, or mingle together the ministry of baptism in them which
are full grown, and of infants by their exorcismes, and such like.

4 They say that baptism by it self, and by the work wrought, that is, by
the action it self of Baptism, does confer grace to all the baptized, as
well faithful as unbelievers, to justify, forgive sins, sanctify and save.

5 That the same by their feined devise, does pour into and print into the
soul a mark, which they call a Character which cannot be put out, whereby
even in Hell a Christian may be distinctly known from a Jew and Gentile.

6 That baptism of water, is absolutely necessary to salvation, and that none
at all can be saved without baptism.

7 They make the offices of a Coniurer and of a baptizer all one: and the
adiurations of coniuring being added thereunto, they go about to cast an ill
spirit out of him, who if he were possessed with such a spirit, were not to be
baptized.

8 They do grant unto women the administration of baptism in the feined case
of necessity: and if the child live, they offer it again to the minister,
that it may be baptized.

9 They dream that there is a Divine power put into the water it self, or
into the ceremonies of baptism.

10 They do adjure or conjure the water of baptism, and do magically hallowe
it, the day before Easter, and whitsontide, where as the Apostles used such
water as they met with by the way. Act. 8.39. as appears in the baptism of
the Eunuch.

11 They require three several duckings in the water, as necessary.

12. Infants which die before baptism (as deprived of the beholding of God,
and of life eternal) they place in a peculiar Limbo, or special place,
wherein they have neither well nor woe, where they have the punishment of
loss, but not of sense: neither do they bury them with the rest of the
Christians in the Churchyard, or blessed place, where many men are laid, but
without, unless they be baptized in their mothers womb.

13. They do admit to baptism any infants whatsoever.

14. They baptize Bells in the name of the holy Trinity, and truly with
greater solemnity then men are baptized. For it is not lawful for any but
Bishops to baptize bells, when as to baptize men, it is lawful amongst them,
even for women. And they give them the names of some woman, saying Margaret or
Paulina, I baptize thee in the name of the Father etc. And they do feign that
by the sounding of them being consecrated and so baptized, ill spirits, hosts
of enemies, wiles of enemies, tempests, hailes, storms, whirlwindes,
boisterous blastes of winds, thunders, and hurtful lightnings, are driven
away, that flames and fires are quenched (or put out) that the dead also are
refreshed.

15. They feign a spiritual kindred between the party baptized, his parents,
children and kinsmen, and the sureties, their parents, children, and kindred of
their children.

16. Likewise also they do ordain a Physical copulation, a joining together
of the sign and of the thing signified, that is, of water, and of the spirit.

17. They judge baptism to be of less account then the vows of Monks.

18. They do administer the same in a strange tongue.

2. The false opinion of them which do determine that by baptism is signified
only forgiveness of sins past: whereupon, many of the ancients (which was
not well done) deferred baptism until the last time of their life.

3. The error of the common people, which in the beehalfe of the new borne
infant say to the Pastor of the Church, GOD has given me an Ethnicke, I
desire that you would make him a Christian, whereas baptism does not make a
Christian, but signifies a Christian.

4. The error of them who do contend that baptism in dignity and use is
much inferior to the Eucharist: and they say that we are partakers of Christ
only in the Lords Supper, and not in baptism.

5. Of the Ethiopians, which are called Abyssini, who not being contented with
the baptism of water, do moreover presently burn with fire those that are
dipped of them, as Seleucus and Hermias being Galathians, which (as Augustine
reports) did not baptize in water, but in fire: understanding the word, fire
properly, in the saying of John Baptist. Mat. 3.11. He that comes after me,
he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire, which is taken by
translation, for the efficacy of the holy Ghost, purging, and enlighning the
minds of men, when as he speaks of inward baptism.

6. Of certain nations of the East, and of the West, which do together
baptize, and circumcise their little children.

7. Of the Donatists, which do measure the virtue and price of baptism by the
worthiness of the minister.

8. Of the Anabaptists, which do urge that they which are baptized of
Idolaters in the papacy are to be baptized again. And also of the
Catabaptists, which deny that Infants are to be baptized, and they will have
baptism to be only a sign of Christian profession.

9. The error of Marcion, who taught that baptism is to be given the second
and third rhyme, to one and the self same party, after any heinous offense
committed. And of the Hemerobaptists, who for daily sins brought in daily
baptism.

10. The sin of them, which though they know the truth of the Gospel, yet
deliver their children to be baptized of false Pastors, in the Papacy.

The eight and fortieth common place. Of the Supper of the Lord.
How is the other Sacrament of the New Testament called?
THE Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ's 1. Cor. 11.20. In respect both of the
time wherein it was first instituted: namely in the evening or night going
before that day wherein Christ was crucified, and also of the thing it self
for which it was instituted, because it is a holy banquet, not of the belly but
of the mind, instituted by the Lord. And it is called the Lords, from the
author, or also from the end: for it is both ordained of the Lord, and it is
celebrated in remembrance of him: or also from the time, because it was wont to
be celebrated upon the Lords days. Act. 20, 9.7.

2. The breaking of bread, Act. 2.42.46. and chap. 20.7. 1. Cor. 10.16. But it
is so called by an excellency of speech, and by way of specialtie: for
elsewhere, it is taken in general for common food Luke 24.33. where Christ was
known of the two Disciples in breaking of bread. and Ast. 27.35. Paul in the
ship brake bread and eat it. And in giving of alms, Esaias. 58.7. Break thy
bread to the hungry. Be cause it was the manner of the Jews (which did use
bread not so thick as we but broad and less gross) to begin their meals not
with cutting of bread, but breaking of it.

3. By a Metonimie of the effect, it is called the Communion of the body and
blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the body of Christ? Because, as says Damascen, in his fourth
book of the Orthodoxall or right Faith, chap. 14. By it we do communicate
with Christ, and by it, we do communicate, and are united or knit one to
another.

4. The Lords Table. 1. Cor. 10.21, by a Metonimie of the Subject, for meat
and drink which are set upon the table. Whereby it appears that the Apostles
in celebrating the Supper of the Lord, used not an Altar, but a Table, Act.
6.2. It is not meet that we should leave the word of God to serve the tables,
not Altars.

5. Of the old Fathers, it is called, a gathering together, by reason of the
assembly of people which was to celebrate the Supper of the Lord, because it
ought to serve for the joining together, not the dividing of the faithful. For
it is a public Supper of many gathered into one, not a private Supper of one
Priest. 1. Cor. 11.20 21.

6. The Euchariste, because of thanksgiving, without which the Supper cannot be
celebrated.

7 Charity, for because, among the Communicants, mutual love is required.
Although this brotherly word may signify the feasts of the Church assembly
(which also is called brotherly fellowship, 1. Pet. 2.17. and 1. Pet. 5.9.)

So called, ( Iud. verse. 12.) because they were prepared according to the gifts
bestowed, and giving liberally to the uses of the poor, did give a certain
testimony of their brotherly love: to which some refer that saying A. 2.46.
Breaking bread at home Or from house to house
, to which feasts they had wont to add (or annex the holy Supper of the Lord)
as it appears out of Act. 6.2. 1. Cor. 11.21. and of Tertullian in his
Apologetico chap. 39.

8. It is called an offering, because of the offering of the brethrens bread,
and cup to him that was present, and also for the gatherings or liberal gifts
which were made to the uses of the poor: and also because the Supper was
offered not to God, but to the co^municants, as Justinius teaches in his second
Apology for the Christians, or because the chief of the brethren does send up
praise and glory to the Father of all, (says Iustine in the same place) which
oblation is most acceptable to him: but he says not that the son is offered
to the Father, by the Priest.

9. A Sacrifice, an Host, and a burnt Sacrifice: but in a little more large and
broad signification, and that, because of the prayers and commemoration of the
sacrifice of Christ once offered for us upon the cross: but figuratively,
because it is a remembrance of that Holocaust and only sacrifice, whereby God
is pacified with us, as Christ called his body, the sacrament of his body.
Otherwise, Christ bidding his Disciples to take, but not to offer, instituted
not a Sacrifice, but a Sacrament.

10 It is called of Cyprian a sacrament finishing and perfecting all things,
because it put an end to the legal ceremonies, whereof the chief was the use
of the pascall Lamb, In his tra^tate of the Lords supper
and contains the mystery of our perfection in Christ.

But that the word Mass should be taken for the supper it self of the Lord,
has been unknown to the Scripture, and to the Apostolic Church.

Whereas some do draw it from the Hebrew word Missath, which signifies
tribute or oblation, it is not likely: because the Hebrew words came not to the
Latin Church, but by the Greek. Deuteronomy. 16.10
But we read no where this word used of the Greek Fathers. But the Greek
Church called the Supper of the Lord (...), that is to say, a holy Function,
because it is said in Act. chap. 13, 2. (...), that is, as they ministered.
Others, and more likely, do derive it from the Latin word Missio, that is to
say, leave to depart, as the ancient fathers said remissing of sins, for
remission, as Tertullian. So in stead of Mission. they said Miss, 4 Book
against Marcion.
from whence sprung that saying; Ite, Missa est, as in time past the ancient
Romans having ended their sacrifices, did bid these words to be pronounced,
licet Missa est; as in old time among the Grecians, the Priest, having ended
his service, did thus signify, (...), that is, a dimission to the people, as
though he should dismiss or send the people away. Apul. book 11. Metamorph.

But othersome will have it called the Mass, as it were, transmissed or sent
over, that is to say, the Oblation by the Priest unto GOD. Seeing then the Mass
which the Popish Clergy do faigne to be a Sacrifice belonging peculiarly to
the Priests, for remission of sins, both of the quick, and also of the dead,
does every kind of way differ from the Supper of the Lord (as it is instituted
of Christ) and is stuffed with horrible Idolatrous madness, it is an unworthy
thing: that the Supper of the Lord should be deformed with the name of the
Mass, as neither does it accord that it should be called the Sacrament of the
Altar.

What is the Supper of the Lord?
It is the other Euangelical Sacrament in the Christian Church, ordained of
Christ (being even now about to die) for them which are full grown, being
already baptized, and examining themselves, wherein, by outward breaking of
bread and pouring out of wine into the cup, is represented, and as it were, is
set before the eyes of the faithful, the crucifying of the body, and shedding
of the blood of Christ for us: and by giving, taking and using of those
Elements, the forgiveness of our sins gotten by the death of Christ, the
inward raking and spiritual enjoying of his body and blood, and moreover
communion with Christ, and full nourishment in Christ and vivification, and
fellowship together with the rest of his lively members is signified,
confirmed, and sealed to the faithful: and the memory of so great benefits,
and giving of thanks is celebrated, for the commendable use of the faithful,
assembled together that they may increase in faith and love.

For as by baptism we are borne again, so (being borne again) we are fed and
nourished by the Supper of the Lord, and in Christ we are as it were nourished
and brought up to life eternal. Therefore when as Baptism may once only be
administered, the Supper of the Lord is to be used often, because in it Christ
is given unto us after the manner of meat: but because meat and drink do go
away into nourishment, they are often in our life time to be taken of us.

Furthermore the first example, or pattern of that definition, is the history
of the first Supper of the Lord expounded by Paul, and of the rest of the
Evangelists. 1. Cor. 11.23. Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.19.

What is the efficient, principal, cause of the Lords Supper?
The Lord himself, who is the only testator of the new Testament, and the
Author of the Covenant of Grace, and GOD the Redeemer, in whom alone it haht
pleased the Father to gather together all things. Ephe. 1.10. And who is the
way, the truth and the life, Ioh. 14.6. the high priest, Heb. 3.1. and the
eternal King of the Church, Psalm. 2, 6. concerning whom alone the father cried
from heaven, hear him, Mat. 17.5. from whom it is called the Lords Supper,
therefore faithfully to be delivered of the ministers, reverently to be handled,
neither is it to be depraved by adding, minishing, changing. For Paul says. 1.
Cor. 11.23 I have received of the Lord that which I also have delivered unto
you, namely, by the revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. When he was taken
up into paradise, or the third heaven, although this lets not, but that he
knew very many peculiar sayings and doings of Christ, both from Ananias, and
also from other disciples of Christ (which were eye witnesses) and from Luke
himself.

At what time was it instituted? 1 Cor, 1.23,

In the year of the world 3995. of the age of Christ 33. of March 24. day,
which was Thursday, in the evening: surely, that night wherein he was betrayed
by Judas unto the Jews, was the Supper of the Lord instituted.

1. First of all, because of the figure going before, that is to say, of the
eating of the Pascall Lamb, or the legal, solemn and Sacramental Supper, in
place whereof Christ substituted the Supper Eua^gelical, Lu. 22.14.19. where
that being performed, a new institution of this, in express words is put in
the stead thereof: and so the Apostle teaches. 1. Cor. 5.7. Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us. From whence it follows, that the Supper of
the Lord is our Passover. For the same thing in both, is signified, namely
Christ, the true and immaculate sacrifice for the sins of the world there
promised, here exhibited. The remembrance of the like benefit, there, of the
deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt, and of induction into the promised
land: here, of freedom from the cruel slavery of Satan and of introduction,
into eternal life.

2. Secondly, because of his passion and death neat approaching, Dan 9.24 27
the remembrance of which benefit therein performed unto us, he would set forth
in this Supper.

3, Thirdly, that he might plainly show a consummation and taking away of al
Sacraments and Sacrifices of the Old Testament, and manner of the Paschall
lamb it self, which he had eaten before with the Disciples,

4. Forthly, that he might signify or give to understand that he came in the
fullness of time. Mat. 11.13. Gal. 3.24. Gal. 4.4.

5. That he might so much the more commend his Supper, which being now about
to dye, he so earnestly commended unto his.

Seeing that Christ having Supped distributed the Supper to the Disciples in
the evening, whether is it lawful for us to give it in the morning, and to
them which are fasting?
It is lawful, because circumstances of time, as both of sitting down, of
apparel, and of a certain number of Communicants, do not appertain to any
mystery, neither are they substantial p^rt^ of the Sacrament, neither have
they expres commandment from God, because Christ said not This do ye, having
supped, or sitting, or standing, or so many in number: for Christ first did
eat the Passover, because he would, after old things, institute new.

But the Eucharist is more conveniently distributed in the morning.

1. Because it is an easier thing at that time to have a holy meeting together:
forasmuch as in the day time much business does happen, whereby men are lead
away from holy things.

2. Because at that time we are more sober, and we have a more apt and
attentive mind to perceive excellent thing.

Yet notwithstanding the ancient fathers in time of a fast (because they did
spend the whole day in prayers, in Sermons, and in holy hymns) did give the
Supper of the Lord a little before night. And in the time of Augustine, in many
Churches of Africa (as he reports) the thursday before Easter, that the
action of Christ might be the more resembled, the Eucharist was given to the
fathfull in the night, and after Supper. But this custom was taken away by the
sixth Synod or general Council, which was held at Constantinople.

Seeing that Christ being about to celebrate the Supper, abased himself to wash
the Disciples feet and said unto them, I have giving you an example, that ye
should do, even as I have done to you. Whether are we being about to
communicate, tied to this precept concerning washing of feet?
Not a whit: because Christ did not therefore wash the feet of the Disciples,
that they should always imitate that fact in kind, but that he might drive
from them the dream of a civil kingdom of the Messiah, whereabout they did
strive, and that he might show in himself a perfect example of humility
like as elsewhere, he commanded, that they should shake off the Dust from
their feet, that they should not bear a staff, nor scrip with them by the
way, that they should salute no man by the way, that they which fast, should
anoint their head. Not that they should draw these things to a strait
observation of words, but that by this means they might be brought back to a
more high thought and understanding: neither do we read that the Apostles
observed that washing of feet: but that, these parts of washing of feet in
those hot countries, wherein they go not so well shod as we, appertained to
women rather then to men. 1. Tim. 5.9.10.

Who are the fellow helpers, or administers, or service able causes of the
Supper of the Lord?
Only the ministers of the word lawfully called, to whom the keys of the
Church are given, whiles that, they do rightly execute their office in the
administration and dispensation of the word and of the holy Supper: for no man
takes this honor unto himsef, 1 Cor. 3.9 and. ^^.1 Math. 28.19
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4. But the son of God who
is present at hand with his Church, not with a bodily presence, but yet with a
spiritual and wholesome presence for us, as being the master of the feast, does
so celebrate the same by the means of his ministers, that he alone does as
truly exhibit unto us, bread and drink of life, that is to say, himself, to
be enjoyed by faith, as he does evidently exhibit unto us by the hand of his
servants the signs thereof, that is to say, bread to be chewed in the mouth,
and wine to be drunk, Ioh, 6.51. the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the world.

For whom is the the Supper of the Lord instituted? Ioh 16.7

Not for all confusedly mixed one with another, without exception: for Mat. 7.6.
he forbids that which is holy to be given, to the profane, and to dogs, and
to strangers from Christ: but to the^ which are borne again of water and of the
spirit, that is, to the disciples of Christ Math. 26 26. Luke 22.14 1 Cor. 11.23
, because he promised to these only, as also he does give, the sustenance of
his quickening flesh and of his blood. And the Sacrament does belong unto them,
to whom the promise does belong: from whence, in time past, they which were
coming on, and learned the Catechism, which were not yet baptized, and they
which were accursed out of the Church, and the penitentiaries, the Sermon being
ended were commanded to go out, the Deacon crying, let the Catechumeni, that
is (such as learned the Chatechisme) and the excommunicated go out: from
thence, was said the Mass that is, the dimission of the Catechumeni. And the
Grecians did say, (...), that is to say, holy things for holy men, like as
Apulcius in his second book does report that the Priest was wont, when he was
about to begin the Sacrifices, to say thus, (...), that is, who is here, to
whom answer was made (...), as if it should be said, honest and good men, when
as the polluted and unworthy went away.

Of how many parts does the institution of the Lords Supper consist?
Of three.

1. Of the institution of Christ, whereby he ordained the outward matter of
this Sacrament.

2. Of his words both preceptiue, and also determinatiue, annexed to the
institution whereby he does declare the inward matter and form, and moreover
the end.

3. Both of a lawful administration, and also of the receiving of the Lords
Supper it self.

What did Christ when he instituted his Supper?
He sat down at the table with the disciples, but stood not at the Altar,
because he instituted a holy banquet, not a sacrifice Mat. 26 20 Mark 14, 18
Luke 22.14.
, whereupon, again it ought not to be termed the Sacrament of the Altar, but
the Lords Supper, or the Lords Table: even as it is named by Paul. 1. Cor. 11.

Moreover, he took, and instituted the matter, namely outward signs, two
only, no more nor fewer, that is to say, bread and the cup, or wine in the cup.
In like manner he added thereunto holy and ceremonial actions. For as he was
about both signs. 1. He gave thanks to the Father. 2: Having taken the bread
he brake it. 3. He gave it to the Disciples: so also he gave the cup or wine.

I^ not the holy Supper a double Sacrament, seeing that the sign thereof is
double?
No. 1. Because every sign, severally by it self, is not a Sacrament, but
both of them joined together.

2 Because amongst us it is one banquet alone, not diverse, where
notwithstanding many meats and drinks are set on. For those two signs, do
declare one action of Christ, that is to say, our whole spiritual nourishment.
For that is said to be one, not only which is simple, and indivisible, or
continual, but that which is perfect, and that is one in perfection, to whose
integrity all things do concur which are required to the end of the same,
as one man consisting of the essential parts.

Therefore this Sacrament is many things materially, but one thing formally,
and perfectly, in as much as in them one refection is perfected, says Thomas,
Part. 3. qu. 73. Artic. 20.

But why would Christ have us use a twofold Sign?
That by distinct symboles or signs, he might, as it were, set before our
eyes, and imprint in our minds, his cruel and bloody death, and truly note
out both the giving of his body severally, and the shedding of his blood out
of his body for our sins. For as Bellarmine does confess, in his book of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, 4. book, chap. 22. The form alone of bread
does not exactly represent Christ, as dead, unless the blood also be seen on
the other part, as shed: and the form of wine alone, does not sufficiently
represe^t Christ, as offered in sacrifice: for blood alone is not a sacrifice.

2 Like as in this life (as Augustine says in the 26. Tractate upon John) the
whole refreshing or nourishing of bodies does consist of meat, which is a due
nourishment, and of drink, which is a moist nourishment: so let us know that
Christ is set forth unto us in the Eucharist, distinctly, as meat and drink:
neither let us think any thing to be wanting unto us, which may appertain to
our whole spiritual sustenance or nourishment: and so let us by faith apply
unto our selves the body and blood of Christ, and the benefit obtained by the
delivery of his body, and shedding of his blood: and so, as it were by faith,
let us eat and drink Christ himself whole, John. 6.55. My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

Therefote they do scarce leave unto us half full satisfaction for our
sins, but a lame or halfed matter of nourishment in Christ, and do take away
the integrity or perfection of this Sacrament, whosoever do sunder the cup
from the Eucharisticall bread, against the precept, Math. 19.6. That which God
has coupled together, let no man put asunder.

Whether therefore do they sin which take away the cup from the
Eucharisticall bread?
Yea, greatly: because they go from the ordinance of Christ, and do otherwise
preach the Gospel then he and his Apostles did Gal. 1, 9 1 Cor. 11, 25


2 Because it is a cursed deed to add any thing to the testament of Christ,
or to take away. Gal. 3, 15.

3 Because more fruit does redound to the faithful by both signs then by one:
and two signs do signify more fully, and do more move the mind then one:
otherwise Christ had added another sign to no purpose.

4 Because Chrysostom says. It is not with us as in the old law, where some
parts of the sacrifices were given to the priests, and some went to the
offerers: Hom. 8. upon 1 Cor. 11
but the same body of Christ and the same cup, is set forth to us al.

5 Because it is lawful for councills to determine nothing against the word
of God.

6 Because although we be not bound to do always that which is commanded (as
when men cannot, for want of opportunity be partakers either of baptism or the
lords supper) yet when we do it, we must not depart from the ordinance of God.

7 Because, seeing that we are so free from a multitude of Ceremonies that we
have a few, easy and plain, it is an intolerable thing, if we will not
perform them without corruption.

8 Because the Pascall Lamb, Manna, and the sacrifices were not figures of the
supper, but of Christ: And. 1. Cor. 10.3, 4. The Israralites are said, to eat
the same spiritual meat, and to drink the same spiritual drink.

9 Because the keeping of the bread of the Lords supper was superstitious, and
could be done more easily then of wine.

10 Because the adversaries themselves do grant that in old time bread was
given into the hands, but that the cup was wont with the Deacons hand to be put
to the mouth of the communicants which would drink of it in the Church: and at
that which they call Corpus Christi feast, they sing thus. Dedit fragilibus
corpo ris ferculum. Dedit and testibus salutis poculum. Dicens, accipite quod
trado vasculu^, omnes ex eo bibite. That is, he gave to the weak the dish of
his body: he gave also to the sorrowful the cup of safety, saying take this
small vessel which I give, drink ye alof it.

11 Because, godly consciences are not to be debarred of the sweet promise,
which by the voice of the son of God is annexed to pertaking of the cup.

12 Because, the cause is not taken away, for which Christ ordained the use of
the cup.

13 Because Paul wrighting to the whole church of the Corinthians, yea, to all
that call on the name of Jesus Christ in every place. 1. Cor. 1.2. (not only
to the ministers of the church,) does command both kinds to be given, take,
eat, drink: Neither are the words let him eat and drink less commanding,
then let him examine, and truly till the coming of the Lord, Chap. 11, 28.

14 Because they are deceived, which suppose that the lay men's communion in
time past, signified the participation of one of the parts only, but the
Clergies of both: For there also both kinds were given: but it was called a
lay communion, because the Clerick ministers put out of their office for some
offense, did not communicate any more among the Clergy, or among the ministers,
but as mingled among the company of lay men.

15 Because, it is a new and lately devised mingling of the sacrament of the
Euchariste.

16 Because, when their is mention made of breaking of bread, by a Synecdoche,
the whole supper is understood: otherwise the Apostles themselves, whose office
it was to break bread, had used only one sign.

Whether or no, for the discommodities which Gerson does recke^ up as, 1. The
liqour by some chance may be spilt, 2. It cannot be carried about without
danger. 3. In winter it soon waxes sower. 4. In his book of the communion
under kind
In summer, it purifieth and has worms. 5. It brings a lothing to the^
which drink. 6. In some countries it is hardly gotten. 7 By this means, lay
me^ touch the cup. 8. Some of them have beards, 9. Some are taken with the
palsy. 10. The dignity of the priest and of lay me^ is not alike: are these
causes weighty enough, and just for which by good right one part of the
sacrament could be taken away from the laics?
In no wise: because.

1 Christ, the Apostles, and the ancient Church set not so much by these and
the like things foreseen of them, that therefore they supposed the holy Supper
in one part thereof should be maimed.

2 Because it may happen also to the bread, that it may fall upon the ground,
and being kept long may become mustie, yet it is not excluded. Truly
negligence in handling of mysteries is to be taken heed of: but if by chance
but one only piece of bread, or drop of wine fall on the earth for want of
circu^spectio^, it has not any more, the form of a Sacrament, when it cannot
be any more used.

3 Because the keeping of it against the time to come, for the use of sick
folks, and the carrying of it from place to place, did spring from man's
superstition.

4 Because it is a superstition, not to permit unto lay men that they should
touch the cup with hand or with mouth, whom Paul 1. Cor. 6 11. says: To be
washed and sanstified and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our Lord.

5 Because, that collection from particulars is erroneous, For neither if some
do abhor wine, and some nations do hardly get wine, some also can hardly
keep it, being carried unto them by reason of the extreme cold, is a law to
be made which may prescribe to the whole Christian world a necessity of
communicating in one kind. But it is more tolerablie concluded, that the
abstemious may either abstain from the Supper of the Lord, whereof nature has
deprived them, or if they be present, that the offering it them is sufficient:
Or that proportionable drink, which men do familiarly use, is to be used in
those places where wine cannot be had at all, then to conclude upon Gersons
premises the denial of the cup.

6 Because by reason of the bearded, which were in the ancient Church, the
cup was not, nor is not to be denied unto women, as it is in popery.

7 Because Christians ought not to be so delicate, and if the pollution of some
communicants be enormious, and abominable, or there be sear of some dangerous
and infectiue sickness, these may communicate either a part by themselves, or in
the last rank.

8 Because in the palsy, and those which are troubled with the shaking of the
head, that wariness may be used, that there may be no need of changing of
the institution of Christ.

9 Neither is the commandment of Go to be made of none authority, that the
tradition of men may be kept. Math. 15.6.

10 Because the dignity of the minister is not placed in this, that he should
take a double portion, and the people one kind only, but in those properties
which Paul describes. 1. Tim. 3.2. and 5.17. where he says, that the Elders
are worthy os double honor, when they rule well, and labor in the word of
God, Hom. 18 upon 2 Cor. Gratiam. Cau. compernu. de consecrat distinction. 2
and excellent is the sentence of Chrysostom. There is a time when a priest
differs nothing from an inferior, as when they must use the mysteries: for
we are accounted worthy all alike that we may partake of them. And Ignatius in
the Epistle to the Philadelphians: One bread broken to all, and one cup
delivered to all. And Gelasius, The division of one and the same mystery
cannot come to pass without great sacrilege,

11 Because whatsoever pretense is brought, Christ not only instituted the
supper with a twofold sign, but commanded his Disciples to take it, and use
it under a twofold sign, Take, eat, drink, and do this.

And the doctrine of the Lords Supper which is handled. 1. Corinthians. 11. verse.
23. and so following, is common to all the faithful.

Finally, because the Sacrament ought to be whole, and to be taken wholly.

Wherefore did Christ take bread, not breads?
To signify the mystery of one and the same body, from whence, the
communicants do partake of one bread.

What manner of bread used Christ, unleavened bread, or leuened?
Such as they used with meat, true, and common bread, but yet valeauened,
because of the circumstance of time, to wit, the feast day of unleavened bread,
wherein after the eating of the paschall Lamb, Christ celebrated the supper;
Mat. 26 17
and also because the use thereof was common on those feastiuall days of
Easter, wherein it was not lawful to use leauened bread. Exodus 12.15
And the Apostle speaking of the holy supper, does term it simply, bread,
meaning undoubtedly common and usual bread among the Corinthians (such bread
as the churches of the Graecians do use) and which the Corinthians did eat of.

Wherefore ordained he bread to be the sacrament of his body?
For the Analogy, or similitude of the properties, and effects of the sign
and of the thing signified. For as of the grain of wheat, is made corporal
bread: so of the body of Christ is made spiritual bread.

2 As bread in the oven is baked with the heat of the fire: so the body of
Christ was baked with the fire of the cross and prepared to be meat of life.

3 As corporal life is sustained with bread: so by Jesus Christ, the bread of
life, the soul is nourished unto spiritual and eternal life.

4 As the heart of man is vpholden and strengthened with bread Psalm. 104 15
, so the virtue and merit of the body of Christ does comfort the soul to life
eternal.

5 As bread does drive away the hunger of the body: so the merit of the body of
Christ does assuage the hunger of the soul.

6 As bread does profit the hungry, not the full fed so also the virtue or
merit of the body of Christ does not profit any, but them who hunger after
righteousness: and them which are puffed up and swelling with their own
righteousness, and for such as are full, truly nothing does it profit them at
all.

7 As bread distributed among many is a sign of concord or agreement: so
also the body of Christ offered for many, is a pledge of the good will of
Christ, and of mutual love amongst our selves.

8 As one bread is made of many grains: so we being many, are one mystical
body of Christ, which do partake of one bread, one I say, by a common notion
of the sacrament (but not in number) and because it is taken to one end, as we
may see, 1. Corinthians. 10.17. For we that are many, are one bread, and one
body, because we all are partakers of one bread.

Why did Christ take bread, rather then flesh, or other meat to institute his
Supper?
Because he had not regard to the color, and outward form, for the which
flesh is more like to flesh but to the virtue of nourishing, which is greater
in bread then in the flesh of any beast. Theodoret. Dialogo, 1


What manner of wine used Christ, and taught by his example to be used?
Not tempered, which the ancient Graecians called (...), that is, mixed of water
and wine which they used, as a thing free and indifferent, neither necessary
to the Sacrament, occasion being taken from that, because water flowed out of
the rock to the thirsty Israelites, which rock was Christ Numb. 20 10 1 Cor.
10.4^
, and because water and blood came out of the Lords side Ioh. 19.34 Amb. of the
scaraments 5
, or because in old time celebrating the Lords Supper, they did drink more
largely, so that some were drunken in the love feasts ^p. 1 18. book Chap. 53
Tractate. 120 upon. Ioh.
, and therefore, that wine being of it self strong, might do the less hurt,
water should be put thereunto: or to signify the union of Christ with the
Church: as though the waters should figure out the people, as Cyprian will have
it: or to signify the union of natures in Christ, as Nicephorus will have it.

But these arguments are not necessary: and (as Augustine will have it) that
pouring out of water and blood, did signify two sacraments, baptism and the
Eucharist. Moreover, we drink not in so great plenty, or so strong wine in
the Supper; and our communion with Christ is signified after another manner, but
it is better concluded that Christ used wine without water. For the scriptture
does not speak of any water mixed with wine: as neither of red or white color,
but of the fruit of the Vine, Math. 26.29. Verily, I say unto you, that I will
not drink henceforth of this fruit, of the vine, until that day, when I shall
drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.

Which words, Matthew and Mark do apply to the narration of the mystical cup,
but in Luke they seem to be transposed. Luke 22.18, (as Augustine teaches. 3.
book. of the agreement of the Evangelist) and they are not extant in the
Syrian interpreter, And Chrisost. Hom. 83. upon Mat. 26. cha, Of the fruit
says he, of the vine which truly brings forth wine, not water. Yea, if a man
listed to play with Allegories, that might be expounded of the adulterating of
the Lords supper, Esa. 1.22. Thy vintners do mix wine with water.

Wherefore instituted he the Sacramen^ of his blood with wine?
In like mannner for the likeness, properties, and effects of wine and of the
blood of Christ. For as wine is the most sweet liquor flowing out of the Vine,
so the blood of Christ is the most sweet drink of the soul, powered out for us
out of the side of Christ, which is that true Vine Ioh. 15.1.5
.

2 As wine does assuage the thirst of the body: so the merit of Christ's blood
does take away the thirst of the soul.

3 As wine does make glad the heart of man Psalm. 10.15
, so also the promises concerning Christ do make glad the soul.

4 As wine does heat the body, and makes us more cheerful and ready to do
our business: so the blood of Christ received by faith does quicken the soul
unto all good motions, and so the virtue of the spirit does stir us up, and
makes us more nimble unto all good wokes.

5 As wine drives away coldness, so the blood of Christ drives away the
coldness of love and charity.

6 As win^ makes us more secure and more bold: so the blood of Christ received
by Faith, does make us secure and quiet before God, and more constant in
confession, that there may be nothing at all, which we ought to fear.

7 As wine makes us wise: so the blood of Christ received by faith, makes us
wise in the confession and commemoration of Christ's benefits.

8 As wine drives away the palenesse of the face, makes the face of man to
shine, as with oil Psalm. 104 15
: so the blood of Christ does turn the color of the soul being pale with
fear of death, into the very color of the Rose: that is to say, it appeaseth
our consciences, it makes us fair in the presence of God, that we may
appear before him with a fair and ruddie face, that is to say, just, and
accepted.

What if bread such as we have, and wine be wanting in some countries, with
what signs is the supper to be administered?
With those earthly nourishments and corporal meats, which all do use in that
country in stead of bread and wine, meat and drink: for this does agree with
the mind of Christ. From hence it was granted to the Nouergian Priests, as
Volaterranus witnesses, necessity requiring it, that they did conscrate the
mystical cup without wine, with that which they had in common, seeing that,
wine carried into the country is quickly corrupted by the great force of the
cold.

What need is there now of those two signs, that is to say, of bread and
wine, seeing that, the whole humanity of Christ consisting of his parts, of
body and blood, does live glorious in the heavens: and by reason of
concomitancie, that is to say, a natural joining together of the living body
and the blood: the whole may be signified and given in several kinds: and
where the quick body is present, there also must the blood and soul be
present: and by reason of the hypostaticall union, the divinity also may be
there: and so there may be no controversy moved concerning those things that
be equivalent, but one may suffice in steed of two. From whence is that Rhyme of
Thomas, Caro cibus, sanguis potus, manet tamen Christus totus sub vtraque
specie, that is to say, The flesh is meat, the blood is drink, yet Christ
remains whole, under both kinds?
1 Because the same reason of concomitancie does belong to the Priests, which
notwithstanding celebrating the Mass, will always use the whole sacrament.

2 Because Christ Jesus, who is the wisdom of the Eternal Father, commending
to his Church nothing superfluous, ordained those two signs, and of set
purpose commended the use of the cup to all, saying, Drink ye all of it: to
signify the drinking of one and the same blood shed for many, common to all
the faithful without difference of Nation, of sex, of estate. But for men's
conceits the commandment of God is not to be violated, who called
distinctly and exactly bread the body, not the blood; and wine, the blood, not
the body. Neither can the Church change the matter or form.

3 Because, neither for the connection of parts in the thing signified, is a
diuulsion or division of the parts to be made in outward rite or ceremony

4 Because there is not made an inclusion of Christ into the Sacramental
signs. For Christ is present in the Supper, not for the bread, but for the man.

5 Because that body and that blood of Christ, is not in this action
represented unto us sacramentally, as now the whole indiuided humanity of
Christ does live glorious: but so far forth as they were offered unto death
for us upon the cross, the blood being shed out of the body: for the words
added to the signs do plainly cry; that the body and blood of Christ are
offered and exhibited to us in the Supper, as things separated in the sacrifice
of the Cross.

From whence we must conclude, seeing that the concomitancie of the body and
blood cannot agree to the death of Christ (for to be in the body, and to be
shed out of the body, are things contrary) that, that concomitancie is
directly contrary to the institution of Christ. Neither is the hypostaticall
union of God and man therefore broken: which is not broken in death, although
the soul and blood be separated from the body. Rightly therefore Beda: The
bread is referred to the body of Christ mystically, the wine to the blood. And
the ancient fathers spoke no otherwise of this mystery, then if daily in the
administration of the Lords Supper he should be slain, die, and be sacrificed
for us, This is in the cup, (says Chrysostom) which flowed out of his side,
and we are partakers of it.

But what: If a man at this day be conversant in those places where one part of
the Supper is taken from the laity, shall he altogether abstain from the use
of the communion?
It were far better for him to abstain, especially, if he have learned out
of the former doctrine of the Gospel, that that corruption does fight with the
word of God. For it is a great sin to consent to the least pollution of Christ's
institution against conscience. Rightly therefore Ambrose: He is unworthy of
the Lord, which does celebrate a mystery, otherwise then it was delivered of
him: for he cannot be devout which does presume otherwise, then it was given
from that author.

What did Christ when he had taken the bread?
He instituted signs of a second kind, that is, the outward actions of them
which do administer the Supper: or rites of dispensation of the Lords Supper,
wherein he went before all ministers by his example.

What rites are they?
He gave thanks, to the father: to whom he gave all the thanks of our
redemption, as it were the chief cause thereof, and in the use as well of the
Supper as of daily meat, and of other things, he taught us to do the same John
6.11. 1 Timothy 4.5
, by his example.

Moreover also with blessing and tha^ksgiuing (for the word (...) that is,
blessed, and gave thanks, are used one with another. Mat. 26.26.27. concerning
the Lords Supper, and Mark. 14.22.23.) not with the sign of the Cross, as the
popish Clergy ignorantly do think, as though he used coniuring, but with
blessing, that is, with prayers unto God, he prepared, he appointed, and he
sanctified, the bread as also the wine to an holy use.

For although the word Benedicere, (that is, to bless) be used, 1. Concerning
God, blessing the creatures, either by a general action, as Genesis 1.28. Or
blessing the Church by a special action, as Numb. 6.24. For Benefacere, that
is, to do well unto, because God in saying does bring to pass, and gives
good things either corporal or spiritual, or moreover concerning men, either
toward God, as Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Luke. 1.68. For, to thank
and praise God: or toward other men, for to pray for, Math. 5.44. as Bless
them that curse you: and to gratulate. Luke 1.42
yet notwithstanding oftentimes it signifies the same which is to dedicate or
consecrate, that is, to separate from profane use, to appoint an holy use
according to Gods ordinance, as Genesis 2.3. God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it: From whence Ecumenius says that the Cup of blessing which we
bless is all one thing, as if it should be said, which we reverence with
prayers and giving of thanks.

From hence comes consecration, or sanctification, and blessing, whereby, not
with a mere Historical reading of the text, of the Epistle to the Corinthians,
or of the Gospel, but with prayers, with giving of thanks, with a plain and
faithful repetition of the words of the Institution and of the promise of
Christ always effectual and with a lively significatiue exposition, and
moreover with all that Lyturgy or holy action, which Christ commanded us to
perform, as he himself did, wherein God is effectual, those which were vulgar
and common helps of nourishing the body, are made sacraments of the body and
blood of Christ, appointed and set out for quickening meat and drink, and so are
translated from common and natural meat, to holy and spiritual meat,
forasmuch as they are appointed to this use and office, that it may be the
body and blood of Christ, not of it own nature, but by divine institution:
which ought to be rehearsed, against Faustus book. 20 Chapter 13
and declared, that faith may have what to embrace, both in the word and in the
Elements. Augustine says Noster panis and calix certa consecratione mysticus
fit nobis, non nascitur. That is, Our bread and cup by a certain consecration
is made but not borne mystical unto us.

Therefore they are deceived which refer the consecration only to those
words: This is my body, and this is my blood: and they which do interpret the
consecration concerning the hid virtue of those words, which they call
operatorie, whereby the substance of the bread is changed, and an inclusion
made of the body and blood of Christ. For the Lord did not speak to the
bread, but to the Apostles, when he says concerning the bread. Take, Book. 7
Epist. 63 Apology. 2 book 1. Epist 1 book. 4. Chapter 57 Book. 4. of the Sacram.
Chap. 4
and eat, this is my body, etc.

And Gregory says, that The Apostles added, the Lords prayer, to
consecration: Justinius says, that the Eucharist, was performed with prayer.
Cyprian says, with invocation of the highest God. Irenaeus says, with giving
of thanks: (which is the thing which the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 10.16. The cup
of blessing which we bless) Ambrose says, with the words and speech of the
Lord Jesus: And what those words are, he declares. chap. 5. reciting the words
of institution: and Augustine says: The word comes to the Element, and so is
made the Sacrament.

But for the Canon of the Mass, (without which the Popish Clergy do deny
that either consecration or participation can be made) no scripture does teach,
that it was taught by Christ and his Apostles: but it is a pontificiall
ordinance, sown together like unto pieces, of many authors, and diverse times,
and stuffed with many blasphemies against Christ.

What did Christ after the blessing?
The bread being taken he brake it: and he brake it, not only because he would
divide it, but because of representing his death.

Is the breaking or cutting of bread an indifferent ceremony?
It is not: but essential and Sacramental, wholly belonging to the end or
scope, and moreover to the form of the holy Supper, as also the pouring in of
wine into the cup: forasmuch as, by it the faithful do behold with the eyes of
their mind Christ, not only bestowing himself for us, but as it were torn in
pieces, beaten to pieces, broken in pieces, with unspeakable torments of mind
and body, and torn a sunder even to the most violent separation of the soul
from the body, and according to his humane nature butchered as it were into
two parts, and trickling down drops of blood for our salvation.

Not that his body was broken in very deed: For not a bone in it ought to be
broken, as was shadowed out by the Paschal Lamb Ioh. 19.33 36 Exodus 124.
but we call it broken, because then it was pulled a sunder, his side opened,
his hands and feet pierced, at length also the body separated from the soul:
which also is the cause why the Apostle by a Sacramental Metotonymie, and
change of names, does attribute to the body it self of the Lord, that which
was done in that bread, and ought also now to be done: when as he says that
the Lord spoke this concerning the bread: This is my body which is broken for
you. 1. Cor. 11 24. And from the same custom of breaking of bread, the
Eucharist, is called breaking of bread. Acts. 2.42 and. 20.7
.

And that the custom of breaking was usual in the Churches in Paul's time, it
plainly appears by his own words, when he says: The bread which we
break, 1. Cor. 10. and this custom, the Church long observed. But the manner
of the Host 6. That is, of giving those round small little morsels the Church
of Rome instituted.

What did the Lord concerning the bread broken, and the wine powered forth?
He gave to the Disciples, or he delivered and distributed them into the
hands of the Disciples, and by the self samse thing he taught that the
faithful ought to consider with a faithful mind the same Christ in the
distribution of that bread, and of that wine, even as if they did see him
giving himself (with eternal life) with his own hand to be used and enjoyed,
which thing also he does in very deed, by the inward virtue of his holy Spirit.

What words did Christ join to his action.
Three sorts: some commanding, in which he commanded what he would have his
disciples to do in celebrating of the Supper, and wherein he expressed the
outward form of the Supper, and signified the inward; some are Indicative,
Sacramental or words of promise, which for declaration sake Christ joined to
the signs wherein he declared the inward matter or thing signified: finally
some are exegeticall, wherein he set forth the end of this holy action.

What does he command his, to do in the supper?
1 What the ministers themselves or disposers of the supper ought to do, he
teaches in the administration thereof. And the^ he teaches what the whole
church ought to do in the use or taking of it. For in that holy action he
speaks to the Apostles both as to the pastors, or disposers of his secrets,
and also as representing all the company of the faithful who must receive.

And truly, first of all he commands the Apostles or ministers administering
to take bread and wine: to give thanks to God the father, to break bread, and
to distribute: for when he says. Luke 22 19. And. 1. Cor. 11.25. do this in
remembrance of me. the particle, this, is not to be referred to the body or
the cup, but to that which the lord had done about the bread and cup. Truly he
offered or sacrificed not his body and blood to God the father, under the
forms of bread and wine, but he took bread, he gave thanks, he brake, he
powered into the cup, Neither offered he to God but gave to the disciples, with
a double command, eat, drink ye all of this. Therefore the same, not any
other thing is commanded to the ministers: unless they will be accused by
Christ as false Ambassadors. Neither is the signification to be regarded of
the Latin word, facere that is to do, in the commandment of Christ, (...)
hoc facite, that is, do this, which sometime among the latins joined with an
ablative case signifies to sacrifice: for they say fafacere hac, vel illa
victima, that is to sacrifice with this or that slain beast, as in that of
virgil Eclog. 3. cum faciam vitula^, pro frugibus, ip se venito, that is when I
sacrifice with an heifer or a young cow, come you for corn. But not as the
popish clergy read it in a calflike construction, cum faciam vitulam, and
sometime in the scripture, namely when the thing which is sacrificed, or is
offered to the Lord, is joined together with the said verb, or where the text
does manifestly speak concerning Sacrifice: as when the Scripture says,
Facere, that is, sacrificare agnum, to sacrifice a Lamb, A Goat, fine flower,
and the rest of like sort, in the Hebrew construction, not in the Latin, as
Leuit. 15.15. Moses speaking of two turtle Doves to be offered in sacrifice,
Facies (says he) vnum pro peccato, Thou shall make or offer one for a sin
offering, the other for a burnt offering, alterum in holocaustum, and Numb. 28.
Agnum vnum facies mane, that is, offeres seu sacrificabis, Thou shall offer or
sacrifice one Lamb in the morning: but no where the word (...) in this
proposition, (...), does signify to sacrifice but to do this which was done in
the first Supper, does belong as well to the dispensation as to the receiving
of the Supper.

Moreover, these words, Hoc facite, do this, are referred to that which the
communicants must do, in the use and taking of the Supper: which is evident by
that, that Paul does apply them not only to Priests, but to the whole Church
of the Corinthians. Therefore he bids that the guests or communicantes
should first take, and then eat the bread broken, and should drink the wine
powered in: which are the sacramental rites prescribed to all comers to the
Lords table, namly a comely taking of the outward signs into the hands, an
eating and drinking of them.

Did not Christ in the last Supper offer himself to God the Father, under the
form of bread and wine, and command the same to be done until the end of the
word?
Truly, he presented both in actions and words the sacrifice which he was about
to offer upon the Cross the day after, and commanded a remembrance thereof to
be made: but he neither offered himself really, corporally, and properly in
the form of bread and wine to God the Father, nor commanded an oblation to be
made for remission of sins,

1 Because, with one offering once done, and perfected (not with two, one
unbloody, another bloody: one primarie, another secondarie, either
co^memoratiue, or applicatory, not by repetition of that one) he has
consecrated for ever the^ that are sanctified Heb. 10.12 14.2.5.6.
. Beside, where there is remission of sins, there is no more offering for
sin. Heb. 10. verse. 18.

2 Because both by the word and also by a lawful use of the Sacraments
outwardly, and by the working of the holy Ghost inwardly, and by faith the
fruit of that only offering is applied unto us.

3 Because the representation or application of a thing, is not the thing it
self, for those things which differ in number, in object, in measure, in
manner of doing and in adjuncts, as the Supper of the Lord and the sacrifice of
Christ upon the cross do, truly cannot be the same: neither are the Image of
a thing and the truth it self the same thing, unless among them which are
weak wited, but even the very application of satisfaction does imply a
satisfaction formerly made.

4 Neither did Christ offer any sacrifice, or commanded to be offered by
priests in the Supper, by which they may be purged, and their sins forgiven.

5 Neither has any thing power to satisfy for sins besides that one sacrifice
of the cross.

6 And without shedding of blood is no remission of sins. Heb. 9.22. Neither is
it said in any place in the scripture, that Christ was offered to God, but by
reason of his death. For Heb. 9.25. Not that he should offer himself often,
for then must he have often suffered.

7 Neither is it apparent in the Scripture, that Christ is to be sacrificed
unto God, that his sacrifice may be applied to us, but to be received by faith
Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation thorough faith in
his blood.

8 Truly, he is sacrificed after a certain manner, by preaching of the
gospel Romans 15.16
and is crucified, Gal. 3.1
but figuratively and spirituallie: Not to God, but to us, that with our whole
souls we may embrace him being received by true faith.

9 Because, since that, the chief priest is now exhibited, the Apostles
substituted no second priests of the new Testament, and properly so called,
either to Christ, or to those of old time Heb. 7.24.
.

10 Because the alone, and the same most perfect sacrifice of Christ abrogated
all outward sacrifices whatsoever.

11 Because there is no real sacrifice, outward and propitiatory, but
bloody: but if there be shedding of blood in the Supper made Sacramentally, it
is not therefore reallie.

12 Because the place, Malac: 2.11. from the rising of the sun, unto the
going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every
place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: is not
understood of outward Sacrifice, but allegorically or metaphoricallie (by
allusion to the legal ceremonies, and their words being used, as also. Esai.
22.) concerning spiritual sacrifices, that is concerning the spiritual worship
of God; which especially, shined to the church, in the time of Christ, when as
the Gentiles embraced the preaching of the gospel, concerning which. Heb, 13,
15. and. 6. and. 56. 66
Let us by Christ himself offer to God the sacrifice of praise.

13 And whereas Daniell, 12.11 says, that in the last times (Antichrist
raging) a docilie sacrifice shall be offered, that is to be meant either of the
daily legal sacrifice, which was interrupted in the time of Antiochus, and
afterward quite taken away in the destruction of Jerusalem, as Chrysostom
will have it, in the oration against the Jews, or metaphoricallie of the
worship of God prescribed out of his word, to be taken away, Antichrist
possessing the world, as Hierom will have it upon Daniel, Chap. 12.

14 But although Melchisedech was a figure of Christ, yet not in regard of
outward sacrifice, whereof there is no mention made. Genesis 14.18.19.20. neither
in all that comparison of Christ with Melchisidech, which the Apostle does
unfold most accurately. Heb. 7.

But 1. because Melchisedech was a King and also a priest.

2 Because the same Melchisedech as a Priest blessed Abraham, that is, he
prayed, for the grace and favor of God to him, saying blessed art thou Abraham
of God most high.

3 Because he is set forth unto us in the scripture without genealogy as though
he were eternal.

4 It is gathered that he was more excellent then Abraham and his posterity by
that, that Abraham offered tithes unto him. Notwithstanding that we may grant
(which is not spoken) that Melchesedech, (before he entertained Abraham with a
banquet returning with his servants from the conquest, took part of the bread
and of the wine and sacrificed, that is oblation being made, gave thanks to God
for the victory and for the wholesome use of bodily food, and for all other
benifites (which was the custom of the holy fathers, and which also went
forward from them to the Gentiles: as Atheneus does praise Homer because he
describes the Grecian Princes never to sit down at the table, or to depart
without Sacrifice and prayers) it does not therefore follow that that
thanksgiving was a Sacrifice applied for Abraham and his company, that it
might merit for them remission of sins.

So in the Lords Supper there is made a most holy Sacrifice, that is, the body
and blood of the Lord being tasted, we give thanks for spiritual nourishment,
and for so great victory, whereby Christ has overcome sin and death for us,
and has made his conquest common unto us, but this thanksgiving does not
deserve for our selves or others, remission of sins. It does much less follow
that Christ in the Supper offered himself to God, in the form of bread and
wine: but only in an argument Allegorical, it follows that the bread and
wine offered of Abraham, were types of Christ, who offers himself to us in
the Supper, to be received by a true faith. In which sense, the Fathers do
apply the type of Melchisedech to the Supper of the Lord. Which thing Lombard
does enough declare. Melchisedech showed the rite of this Sacrament, 4.
Sentence distinct. 8
when as he offered bread and wine to Abraham.

Lastly, whereas the ancient fathers do every where call the Eucharist a
sacrifice, they do it.

1. For the blessing of the signs.

2. Because in this mystery there is a commemoration of that only sacrifice
which was made for us upon the cross, and a certain representation of it
under the image of the Sacrament.

3. Because it is an Eucharisticall sacrifice by reason of the solemn
profession of faith, prayers, and especially of a peculiar giving of thanks.

4. Because in it we consecrate our selves wholly unto God. To. 12.2

5. Because in old time it was a custom, that when the holy Supper was
celebrated, the faithful did offer alms, wherewith they might help the
needy brethren, which also is a kind of spiritual Sacrifice Heb. 13.16.
Distinct. 2
, Lombard says, Christ died once upon the cross, and there Sacrificed in
himself, but he is daily offered in the Sacrament, because in the Sacrament
there is a remembrance of that which was done once. 4. senten.
And Distinct. 13. It is called a Sacrifice as it were a holy thing done,
because by a mystical prayer it is consecrated for us in remembrance of the
Lords passion.

Because in the celebration of Mysteries, there has been always a threefold
oblati^n observed in the Christian Church: one mere spiritual, whereby every
one does present himself before God, with a contrite heart, and endued with
faith: another visible, every one bringing something, least he should appear
before God empty, Ex. 23.15. The third, both of the body and of the blood of
the Lord himself, whether are both the latter justly taken away by our
Churches?
Yea rather, neither of both, if they be rightly understood, is taken away, but
rather renewed. For although now, alms are bestowed not as in times past,
whereby both the common feasts, which they did call (...), love feasts, were
furnished, and also the ministers, and the poor were helped, and which served
for other necessary uses of the Church, which were wont to be laid either upon
a table, or a cupbord made for that purpose, (which in the Canons which they
call the Apostles Canons, Canon. 3. is called (...), or an Altar) and by
solemn prayer unto God, consecrated to holy uses, the bread and wine first of
al being set apart, which they did bless severally to the use of the
Sacrament: yet notwithstanding, the love feast, being now taken away, according
to the Precept of Paul, If any man be hungry, let him eat at home, not in the
Church, 1. Cor. 11.34. and so by little and little, things being so ordained in
the Christian Church, that we need not labor to seek goods, wherewith
Ecclesiastical persons are nourished, but rather we must be careful, that
the wealth wherewith they do abound be bestowed in good uses. It was not
needful to retain in our Churches these kinds of offerings, prescribed by no
law in the word of God: but it is better to take heed by what means both just
stipe^ds may be paid to the ministers of the word, and also that the poor of
every place may be provided for, and also that an eye may be had to setting up
of schools, and to nourishing of poor scholars, and to maintain the
buildings of Churches, neither yet is the collection of private alms,
therefore to be neglected.

Therefore the offering of the unbloody sacrifyce does remain among us sound:
whether you regard the blessing it self of the signs, that is, the rehearsing
and explication of the Lords institution joined with prayers, whereby after a
sort the passion it self of the son (as Cyprian speaks) is offered to God
the Father, and the whole Church, showing the death of Christ, after a sort
does sacrifice and vow it self to God: whether by name of a sacrifice, you
understand the solemn profession of the Christian faith: or finally the giving
of thanks and bestowing of alms.

What is it to Take?
Amongst the Evangelists it is (...) or (...), which is properly vndrestoode of
the hand: from whence also, every thing whereby a thing is taken, as the handle
of a cup, the ear of a pot, the hilt of a weapon, is called of the Grecians
(...).

2. Neither is it like to be true, neither can it be gathered out of the
history of the institution of the Lords Supper nor by the manner of the sitting
of Christ and of his Apostles at meat, that Christ in the first Supper put
bread into every Apostles mouth. For Io. 13 23. John is said in the last
Supper, to have leaned of Jesus bosom; namely according to the manner of
feasts of that time, wherein, in taking of meat they being stretched forth,
did lean upon the ground, or in an high chamber trimmed with beds: as we may
read, Luke 22.12. so that they did make, as it were, a certain circle, and
the next did as it were lean upon the former, their heads always within, and
their feet stretched out without.

3. Moreover, the manner of taking both of me ate and drink with the mouth,
not with the hand, agrees not to those of age, and to the great ones, that is,
to those which have their wits exercised, to discern both good and evil Heb.
5.14
, (such as it behooves all them to be, as much as may be, which are commanded
to examine themselves before they come to the Lords table) but to Infants yet
crying, and which cannot discern between their right hand and their left
Jonah, 4.11
.

4. Furthermore, that the word of Taking is to be understood, of the taking by
the hand, it is evident, because otherwise there should be a manifest
Tautologie in the words of Christ, when, the taking of the mouth is necessarily
understood out of the words by themselves (...), that is to say, Eat and
Drink.

5. The practice also, and use of the ancient Church does show the same, whose
example is extant in the wor^s of Ambrose to Theodosius the great, Emperor;
How will thou stretch out the hands from which innocent blood does yet drop?
How will thou take the holy body of the Lord with such hands? Theodore^. hist.
Ec^lesiasticall, b^ 5 Chap. 8
with what rashness will thou take in thy mouth the cup of the precious blood?
since that, by the fury of thy words so much blood is unjustly shed.

Therefore it is a superstitious thing to forbid the communicants to take
Eucharisticall bread or cup: for the inner mouth is no more holy, then the
lips and hands. Wherefore they which put in whole little morsels into the
mouth, not into the hands, of the receivers, I cannot tell with what reason they
can deny that they are papisticall, and do cherish the spawne of superstition
amongst their people.

What is declared by this receiving of bread and wine into the hands?
As true a spiritual sealing within us by the instrument of faith, both of
Christ himself, and also of his benefits necessary to our salvation, as there
is a true and certain receiving of these signs into the hands of the takers.

What does the bodily eating and drinking of this bread and this wine, and
moreover the conueying of it into our body signify?
That Jesus Christ, received by the instrument of faith, by a Divine virtue
through the Covenant of a new league, is so far made ours, that he does
pass as it were, into us by an incomprehensible mystery, to seal up
spiritual life in us, and we in like manner pass into him: yet with this
difference, that in natural eating, and nourishment, those things which we
eat and drink, by the strength of natural heat are changed into our
substance, that there may be a renewing of that which began to be consumed: but
in spiritual nourishing, the body and blood of Christ do so nourish and
renew us, and make us one body with Christ, that they do change us, but are
not changed in us because we had need, and must be conformed to Christ, and
made like to his Image. Romans 8.29. Phil. 3.10.

Is the giving of the signs and eating them with the mouth and the giving and
eating of the things signified one and the same in number and kind?
No, in no wise.

1 For as there are two persons administering the Lords supper, on of the
pastor, performing that which is done outwardly and without: an other of Christ
effecting by his holy spirit that which is done inwardly.

2 And as the whole action of the Lords supper does consist of two things, one
earthly, corporal, and to be perceived by the senses themselves: Another,
heavenly, spiritual, and to be understood by a faithful mind.

3 And as there are two parts of a man, whereof one is the body, the other the
soul; so there are two diverse giuings, one to the body, which is done by the
minister, and another to the mind, performed by Christ.

And so many eatings, that is to say, one outward corporal, orall, natural,
and sensible, namely of sensible signs, which also is called Sacramental,
which is done by the instrument of the mouth: the other inward, supernatural,
of the things signified, and to be perceived with the eyes of faith, which is
called spiritual. That first, was instituted by Christ that it might be an
express image, of this spiritual eating and drinking.

This twofold eating Augustine acknowledged. He which eats within, not
without, he which eats in heart, not which presses with his tooth. Tractat.
36. upon John. b. 4. did. 1.9.
And Lombard, As there are two things of the sacrament, so there are two ways
of eating, one sacramental, whereby the good and bad do eat, the other
spiritual, whereby only the good do eat.

For look what those earthly gifts are to man's body and the instruments
thereof, that are heavenly gifts to the soul, and the most excellent
instrument thereof which is faith. But earthly signs are laid hold upon with
the body, and the instruments thereof, that is to say, sensibly, and
corporally: therefore the celestial good things are received only with the
soul and with the instrument thereof, that is, to say by faith spirituallie
and intellectuallie Ioh. 6.35
, from whence also that may be gathered that the word manducandi, that is of
eating, is taken concerning the partaking of the signs, properly, but
concerning the participation of the body of Christ, in a borrowed sense.

Seeing that the flesh of Christ is corporal, is not the eating of it in the
Supper also corporal?
Truly the flesh of Christ is corporal, in respect that it is a body, but it
is not corporal by speaking properly, in respect that it is meat, for as much
as, our body is nourished, neither with his flesh nor blood, as if it were
food for this corporal, temporal, and brittle life: for this would bring in
a Capernaiticall eating of his flesh,

But it is spiritual, not in respect of essence, but in the manner of
receiving, and by the spiritual strength and efficacy of our norishing by it,
because the spirit or mind of man does receive it by faith alone, and really
and truly (for there is also in spiritual actions their realitie) is
nourished by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and is fed unto spiritual and
eternal life. And truly the benefit of spiritual life does redounde also to
the body it self, forasmuch as from thence it is regenerated, it is
sanctified, and at length shall be partaker of the blessed Resurrection, but
nevertheless, that meat is not to be called corporal but spiritual because it
gives only spiritual nourishment. Therefore although there is an eating of
the body, in which respect, that is to say, in respect of the term or object
it might be called corporal, notwithstanding in respect of the manner it is
not a corporal eating. Therefore seeing that the flesh of Christ is only
spiritual meat, and in like manner the blood of Christ spiritual drink: it
followeh that the flesh of Christ is eaten only spiritually, and also that his
blood is drunk spiritually, that is, with the mouth of the spirit or soul,
namely by faith, which the holy Ghost himself does engender in our minds. Ioh.
6.51.

Because the commanding words of the Supper; Take and eat, do speak of a
corporal action and of one eating with the mouth: And concerning that, which
ought to be taken and eaten, Christ says a little after; This is my body:
whether therefore is the true body of Christ taken by a corporal action and
eating?
The Mayor is denied: because seeing that the holy Supper (as has been said)
does consist of two things, earthly and heavenly, or of the sign and of the
thing signified, there are two sorts of eating: and therefore a twofold eating
is commanded, one of the sign, another of the thing signified; that,
corporal and sensible, but this, spiritual and intelligible.

The word of eating is attributed to that properly, but to this figuratively,
as Psalm. 14.4. The workers of iniquity eat up my people as they eat bread.
And Ioh, 6.53. Otherwise it should follow, that the body of Christ is to be
eaten by a corporal action, which is a horrible thing, and the conceit of the
Capernaits. For Christ goes not into the belly, but into the heart, Ephe.
3.17. and therefore is not eaten with the mouth Mark. 7.18 19
. And whereas to avoid this absurdity, some do feign a corporal eating,
which may be done after a heavenly and supernatural manner, it is a devised
forgerie unutterable, and no way is intelligible, and moreover implying a
contradiction.

What is it to eat the body and to drink the blood of Christ?
It is not only to believe the promise of God, which does witness (as Christ
himself expounds it. Ioh. 6. verse. 35. I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never
thirst. Where the Lord does declare, that, to believe, is to drink, and to
come to Christ by faith, is to Eat) that the flesh of Christ is crucified for
us, and his blood shed for us for remission of sins: but to be spiritually
refreshed and to receive spiritual life and strength by a true communication
of the body of Christ, as it were by nourishment: (as Christ says, He shall
not hunger, nor ever thirst,) and moreover to lay hold upon Christ by faith not
appearing a far of, but so uniting and insinuating himself unto us, that he
may be our head, and we his members.

and Tractat 26. and. 27 upon John
Whereupon Augustine in the second Sermon, De verbis Apostoli, says, That same
manducare, to eat, what is it but to be refreshed? that same bibere, to
drink, what is it but viuere, to live?

This is (says he) to eat that meat, and to drink that drink, to abide in
Christ, to have Christ abiding in him: as Christ himself declares. Ioh, 6.56,
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
And by this, he which dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ does not
dwell, without doubt, he neither eats his flesh spiritually, nor drinks
his blood: although carnally and visibly he presses the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ with his teeth.

Therefore the eating of the flesh of Christ, and the drinking of his blood, is
not only faith, but a certain consequent and effect of faith, namely the
inward conjunction of us with Christ, the effect whereof is joy in God, and
moreover life eternal John. 6.51 54.56. 1. Cor. 5.8
.

Seeing that Christ is given daily in the word to be eaten by faith, and is
there eaten of the faithful, John. 6.35. why is there need of the supper?
That by this Sacrament as by an action more evident unto us, or by a word
visible, that is, showing that self same thing to the eyes, which the word
does signify to the ears of the hearers, our faith being more exercised, and
more confirmed, we may eat him more and more, and may apply him unto us more
nearely and more effectually; and moreover by Christ so eaten, we may have more
spiritual sense, motion, and life, until, in that last day, needding the use
neither of the word nor of the Sacraments, we all in Christ, and with Christ
being present with us in very deed, in heaven, do enjoy that everlasting
spiritual life.

Now therefore at the length distinguish exactly the ways of eating of the
body of Christ.

As it is a Sacrament, it is not taken generally for the whole action of the
Lords Supper, and for the taking it self both of the sign, and also of the
thing signified, but for the sign it self, Question upon Leuiticus. 57.
as Augustine says, Secundum quendam modum, Sacramentum corporis Christi,
corpus Christi est, that is, after a certain manner, the Sacrament of the
body of Christ, is the body of Christ: and he says the same thing
oftentimes, Sacramentum Ecclesiae duobus constare, Sacramento, and re
sacramenti, that is, That the sacrament of the Church does consist of two
things, of the sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament.

In this sense, one eating is outward, Sacramental, Symbolicall or
Sacramental only, namely, of them which in the Lords Supper do eat that
holy sign of the body of Christ with the mouth of the body, but which without
faith is of no moment to salvation.

Another is Mental, or spiritual only, namely of the thing signified, which
is done by faith alone, by hearing, reading, and meditating of the word of God,
concerning which, Ioh. 6.53.54 55.63. (and it belongs to all times: but yet
only to the faithful, and in the old time also it was common to the Fathers
Cor. 10.3.
) verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has eternal life, And my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed.

Concerning which eating, Hierom says, Quando audimus verbum Dei, tunc caro
Christi and sanguis eius in aures nostras funditur, that is, upon psalm. 147.
When we hear the word of God, then the flesh of Christ and his blood is
powered into our ears.

Finally there is another, Spiritual and Sacramental together, in the lawful
use of the Lords Supper, that is to say, of them which in the Lords, Supper, do
eat both the sign of the body of Christ, with the mouth of their body, and
also the body of Christ with the mouth of the soul it self, that is, they
receive it by true faith and are truly partakers of it by the working of the
holy Ghost eating not only panem Domini, the bread of the Lord, but also panem
Dominum, the bread, the Lord, as Augustine sometimes said.

Although it is the same, not a twofold receiving of the same, and one Christ,
that is to say, spiritual, by faith, whether it be given to our mind to be
taken in the bare word, or Sacramental signs being added thereunto. And
therefore it is not to be denied that those words Ioh. 6. do belong to the
spiritual eating which is done in the Supper. For although Christ then spoke
not of the signs themselves, yet he spoke of the matter of the Sacrament. For
which cause the Fathers in their Homilies especially to the people, applied
that place to the Sacrament of the Euchariste.

But as for a carnal or orall eating, whereby the body of Christ may be
received with the mouth, and conveyed into the stomach, there is none, because
it cannot stand with a spiritual eating and with his ascension John. 6. verse.
62
. And because carnal eating, is not only unprofitable, but Capernaiticall: but
the spiritual, quickneth (as it is in the same place Verse. 63.
.)

But whereas Bellarmine goes about to prove that the words of Christ. John.
6. are properly to be understood of the corporal eating of the flesh of
Christ, which may be done in the Eucharist, Book. 2. of the sacrament, Enchir.
Chapter. 5^.
(which he calls Sacramental) because Christ confirmed with an oathe,
verily, verily, which is not lawful to add, but in most plain sentences,
and which cannot be wrested to another sense, least a gappe be thus opened to
periuries.

It is easily confuted, because Christ, John. 3, 3, used the same oath in one
figurative sentence, and taken of Nichodemus to another sense, verily, verily I
say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
GOD. And to make it a proper speaking: a most absurd consequence should
follow, that every one, coming never so unworthily, shall have eternal
life, for all such should eat the flesh of Christ. upon Psalm, (...) 97


But contrariwise, Augustine speaking of those words of Christ, says, Have
thou understood spiritually? They are spirit and life. Have thou understood
carnally? so also they are spirit and life, but they are not to thee:
understand spiritually those things which I have spoken, Ye shall not eat
this body, which ye see, and drink that blood which they who shall crucify
me shall shed. I have commended unto you a certain Sacrament, being
spiritually understood, it shall quicken you: but the flesh profits nothing.

And (in his Tract. upon John) To believe in Christ, This is to eat the living
bread. And he says that those words, Except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man, do signify nothing else, De Doet, Chr stum Book 3 Chapter 16
but that we must communicate with the Lords passion, and sweetly think in
our minds, that the flesh of Christ was crucified for us.

And he says, Vt quid paras dentem and ventrem? Creed, and manducasti: that
is; Why do thou prepare thy tooth and thy belly? believe and thou have
eaten: in which words truly, he grants that the flesh of Christ is eaten
figuratively, whether we regard the essence, or the manner of corporal eating.

Which are the Sacramental or definitive words, or the words of promise, which
the Lord added to the signs?
Namely, those which do show as it were the kernel, or inward matter, or the
thing signified: whereof some are said concerning the bread: and some
concerning the cup. And truly there are two parts of that speech concerning
the bread: the first, This is my body. The latter, Which is given for you, or
is broken.

Which is the subject of the former part, and also the Attribute?
The Pronoune demonstratiue, This, not taken adiectiuely, but substantiuely,
which does not signify a singular thing, and unfruitful, or any singular
thing of a more general substance, which may signify the same thing with that
which is spoken of, or (as Scotus speaks) may pro eodem supponere, that is,
put in the place of the same, so as they which are signified by the subject and
attribute differ not betwixt themselves, except in a diverse manner of
conceiving, as though the sense should be; This thing contained in the bread is
my body. Neither also is that subject to be understood of that which was
bread: as if we should speak of that which Moses held in his hand, and which
was a staff or a rod. This is a Serpent, or this, which was water, at the
marriage in Cana, is wine; Also it is not to be taken for the aduerbe of place,
Hic, here.

But that pronoune demonstratiue, is referred to certain bread, which Christ
took, brake, and gave to the Disciples, but it is not referred to his own
body: Paul being the interpreter. 1. Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ.

It is false therefore, which Bellarmine assumeth book 1. chap. 9. concerning
the Eucharist; that, Hoc, this, cannot be spoken of a thing which is seen, and
openly known, unless that thing be of the neuter gender.

But the attribute is, corpus meum my body, which is spoken concerning the
subject, that is to say, true bread. But the couple, wherewith that attribute is
joined with the subject, is the Substantive Est, is.

Is the verb Est, to be taken essentially, or substantiuely and in his
natural signification?
In no wise: but significatiuely, representatiuely, and figuratively: and
again, Bellarmine is deceived, who thinks that this verb cannot by any
means be taken in any other, then in the proper signification: because by no
reason at all, neither Physical, nor Logical, nor Theological, can an unlike
thing be said of an unlike, properly, existently, essentially, and
substantially: but only figuratively. Neither can two things remaining
substantially divided. how much soever joined and united together in their
essences, be truly said so to be one (...), that one may truly be said to
be another substantially. So the soul cannot be truly said to be the body,
or the body, the soul, although conjoined personally in one man: yet in that
peculiar (and beyond all example) uniting of the humane nature by subsistence
of the Deity in the person of the Son, God is said to be a man, and man,
God, against Nestorius, by unity of person, and (...), by naming one by the
other against Eutiches.

According to what sense, is the bread of the Lords Supper the body of Christ?
Not according to an essential, or personal, or real, but according to a
mystical meaning, Sacramental, and significatiue, whereby; the thing which
does signify, takes the name of that thing which it signifies; says
Augustine, namely by reason of the Analogy, or mutual respect both of one to
another, and also to him from whom it is taken.

For Christ teaches not in this proposition, what that bread and that wine is
in it own nature and substance, or in the same signification of diverse words,
or what is contained in them: but what they are in signification, in office, in
use, in proportion. In nature they are bread and wine: in signification they
are the body and blood of Christ. And therefore here the predicate is spoken
of the subject, Sacramentally, that is to say, in that kind of signification,
wherein the thing signified is no less truly offered, and to be taken
spiritually by faith then the sign it self is delivered to be taken with the
instruments of the body.

What manner therefore of predication is it?
Not proper and regular: for that proposition is not identicall (wherein the
same thing is said of it self, as, This is bread, of bread, This is a body,
of a body) seeing that bread and the body of Christ do differ in kind:
neither is the special spoken of the singular, nor the general, the
difference, the proper, or the accident, of the special, as Peter is a man, a
man is a living creature, apt to be taught, white: but an unlike thing of an
unlike, the thing signified, of the sign, yet notwithstanding proportionally,
as the manner of relatiues does require: for things severed, or unlike, if
there be an Analogy or signification, may so be conjoined, that they may make
a proposition, but figuratively, as I am the vine, John. 15.1. and the field is
the word. 13. Mat. 38.

Therefore this predication is figurative, and that not simply Metaphorical,
or allegorical, (like as, the flesh and blood of Christ are called the meat
and drink of the faithful) but Metonimicall. For, most rightly it is called a
Metonimie not of the continent for the contained, but of that manner, whereby
the name of the thing signified, is given to the sign. As in this proposition,
The bread is the body of Christ, the name of the thing signified, which is the
body of Christ, is given to the sign, namely bread. Therefore it is a
metonimicall speaking, very familiar in the scriptures: as Genesis 41.26
the seven kine are seven years. John is Elias Math. 11.14
, that is to say figuratively (for the predication of a singular concerning a
singular, is not true, but figuratively:) Herod is a Fox Luke 11.32.
, that is to say, Metaphorically. Christ is the way John, 14.6
, The door John. 10.7
, bread John. 6.53
, The rock is Christ Ier, 10.4
So the bread of the Eucharist is the body of Christ, figuratively,
metonimycally, and Sacramentally.

For the body of Christ cannot be called bread, regularly, and properly,
when as the body of Christ is neither the Genus nor the species, nor the
differentia, nor the proprium, nor the Accident of bread. Whereby it comes to
pass that the predication of the body of Christ concerning the bread
Eucharisticall, is figurative, seeing that, every predication is, either
proper, or figurative, for a third time of predication there is none.

For it is a foolish thing to say that Sacramental predications are unusual,
whereof there is so frequent use in the Scriptures.

And truly this figurative predication is, not in every word severally, and
considered in it self: but in the whole attribution: for bread is bread
properly: and the body not allegorical, not tropicall, not figurative, much
less a spirit, or vision: also not a mystical body, which is the Church, or
a sign of the body: it signifies not the merit of Christ; but the proper
body of Christ: for the true body of the Lord is altogether spoken of the true
bread, I say, it is in the whole attribution, because the copula or word est
is, does join together two things unlike: which we may resolve thus, Bread is
the sign or seal of the body of Christ.

But again, it is to be noted, that it is not only a figurative,
Metonimicall, or significatiue speech, as this is, The field is the world, that
is, signifies the word, and other like in parables (because so it should more
faintly express the nature of that mystery) but Sacramental: because
therwithal the exhibition of the thing sealed is promised, as in this
proposition; Rods bound together, are the Roman Empire, that is, they do not
barely nor simply only signify the Jurisdiction of the Roman Empire, but
they do certainly testify that the Empire together with the signs is
transferred to him to whom the rods are lawfully delivered. So, that which is
promised by word, and is signified by signs, is truly also given of GOD, but
to be taken by says.

Is not the propriety of the speech, or the word to be kept in the very
words of the Supper?
Seeing that, the appellation of the word is used sometime in a larger,
sometime in a stricter signification, truly, in the very words of the Supper,
the Sacramental word is to be kept: but this same sacramental word is unlike
to other regular predications: and it is to be made plain by a convenient
interpretation, agreeing to the nature of the Sacraments. For in a Sacramental
speech, not so much the letter, or the sound of words, as the true sense is to
be followed, that is to say, which does agree with the nature of the
Sacrament, which Christ instituted, and with all the circumstances of the
institution, and with the Analogy of faith.

Is it not a proper proposition, wherein the Subject and the attribute are
understood so to be coupled, that the Attribute is in the Subject, or in the
place wherein the subject is as Deuteronomy. 12, 23. The blood is the life because it
contains the life?
Not at al for never can any thing be properly predicated of another thing, in
which it existeth or to which it is conjoined, although it be a straight
conjunction, but only figuratively. Therefore if the bread be therefore the
body, either because some hidden thing in the bread is the body of the Lord,
or because in this bread is that body of the Lord: it can never be proved
that these words, This is my body, are a proper predication.

Are the places of Scripture, which are the grounds of Doctrines, or of the
Articles of faith, and of the commandments of God, always to be taken without
figures altogether, as the words do sound?
No: seeing that there is no less certainty in a figurative speech, which may
be applied to the nature of the thing, concerning which it is spoken, then in
a proper. Like as the first promise of the Gospel was published by God in a
figurative speech: The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Genesis
3.15. which John declares in a proper speech. 1. Epistle chap. 3. verse 8. The
son of God appeared that he might dissolve the works of the Devil.

And the first chapter of John is the ground of Doctrine, concerning the person
of Christ, and yet in it are figurative speeches Verse. 4. and 5. That light
was the light of men. And that light shines in the darkensse, and the
darkness comprehended it not.

But is it not absurd, that Christ spoke tropically, (and therefore
enigmatically, that is, obscurely, or doubtfully) in the institution of his
supper with the Disciples which were rude and simple?
In no wise: for the thing it self shows that that Metonymicall speech, was
not enigmaticall, doubtful, or dark to the Disciples: for unless it had come
into their mind, that bread was called of the Lord, his body, because it was
a sign thereof, doubtless they had been troubled at so prodigious a thing as
follows upon the proper and literal sense of the words: And that so much the
more, because almost at the same time they could not understand far more
easy things John. 14.8. and 16.17
: a seeing therefore they are not trobled with these words, it is plain that
they understood those things Metonymically after the mnaner of the Scripture:
Especially as a little before they had eaten the Lamb; which in the same sense
is called Pascha, that is, the Passover. Exodus 12.27.

Which is the other part of words of Christ concerning the bread?
Which is given for you. In Luke. 22.19. or Which is broken for you. in Paul,
1. Cor. 11.24. For in Matthew, and Mark this part is wanting: the subject of
which member, is not bread, but body, expressed in the Pronoune Relative,
which: And the Attribute, Which is given, (or delivered for you) (namely unto
death,) or is broken, that is, Esaias being interpreter, Chap. 53.10. He is
broken with sorrows, or is crucified and killed.

What is signified in this proposition?
1 The mystical body of Christ is not signified (for the mystical body of
Christ which is the Church is not given, or delivered, or broken for us) but
the true body.

2 It is signified that Christ gave not a glorified and spiritual body, and
therefore that the flesh of Christ is not simple meat, in respect that it is
glorified: but that it is living meat unto us, in respect that it was in time
past crucified. John. 6.51.

3 It is gathered by a proper and regular predication, that the bread is not
called the body of Christ, but figuratively: because it is universally true of
a proper and regular signification, Whatsoever is the predicate of the
predicate, is also the predicate of the subject. But that which is said here
of the body of Christ, cannot be spoken properly and regularly of bread. For
bread is said to be given to us, properly, not given for us: Neither is wine
said properly to be shed for us, by powered in, to us.

Again, that, which is given, is (but an Enallage of the present time for the
future) spoken for that, which shall be shortly given upon the cross, but not
in the Eucharist: Because Christ therein, offered not, or gave his body for a
sacrifice, but upon the cross. For it is an usual Enallage of scripture, to
speak concerning a thing now instant, and to be forthwith, as it were of a
thing present. And so to use the present tense for the future. So Mat. 26.24.
Woe be to that man, by whom the son of man is betrayed. And John. 10.15. I lay
down my life for my sheep. And the common translation has. Which shall be
given for you.

Which is broken, cannot be affirmed of the sign which the Lord had broken
already, neither can it be spoken of the body of Christ, unless it be
Metonymically, seeing that it was said of the body of Christ. Exodus 12.46. and
John. 19.36. yea shall not break a bone thereof.

4 And also the love of Christ toward us is commended, because when he owed
nothing to Death (because he was without sin, for he was holy and undefiled
Heb 17.26
) he would undergo it for us.

5 Last of all, the fruit of his death, because he is said to be delivered unto
death, not only for the Apostles, but for many.

What are the words of the Lord concerning the cup?
They also, consist of two branches, the former is in Matthew and Mark, This,
is my blood of the new Testament: Or, as Luke and Paul has it, This cup is
the new Testament in my blood.

The subject of which speech is (...). This of the neuter gender, but not, hic,
this, in the masculine gender (as has the old interpretation) which pronounce
hoc, this, is referred to the wine, not to the blood (for so it should be an
Identicall proposition) which is manifestly plain out of Luke. 22.20. who
adds unto (...), that is, this, the Noune (...), that is, cup or wine, as as
if he had said: This which I hold in my hands, and give to you: And the
predicate, is blood, or the new testament in my blood. The couple, the verb
substantive est, is; which in Luke is wanting.

In which proposition surely, it cannot be said without a Metonymie, that the
word cup, is taken for wine which is contained in the cup, and that, this cup,
is that New testament.

In the one is the continent put for the thing contained, in the other of the
thing signified is for the sign. For properly and according to the word, the
cup it self, or wine, is not the new Testament it self, but a pledge and
seal of the new Testament, or rather that wherewith the Testament is
established, that is to say, of the blood of Christ, like as Circumcision was
called the old Covenant. By all which it appears that the words of the Lords
supper are full of figures, but yet most usual and easy to be vndestood.

Whether may this proposition of Christ. This is my blood, be so compared with
that of Moses saying, Exodus 24.8. (concerning the blood of calves, this is the
blood of the covenant, that both here and there, blood being in deed, and in it
own essence, (as that being holden in the hands of Moses, and this in the
hands of Christ) be demonstrated properly, and not figuratively?
In no wise. For Moses truly sprinkled the people with the blood of the
offering taken out of a basen, and that blood was a sacramental sign, and
therefore that enuntiatio^ of Moses was identical, rightly expressed in these
words, this is the blood of the covenant. But Christ gave to his disciples wine
contained in the cup, and sacramentally signified the thing by the sign of
wine. Therefore in the enuntiation of Christ, this, namely the wine which was
contained in the cup, is one thing, that blood of the new Testament, that is,
the thing it self of that sacrament, is an other thing. And therefore the
enuntiation of Christ is rightly expressed in these words, hoc est sanguis,
this is blood.

What is the new testament in the blood of Christ?
They acknowledge that the name of Testament is the same here, that Covenant
is, who do take it to answer to the Hebrew name, Berith, and therefore to
declare (...) which is an agreement begun between them which first did
disagree, which signification does especially here accord: although it comes
all to one reckoning whether we understand the new covenant begun by the blood
of christ, or the will of christ dying (which is signified by the word
testament) established and confirmed by his own blood shed.

For the particle, In, in the Hebrew phrase does not signify a simple
conjunction, inexistence, or real concomitancie, as though it had been said,
with my blood, but the cause, the manner, the instrument, and the adiuuant
cause of any thing: as Psalm. 33.16. The King is not saved, in multo exercitu,
that is, by the multitude of an host, and Romans 5.2, In the blood of Christ,
that is, by the blood, as it is expounded. Coloss. 1.22. Romans 3.14. But this
Testament, is not any corporal draught of the blood of Christ, or drinking of
wine, but it is the covenant of grace, reconciliation, or agreement, and a
covenant between God and the believers, wherein God does promise unto us that
he forgiueth us our sins, and gives the holy Ghost, righteousness, and life
eternal, of his mere mercy, by faith, for the blood of Christ shed upon the
cross: and we in like manner to bind ourselves to God, to receive these his
benefits by true faith in Christ, and to show thankfulness, by true obedience
toward him in the whole course of our life: Of which covenant, Esaias speaks,
chap. 59.24. and Ier. 31.31. and 32.40. Heb. 9, 15. Gal. 3.17.

Why said not the lord, This is my body of the new Testament, as he said, this
cup is the new testament in my blood?
Because, although the Testament or new covenant was established by the
oblation of whole Christ, and by the intercession of his death. Heb. 9.15.16.
yet notwithstanding his death was more evident in the blood shed, then in the
matter it self of the flesh. Therefore under the old covenant, Moses said, Exo.
24.8. Heb. 9.20 Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord has made with
you. And therefore Christ, that the relation of the truth might be more plain,
he applied the appellation of the New Covenant, rather to his blood, then to
his body, yet so that he excluded not his body (the blood whereof was shed)
from the confirmation of the covenant and redemption of the soul. Add to this,
that when Christ had made mention of drinking wine which he calls his blood,
he remembered the new covenant: because under the old, the use of blood was
forbidden Leuit. 17. Verse. 10.16
, which in the other sign of bread was not necessary to express.

Which is the other branch?
Which for you (in Luke) and for many, (in Matthew and Mark) is shed, for the
remission of sins. The subject of which speech is the Relative (...), which,
and it is referred properly to the blood, not to the wine. Truly if you look to
the construction of the words in Luke, it must be referred to the cup: but
because neither the cup, nor the wine was shed for us, that subject is
altogether to be understood of the blood: The predicate Effunditur, is shed,
again by Enallage, for Effundetur, shall be shed, as the common translation
does also expound it.

Yet the Lord does seem upon set purpose in the institution of this mystery,
although speaking of a thing to come, yet to have used in both places the words
of the Present Tense, that the Disciples might be admonished, that this is the
use of these signs, that with the eyes of faith the things forthwith to be,
should be seen as it were already present in them: like as, we must behold
them in this action by faith, as it were being before our eyes, although
already performed long ago, that is to say, the whole history of the
passion, as if with these our eyes we did see the body of Christ hanging and
pierced through, and the blood dropping out of his wounds. Therefore it is
shed, says he, that is to say, upon the Cross, not into the cup, or into a
mouth: whereby again is signified, in what manner, the blood of Christ is
living drink to us, not simply, as it is now clarified, but as shed for us,
and truly for you, and for many, Mark. 14.24. although not for all, but for
the elect only, that is, for their cause, for the remission of sins: which
is a most exceeding wholesome end of the blood of Christ shed, not of the
drink of wine: For of this it is said, In remembrance of me: but of the
shedding of blood, For the remission of sins.

From whence do you gather besides, that Christ spoke Tropically?
1 From the nature and sacramental speeches of all other Sacraments, already
instituted from the beginning of the world, wherein it comes to pass that
the name of the thing signified is given to the sign it self, or the sign is
named for the thing signified, as Genes. 17.10.13. Circumcision is the
Covenant, that is, the sign of the Covenant. Exodus 12.11.27. The Lamb is the
Passover: that is, the sign and memorial of the Lord, The Rock was Christ,
that is a sign of Christ. Exodus 17.6 1. Cor. 10.4


2 From the known speech concerning the same Sacrament, in Paul. 1. Cor.
10.16. The bread which we break is the communion of the body, that is to say,
Metonymically, like as the Gospel is called, the power of God, that is the
effectual instrument of God. Romans 1.16. And We that are many, are one bread,
and one body: And 1. Cor. 11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation: which things unless a trope be used,
cannot be understood, and the body it self of Christ cannot be said to be
eaten but tropically.

3 Because the Ascension of Christ into heaven, and the verity of the humane
nature which he took admits not a proper speech. For Augustine teaches,
That one place is not to be interpreted, so that it may be contrary to many
others, but so, that it may agree with many other. De Doct. Christ.


4 Because the Fathers, had the same meat and drink not only among
themselves, but also with us, that is to say, in respect of the matter. 1. Cor.
10.3. What is the same, but that which also we have? says Augustine.
Therefore the same meat and the same drink, but to the understanding and
believing. But to the not understanding, that Manna alone, Book de Vti. lit.
paenitent. and upon Ioh. tract 21
that water alone: but to the believers, the same which now, for then Christ
was to come, now he is come: was to come, and is come are diverse words, but the
same Christ.

5 Because it could not be, that Christ locally sitting at the table, and
communicating with the disciples (as it is, Mat. 26.29. I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine) should himself eat himself really and
corporally.

Did Christ Jesus take part of the same signs?
Truly no less then of the Paschall Lamb. Concerning which let him which
doubts think.

1 That the Lord Jesus sanctified the ordinary Sacraments of both the
Testaments, in the use thereof.

2 And in instituting of the supper, by his example went before in sayings and
doings, that the whole Church may know that the first pattern is to be
respected of her, and in that regard, that it was the greatest cause why he did
not abstain: whereupon Hierome says, ipse conuiua and conuiuium, ipse
comedens and qui comeditur: that is, Epist. ad Head. biam
he is the guest and the feast: he is eating, and that which is eaten.

Is there that virtue, and that sense of the words of Christ, wherewith he
instituted this Sacrament, that as often as upon the bread and wine, they are
recited by the Priest who has a purpose to consecrate, then the substance of
bread and wine, either by Analysis is resolved into the first matter, or even
into nothing: so that in steed thereof do succeed the body and blood of
Christ: or by a simple mutation is turned into the substance of the true body,
and of the true blood of Christ, so that the substance of bread is formed into
the flesh of of Christ, the bare accidents of breas and wine remaining, hanging
without a subject?
God forbid.

1 Because it were magical to attribute the power of changing the substance of
the signs to certain words mumbled over.

2 Because in express words of the Apostles and Evangelists, the true and
natural substance of bread and wine is affirmed before and after consecration,
as they call it, 1. Cor. 10.16.17. and 11.26 27.28. The bread which we break
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? And, we that are many, are one
bread and one body, because we all are partakers of one bread: and, As often
as ye shall eat this bread, ye show forth the Lords death till he come. And,
Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily;
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. For
whereas they say that it is called bread, not which is now, but which was
before, it is confirmed by no testimony of Scripture, or judgment of sense:
and besides Math. 26.29. I will not drink (says he) henceforth of this fruit
of the Vine, Thus spoke Christ after consecration.

3 Because the kingdom or God is not corporal meat and drink, Romans 14.17.

4 Because in the proposition, the pronoune, hoc, this, demonstratiue, does not
demonstrate the body of Christ: (For the transubstantiation, says Thomas, is
not accomplished, but in the last instant of the pronouncing of the words)
neither does it demonstrate the accide^ts alone of the bread. For the
accide^tes are not the body of Christ, neither does it demo^strate any wandering
thing, or singular thing uncertainly determined: For there is no Indiuiduum or
singular thing which is not something. And therefore certain, not wandering
undetermined, or indefinite: and especially the Demonstratiue, Hoc, this does
signify some certain thing.

5 Because it is a wicked thing to be thought, and spoken, that the bread it
self is properly and substantially the body of Christ.

6 Because, of this conversion, neither does the Scripture give sentence, nor
sense or reason judge, as of the rod of Moses turned into a Serpent Exodus, 4.3
, and of the water turned into wine. John. 2.9. Where the Evangelist said not
simply Water, but Made wine. For the accidents of bread do plainly show that
bread does remain, and they which partake of those holy signs, do feel in
themselves a taste of wine, and the power of the bread and wine. This is an
unanswerable reason, Framed thus, every miracle is sensible,
transubstantiation is not sensible, therefore it is no miracle.

7 Because the substance, the accidents thereof remaining, cannot perish,
neither can the accidents subsist without a subject, nor be the accidents, of
bread, which are not the accidents of bread.

8 Because the substance being removed, and the nature of the signs, the
similitude, affinity, habit, relation, and Analogy of the signs to the thing
signified come to nothing. For the bread signifies the body of Christ,
because it nourishes, strengthens and sustaineth, which accidents cannot do.

9 Because here is no word of Christ which may signify a conversion or
transubstantiation. For the verb Est, does not signify to be made, to be
changed, to be turned: And note, that which is said to be made, cannot properly
be said to be, for Esse to be, and Fieri, to be made, are said, (...) that is
to say, contradictorily.

10 Because, a carnal eating of the body of Christ, is no where proved in
the Scriptures.

11 Because, it should follow that both the faithful and unbelievers do
receive the body of the Lord, and his quickening spirit, which never can be
feuered from his body. And Augustine says, that They do not eat the body
of Christ, but which are in the body of Christ.

Because, that body cannot be spoiled of quantity, nor in an instant, and
without local motion, be together in heaven and in earth, unless upon
necessity we should make an vbiquitie of Christ's body, which the very
transubstantiators do refuse to do, and the Fathers deny: and they do
determine contrary things, which say that a body, and the quantity are
truly present, and yet not by means of the quantity.

13 Because now the body of Christ cannot be separated from the blood, nor the
soul from his body: and concerning Concomitancie, there is nothing extant is
the word of God.

14 Because they write that Victor the third, Bishop of Rome died, having drunk
poison out of a chalice given him by his Subdeacon, and that Henry the seventh
Emperor, of Lucelburge, took poison from the bread taken in the Eucharist by
a Monk of Senens, one of the preachers order.

15 Because infinite discommodities do follow this Transubstantiation, as that
the accidents must remain without a subject: that if it happen that Mice do
gnaw the bread, they shall be said to gnaw accide^ces: or that if worms do breed
of the bread, it shall be said, that they are brought forth out of the
accidences, that although the bread be broken, it shall be concluded that the
accidences are broken, with many of the like kind, all which are against the
nature both of Christ's sacrament, and Christ's body.

Is not the bread of the Supper, at leastwise by a miracle turned into the
body of Christ?
No. 1 Because such a miracle does not affect the outward senses, for miracles
do plainly show a change, if there be any made, and do run into the eyes
and the rest of the senses, and do strike men with admiration: as the rod did
being turned into a Serpent, and the water when it was made wine.

2 Because miracles are ceased.

3 Because miracles, although they are done besides, and above, yet not so
against nature, as that they do ouerturne it.

4 Because this is spoken (...) that is, contradictorily, that a miracle which
is an extraordinary work of God, should be done in an ordinary Sacrament of
the Church. For miracles are extraordinary works of God, and of a certain
time, and belong to certain persons, if you look to the workers of miracles.

But the Sacraments do belong to all times, and to the universal Church: and
are part of the ministry of the Gospel; wherein Christ deals after an
ordinary manner, or by certain and perpetual ordination, not making a
miraculous change in the nature or in the qualities of the Elements.

5 Miracles take not together away the substance or qualities natural, and
also leave them, that is, they do not implie a contradiction: as when the rod
of Moses was turned into a Serpent, it was not together, a rod and a serpent.
But the miracle of Transubstantia^ion takes away the substance of bread, and
withal keeps the properties of bread. And it repugneth this immovable, and
everlasting principle, of any thing whatsoever, either the aff^^mat^on or
negation thereof is true: that is, to say every thing is, or is not.

6 For the faith or credit of miracles, as, that in the hands of Gregory, in
his book of the super
at his prayers, this Sacrament was turned into a fleshie fing^r: sometime
there appeared a little boy: and that the Sacrament being bored through with
Laurel sticks sent out blood: and that it was turned into coals and ashes in
the time of Cyprian (as he w^^teth) we do thus embrace them, that they may be
said to be done either to drive away ungracious and unworthy men, from so great
a Sacrament, or to declare and commend the dignity thereof, but not to
confirm the superstition and error concerning Transubstantiation. For we know
that we must not believe false Prophets (making me^ by miracles to believe the^
Math. 24 2 Thessalonians. 2.9
) and that Antichrist shall come, being famous for signs and lying wonders.

Is not that true which Christ spoke, and can it not be performed by him?
No doubt it is, and is also performed, the question is not concerning the
truth, but concerning the sense of the words, namely whether it be plainly
affirmed by the words of Christ, that the body and blood of Christ together
with the bread and wine, are essentially, actually, really present upon earth,
and really, corporally, in the mouth of the body, although invisibly,
received as well of the godly, as of the ungodly, which thing we deny.

1 Because the words of Christ do not bear it, and they which hold
Consubstantiation keep not the words of Christ as they are most properly
spoken, but they follow a certain sense. For Christ neither said, In or under
this bread is my body: but, this, that is, this bread is my body: which
things, do as much differ between themselves, as to be, and to contain
something: And the visible bread it self, not any thing hidden in the bread,
is called the body of the Lord. And the School men themselves do confess,
that the letter of the words is not kept, if, for, this is my body, thou
say, here, or under bread, is my body.

2 Because a real inexistence of the body of Christ, In, with, or under the
bread, makes nothing to the spiritual taking thereof: which notwithstanding is
the final cause of this Sacrament: Seeing that, faith being taught by the word
of of God, and more confirmed by those holy signs, does truly receive the
body of Christ, being in heaven (by the holy Ghosts working) as the sayings do
teach which bid us, seek and behold Christ in the heavens Col, 3.1
. Moreover a real and bodily presence does bring no profit, which may not be
had from the spiritual presence. For John. 6.51.54.56. The Lord promised to
them which eat him, life eternal: and also that he will dwell in them, and
they in him, what is required more then these things?

3 Because the body of Christ is spiritual meat, and therefore of the mind,
not of the body: to be eaten with faith, not with the mouth. Neither is it
more difficult to faith to receive the body being in heaven, then in the
bread, or in the mouth: and that which is more, faith of her own nature and
force, looks upward, and is not excluded by any distances of times or places.

4 Because, how much is given to the Eucharist by an Hyperbole, or exaltation,
so much is taken away from all other sacraments by a Tapeinosis or extenuation.

5 Because the opinion of the inexistence of the body of Christ does confirm
the worshipping of bread, and the carnal opinion concerning that iornall
provision, necessary to salvation for them which are about to die.

6 The nature of a body is ouerturned, whiles that it is decreed that it is
substantially in many places, or every where, which thing agrees to no
creature. For most truly Athananasius, (...). That is, That which is
consubstantiall with God, is every where. And Chrysostom, 2 Col. Hom. 5. He
is God whose center is every where, and circumference no where. In like manner
there is determined against nature that there is a thing, not to be felt,
insensible, invisible, vncircu^scribed, without quality, quantity, form and
figure, and yet corporally present, that is, a body, without a body, against
the Essential properties of a true body, whereby Christ proved the true and
essential presence of his body. Luke. 24.38.39. John. 20.27. saying. Behold
my hands and my feet: For it is I my self: handle me and see: For a spirit
has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. For he is said not to be seen
of them (...) not (...). Luke 24.31. because he was taken from their sight. But
He denies the nature it self, which denies the properties thereof, or as
Theodoret says: the taking away of the properties, is the denying of both
natures. And that eistinction of corporal presence into visible and invisible
is a fained distinction. For this abolisheth the manner of a body: neither
does one nature receive any thing contrary and diverse in it self: or as
Damascen says, One nature is not made capable of contrary Substantiae, things
disagreeing

7 Because the presence of the body is opposed to a religious remembance.

8 Because it should follow that the Apostles did eat the passible and mortal
body, and that Christ is not to be sought in the heavens.

9 Because the heavens must receive him, and being received contain him until
the time that all things be restored. Act. 3.21.

10 Because the like kind of speaking is no where found in Scripture, which is
properly, and according to the letter to be understood of two natures together
and unlike essences. For it is not said, water is wine, or the rod is a
serpent, but water was turned unto wine, and the rod into a serpent. And as
often as the first substance that is, (...) hoc aliquid is predicated of
another first substance in scripture, the Enuntiation of that sort is
figurative, as, the Rock was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.4. Christ is that lamb of God
John, 1, 29, John is Elias. Math. 11.14. Christ is the true vine. John. 15.1.

11 Because it is needful to seek for an othet sense, when the absurdity of
the word or letter written, do make against any Article of faith, or against
any manifest place of Scripture, as this does. And to make sense of these
words, Hoc est corpus meum, there are fourteen several opinions amongst the
Papists.

12 Because, when the Capernaits did imagine in their mind I know not what
corporal eating of the flesh of Christ, Christ drew them back from that
conceit, saying, That his words are spirit, and life: that the flesh profits
nothing, that is to say, so eaten, as the Capernaits did dream. And he
objected unto them the mention of his Ascension into heaven. John. 6.62.63.

13 Because this opinion makes, that the body of Christ is common to the
godly and ungodly, which truly is no light discommoditie, but a great impiety.

14 No Sacrament can be fully expressed and understood without a Trope.

For in all Sacraments it is most usual, that the name of the thing signified
is given to the sign it self, or the sign is named from the thing signified:
and that both for the conueniencie of the sign and the thing signified, and
also for the most certain giving and receiving of the thing signified.

Whether does the omnipotency of God take away the discommodities which follow
transubstantiation, and consubstantiation?
It is not lawful to reason Theologically from the Omnipotency of God,
unless the will of God goes before plainly laid open in his express word.
For so Christ said to the Sadduces. Math. 22.29. Ye are deceived, not knowing
the scriptures, nor the power of God. Because we must look, not what God can
do absolutely, but what he will do, for our God is in heaven, says the
Psalm. 115.3. He does whatsoever he will, not what he can. Whereupon
Tertullian, Dei posse velle est, non posse, nolle, that is, de spiritu e^
Litera.
God can do that which he will: that which he will not that he cannot: but
that which he would, both he could do, and he has showed it. And Augustine
says, God is omnipotent, not because he can do all things, but because he can
bring to pass whatsoever he will, so that nothing can resist his will, or any
way hinder the same, but that it is fulfilled. Which sayings are understood of
that absolute omnipotency, by which God is said that he can do many things,
which notwithstanding he will not, and therefore does not but of the actual
and effectual power, whereby God brings to pass all things which he will.
For the will of God is converted with the actual omnipotency, whereupon we
rightly gather, God will, therefore he can do, and does; in like manner, God
can and does, therefore he will. But it is absurd to gather, God is omnipotent,
therefore he does al things even which he will not: whereupon Damascene says
omnia quide^ quae vult, potest: non vero quae potest, vult: potest enim perdere
mundum, sed non vult, that is to say he can do all things which he will, but he
will not do all things which he can. For he can destroy the world, but he will
not.

2 We may not argue from the omnipotency of God, to confirm that which
contains a contradiction, as when any thing is said to be, and also not to
be, or to be such a thing and also not to be such a thing in act and in deed,
Therefore the schoolmen do affirm, that God cannot make that contradictories
may be together true. Because a contradiction does put to be and not to be
together, which to do is a point of impotency, not of omnipotency. This
Impossible, is not a sign of weakness, but it is a token of exceeding great
virtue, and constancy. So God cannot die, he cannot sin, he cannot be deceived,
he cannot ly Tit 1.2 Heb. 6.18
, he cannot make a thing done, undone, one that is begotten, unbegotten, he
cannot bring to pass, that, if there be a thing defined, there may not also be
a definition thereof.

He therefore which says indefinitely and simply that God can do all things,
does comprehend not only good things, but also the contrary evils of these
things which do agree to the devil, and not to God as says Theodoret very
well.

But those things which are said to be possible to God, some of them are said
to be simply impossible, by reason of his constant nature. Some,
Hypothetically, that is, by a presupposall, by reason of the constant and
altogether unchangeable truth of his decree and will. God truly can simply
bring to pass, that that may be done which is not, or that which is, may cease
to be, that a body may be a Spirit. Also, He is able of stones to raise up
children unto Abraham Mat. 3.9
, he is able to bring to pass, that a Camel may go through the eye of a
needle Math. 19 24.26
, but not leaving him as he is by nature, but making him so slender as is
needful to be done: like as he is able to bring to pass that a rich man may
enter into the kingdom of heaven, not so long as he is such a one but changing
him, and teaching him to depend only upon one God. But because it once pleased
God, that his son having taken unto him flesh, should be made our eternal
brother like unto us in all things which do appertain to the natural and
substantial truth of a body according to his creation Heb. 2, 17 and 4.15
Phil. 3.28
, he will not have things contrary to nature, which do destroy, the humane
nature in Christ assumed, which do take it away and ouerturne the definition
thereof: therefore potenter non potest, that is, powerfully, he is not able,
says Augustine, To bring to pass that the body of Christ may be together in
act a body, and not a body; together in act circumscribed and not
circumscribed: because these things are contradictorie.

But contrariwise, we retort the argument drawn from omnipotency, God is
omnipotent: therefore he can bring to pass that we being in earth may partake
of the true body of Christ being in heaven, and therefore we do so, though we
are upon earth, and so need not a corporal Manducation.

Is it true which our adversaries take for granted, that Christ, when he
appeared to Paul in his journey, Act. 9.17. and stood by him in the Castle,
Act. 23.11. was in body, both in heaven and on earth together?
No: For it was a heavenly vision, as it is said. Act. 26.19. Which helps
nothing the presence of the body of Christ in earth. For Christ is said to
have talked with Paul, not placed in earth, but from heaven: either without a
corporal voice, the Lord powerfully imprinting into him the conceit of
speech: or by a voice framed from heaven, which came to his cares like thunder:
And Act. 23.11. Noe man but sees that it was a nocturnall vision, which
appeared not to his eyes, but to his mind, either in waking, or dreaming.

But yet, for some peculiar and extraordinary apparitions, we must not depart
from the universal rule of faith, whereby Christ is believed to possess
heaven in his body, and there to remain until the end of the world. Yet
notwithstanding we must not deny, but that Christ in every moment is
wheresoever, and howsoever it pleases him, according to his Majesty, not
corporally but spiritually.

Is he a manifest denier of the power of God, which denies that by his
absolute power he does bring to pass that the body continuing in his
property, may be in many places after another and diverse manner?
He is not: yea rather because we deny that God can bring it to pass, we
openly affirm the omnipotency of God. For seeing God is so ommipotent and
effectual, that he is not contrary to the truth: he can in no manner of wise
bring to pass, that a thing may together be, and not be, that the same body
may remain in his property, that is, to retain his dimensions and
circumscripton, and be the same body together, and at one time present in many
places, and separated by a long space between. Rightly therefore Cyrill, Will thou grant also to another nature not divine, Book. de Trin. 5
besides the divine nature that it can fill all things, and pass through all
things, and follow in all things? No verily.

Is the contradiction taken away in the diversity of respects, and of these
names, if it be said, that the body of Christ in truth and very deed is in
heaven according to the natural properties of a true body, circumscriptiuely,
locally, visibly, and after a natural manner: and that it is by the power of
God, also in truth and in very deed in many places, or every where, or in the
supper, but sacramentally, inuisibly, supernaturally illocally, after a
celestial and miraculous manner: and if it be said that the nature of Christ
in the property of his nature is circumscribed, and visible, but in regard of
the union uncircumcised and invisible?
In no wise, because these distinctions or manners cannot be proved out of
the scriptures. Moreover all such manners, do not always excuse a
contradiction: as if one say that the body of Christ was dead according to the
manner of death, and at the same time was alive according to the manner of
life. Finally, contrary modi or manners, which do destroy one another, when
they are put in, do not take away, but confirm a contradiction.

But yet such a diverse respect cannot be granted, wherein one and the same
thing may be the same, and be not the same in truth, which is the first lie
of the adversaries: neither is a manner to be feined, which may take away the
essence of a thing. Wherefore seeing the body of Christ assumed, is in act
organical, Physical, tempered together, disposed and finite in his parts, it
cannot be in act, in many places by any means, not Organicall, undisposed,
infinite, or in many planes, although it be adorned with unspeakable glory,
because God is unchangeably true, neither will he that an affirmation should
be a negation, against a principle immovable, Quodlibet est, aut non est, that
is, every thing is, or is not.

Whether, as the eye has not the force of seeing in it self, but by reason of
the union with the soul, and receives it in the union: so the flesh of Christ
receives not those proper things in it self, but has them truly and really
in that wonderful union?
No, because things unlike, and in kind diverse, are compared together. For the
eye is so ordained by nature, that it is a natural, proper, and necessary
instrument, whereby the sensitive life does exercise and accomplish her
faculty of seeing: and without which it cannot bring forth this faculty into
effect. But the flesh of Christ is so ordained by nature, that it is a
natural, proper and necessary instrument, whereby the divine nature alone may
show forth his omni presence, and inuisibilitie, and so necessary, that
without it the divine nature, in the Act it self, cannot be omnipresent,
norinuisible.

Furthermore, the flesh of Christ is not considered in it self, or out of the
union: seeing that, that flesh, neither is, nor has been, nor ever shall be
out of that union.

Moreover, one nature receives not any contrary thing, or diverse in it self
(...), that is, it self: but, it is a thing diverse, and far unlike, to be
circumscribed in a place, and to be every where. Otherwise we should say that
the humane nature of Christ has a beginning in it self, and has not a
beginning in the union: that it is created in the propriety of it own nature,
and that it is not created in the union. That it is less then the Angels in it
own, nature, but in the union, equal to the father, finally that it is dead
in it self, and not dead in the union, or for the union, or for the cause and
respect of the union.

Must we altogether abandon man's reason, and the principles of Philosophy in
those things which are affirmed concerning the body of Christ?
No, so far forth as man's reason being made spiritual, after Regeneration,
bears true witness to the creatures, and affirms true principles
concerning things proper to man's body. For it is written, Be ye not like a
horse or like a mule, which understand not. Psalm. 32.9. and besides, God is the
author of all truth, in Logic, Ethics, and Physics.

Moreover Christ after his resurrection, appearing to the Disciples, when he
would prove his own body to be substantially present, he reasons from his
adjoined visibilitie and palpability, and appealeth to the very senses of the
Disciples Luke 24.36
. Like as from all the accidents of the bread of the Eucharist it is rightly
gathered, that it is the substance of bread, by experiment of all the senses,
all which truly, together, cannot be deceived, unless they be withholden:
as in the two Disciples which did think the Lord to be some stranger, and in
Marie Magdalene, which supposed that he had been the gardener, Luke 24.16.
Ioh. 20.15.

Whether, unless the body of Christ be determined to be every where, by this,
is it separated and pulled asunder from the Divine nature, which is
eueriewhere, and to which it self is personally united, or has the body of
the Lord obtained that, by the union, that it should be wheresoever the word is.
In no wise, because of those things which are equally united, so as one does
not stretch further then another, one cannot be in any place, where the other
is not; but if the one do stretch further, then, wheresoever the less is,
there also is the greater: but not contrariwise: as we may see in a precious
stone and in a ring. Because therefore the divinity of Christ, does exceed
the humanity, wheresoever the humanity is, there is the divinity with it, not
on the contrary.

Neither is the personal union a making even, of the humane nature with the
Divine, or an effusion of the properties of the Divine nature into the humane,
that the humane nature may have the same properties which the divine has: but
it is such an union whereby the humane nature does subsist in the person of the
word, so as it may be as it were a part thereof, neither may it subsist by it
self, or without the word. But it does not follow, Epist. 57. ad Dard.
says Augustine, that that which is in God, is every where as God is.

Moreover, seeing that the deity is every where whole, not by parts, not as in
a place, it cannot be that, the humane nature which it assumed can be said to
be separated any where from it, although it be contained only in it own
place, so as the inviolable truth thereof does bear.

But also the body of the sun, and the light thereof have between
themselves a natural and extreme conjunction, yet notwithstanding to what
places soever the light does extend it self, the body does not come to them
really. So also the eye and the sight are very nearly joined together between
themselves, and yet the sight goes to many things to which the eye does not
extend it self. Finally, rightly said those ancient fathers in the general
council of Chalcedon, that the difference of natures in Christ is not taken
away for the union, but rather that the property is kept of both natures
concurring into one person, or one hypostasis.

But whether did that which Christ said Ioh. 3.13. No man ascends up to
heaven, but the son of man which is in heaven, make the humane nature of
Christ while it was in earth, to have been also at the same time in heaven?
No, for the Son of man, in this place signifies the whole person of Christ,
which also is the Son of God: but the humane nature does signify only one
part of that person, which was assumed in time, of the virgin. Therefore that
which is spoken of this person, which is not man only, but also God, is amiss
said to be spoken of the humane nature also. For by this it should be gathered,
that the humane nature was before Abraham, before it was conceived in the womb
of the virgin. But it is certain, that the son of God, when he did speak
in earth, was in heaven in the same manner wherein he descended from heaven.
For Christ does speak of one and the same subject, that is, of the son of
man, that he descended from heaven, concerning whom he said, that, he is in
heaven. But the son of man is said to have descended, not because his flesh
fell down from heaven, but because the divine nature is from heaven, and took
unto it humane flesh. Therefore the son of man, when he was upon earth is so
said to have been in heaven, not because the humane nature, but because the
divine nature of this son, which always fills heaven and earth was in
heaven: namely, by the Trope Synecdoche, whereby both the whole is plainly
understood, Book 6. cap.
and a part is named of the whole, says Cassian.

It is not unjust to subject the nature of Christ's glorious body, which is
called spiritual, to the laws of common nature?
In no wise, because the glory abolished not the truth of the body, nor
changed it into a spirit: but altogether made it subject to the spirit Luke
24.36 Acts. 1.9, 10 11. and. 7.55 56
. Aug.

Whether do the Orthodoxall Fathers when they write that the bread which the
Lord did reach to the Disciples, not changed in form but in nature, by the
almighty power of his word, was made flesh. Cyprian. Sermon. de caena domini, In
prologe. Psalm. 33,
That Christ bare himself in his hands. Augustine. That the body of the Lord,
does enter into our mouth, That the tongue is made bloody with the blood of
Christ, and that Christ himself is seen, touched, broken, and that teeth are
fastened to his flesh, whither do they I say Chrysostom, Hom. 83. upon Math. and
45. upon John. and hom. 24, upon. 1. Cor.
speak properly and without trope?
No, seeing that, the senses themselves, and experience do witness the
contrary, and these things cannot be spoken properly, without great and
Capernaiticall blasphemy. Therefore those speeches of the fathers are
figurative, whereby the name and effects of body and blood are given to bread
and wine, and in like manner those things which are done in the signs, are
attributed to the body and blood of Christ, but yet (although somewhat hardly
and by an hyperbole, to commend the worthiness of the mystery) they do show
in these most express, figurative, and Metonimicall phrases, how certain and
effectual the mystery is of our communion with Christ, or our spiritual
eating of Christ, namely of such sort, that we may be flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones, that is, that being truly made one with him, we may enjoy
all his goods Ephe. 5.30 In epist, upon Ioh tractat. 1 sermon. de Cr^mate Epist.
102 ad Euodium
.

Otherwise says Augustine, We cannot with the hand handle Christ fitting in
heaven, but we can touch Christ by faith. And Tract. upon Io. 50. The body of
Christ ascended into heaven: some body may ask, How shall I hold him being
absent. How shall I send my hands into heaven, that I may hold him sitting
there? Send thy faith and thou have hold on him. And upon Ps. 73. he writes,
that he did bear himself in his own hands after a sort, namely, because he
did bear in his own hands the Sacrament of his body. And Cyprian says that,
Sacraments have the names of those things which they do signify. And the same
Augustine. Neither let it move thee, says he, that sometime the thing which does
signify, does take the name of that thing which it signifies, for so the rock
is called Christ, because it signifies Christ. So we say with Cyprian, that
the form, that is, that the appearance and sight of bread and wine, are not
changed, but that the substance of bread and wine are changed into the
Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, which before they were not. So
Chrysostom, That which belongs to the signs, he attributes to the thing
signified, especially in respect of faith, and the cogitation of the mind.

What mean the ancient fathers, whiles that, every where they do admire with
astonishment the mystery of the Supper, they call it the Fearful mystery,
they require Faith, they celebrate the power of God, they deny that the order
of Nature is to be sought in the body of Christ, they attribute a conversion
to the signs?
They signify a change made by grace, not of the substance, that is, of the
natural matter and form, but of the quality, that is, of the former office,
condition, calling, end and use of the Elements: which is the consecration,
appointment, and adhibition or traduction of the signs, from a common use, to
an holy and mystical use or office, that is, to the obsignation and testimony
of eternal life, that surely they may be nourishment not for the body only
for this life, as in our ordinary table, or before the blessing, but that by
reason of Gods ordinance (because they are now the Sacraments of the body and
blood of Christ) they may feed the soul also, for as much as, they are taken,
that they may be unto us most sure pledges of the body and blood of Christ,
and of eternal life flowing unto us from him: Whereupon Paul does not simply
call it the Supper, and the cup, but the Supper and cup of the Lord, and 1.
Cor. 10.4. he calls the rock, of which the Israelites did drink in the
wilderness spiritual. Dial. 10 8


From hence Theodoret, says; The Lord honored the signs, which are seen,
with the name of his body and blood, verily, not changing the nature it
self, but putting grace to nature, because these Elements are made Sacraments,
or spiritual things, that is, outward means of the holy Ghost and instruments
of strengthening, keeping, and increasing the communion of Christ in us.

Therefore this change not essential, but Sacramental, the fathers admire as
wonderful and supernatural, and that worthily. For it cannot be done without
the power of God, that, that earthly and decaying thing, which is appointed
properly to nourish the body, should begin to be unto us a most holy thing, a
spiritual and heavenly food. Neither is it a work of nature, that those
signs should move the mind so powerfully and effectually, and should offer
and exhibit the body and blood of the Lord, to be apprehended also of our
minds by faith, like as it is not a work of nature, that water should be made
the lauer of regeneration or washing of the new birth: Tit. 3.5.

Although the Sacramental change is no more a thing miraculous and
unspeakable, then when of common wax is made an authentical seal of a
public instrument: but because that is divine, and a cause of divine things,
but this is humane, and an ordinance instituted to establish men's matters:
Whereupon Augustine says, that Sacraments may have honor as religious things,
De trinit. B. 31. c 10.
but not astonishment, as wonderful things.

Moreover, the same fathers do require faith, because faith is here
especially necessary, whereby we may firmly determine, that the bread is
the body of the Lord, that is, that we by the lawful use of the bread, are
truly made partakers of the bod^e of Christ.

Finally they do grant that, that unspeakable and truly marvelous
fellowship of us with Christ is established, wherein the order of nature is not
to be sought for, because it goes beyond all humane sense.

Whether, when we say of a fiery sword, of an infant lying in a cradle, of wine
contained in a vessel and the like, This is Fire, this is an Infant, this is
wine. And Deuteronomy. 12.23. The blood is the life, because it contains the life:
(by which speeches the presence of the Attribute is manifestly affirmed:) are
therefore the words of Christ to be understood of his bodily presence at the
place where the bread is?
No, for truly, the fire does set the sword on fire, and does pierce through
the whole substance thereof, but it changes not the nature of the Sword, says
Theodoret: and in a fired sword, the fire does keep still, the force of
burning, as the sword of cutting, neither has the sword, the operation of
fire, Dial. 2, c, 19. B. 3, c, ^9
but the burning is the effect of fire, as cutting of the sword, says
Damascen. By which simile, the ancients declared the most straight union of the
two natures made without confusion, and not a real effusion of the Properties
of the Deity into the humane nature.

But here is a great dissimilitude, For those are natural conjunctions,
whereby either new qualities are applied to bodies, or substances to
substances: but here all things are supernatural by the institution of Christ.

Besides, Christ is present in the Supper, not for the bread, but for the man:
for Christ spoke not these words, This is my body, for the bread, as though
he were about to make a substantial change thereof, or were about to
communicate his body to the bread: but he gave a promise to the disciples
concerning the communication of his body, whereby he does join us to
himself, as it were members of his body.

What is therefore the natural and proper sense of the words of the Lords
Supper?
This, that is bread (which being broken, Christ did reach with his hands to
his disciples) is not substantially, or essentially or naturally, in it self,
but mystically or by a Sacrame^tal promise, not by a simple and bare
signification, but also, although spiritual, yet a real signification, that
is, true and not imaginary, but he himself (because nothing is so truly
done, as that which he does by exhibition of the holy Ghost under condition of
faith) that he himself My body, or as Paul does unfold it. 1. Cor. 10.16. The
bread is the Communion of the body of Christ, that is, the seal and effectual
token, or instrument, or means of the communion of the body of Christ. Which
interpretation Augustine does confirm, The Lord doubted not to say, This is my
body, when he gave the sign of his body. And Tertullian; Against Adimantus.
c, 12 Against Marcion. b. 4
having taken the bread and distributed it to the Disciples, he made it his
body, by saying, This is my body, that is, a figure of my body.

Neither do we otherwise interpret that enuntiation, This, or this cup is my
blood, that this may be the sense of the words of Christ, As often as ye,
which are my Disciples, and believe in me, do eat this bread, and drink of
this cup, let it be unto you a sure remembrance and testimony, that you are
truly, but yet spiritually fed with my body given for you, and my blood shed
for you, and are nourished by it to life eternal.

Why had the Lord rather use this phrase, This is my body, and this is my
blood, then to say, this signifies my body, and my blood?
Because the word of signifying, worthily seemed unto him somewhat light, and
he would more expressly declare that those signs are not propounded, that they
may be considered as they are in themselves, but that it behooves the
receivers so to behold, and spiritually to apprehend with the eyes of a
faithful mind, those things only in those signs which are represented by
them, as if that bread and that wine, were not the signs of those things, but
those things themselves, which they do signify.

Whether, if the body of Christ be denied to be in the bread of the Supper,
therefore Christ himself is said to be altogether absent from his Supper?
No: yet so that whole Christ is present, but not the whole: for Christ man is
truly present.

1. By the grace and operation of his spirit, Where two or three are gathered
together in his name, Mat. 18.20.

2. And by his power and majesty Math. 28.20 Heb. 7.26
.

3. That he which being absent in body, and made higher then the Heavens, yet
may be whole most present by his virtue, whereby he does spiritually communicate
both himself, and all his great things to us truly by faith.

4. And by the promise of the Gospel he does lift up the hearts of the
faithful to himself even into heaven, that there they may behold, namely in
the celestial sanctuary, the sacrifice offered upon the cross, and so may
feed upon it by faith. Finally Christ does truly and fully without all doubt
accompish that which he promised.

Is the body of the Lord truly and Substantially present in the Supper?
It is present, not truly by conversion of the whole substance, that is, both
of the matter and form of the bread and wine, into the body and blood of the
Lord, either by impanation, or assumption of the bread, or local inclusion:
not as an infant in the cradle, for neither is it present in outward signs by
in existence or indistance: nor in regard of the place, where the bread is:
neither also is it present in the bodies of men, or is put into the mouth: for
if you respect the place, the body of Christ is in heaven circumscribed. But
in the minds of the faithful, and in regard of the faith of a man lawfully
using the holy Supper of the Lord. For that is the strength of faith, that it
may join together most straightly, things never so much distant asunder.
Therefore a true and lively presence of the body of Christ in the Supper, and
communion of him with the believers in the ministry of the Sacraments is not
rejected, but only that manner of presence which is fained at the bread, is
denied.

Are these propositions contradictorie, Christ is corporally in heaven, and
Christ with his body and blood is in the Supper?
Not a whit, because this latter is nor rightly vn^erstood of the presence at
the place of bread, but of the communion with man which is sealed and exhibited
by the rite of the Supper.

Is not the Supper of Christ made void, if the very flesh of Christ be
determined to be so far essentially absent from this action, as the heavens
are from the earth?
In no wise: because the body it self and blood of Christ are set forth in
these mysteries not simply and so far forth as they are things subsisting in
themselves, but to be considered intellectually, and are offered to the mind,
not to the body, to faith, not to the senses, to be taken also in the mind and
by faith alone. For truly like as those things which are heard, are to be
perceived by the hearing, those things which are seen by the sight, so also
those things which are understood by the understanding, and so those things
which are believed, by faith: neither are these things alike present to their
objects. But the perceiving of faith is a great deal more certain, then all
comprehension of the senses, or of reason: and how faith can make a thing
present, Paul declares, Gal. 3.1. where he says that, Christ was described
in their sight, and among them crucified.

Are earthly and celestial gifts present after the same manner of presence?
Not after the same: because there is no other presence of Christ in the seal
of grace, then in the word or promise of grace. But the presence of Christ
Jesus in the word, add also in baptism, yea and in the whole ministry, is
only spiritual, not corporal or local. For as there is not made an inclusion
of Christ in the voice of the minister outwardly sounding: so neither in the
Sacramental symbols or signs. For Paul says, that, We, whiles we are
strangers in the body, are absent from the Lord, and do walk by faith, and
not by sight. 2. Cor. 5.6.7. Neither that we know Christ henceforth after the
flesh but after the spirit. verse. 16. Also that Christ is above, Col. 3.1. That
Christ shall descend from heaven in the day of judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. And
truly that he shall come not daily and every moment, and otherwise then he
ascended (that is to say, inuisibly and vncircumscriptiuely) but (...), that
is, in that manner and not otherwise wherein he was seen to ascend into heaven
Act. 1.11
. Wherefore the presence of Christ also in the Supper is spiritual, (which you
may call celestial, Divine, and supernatural) but not corporal, or natural.

Which therefore is the thing signified of the Lords Supper?
Christ himself, offering himself, with all his benefits, spiritually to be
apprehended in our minds by faith: for in the Lords supper we are made
partakers not only of the operation, or of the benefits and gifts of Christ,
but of the substance of the living body of Christ.

What is understood by naming of body, and blood in the Attribute of these
propositions, This is my body, and This is my blood?
Not a sign thereof, which some fathers call a Sacramental body, that is to
say, Sacramentally understood: even as when they say that the body of the Lord
is seen, touched, bruised with the teeth, does fall upon the earth, is created,
made, consumed. Also not the mystical body which is the Church Eh. 5.32 Ephesians. 23
. For so the faithful should seem to cate either the signs alone, or the
Church: although we do not deny this, that the mystical body is shadowed,
and moreover established by the signs of bread an^ wine 1 Cor. 10 16
: but Synecdochically the whole humanity of Christ both altogether and in
respect of parts the true and natural body of Christ delivered for us,
crucified, and buried. The true blood shed for us, and his true soul, yea also
the whole person of Christ. For truly his humanity without the Deity of the
word, which is life it self and the fountain of life cannot be the bread of
life to us Ioh. 14
. Neither can the humanity be separated from the word, neither can the
humanity subsist without the Divinity, and his benefits without the whole
person: and therefore the one without the other are neither given nor received.

Whether in the Supper of the Lord, for the thing it self of the Sacrament,
do we partake of his merits alone, or the lively operation, gifts, or
benefits of Christ, without Christ himself, that is, without participation of
the body and blood of Christ, or do we partake of Christ himself, with his
benefits?
Truly Christ himself with all his benefits, both those which are given to us
by imputation alone, and also those which are given by real efficacy.

1. Because Christ himself one and the same God and man, is that living bread,
from whom life eternal does flow to us Ioh. 6.51
, and is eaten of them which are endued with true faith.

2. Because bread and wine are holy signs, not only of the death and
benefits, but of the body and blood of Christ.

3. Because Paul does plainly affirm it 1 Cor. 10.16
, and we ought to have a communion with the body it self, and blood it self of
Christ, that we may be partakers of his benefits. For those benefits, and that
lively virtue or operation which sustaineth our souls unto life eternal,
cannot be severed from the body and blood of Christ, and moreover not from
Christ himself, to whom it cleaves Ioh. 5.11
, no more then the effect from the cause containing it, or the quality from
the subject in which it is properly inherent, and from which it issues,
because, as Cyrill says, The spirit in Christ is joined chiefly with the flesh
of Christ, and the flesh also with the spirit, so that we can neither take his
flesh without the operation, nor the operation without the flesh, neither in
the plain word, or in the Sacraments.

4. Because he which imbraceth the promises of the Gospel by faith is made
partaker of Christ Heb, 3.14
.

5. Because the very words of Christ do most clearly witness it, Take,
eat, this is my body. Therefore it is needful that the body of Christ
should be received and eaten of the faithful.

6. Because the true communion with Christ himself God and man, is established
in baptism. Therefore we must determine that the same thing is done in the
Supper.

7. Because the Analogy of receiving and eating of bread and wine should be
lost, unless we should spiritually receive Christ himself: but that we may
receive the strength of nourishing which is in the bread, it is needful that
we should receive the bread it self.

8. Because like as we dye in Adam, because we are joined together with him by
a natural participation, so we do live in a spiritual life in Christ, and we
draw it from Christ, by reason of the spiritual participation with Christ 1
Cor. 15.22
.

9 Because the Scripture every where teaches that the Church is one body of
one head: but truly it cannot be imagined that life does come from the head to
the body, without the joining together of them both.

10. Because they which stick to the accidents alone, and leave the substance,
are in no Science to be suffered. But the death of Christ and his benefits are
reckoned among the accidents. Therefore it is an intolerable thing to propound
the benefits of Christ alone, and not Christ himself.

But this, we add; like as in the plain word, the word preached showing
Christ to us by voice is perceived by the sense of the ears: but Christ
himself signified by the word preached, is not received but by the
understanding believing: and in baptism the body is dipped in the water, but
the mind of the believer, is washed with the blood signified by the water: So
in the Supper, the body is fed with that bread and that wine, but the soul of
the believer is made fat with the flesh and blood of the Lord, as Tertullian
speaks. Mandu^atio Corporissed non manducatio corporalis


Therefore there is an eating of the body, but not a bodily eating, but of
faith, or spiritual, like as the conjunction is spiritual, mystical and
supernatural, for as much as, it is made by the apprehension of faith, by the
efficacy of the holy Ghost, and also in like manner the presence of the body
of Christ is spiritual. For if our sight in a moment of time be joined with
the body of the sun, much more is faith conjoined with Christ himself and
moreover with his body placed in heaven.

Can this proposition be endured, The body of Christ is exhibited with the
bread?
If you do refer the word (with) to the time wherein the faithful do use
the Supper, that the sense may be; When a faithful man using the Supper, does
eat the bread of the Lord, and drinks the wine of the Lord, he is made
partaker not only of earthly gifts, but also of heavenly, that is to say, of
the body of Christ and of the blood of the same: then truly we do in no
manner of wise mislike that proposition.

But if any do refer it being taken together with the other two particles In
and sub, that is, in and under, to the place, that is, to ordain a presence of
the invisible body of Christ, In, cum, sub, pane, that is, in, with, under the
bread: we do worthily reject this consubstantiation, inexistence, and
indistance: seeing that this is neither expressed in the words of Christ, nor
can rightly be drawn out from them.

Of how many sorts is this union or conjunction in the use of the Lords Supper?
Twofold, one of the body and blood of Christ with the bread and wine, which
is called Sacramental, and belongs to the form of the Sacrament. Another is
the conjunction of the same body and blood of Christ with the believers, which
(although spiritual) is called the mystical, real and substantial
communion, or communication, and fruition of the body and blood of Christ,
which is exhibited under the holy symboles of the Supper, Calu. Inst. b 4. c.
17 sect. 19, and 33
and belongs to the end of the Sacrament.

Notwithstanding, a mixture or transfusion of the flesh of Christ is not to be
imagined, in our soul: because it suffices that Christ does breath life into
our souls from the substance of his flesh: yea rather does power into us his
own life, although the flesh it self of Christ does not enter into us.

Of what quality is the conjunction of the signs and of the thing signified
in the supper of the Lord?
Not consubstantiall or natural which may make a presence of the thing
signified, at the place of the sign.

1. Because the words of the institution do by no means bear it.

2. It is manifest that Christ sat, placed with the Disciples at the table
really and corporally.

3. Neither are Sacraments instituted, that they may be hiding places of things
signified: but that they may be effectual signs, seals and memorials, as the
Scripture speaks, Aliud existentia, and aliud significantia (says Augustine)
that is, being one thing, and signifying another thing.

But merely significatiue, or relative, that is, wholly placed in this, that
according to Gods ordinance declared in the Sacramental word, these things in
a mutual respect, and reciprocal relation, between themselves are one
certain thing (for as Beda says, upon Lu, 22
Panis ad corpus Christi mystice, vinum ad sanguinem refertur, that is, Tho
bread is referred to the body of Christ mystically, the wine to the blood) and
are offered to be considered, and also to be taken spiritually by faith; the
signs, of them which do lawfully administer the Supper: but the things, are
given of the Father, and Christ the son, the holy Ghost working together with
them.

Seeing that Aristotle, book, 5. chap. 6. of the Metaphysics does teach that
there are four kinds of them which are one, In number figure, general,
Analogy, which of these ways is the bread the body of Christ?
Neither in number, nor figure, nor general kind, but in analogy or
proportion and similitude, for they are said to be one in proportion,
whatsoever are compared together between themselves, as one thing to another,
according to proportion, he says, What things soever are as one thing to
another, are said one in respect. Therefore the bread and body of Christ, or the
bread of life, are one thing in proportion, because both of them do give
sustenance; that is, nourishment and increase to a man, but that to the body,
but this to the faithful soul. So the wine of the Lord and the blood of the
Lord are one in proportion, because they quench thirst, and do refresh, but
that the body and this the faithful soul.

Whether can that supernatural conjunction, whereby the Deity of Christ is
personally conjoined with the humanity, or that miraculous whereby God having
taken some visible shapes disclosed himself to some men, as when God is said
to have appeared to Moses in a flame of fire in a bush Exodus 3, 2
, or when the holy Ghost descended upon Christ in the shape of a Dove Mat.
3.16. or when it was given to the Disciples by the breathing of Christ, and
with fiery tongues. John. 20.22. Act. 2.3, take place here?
No: because the the personal union, and the Sacramental union do differ in
the whole kind: and because the condition of that bread should be better, then
of all the faithful men, to whom the body of Christ is united not personally,
but only mystically. Moreover, the body of Christ is one thing which cannot be
in many places; God, or the holy Spirit another thing, which is every where.

And besides, we may not argue from that which is done against order and by
miracle, to that which is ordinary in the Church of God, of which sort is the
Supper of the Lord, according to his own precept, Do this.

Finally, neither that Dove, which John Baptist saw descending from heaven upon
Christ, nor that breath wherewith he breathed upon his Disciples: nor the
fiery tongues which sat upon each of the Disciples, were God, or the holy
Ghost essentially, or had the holy Spirit in them, but were signs of that
spirit, both in Christ, and also in the Disciples.

Is it true in all things, that those things which are joined by Gods ordinance
in a peculiar manner, are affirmed one of another, as This man is God, the Dove
is the Holy Ghost?
No, otherwise we might say truly, in a man, The soul is the body; and in
Christ, The Humanity is the Divinity: and in a fired sword, the sword is the
fire, or the fire is the sword: which yet no man does grant. But it is true,
chiefly in the propositions concerning the person of Christ, when as for the
same substantial word they put in concrete words, as well this man as this God.
But the personal union is not placed in the Sacrament, wherefore it cannot be
that, that should be alike true, This man is God, and that, This bread is the
body of Christ. Moreover, in symbolicall and Sacramental speeches, as we read,
that the holy Ghost was seen of John, descending like a Dove, because the Dove
was the sign of the Holy Ghost, and so we grant, that the bread is the body
of Christ.

But concerning a vessel of wine, we say truly, but yet figuratively, This is
wine, seeing that, there are two substances their joined, and as it were, the
thing contained in the thing containing: as also of an Angel appearing in man's
shape, it might be said, This is an Angel, but as a thing in a place; which,
that it cannot be said of the body of Christ in the bread has been already
proved at large.

Why therefore are the Sacramental signs called Exhibitiue?
Because the Lord does so truly exhibit and give himself, being the bread
celestial, ^ucer comment. upon the Ephesians.
and that of eternal life to those which are his, like as he gave truly to his
Disciples the holy Ghost, by the sign of the breath of his mouth, or as by the
touching of the hand he gave unto many health of body and mind, as, sight by
clay made of spittell: as by circumcision of the flesh, the circumcision of the
heart, and as by baptism, Regeneration. For they which with a true faith do
communicate with the signs corporally, do receive true confirmation and
increase of the communion of the body and blood of the Lord spiritually.

But Irenaeus says, that the Eucharist does consist of two things, of an
Earthly and a Heavenly.
Rightly, yet we must not think that it is compounded, or whole, altogether
substantial, or some subsisting thing made of whole parts, as a man, of body
and of soul; and the body of an head, and a trunk: but it is a holy action,
or a divine ordinance, wherein at one time, but not in one place, diverse things
are distinctly propounded and delivered, no otherwise then as a pledge being
delivered, or the earnest of any thing, the thing it self was wont to be
delivered also together,

To what purpose commanded the Lord to make his Supper?
Not for an unbloody oblation of his body to God the Father, for the sins of
the quick and dead, or for a Scenical representation of the death of Christ,
but for a commemoration of his death: for he says, Do this in remembrance of
me, that is to say, to be celebrated, in the assembly of the faithful, to
that end Luke. 22 19.
, to which purpose also serves the words of Paul, verse. 26. declaring what
that is, In remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup, ye show the Lords death until he come. Verse. 25. That is,
1 Cor. 11.24
call to mind and speak of the whole obedience of Christ, and all his
benefits with a thankful mind, and profess openly, that you do believe and
embrace them. For (...), that is, (to show) is not to express any thing by
similitude of fact, or to represent by stage playing gestures, but to declare
and show: Neither ought it to be restrained to the Priests alone: for seeing
that whiles we are strangers in the body, we are absent from the Lord 2 Cor,
5.6.7
, we do by this remember the Lord Jesus, which is in the heavens: which thing
he himself commands us do, till he comes to judgment: (signifying that
the Church shall continue until that judgment) he would not have commanded
it, if he had determined to remain with his corporally. For memory, is
opposite to bodily presence, because remembrance is not of things to come, nor
of things present, but of things past.

Of what quality ought that remembrance to be?
Not any bare or idle remembrance of a thing past, which nothing appertains
unto us, but operative, and such whereby the faithful mind, in the use of
this Sacrament, does by faith lay hold upon Christ with all his benefits, does
apply to himself particularly, and so calls to mind the sacrifice past, and
once performed in the flesh, that thereby it feels present comfort, gladness
of mind, peace of conscience, increase of faith, and of love, and moreover
does conceive most certain hope of the life and happiness to come, by reason
of that sacrifice: Finally, it is stirred up to consider of so great love of
Christ, and to offer unto him by faith the sacrifice of praise, and to give him
thanks. Psalm. 50 23
.

From which end we do again understand, that the supper is not ordained, that
it may be a real and expiatorie or appeasing sacrifice, for the quick and the
dead, but a solemn and public thanksgiving, for the incarnation, death,
redemption, and all the benefits of Christ.

Which are the causes, for which Christ ordained, the memory of himself to be
celebrated amongst us?
1 His great love, the property whereof, is, that they which do love
sincerely and from the heart, do desire to live in their minds and memory.
Whereupon we gather that Christ is never unmindful of us.

2 The faithful providence of Christ, whereby he provided for his beloved,
that the benefits bestowed might truly profit, and enjoy their end. For as by
the forgetfulness of the benefactors, a benefit received is lost, so by
memory it is especially kept.

What is it to show the death of the Lord?
Not only to meditate upon the history, but also to think earnestly.

1 Of the justice and wrath of God against sin, which are seen in this
sacrifice.

2 Of the great mercy of God toward us.

3 Of the love of the son toward mankind.

For so great is the severity of Gods justice, and the weight of sin, that
there may be no reconciliation made, unless the penalty due to sin should
be paid: so great is the greatness of his anger, that the eternal Father may
not be pacified but by the entreaty and death of the son.

His mercy so great that the son is given for us.

So great is the love of the son toward us, that he derived this true and
great anger unto himself, and being made a sacrifice for us, does make us
partakers of his flesh and blood: all which in the use of the supper, we must
speak of and meditate upon, that we may be truly feared by the acknowledgement
of Gods anger, we may be truly grieved for our sins, and again may be lifted
up with true comfort: And finally that we may celebrate, our Lord Jesus Christ
with true thankfulness, heart, mouth, and life.

Is Christ to be adored in the bread of the Supper?
No. 1 Because he is not there present with his body.

2 Neither has he in his word tied himself to the bread. Therefore he is to
be adored in the mysteries, as says Ambrose: that is, in the celebration of
the supper, in that he is God, and in respect that he is God and man together:
yet so as that we rest not in the supper, but that we may lift up the eyes of
faith, and our hearts, not to a piece of bread, but into heaven, where he is
sitting at the right hand of God Coll, 3.1
, whether also in time past the people in the administration of the supper were
invited, while they were admonished Habere sursum corda, that is, to lift up
their hearts. Not that they should be yet taught to seek downward for the
body and blood of our Lord present in Essence, either in the accidents without
the subject, or in, under or with the bread, but rather to seek for him in
heaven; that selfsame flesh long ago delivered for us, and that blood shed
for us, to be touched and laid hold upon with the hand of faith.

Wherefore, every one of the Disciples did not rise, that (falling down upon
their knees) they might take bread, and that wine out of his hand. And in the
little book of Constitutions ascribed to Clement, the people are commanded to
come with a certain shame fast reverence without tumult.

But concerning the showing or lifting up of the Sacrament, we confess, that
it was the custom in the ancient Church, that the whole Sacrament, covered
with a clean linen cloth, should be set upon the holy table, until it should
be distributed to the people.

For then the minister of the Church, the linne^ being taken away, (...) (as
says Dionysius) that is, opening the mysteries did set them before the eyes of
those which were present. In the Lyturgy also of Chrysostom, he says, that
the Priest was wont to lift the holy bread a little while from the table (not
above his head) and to say with a loud voice, Sancta sanctis, that is, holy
things for holy men, (surely in imitation of the Jewish custom, among whom the
Priest being about the sacrifices, did show before hand the oblation before his
breast, and did lift it up Exodus 29, and. 24.27. Leuit. 10.15
.) But not in any other respect then that the people should prepare themselves
to the communion.

But now seeing, that the elevation of the bread above the Priests head is the
sinew of Bread-worship, and prescribed neither by Christ nor of the Apostles,
nor observed in the most ancient and purest Church, it is rightly taken away in
Evangelical Churches.

Is that which is left of the Supper to be laid up, to be carried about to be
seen, or to be adored as though some holiness did remain inherent in it?
Much less: for the Sacraments out of the holy and lawful use, or out of the
taking of them, prescribed in these words, Take, eat, take, drink, are not
Sacraments: like as neither water is the water of baptism, unless some body
be dipped in it, (as is meet) but when any body has been dipped or
sprinkled with water, the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost being called upon, the Sacrament does cease. For the Sacraments are
religious and continual actions, to which signs are added, not that the mind
should stay it self in them, but that they might move them to whom they are
given to think upon, and do another thing.

2 Is is manifest also out of the word of God, that it was plainly forbidden
of the Lord, that any of the Paschall Lamble (being the express type of our
Eucharist) and of Manna, should be kept till the next day, undoubtedly, that
the least entrance to superstition might be shut up.

3 And this worshipping of bread, Dan. chap. 11.38. Does attribute to
Antichrist, when he says, He shall honor the God Mauzzim, as if he should
say, Missarie, that is to say, crustie, or breaden, In Gold and silver, and
precious things.

4 Neither said Christ, lift up, offer, lay up, carry about, worship, but take,
eat, drink, in remembrance of me.

What is the second end?
That the Lord may visibly represent his invisible gifts, near to all the
senses, to the sight, to the hearing, to the taste, to the feeling: that the
whole man, being moved in body and soul, may celebrate this most pleasant
and holy thing, with greater joy.

Which is the third end?
That it may be an effectual token, symbol, pledge, testification and
confirmation of our communion, conjunction, and incorporation with Christ the
head, and by him as it were by a Mediator, with the Father, and the holy Ghost
1 Ioh. 1.3.
. Of which end the Apostle says, the cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.16. (that is to say,
Metonymically, like as the Gospel is called the power of God to salvation.
Romans 1.16. That is, an effectual instrument of God:) which end the promise of
the Lord does also note, John. 6.56. He that eats my flesh, dwells in me,
and I in him.

Of how many sorts is the conjunction of our nature with Christ?
1 Threefold, the first is of natures, that is, of our nature by Incarnation,
but yet in the particular, and truly of the seed alone of Abraham, and a
joining together of the divine nature in the person of the son into one
person Ioh. 1.14 Heb. 2.14 16
, which is called Hypostaticall, and according to this we say that the son of
God is of our flesh and of our bones, because he took flesh of our kind.

2 There is a joining together of our persons, but yet being absent, and on
pilgrimage from the Lord, and of the person of Christ, God and man, yea of both
natures, both of the Divine and of the humane nature of Christ into one
mystical body, which in regard of the extremes, See Zanch. his Spiritual
marriage betwixt Christ and his church and his comment upon Ephesians. 5. de
communione cum Christo.
is called Substantial and Essential: but in regard of the bond or manner
whereby the extremes are united, merely spiritual and mystical, that is to
say, secret. Whereupon depends the participation of the operation, and of the
graces of Christ, that is, of remission of sins, of regeneration, and of life
eternal: Concerning which. 1. Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are
called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. And according to
this, we are said to be of his flesh, and of his bones, not in respect that we
are men, but in regard that we are Christians, and ingrafted into Christ, and
by this, Christ is the Spouse of one Church, that is, of all the Elect Ephesians. 5.30
.

3 And there is a conjunction of our persons (but present with the Lord) and of
the person of Christ into one glorious body, and that is called glorious. Of
which conjunctions, the third depends upon the second, and the second upon
the first.

What does the word Fellowship signify in the saying of Paul 1 Cor, 1.9
, that is, which conjunction of those three does it signify?
Not the concord or conjunction of consent and will only, but the habitation
and dwelling 2 Cor. 6, 6.
, and consociation or participation of our persons with Christ's person.
Although (...), that is, participation, does seem to be referred properly to
the signs: and to the several persons eating the same bread, but yet broken
and distributed severally by parts, as the same Apostle notes, 1. Cor. 10 17.
and as Chrysostom interprets it, (...). that is, Because we all are partakers
of one bread: But (...) that is, Fellowship is to be referred to whole Christ to
be applied to themselves by faith: that (...), that is, participation may be an
exception of the part: but (...), that is, fellowship, a fruition and
possession of the whole: And (...), that is, participation, may be said of the
signs taken by parts, but (...), that is, fellowship, of the thing signified,
that is to say, whole Christ.

Verily, how straight this is, it is evident, Ex nomine (...), that is, by the
name of unity or conjunction, which Christ unfolding says. I desire of thee,
O father that they which thou have given me may be one as thou O Father art in
me, and I in thee, even that they also may be one in us. John. 17.21. Else
where (...) does signifye, both fellowship in prayers, and in breaking of
bread: and also alms or contribution, or collation, or ability act. 2, 42
Romans 15.26 2 Cor 8, 4 Heb. 13.16
, and also consent in doctrine. Gal. 2.9.

What is it to communicate with Christ?
It is not only to profess Christ, or only to communicate with his
incarnation, whereby he was made a certain one thing in special, with all
mankind (although this incarnation be the foundation of this Union, whereof we
entreat) neither only in affection, in love, in consent and concord to be
united to Christ, nor to communicate only with the merits of Christ: But it is
to have Christ dwelling and living in us, and us to dwell and live in Christ
Ioh. 6.55
, and that in very deed, (as Chrysostom speaks) and naturally as Cyrill
says, that is, in the very communication also of the humane nature of Christ
to be united and joined with Christ: to cleave to him, and Christ to be made
ours, and we in like manner to be made Christ's, and moreover to be nourished
with Christ, or to be joined to him to be ingrafted into him, so that more and
more growing up into his mystical body in one spirit, we be members of his
body 1 Cor. 6.15
, of his flesh, and of his bones: And that we may all meet together in the
unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto
the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. and 4.13. Of
which place Zanchius in his comment, upon it, discourses most learnedly.

What therefore is that which is conjoined unto us?
Christ, according to himself, and according to his effect and grace, that is,
Christ himself whole, but yet spiritually, and to be considered in mind,
together with all his merits.

How is this union made, whether by a real, actual, and corporal, invisible
falling down of Christ's flesh into us, and by a natural touching with ours,
or by a connection, contiguitie, local indistance, orall perception, or by an
essential commixtion of the flesh of Christ and ours, or by an ingresse of his
body and soul, or by a corporal conjunction.
By none of these. For the verity of the flesh of Christ, and his ascension
into heaven do not suffer this. Besides also, out of so many substances of
diverse bodies there should grow a most monstrous body: but by a copulation or
connection altogether spiritual and supernatural, yet real and true,
altogether after a divine and heavenly manner.

For if the things, which are united be respected, it is an Essential union:
If the truth of the union, it is real: But if the manner whereby this union is
made, it is spiritual: That there is such an union it is truly manifest unto
us out of the both simple and sacramental word of God: but for the form which
may contain the exact definition thereof, and the (...) the very being of it
how it is, which some do importunately require of us, the Apostle by the best
right, calls a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. They shall be two in one flesh:
The reason whereof is such, that we cannot in our minds comprehend it.

For it is spoken Contradictorily, that any thing is accuratelie declared,
either that the form thereof, or formal cause is accuratly known: and is
secret. For now we see through a glass darkely, but then shall we see face
to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as I am known. And we
walk by faith, not by sight. 1. Cor. 13.9.12. and 2. Cor. 5.7. And it is
enough in this mystery to know the efficient cause with the final, and
adiuuant causes.

For also in actions we then know chiefly, when we see the beginning of the
motion, says the chief of the Philosophers, book third, that is, when we
have known the efficient cause.

Which is the proper cause or the means, and the Energeticall, that is,
efficient cause of this our communion with Christ.
The operation, efficacy and working of the holy Ghost does cause that a man
receives Christ together with his merits. For as the sinews coming from the
brain are scattered into the integrall parts of the living body, and do
join the middle and low panch, arms, hands, and feet, both to the head, and
also to the members by a convenient situation, and function of every part
remaining safe: So one and the same spirit of Christ comprehending us Phi. 3.12
, does so make us partakers of him, that cleaving fast both to Christ the head,
and to his members, more straightly, and more strongly then the members of the
natural body to the body, we may never be separated from him, and from
them, as Paul teaches. 1. Cor. 12.12. As the body is one, and has many
members, and all the member of the body which is one, though they be many, yet
are but one body: even so is Christ. For so collectiuely, by a word taken from
the head, he calls, both Christ who is the head, and the mystical body of
that head, which is the Church.

Whereby it comes to pass, from that great bounty of our Savior, that
Christ also himself becomes so nearly ours and we likewise his, that before
the fathers judgment seat, Christ and the Church (not by a hypostaticall
joining of substances, but by a mystical belonging to this communion) are as
it were one and the same subsistence, and we are taken to be, one Christ, most
effectually.

For by one spirit we all are baptized into one body (says the same Apostle)
that is, that we should be gathered into one body of Christ: and have been
all made to drink into one spirit, that is, with one lively draught of the
Lords blood: 3.19
We are made partakers of his one spirit. 1. Corinthians. 12.13. And Irenaeus
says, like as of dry wheat, one lump cannot be made without moisture, nor
one bread: So neither we being many could not have been made one in Christ
Jesus, without the water which is from heaven.

Therefore Paul. 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit,
(with him) whereupon also it is called (...), that is, The communion of the
holy Ghost 2 Cor. 13 13
. And 1. John. 3.24. Hereby we know that Christ abides in us, even by the
spirit which he has given us. And Romans 8.9. If any man has not the spirit of
Christ, the same is not his.

Therefore like as by one and the same soul, all the members of the body are
united with the head, and are quickened: so all the faithful although they be
in earth, and their head in heaven, yet in very deed, (by one and the same
spirit issuing from the head, and by every joint of the mystical body
yielding nourishment) are united with him, and being knit together do abide,
live, and receive increase according to the measure of every part. Ephesians.
4.16. Gal. 3.5.

By what means do we in like manner communicate with the flesh of Christ?
Not by nature, as we communicate with the flesh of Adam: nor yet by a
natural and corporal instrument, but by one supernatural and spiritual,
that is, by faith alone created in us, by that self same spirit, whereby
Christ does comprehend us Phil. 3.12
, by which we do receive, lay hold upon, and as it were by an isntrumental
cause possess Christ himself. Concerning which manner, Ephesians. 3.17. the
Apostle says: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Therefore we are
united to Christ by faith.

Therefore this union is made by the Spirit, in respect of Christ: and by
faith, in respect of us. Neither is their any other manner of union with Christ
delivered in the scriptures.

They err therefore, which say, that faith is the formal cause of our union
with Christ, or of our justification, seeing that, it is, as it were a
spiritual hand which receives Christ, and his merits applied unto it self by
the holy Ghost.

Which are the outward instruments of this communion?
The Gospel, and the Sacraments, whereupon it is called the communion or
fellowship of the Gospel, Phil. 1.5
, because by the preaching of the Gospel, and use of the sacraments we have
fellowship with Christ and his Church. 1. John. 1.3.

Is this sacramental conjunction of us with Christ necessary?
It is: being as it were the cause of all things, which we have in Chist, and
no other besides this, for as the branch draws not juice from the vine,
except first it grows with the vine: and the members have not sense, and
motion from the head, except they stick together with the head: so except we
be partakers first of all, of Christ himself, we cannot be partakers of his
gifts, for he (says the Lord) Which abides not in me, is cast forth as a
branch, and withers Ioh. 15.6
: and how shall he not with him give us all things also? Romans 8.32
. And from the conjunction of Christ and us, the same Paul testifyeth, that a
communion follows of his benefits. 1. Cor. 1.30. saying. Of him, ye are in
Christ Jesus, (where thou have the conjunction of Christ and of us) then it
follows, Who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption: where you have in the second place the participation of his
benefits.

When as the Fathers do plainly affirm that Christ is in us corporally,
naturally, by natural participation, by corporal union, or according to the
flesh, and as wax melted in in the fire is mingled with other wax likewise
melted Cyril upon Ioh, b. 10 Chap. 13
, so by the communication of the body and blood of Christ, that he is in us,
and we in him; Whether do they refer these sayings to the manner of the
presence of the participation and union?
No. For the same Fathers do decree that Christ is in heaven with his flesh
and in no other place: The same does Cyrill, book 11. chap. 21. and 22.
besides, the manner of our union with Christ, is spiritual not corporal, but
yet they look to the term or to the thing which is participated, or to the
object of this communication, that is, to the true and natural body it self
of Christ. Neither do they understand a participation which is made after a
natural manner: but a true participation of the natural body of Christ. To
whom (although separated by space of places) we are joined spiritually by
faith, that we may know, that wholly in body and soul we do cleave, not
only to his Deity, but to the substance and nature of his flesh, as members
to the head, and are engrafted by the bond of the spirit, and by faith.

And also they do teach that the foundation of this our conjunction with him
is that nature, by taking whereof he is made our brother: and moreover that we
are united with Christ, not only according to the spirit, Nullum Simile q^atuor
Pedibus cur rit
but also according to the body. To which also belongs the permixtion of the
wax melted: For no simile runs with four feet, that is, agrees in all
things. For it is certain that neither our body, nor the body of Christ is
molten, that they may be united together: Therefore neither is there cause why
we should imagine, any natural touching, but spiritual only, whereby as
wax to wax, so the flesh of Christ may be most straightly united to our flesh
according to that, They shall be two in one flesh, that is to say, Christ and
the Church.

How are the faithful said to be partakers of the divine nature? 2. Pet. 1.4.
Not in respect of the nature, or essence of God, for he is incommunicable: but
of qualities, and that of the greatest and most precious gifts, wherewith the
regenerate are endewed by the holy Ghost, which Peter calls not the nature of
God which is essential, but the divine nature, being a created quality
opposite to our old and vicious nature, and affirms that it is promised of
God to the faithful, and performed to them: and comprehends those things
which belong to life and religion, and also that most blessed immortality,
when God shall be all, in all his.

Whether is our soul only without the body joined with the soul only of
Christ, or also our flesh with the flesh of Christ?
Yea, the whole person of every faithful man is truly conjoined with the
whole person of Christ.

1 Because the whole person of Adam was coupled with the whole person of Eve.

2 Because not the soul alone of the faithful man, or the body alone is saved
by Christ, but both.

3 Because our bodies are the members of Christ.

4 Because the whole person of the Son of God took into the unity of
himself whole man, that is, the whole humane nature, not flesh alone nor soul
alone, but both together.

5 Because whole Christ in his Deity and humanity, that is, in his soul and
in his flesh is our head and our Savior. But yet that conjunction of us with
Christ, does appertain first of all to our soul, and then it redoundeth to
the body.

To which first is our mind, and by consequence our flesh, joined, to the word
or to the flesh?
First we are united to the flesh by faith: and then, zanch de incarnatione
Christi
by the flesh to his Deity. 1 Because as the scripture does set forth Christ
to us, first as man, and then as God, so first and sooner we know, apprehend
and understand him as man, then as God Genesis 3.15 Deuteronomy 18.15
, as Isaiah. 7.14. where first it is said: Behold the virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, and 2. he shall be called Immanuell. So the Evangelists and
Apostles do set forth Christ unto us, first as man, and then as God.

2 Because like as we are not united to God, but by a Mediator, so neither to
the Godhead of Christ, but by his flesh, in which he performed the chief
offices of a Mediator. For in his flesh was made redemption, sin destroyed,
the devil conquered, death overcome,, eternal life, and salvation obtained:
and the life which wholly flowed from the fullness of Christ's Godhead, as it
were from a fountain, is not derived into us, but in the flesh and by the
flesh of Christ, as it were a pipe or instrument, but yet inse^arably taken
from the godhead by the unity of person Rom^ 5.12
, As by one man comes sin. So by one man, righteousness has abounded.
John. 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, ye have no life in
you. Unless therefore a man do lay hold upon this pipe, and be united to it:
truly he cannot be partaker of the waters which flow from the fountain.

Whereupon, it behooves us in the exercise of faith, and piety, to fasten and
fix the eyes of our mind immediately and especially upon the humane flesh of
Jesus Christ, as it were upon a veil, by which an ingresse was made into
sanctum sanctorum, that is, the holy of holiest, where the glory of God
shines Leuit. 16 2 12 Heb. 6.19 and, 10.20
, and moreover to penetrate as it were into the sanctuary it self to behold
his deity.

Seeing, the end why we are united to the flesh of Christ is, that being
quickened by it we may live a life eternal, by what means is the flesh of
Christ, that is, the humanity, quickening us?
Not by habitual grace, (as they speak in schools) but by grace only of
union, not by any virtue ingrafted into the flesh it self, as if the power of
quickening were really powered forth into the flesh of Christ, or this were
adorned with it in it self, or that life were in it self, or quickening in it
self, for it is a property incommunicable of the godhead alone to quicken:
For as Cyril says: It agrees to God alone, to be able to quicken that which
is void of life. De Recta Fide ad Reginas
.

But first, by reason of union, because it is the proper flesh of the word,
quickening all things, (as speaks the Synod of Ephesus:) either because the
word is the fountain and author of life, being life it self, dwells in it,
not only (...), that is after operative manner, as he is said to dwell in those
that be his, but (...), that is in a bodily manner, personally: or because,
that flesh is so straightly united to the essential life, that these two
natures do make one subsistence, or because this man is essentially God: from
whence it comes to pass, that the death of that flesh, because it is the
flesh of the son of God, has been precious enough to obtain life for us
Act. 20.28
. And Cyrill says that, That the flesh is not quickening in it self, but in
the word Hypostatically united unto it.

upon John 10, 13
2 In regard of the merit of obedience, whereby Christ (a sacrifice being
offered in his flesh given for us upon the Cross) obtained eternal life for
all believers. Job. 6.51. My flesh is the living bread, which I will give for
the life of the world.

3 In respect of our copulation with Christ: because we cannot come unto God,
the fountain of life, and that eternal life, but by that flesh of Christ
coming between, that is, unless by the efficacy of the holy Ghost we be
made members of Christ, engrafted into his flesh by faith.

Therefore that which is said John. 6.63. The flesh profits nothing, is not
to be understood simply of the flesh of Christ, but of carnal opinions, not
agreeing with the mystery of the eating of Christ's flesh.

Is it real and true, or does this union of us with Christ, consist in the
apprehension alone of the mind, like as we do comprehend, and have in mind
things and substances in the phantasy and mind by forms that may be
understood, but not that they are in very deed united in us?
If the things which are united, and the truth of the union be regarded,
truly, it is real, true, and essential: but if the manner, whereby it is
done, it is merely spiritual.

1 Because it is said concerning Christ and the Church, They shall be two in
one flesh, Ephe. 5.33. Now the union of man and wife into one flesh, is real
and substantial, in regard of the marriage bond, whereby according to gods
ordinance they are bound; so although the man be in the market, and the wife at
home, he beyond the seaes, she at home, yet this union continues.

2 Because Christ is the head and foundation of the Church: but the union of
the members, with the head, and between themselves, is substantial, true, and
real: like as also, of the foundation with the building, yea with every stone
built upon it.

3 Because Christ says, John. 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches. But
the conjunction and incorporation of these is real, as also of an Olive tree,
and the boughs set or engrafted into it.

4 Because the flesh of Christ is meat indeed, therefore like as bread is
really and truly united to us corporally, because it is corporal meat, to
them which eat it with a corporal mouth: so also truly and really, but yet
spiritually, because it is spiritual meat, the flesh of Christ is united to us
which eat it.

Seeing that, the body of Christ is in heaven, neither shall return from
thence before the last day, how can he be conjoined to us really and indeed?
By the holy Ghost working in us, and by faith. For if our sight in a moment of
time do touch the stars visually, says Augustine, Epist. 3. ad volusianum
tract. 50. in John
much more does faith join us together with Christ himself, and moreover with
his humane nature placed in heaven. The same Father says: Fidem mitte in
Coelum, and cum in terris tanquam praesentem tenuisti. that is, send faith into
heaven, and thou have laid hold on him, as it were present in earth. There is a
great distance betwixt the head and the foot, the branches and root, the wife
in England and her husband in Turkey, yet are they all united together.

But faith is only a conceiving and imagination of a thing absent: Therefore
the body of Christ is not joined to us in very deed, neither is present to
our faith in the Supper: but by imagination or contemplation, vehehement
cogitation and assent.
The Antecedent is false and ungodly. For if faith be only an imagination and
fantasy, and a conceiving of the mind, then it differs not from opinion,
being a naked action of the mind, or a simple and strong conceit and consent.
Neither then does it differ from history all faith common to very many
reprobates, yea to the devils themselves Iam. 2 19
. Then surely, that faith which imbraceth the Evangelical promises in Christ,
and moreover Christ himself shall not be (...) that is, a full assurance, nor a
sure trust or persuasion, nor an apprehension, from which, imagination yea
theorie, or conte^plation do very far differ: Finally, Faith shall not be the
heavenly gift of God, and supernatural, according to the working of his
mighty power Ephesians. 1.19 and 3, 7
, but natural: For the conceit of the mind is natural to a man. All which
things seeing they are absurd, the Antecedent must be false. And also the
consequent false.

For if the spaces of times do not let faith, but that it apprehends things
past and to come spiritually as present: Then neither does distance of places
hinder it, that it cannot spiritually both have things present, and apprehend
them that are set far a sunder by places. For faith is that thing which
makes those things present which are hoped for, and that which shows those
things which are not seen. Heb. 11.1 Ioh. 8.56 Phil. 3.20
. We have a sure and steadfast anchor of the soul entering even into that which
is within the veil, whether the forerunner is for us entered in, even Jesus
Heb. 6, 19.
.

By what similitudes is this communion illustrated in the scriptures?
By very many, whereby notwithstanding the nature and manner of this communion
is not declared, but rather the effects which come from it, to the believers.
Therefore they are not to be stretched further then the scope of the holy
Ghost may suffer.

1. The first is of Marriage, by which the Church is made flesh of the flesh of
Christ, and bone of his bones: not according to substance, as Eve was of the
flesh and bones of Adam, but according to quality, for as much as the Church
is the Spouse of Christ: not in respect that we are men, but in that we are
truly Christians Psalm. 45.11 Cantic. 1.8 2 Cor. 11.12 Apoc. 21.2
, by which similitude is declared, that Christ does not only deliver his goods
to his Church to be used and enjoyed, but also does give himself to us and
make himself ours.

2. The second is of the head and of the members bound fast by the same
quickening spirit, Ephesians. 2, 22 and 4, 12 1 Cor. 6.1^
whereby is signified not only the most straight copulation of us with Christ:
but that we do take life, safety and every good thing from him alone, and
that he does excel his Church.

3. The third, is of plants and stocks, as of the vine and the branches, and of
engrafting, Ioh, 15 1
by which, the stock and the young slip being ingrafted, do grow together into
one plant in very deed Romans 6.5 Coll, 2, 7
, but this is the difference.

1. That we by nature being wild vines, do not grow out of that vine
concerning which it is spoken: but we are first ingraffed into in by grace, and
afterward we are trimmed by the husba^dman, that all bitterness of taste being
laid aside, by little and little we may bring forth sweet fruit.

2. Because in this spiritual grafting, we being the gresses must pass into
the nature of the stock into which we are grafted, not on the contrary, as it
is in natural graffing.

3. Nether thereupon is to be imagined a real transfusion of the substance or
qualities of Christ himself, and a certain (...), or continuitie of them
between themselves, (as the Postellians, and Libertines do think) but, a
power, an operation, and a straight efficacy, whereby Christ by the holy Ghost
does change us being justified, into himself, and does renew us unto
spiritual life.

4. The forth is of a spring and Ioh. 4.14
of rivers, but so, that seeing we are a most impure sink, we must first of
all by grace be purged from uncleanness, most pure waters being powered in.

5 The fifth is of a house and of a building built together of living stones,
but yet by workmanshippe not made with hands, and laid upon the chief corner
stone and precious, yea the fundamental corner stone, a living and precious
stone Ephesians 2.20 1 Cor. 3, 16 1 Pet. 2.4
, which similitude does tend to this end, that it may be manifestly known,
that the whole Church, and every member thereof, is sustained by Jesus Christ
alone, to whom it cleaves spiritually by faith, in whom, by whom, and in
respect of whom, the holy Ghost does build the whole company of the faithful
upon this foundation, the stones whereof he does join together, by unity of
faith and continual love, and so being joined together he does defend and
maintain them against all the tempests and insultings of the world. 6. The sixth
similitude, is of meat and drink, or of eating and drinking Ioh, 6, 51.
, but with a manifold difference. 1. Because meat and drink taken after a
corporal manner cannot give life, but only does conserve corporal life, and
that as it seems good unto God: but the meat and drink which in this
mystery are signified by similitude, have life and that truly eternal in
themselves. 2. Because these natural meats and drinks are digested by natural
heat, and being altered, are assimulated to the substances of the bodies. But
this spiritual meat and drink is incorruptible, and does transform us into
it self, by a new (as I may say) qualification, as Augustine says, Non
mutaberis in me, sed ego mutabor in te, that is, thou shall not be changed into
me, but I shall be changed into thee. 3. Corporal meat and drink does
maintain this life, but for a small time, which life also they do hurt and
sometime also kill, unless they be taken in that measure and discretion wherein
it becomes them to be taken. But whosoever does eat and drink that
spiritual meat and drink, one only, and the same, is made partaker of
immortality.

4. Seeing that, Christ gives his flesh with the meat, and his blood with the
drink, and declares the spiritual receiving of the same, by the names of
eating and drinking, he does not signify a passage of his flesh and blood into
our soul or body, or a transfusion of the qualities either of his soul or of
his body into us, but an inspiration of the peace of conscience, of an holy,
spiritual, and heavenly life, by the gift of the spirit, of sanctification.
Therefore in those similitudes, all are metaphorical, but not proper speeches,
neither are to be urged precisely (...), that is, according to the letter, 1
Cor, 2. 13
but so (as the Apostle admonishes) that spiritual things may not be joined to
corporal, but spiritual things to spiritual, that is, that we may apply the
words to the things.

What is the end and fruit of this our communion with Christ?
Manifold. 1. Our bringing again into the good favor of the Father, by a
Mediator. 2. The communion of Christ himself with us, whereby, as our eternal
Priest, he does bear us in his heart, and makes intercession to the father
for us, and esteems it done to himself whatsoever good or ill is done toward
his brethren.

3. The participation and communion of all his goods (for among friends all
things are common) and a spiritual congruence and conformity with Christ. For
even as our guilt, and natural blemish, and al our sins, which follow
thereupon, are laid upon Christ himself not by real inhesion, and infusion but
by imputatio^ alone, according to the covenant of the Gospel, but that all the
miseries (sin excepted) and punishments due to our sins, that same our surety
Heb, 7.22
in very deed took upon himself subiectiuely: so his most perfect righteousness
proceeding from that obedience, which being most absolute he performed to the
father in his flesh even to the death of the cross, and by which he attained
both the paying of all our debts, and also right to obtain eternal life for
the believers, is not ours by a real infusion and inhesion thereof, but by
imputation and acceptance.

4. By virtue of the holy Ghost, or by a real efficacy within us, he does
convey into our mass, (which is inserted into his mass, by faith spiritually)
the lively liquor, juice and spirit of eternal life, that is, he brings
forth in us another effect of that saving virtue, being inseperable from his
flesh: by which he does quicken, renew, and sanctify within us, both our mind,
and also will and affections, and does make us conformable to his humane
nature, and so he begins spiritual life and inherent righteousness in us
subiectiuely, at length to be perfected in the last day: and moreover does
communicate to us all wholesome graces necessary for us, to obtain and enjoy
life eternal, as the feeling of Gods love, the certainty of Election, the gift
of justification and of regeneration, faith and good works, and other graces of
his spirit, he distributeth to every man severally as he will 1 Cor. 12 12 Ioh.
1, 16
, until we live with him eternally in the heavens, According to the sayings,
Io. 15.5. He that abides in me and I in him, the same brings fourth much
fruit. Of his fulness have all we received. We are joined to the Lord, we are
one spirit with him, that is to say, by conformity of the understanding, of the
will, and of the affections, and by that renewing of the image of God within us
by the holy Ghost 1 Cor. 6.17
. Again, We are changed into the same image, 2. cor. 3.18 We shall be like
him. 1. John. 3, 2. He shall make our bodies like unto his glorious body.
Phil. 3.21. Hereupon, Christ is said to be, and to live in us, and we in like
manner are said to be and to live in him. Whereupon Paul says, I live not,
but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20. by which words, again, is not signified
an existence of essence, or of substance, or an issuing out of qualities from
the soul or body of Jesus Christ into our souls, (as some not well in their
wits do imagine) but an operation and virtue of this communion much more
powerful and stronger as well to justify as to sanctify us, then is the
strength of our soul it self conjoined with our body, to quicken our body.

Finally from this communion between Christ and the believers, does spring the
conjunction of the believers, between themselves, not by a certain
insinuation of souls and bodies, and as it were by contiguitie, and by
soldering together; but by unity of faith and of hope, and by the bond of
true, holy, and mutual love, so far forth that the heart and soul of them
all may seem to be one Act. 4.32
, and which is therefore called the communion of Saints.

Which is the forth end, of the Lords supper.
That it may be a testimony, whiles that, we use it according to his
institution, of our spiritual education or nourishment in Christ, that is,
that we are fed and sustained spiritually by the benefit of the body and
blood of Christ, according to the promise, Eat, drink, this is my body:
which end is near and of kind to the former.

Which is the fifth end?
The obsignation or seal of the new covenant between God and men, that is, of
the promise of the Gospel, concerning remission of sins wherein God witnesses
that he receives into favor and remitteth sins for the death and passion of
Christ to all which use this Sacrament with a true and lively faith, like as
he himself said, This cup. etc.

And so the Supper is a most sweet covenant, and consideration, in which the
son of God does make a covenant with us, that he will mercifully receive us,
and we in like manner do make a covenant with him that we will believe him,
and take his benefits with thanksgiving, and that we will perform his
obedience before all things.

Which is the sixth end?
That it may be a symbol and pledge of our resurrection, both spiritual in
this life, which is called the first resurrection, and belongs to our souls
Romans 6.4 5, 11
, in which they which have part, the second death shall have no power on them
Apoc 20.5
, and also by consequent, of our corporal resurrection at the last day, which
belongs to the flesh, and is the latter, and which delivers us from the
first death verse. 13
: and moreover to get life eternal and salvation by the virtue of the body of
Christ being raised again: according to the saying of Christ Ioh. 6.54.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day.

Which is the seventh end?
That it may be a symbol, and an earnest penny of the spiritual gathering
together, of communion, or consociation, whereby we are united as it were into
one body, by the spirit of Christ as many as do receive the Sacrament
together, and that as many of us as come to the same table, do take the same
meat and drink, are as members of the same family, and as it were table
fellows, and (...), that is, consorts and confederates of the same holy thing,
like as the ancient were wont to confirm their covenants with the fellowshippe
of holy things: whereupon, they were called (...), that is, (...) or faedera,
that is to say leagues, or covenants. Hereupon Paul. 1, Cor. 10.17. because
there is one bread. (one, I say, by a common notion of the Sacrament, but not
necessarily one in number) We that are many are one body, that is to say,
mystical in Christ: For we all are partakers of that one bread.

Whereupon again it follows that our fellowshippe with Christ is not
corporal and natural, seeing that our fellowshippe between our selves, that
is, of the Church, is not corporal, but mystical and merely s^^^ituall.

For even as the bread is compacted of many grains, and the wine does consist
of the juice of many grapes, so we that are many, that is to say, believers,
are spiritually knit into one mystical body, the head whereof is Christ. Romans
12.4.5. Even as in one body we have many members, and all the members have not
one office: so we being many are one body in Christ, Ephesians. 3.6
and every one, one another members or concorpores, that is of the same body,
in Greek (...) or one, that is, like unto one man, in Christ Jesus.

Which communion does flow (as it were the effect from the cause) from the
former which we have with Christ himself being the head, and the consent of
wills does necessarily follow it: from thence is mutual love among the
communicants, concord, one heart, one soul, forasmuch as it is between the
members of the same mystical body: which love whosoever feels not at all in his
heart, must needs abstain from that Supper, which is a louefeast.

For the Supper is an example whereby we may learn to offer our bodies, and
spend our life to Gods glory, and the defense of our neighbor, if need be,
and also we may accustom our selves both to distribute all good thing which
we have received from God, with the like liberality to the needy, and to
power out upon others with the like charity: that it may be a certain
provocation to love brotherly charity, springing from the most excellent
pledge of Gods love toward us most wretched sinners. But God forbid, that
either we should account this to be the chief end, or we should with the
Anabaptists have these holy mysteries for example of imitation, and only for
mystical commonefaction.

Which is the eight?
That it may be 1. A public testimony of our profession, and a testification
of consent, in the doctrine, worship, and faith of Christ.

2. A token of separation from the tents of Satan, from heathens, Turks,
Jews, Papists, and from all sects disagreing from the true knowledge of Christ.

3. A promise and a certain obligation of constancy in the faith and
profession of the Gospel, in what estate soever we may be forced to live.

4. A sinew, and a conservation of public meetings.

5. An exercise, and upholding of pie^^^, and a provocation to beware least we
defile our selves with the pollution of the world, from which we are washed by
the blood of Christ.

6. Finally it is a comfort in temptations.

Whether is the efficacy or fruit of the Eucharist equally alike to all?
upon.5 Mat

In no wise: but (as Origin says) according to the manner, quantity and
proportion of the faith of the communicants.

Which is the right order of administering the Supper?
That it may be administered.

1. In the manner which comes most near to the simplicity of the first
institution, and is most far from superstition and pride (For the Sacraments
do not seek gold, neither do they please with gold, being not bought with
gold (says Ambrose) by godly and lawful ministers of the Church. For whereas
some do think that in the old time also it was so administered in families at
home, that it should not be needful for the ministers of the word to be
present (even as in the celebration of the Paschall lamb, we do not read
that priests were present in every family) if it were so, it was not agreeable
to the institution of Christ. But let the ministers exercise the ministry
honestly and comelily, let them conceive holy prayers: let them plainly
rehearse and expound the words of institution: let them inuit the people to
the mystical table, and let them stir up and admonish them by their own
example, that they may come orderly, that they may take with reverence that
which is given, that they stay not only in signs, but lift up their hearts.

2. Let them exhort to the same exercise of Christian love or beneficence: for
hereupon the Supper it self was called (...), that is (Love) because they did
give to ^^ns of love, by bestowing libeberally to the use of the poor.

3. Let them add thereunto the Annuntiation of the Lords death: for it is not
meet that it should be a dumb action, but that, either the history of the
passion should be read, or some other thing, or that they sing, or a Sermon be
had concerning the Lords death.

4. Let the holy communion be shut up with a Hymn, or public giving of
thanks as the Disciples did Mat. 26, 30 2 Apologet.
together with Christ, that is, let praise and glory be given to God the
Father, as Iustine reports to have been done. Finally let all things be
pronounced in the usual tongue, and language of that place, so that, the
communicants may both understand al things and to the^ consent in heart. But
whether it be taken of them which stand, or of them that sit, it little
skilleth: although the Paschall lamb was taken standing: as the Supper by the
Disciples when they sat, or rather leaned one upon another.

In what place is it to be administered?
In a public asse^bly, not to every man privately, nor to such as ly sick at
home, or which are ready to die, out of the congregation, and partaking
together of the faithful: because it ought to be ecclesiastical and public,
1 Cor. 13 17
not (...) 1 Cor. 10 20.21
that is a private Supper, and the Supper is a symbol of the communion of
Saints: neither ought men to open a gappe to the opinion of the work wrought,
and of a preposterous confidence, as is in the popish communion.

In the time of Iustine the Deacon, some did carry that which was left of the
communion, at what time the Lords Supper was celebrated, to the^ which were
absent by reason of their disease, from the public assembly, or unto
strangers, and outlandish bishops into their Inn. And as Eusebius reports,
the bishop of Rome was wont to do so, of the church histor. Cap. 5, b 24
but without superstition, and for no other end but for a token of concord and
consent in Doctrine, and in the whole profession: but because we say, that we
must not so much enquire whether those fragments were sent, or but whether they
were well sent. And that custom has degenerated into superstition, whereby at
this day, the host is carried to them alone which are about to die, and that
for certain gain and advantage, as also in a vain persuasion of a certain
necessary provision for their journey, that custom of carrying the Supper to
the absent, is worthily taken away in our Churches. Cyprian in the
administration of this Sacrament, We ought to do no other thing then that
which Christ did.

Epist. 3. b. 2
At what time, and how often ought this Supper to be celebrated?
Although a certain and set time is not prescribed by the Lord, as their was
appointed in the law a certain day in the month, and of the year, for the
eating of the Passover: yet reason it self does show that of all Christians
it may not be only once in a year, but in frequent use, as that particle
(...) that is, as often as, does admonish, being twice used of Paul, 1. Cor.
25.11. Undoubtedly, that they should often call to remembrance the passion of
Christ, and by that remembrance should strengthen their faith, and should join
together themselves, to set forth the praise of God, and to speak of his
goodness, and finally, that they may go forward in mutual love, the coupling
together whereof, they do see in the unity of Christ's body.

Augustine says daily, To take the Eucharist, I neither praise nor dispraise,
yet I exhort that it should be communicated to all upon the Lords days: but
if not more often, at the least let men communicate thrice in a year De
Ecclesiasticis. Dogm. c. 53
.

Neither also does the example of Christ bind us to celebrate the Supper in
the night: because Christ according to the custom of the Law, for the
solemnity of the Paschall Lamb which was to be observed between two
euenings, celebrated the Supper a little before night. But we are freed from
the old ceremony.

After what manner ought we to come to the Lords Supper?
Not unadvisedly, rashly, or unworthily: for as the medicine of the body does
not only not profit if it be ill used, but it hurts, if it be not applied in
his time, place, manner, measure, and peculiar disease to which it is
appointed: so the Lords Supper which is the wholesome medicine of the soul,
does not only not profit, but also it hurts not being rightly used. For
whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily,
(the Apostle says (...), that is, unworthily) shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord. 1. Cor, 11.27.

How many sorts are of them which come to the Supper of the Lord?
Two: one, of them which eat worthily: another of them which eat unworthily.

Who do come worthily?
These do differ, To be worthy or unworthy: and to come worthily or
unworthily to the supper of the Lord. For no where does the Apostle so speak,
That some are worthy, some unworthy, but he speaks of the^ which eat
worthily, and unworthily Therefore they do eat the bread, and drink the
cup of the Lord worthily, not which want the least blemish or spot of sin, of
which sort there are none in the world: For by nature we are all both unworthy
of so great a benefit, and not sufficient to, perceive so great mysteries: but
our sufficiency is of God. 2. Cor. 3.5 Col. 1.12
.

But.

1. The which acknowledge their own unworthiness, and bewail it, and rely
upon the worthiness of Christ, that is, They which are truly afraid in the
acknowledging of the great wrath of God against their sins, and are grieved
with their whole heart, because they have offended God, who do acknowledge and
confess that they have many ways deserved punishments for their sins, and
have in heart and in mouth that confession of Daniell, O Lord, righteousness
belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame, chap. 9.7. Which motion is stirred
up in us by consideration of Gods law, of eternal and temporal punishments:
but especially by thinking of the son of God laid groueling in the garden,
and hanging between two thieves upon the cross for our sins.

2. They which have hungry, and thirsting souls after the favor of God, and
do flee to the only haven of health, that is, to the mercy of God for
Christ's sake, the mediator and are lifted up with confidence hereof, and do
judge with a firm assent, that they are received of God into favor for his
sake, and that the good promises in the Gospel are exhibited to themselves,
that is to say, the communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and
participation of the merit and efficacy of him, remission of sins, renouation,
and life eternal Mat. 5.6
.

3. They which have a purposed endeavor to amend their lives, and to yield
new obedience, that is, who have determined nothing more surely, then to
refer all there purposes, and endeavors to the honor of God: who have
remitted wrongs and all their injuries, as it is said Math. 5.24. Leave thine
offering before the Altar, and Go thy way. First be reconciled to thy
brother. And they which are ready to love all the members of Christ, to help
them, and to bestow themselves for them, according to the example of Christ.

4. They which call to mind the sending of the son of God, his passion, and
the whole benefit of redemption, and do give thanks to God for it.

5. They which do determine with themselves to die for the confession of the
name of Christ. Finally, faith even begun, with repentance, does make them of
unworthy to become worthy. But this worthiness is not to be meant concerning
perfection, such as befalls, no not to the most holy: But concerning the
beginnings of conversion, and faith, which may be felt in our selves, and
acknowledged of others, by no obscure but evident signs and tokens.

But for such as do repent, and yet are earnstely afraid, may not these flee
the use of the Sacrament, by reason of former slips?
No: but let them know that therefore this so great pledge is set forth, that
their faith may be kindled and confirmed concerning remission of sins by the
use of those things: and let the mind reconciled to God, call upon him again,
and serve him afterward with a good conscience. Let the minds of such rely,
not upon their own worthiness, but as the prodigal son, returning to his
father, does not plead his merits, and deserts, but acknowledges, accuses,
and bewaileth his fault: so let us acknowledge our pollutions, let us accuse
our selves for them, and let us flee unto Gods mercy promised for Christ's sake.
The pledge of which mercy is the Supper it self, in which Christ testifies
that remission of sins is given to us freely, that is, not for our worthiness,
but because he was made a sacrifice for us, and let us know that this medicine
is prepared for the sick, that is for them which acknowledge their own
weakness.

What counsel therefore, does the Apostle give to them which come to the
Supper?
Let a man examine himself, and so, that is to say, (when as he has examined
himself, and found himself fit by the grace of God) Let him eat of this bread
and drink of this cup. 1. Cor. 11.28.

What must we examine?
This Paul declares saying. 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves whether you are
in the faith: examine your selves: know ye not your selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? Yet notwithstanding they are not
forthwith, to be thought reprobates, whosoever are not yet effectually called,
or whosoever also after calling, do fall into great sins.

Wherefore the right examination and trial of our selves consists in this,
that every one should descend into himself, thoroughly try, and examine
himself.

1. Whether he be truly grieved for sins committed.

2. Whether he does truly believe in Christ the pacifier of Gods wrath for
sins.

3. Whether he has an earnest purpose afterward, to avoid sins, hatred, lust,
gluttony, and the like, and to live righteously and holily that so he may
show himself thankful to God.

Who ought to take this examination?
Let a man examine himself, says Paul, for, 1. No body can better and more
certainly judge, whether he be in the Faith, then every one himself. 2.
Neither does the unworthiness of others condemn us, but our own. 3. Neither
does any man know, what is in our heart, or what our affections are toward
God, more than we our selves. 1. Cor. 2.11. Finally the saying of the Apostle
is emphaticall, that every one may know that this he must do, least any man
should dream that the faith 'which they call implicit or folded in, is only
required, or that we should depend upon an other man's faith.

And truly, the Apostle says, let every man examine himself, but not his
neighbor, least any should be busied in judging his neighbor, or should
think that, the unworthiness of another may be danger to himself. For every
one shall give accounte of himself to God Romans 14.12.

Which thing notwithstanding does not hinder the examination and instruction of
Pastors, whereby the Pastors, in the Doctrine of piety, do make trial of their
hearers profiting, which are helped, if need be, with familiar instruction,
counsel and comfort. For this latter examination does serve for the former.
And every one is bound to confess the faith, and to show their Pastors what
they think of the Doctrine taught, like as Peter commands, that We should be
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks a reason of the hope
that is in us. 1, Pet. 3.15.

Is it gathered, from this Pronoune, (...), that is, himself, that every one
is to be left to his own private judgment, and that the Sacrament is not to
be denied to any man coming to the Lords table?
No, because all are not sufficient to examine themselves: neither is it
manifest concerning all, whether they are, or are not of the Church: neither is
it sufficient for them, which by a lawful knowledge going before have been
judged impenitent, and therefore accursed out of the Church, that they should be
thought fit, and to have truly repented, if after any manner of fashion they
present themselves again at the Lords table.

Who do come unworthily to the Lords table?
Not they which are simply, subject to sins, or any weak in faith: seeing
that the Supper is instituted especially for the weak: And the Centurion said
rightly, Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. Mat.
8.8. But they which know not what this thing is, and which are all together
void of the fear of God, or of repentance and faith, and do continue in
sins against knowledge. In like manner they which do nourish confidence of
their own strengths, superstition, and hypocrisy, and false worships, which
do maintain manifest errors, or do live in strife, do still keep an evil
purpose of fostering anger, lust, or other bad affections: or do despise the
poor, or do come not as it were to a mystical, but as it were to a common or
profane table.

What is the punishment of them which eat unworthily?
As there are diverse degrees of unworthiness, so the punishment or judgment
is unlike, the chief degree of unworthiness precisely so called, is to come to
the mysteries of faith, without faith or any repentance, which is the use of
unbelievers, castawaies, hypocrites, and wicked men.

They therefore which so come, are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord,
the imputation of his death is laid unto them, that is, the death of Christ,
it returns unto death not unto life to them, and as Basil speaks, They do
bear the offense of Christ crucified, even as they who through unbelief
crucified him corporally. For these men do esteem the blood of Christ
profane, and they have him in no other account, then as an heinous offender
Heb. 10 29
: concerning these men it is said, he that believes not, shall be condemned.
Mar. 16.16. These therefore do undergo the judgment of condemnation unto
everlasting torments 1 Cor. 11.32
.

Another degree of unworthiness, taken more moderately, is of the believers:
which do not discern or judge of the Lords body, that is, which although
they are not altogether void of faith, yet they have a faith as it were faint
and weak, and therefore not, as it were, effectual by charity and
repentance: neither do they discern the mystical bread of the Lord from
common bread, but handle it irreverently, nor in that manner as the Lord
appointed it. To these judgment is threatened, Paul. 1. Cor. 11.29 saying, He
which eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation,
that is, by eating and drinking, he drinks it and calls for it.

But this judgment is not of eternal damnation, but of temporal punishment,
which the Lord does inflict in this world, even upon his own faithful ones,
which do sin: as it is manifest out of the words following of the Apostle,
wherein he does rehearse examples of this judgment, diseases, and the death
of the body, For this cause many are weak, and sick among, you and many
sleep, and especially out of verse. 32. where he says, That we are therefore
judged, ihat we should not be condemned with the wicked, but that we should
be chastised of the Lord. And this judgment is of correction and discipline.

To whom therefore is the Lords Supper to be given?
To all the faithful members of the Church, which can examine themselves, and
are taught in the mystery of faith, and can show forth the Lords death: for
to this mystery is required the examination of a man's own self, and this
show forth the lords death.

And therefore not to Infidels, not to infants, not to madmen, not to them that
are ignorant of the mysteries, or to them which know not what is done, not to
the impenitent, not to them which are excommunicated by the lawful judgment
of the Church, not to the polluted, either with manifest errors, or with any
notorious wickedness (unless they have first satisfied the Church, and given
a testimony of their repentance). Finally not to the dead, nor for the dead.
For the oblations of bread and wine, which were offered in times past by the
friends of the dead (after a heathen custom) went to the use of the poor. In
like manner the sacrifices, and offerings, which Cyprian says, were offered
for Martyrs, were in his understanding, praises, and thankesgiuings unto God,
in that it pleased him to afford his Church such excellent lights as they were.

Are godly and honest persons to be kept from the Lords Supper for being in
war, or having controversies depending in Law?
No, for actions and lawful wars are a part of that politic order, which
the Gospel does not abolish. And Constantinus, and the soldiers with him,
which were now in the battle ready to put to the sword the huge army of
Licinius, were justly admitted to the Lords Supper; And Melchisedech received
Abraham returning from the battle and blessed him Ge^. 14 17
. And good men may without bitter hatred, and desire of hurting each other
dissent about inheritances, contractes, and other like businesses.

But yet both soldiers, and those that go to Law, when they are about to
receive, must be admonished to lay aside hatred, strife, and other vices which
happen not of themselves, but by accidents to warfare and suites in Law.

What is it to make difference of the Lords body?
(...), is to discern a thing, and to sever, or exempt it, as it were, from
the common order, and to account it and use it more honorably then the rest, as
in Jude verse 22. we are bidden (...), to make a difference between sinners
that are recouerable, and those that are obstinate: And 1, Cor. 4.7. Who has
made thee more excellent? (...): therefore to discern the Lords body, is to
distinguish that bread as a most precious sign of Christ's body from other
things, and to use it with fit devotion, and therefore with faith, repentance,
and most high reverence; not to come unto it as to common bread, and drink,
but as unto the mystery of a thing of all other most precious.

Do they of the first sort of unworthy communicants, that is to say the wicked
eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ unto the judgment of their own
condemnation (...) truly; and, not refusing, but receiving it, are made
guilty of Christ's body?
No, for.

1. To eat unto themselves Judgment, or to bring Judgment upon themselves is
not to eat Christ, who is made unto us righteousness and life.

2. Because the promise of grace does promise only to the faithful the
participation of Christ himself, and they are Sacramental Seals to none but
to the faithful only: For what part has the believer with the Infidel?
light with darkness? Nor, must we say (says Augustine) that he eats
Christ's body that is not in Christ's body: and therefore their unbelief
cannot make void the faith of God and the institution of the supper.

3. Because no man, says the Apostle can be partaker of the Lords Table, that
is, of the meat set upon the Lords table, and of the table of Devils, that is,
have any thing common with Devils and unclean spirits.

4. Because the thing signified is received with the heart, and not with the
mouth: for indeed Christ is not received by the instruments of the body, but
by faith alone Ephe. 3.17
, which the wicked do want.

5 Because God gives not holy things to dogs, seeing the Lord forbids the
same to be done. Math. 7.6.

6 Because there are not contrary effects of the participating and
communciating of the body and blood of Christ. And the power of quickening or
giving life cannot be separated from the communion of the body of Christ: and
the wicked have not life eternal, but are condemned already, but, he that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life, says our Savior
Christ. John. 6.51.

7 Because Christ's body eaten, works life, but being despised, refused, and
rejected, it works death, and condemnation but this accidentally, not in
respect of participation, but of privation.

8 Because Christ can discharge the office of a Judge, although the unbelievers
eat not his body with their mouth; they eat then the Lords bread, but not the
bread which is the Lord; hereunto tends that excellent saying of Augustine:
If thou receive it carnally, it cease not to be spiritual, but it is not so
unto thee. Again. A good man receives the Sacrament and the matter of it, an
evil man the Sacrament only, and not the thing it self. And again. He that
disagreeth from Christ, eats not Christ's body, nor drinks his blood,
though he daily receive the Sacrament of so great a thing unto his own
judgment. Whereas therefore the Fathers, Tract. 25. upon John.
but especially Augustine, say that the Lords body is sometimes received even
of the wicked, by the word Body they mean the signifying sign, and not the
thing signified, or matter of the Sacrament. And the body of the Lord, that is
to say, his symbolicall body, is distinguished from the body of the Lord,
that is to say, from the very matter of the Sacrament.

9 And lastly, this consequence of our adversaries is ridiculous; Christ's body
is given, or offered, therefore it is received. It is not received, therefore
it is not given.

Can a man be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, which eats not his
body, nor drinks his blood Essentially?
He may, by reason of the abuse of the holy signs, which is contumelious to
the thing signified, even as they which despise Christ's servants, are guilty
of contemning our Lord Jesus Christ yea and of the father also. Luke. 10.16.
And a contumely done to an Ambassador, redoundeth to the Prince that sent him,
and whosoever spitteth upon, teareth, or trampleth upon the kings Image or
letters, is guilty of offense to the majesty of the king himself: to
conclude, the unworthy receiver is guilty, in that he does not spiritually
receive and eat Christ's body offered unto him.

Whether may the minister without peril of conscience admit all to the Lords
Supper, seeing he cannot know who are worthy, and who are unworthy?
As the Church judges not of hidden things, that is to say, does not prye into
the secret corners of our hearts, but judges the outward actions, having the
Decalogue rightly understood for a rule therein: so the ministers duty is to
leave to God the judgment of every man's heart, admitting all that are not
tainted with open crimes, but he must restrain those that are bewitched with
errors, repugners of the foundation of doctrine, blasphemers, heretics,
worshippers of Idols, drunkards, cozeners, thieves, tyrants, adulterers, evil
and filthy speakers, and those that any other way live ungodly, and walk not
worthy of the Gospel, which give no signs of repentance, the Ecclesiastical
Consistory having first taken knowledge of them, for to them belongs that of
the Poet.

Procul hinc procul este profani.
People profane and wanting grace.
Pack hence and come not near this place.
For Christ, gives a weighty and serious prohibition, Give not holy things
unto dogs. Mat. 7.6. Neither must we communicate with other men's sins. 1.
Tim. 5.22. therefore Chrysostom says, He would rather give his body to be
shamefully torn in pieces, then wittingly, and willingly reach out the body
and blood of our Lord to a wicked man, that lives without repentance. And for
this abuse Paul witnesses, that among the Corinthians many were weak, and
sick, and many slept.

Is it a thing arbitrarie or indifferent to use the Supper of the Lord, or to
abstain from it?
No: but the contemners of the Lords table sin grievously for they contemn.

1 That edict not humane but divine, Do this.

2 The memory of Christ's death whereby we are redeemed.

3 They neglect the communicating of the body and blood of Christ.

4 And lastly they show themselves unworthy to be accounted Christ's disciples.

Shall we need any sacramental signs of Christ's body and blood in that life
that shall be everlasting?
No, for we shall be with our Lord Jesus Christ even in bodily presence, for
there will be no place for any sacrament, when Christ's corporal presence shall
be restored to the Church, and the Church by the way of faith shall be restored
to the heholding of Christ even face to face Romans 8.24 1 Cor. 13.12 and. 5.7 1
Ioh. 3.2
.

What is contrary to this doctrine?
First, the error of the Aquarians, who under pretense of sobriety, used not
wine, but water in the Lords Supper.

Secondly, the errors of the Papists, who do horribly profane the Supper of
the Lord, and disdaining the name thereof.

1 Borrow the name of the Mass from the rites of Isis.

2 They feign that the Mass, as it is now retained among them was celebrated
by James the brother of the Lord, or by the other Apostles.

3 They adorn it with Gold, Silver, and precious stones, as if it were a
whorish Thais, to allure the more to love and affect it.

4 They do superstitiously use bread, that is, merely without leaven.

5 They do necessarily mingle water with wine.

6 They transform the words of the Lords Supper into Ephesian letters, or into
such a consecration, as nothing differs from magical enchantments.

7 They whisper the words of the Eucharist with a low voice, blowing the cross
upon the elements, turning their face from the people, that so the people might
with more religion adore the Elements.

8 They refer consecration only to those five word, Hoe est enim corpus
meum, for this is my body, and this is my blood.

9 They say that the outward signs do vanish away, and that they are
converted and turned into the substance of the body, and blood of Christ: or,
that, by force of the consecration made by the Priest, the body of Christ does
succeedc and come into the place of the substance of the bread, the bare
accidents still remaining, and hanging in the air without the subject: and
they feign that Christ is corporally contained in the hand of the Priest.

10 They have taken away the breaking of the bread, and have brought in wafer
cakes printed with the Image of the Crucifixe upon them, to maintain
superstition, keeping still the shadow of the breaking in the Priests mass.

11 They affirm that the sacrificers are creators of the Creator, from whence
are these saying that are to be found in their books, He is made food, flesh of
bread, God of the element. Also, He that created me gave me power to create
him. And he that created me without me is created by my means. And in this
respect they prefer themselves before the blessed virgin Marie, inasmuch as
she only once conceived Christ, but they can create him as often as they will
themselves.

12 The Sacrament of the supper which they call the mass, they turn into a
sacrifice, true, proper, and propitiatory, or expiatorie, without blood, for
the sins of the quick and the dead, yea more for the dead then the quick,
for whom it is celebrated, and all this for gains sake.

13 They say there is application of this sacrifice, made for others by the
very work wrought.

14 They teach that this sacrifice does not only merit for those that are
alive, that they should be freed from their sins, and the punishment of them,
and from all wants whatsoever, but also that it does avail for the deluerance
of the dead out of their fained Purgatory,

15 They feign that the Priest does offer Christ unto his eternal father, and
that the Priest is the mediator between Christ and the Father; by which means
the sacrifice of the cross of Christ is made altogether of none effect, his
alone perpetual Priesthood is denied, the merit of his death is drowned and
swallowed up, and Christ himself is again crucified Durand, I. 4. Heb 5.6.7
24.9.12.10 12 Math. 26.28
. As the Paschall Lamb was to be sacrificed, so say they is Christ sacrificed
in the Eucharist, and yet he was but once to be sacrificed upon the cross 1
Cor. 5, 7
. That which Malachy. 1.11 after the manner of the Prophets spoke
metaphorically, or allegorically in general of the reasonable worship, of the
inward spiritual worship, or of the spiritual oblation accepted by the God of
the Church of the new Testament under the shadows of ceremonial worship (as of
the incense and pure oblation) used in the old Testament (In every place they
offer sacrifice unto me) and they offer to my name a pure oblation) they take
this to be meant properly of the particular, real and outward oblation of the
body of Christ in the supper. That which the Apostle Hebr. 5.1. speaks of
the leuiticall Priests by Enallage of the time present, (Every high priest is
appointed of men that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins) they
do unskillfully expound it of the ministers of the Gospel. They say that
Melchisedech the priest of the most high, who was a type of Christ, did offer
unto God for a sacrifice bread and wine (that so they might prove that the
Priesthood of Christ does consist in the offering of bread and wine) which
notwithstanding like a bountiful king he brought forth, Hotsi, that is to say,
he caused to come forth, that is he drew out, he brought forth food, that is
to say, of every sort some, for the refreshing or nourishment of Abraham, and
his servants, who returned weary from the battle, to whom he would thus
congratulate for the victory, that he had obtained: and moreover he blessed
him as a Priest, and received tithes of him. Genesis 14.19.

They understand Christ to be called a Priest after the order of Melchisedech,
chiefly in respect of the daily sacrfice, which is offered unto God under the
show of bread and wine, which indeed is not so, (for the Apostle makes no
mention of it when he sets down the comparison between Melchisedech and
Christ) but in that he is a Priest far above all the leuiticall Priests, and
an everlasting Priest, and his Priesthood is without succession, as
Melchisedech he is brought in by Moses, as without father, without mother,
without beginning of days (as far as we know, as Chrysostom says) as if
he were suddenly come down from heaven, and by and by had betaken himself
thither again, making no mention of his ancestors, nor of his death. Also
because his sacrifice being once finished upon the Cross, has a continual
and perpetual force Hebr. 7.3.24.

16 Moreover one part namely the Cup, notwithstanding (says the Counsel of
Constance) the institution of Christ, and the practice of the ancient Church
they do most wickedly keep back from the Laity.

17 Those things which Christ has indeed distinguished and separated, they by
their fained Concomitancie, will needs have to be signified, and to be both
together.

18 The bread being magically enchanted, they stirred up and down, and adore
it as God, and by and by devour the same: not remembering what Cicero says,
Whom do thou think to be so madd, as to believe that to be God which he
eats?

19 They feign a separation of the body of Christ and of us, saying that
Christ is forthwith received into heaven as soon as the signs are torn with
our teeth.

20 They abolish the communion, which ought to be of many, and teach (...) an
eating alone, one having his own proper and private feast at one alter in one
corner apart by himself.

And therefore although none of the people, or of the Clergy be present and
communicate with him, yet they teach that private Masses, and that many in one
temple in diverse places at once, and continually may be celebrated, that so
there may be made an oblation of the sacrifice of Christ, and that the Priest
may communicate himself; which is all one as if a man should baptize himself,
and should say that it were available for others that are not baptized.

21 They proclaim their Mass for gain.

22 They celebrate it with a stage-like, and Histrionicall ornament, gesture,
bellowing, murmuring, lisping, groaning, singing, and other fashions like the
Orgian sacrifices, or Bacchanalls, without a Sermon, or declaring of the Lords
death (which Paul would have to be used in the Lords supper.)

23 By hearing, or rather by looking upon the Mass, they think themselves
armed against God, and as it were with an Ammulet or preservative against
poison safe from all danger.

24 That the Sacrament is once a year to be delivered, or communicated to the
people.

25 They teach that auricular confession is necessary for those that will be
communicants.

26 They celebrate the Mass in a strange and unknown language.

27 In the Canon of the Mass, besides the offering of their sacrifice, they
use invocation of Saints departed, and they mix withal imaginary merits.

28 They celebrate Masses for the honor of Saints, and for the obtaining of
their intercession with God, whereby the remembrance and intercession of Christ
is obscured and overthrown.

29 They think that the use of the Supper is of absolute necessity to those
that are ready to depart this life.

30 They use consecrated bread for the quenching of fire, and for the calming
of tempests.

31 They do superstiously include it in their Armories and Cupbords.

32 They burn candles before it.

33 When they please (even as in the old time, the Persians did the fire)
they carry it about to be worshipped.

Thirdly the errors of the consubstantiators, who do not admit the true
doctrine of the letter and the spirit, but think that the sacramental
speeches are to be interpreted literally according to the letter, and
rationallie, as they mean.

2 That it is offered bodily, or essentially or jointly, or after an admirable
and unspeakable manner, and yet by the hand of the minister.

3 They say that the body of Christ is cast into the mouths even of the
wicked.

4 They commend the recantation of Berengarius which was set down to him, by
Pope Nicholas, wherein he professes that not only the Sacrament, but even the
very true body, and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, is sensually and in truth
handled, and broken by the hands of the minister, and torn in pieces by the
teeth of the faithful.

5 They teach the real omnipresence of the very body of Christ upon earth,
in many places, nay in every place.

6 They attribute to the flesh of Christ many sorts of beings.

7 They hold that there is a communion made by a mutual, real, and actual
conioyning of the substances

8 The do not acknowledge the spiritual presence only of the body and blood
of Christ.

9 They reckon the papisticall elevation and lifting up of the host among
things indifferent.

10 They do wickedly confound the twofold eating, namely the one outward of
the bread, the other inward of the body of Christ to be but one and the same.

Fourthly, the error of them, who have taken away the breaking of bread in the
supper of the Lord, and in stead of bread broken or cut, do distribute unto
every one that comes to the Lords table so many in number of whole and
several breads, or round and thin cakes.

2 They have abolished the delivery of the signs into the hands of the
receivers, and the taking of them by their hands.

Fifthly the error of those who do very seldom make mention of the
sacramental changing of the bread and wine.

2 They teach that the only merit of Christ's obedience is to be accounted for
the thing signified in the holy Supper of the Lord, and think that only the
commemoration, and remembrance of the death of Christ and of his benefits is
taught therein, and do not urge us to be, by communion, incorporated into
Christ.

Sixthly, the errors of them who first deny the presence of Christ in the
Supper.

2 They hold them to be but common signs which do not effectually and
powerfully move.

3 They account the sacramental signs, but as bare pictures, and things to
look upon, whereby they may only be stirred up to renew the memory of Christ's
death.

4 They take these holy mysteries, but as outward notes or badges, whereby they
that profess themselves to be Christians, may be distinguished from other
profane people.

Seventhly, the error of them who do irreverently use these holy actions, and
in no other manner but as common and daily matters.

2 They that think it is free for them either to come to the Lords Supper, or
to abstain from it at their pleasure, and therefore use it very seldom,
whereas indeed it is no small part of Gods worship, and by God commanded.

Eighthly; the error of some who allege that the Supper of the Lord succeeds
not the Paschall Lamb, but Manna (which was not an ordinary and perpetual
sacrament, nor joined in time with the Supper; neither had it any sign of the
merit of Christ, which is the chief thing in the Lords Suppe) contrary to
the manifest institution of the Lord Luke 12.19
.

Ninthly, the error or rather the dream of a certain libertine Iodochus,
Harchius, a Montensian Belgan, who holds that we do not either corporally,
or spiritually take, and eat the very body of Christ crucified; but making a
twofold flesh of Christ, one natural, and taken of the virgin Marie now
glorious in heaven; the other spiritual, intelligible, and made by the divine
power of God, of bread and wine to be tasted and conceived chiefly in the
mind, this he imagines to go into the nourishment of the mystical body,
that is to say, of all the faithful being daily taken with the mouth and by
faith; or otherwise he dreameth, that there is a certain power proceeding from
the flesh of Christ, and after a wonderful, and unspeakable sort infusing it
self into the bread, does nourish the flesh of a Christian man; which is
contrary to the express words of our Savior Christ, which is given, which is
powered out; which words do evidently show that the true body of Christ and
the true blood of Christ, are signified, and spiritually exhibited unto the
believers.

The nine and fortieth common place. Concerning Magistrates, or Politic
government.
Is the doctrine of policy, or civil government and Magistracy to be
delivered in the Church?
IT is: Because Commonweales are the Nourceries of the Church, and the
consciences of both godly Magistrates, and faithful subjects, are by this
doctrine to be informed, against such Fanaticall Spirits, as oppugn that
doctrine.

Whence is the Commonwealth called, Politeia, Policy?
Of the Greek word (...) a City, coming of (...) many. But Ciuitas, a City
(as it were, Coiuitas or Ciuium vnitas, the unity of Citizens) is, not only
such buildings as are comprehended in one ditch, trench or wall, but that
multitude of people, which does inhabit those buildings. And the regiment and
order of that company or people is called in Greek (...), policy, in Latin
Respublica, the Commonwealth. From whence is derived politice, the Art of
policy, which teaches how the Commonwealth must be ordered and preserved; as
also (...), Regencie, Burgesship, civil conversation Philip. 3.20
. And they are said (...), to practice policy, who are in public office, or
about the common good. Whence also Basil calls the Lyturgie, that is, that
policy which is in the Church, according to God, and the Gospel,
Ecclesiastical policy.

What is Respublica, or the Commonwealth?
It is a company of many people, using the same laws, and that by common
consent, whether they inhabit one or several Cities.

What is the Original cause of Commonwealthes?
God himself, that author of mankind, who instituted the first society, to
wit, the band of marriage betwixt Adam and Heuah: whence, by Gods blessing upon
that marriage, and his real confirmation of that word, increase and multiply,
came an house, or private congregation, out of which anon came, first
children, after that Families, and they diverse and distinct one from another.
The head and chief of which house or family, was called the Master, or
Mistres of the house, in Latin, Pater, or Matter familias.

These inhabiting near together, by reason, both that man's nature is sociable,
and that they might afford each other mutual aid, did of those diverse
families collected together make Villages, in Latin called vici, a via, of the
way, and Pagi of (...) or (...), by the doricke dialect, a fountain, whereupon
they were called Pagani, Pagans, who came to one fountain or spring for water,
but these Villages were built in the fields, without such walls as now Cities
have.

After villages, walled Cities were erected, to preserve the inhabitants from
carnal men, and wild beasts. These were environed with a wall or ditch, and
were called in Latin Vrbes, (of Orbis, a circle,) because, as Varro says,
they with ploughes, made a round circle about that ground which they meant to
wall in Genesis 4.17
. Out of one or diverse of the Cities, came, that society which we call the
Commonweal.

But many Cities, and towns having the same uniform administration, were
called in Greek (...), in Latin Gens, in English a Nation.

But the first Monarchy, (in which the government was partly Herus, a master,
then Rex, a King) was established at Babylon in Caldaea, after the flood, and
division of languages Genesis 10 8
, By Nimrod a Giant, or mighty man, the Nephew of Cham, by his son Cush: who
to make himself great, abused his might, and tyrannized over men as his
vassals. Some think he was after called Belus.

This Monarchy was both of the Caldaeans, Babylonians, and Assyrians. For
Ninus translated it to the Assyrians, who made rather Niniue then Babylon, the
seat of his kingdom, which Niniue was founded by Assure, the son of Sem,
Noah's son Genesis 10.11
. After this Monarchy was that, first of the Persians, after it of the
Graecians, and last of the Romans.

Should there (if Adam had continued in his innocence) have been use of
Civil government?
There should: and such as one as is fully distinguished from domestical,
least diverse and distinct families should remain without an head, but yet
should that commonwealth have been guided with greatest equity, justice, and
clemency, even as there is a policy, and certain order amongst the company
of the blessed Angels, and therefore it should have been far different from
these Empires which now we have after the fall.

Did subjects go before and constitute them Princes, or Princes go before,
and create unto them subjects?
Although Princes and subjects are Relatiues, yet in nature and time subjects
were first. But Princes (except tyrants) were not, as Fathers, made by nature,
but by the subjects suffragies and consentes, and that upon certain
conditions, for the good of subjects. Whence is that Daniell the 4.32. Know
that the most high gouernes the kingdoms of men and gives them to whom he
will. By this it appears, that subjects are not so much borne for Princes, as
that Princes ought to rule for the good of subjects.

How manifold is politic government?
Twofold, the one lawful, which is appointed and approved by the word of God,
and the general consent of all mankind, the other unlawful, which is
condemned by the same word, and by the general voice of all men.

How many forms are there of lawful government?
Three: the first in which one commands by just laws, which is called a
Monarchy, Regnum, a kingdom, or the government of one: the second, in which
Optimates, or the best sort do rule by good laws, and have chief command,
this is called Aristocratia or the government of the best, in Latin it is
called especially Respublica, the Commonwealth, and Politia, a policy: the
third in which all, that is, the people themselves do by themselves bear
rule, and it is called Democratia, or a popular state.

Which is the best kind of lawful government?
That which is either composed of all those three, or at the least of two of
them: such as was the government of the people of Israel, as is plain in the
old testament: for one of these do temper the other, so as neither one
Prince, or diverse great ones, or the people it self can abuse their government
to tyrannize: But yet that government is best unto every people or nation,
which is most agreeable to the manners, nature, place, commerce, and other
circumstances of that people and nation.

What forms of government are contrary to these three?
Three other.

1 To a Monarchy tyranny: which is, when one rules unjustly and contrary to
the prescript of holy laws.

2 To Aristocratie Oligarchie, that is, the rule of a few: and it is called
faction, and in Latin Duumuiratus, when two rule, or Triumuiratus, when three
rule. Now this is when a few rich men dominere unjustly, and besides the laws:
thirdly to Democratie, that is, the right government of the whole people is
opposed Ochlocratia, that is, the power of the tumult, or that confusion, which
causes mostlye uproar and sedition, whilst one will not yield to another, and
this is when the people do unjustly rule.

Which are the parts of politic government?
Three: the Magistrate, the Laws, and the people, or Subjects.

Whence is this word Magistrate derived?
Either of Magister, a Master: which word is derived of Magis rather, as says
Pompeius, whence in all things those Offices, says he are called Magisteria
Maisterships, which rather command then others: as the Maistership of the
horse, of villages, towns, cities: whence this word Burgi-magister, and
magistrare in Festus is for to rule and moderate expenses: or else it comes of
the Greek word (...) the greatest: whence they who in Greek are called (...),
and in Latin Magistratus, are by Suetonius, keeping the Greek word, called
Megistanes, that is peers, or Maximates, the greatest, in the life of
Caligula, where he says that Germanicus would not join with the Megistanes,:
now although there be diverse sorts, Magistrorum, of masters, yet use has
obtained that that only power which bears the sword, should be called
Magistracy: but this word Magistratus is taken either in the concreete for the
Magistrate, or in the abstract for Magistracy it self.

What is Magistracy?
It is a politic office instituted by God, whereby one certain person, or
diverse having received lawful dignity, and power, do rule and govern by
honest laws the whole, or some part of the Commonwealth, in those things which
belong to this life, for the preservation of peace and tranquillity amongst
men, and for Gods glory.

Aristotle most learnedly defines it thus: A Magistate or Prince is a keeper of
that which is just, and consequently of that which is equal: Lib. 5, eth. c 6
yet Paul far better defines it, expressing both the efficient and final
cause. Romans 13.4. saying, He is the minister of God for our good to defend the
good, and to punish offenses with the sword, that is, with corporal
punishments.

What do Officialls differ from Magistrates?
In this, that Magistrates have jurisdiction both to know causes, and
authority also to execute annexed: but Officials are the magistrates
ministers, to whom is committed the bare execution of things determined: such
amongst the Romans were called Viatores, in French Sergens, Sergeants, as it
were servants: but the ministers of the Commonwealth are they, who only do
take knowledge of some things, as they who are governors of public works,
as Surueyers, controllers, paymasters, overseers, clerks, and such like: or
who have some office in the Commonwealth, as Tribunes, Treasurers, Wardens. etc.

How many sorts of Magistrates are there?
1 Diverse: and first in regard of jurisdiction, the Magistrate is either
superior or inferior, the superior is he that is assigned, and depends in
that Commonwealth of none other but only he, and upon God, as Caesar,
Dictator, the King, the Emperor, the Senate, the people, who has sole
government Romans 13.1, 1 Pet. 2.13 14.
: the inferior magistrate, is he who is assigned by, and depends upon the
sovereign Magistrate, as presidents of provinces, and other officers, who
referr the most weighty causes to the discretion of the superior. Act. 10.1.


2 In regard of religion the magistrate is either faithful, as David, Luk, 9.50
or unfaithful as Saul, and this latter is either a persecutour of true
religion as Herod, or else he who does only tolerate true religion: and yet
such a one is worthy of commendation: for he that is not against Christ, is for
Christ e, such a one was Traian the Emperor.

3 In regard of the objects, magistrates are either Togati, men of peace, or
Armati, men of war.

4 In regard of affairs, some are Senators, who determine public affairs,
others Judges, who hear and determine private suites, and these are Judges,
either of civil, or capital causes.

5 In regard of office, some are Lawgiuers, others are Lawkeepers, as were the
Censors Censores.
among the Romans, and the Ephori, amongst the Graecians.

6 Again, in regard of the adjuncts, some are lawful, just, and good
magistrates, who lawfully do exercise their authority whether they have it by
election or inheritance. Others are unlawful, unjust, or who come to that
dignity by evil means, or use it euelly, that is to say, either cruelly, or
couetously.

7 In regard of dignity, some are Kings (...), as it were (...), the bases,
supporters, or foundations of the people, others (...), Princes, others Dukes,
Earls, Lords, Presidents, Governors, Majors, Heads of Families, Elders; and
in regard of order in the Commonwealth, one is Dictator, another Consul,
another Senator, another tribune, another Treasurer, Warden or Ouerseer.

Who is the Author of the Mgistrate?
God himself: for he at the first, did so illuminate men's minds, that he
knows, he cannot live without a guide, and governor, yea the very Bees, do
acknowledge a King, and follow him, the Cranes have a guide, and setting their
ranks, do keep watch by night, which similies, taken from nature, do
declare that the institution of Magistrates is as well natural, as divine.
Besides Gene. 9.6. God made a Law, that he who sheddeth man's blood, his blood
should be shed by man, not by any man, but by one called lawfully to that
office, and furnished with authority from God; and therefore it must be done
by an ordinary Judge or magistrate, who by a set order may punish the offender,
and execute the judgment of God. Now since this is given to the Magistrate to
punish Homicides with capital punishment, it is certain also, that all other
degrees both of causes, and punishments, are ratified and confirmed by that
speech.

Exodus 18.21. Moses appointed Magistrates, the which (though he did it by the advice of Iethro) yet the Lord himself appointed it, Deuteronomy. 16.18. saying, Thou
shall appoint Judges and Magistrates in all thy gates, that they may judge the
people with judgment. And Deuteronomy. 16.13. and 19.2. the same God appointed both
power and punishment, adding this severe command, Thou shall not pity him,
but shall take evil from the midst of thee, that others hearing may fear.
Now the moral and natural parts of Moses Law appertained in general to all
ages in the world. Prou. 8.15. By me, says Wisdom, which is the son of God,
do Kings reign, and princes decree justice, by me princes rule, and the
Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, that is, all their authority is from
me. 2. Cron. 19.6. Iehosaphat the king of Judah speaks thus to his Judges,
Take heed what ye do, for ye do not exercise the judgment of man but of
God. Dan. 2.21. God sets up Kings, and translateth Kingdoms.

In the new Testament, Christ confirms Magistrates, when he says. Math.
22.21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and to Pilate. John.
19.11, Thou have no power over me, unless it were given from above. and Paul.
Romans 13.7. There is no power but of God, and the powers that are, are ordained
of God, or distributed by God, where note, that he calls authority, (...),
(...)
the ordinance of God, and verse. 4. and the 6. he calls the Magistrate the
Minister of God, which also even the heathen do acknowledge, as Hesiod when
he says that Kings as of Jupiter (...).
.

3. Moses, Joshua, the Judges, David, Hezechia, Josias, and many such like were
often stirred up by God himself, when he would deliver the people from the
oppression of their enemies, and we may read in the Bible, that the condition
of the people of Israel was never more miserable, then when they wanted
lawful Judges, and Magistrates, but were without a King: for then every man
had a superstition of his own devising, and all things, became dissolute by
impunitie, whereby they fell into a thousand both public and private
calamities Judge. 2.19 and. 4.1. and, 13.1. and, 17 6 and. 19.1. and 21, 25
. Now in that Peter calls the Magistrate an humane ordinance, 1. Pet. 2.13.
this he does not because man devised it, (for it is an excellent gift of God)
but because it is either proper to men, or appointed for the good of men. Out
of all this we may gather, that the Pope of Rome is Gods adversary, in that he
dares arrogate this to himself, to translate Kings, to set up and pull down
whom he will.

Is it necessary to keep this particle in the difinition of a magistrate,
that he is ordained of God?
It is.

1. First that by this we may acknowledge God the author thereof.

2. That we may obey this divine ordinance.

3. That the Magistrate may know, that in his faithful service to God he does
that which pleases him.

4. That both Magistrates and subjects, may receive comfort from this, that
God governs all the dangers of this politic life, but as for tyrants, and
rebels, he will punish them.

May a Christian man, being lawfully called, by the Law of God, and in a good
conscience become a Magistrate?
Surely he may.

1. Because magistracy is the good ordinance and disposition of God Romans 13.1
1 Pet, 2, 13
.

2. Because the Gospel does not abrogate policies and politic administration,
no more then it does physic or Architecture the science of building, only it
proclaims spiritual righteousness, which is by faith in Christ.

3 Because the Magistrate is commanded to serve the Lord in fear, and to
kiss the son of God Ps. 2.11
, that is, by this symbolicall note of subjection, to acknowledge and profess
Christ his Lord. Now this no man can better do then a true Christian, who
above others is indewed with the knowledge, faith, and fear of God.

4. God commands prayers to be made for the Magistrates Ierem. 29.7. Pray for
the kingdom of Babylon, for in the peace thereof shall be your peace. Thus
Abraham prayed for king Abimeleck Genesis 20.17
, and Jacob blessed the king of Egypt Genesis 47.10
, and 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort you (says Paul) that prayers and supplications and
thankesgiuings be made for all men, for Kings and such as are set in
authority, yet the magistrates of those times were Infidels, it follows
therefore necessarily, that magistracy is both a good thing, and acceptable to
God, for we must not pray for the establishing of that which is evil.

5 We have also examples of such as bare rule, and yet were Christ's most
faithful disciples, such were Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus, Sergius Paulus,
Erastus and many others, and such we read that the Centurions were, Mar. 15.9,
Ioh. 3.1 Act, 13, 7, 12 Romans 16.25
that I may say nothing of those most holy Emperors, Constantine. Theodosius,
and others, who defended the church both by public authority and victorious
arms.

Is (think you) power and authority from the Devil, because he is called the
prince of the world. John. 12.31. and. 16.11. And because he says. Math.
4.8.9. That the kingdoms of the earth are in his power and he can give them to
whom he will?
In no sort. for he is not called a prince by right, absolutely, and simply,
but in that he is so by treachery, malice, usurpation, abusion, and relation to
those who are subjects unto him: as for his speech to Christ, he belyes his
authority, and therein shows himself a lying spirit, for he cannot give
kingdoms to whom he will.

But does not this make as though god allows not the authority of Princes,
because he is displeased with his people, for making a king in Israel 1. Sam.
8.6.7.
No, but he rather disliked.

1. The diffidence of the people, who relied more upon man than God.

2. Their boldness, in erecting a new form of government.

3. The contempt of Gods government, in that contemning God their King, they
sought a certain King, after the example of other nations.

4. Their tedious weariness both of faith and hope, whereby they were bound to
depend upon God, and expect judges, at his alone pleasure: for the Israelites
from Moses to Samuel had Judges, who sometime of one, and sometimes of another
tribe were set over them, for the most part, by the extraordinary hand of God:
therefore God in his wrath says unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of this
people, for they have not only despised thee, but me, that I should not
reign over them. 1. Sam. 8.7. and in Osea the 13.11. says the Lord, I have
given thee a King in my wrath, and taken him away in mine indignation.

But since many bad men, yea tyrants are Magistrates, and in governments much
injustice is committed, in judgments are many deceipts, can we say that even
their offices are of God?
1. Surely they are, because they are the good ordinances of God. Romans 13.1. as
for these abuses and corruptions they are in the persons, who take upon them
the office of Magistrates, neither are these from God, but have another
beginning, as from the Devil, and from both the malice and weakness of men:
we must therefore distinguish betwixt the office, and bad persons which are in
office.

For this is a fallacion of the accident, when by reason of the corruption of
some governors, and manifold confusions in man's life, the politic government
it self is condemned.

2. Neither must we look only what evil is in government, but what good is
in it: the good, we must commend, as, the consociation of mankind, marriage,
and in it, the procreation, and education of children, contracts, distinctions
of Lordships, judgments, punishments of the wicked, defense of the good,
nourceries to schools, and Churches, and such like: but as for the evils in
government, we must wisely cover them, and by the consideration of our good,
not so much as name them.

3. To conclude, corruptions in governments are oftentimes punishments, and as
it were prisons, whereby God does punish the sins of men, as it is said.
Ecclesiasticus, 10.8. Because of the unrighteous dealing and wrongs, and riches
gotten by deceit, the Kingdom is translated from one people to another, and
this saying is often true, Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achini.

Let Grecian Princes do amiss,
The Grecian subject punished is.
Does not the Gospel utterly abolish politic order in prohibiting Revenge?
No: for revenge is twofold, one ordinate, or public, which is done by the
Magistrate in a certain order, by certain laws, to a good end, without
hatred to the person, which the Gospel forbids not: nay it is a part of the
magistrates office, whereupon. Paul. Romans 13.4. does expressly call the
Magistrate, (...), an auenger of him that does evil, and it is most agreeable
to the Law of nature, and consonant to that Deuteronomy. 32.35. Vengeance is mine and
I will repay it: for God the just judge does punish sins, either without man's
help, as in the destruction of Sodom, or by ordinary punishments, which he
has committed to Magistrates.

2. The second is inordinate, proceeding from an evil affection, tending to
the hurt or overthrow of him, of whom we seek to be revenged; and is, when
either the Magistrate himself, contrary to law, upon private grudge, does
abuse his authority, and hurt the harmless, as, when Saul seeks to kill
David, or when a private man, upon hatred, emulation, and malice, pursues a
wrong, and seeks not so much his own defense, as the ruin of his adversary,
or without lawful knowledge, will be his own judge, and auenger, as when
Ioab would kill Abner 2. Sam. 3.27
, of this kind the Poet says, At vindicta bonum, vita iucundius ipsa, Revenge
is good to men of strife,
Sweeter to them then is the life.
This kind of revenge the Gospel forbids. Romans 12.17. Recompense, to no man
evil for evil. Mat. 5.36. Resist not evil. Deu. 32.35. Vengeance is mine,
says the Lord, and I will repay. So Prou. 24.29. Say not as he has done to
me, so I will do to him. To this beelongeth that precept, thou shall not kill,
to wit, upon private affection, and pleasure, and contrary to the order
instituted, and approved by God: yet let the Magistrate, according to Law,
punish malefectors even with death.

But, that Elias caused fire to descend from heaven upon them, who came to take
him. 2. King. 1, 10, and Elisha cursed the children that scorned him. Chap.
2.24. it proceeded from an heroical spirit, and was an effect, not of a
private wrong, but of such an one as was done against GOD and his Church.

Therefore Celsus, Julian and others, did falsely accuse the Gospel, writing
that it by prohibiting revenge, did take away magistrates: but by this it
appears that the Doctrine of the Gospoll does not forbid all kind of revenge.

Why do Magistrates punish offenses.
1. Because God by these examples would be known to be a God, who discerns
betwixt things just and unjust, and who truly is angry with sins.

2. Because he would have these momentarie punishments upon few, to forewarne
us of the judgment to come, and eternal punishments.

3. Because, by this means he prouides for the commodity of others, whilst the
disobedient are taken away, so as they cannot hurt more.

4. That by this, men may be advised to repent: for exemplarie punishment
shows that others should not sin.

Seeing John Baptist Luke 3.13. granted to his young auditors to use politic
offices, ught not the like to be granted to other Christians, who should be
more perfect?
It ought.

1. Because God in the Baptism of Christ by a notable testimony confirmed the
calling and Doctrine of John.

2. Because politic services are things propounded by God, that he may be
more known in the societies of men, and that we may have exercises of
confession, patience, love, and faith. Therefore to forsake these offices is
rather an infirmity then perfection, even as it is said, Magistratus ostendit
virum, Magistracy shows a man. And Christ not as a Counsel, but as an
universal Mandate, gives this precept to all men, Give unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that be Gods.

Did not Christ's when he would not condemn the Adulteress to death, John 8.
by that fact, disalowe the severity of politic punishments?
Surely no more then he did disalowe the division of inheritances, when he
would not divide them between those two brethren, saying. Who made me a Judge
or diuider amongst you. Luke. 12.11. but by this he taught, that he came not
into the world to be a Magistrate, or a Judge, but to call sinners to
repentance, and to save such as truly repent.

Neither did he simply absolve her in regard of politic judgment, but in
regard of her conscience, and for a peculiar testimony of his mercy, and free
forgiveness, propounded that example: but to the magistrate he left his
office, of whom it is said, He bears not the sword for naught, Romans 13.4.
To conclude, by this he plainly put difference beetweene the ministry of
the Gospel, and the office of the Magistrate

Who has power to choose Magistrates?
Either the Magistrates themselves, who are to appoint either inferior
magistrates for the good of their subjects, or their successors: so Moses,
chose his inferior officers Exodus 18 25.26
, by the counsel of his father in Law: and this same Moses, joined to
himself 70. of the Seniors, for the government of the whole people Numb. 11 24
, and being now to die, by Gods commandment, left Joshua his successor Numb.
21.22
.

Or the subjects themselves, who appoint, for their own good and profit, a
Magistrate: so the people, and gentlemen of Rome, created magistrates, and in
times past, the soldiers made choice of their Emperors.

But if the Kingdom be hereditarie, the King may be chosen, if the former
king have many children different in manners, or there be several branches of
the same princely family, and the election may be made, either by the King
himself in his own life, or by the peers and states of that Kingdom, yet
so, as the first and fundamental Laws made at the beginning of that Kingdom,
between the king, and his people, do permit, as we may see in the coronation
of Solomon and Azarias 1 King. 1.3 2 King. 14 22
, to this if the people give their assent and voice, it procures much
authority to the new King, as it fell out to Rehoboam 1 King. 12.1
, and to Solomon 1 Cro. 28.1
: for to them it belongs to defend the Kings issue, to preserve the lawful
successor of the Kingdom, and to help him against all usurpers, and
intruders. Also the Pastors of congregations in as much as in them lies ought
to further such consultations: as by the help of Iehosabe the daughter of King
Ioram, and Iohoida the Priest her husband, the young child Ioas was preserved
yet from slaughter, and made king 2 King. 11.24 2 Cron. 23.4
.

How ought Magistrates to be chosen?
Such as go by choice, are to be chosen.

1. Freely and incorruptibly without ambitious seeking.

2. Religiously, and holily, that is, with serious invocation, even in that
place, upon the name of God, and as it were with his advise, as was done. Iud.
1.1. and numb. 27.16. Let the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man over
this company.

3. He must be chosen with circumspection, that is, with trial made of his
sufficiency.

How ought Magistrates to be qualified, and who elected and created?
This Moses teaches Deuteronomy. 1.13. saying, Choose out from among among you, men
of wisdom, and prudence and known unto you from among your tribes, that I may
set them over you, and Exodus 18.21. Iothro does briefly describe them thus.

First that they fear God, that is, be godly and religious.

2. That they be true, that is, lovers of truth, righteousness and
sincerity.

3. That they hate filthy lucre, that is, covetousness and bribes: for, Gifts
do blind the eyes of wise men, and pervert the words of the just. Exodus 23.8.
Deuteronomy. 16.19. but they must be such as love the public good.

4. That they be men of courage, that is, stout, mighty or strong, that is,
endued with authority, fortitude, and constancy of mind, least they be
carried with perturbations: yea they must be lovers of all virtues, especially
of sobriety, chastity, and honest conversation: to this we may refer that
which is spoken of the election of Deacons, Act. 6.3. Appoint ye brethren,
seven men from amongst you, men of good report, full of the holy Ghost, and
wisdom, whom we may appoint to this buisinesse.

What titles are given to Magistrates in the Scriptures?
1. They are called, Elohim or Gods, and sons of the most high Exodus 22.28, Ps.
82.1.6
, not by nature, but by office and dignity, that is, as it were the
Vicegerents, and Images of God himself.

2. Nourcing Fathers, and nourcing mothers.

3. Ministers of God.

4. Sheepheards, as Homer calls his Agamemnon, (...),, a shepherd of the
people.

5. Fathers, as the same Homer calls the king, (...), a gentle meek, and
benign father: and the Senators among the Romans were called patres
conscripti: neither was there in the common wealth any greater or more ancient
honor, then to be called pater patria, a father of the country. Whence
Zenophon says that a good Governor differs nothing from a good father:
(...). l. 8.
wherefore Princes owe to their subjects, the love and natural affection of a
father: and as the shepherd excels the sheep, so magistrates ought in
goodness to excel the people, else they are not worthy to rule over them: in
other writers they are called (...), guids, which word also the Scripture
uses, (...) leaders, because they must in virtue go before others.

2. (...) adorners or orderers, because they prescribe order to the multitude,
then which nothing is more beautiful.

3. Episcopi, watchmen, and (...), obseruers, because they must diligently
look what each citizen does: they are called also in general, (...), keepers,
and (...), helpers, and (...), Saviors, with which title, they are also styled
in the old Testament: and (...), Governors, which word is taken from ships:
for as a ship, tossed in a tempestuous sea, cannot come safe to the haven
without the skill of a pilote, so the commonwealth must needs be overthrown,
unless it have a skillful Governor: they are called also (...), gracious
Lords, as Christ witnesses. Luke 22.28. whence Pindarus says, that a mild
and a good king is (...), gracious to mortal men, and a great friend, and
amongst the Egyptian kings, two by name are termed Euergetae, bountiful, as
Ptolomeus Euergetes, And Antiochus Euergetes.

What is the office of the Magistrate?
1. In general, that he keep and observe both the tables of the Law Sent.
17, 17
and so first and principally kiss the son, and do him homage, with due
service and true reverence.

2. That he erect, according to the word of God, and also defend, and
maintain, gods true worship, and prohibit all false worship Deuteronomy. 13, 5, 6
, 2. K. 23, 2, 4.
and take away, and remove whatsoever may seem to be any hinderance to true
Religion, after the example of Ezechias, Dan. 3.29
Josias, and Nebuchadnetzar 2 K. 18, 4
.

3. He must be helpefull to the Church with his counsel and substance, and
promote the ministry of the word. Psalm. 122.9. For the house sake of my God,
I will procure thy good: and Isa. 49.23. Thy Kings shall be nursing fathers,
and thy Queens nursing mothers.

Furthermore in humane matters, he must execute judgment, and justice, that is
to say, he must punish the wicked, defend and reward the good, deliver the
afflicted out of the hands of the wicked, help the orphane, give righteous
judgment to the poor fatherless, and needy that have none to help them
Genesis 9, 6 Psalm. 82 3.4 72, 2.12
: he must be a preserver of peace. But if need so require he must defend his
subjects with arms, and the Dominions that are committed to his trust by
war, he must bridle them that infring the peace, defend his provinces from
Rapines, and other annoyances, and recover those things that are injuriously
taken away.

So Alphonsus King of Naples his Symbol was the pellicane pecking blood out of
her breast with her bill, to refresh her young ones, with this inscription, pro
lege and pro grege, for the Law and for the Land: he must be (...) and (...)
or (...), that is to say, he must with a fatherly affection provide food for
his subjects as Joseph did Genesis 45 48,
.

Lastly he must govern the common wealth, and guide his judgments, by laws
honest and agreeable to reason.

Does the care of Religion belong to the Magistrates?
Yea; Epist. 50. ad Bonif.
for as Augustine says Herein Kings serve the Lord as they are Kings when they
do those things which they could not do except they were Kings, that is, when
they publish and set forth Edicts, and decrees for true Religion. And if the
care of Religion do appertain to every householder, as the father of the
family Ephesians. 64
, much more then to a Magistrate, who is the father of all his subjects.

But the care of setting up or restoring of Religion according to the prescript
of Gods word, and of maintaining the same, does then especially belong to the
Magistrate, when the Bishops are negligent, or adversaries to the Gospel: but
the administration of Religion belongs to the Ministers of the word. We see
what the Scripture requires of the Magistrate, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the son and
serve the Lord in fear, and Psalm. 24.7, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and
be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that is, Open your gates O ye Princes,
that the King of glory may enter in. He calls the Empires themselves and so
also Kings, Princes and Magistrates, Gates, because in old time Judgment was
given in the gates. And therefore when Ioas was installed into his Kingdom he
had the book of the Law of God given into his hands 2 K, 11.21
, according to the commandment, Deuteronomy. 17.18. And for this cause especially,
the Magistrate is by the Apostle called (...) and (...) the minister and
servant of God Rom, 13.2, 4.6
. To this purpose tend the examples of Moses, David, Josias, Ezekias,
Theodosius, and others. And these precepts belong to the whole Church and every
member thereof. Mat. 7.15. Take heed of false Prophets or false teachers. 1.
Cor. 5.13. Take away the evil or wicked person from amongst you. Gal. 1.8. If
any man teach any other Gospel, let him be accursed.

Further he is to see that all thing; be done decently, and orderly in the
celebration of the outward worship and service of God by the advice and counsel
of good and godly Church governors. And that such an Ecclesiastical order
being once rightly established, may be kept and observed. David. 1. Chro. 13.5.
by the counsel of the captains, and governors, took the Ark of the Lord from
Ciriath Icarim, to carry it to Jerusalem: and 23.2, and the verses following he
calls the Levites and disposes to every one his office: and 2. Chron. 29.5.
Ezechias being made King, presently restores Gods worship, commanding the
Priests to sanctify themselves, and to purge the temple.

It is likewise also the Princes duty, to have a care of those Schools
wherein good learning, and those Arts that are necessary for the Church are
taught, and delivered, to nourse, and train up in convenient sort, godly
teachers, and to foster and make much of the Church, as it is said. Esaias.
49.23. Thy Kings shall be noursing fathers and thy Queens noursing mothers.
They must also be examples of piety and virtue, as David vowed and professed
that he would be when he should be advanced to the Royal throne Psa, 101
. And Claudian says very well speaking to a prince on this manner.

In commune iubes, si quid censesue tenendum,
Primus iussa subi, tunc obseruantior aequi
Fit populus, nec far vetat, quum viderit ipsum,
Auctorem parere sibi: componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum: nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis,
Mobile mutatur semper cum principe vulgus.
If people thou commaundest, and think they should obey:
Thou first must keep thine own edicts, then will they not gainsay,
The princes life a Law, the people ever make,
As Princes change, unconstant folk to change occasion take,
Whether ought the Magistrate to tolerate only the true Religion in his
Dominions or Diverse?
Only the true Religion, L. 3 contra Crescon. etc, 51
because it is the fountain of all virtues, and the cause of all public and
private Justice and happiness. Whereupon Augustine has this speech, Herein
Kings, as they are commanded by GOD do serve the Lord when in their kingdom
they command those things that are good, and forbid those things that are
evil, and not only in things pertaining to humane society, but in those also
which concern Divine Religion. And it is the express commandment of God,
Thou shall have none other Gods but me Exodus, 20
.

Yet notwithstanding, sometimes the days are such, that godly Kings, and
Magistrates moved with the necessity of retaining the public peace, and the
avoiding of secret plots and seditions, are constrained like skillful Pilots,
as it were, to give way unto the tempest, and to bear with them that are
superstitious, or go astray, that so they may rather have some Religion, and
some common wealth then none at all.

Ought the Magistrate to compel any man to believe?
He cannot put faith into a man, nor compel the mind; but he ought to
compel the outward man to the hearing of true Doctrine, and he ought to
further those means whereby faith is wrought, hindering all scandals and
offenses, and, after diligent search, and knowledge, casting out all public
heresies, and errors that weaken faith. So we read, 2. Chron. 34.33. that
Josias took away all the abominations out of all the countries, that
pertained to the children of Israel, and compelled all that were found in
Israel to serve the Lord their God.

Is it lawful for the Magistrate to put heretics to the sword?
Surely it is, especially those that are obstinate seducers of others, and
wickedly seek the euersion of Church, and common wealth, if once, being
convinced by the Scriptures, they do still remain incorrigible. The reason is.

1. The Law of God commands the same to be done to blaspheamers, and false
Prophets Levit. 24, 16 Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6.7. and 17 5.18.20
. And Josias did it very commendably. 2. King. 23.20.

2. Because, if Nebuchadnezer a heathen King would not endure them that were
blaspheamers against the God of Israel Dan. 6.25
, much less ought a Christian Magistrate to tolerate them.

Bu^ the seduced heretics, if they refuse to be instructed, he shall in
wisdom constrain either by banishment, or imprisonment, until they come unto
themselves, and repent, and renounce their heresy, least the scabbed sheep
infect the rest of the flock, and least a little leven corrupt the whole
lump. 1. Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.

Neither must we think that the Gospel detracteth any thing from the civil
government or jurisdiction, in matters concerning the conservation of religion.
For Peter using an extraordinary authority, put Ananias to death for his
hypocrisy, and shameless lying Act. 5.5
.

And Paul struck Elimas the sorcerer with blindness Act. 13.11
, because he perverted the straight ways of the Lord.

And the advice of that moderate man Gamaliel, Act. 5.38. for bearing with the
Apostles, does not prove that the magistrate has no power over heretics, and
perturbers of the Church; only seeing the Judges ready to slay the Apostles,
he labors to recall them from that wickedness.

No more does that speech of Saint Paul 2, Cor. 10.4. disarme the Magistrate of
the sword, where he says, The weapons of our warrefare are not carnal.

And whereas Paul Tit. 3.10. warns us to reject an heretic after once or
twice admonition, he does not there prescribe the duty of the magistrate, but
this speech in that place is to be understood of private admonition, or that
which is given in the Consistory.

May a Christian Magistrate exercise civil, or criminal Judgments?
Yes indeed, for if a householder may in his house govern his children by
discipline, correct the stubborn, and reward the good, surely the same may a
Magistrate do in the common wealth, as the Apostle teaches, saying; That the
Magistrate does honor good works, and punish the evil Romans 13.3.4


Neither does that saying, Mat. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not judged,
forbidd public judgments, whether political, or Ecclesiastical, but only
prohibiteth rash Judgment of matters, either uncertain, as Augustine says,
or Divine, which are beyond our reach, and to high for us, as says Saint
Hilarie; or that judgment which proceeds out of the bitterness of the
mind, as says Chrysostom: and the purpose of Christ in that place is to
treat of contratie or malignant censurers, either of matters or persons.

And as for that, Romans 14.4. Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? It
condemns their unmeasurable pride, who, being puffed up with the knowledge of
Christian liberty, make no account at all of their weak brethren.

And that 1. Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, forbids only those
Judgments, which are grounded only upon slender signs, and bare suspicions,
and not the private Judgments of charity, and much less the public
judgments either of Church or common wealth.

Lastly that saying of the Apostle. Heb. 13, 4. Whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge, comprehends the office of the Magistrate. For God will judge and
punish them, either immediately without the ministry of man, or mediately by
the Magistrate.

Does Paul condemn the order of Judgments, and all manner of contending at
the Law where he says. 1. Cor. 6.7. There is utterly a fault amongst you
because you go to Law one with another?
No, neither does he simply deny the lawfulness of going to law before a
magistrate, but only rebukes in Christians that go to law with another,
that same (...) (which is less then (...), and signifies weakness or defect
and impatiency of mind.)

1. That they labored with lust, sorrow, hatred and covetousness, even for
unprofitable matters, and for trifling businesses, and would contend in law
for the most slender injuries that might be, and would deal therein with an
obstinate purpose of revenge, and with all the sleights and devises that could
be.

2. In regard of the scandal and offense, because they did strive and go to
law under the heathen and unbelieving Judges, which brought a reproach upon
the whole Church: as if Christians should at this day bring their actions
before Turkish governors.

3. Because they did willingly offer injury and damage one unto another, even
those that were brethren and partakers in the same Christian Religion.

4. Lastly that they neglected to compound their differences, by the
arbiterment of the faithful in the Church.

But that a man may even before wicked Judges defend his own innocence
against the injuries of wicked men, even himself giving the first onset, the
Apostle Paul shows not only in words but in deed, and in practice, when he
appealed to the laws of the Romans, when he was beaten with rods: and so
also he required help of the Roman tribune, against the Jews that lay in
wait to kill him: and again, from the unjust Judge, he appealed to the tribunal
seat of Caesar Act. 16, 37 and 23.27, and 25.10.11
. By all with it appears that to go to law, of it self is not evil, but
the abuse is that that makes it vicious.

What does Christ mean then Math. 5.39. when he forbids them to resist
evil, and commands them, that to him that will take away their coat they
should give the cloak also, and to turn the right cheek to him that shall
strike them on the left?
It is not an advise and counsel given to them that are come to perfection (as
some expound it) but a manifest and express commandment, wherein he does not
absolutely enjoin them to turn the other cheek to him that smites them (for
Christ himself did not so to him that smote him, but rather reprehendeth his
malapertnes. John. 18.22. And so Paul, Act. 23.2. God will smite thee thou
painted wall.) But the meaning of Christ is that he would have the minds of
his Disciples to be so far from the desire of revenging of injuries, that
they should rather endure the injury to be doubled upon them, then they should
revenge the same; and that they should rather be willing to suffer wrong then
to offer any, or requite it being offered to them. But it is one thing to
defend themselves, and their goods which is lawful for Gods children to do,
and it is another thing to hurt another man which the godly may not do.

Neither yet is this patience which Christ prescribes, Luke. 21 19. or equity
and moderation of the mind, any hinderance, but that keeping still sound
friendship toward our adversaries, we may without bitterness, of hatred, or
desire to hurt them, use the remedy granted unto us by God, that is to say,
the help of the magistrate for the preservation of our goods, and substance;
and let the causes contend and strive so, as still the hearts may be free from
contention (for according to the old saying: Dissidere bonos etiam de rebus
iisdem,
Incolumi licuit semper amicitia.
The selfsame things may make good men to vary:
And yet still friendship stand, and not miscarie.)


Or they may in a care of the public good, and in pure and true zeal, bring
before the magistrate a guilty, stubborn, and pestilent fellow, and require
to have him punished: so as it be done with an upright conscience, and a mind
free from all guile, and corrupt affection, aiming at the amendment, or at
leest the bridling, and restrayning of the offender, the quietness of others,
the preservation of justice and Gods glory.

What say you to that of Solomon. Prou. 10.12. Love covers all trespasses?
Does that speech command the Magistrate to spare those that offend? or does it
command private men that they shall not bring their complaints before the
magistrate against those that do them injury?
No: But it teaches that private offenses, such as usually fall out among men,
must be favorably intepreted, forgiven, and forgotten, according to that,
forgive and ye shall be forgiven, and as Paul says, Love suffers all
things, namely those which are not enormious, but may be tolerated, and
mitigated, without breach of discipline, or godliness. 1. Cor. 13.7.

In what sort are judgments to be ordered?
This point the scripture teaches. Deuteronomy. 1.16. First, Hear the controversies
between your brethren. Secondly, Judge rightly between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him. Thirdly, Ye shall have no respect
of person, in judgment, but shall hear the small as well as the great, ye
shall not fear the face of man for the judgment is Gods. And fourthly, chap,
17.4. If any thing be told thee, and thou have heard it, thou shall inquire of
it diligently whether the thing be true and certain.

So Leuit. 19.15. Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment, thou shall not
favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou
shall judge thy neighbor justly. Pro. 17.15. He that justifies, that is
acquiteth, the wicked, and, he that condemns the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord. And Pro. 24.24. He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous, him shall the people curse, and the nations shall abhor him. And
John. 7.24. Judge not, says Christ, according to the appearance, but judge
righteous judgment, as if he should say, weigh, and consider the fact by it
self simply, without any respect at all to the person. And 2. Chron. 19 5.
Iosaphat said unto the Judges. Take heed what you do, for you execute not the
judgments of man but of God: (That is, you do not in judgment supply the
room of any man so much as of God himself) and he will be with you in the
cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take
heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither
respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.

And the law of the Athenians was this, (...). Both must be heard: and (...).

"Give not thy judgment any way,
"Till thou have heard what both can say.
Our proverb is, One tale is good till the other be heard.

Seeing Christians are by the law of God forbidden to kill, and it is
prophesied of the Church. Isa. 11.9. and 65.25. there shall none hurt or
destroy in all the mountain of my holiness, does not the Magistrate therefore
offend, in putting malefactors to death?
No: For he executes Gods judgments: And it is one of his royal virtues, to
revenge the afflictions of the godly, according to the commandment of the
Lord, to take away the wicked out of the land, and to cause all the workers of
iniquity to be destroyed out of the City of God Psalm. 101, 8
. Neither, does he bear the sword in vain says Paul, Romans 13.4. for he is
the minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil. But a way with
that savage cruelty, and Cassian tribunal which was called Reorum scopulus
The Rock of the acused: yea precious rather in the eyes of the king, must be
the blood of his subjects Psa 72.14
.

But those prophetical speeches of the Prophet, do signify that there can be
nothing hurtful to the Church, inasmuch as to them that love God all things
work together for the best. Romans 8.28.

Seeing our Savior Christ. John. 8.7. answers the accusers of the adulterous
woman on this manner, Let him that is without sin among you cast the first
stone at her, may therefore offenders be condemned or punished, but by them
that are just and free from sin?
Yes, for we must not respect the vice of the person, but look unto his
public office, and the order and course of the laws, which the Judge must
follow in giving sentence upon others, though himself be polluted with some
kind of blot. Although indeed it is true, that it is no small scandal of
offense, if the Judge be guilty of the same crime, for the which he condemns
another man,

But that answer of our Savior Christ is a particular answer, appropriate
unto the Pharisees, that lay in wait for him to entrap him, and thereby he
reproves their hypocrisy, who, being most severe censurers of other men, were
blind in their own faults, and did most foully flatter, and deceive
themselves.

May the chief magistrate with a good conscience show favor or give pardon
unto malefactors that are lawfully convicted?
So far forth, as the offenses do either directly concern God himself, and
are committed against him, as blasphemy, Idolatry, magic, sacrilege, or
sorcerie, (in which God is either dishonored, or denied) or else are committed
against the very nature of mankind as Sodomitrie, or the burning lust of a man
toward brute beast, or theft; these the magistrate should not forgive, for
these offenses do as it were extinguish, and dash the very welspring and
fountain of mankind: And therefore in this case the king must beware, that he
do not spare the offender, with the hinderance and endangering of Gods glory,
and of humane society Deuteronomy. 13 8.9
: For in that case It is better, as Bernard says, that one should perish, then
the whole company. Vnus quam Vnitas.

But so far forth as the offenses that are committed, concern only some
particular persons directly, there, upon weighty reasons, and wise
understanding of the matter, he may forgive, as far as the safety and state
of the Commonwealth, with equity and justice, will permit the same. For as it
is lawful for the Prince to aggrauate and increase the punishment that is
appointed by the law upon a good and just cause, as David, 2. Sam. 12.5. when
he was questioned withal concerning the rich man that had taken away the poor
man's sheep, pronounced him worthy of death; so may the same prince, upon just
cause moving him mitigate, and abate the punishment that the law has
appointed.

Moreover the will and purpose of the offender, make a difference in the
offense, and the diverse and unlikely circumstances of persons, sexes, age, and
the former course of a man's life, may be causes that in one and the same fact,
of one and the same offense, in men that are partakers in guiltiness, yet the
crime may not be alike, and therefore not the like punishment to be inflicted
upon them.

But if pardon be granted, let it be.

1 Upon a just cause, and necessary for the Commonwealth, and not out of the
sole favor of the Prince toward any.

2 Let not the offender that is guilty of a crime be freed from the whole
punishment, but only from some part of the greatness of the punishment, upon
hope of amendment: After the example of Solomon toward Abiathar the Priest,
who took part with Adoniah when he sought to be king, And by the example of
David toward Simei, when he railed upon him and cursed him. 1. K. 2.26 36


3 The Prince must take heed that the example of his lenity do not breed
liberty of offending, and that the people do not grow worse thereby: for the
impunitie of sin, when offenders may escape without punishment, it makes them
the bolder to offend.

The Magistrate indeed ought to be moved with pity, toward those that are
malefactors, and to abstain as much as may be from the exact torment of their
deserved punishment, but absolutely to forgive those that deserve death, he
ought not. For to him especially belongs that saying which is so much beaten
upon in the law, Thou shall take away evil out of the midst of thee. Deuteronomy.
19.19. And 1. King. 20.42. Because thou have let go out of thine hands a man
whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his life.

Forasmuch as we have no example or precept, in the new Testament for warfare,
is it unlawful therefore for Christians to go to war?
No: For. 1. It was not the purpose of Christ in the Gospel to frame a
politic government, Epist. 14. ad Marcell:
but to erect a spiritual kingdom.

2 As Augustine says, They whom Saint John Baptist commanded to be content
with their own wages, he did not surely forbid them to go to war. And it is
usual to argue from the Concreets to the abstractes: and the consequent
follows well, where there is no ambiguitie, as thus: John Baptist intertaineth
and approoueth of soldiers that remained in their offices, therefore also he
approves of warfare, for by the approbation of the example in his proper
subject, the thing it self in general is approved.

3 If the Magistrate do justly punish those thieves, whose offenses are only
against a few, then by no means may he suffer the whole land to be spoiled
and wasted with robberies, and yet the offenders go unpunished. For, He
bears not the sword for naught: but is the minister of God to take vengeance
on him that does evil. Romans 13.4. And lawful wars (whereof 1. Sam. 25.28.
Abigail speaks to David, Thou fightest the Lords battles.) Are of public
revenge.

4 It is written, Hebr. 11.34. that, men that were truly a part Godly, did make
wars, yea, and that by faith, and overthrew their enemies. But we must
remember this withal that a wise man must first try all means before he go
to war: And the magistrate must beware that he be not therein led by his own
lusts, or by any wicked or corrupt affection, but as Augustine says, Let him
even pity the common nature in that man, in whom he punishes his proper and
particular offense. And lastly, the war must be just. As for that speech,
Math. 26.52. He that smites with the sword, shall perish by the sword, It is
to be understood of him, to whom the sword is not delivered by the Lord, that
is to say, he that without any superior authority, commanding or granting
the same unto him, does usurp the sword to smite another man. And to Peter
being a shepherd of souls, and a preacher of the Gospel, it was said, Put up
thy sword into his sheath: as in like manner that 2. Tim. 2.4. is spoken to
ministers, No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life: Only they may with their exhortations and prayers be helpefull unto them
that fight just battles, as Josh. 6.8. commandment is given that the Priests
should blow the Trumpets in the time of war.

Lastly, that speech of the Prophet Micah prophesying of the kingdom of
Christ, Micah. 4.4. They shall break their swords into mattockes, and their
spears into sithes, nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, nor
learn to fight, is meant of the Christians, and thereby is showed what their
behavior, and endeavor shall be, and ought to be among the Gentiles, namely
that they shall seek love, and peace, and concord, which all they do that
embrace Chrst Jesus the Prince of peace, with a true faith, but outwardly to
defend themselves against wicked men is not forbidden.

How many sorts of war be there?
Two, Spiritual and Carnal: Spiritual, is that kind of war or combat,
which the spirit has against the flesh, the devil, and the world Gal. 5.17
: In which war faith in Christ Jesus, the word of God, a care and zeal of
justice, and such like virtues are weapons necessary for us, but they are
spiritual weapons Ephesians. 6.13, 2 Cor. 10, 4, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8
: The carnal war is that which is fought with carnal weapons: And the
battle is the very fight and conflict of disagreeing persons among
themselves, this later the Graecians call (...), fight, the former is called
(...) war.

What is political, or carnal war?
It is a lawful defense, or a lawful recovery of those things, which are
wrongfully taken away, or a just and due punishment which is inflicted by a
man's own magistrate, by force, and by corporal weapons.

Which are just wars?
1 Those, which without the manifest danger of the whole common wealth, and of
the common safety cannot be pretermitted.

2 Those, which are commanded by the chief magistrate to whom the care of the
commonwealth is committed, or else by him that has the government thereof
under him: and in this case the private person must follow that commission that
he has received of his superior magistrate: for this action of war is the
principal part of the higher power.

3 The war must be undertaken upon a cause just, and necessary, and
agreeable to the word of God.

4 The war must first be denounced to the enemy, and the matters, for which
they war, must first be rehearsed, that is to say, there must be no warlike
action used, nor hostility performed, until first the Heralds, that is, the
public messengers of arms, and of war, have denounced the same unto the
enemy, and offered conditions of peace Deuteronomy. 20, 10 Genesis 11.12
.

5 They must be made with a right intention, not in desire to hurt, or in
cruelty, but laboring for peace, and to bridle the wicked, and relieve the
good. For as Augustine says, Men do not seek peace to the intent to make
war, Libro. 5. de verbis do^ini.
but they make war to the intent to seek peace.

Which are just and necessary causes of war?
The remote causes are, peace in time to come, and the amendment of our
enemies against whom we fight, and by whom we have been unjustly injured and
provoked Math. 5, 9 23
.

The propinque, or immediate causes are the requiring again of the thing that
is unjustly taken from us, and not restored, or of the injury or contumely:
but chiefly the repulse, punishment, and revenge of the offense that is
committed against us Genesis 19.15 20.1 2 Samuel 10.6 7
.

And lastly the necessary defense of those that are in league with us, or
being in our army are in some extreme danger.

Is it lawful to defend true Religion with weapons?
It is lawful so to do, against those that are of other countries, that have
no authority over us: yea and against any part of the Commonwealth, which
goes about to overthrow the true Religion being once received by the public
consent of all estates of the land Ios. 22.10, 11.12 2 K. 23.15
. In this regard it was lawful for Constantine to defend the Christians
against Licinius his fellow in office. For so God commands in the law. Deuteronomy.
13.14. to slay the inhabitants of that City within our dominions with the edge
of the sword, which shall worship other Gods, and continue obstinately in their
wickedness; and much more just then, and more necessary is it to resist them
that would force upon us strange Gods, and wicked superstitions, and take away
the wholesome doctrine of the word of God, or infect it with the brainsicke
conceits of men's traditions, And this the law of nature approves, which
teaches us that we owe all we have to God, and by which the Athenians in
times past being enlightened, did publikly bind their Citizens by an oath, that
they should fight for their Gods, and for their Temples, and holy rites, both
with themselves and with others.

But the Lord has not commanded his servants to invade other countries, or to
make war for idolatry, but commands his people to overthrow the Altars
within their own lands and territories Deuteronomy, 7.1 5
. Neither has Christ commanded us for the propagation of religion, to make
war upon foreign countries which are not subject unto us, but to teach them,
and to preach the gospel unto them; and where the gospel is not received to
fly and give place. Math. 10.23.

Are those just actions, that do accompany and are incident to war, namely,
spoils, ambushes, besiegings, slaughter, taking away their furniture and such
other Calamities which are usually done to the enemy in time of war?
They are just actions, if the cause of the war at first were just, Epist.
105 ad Bonif.
if that were unjust, they are also unjust. But yet Saint Augustine tells us
that, It is not sufficient that the war be just, unless it be also justly
performed. Which that it may be, these cautions following are to be observed.

1 Burning or pulling down of villages, trees that bear fruit, cutting up,
and spoiling of cornefields, unless the enemies abuse the same to our
prejudice, are not allowed by the word of God. deuteronomy. 20.19


2 In just wars, it is lawful and meet to use against our enemies, spies,
ambushes, policies, yea and stratagems (but so as no promise made unto the
enemy be broken, for we must keep faith, even with the enemy, so long as he
does not break with us.) Whereupon Augustine has this speech: Psalm. 15, 4
Lib. quest Quest. 83
When war is once justly undertaken, it skilleth not whether a man fight
openly in the field, or closely by way of ambush. And this he proves by the
authority of God himself, who commanded Joshua that he should lie in wait,
against the City of Ai Ios, 8.2
. And commanded also David that he should turn about behind the Philistines,
and come upon them on the other side 2 Samuel, 5, 23
. For in war that sentence is very true. Dolus an virtus, quis in host
requiret?

If once I fight against my foe,
I look for fraud, let virtue go.
And we see that, even by the commandment of God, spies were sent from the
host of Israel unto the promised land, and that good men even Caleb and
Joshua Numb, 13, 17
.

3 When the enemy seeks peace, the law of suppliants, and of those that
yield and submit themselves is to be observed, by which means the Gibeonites
were spared. Joshua. 9.3.

4 In Cities or Towns that are vanquished by force, after once the victory
does appear certainly to be thine, refrain from shedding the blood of the
Citizens that are taken, and so also from cruelty toward women, infants, and
old decrepite men, and above all, beware of rauishing or deflowring of women,
for the law of God never tolerateth adulterers, or rauishing of virgins or
matrones, but most severely condemns it, and so long as the enemy lives so
long continues the divine bond of marriage. Those whom God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. Math. 19.6.

5 The victory must be used moderately, and difference made between the
causes that moved the leaders, and the error of the people, and the army or
people yielding themselves must not be cruelly put to the sword. 2 Cron, 28, 18.
For (says Augustine writing to Boniface.) As he that fights it out, and
resists is to be requited with violence, so the conqueror owes mercy to him
that is taken captive, specially if he be such a one as in whom there is no
fear of disturbing the common peace. And therefore the Romans are commended
because they knew.

Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos.
To pity those that subject were,
And stubborn proud ones down to bear.
And in general, unless there be a special and peculiar commandment of God
to the contrary, clemency is more to be commended then too much severity.
For it is no unadvised speech, that, in lenity and mercy, is the chief part
of the victory.

6 The ransackings and spoils taken in war do of right belong to the
Conqueror, and are of right his goods, and that, as Ambrose says, by the
very law of war: For there is a just translation of things from one to
another, when he that wageth lawful war does possess the substance of them
that are offenders, as Cyrus was justly made ruler of the king- of the
Babylonians Isay. 45.1,
. And this point is confirmed by the examples of Abraham Genesis 14.21
, David 1 Samuel 30 20
, and the Israelites e.

7 There must be a mean used in the defending of places besieged, that we
fight not with man's nature, Ios. 22, 8
but with men our enemies, as Xenophon, in his first book of the matters of
Greece, reports, that Anaxilaus being accused before the Spartane Judges, for
yielding into the enemies hands the city of Byzantium, which was committed to
his charge, when he saw many die for hunger, he made answer, that he defended
it as long as the war was betwixt them and the enemy, but when he saw that
the war was between them and nature, and that such men perished, as in war
use to be spared, he then thought there was an end of the war; which honest
excuse when the Judges heard, they acquitted and discharged him, for warlike
offices have their bounds confirmed by the law of God and nature.

8 As for common soldiers, and those in garrison traveling along the
countries either of their companions, they have these laws given them by John
Baptist, Luke. 3.14. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages. And the sentence of the Emperor Aurelian in Vopiscus,
is worthy of exceeding great commendation, who gave unto the Tribune his
vicegerent these commandments: If thou will be a Tribune, nay if thou will
live, restrain the hands of the soldiers, let no man take another man's
pullen, let no man touch another man's sheep; let no man take away other men's
grapes; nor destroy their corn, nor exact of them oil, salt, or wood; let
every one be content with his diet, let him take part of the enemies pray, not
of the tears of the inhabitants. etc.

Seeing that, for the most part, Princes make war of an evil and corrupt
affection, how shall the subjects that are their soldiers satisfy their
consciences?
They are thus to be persuaded, that the war is made upon a just cause, and
that it is not undertaken against the word of God: which is spoken to this end
that subjects should not suffer themselves wittingly and willingly to be
compelled to oppugn just and true causes. But because subjects cannot always
understand the true causes, and counsels of their Princes, in this case, in the
midst of their doubtfulnesss, this rule is to be followed, hold that which
is certain, and leave that which is uncertain. Now this is certain, that we
must obey authority when it commands, not things manifestly unjust. And as
in the law of Moses, Exodus 21.13. there was a refuge and sanctuary appointed
for him that had killed another man, not willingly, nor of set purpose, so are
the subjects worthy of excuse when in a doubtful cause they obey their Prince.

Are those mercenarie soldiers to be allowed of, that being hired with a price
will follow either side?
No, in no sort. For. 1 The most of them do not fight for their own
magistrate, but for foreign Princes.

2 They do most filthily forsake the calling that they have from God, and
leaving their parents, their wives, their children, their trades, or their
husbandry, they betake themselves to such a kind of life, as there cannot be
at this day a worse or a more wicked life devised.

3 They propound unto themselves none other end but spoil, or to satisfy
their lust, and they are for the most part of the number of those that shed
innocent blood for reward, whom God has pronounced worthy of cursing and
destruction. Deuteronomy. 27.25.

What kind of authority has the magistrate?
In divine matters, it is fully contained within the limits of Gods word. Deuteronomy.
12.8. Let not every man do that which seems right in his own eyes. And
Math. 15.9. They worship me in vain, teaching for doctrines men's precepts. But
in the outward government of the Church, the king ought to confirm the decrees
of the Ecclesiastical Synod which himself has assembled. 1. Chro. 23.2. etc.

But in humane matters it extends it self a great deal further. For the
magistrates law is.

1 To command his subjects necessary duties tending both to the public
weal, and safety, and to every particular man's profit, and commodity.

2 To compel every man in his order, and estate, whether it be
Ecclesiastical or civil, to do his duty, and to punish those that are found
rebellious.

3 He has power also over the goods of his subjects, and they are all the
kings, as we use to say, not simply, or for occupation, and possession, (for
Genesis 47.20.24. Joseph bought the whole land of Egypt for Pharao, and
afterward let it again to the Egyptians, that they should be the perpetual
tillers of it, and should answer unto Pharao a fifth part of the increase.) But
they are the kings, as concerning protection, defense, and lawful
administration of Justice: which we see confirmed by the history of wicked
Achab, who was punished by God for taking away by violence Naboths vineyard.

4 The king has right to require ordinary tributes, or toll of the heads,
grounds, and immovable goods of his subjects, 1 K. 21.2
and portage, or custom of wares, brought in or carried out, and tribute of
their fields, and subsidies according to the estimate of their whole substance.
And these ought still to be ordinary, for the upholding of the public charge
of his office, and to maintain the glory and dignity of his house. Math.
17.25. and 22.21. Give unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's. Romans 13.6.7.
Give unto all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute: custom to whom custom
belongs 1 Samuel 8 11 Gen 41.34 47.2.6 Dan. 2.4, 8,
. And the king has right also to demand extraordinary tribute, when any
urgent necessity requires it, but not to spend wastfully or riotously.

His exactions therefore must be moderate, least they being immoderate, he do
thereby overthrow, exhaust, and devour his people Psalm. 53, 5 1 King, 12.11
. And let Princes remember, that what tribute or custom soever they have of
the people, it is the public good, and must not be an instrument of private
lust or tyranny. The saying of Tiberius is well known. It is the part of a
good shepherd, to sheare his sheep, but not to fleece them. And therefore in
Daniell Dan. 4.7, 12
, a king is described to be like a tree, under which many gather fruit, are
fed, and shadowed, and in which many build. And to the publicans and officers
of Princes, Saint John Baptist preaches, Luc. 3.13 Require no more then that
which is appointed unto you.

5 He has right to determine all controversies according to the law, and to
make laws, and edicts, such as may be requisite for the right ordering of
civil government: as namely concerning Judicial proceedings, punishment of
offenders, contracts, successions, and the like, according to the diverse
circumstances of place, time, and persons. But he cannot take away the
fundamental laws of the kingdom, or commonwealth, but by the free consent of
all estates and degrees.

Seeing that 1. Sam. 8.11. Samuel says. This shall be the manner of the king that
shall reign over you, 1. He will take your sons and daughters, and make them
his servants. 2. He will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your best
Olive trees, and give them to his servants, 3 He will take the tenth of your
seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his servants. 4. He will take your
men servants, and your maid servants, and your choice young men, and will put
them to his work. 5. He will take the tenth of your sheep. 6. And lastly you
shall be his servants: Does Samuel in this place arm kings with an infinite,
or absolute power, circumscribed within no laws, over the bodies and substance
of his subjects?
No. For. 1. It is only spoken of God, and it is only true in him, He has
done whatsoever he would. Psalm. 115.3. For God alone is truly (...), of his
own proper power, and rule: and (...) free, and at liberty from giving account
to any, bound and obliged to none, as Nabuchadnezzer confesses. Dan. 4.35. No
man may say unto him, what do thou? And surely to proud is that speech for
any mortal man to use: Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
So I will, and so I command.
So for reason shall it stand.
And Aristotle calls none (...) but him that is a tyrant, Pol. 4

2 Because Deuteronomy. 17.18. and the verse following, and Deuteronomy. 22.37 commandment
is given that the king should learn the law, and follow the same in all his
government. Lib, 1. God, Justin, Tit. 14. Cap. 4
And Achab was punished because he would take away the distinction of
government appointed by the law, when he had taken away Naboths vineyard
against his will. 1. King. 21.18. And the Emperors themselves have a saying,
It is a speech worthy the Majesty of a ruler to profess himself to be bound
by the law, so much does our authority depend upon the authority of the law.

But Samuel in that place. 1. Threatens the diminution of those liberties, and
freedoms which the Israelites before time enjoyed under the Judges. 2. He
admonishes and warns them of their hard estate that was to ensue (which they
notwithstanding must not cast off) under the government of a Monarchy, worse
then that Aristocratie, or government of some few great men, which they had
before, because it seldom comes to pass, but that kings do stray beyond
their bounds, and abuse the power they have. And the law, he calls the manner
or course of government and rule which they must of necessity obey and ought
not to resist.

Has the chief magistrate free power, in his subjects affairs, and causes,
beside, or contrary to the laws received, for the determining of any matter?
Surely he has, upon just cause, and upon a serious and wise understanding of
the matter, for he himself is a living law, (...) which ought to interpret, and
moderate the laws that are already made according to Equum and Bonum, equity
and right, where the conscience of himself, being the chief Magistrate, and
the manner of the fact does require such moderation. And therefore in many
things, (...), or Equity, and moderation of the written law must be admitted.

What is (...), Equity.
It is derived as it were (...), because in respect of the circumstances of the
matter, it abateth the severity of Justice, and moderateth and tempereth the
extremity of the law, which the Graecians call (...), the extremity of law.
And it is of two sorts, 1. Public, or the Judges equity, supplying the place
of that person, whereby he bends the law unto the cause in hand, that is, he
does not respect (...), the extremity of law but applies the meaning and
purpose of the law to the manner of the cause. On the contrary, the cause is
bended to the law, when in judgment the extremity of law is retained, and no
equity admitted, in respect of any circumstances. And then Summum Ius, summa
iniuria. Extreme law becomes extreme wrong. In this respect, it is said
Ecclesiastes. 7.14. Be not just over much, neither make thy self over wise.
And Proverb. 30.33. He that wringeth his nose overmuch, causes blood to come
out. Yea the Lord himself adddeth exceptions of certain cases, to the
extremity of the law, as to the law of manslaughter. And laws are general
and universal rules, which do not presently fit every particular matter, and
case in question. And therefore they are to receive a fit interpretation, by
the industry of the Judge. In this respect Christ defends his disciples for
plucking the ears of corn upon the sabbath day. And David, for the same
reason, contrary to the law, did eat of the show bread 1 Samuel 21, 6 Mat. 12,
3,
. And this is public equity, or (...).

2 Private equity, or (...), of every private man, is that which 1.
tolerateth the infirmity of our neighbor. 2. It covers secret faults. 3 It
interprets doubtful actions or words, not to the worst, but in the best
sense, where there appear no manifest tokens of malice; It does not lay open
to the world secret offenses, but cures them by Instruction, Counsel,
Admonition, and brotherly reproof: Of which we read, Phil. 4.5. (...), Let
your moderation, your equity, your gentleness, mildness, and patient mind
be known to all men.

3 The chief equity, or (...) is that of Christ, in that he took the
punishment of our sins, and laid it upon himself, prayed for his enemies,
and left pardon and forgiveness ready for all repentant sinners, at what hour
soever.

4 Lastly, private (...) or equity or moderation remitteth ofences, yealdeth
from his own right, both in defending, and reteyning the good, and in
repelling the evil, and in revenging of injuries for the peace sake.

What politic laws are to be allowed?
Those which are agreeable to the law of nature, (whereof the decalogue is an
abridgement) and composed for the safety of the people: or those which do not
swerve from the eternal rule of the honoring of God, and loving our
neighbor, and are made by a lawful magistrate. Those that are made after any
other manner, they are no better then tyrannical bonds, Isa. 10.1.

What things are there that give weight and strength to the law?
1 The example of the magistrate if he be a living law, that is, if he express
in his life that which he commands in his laws, for, Regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbis.

The kings example bears such sway
That all the people go that way.
2. A care of the keeping of the laws, that they be not made like spiders
webs.

3. Equity in the observing of them, that Crows may not be favored, and
Doves censured, that is, the wicked spared, and the innocent punished.

4. The speedy execution of the Laws.

Does the Judicial law of Moses bind the Christian magistrate?
No, not precisely as it was appropriated to the people of the Jews, during
the government of Moses Law. For the law (as the rule is) binds none but
those for whom it was made. And, The Law was given for a certain time, and
is of no authority after that time. But it does bind him so far forth, as
it commands equity, and sets down punishments for sin, though not the
peculier manner of the punishment, which is to be tempered according to the
estate of the time, place, and country. It is lawful therefore for Christians
to use the Laws of their own nations, being agreeable unto reason.

Are tithes abolished, because the Law Ceremonial is abolished?
No: because the Precept of Tithes was not simply ceremonial, but partly
moral, imprinted in the rational nature, which teaches, that stipends are
due to such as watch for the common good. The which the Apostle proves by
arguments, 1 Cor. 9
taken from the Law of nature, and the common custom of men, saying, Who
goes to war of his own cost? or who planteth a vineyard, and eats not the
fruit thereof? and this, Christ confirmed, Mat. 10 10. The Labourer is worthy of
his hire. But the determination, of a certain portion suppose the tenth,
rather then the seventh, ninth, eleventh, or twelfte, was a Judicial precept,
which may without sin, and ought to be observed, if it be set down by the
authority of the Magistrate.

What is understood by this name Subject?
The whole multitude of people, who are governed: and the name of a subject, is
more general then the name of a citizen. For every citizen is a subject to the
Sovereign Magistrate, but every subject is not a cytizen. For he upon whom
only burdens and services are imposed, and not honors, that is offices and
dignities, he in that common wealth in the which he lives, is not a citizen
but a subject, but if in the same common wealth, in the which he lives he be
partaker both of dignities and services, either in whole or part, with the rest
who live under the same Laws, he is a citizen: a citizen also, one is said to
be, either in respect of his country, or common wealth in which he is borne
or enrolled, but a subject in respect of the Magistrate.

Who are the Magistrates subjects?
All and every one who live in his Kingdom, of what condition soever, whether
high, or low, politic or Ecclesiastical persons, so even Aaron the Priest
should have obeyed Moses the civil Magistrate Ex. 4, 15 32, 21
, so the Prophets, who, when they were ruled by the spirit of God, did
courageously, and constantly perform the office of reprehension committed to
them of God, yet to their kings and princes, whom they did reprehend (as in was
meet) they did reverence: and Christ the high Priest, and our master, did
acknowledge the Magistrate, and obeyed him in civil things Mat. 17, 24.27
, the like Paul performed, and commanded. Romans 13.2. Let every soul
(Emphatically, that is, every man, without exception) be subject to the higher
powers. Whereupon Chrysostom says, that this commandment is given to all,
to Priests and to Monks, and not only to Lay people, the Apostle in the
beginning declares, when he says, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, be he an Apostle, be he an Evangelist, be he a prophet, be he who
he may be, for, this subjection does not ouerturne piety, and. 2. Peter.
2.10. Peter condemns them who despise government, and fear not to rail on
them who are in authority. The which it is plain against whom it is spoken.

Neither was it lawful for princes and governors so to depart from their
right, as to exempt the Clergy from the authority of the magistrate: neither
must we look what they did in this matter, but what they ought to have done,
because they cannot, neither ever could, annihilate the commandments of God.

What is the office of a good subject and citizen toward his commonwealth?
1. In general, to profit it in the Lord, according to his calling, both in
peace and war 2 Samuel 2^ 16, 22 Heb. 11, 22, 2
.

2. To pray for it, and the safety of it Ps, 122, 7 Ier. 29
.

3. To help it, but in a just cause, by the precept of Christ. Mat. 20.27. in
a word, amongst Christians a good man, and a good citizen has in every thing
the like office.

What is the office of subjects to the Magistrate?
1. Obedience, that all men (if he be lawful) obey him, be he faithful, or
an Infidel, whither he command justly or couetously, or cruelly 1 Sa^. 8,
11 Ier, 27, 8, and 29, 7, Ac, 24 16. Tit. 3, 1 1 Pet. 2.13 Rom, 13.1
, because not without the singular providence of God, even they, who iniustly
and cruelly rule, are stirred up, to punish the sins of the people EZe. 29,
19 Dan. 2.21, 37. and, 5.18
. Romans 13.1. There is no power but of God. Nay it is necessary, and most
equal to be subject: neither is it a thing indifferent or arbitrarie, but such
as binds the very conscience. Romans 13.5. Because no man with a good
conscience, can resist him, to whose power God has made him subject.

And surely, subjects are bound to obey in all things, but vsque ad aras, not
violating religion, and so far forth as Magistrates command not things
impossible, and above our ability, and contrary to the law of Nature, or of
God, or forbid those things which God commands, according to that rule of
Christ Math. 22.21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods, and Acts. 5.29. It is better to obey God then men,
according to which rule, Sidrach, Misach, Abednego, and Daniell did well not to
obey, but without deliberation constantly and sincerely withstoode the ungodly
edicts of the Kings, both of worshipping the graven Image, and not calling upon
God Da. 3, 18 and 6, 11
: on the contrary, the Israelites are condemned, who obeyed the ungodly Edict
of King Jeroboam to worship the golden calfe 1 kings 12 30
.

What if some Magistrates command things just or unjust, are the godly
citizens to esteem them as such Laws, as they are bound to keep?
No surely, not simply, to both the terms of the Law, because every Law
binds, either to obedience, which is one term, or to punishment, which is
another term, but they are so far forth to esteem them as laws, and are
bound unto them, as they themselves, or their country, or that common wealth in
which they live, can yield, or else can willingly undergo the punishments
appointed, if they live in that commonwealth, and cannot obey these laws: for
private men cannot violate public and ancient Laws (though they be evil) but
they must either obey them, or if with a good conscience they cannot, they must
either submit themselves to punishment, or else depart out of such governments;
but the states of a Christian common wealth must either abrogate such Laws, or
provide that they be abrogated.

Does Paul exempt the faithful from obedience to these Laws, in saying. 1.
Tim. 1.9. The Law is not given to the righteous?
No, but he shows that the Law was not made against him, who orders his
life according to the rule thereof (such a one is only he, whom the Lord
indueth with true Doctrine and the holy Ghost) against such a man also the Law
cannot pronounce the sentence of condemnation, because he is justified, neither
does it handle him as an enemy, but rules, teaches and delights him, as
one assenting unto it: but this Law is against him, who has not these fruits
of the spirit, which are repeated Gal. 5.13. and it confirms that which is,
Romans 13. The Magistrate is not to be feared of them that do well, but that do
evil: and thou shall not fear the King.

What is the second office of subjects toward the Magistrate?
Honor, or fear, or reverence.

1. That they admire and reverence governors ex animo, in heart, in word, in
gesture, and fear them as Gods vicegerents: such was the reverence which
Quintus Fabius Maximus, yielded to his son, being Consul, but Christians
must go far higher. Further, that they think charitably and judge honorably
of the whole state 1 king. 1, 23.31
, that they construe even faults in the best part, and either cover them with a
godly equity, or pass over them by a prudent dissimulation, or correct them
by moderate counsels and admonitions, that they submit themselves willingly to
his sentence 2. Sam. 19 19
, that they pardon all wrongs: forbear the least violence: and in a word, that
they speak not evil of him Exodus, 22, 2.8 Act. 23, 5 1 Pet, 2.17,
. But that they Give fear to whom fear belongs, and Honor to whom Honor
belongs, Romans 13.7.

What is the Third?
Fidelity, or that natural requiting affection, which the grecians call
(...): that subjects do, as much as they can, by an honest and godly means,
preserve, keep, and defend, the safety, life, right, dignity, cause, person,
and family of their Sovereign Magistrate, against all such as shall conspire
against him 2 Samuel 16, 9.20.2.11, 2 K. 12.2, etc
. For if we must give our lives for the brethren, much more for our Governors,
who are fathers. 1. John. 3, 16.

What is the forth?
Piety: to pray for the Magistrate, for his safety, and government. 1. Tim. 2.
1. Ier. 29.7. Dan. 6.21. So the Christians of the Church Primitive, prayed for
their heathen Emperors, wishing unto them, long life, secure government, a
safe house, Tract, in Apol. Cap. 30
valiant soldiers, faithful Senators, good people, and quiet Kingdoms. Only
Julian the Apostata was that Emperor, for whom they durst not pray 1 Ioh,
5.16, Gal. 5, 12
.

What is the fifth?
Not, as Polypragmous, to make an inroarde upon the duty of the Magistrate,
but rather if we know any thing which may be for the good of the common
weal, to acquaint him with it, and to crave both advise and assistance from
him 2 Samuel 4.4 2 K, 6, 26.8 3.
. Those two verses are therefore worthy to be remembered of all busy bodies,
which John Functius, as he went to be punished, did repeat.

Disce meo exemplo, mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge, ceu postem, (...).
Learn by my loss to do, alone that longs to thee,
And, as a plague that kills, all busy meddling flee.
What is the sixth?
Love, or gratitude, and benevolence, which they must declare by their best
services Gen 47 7 to 2 Sa^. 14.4 2 K, 19.2 20, 7
.

What is the seventh?
They are bound to help him, according to their abilities, be it by Taxes, or
Subsidies, or tenthes, or other ways, and this they must do without murmuring
1 Samuel, 8.1^ Pro. 13.7
. Christ did so Mat, 17,
, and commanded subjects to do so M, 22.21
, Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedech, Genesis 14.20. Joseph and Marie, in the New
Testament, went to be taxed L, 2.4, 5
. And how can the common wealth be preserved and governed without tributes? yea
and, The labourer is worthy of his hyre. Luke. 10.7. Nay the Law of Nature
teaches it, by which all Nations, who had any form of government, since the
creation of the world, have paid tributes.

For Taxes, Subsidies, and regal hereditaments, are granted to Princes,
either to testify the love of subjects, or to reward the care of the
Magistrate, and that they may better endure all public charges. And if
citizens are bounden to adventure their lives in the Kings service, much more
must they communicate their goods for the common good.

Are Clergy men, or Church men, as they are called, exempted from all taxes,
and Subsidies?
Surely Christ challenged no such privilege: for he was ready to pay tribute,
for himself and Peter. And it is against the Law of charity, that they who
have proper Lands, and other emoluments by the Church, should be exempted from
civil charges, casting that burden upon the shoulders of others: as though
when all others are in want, they only should be free 2 Cor. 8.33
.

As for that Genesis 47.26. where we read that the Egyptian Priests paid not the
fifth part, this was, because their fields were not sold to the King, in that
dearth, they having corn from the Kings Granaries.

But the Leuiticall Priests were in Israel, justly exempted, because they
possessed no fields amongst that people, but only lived of oblations.

Notwithstanding, Justinian made a Law, that Churchmen should be free from such
personal services, as were performed by industry and labor, because if they
were bound to them, they must needs be withdrawn from their duties.

We also deny not, but that princes may remit to them somewhat of their
tributes, so it be not to others hinderance, and to maintain their riot. But
we avouch, that Churchmen cannot challenge such immunitie by gods word: neither
that they can in conscience deny trybute to princes, if it be demanded.

Wherefore we avouch that, that decree of Boniface the eight, is most iniust,
wherein he straightly forbids Churchmen, not once to pay tribute to profane
Princes, without the Popes authority.

Why must subjects perform obedience to the Magistrate?
1. For the commandment, and ordinance of God.

2. To avoid punishments, because they who resist magistracy, are subject to
punishment, Romans 13.2. and we must be subject not only for wrath that is (for
fear of temporal punishment) but also for conscience, that is (the fear of
God, least we offend god, before whom we must keep a good conscience): or,
not only to avoid punishment, but because it is acceptable to God: and note
that the conscience becomes guilty, and subject to eternal punishments, not
for violating the Princes commandment, which sometimes may be unjust, but
for violating the institution of God, which commands obedience to Magistrates
and Laws politic; because not humane but divine Laws bind the conscience,
and make it guilty of eternal death.

May Subjects rise up in arms against Magistrates, or become mutinous?
No, for God has often punished the authors of sedition: so Core and his
company murmuring against Moses was in the desert consumed with fire: and the
earth swallowed up, Dathan, and Abiram alive with their families Numb. 16 12, 31
, so Absolon was hanged in his own hair, being thus punished, as a rebel to
his father: neither did Ziba, Adoniah, and Zimry escape 2 Samuel 12 22 1 K.
2.10.20 25.16.16
.

Did Naboth well, 1. King. 21.3. to deny Ahab his vineyard, who deserved it,
and offered money for it?
He did well.

1. Because God gave an especial law to this people, that hereditarie
possessions, should not pass from one tribe to another, but should be
retained still in the tribes, who, to that purpose, must marry amongst
themselves Leui. 25, 23, Number, 36 7.9
, because God would have that stock to be known, out of which he had decreed
the Messiah to be borne.

What if the Magistrate offer thee some open and great wrong? what must thou
do?
I must not use any violence against him, for now no private person has, with
Ehud, Judges 3.21. Extraordinary commandment from god, Tihis and 7 questions
after are added of purpose to this English translation,
to kill Princes, as may be observed, in the Lords provident disanulling of such
traiterous attempts. And here note, that all such persons, as in the Scriptures
attempted any thing against the life even of Tyrants, they had not only a
personal warrant from God, but also effected their purpose, and without the
loss of their own lives delivered the people. And surely it were better for
private men privately to bear all wrongs done by Princes, as it were in a
doubtful case, then in auenging themselves to sin against God: For here Christ
bids me, to turn the other cheek, that is, to bear all wrongs done,
especially by my governor, for Gods sake, knowing this, that he who is
rejected by men, is not, for an injury received, abiected by God.

Secondly, it becomes wise men to try all means, and suffer all wrongs,
rather then to rise in Arms against Governors.

Thirdly, if it be an inferior magistrate who wrongs me, I am to come, by
supplycatorie petition, to the superior for his aid: and, even against him, use
rather Law then force, in a free common weal.

Fourthly, I am by flight to avoid the present wrong of my governor.

This in the Scriptures we find Practiced by Gods people to Pharaoh Exodus 5,
1. Isa, 29, 7
, and the same people to Nebuchadnezzar a tyrant were commanded to perform
obedience, and to pray for him. His successor Darius, Daniell obeyed, and said,
O King live for ever, Dan. 6, 21
. And when David was moved to kill Saul, though he was to succeed him in his
kingdom, and had received many wrongs from him, as that he gave his wife to
another, banished him out of his kingdom, and killed the priests for his sake,
yet he said God forbid that I should lay hands upon the lords anointed 1 Samuel,
26 11
, and when he had but cut off the lap of his garment, he was grieved for it 1 Samuel 24, 6
: what would he have bin, if he had shed his blood? yea when one brought him
word that he had slain him, did he not command him to be executed as a traitor
2 Samuel 1.14, 15
? And this he did, that he might not make himself a president for traitors by
a discontented spirit, through his example, to kill kings. Nay, he thought it
better, to make a dear account of his Sovereigns life, though he sought his.
Tertullian has to this purpose an excellent speech, Christianis praestat
occidi, quam occidere, It is better for Christians to be killed then to kill.
This made Paul to say, let every soul be subject to the higher powers Romans 13.1
this made him to exhort, that prayers and supplications be made for Kings 1,
Tim. 2.1
, even for such kings as Nero was in his time: this made Peter to say, Fear
God, Honor the King 1. Pet, 2, 17,
. This made Solomon to say, My son fear God and the King, and meddle not with
them that are seditious 1 Prove. 24, 21
, and to advise all men in the book of the Preacher, not so much as to curse
the king in their hearts Eccle. 10.20
.

But seeing you set down this true Doctrine of obedience, tell me whether this
be the Doctrine of popery, The answer is ^n ^^ridgment of the Ex^ct a^scorse
that it is lawful for any man to kill a Prince, who is of a contrary
Religion to Popery?
Questionless it is: as may be proved, first by their own assertions,
Secondly by their several practices. Thirdly by the Popes own pardons for,
and commendations of such seditious persons, as have either attempted, or
achieved the like treasons.

What are the assertions of papists in this point?
They do not only say that. Heretic neighbors may be spoiled lawfully of their
goods Decret: papa. ^pud great c. 15. q. glossa:
, that, protestant ministers may be defrauded of their tithes A^^^ us Card. Et
personus.
, that, Heretic creditors are not to be paid Symanchalnst cath: Tit. 46.
Toletus Ios. Insti sacerd. de Excom Gratia. c. 15, quib,
, that Keepers of forts are freed from such Lords ibidem, Sym
, that, wives are not bounden to such husbands Sym, Instit,
, that Fathers may disinherit such children Alanus.
, that children may deny such parents Alanus, pars:
, that kinsfolks may kill such kindred Great. l, 5 causa. 13.9. Cap, legi.
, and that, one borne in an heretical country may deny his country Alan, pars,
, but that, by Heresy a man, nay a king, is deprived of al his jurisdiction,
whether natural, civil, or politic Sym. i^stit: Tit, 46. sect. 47
, And the tenor of the oath of the league in France is thus: If ever I make
marriage, use traffic, yield aid, hold friendship, give credence to heretics,
or once salute them, let God confound me Ludou, de Orl. Part. ^9
.

Show this in particular. One of their own Bishops says, As soon as a
Christian King becomes heretical, forthwith the people are freed from
subjection Sim^ncha: Inst: Tit. 23: sect, 11
. A Cardinal says, As long as the prince continues excommunicate ( as he
must do ever, if he be not a Romanist, for the Pope excommunicates ipso facto
all heretics) the subject is freed from the oath of subjection Tol. Instr.
sa^erd: L: 1. c. 13
: but by whom? By the Pope, says a Jesuit, who upon just cause has power to
absolve from oaths both himself, ( as Gregory the 12. did when he swear that
if he were chosen Pope he would give it over) and all others Ar or, Ies, mar,
c. 15:
. If he be personally excommunicate, Then, says their Lawyer, subjects are
freed from their allegiance, and all his heretical assistants are to be
rooted out, and their Land to be exposed to be possessed of (strangers)
Catholics Massov, Iuriscons. de may (...) ^^eccl: par, 2, L, 4. de imp, page
676,
. Nay, says another Lawyer, if he be not excommunicate, yet if his heresy be
publicly known, Panorm. cap cum in hom,
there needs no pronuntiation of the sentence of excommunication, so that
(says the Jesuit) subjects may lawfully deny him obedience Valent. Ies. Tom
3, in Thomae d s^, q. 12 p. 2. p^g. ^63
? How so? For the evidence of the crime, (says their whole school, and make it
a matter of certainty and faith) does infer a sentence of condenation Bannes
^n. 2. 2, q. 12. act. 2 concl. 2
because (as the more common opinion does define it) there must we understand
the Popes will to have him excommunicate, whom upon the knowledge of his fault
he would excommunicate. Nay, suppose that a Protestant Prince have a just
Quarrel: yet, no war can be lawfully denounced or waged by the Queen (being
excommunicate by name) though otherwise in it self it were most just: because
her power is unlawful Alens letter to ^^^ley.
.

Come we next to practices, show me them.
First, Pope Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand, begins this Pageant,
We by the Apostolical authority do absolve all from their oaths, which they
have given to persons excommunicate apud great. c. 17. 6. 6
. And another Gregory, uses the like tenor, we excommunicate al heretics,
that they who are bounden unto the^ by oath, may know that they are absolved
from all duty of fidelity Greg 9 L. 9: decr: Tit, 7. c. 5
. Lastly, Pius Quintus their successor in place, but superior in malice,
says, We command all subjects, and absolve the^ from the faith they have
plight with their queen Elizabeth Pius 5 in bulla,
.

But this is only for obedience to Kings, what can you show for offering
violence to Kings?
Costerus says, This power of deposing Kings of their crowns, and Emperors
of their dignities, in behalf of the good of the Church was ever peculiar to
the Pope: who has no less authority, as Christ's Vicar, over Christians, then
the hireling over his beasts In Apol: pro part. 1. ench. p. 64
. So the pope has authority over the Emperor (says Molinia) because the
Emperor is but the popes Minister, and is to use his temporal sword only at
his beck de Inst. disp^ 29 tract. 2
. And if Kings will not enthrall themselves to the Popes authority: It is not
lawful for Christians (says the Cardinal) to tolerate any such King who
draws his subjects to heresy Bellarm. L, 5. c, 6, 7, 4. de To, P,
. But, subjects ought (says Sanders) to set up another in his place De visib,
monarch, L, 2, c. 4
. Yea, they ought (says Creswell) to expel him out of his Kingdom, as the
enemy of Christ, which is, as he calls it, in philop, page 194
an undoubted doctrine among the learned, and agreeable to Apostolical truth!
Yea which is more, though the Pope (says Bannes) should tolerate an heretical
King, yet may the Common wealth remove him In thoma, 2 2, q. 12, art. 2^.
. And then who shall remove the Jews, and the Stews tolerated by the Pope
even in Rome? But yet behold a greater mystery of this iniquity: for, suppose
that the King deposed shall be willing to be reconciled to the Church, yet
notwithstanding (says Simancha) he may not recover his crown In stit, Catho.
Tit. 33, sect.
. And does not the Bull of Pius or rather impious Quintus roar thus, We
command the subjects of England to take arms against their Queen Elizabeth
bulla pi^ Q. p, M
? Does not another say, Any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant, which I defend
by common consent Libro de Abdica, Henr^ 3. p. ^62, 270
. Now, it is evident (says Reinolds that fox) that every heretic prince, is
most properly, and perfectly a Tyrant in Rosao
, and, if (says a Spanish Jesuit) they may be bereaved of their lives, much
more of their livings and renownes Valentia To^o, 3, disp, 1 q, 11, punct. 2
. Nay, Heretical Kings (says Simancha) deserve more grievous punishment, than
private men: Therefore the Scythians (as he well deserved,) did put to death
their King Scylen, for violating their Bacchanals Instit cath: Tit: 23. sect:
12, 13
. Behold your faces in this Scythian Glass, you Priests of Baall. But to go
on, were not, the Jesuits the causes of all that tyranny which was exercised
amongst the Indians, Mercur: gallobel^g: to^ mo, 2. L, 10
and which yet cries for vengeance from heaven? Did not Duke Randolphe
persecute the Emperor Henry his King by force of arms, and that only at the
popes instigation Abbas vsp: Crant: in Cron: 2
? Did not Clemens, that merciless Monk, murder Henry his king in France? Did
not Parrey, and Lopez, and diverse others attempt the like against Queen
Elizabeth? and have not those monsters of men, those infamous traitors of late,
attempted the like against our King and country? and one of them seduced by
Jesuits, died in it, that it was no sin? Does not Reinalds speak against the
King of Navarre to the French in these words, Will you proclaim Navarre a
Caluinist, king of the most christian Kingdom of France? What is this else but
to advance a dog to be Sovereign over men? Shall Catholics pray God save that
King, whom they may not admit into their houses? But now that France is theirs
as they think; this Island of Britain is a great eyesore to them, and to the
end they might have a prince to their purpose, they can write whole volumes, to
advance a woman stranger, and to disable the just title of our dread Sovereign
King James. Remember these children of Edome, Psalm, 137.7
O Lord, who said of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it unto the ground.

But you cannot show that any Romanists have commended this practice?
Yes, that I can: Bellarmine says, Many Popes have justly deposed many princes
L. 5. de Romans pontif. c. 6 et. 7:
: Cardinal Allen To si^ william Sta^ly
, Reinolds in R^saeo
, Parsons in h^s Dol ^a^ that is his deceitful man.
, inciting subjects to take arms against their Prince, do persuade by
examples merely rebellious, as the resisting of King John: of Edward the
second: Richard the second: of Henry the sixth, as presidents to be followed.
The author of the book of Deposing Henry king of France, does sing a Gaudeamus,
for his death Libro de insta, abdic. H. 3:
. And again Allen does approve the perfidious rendering up of Deuenter, and
encorageth the English maleconte^ts, to join their forces with the Spanish
invasion To sir vvilla^ Stanley, 1587.
, And I have, and have read an Oration made at Rome 1588. by Georgius Picchae,
to Pius Quintus, and other Christian Princes pro Britannico bello indicendo,
for inuading of England. So the College of Jesuits at Salamancha approved the
insurrection of Tyrone Admon. to the nobility of England.
. And what traitor is there, who has suffered for treason, and is not amongst
them canonized for a Saint? (it may be our late Traitors in policy shall not
be so, because it was not felix scelus) And when that seduced servant of
Catesby, Bates, began but to doubt whether the late treason was lawful, did not
a priest tell him that it was meritorious, and that he sinned because he so much
as doubted? Furthermore it is plain, that Xistus Quintus does commend in a
panegyrical Oration Habita in consist: 1589.
, the murder of the French King as a notable, rare, and memorable act. But
why? Because he slew not (says he) a King painted in paper, or graven in
stone, but the King of France in the midst of his host. This, says he, was a
fact done by the admirnble providence, will, and succor of almighty God, a far
more maruailous work then that of Judith. And that English traitor Parry, had
his pardon from the Pope to kill the Queen, and Lopez his pay to poison her.
And Cardinal Poole, when the Emperor was going against the Turk, he advised
him to divert his forces from the Pagans, and to enforce them upon Henry the
eight, as upon an enemy more pernicious than the Turk Card: pool ad. H, 8. L.
3 Page 38, 4 Jude. 8.
. Thus we see that these are the men who resist government, and because their
Pope must be head of the Church as they will have it, therefore they give
Commonweales, Leave to choose a king, and limit him at their pleasure Parson in
his Dolman,
, saying, that majesty is seated rather in the kingdom than in the king; that,
people are not ordained for the prince, Ies, de Instit. abridge in h: 3:
but the prince for the people Dydimus: page, 26 1: Stapleton,
, and that a king is but a creature of ma^s creation Rotiqual du^ de iusta
auctoritate page 8.


But have not Lutherans, Caluinists, and such as are called Puritans defended,
and practiced the murdering, or at the least deposing of princes, and does not
this author, who^ you have translated defend the like?
It may be, that some of these have not spoken so advisedly of the authority of
princes as they ought, living themselves mostly in free states and cities, where
governors are chosen by election; as thinking, that when such princes shall go
about to alter the ancient and pure religion of God, dilapidate and consume the
revenues of the crown, tyrannize by exactions over their subjects, and beat
them as Rehoboam did with scorpions: that then the general state, the peers,
and Parliament of the land may labor to redress such disorder. But that a
king should be deposed by his subjects, murdered by a private man, or assaulted
by foreign force, either it cannot be proved out of their writings, or if it
be, we are to esteem it as a doctrine of men, not of God: as a private
conceit not a public assertion. We have no such doctrine, neither have the
Churches of God. As for the truth of this in practice, look we but to the
days of Queen Mary, when more suffered for religion in 5. years, then have
done for treason in 45. since: did any the^ rebel against the life of that
Queen? did they not suffer the loss of goods, liberty, country, lands, and
life, and prayed rather that their soueraigns eyes might be opened, the^ her
years diminished? And though diverse amongst us who cannot conform themselves,
are by the sentence of our consistories deprived of their livings, do any of
them lay hands upon the Lords anointed? and do not the Protestants in France
the like, at this time? And surely (if we well consider) amongst many
arguments, to persuade the truth of our religion and the falsity of popery,
this is not the least, that our religion (without equivocation) is an obedient,
merciful, and co^passionate religion (though our adversaries prefer Turks
before us) theirs is, a cruel, merciles, and bloody religion, burning al such
as deny their breaden God, and murdering such governors as do but favor of
our true, Catholic and Christian faith. As for this auctor, because the
auctor of the protestants Apology for Catholics, may bring him in an enemy to
magistracy, I wish in some points he had written more sparingly: He says if a
governor come upon a subject to spoil him, and kill him, by the law of
nature, he may defend himself. We say with Tertullian it is better to be
killed then to kill: and to answer them, defense, and offense are not a like.
He says, David might have killed Saul: we lay with David, God forbid I should
lay hands upon the Lords anointed: and David being anointed king, had another
gates warrant than they can show. He says, in public and notorious tyranny
subjects may crave aid from foreign Princes, we say, Blessed are they that
suffer: And blessed be God, our governors are such as we need not to seek aid
against them. He says, the Heluetians did well in shaking of the yoke of
Austria: we say, a particular is no general rule. He says, that the Jews did
well to rise against Antiochus, we say the fact was extraordinary. In a word,
there is nothing in him, nor I hope in any Protestant writer, which will
warrant conspiracies against Princes: which doctrine was devised by the devil,
nourced by the Pope, learned in Seminaries, practiced more of late by Jesuits,
then ever it was before, and written, as Dracoes laws, by the favor of God, in
their own blood. And if we read diligently this common place of magistracy, we
shall see that the author was no enemy to government, who doubtless thinks
that the king is to be honored as a second from God, and only inferior to God
alone, as Tertullian says.

You have added to your author 8. questions and answers, return again unto
him: what is the general end of politic admistration, and magistracy, or
magistrates?
Public peace, the preservation of piety, and Religion, or that right and
lawful worship of God. Unto which two heads we may refer all laws civil.
For hence comes vengeance to the bad, defense of the good, safeguard of goods,
rewards of virtues, discipline of manners, execution of malefactors and robbers,
and in a word the safety of man's life. To conclude, by this means the Eutaxie,
and good order of all things, yea of religion it self, is preserved: or as
Agapetus writes to Justinian, by this all men being assembled together, and
instructed in Gods word, may unfeignedly adore, safely keep, and without fear
practice his upright righteousness. To which purpose Stigelius has these two
golden verses.

Vtque alios alij de relligione docerent,
Contiguas pietas iussit habere Domos,
That one might teach an other piety,
God houses joined with contiguitie.
To this end Paul says, pray ye for kings, and for all set in authority (I
say, set in authority,) that under them, we may live a quiet, and peaceable
life, in all godliness, and honesty.

What use make you of this doctrine of mgistracy?
Surely in regard of the magistrates. 1. that they labor to recognize their
dignity, use it with good conscience, and that they maintain, and adorn it
with the greatest piety to God, integrity of life, equity toward men, care of
their charge, and diligence in their calling that possibly they can Deuteronomy. 1.16
2 Cron. 19, 6 7. etc.
. 2. That they may comfort themselves, and hope of Gods aid, being indeed in a
most troublesome, but yet a most holy calling, in that they are Gods
Ambassadors, or viceroys upon earth, yea that they may know that God cares for
them, according to that of the Psalmist, I will sing unto thee O lord a new song
who gives salvation to kings. But in regard of subjects, that they with thanks
to god acknowledge so great a benefit, and with good conscience submit
themselves to Gods ordinance, giving Caesar's to Caesar, tribute to who^
tribute, and praying for the life of their governors, and maintain it by the
hazard of their own both life, and liuelyhood if need require.

What now is contrary to this doctrine of magistracy?
1 The heresy of the Donatists, who took away the authority of magistrates,
and in hatred to this order, do reckon up many persecutions, which some
magistrates have made against the Church of God. 2. The error of the
Anabaptists and Libertines (who were so called, because they seek liberty in
outward things: and for, which in the memory of our forfathers they moved the
common people to take arms against their governors) these deny. i. that
magistracy is to be exercised amongst those christian and spiritual people,
whom the truth, to wit, Christ, has made free Ioh, 8.32
. 2. They admit of no suits in law, seats or sentences of Justice, or any
defense of a man's self: whereas the internal liberty of conscience, which God
by his spirit works in the hearts of his elect, takes not away the subjection
of the outward man due to governors Gal, 5, 1 2: Cor, 7, 21
, 3. They are of opinion that God would not have Christians at all to become
soldiers in war, because Paul says, speaking of spiritual not corporal
warfare. 2. Cor. 10.7. The weapons of our warfare, are not carnal but
spiritual. But Paul speaks not here of politic magistrates, but of the
Pastors of the Church, armed on all sides, with the word of truth, the weapons
of righteousness. 2. Cor. 6.7.4. They speak evil of such as are in
authority Jude, 8.
.

3 The seditious rebellions of the Pope, and all his papal Clergy, who upon
certain forged immu^^ties, presume to take the sword of authority out of the
magistrates hand, and to make all Princes vassals to them: yet Peter himself
(whose successors they would be) commands Bishops in plain terms, that they
should not be Lords over Gods inheritance 1. Pet. 5, 3
, yea bids all men, to honor the King 1. Pet. 2.17
. But (says a papist) Persona praecipientis non continetur in persona
loquentis: Peter commands this in his own person, therefore is not bounden to
it in his own person. Well then, Peter says before, Fear God, is he by this
comm^undement excluded from Gods fear? It seems surely his successors are,
who because they will not honor governors, show to the world that they fear
not God, for he that fears the king of kings, will honor and obey his
vicegerents and Ambassadors.

3 The flatteries of such as so either extol the power of princes, that they
derogate from Gods power, or deny that princes in causes both Ecclesiastical
and civil, have supreme authority and headship over subjects, where as the
princes of Israel are often in the scripturs called, heads of the people, not,
as the Pope would be, to give life to the church, for so only is Christ the
head, but to command, and direct that people over who^ it pleases god to place
kings in suprem authority

4 All such manners, rites, edicts and consultations which are not agreeable to
that eternal rule of honoring God, and loving our neighbor, permitting
thefts, robberies, unbridled and promiscuous lusts, or any other monsters of
the like nature.

5 Seditious co^motions of turbule^t rebels, against their magistrates.

6 Anarchy, or want of governors, which is worse then either the excess or
defect of any magistrate Judge: 17, 6 (...). 21.25.
. (...) made Chrysostom in his sermon to the people of Antioch to say, It were
better to have a Tyrant king, then no king, and Cornelius Tacitus to say, in
the first book of his history, It is better to live under a bad prince, than
under none.

Laus Christo nescia finis.
1. Pet. 2.17. Fear God, honor the King.
To fear God, is the beginning of this Book,
To honor the King, is the end of it.

FINIS.

