Two little works defensive of our Redemption, That our Lord went through the
veil of his flesh into Heaven, to appear before God for us.

Which journey a Talmudist, as the Gospel, would term, a going up to
Paradise: But heathen Greek, a going down to Hades, and Latin, Descendere ad
inferos.

Wherein the unlearned barbarous anger God and man, saying, That Jesus
descended to HELL: and yield unto the blasphemous Jews by sure consequence
upon their words, That he should not be the Holy one of God.

BY HVGH BROVGHTON.

If any man love not the Lord JESUS, let him be Anathema Maran Atha. 1. COR.
16.

1604.

To the Reader.
BY knowing that Hades, a term used in the Creed, is the place general,
where souls are before Gods throne, divided there, fat enough, by heaven and
hell, so that in speech of the holy, Hades the general, by difference of the
Person, is Heaven, and in the wicked, Hell, as we commonly term Hell: which
place is on high, out of this world by Apo. 14. and all Jews in Cether Malc.
fol. 11. by knowing of this great light comes to Religion. First their opinion
falls, who thank God for sending his son to redeem the Fathers from Hades,
to Paradise: that is, from Paradise to Paradise. So Limbus Patrum and
Purgatory fall: when Hades has only two parts, Heaven and Hell. So our
madness falls, who in the Creed, put for that Part of Hades, which holds
the faithful, and is heaven or Paradise, the part which holds the wicked,
and put for Heaven, Hell, to which they that go, perish for ever. Here
stands the Article: Our Lord being in body crucified, dead and buried, had a
soul immortal, as all men, which went hence to God: and being in Hades, holy,
had not hell but heaven. This is all. When the Gospel began scant any held
souls immortal. Pliny shows that. Therefore it was needful the Creed should
have it. When the immortality was granted, very many Creedes did omit the
article: because in speech of a man, to die and to go to Hades is all one. Of
an horse, Greeks would say, he is dead. Of a man, more: He is dead and gone to
Hades. This matter unknown has vexed the world by ignorance of one Greek
word. And two Bishops vexed their own. Against whom two small writings follow:
besides much otherwise printed and written to them. The style is not of their
gall, but it may gall, in mildnes.

The argument of the Admonition following.
BR. wrote unto Queen Elizabeth, that King Edward the sixth and her May.
swearing to the Gospel, swear to this, That to go to Hades in the Creed, was
to go to Paradise, even by Heathen Greek: to whom Hades is the world of
souls: in which the holy have Paradise, and the godles, Gehenna. Both be on
high before Gods throne. And Br. commended the cause to Q. Elizabeth's M. and
the King of Scots Majesty. Against that a libell was allowed to scoff the
Scottish mist, penned by some Belial Bar Lo: and against salvation Bilson
raged: as this short work tells.

A lie resumed of D. Bilson.
DOctor Bilson in his sermon book against Master Jacob, folio 419. fumeth
thus: First then tell your abettor that all the Realm will take him not only
for a rayler against all honesty, but a lier against all duty that voucheth so
co^fidentlie: King Edward the sixth and his subjects held that Christ his
soul never went to Gehenna: and the Realm knows the Qu. oath, as also the Q.
adventureth her eternal state. These be no states to come within his unclean
mouth. He may do well to remember who they be of whom it is written: They
despise government: and speak ill of them that be in authority, as raginge
waves of the sea, foming out their own shame. Thus the D. writes. Mark now
the Zurich confession, which K. Edw. and Queen Eliz. allowed. Per inferos
intelligimus non locum supplicij designatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles,
quemadmodum per superos adhuc superstites in vita. Proinde anima Christi
descendit ad inferos, id est, delata est in sinum Abrahae: in quo collecti
fuerunt omnes defuncti fideles. Ergo cum Latroni secum crucifixo dixit, hodie
mecum eris in Paradiso, promisit ei consortium vitae, and beatorum spirituum.
Licet enim Dominus descendisse dicatur, fit tamen ex more loquendi. Confitemur
in hoc articulo animas esse immortales, easque protinus a morte corporea
transire ad vitam. This is the Zurick confession, allowed by King Edward and
Qu. Elizabeth: So Descending must be granted to be Ascending, and Hell to be
Paradise. If our Bishops miss in terms, (...)t (...)o sim(...) ever (...)ink
that (...)ell, as men (...)mmonly (...)ak is hea(...)n* But if (...) fool put
(...)ll, by his (...)gue where (...)auen is in(...)eed: a fool (...)not by
un(...)rnedship (...)rne heaven (...) Hell The (...)arbarous (...)anslation
(...)f the Greek (...)reed with (...)ceaved D. (...)on i(...) bla(...)ed: not
the (...)e Creed.
they must blame them selves: and not rage with heretical Satanean madness upon
such as force them to faith. Now what grace the D. has in his words, all may
soon judge: considering what him self grants: and how in his escape
afterward he differs from all the world. This was the question: Whether
our Lords soul went hence to Gehenna: or hence to Paradise: John Cant. and all
vexed by him know that, and for one of these two opinions the Princes religion
was to be esteemed. And if I. C. had invented a going from Paradise to Gehenna,
Geneveans would have renowned him over the world. Now mark how rightly the
right reverend Father and Doctor takes of him self the lie unto him self,
fol 219. We have no warrant in the word of God so to fasten Christ's soul unto
Hell for the time of his death, that it might not be in Paradise before it
descended into Hell. Now John Cant. will grant, that he damneth them both: and
justifies the adversary, as a Greek Epistle printed at Hannawe required Sir
John Fortescue once Queen Elizabeth's greek Reader, to determine, whether both
Bishops were not condemned most certainly by their own grant. The ridiculous
feigning of a new Satanean fable that our Lord went from Paradise to Gehenna:
and to Hades, as from Paulls to London, from Winchester to England, from
England to Europe, from Europe to this world, from part to the whole: and
again, the fable that he went not to Hades, that is, in truth, to the world
of souls, till his body was buried: and again his feigning thrice, at Paul's,
Hades in S. Matthew, cap. 5. twice, with 10. once, where Gehenna is the text,
perverting the original with wresting Scriptures and Fathers to an opinion
that never came into holy minds, this excuses not his Lie, but augmenteth his
impiety: that befooleth all Scriptures of God, and all Divines that ever have
been in the world. Cursed be he that makes the blind wander out of the way,
and let all the people say, Amen.

The argument and effect of the Epistle following.
I. C. was advised in a work dedicated to Queen Elizabeth and to the most
Noble, our King now, That he should not burn for Gehennaes honor, least he
burned in Geheaenaes shame for ever and ever: At the first he skoffed all
truth of God and the King: but being taught how he was caught in his own
syllogism thus: The place which our Lords soul went to hence, tells what
Hades (his HELL) means in the Creed: But Paradise is the place which our
Lord went to hence: Therefore Paradise is the HELL of the Creed, being taught
how he was caught, he sent his Chaplayne M. Greffrey King, obteyning the
Queens hand for his leave, to agree with his adversary: and he upon
agreement, returned presently, saying that he should be sent again: but
presently after he came home, he would write. Conditions were not kept. The
libell was still sold: and Machmadisme was in it: and a contumelious mockage
of Christ and all Christians and Jews: when he said Ruben the Jew his Ebrew
Epistle was forged: whereby he hindered the defense of Christianity, and
deserved rooting out* Besides that, after the King was ours, Paul's sold the
treason of the libel. For not standing to his covenant, three Greek Orations
played upon him: and one dedicated to the King and Brettish nation in Queen
Elizabets days: And after all, this Epistle. At the first sight he laid the
blame on Bar Lo, that usurped his authority, as being guiltles: yet when at
the Court a Duke showed what he had done, he fell as dead, and soon died. The
party grieved was much grieved at his death: because he had protested he never
spoke against him. Yet as Ely, so he by softnes paid for others blame: while he
repressed not bad souls. And his Gentlemen wished Bar Lo unborn: as more
grief to the Archbishop then all that ever were his adversaries: not only for
his libel against the Scottish mist: full of most deadly treason: and full of
blaspemy and lying against God and man: But also for his Satanean declamation
at Paul's against the best Nobility, and the best bent for the good of the
State: against whom the Iscariot railed and raged: whereby the Nobility justly
term him: The vilest that is this day under the cope of heaven: as bent
against God, the King, the Nobility, and all humanity. So Bar Lo will be his
notation.

To the aged Sir, JOHN of Canterb. Archbishop, grace and truth.
MASTER Francis Hall told that your G. deprived M. Pickaerd and him of their
benefices, and gave both to Bar Lo (whom he described after his name, a babe
most bad) for defending your Gehenna: which haeresie of yours was used for a
bar, that you were not fit to confirm others, who so erred your self:
against all the Bible, all Greeks and Hebrews. That the children which you
would have confirmed and you together may be truly firmed herein, behold your
own grant in D. Bilson: to whom in Bar Lo his book, your grace and wisdom
refers the unlearned for a learned defense of your mind: which held that
the Creed tells whether our Lords soul went hence. And this is your
Proposition and mine too: and you will adventure your eternal state upon it,
and I mine. This it is: The Place into which our Lords soul went hence, is
Hades or Hell of the Creed. This position is built upon a rock: that no
storm, winds, nor waves can shake it. And if we agree to what place our Lord
his soul went hence, we agree what Hades or your Hell is in the Creed. Now
to your Proposition, this assumption D. Bilson lays down, fol^o 219.
Paradise is the place to which our Lord went hence. Therefore by your own
grant Hades or Hell in the Creed is Paradise. Seeing then the whole tenor of
Moses and the Gospel, cannot move you: seeing the universal judgment of the
Hebrews for their own tongue, can not move you: seeing 3000. years heathen
Greek cannot move you: and Eulogines Patriarcha 1200. years old, with all
other Christian Greeks which do place Abraham in Hades, can not move you,
and seeing the Zurick confession, which says, per Inferos intelligimus non
locum supplicij designatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles, and sinum Abrahae can
not move you, let your own confession move you: and publish it in print,
that the simple deceived by you, may know how you led them to deny that our
Lord went through the veil of his flesh into the most holy. Which they that
will deny, may as well deny all religion and truth of God. You have most
highly iniuried the Majesty of God: pretendinge that Sheol Psalm. 16. was the
Devils lodge, which no Ebrew ever thought, neither suffers Moses to think:
contemning the Gospel for the hand of God receaving the holy soul of our
Lord: pervertinge sorrows of death into the second death, Act. 2. to befooll
all Christianity, turning Saint Paul to Gehennean darkness: where he purposelie
speaks of the Gospells brightness: in these three injuries you stain all the
Bible, while you make some iarr from all the rest, and befoole the most holy
Writers. This your sin is heinous. So your despising of Ebrew DD. For their
own tongue, will be holden of the Scottish mist and Brettish nation, and all
nations a brutish part. and no less the rejecting of Heathen Greek, for the
Creed penned for heathen: and your restrayning of Greek only to Poets: and
your teaching as general that Hades in them is ugly, this your learning will be
holden babish. Also where D. Bilson rejects the world of souls, as checking
all Jews in their own tongue, his wrangling was senseles: that he knew no
place where souls were together. Has he ever seen in this world all bodies
together; other saw them not, yet the speech, this world is current with all
men. And for Hades Macedones call it Heaven. Portus Dictionarie would have
taught you so much, though you sought no deeper Graetians. And in Clemens
Alexandrinus, Hades is Iuppiter. To your blame for denying the lxx. in Psalm.
110. a warrant for the New Test. Greek, you say nothing, as damned. And D.
Bilson says: the Greek Fathers understood not Joseph's Haden. Such owls you
bring to Athens: and make your Witgifte a scoph to all learned. Also you answer
nothing to your blame for saying, that it were better the truth of Daniel were
hid, then antiquity should be disgraced for missing. Others thought it a
graceless speech. So when you condemn Saint Paul for cursing Ananias, which
thing he was bound to do, by express laws, for stryking treacherously, and
misleading the blind, you check Christ that promised a mouth that no adversary
could resist, and befoole Moses for making a defense for an open impudent
judge. The blind, the deaf, the officers may not lightly be cursed: but in
open wilfulnes they be cursed, as Saul of David, and Sedechias of Ezechiel, and
the Pharisees. Mat. 23. Herein you stand at the mercy of God. Moreover touching.
Abraham Ruben the Jew, you have iniuried Christ our Lord, and all Christians
most wickedly. If he had not been answered, all Christians had been worse
thought of. Now he and all the Jews in the Empire speak better of
Christianity. And some by that have been baptized: and one D. told that he
would be baptized and come to England: he is the man that prefaced to Aruc. So
a rare learned Jew, to who^ at Basil one gave Rubens epistle, and showed the
apostles Thalmudicall rare skill, he made request to the Professors, when the
party was gone, to desire him to return to instruct him more fully: (but the
party could not) and before requested his teacher to translate into Ebrew, as he
spoke to him, the new Testament. This deserved better then your language. You
say the party feigned that which is written of his praise: and scoph his skill
in Ebrew and Greek: and term him an ass, and offer all disgrace. For all,
Christians and Jews should think you unworthy to have the benefit of
Christian policy. And as you know you have the Anathema maran Atha given you.
It returns to the giver if you deserve it not. If your desert be doubtless,
you are surely miserable: as in your perpetual untruths and misvsing of the
Realms authority to Satan's slavery. So when you scophed the hope in the
Scottish mist, and the British nation, what meant you but to endeavor to set
millions to kill one another. Six years Beza noised a Testament bent badly, and
Geneua meant to kill one for leaning on the Scottish mist: as three Scotts
there then told the party: and Beza wrote much alike to your old head. Yet the
party boldly printed the Scottish mist then to be his King. And now with what
face can you look for any good subject, who knows the blessing of the
Scottish mist turned to a shyning sun ever to wish you well: after your so
great endeavor to overthrow your own nation; The Brettish nation would, as
David's 37. worthies, have laid their life in their hands for their lefull
Prince, then and now most dear King. And wishes you, after pardon, to be an
hearty subject. Great cause you have.

To the Reader.
AS Britanie containing England with Scotland, a Scott is not born in England
because he is borne in Britanie: So Hades containing Heaven and HELL, our L. his
holy soul going to Hades to his holy joy, can not be said to go to HELL,
because his went to Hades. But the barbarous translation should be lothed of al
wise and such as would not descend to HELL, to their eternal woe.


