THE COPY of a Letter, lately sent to an Honorable person in England, from
the Camp before Grave, dated the 23. day of August last past.

Wherein is described the good success both of her Majesty's forces and his
Excellencies against the Admirant, with his going away from the Grave.

Also a Thanksgiving for the victory God gave his Princely Excellency, in the
ouercomming and taking the said City Grave, the 20. of September, style noue.
1602.

Truly translated out of the Dutch Copy.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane near
Smith-field. 1602.

THE COPY OF A LETTER, LATELY SENT to an Honorable person in England, from
the Camp before Grave, dated the 23. day of August last past: Wherein is
described the good success both of her Majesty's forces, and his Excellencies,
against the Admirant: with his going away from the said City of Grave, before
it was taken by his Excellency.
RIght Honorable, my loving and dutiful service remembered unto your good
Honor, it has been thus with us, that I could not send so often unto your
Honor, as I would, in that the enemy lay so near unto his Excellencies
Quarter, that my Captain was commanded to take four more English companies,
and to go and lie with them three English miles from the Quarter near unto
the Enemy, to guard on the Northside the River Maze, to defend the coming of
them over the Bridge to his Excellencies quarter, and for that they should not
relieve the Town on that side. Thus continuing four days together in
defending these passages, we could neither have paper, nor leisure to write,
which makes me write so much unto your Honor at this time together.

The enemy in Grave fell out, at three several times upon the three Quarters.
First, upon his Excellencies: The second upon Grave Williams: The third time
upon my Lords Honors, and were well beaten in, with loss of some men, where
Captain Kayes, and Captain Harcourt, and his Lieutenant Michell were then
there slain.

The enemy and we lying so near one to the other, keeps great watch: many
nights the enemy has made signs to the Town to come on and relieve it, but
did not.

His Excellency has made his approach on the East Side, close to the Town
mote: Count William on the South Side the like: and has planted by them six
pieces of ordinance, planting them severally by two and two in a place, some of
them beating at the Rampires and bullwarkes, the other playing into the Town.

My Lord with his approches, is close to the Mote on the West Side the Town,
he having one Cannon there planted, that beats into the Town: and my Lord is
so near, that he may enter it, as soon as his Excellency or count William.

The one and twenty day, at three of the clock in the morning, the Admirant
with his Field Fortes, came to enter the Trenches between his Excellency and
Count Williams his quarter: our Scoutes and Spies diskenning their coming on
(we being always ready and watchful) drue our men into division, and so into
battle, Horse and Foot. Then we being ready for their coming on (the enemy
being come up to our Trenches, and being dark) we fired our Bracons from one
of our Quarters to the other: and they thereby seeing us in such readiness
within our Trenches, presently fell off executing, running away, seauing all
such provision they had brought thither for their passage to have relieved the
Grave: which were Ladders, Plankes, Mattockes, Spades, Shouels and other Engines
to have entered the Trenches, and then the rest of the Army should have come
on, when first way had been made, which (God be thanked) was not.

So some six or seven troops of Horse fell out after them, put some to the
sword, and took two Italian Horsemen, whom they brought after to his
Excellency: And about three or four days before their coming on, there
would come over to his Excellency twenty Italians and other the Admirants
Soldiers at a time: The reason of their coming away was coniectured to be
thus: That the ground was wet they lay in, want of money, scant of victual and
other things: For in truth, all things were very extreme dear to them,
whereupon they grew weak.

My good Lord the two and twentieth day betimes in the morning went to his
Trenches near the Town, and a small shot came from the enemy, and shot him
in under the eye, between the nose and the ball of the cheek, which bullet
rests, as Surgeons and Physicians take it, near unto the pallet of his
mouth, and as yet not to be gotten out: yet by Gods help, no danger, because
it is cureable.

Captain Morgan hurt, being shot in the leg, and his horse killed under him at
the Town wall: Captain Cook hurt about the head and neck: Captain
Merekerk, Seriant Mayor, shot through the shoulder, down the back, in the
Trenches: and other Soldiers too long to name.

The enemy the two and twentieth at night, set his cabbins on fire on both
sides the River, and took up his bridge, and marched away before day.

Some four or five thousand Horse and Foot of ours marched to his Quarter at
day, finding him to be gone, and had taken all away. So our men firing the
rest, returned.

He is marched, as is thought, toward Venlo his friend Town. Thus my humble
duty remembered, I humbly take my leave. From Aradout, this 23. of August,
stilo nouo. 1602.

Your Honors ever to command to his power or service, W. C.

A Thanksgiving for the victory God gave his princely Excellency, in the
ouercomming and taking the City Grave* the twentieth of September. 1602.
THe time is come, wherein we ought to praise God, who bestows on us from
above his good blessings: he has removed the enemies danger from us, and
dismayed them that were most haughty. Behold the Nassawes blood, which through
Gods grace, at this time brings them down powerfully, who offers us his
mighty help, and drives away sodaynely our proud enemy, like Sisera.

Our God has dispersed the enemies force, which they had relying upon their
Kings might, wealth, and treasure: but those that trust in God, have now by the
Nassawes, overthrown their courage.

See their Kings power and pride, which he has used thus long in these
Netherlands, even with robbings, burnings, and murders; but help thou us, O
God, from his oppression, who does these things to his own shame.

Observe the Regent, a Lady full of wickedness, together with Duke Alvie, the
great Commander, acknowledge Don John, who came in show of peace, but sought
indeed, to carry away the Netherlands treasure, and Parma, who through
disdain was much tormented: Ernestus his fiery courage, and Albertus his gift
here; but God has almost discovered his deceyt.

Rise up also, O you oppressed neighbors, Alas! the Netherlanders blood has
proved sufficiently the Spanish tricks: how long yet shall their heavy
cruelty endure, and be lamented? Abide not them, pray God in your misery,
that he will still help our Prince to war, to make us at peace together, and
with speed to bring us quite in safety from the cruel Spaniards thraldom.

What? be not dismayde, trust upon Almighty God, whose powerful goodness he
has notably showed at Turnout, and also remember how proudly they came by
Niewport, where they were slain: There they had prepared for us their Spanish
poison, and sworn, they would quite tread under foot that valiant courageous
house of Nassaw; but even then when they were about to do it, God did overthrow
them.

Think not, that victory comes at any time, by the multitude and strength of
an army, horse or foot, but only of Gods blessing: For we can show, that God
has set himself with us to hold us up, and has given unto them of Nassaw,
pure wisdom and knowledge, for the comfort of Gods Church, and their
countries defense, which they do diligently put in practice: wherefore, let us
all with one accord praise our God.

Mark now well, you rash inconstant sort, which think you win; set up your
present power, as if you cride with speed, Mauris can attempt nothing, he
flies; where are they? now we shall surely get Ostend: But you have turned and
fled your selves, and with reproachful shame have forsaken the City Grave,
which our Prince has taken, and yet our valiant Soldiers keep Ostend still.

You came with great Armies, power and diligence, to relieve the strong town
of Grave; but you came too late, for that one Princes Excellency had before
sufficiently entrencht himself: The like was also done before Berck. With
grauing works, our Grave had shut the Grave, and so with shame are you retired.
Now you go to mutiny, and with speed cruelly to spoil town and country;
for such are your Spanish exploites.

See here, how soon the Spanish pride is, by Gods mercy, and the Nassawes
valor, brought to shame, also how God has destroyed the rebellious Admirant,
who greatly spoiled and hurt the Duchy of Cleue. Keep this well yearly,
monthly and daily in mind, earnestly thank God, and give him the glory, who
gives our valiant Prince victory: keep this, I say, still in memory, and
give God the praise for ever.

O Prince of rulers, preserve our Prince, and the aboue-named noble Nassawes
blood, defend the City Ostend from reproach, from floods, tempests, storms and
wind, make all our neighbors our faithful friends, deliver us, O Lord, from
misery, and give not only peace in our days, but also hear our lamentations;
for surely it will, O Lord, greatly extol thy name.

FINIS.
TAke heed, gallant western Lords and Princes,
Stay not benumbed, take heart to your senses,
Foresee where you their proiects may down tread,
Drive hence away, the food of tyrants bread.
Think upon this ever.

