DIRECTIONS TO KNOW THE TRVE CHVRCH.

Written by GEORGE CARLETON, Doctor of Divinity.



Imprinted at LONDON by JOHN BILL. 1615.

TO THE HIGH, NOBLE, AND most virtuous, CHARLES, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN, Duke
of CORNWALL, and of YORK, etc.
The spirit of Wisdom and Power, to know and execute the Actions of a PRINCE.
WHen the Queen of SHEBA (most noble PRINCE) had heard the wisdom of
SOLOMON, and observed the order of his house; she pronounced his servants
Happy, that did attend upon him, and heard his Wisdom. It is true, that not
only the household servants find an happiness in a wise Prince that fears God,
(for in the fear of God consists all wisdom) but this fruit of happiness
is also spread and powers it self (as blood from the heart through all the
veins) to all the Subjects that are to be governed by such a Head. Behold
then, how your happiness draws with it the happiness of all other under
you. Of this, my self have had some experience, which I think my self bound
with my humble duty and thankfulness to remember: For not many years since
I published a Book of the consent of the Catholic Church against the
Tridentines: wherein I was desirous to offer my service to God for the
manifesting of his truth. But your Royal Father, our gracious Sovereign, and
your Highness were pleased so effectually to declare your gracious acceptance
thereof, as if it had been a service done to your selves. May we not then say
with the Queen of SHEBA, Happy are the servants of such a King, and of such a
Prince the Kings son? And herein we find great difference between the case
of your servants, and the case of them that serve the Pope, who is found to be
the trobler, not only of yours, but of all the Kingdoms in Christendom: For
your servants cannot do any true service to God, but it pleases you, and is
accepted as a service done to you: But his servants cannot please him by
seeking to please God but if they will have his favor, they must loose the
favor and service of God, by venturing upon some bloody service acceptable to
him: for what other are now acceptable to him but such? This thing must needs
give your servants under your gracious Favor and Protection, a greater
encouragement then our adversaries can find. So that if we should be slack
in promoting GODS cause under such gracious Protectours, a great condemnation
might justly be laid upon us. And this makes me the bolder in this present
service. Since the time of the publishing of that Book, being written in
Latin (for I referred it to the judgment of the learned, and thought the
vulgar sort were not to be troubled with such things whereof they could not
judge) diverse books have come to my hands that are written in English to
seduce the simple that cannot judge, insinuating to them fair pretenses of a
show of the Church: Which show of the Church is the thing that carries away
many that cannot judge between trueths and shows. These books being written
with great confidence, and little knowledge, do work much harm among many of
his Majesty's Subjects, that are led with appearances and shadows. Now for the
help and information of these, I have drawn out of the greater work, some
short Directions to know the Church, (the want of which directions seems to
trouble many of the weaker sort) which may give some light to those that are so
seduced, and may help to dispell that darkness, which their blind Teachers
have brought upon them, and would therein hold them still blinded. This I
present to your Highness, and am bold herein to seek your gracious
protection, both because my service, and whatsoever I can do, is a due debt to
your Highness, and also that by your favorable countenance it may find more
favor abroad, that the imperfections of the Writer may be covered and excused
by the worthiness of the Patron. And thus with my daily prayers to God for an
increase of these graces in your Highness, that may lead you both to
temporal and eternal happiness; I humbly take my leave, and rest

Your Highness most humble servant and Chaplain, George Carleton.

A PREFACE, Containing an Advertisement to the Readers, who call themselves
CATHOLICS.
GEntle Readers, for your sake was this undertaken: Your instruction is my
desire and prayer. Moses did wish that all the people of Number. 11. 21.
God might prophecy, and that God would give them his Spirit: and so do we
wish. But there be many false teachers, that keep the people in ignorance,
and are desirous that they may neither hear nor understand any thing, but as
they receive from their lips. Hence is it that so many Books are written,
and secretly conveyed into your hands, of purpose to seduce you. The care of
your good has moved me to take this pains, to lay down these directions,
that have ever been the directions of the Church, and must ever be: that you
may better understand your own estate, and the ostentation of them that call
themselves Catholics, but are not, that lead you with vain shows and
appearances of things that are not, as iugglers use to do. If any shall
address an answer to me, I will inform you before hand how you may easily
judge of the answer. For we know what they can do, we know their best and
their worst: but for your satisfaction, which is all my care, I will here
warn you of the manner of their writing; that your selves may be able to judge
of the answer, if any shall be returned. For whereas I have proved, that the
rule of faith is only the doctrine written in the holy Scriptures; They
happily may show you out of the ancient writers, that there be some other
things admitted in the Church, which are not written: So does Cardinal
Bellarmine bring ancient testimonies for some things unwritten. But these
things we confess and acknowledge, that some things unwritten must be
admitted into the Church: but these are things in the discipline of the Church:
And therefore we hold things of discipline still unwritten. But if you have a
care to save your souls from these sleights, bid them prove, that things
unwritten must be received as doctrines of faith. For the controversy
between us and them is not of unwritten traditions in external ceremonies,
but of unwritten Traditions in the rule of Faith. We say with Tertullian,
Regula Lib. de virgin. velandis.
fidei vna omnino est, sola immobilis, and irreformabilis: hac lege fidei
manente, caetera iam disciplinae and conuersationis admittunt nouitatem
correctionis. That is, the rule of Faith is one altogether, only unchangeable,
and vnreformable: this law of Faith remaining the same, other things pertaining
to discipline and conversation may be changed and corrected. Ever since this
controversy begun between us and them of Rome, our writers have confessed this
that I say, and have challenged their adversaries to produce some plain
testimonies that may clearly prove, that an unwritten doctrine may be
received into the rule of Faith: which thing to this day they have not done;
what they are like to do hereafter, you may judge by that which is done. Now
suffer not your selves to be blind-folded: Take a courage unto you, and a
discerning spirit, to understand the things that concern you so nearly. And
whereas I have proved that the Pope was never admitted Judge of Faith before
the Trent Council: it may be that some of these blind seducers may tell you,
that the Pope has been a Judge, and held a Judge in Christendom by some,
long time before: which in some sort is true, but not against me. For he has
been by diverse reputed a Judge of controversies of right and wrong, in such
things as come to be pleaded by the Canon Law: But of matters of Faith he was
never held to be a Judge. Therefore the Popes Canons do confess, that Did. 2.
for exposition of Scriptures and matters of Faith, the Expositors of
Scriptures are to be preferred before the Popes, as for their learning and
godliness far excelling the Popes in the knowledge of the Scripture: but in
causis definiendis, that is, in deciding of causes, and ending of suits, which
come to be pleaded in the Popes Courts, the Popes are preferred for the height
of their place. And this is all that their own Cannons have yielded to them
before the Trent Council. I warn you of these things before hand, that your
selves may be the better able to judge of any answer which may be returned
against me. And I think that this warning may suffice to instruct you against
their idle answers: so that I shall not need to trouble my self any further.
I have been short in collecting these directions for these causes: First,
because in this scribbling age I would not trouble the Church with unneedful
writings. Secondly, because I would inuit the more Readers, who may be content
to read a short Book, whereas length does often deter such as either have not
much leisure, or are coy of their pains. Lastly, because if any will answer
it, they may see that I have somewhat helped them in shortness. And therefore
they may be the better contented to set down my words. Now whereas your
seducers pretend that they love the salvation of your souls, and glory so
much in the name of the Church, you must be careful to try the spirit that
speaks in them: for it is as great a fault to believe eury thing without
trial, as to believe nothing. It is Saint John's exhortation to you, Dearly 1.
Ioh. 4. 1
beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God, for many false prophets are gone out into the world. If S. John had cause
even in the beginning of the Gospel to warn the people against seducers: what
great cause have we to warn you? For these false Prophets are now grown both
in number and in cunning: But their multitude and cunning would utterly fail
them, if they did not presume upon your ignorance. We labor to plant
knowledge in all, and are desirous that every man might know the things
needful for his salvation: they labor to hold all in ignorance: their hope
is not in the goodness of their cause: for they see the ruins of Babylon
falling every day: Only their care is to blind you, and keep you ignorant.
They know well, that if you had knowledge to discern their subtilties, it is
not the pretense of the Church that could so much prevail; whereas now the
very bare name of the Church does trouble and entangle many of the simple, as
a snare to catch the ignorant, a just judgment of ignorance. Wherein they deal
with you, as the Arrians did deal with a company of unlearned Bishops and
Priests in the Council of Ariminum. For the Arrians having procured the exile
of the most worthy and best learned Bishops, perceiving that the company that
was left, though they were not very learned, yet would not be persuaded
directly to disanull any thing that had been concluded before in the Council
of Nice: did abuse their ignorance in proposing the matter: For they demanded
of them, whether they would worship Homoousion, or Ruffin. lib. 10. histor.
Eccles.
Christ? they not understanding what the Greek word (...) did signify,
rejected it with a kind of execration, being as they thought opposed against
Christ: Whereas if they had understood the matter aright, they would have
known that this word agreed most fitly with Christ, as best expressing his
divine nature. Even thus your Priests and Jesuits deal with you: for when they
have told you somewhat of their Church, and that out of the Church there is no
salvation, adding some trueths to some appearances, and framing your fancies
after their own devised pattern. If then they ask you this question; Whether
will you rather forsake the Church of God, or the allegiance to your Prince?
Some ignorant men, (but more women) that know not these subtilties, but think
all to be true that these men tell them in corners, must needs answer, that
rather then they would forsake Christ his Church, they will renounce the
obedience of any earthly Prince. And thus is your zeal and ignorance abused by
crafty companions. But if you might understand, that you do not forsake the
Church, but are more confirmed therein, by yielding alleagiance to the King;
then doubtless you would not be unwilling to acknowledge your own errors,
and the craft of your seducers. And here as I have been desirous to help you,
so I heartily entreat you to help your selves, by loving and seeking the
truth. Disdain not to take help of any. My labor has been to bring
endless contentions to a short issue, for your satisfaction: only I exhort
you to try the spirits, because many false prophets are gone out into the
world: trust neither us nor them, until you have tried: for we are all
contentious men, though some contend for the truth and some against it. Try
before you trust; and remember that S. Chrysostom gave this exhortation to his
hearers, That they should be more careful in trying the doctines which are
delivered to the^, then in telling of money, which is delivered to them. Suffer
no false and counterfeit stuff to be thrust upon you at the motion of vain
men, who themselves know not the truth, and have no care to live according to
the truth. And judge your selves who are your best friends, and who are they
that in reason may best be thought to hold the truth: they who call you to the
knowledge of Gods word; or they that would hold you in ignorance? they that
desire you to examine their doctrines by the rule of Faith; or they that bid
you take their doctrines upon their bare word? they that make the Scriptures
judge of themselves, of their doctrines, of the Pope and all: or they that make
the Pope Judge of the Scriptures? they that call you to yield your allegiance
to your Prince, or they that withdraw your hearts and allegiance from your
sovereigns? they that were never found in rebellions, and conspiracies, or
they that stir up rebellions against Kings? they that hold the same rule of
faith, which the Church has always held before them; or they that have
changed the rule of Faith? Judge whom you have best reason to trust, and try
the spirits. All spirits are tried by the rule of Faith, and the rule must be
one to all. Judge you whether they be not afraid to come to this trial, who
have changed the rule whereby they should be tried. Cardinal Bellarmine is
forced Libr. de ver. Dei. cap. 2.
to say thus much, That the rule of Faith must be both certain and well
known: for if it be not well known, it is no rule to us: if it be not
certain, it is no rule at all. And he adds thus much further: Nothing is
more certain, nothing better known then the Scriptures contained in the
Prophetical, and Apostolical writings. Take the confession of their Cardinal,
and tell them that deceive you, by suggesting another rule, that there is but
one rule: that whatsoever they bring besides this, it is both uncertain and
unknown to you* and therefore by their own confession it cannot be a rule to
you.

Consider therefore on both sides what is said. Against them we say, They have
no Church: We prove it, because they hold not Unity with the Catholic
Church. I do not wrangle, by producing sayings out of some of their writers,
which they may answer, that they are not warranted by their Church: but I
deal with their Church it self, and their Trent Council, and have brought
their long and tedious discourses to this short issue; Whether they have not
changed the rule of Faith in their Trent Council, which before that time was
ever held the rule of Faith in the Church of God. This is the thing which I
earnestly entreat you to search out. By this you may understand where the
truth is, where the Church is. Then much have we against them: But what bring
they against us? Against our Church they have nothing to say: we hold the
rule of Faith, which the church of Rome ever held before the Trent Council. We
hold Ordination and Succession even from the Apostles: albeit our succession be
not from the Church of Rome, nor by that Church, yet we hold it sure, and that
not without the testimony of that Church. In these things the learned make no
doubt: only there be some ignorant men, and corrupted with malice, that have
devised a strange tale to slander our Ordination: suggesting among the simple
people, that we have not a true Ministry: wherein, whether ignorance, or
malice have exceeded, judge you. I will relate the tale as they have devised
it. Some of our own seduced, and seducing countrymen have written, that
Sands, Scorie, Horn, Grindall, Jewel, and others in the beginning of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, met at the Nagges head in Cheap side, where they
looked for the Bishop of Landaffe, who should come to ordeine them there; But
Bonner then being prisoner in the Tower, understanding this, sent his Chaplain
to the Bishop of Landaffe, denouncing and charging him upon pain of
excommunication, not to ordeine those that then and there expected him: The
Bishop of Landaffe being terrified with that denunciation, refused to come and
ordeine them; Whereupon they concluded that his Ordination was needless, and
so Scorie being but a Monk ordained the rest, and some of the other, being
ordained by Scorie, laid hands upon Scorie. This is the tale: a tale so odious
would have been made somewhat probable. All that is brought to confirm it, is
that Mr. Neall the Hebrewe Reader at Oxford should confess this to his
Confessors, who told it to these men, and they tell it to you, and you
believe it. By this you may perceive how shameless they are that seduce you
with such absurd tales: But all their hope is in your facility, and
credulity: for answer to this tale, and all other of this kind against our
Ordination, M^ FRANCIS MASON has dealt learnedly and faithfully, declaring the
Consecration of all our Bishops that have been in the late Queens time, and
some years before, out of the public Records which are kept, that all men may
see them that will. I will brieflly relate the sum of his answer, that the
shame may return upon those shameless deuisers of such strange untruths.
John Scorie was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, anno 1551. in King Edwards
time, August 30. by Thomas Canterbury, Nicholas Land. John Bedford, recorded
in the Register of Archbishop Cranmer, fol. 334. The deviser of this strange
untruth, was but a silly shifter, to set the Consecration of this man with
them that were consecrated in the time of Queen ELIZABETH: he has made the
lie improbable, and impossible. Edmund Grindall was consecrated Bishop of
London, anno 1559. December. 21. by Matthew. Canterbury, William Cicester, John
Hereford, John Bedford, out of the Register kept in Archbishop Parkers time,
cap. 1. fol. 18. Edwine Sands was consecrated anno 1559. December 21. by
Matthew. Canter. William Cicester, John Hereford, John Bedford, out of the
Register kept in Archbishop Parkers time, fol. 39. These were consecrated in
the Chapel at Lambeth, the Sabbath day before noone, after morning prayer
with imposition of hands, and with such form of words and prayers as are
used in the Church; where there was a Sermon preached by Master Nowell, then
the Archbishop his Chaplain, upon this text: Take heed to your Act. 20. 28.
selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers:
And a Communion reverently administered by the Archbishop. John Jewel was
consecrated Bishop of Salisbury, Anno 1559. January 21. by Matthew Canterb.
Edmond London, Rich. Elie, John Bedford, taken out of the Register in Archb.
Parkers time, fol. 46. in the Chapel at Lambeth, upon the Sabbath in the
forenoone, with Common prayers, and Communion, and a Sermon preached by Mr.
Andrew Peirson the Archbish. his Chaplain, Matthew. 5. 16.
upon this Text: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Robert Horn was
consecrated, anno 1560. February 16. by Matthew Canterbury, Thomas Menen.
Edmond London, Thomas Couentrie and Lichfield: ex Registro Parker. chap. 1.
fol. 88. in the Chapel at Lambeth, the Sabbath day the forenoone: the manner
whereof in all respects was as the former.

By this you may understand what manner of men they are who seduce you: Is
there any thing so shameless, which these men do not venture upon who dare
venture to tell you such a tale, that by public evidences may so easily so
vnanswereably be convinced? These are your guides and leaders: is it likely
that these men should lead you into the way of truth? Once free your selves
from this pestiferous generation, who devise still how to hold you in the
bondage of their superstition, and consider what account they make of you, upon
whom they vent such stuff; altogether presuming upon your simplicity, hoping
that you will take all without discussing whatsoever they deliver. Men of
common reason, will never put confidence in such men as are convinced once for
liars. If this be true which they have so confidently written, and by which
they have so notoriously abused you, in slaundering of the Ordination of our
worthy and reverend Bishops, then might you have cause to be offended with our
Church. But if this upon trial be found a manifest and absurd lie, then what
cause have you to trust them in any thing, whose whole study is to abuse your
simplicity and credulity; who having forsaken the truth, labor to draw
after them so many as they can into the society of their Apostasy, respecting
neither truth nor conscience, so they deceive by any means. And thus praying
to him that keeps the Keys of David, and opens and no man shuts, and
shuts, and no man opens, that he of his infinite mercy will open your
eyes to see, your hearts to understand his word and truth, and therein your
own Salvation: I rest

Yours in the service of your Faith. GEORGE CARLETON:

SHORT DIRECTIONS TO KNOW the true CHVRCH.
THE Church is either the Catholic Church, or particular Churches. The
Catholic Church is defined in the Scripture; The body of Ephesians. 1. 23.
Jesus Christ, and the fullness of him that fills all in all. The Apostle
describing this Church, says, By one Spirit we are baptized 1. Cor. 12, 13.
into one body. And again, You are the body of Christ, and Verse. 17.
members in particular. And again, Christ is the head of the Ephesians. 5. 25.
Church, and he is the Savior of the body: He is before all things, Col. 1.
18.
and by him all things consist, and he is the head of the body, the Church. So
that in the Scriptures of the New Testament we find no definition of the
Church, but either in these words, That it is the body of Christ; or in words
that signify the same thing: We find no other Head of the Church but Christ
himself.

Particular Churches, are visible Assemblies who profess the true Faith, and
hold the ordinances of Christ, and are governed by diverse visible heads or
governors, as Saint Gregory the Pope says: Peter Lib. 4. Epist. 38. ind. 13.
the Apostle of Christ which was the first member of the Church, Paul, Andrew,
John, what other are these, but heads of particular Assemblies? Singularium
plebium capita: so says Gregory. And again, The Saints before the law, the
Saints under the Law, and the Saints under grace, all these making up the body
of Christ, or members of the Church. So Gregory understood the Church, that
Saint Peter was a member only, but not a head of the universal or Catholic
Church: But of a particular Church says S. Gregory, Peter was a head: Yet no
otherwise, then as S. John was the head of another particular Church, S. Paul
of another, S. Andrew of another: And so other heads or governors of other
particular Churches; because no Apostle could guide all particulars, or the
whole. This was the ancient doctrine and knowledge of the Church.

These particular Churches though in respect of the places wherein they were
gathered they be many, and in that respect called in the plural number
Churches in Scripture, Romans 16. 4. and 1. Cor. 7. 17. and 2. Cor. 8. 18. and
Apoc. 11. 4. and in many other places: yet in respect of the faith which they
profess, they are but one: for the Church is but one, not two, not many. And
every particular Church that would prove it self a true Church of Christ,
must prove that, by the unity which it holds with the Catholic Church,
which is but one: For every particular Church holding unity with the Catholic
Church, by reason of that unity is one with it: And every particular assembly
that holds not this unity with the Catholic Church, is no true Church of
Christ, but an assembly of Heretics.

But now the question between the Papists and the reformed Churches will be,
whether of them two do hold this Unity with the Catholic Church: For if we
prove the reformed Churches keep this Unity, we prove them assuredly to be
the true Churches: and if we prove that the Papists have broken off this
unity with the Catholic Church, then are they proved to be no true Church,
but an assembly of heretics that have forsaken the Church. To prove this,
we must declare what this Unity is, and wherein it consists: which thing
being declared, will evidently declare where the true Church is.

The Unity of the Church is fourefolde: For though others may make more parts,
yet all may be comprised in these four. For the Church is one, first, by the
Unity of the Body; secondly, by the Unity of the Head; thirdly, by the Unity
of the Spirit; fourthly, by the Unity of Faith. All these are necessarily
required to prove a Church to hold Unity with the Catholic Church* And
albeit where one of them is found, they are all found, yet because the
Scriptures and Fathers speak distinctly of them, we will distinctly declare
them.

The unity of the Body is an unity, whereby all the members of the Church are
knit together with the Head in one body: For as the body is one and has many
members, and all the members of 1. Cor. 12.
that one body being many, make but one body; even so is Christ, says the
Apostle: This may be called mystical Christ, or the mystical body of Christ,
that is, his Church: For this is the true Church, the proper Church, the
Scripture does not acknowledge any other Catholic Church saving this, which
is the body of Christ; In which body all believers are knit to Christ, as the
members of one body with the head: And in this body every member receives Ephesians.
4. 16
grace from the Head, and the whole body, according to the measure of every
member receives increase of the body, to the edifying of it self in love.
Thus is every member of the body, that is, every member of the Church, joined
unto Christ by faith and love: And herein stands the unity of this Body.

From this Unity the Papists are fallen away: for they teach that the members
of their Church, as they call it, need not to have any inward grace, but it
suffices if they make only an external profession of faith, and have the
communion of the Sacraments, which by very sense is perceived. So says Card.
Bellarmine Lib. 3. de Ecclesi^, and cap. 2.
lib. 3. cap. 2. de Ecclesia. It follows that the Popish Church has not
unity with the Catholic Church, which is the body of Christ: For there is but
one Church, that is, the body of Christ, and the members of this Church are by
grace knit to Christ their head, as we have proved out of the Apostle.
Therefore that Church whose members are not knit to Christ by grace to the
edifying of themselves in love, is no true Church of Christ. It will not
advantage them to say, that they have among them some good men, who they doubt
not are members of Christ, though their Church has communion also with such as
have no inward grace and virtue. For the Church of Christ has no communion
with wicked men, who live without inward grace: because the communion which the
Church has is called in our Creed, Acommunion of Saints. The Saints are men
sanctified by the Spirit of God, washed by the blood of Christ from their sins.
These Saints have communion both with Christ their Head by faith, and with, and
among themselves by love and charity. This communion is not between good and
evil, between Saints and wicked men, but only among the Saints who are
cleansed from all sin by the blood of Christ: for so S. John teaches,
speaking of this communion of Saints; If we walk in 1. Ioh. 1. 7
the light, as he is in the light, we have communion one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. Then this
communion is among them that are cleansed by the blood of Christ from all
sin: But the members of the Church of Rome, which by their own confession,
have no inward grace, are not cleansed from all their sin by his blood: And
therefore such men cannot say that they have this communion, or any part
thereof. For unto such S. John says in the words immediately going before, If
we say that we have communion 1 Ioh. 1. 6
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. Now if these
be found to be liars by the testimony of S. John, who say they have communion
with Christ, when they walk in darkness, when they have no inward virtue (for
such must needs walk in darkness, who have no inward light and direction)
then out of doubt the Popish Church as now it stands, can have no communion
with Christ, and consequently can be no true Church of Christ. The reason is
plain from these principles, which are their confession on the one side, and
the express testimony of Scriptures on the other side.

The second Unity of the Church, is the unity of the head. Christ is the head
of his Church: And the Church of Christ is known by this unity; for that is
the true Church that has always kept this Head Jesus Christ: But the Romish
Church has changed this head, seeing they have the Pope the head of the
universal Church.

Their common answer is, That the Pope is Christ his Vicar, and the
ministerial head. But this answer is but a cloak to cover ignorance: For the
Church is but one, and herein we have the confession of the Papists: For
Cardinal Bellarmine says, the Libr. 3. cap. 2. de Eccles.
Church is only one, and not two; and of this one Church he makes the Pope to
be the head, as being Christ's Vicar.

Now to bolt out the truth, we reason thus: The Church is one, this one only
Church is Christ his body, Christ his Spouse: therefore if the Pope be Christ
his Vicar, and the ministerial head, he must by this delegacie govern the
same Church under Christ, which is his body, his Spouse. For if Christ govern
one Church, and the Pope another, then the Pope cannot be Christ his Vicar,
because he governs not the same under Christ: for he must be Vicar to him
whose Church he does govern. But the Pope does not govern the same Church
under Christ, but another Assembly. For Christ is the head of his own body, of
his own members, that is, of Saints, of true believers, of such as receive
inward grace and virtue from the head, and by that grace grow up to the
edification of themselves in love, as the Apostle teaches. But the Pope by the
common confession of Papists, is head of such a Church, whose members have no
inward grace or virtue in them, but only the external profession of the
Romish faith, acknowledging that the Pope is their head and governor. For
without this acknowledgment that the Pope is the head of the Church, and Christ
his Vicar on earth, no profession of faith can make a man a member of that
Church; whatsoever faith he profess, he is not received as a member in that
Church, unless he profess this faith, of the Papal authority: And if he
profess this, though there be in him no inward grace, no virtue, yet he is
taken to be a true member of that Church. By this it appears, that the Pope
does not govern the same Church under Christ, whereof Christ is the head: For
Christ is not the head of wicked and profane livers that are without inward
grace, without virtue; the devil is their head. Saint Austin says Lib. 3.
cap. 37. de doctrina Christiana.
truly, Diabolus est caput impiorum, qui sunt eius quodammodo corpus, ituri
cumillo in supplicio aeterni ignis: sicut Christus est caput Ecclesiae, quae
est corpus eius futurum cum illo in regno and gloria sempiterna: that is, The
devil is the head of wicked men, who are after a sort his body, and shall go
with him into his kingdom, and everlasting fire, even as Christ is the head of
the Church, which is his body, and shall be with him in his kingdom, and
everlasting glory* Whereupon it follows, that if the Pope be the
ministerial head of a Church, that Church consisting of wicked men that live
without inward grace or virtue, as themselves confess, and the devil being
the head of all such, as S. Augustine proves; It follows I say, that the
Pope is by this found to be the Vicar of the devil, and the ministerial head
of the devil, ruling an assembly whereof the devil is the head, and not
Christ. This conclusion, though it seem to derogate much from the assumed
title of his Holiness, yet considering the former premises, no man of
learning and understanding, can justly deny. Then the Church of Rome is fallen
away from this communion with the Head Christ Jesus, because it is certain,
that they who have no inward grace and virtue, have no communion with this head.

The third unity of the Church, is the unity of the Spirit: The whole Church
is governed and directed by the same Spirit: And therefore the Apostle speaking
of the gifts which God gives for the edificatio^ of the Church, says; All
these works that 1. Cor. 12. 11.
one and the selfsame Spirit. And of the members of the Church that are
governed by the selfsame Spirit, he says a little after the former words, For
by one Spirit we are all baptized 1. Cor. 12. 13.
into one body: In which words it is evident, that to be a member of the
Church, the Apostle does not think it sufficient to receive the outward sign
of the Sacrament of Baptism, without inward grace, as these men teach: but he
holds the inward spiritual grace to be needful, and therefore declaring
that spiritual grace, he says, We are baptized by one Spirit into one body:
For seeing that by the grace of Baptism men are regenerate, and made the sons
of God; therefore this unity which the Church has by the Sacrament of
Baptism, is defined by the Apostle, not to be external perceived by sense, as
these teach, but to be internal and spiritual. For by one Spirit we are
baptized into one body; that is, by one Spirit we are regenerate, and are made
members of this holy body the Church: And therefore the Apostle joins these
three things together: One Lord, one faith, one Baptism; Ephe. 4. 3.
as if he should say, One head, one rule, one body of believers regenerated by
baptism. We are forced from evidence of the truth, to understand Baptism,
from the words of the Apostle, not of the external perception, but of the
inward grace of the Sacrament: because what he means by one Baptism,
himself declares when he says, By one Spirit we are all baptized into one
body. The sum is, this unity which the Church has from the Spirit, is a
spiritual grace, without which inward spiritual grace, no man can have the
communion of the holy Ghost, or be a member of Christ his Church in the unity
of one Spirit; But without this inward spiritual grace a man may be a member
of the Church of Rome; therefore the Church of Rome is not the Church of
Christ, forasmuch as that Church is fallen away from the unity of the Spirit,
which knitteth all the members of the Church together.

The fourth unity whereby the Church is known to be one and the same always,
is the unity of Faith: For the true Church from the Apostles having received
the true faith, has held the same unto this day, and must hold it without
change unto the end of the world. And therefore the ancient Fathers were wont
to prove the Church to be always the same, in many generations and
successions, because the same faith was always held in the Church without
change: whereupon S. Hierome commenting upon the 23. Psalm upon these words,
Haec est generatio quaerentium dominum, says, Ecclesia ex pluribus personis
congregatur, and tamen vna dicitur propter vnitatem fidei: that is, The Church
is gathered together of diverse persons, and yet it is said to be one for the
unity of faith. Then they who hold not this unity, can never prove that they
have the unity of the Church, which Christ redeemed with his blood, which the
Apostles taught and planted.

The faith of the Church is said to be one, because the rule of faith is one,
and the same from the beginning of the Church to the end: the rule of faith is
the doctrine of faith, contained in the holy Scriptures. This is the rule that
rules the Church: for the Church must teach the true faith; and that is the
true faith which the Church teaches out of the holy Scriptures: so that we
must not take whatsoever the Church teaches without any limitation or rule.
For the Church has a rule to teach by: this rule is the rule of faith taken
out of the holy Scriptures: so long as any particular Church teaches according
to this rule, so long is that Church to be heard: but if a Church once fall
away from this rule of faith, then it cease to be a true Church of God, as
many particular Churches have fallen away, because they have forsaken this rule
of faith.

First therefore, I will prove out of the Scriptures and ancient fathers, that
the true Church is known by the rule of faith And then I will demo^strate that
this rule of faith is no other thing then the true doctrines of faith,
contained in the Scripture. By which means it will appear what is the true
Church, and where it is to be found. The Apostle proouing that the Ephesians
were a true Church of God, says; You are no more strangers, Ephesians. 2. 20.
but fellow citisens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being
the chief corner Stone: In which words he declares what the true Church is;
an assembly of Saints, the household of God, and upon what foundation it is
built: for the doctrine of the faith upon which the Church is built, is called
a foundation: And because this doctrine is contained in the holy scriptures
written by the Prophets, and Apostles; therefore it is called the foundation of
the prophets and Apostles. Then the church is built upon this foundation, that
is, upon the faith contained in the Scriptures, written by the prophets and
Apostles. And if any Church change once this foundation, that cease to be a
true Church of Christ.

Of diverse testimonies of fathers, I will cite a few: Clemens Alexandrinus
says; We Libr. 7. stromatum.
say that the ancient and Catholic Church is known to be in the unity of one
Faith, which faith is contained in the proper Testaments, or rather in one
Testament, which in diverse times is Contra omnes hereses.
one. Athanasius says; The Orthodoxe Church truly reading, and exactly
examining the holy Scriptures, does edify it self upon the Rock. The
Author Hom. 49.
of the imperfect work upon Matt. says; If any would know what is the true
Church, how shall he know this, but only by Scriptures? S. Austin says; In
the Epist. 60.
Scriptures we learn Christ, in the Scriptures we learn to know the Church of
Christ. Vincentius Licinensis says; The Church of Lib. contr. here is. cap. 32.
Christ is a careful keeper of the doctrines committed to her, she changes
nothing of them at any time, she diminishes nothing, she adds nothing, she
cutteth off nothing necessary, she puts to nothing superfluous, she
loses not her own, she usurps no strange doctrine. Bid says; The In
John lib. 1. c. 12
foundation of the Church is the soundness of the Faith of the Apostles, and
Prophets. According to these speak the rest, because we would not stay too
long upon testimonies. Whereby it appears that this has been the common
doctrine of the Church, that the true Church is known by holding the rule of
faith, which true faith, the Prophets and Apostles have written, and declared
to the Church; So that herein stands the ministry of the Church, in
preserving this faith for ever sound, which by the holy men inspired of God to
write the Scriptures, is left to the Church: Or as S. Jude faith, Jude 3.
To contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

Now that this rule of faith is no other thing, saving only the true doctrine
of the Scripture; it will appear, if we briefly consider the testimonies of
the Scriptures, and doctrines of ancient writers in this point. I will take a
few of both. S. Paul says; Whatsoever Romans 15. 4.
things are written before, are written for our doctrine, that by patience and
consolation of the Scripture, we might have hope: Whereby the Apostle teaches
plainly, that the Scriptures are the rule of our doctrine; so that nothing may
be taught, nothing may be learned concerning our faith, but according to this
rule delivered in the Scriptures. And again; All Scripture is given 2. Tim. 3.
16.
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. The Apostle declares how
the Scripture is profitable and perfect. The Papists confess that the
Scripture is profitable, but not perfect: They deny the perfection, the
Apostle proves both. It is profitable to perfect the man of God: that
profitablenesse that is able to make men perfect, is both profitablenesse and
perfection. If the Scripture can make the man of God perfect, then there is no
need of any traditions of men to make up this perfection. This has been the
common doctrine of the Church, that the Scriptures are so perfect in
themselves, that they contain the whole rule of faith. In this confession,
agree the Greek Church, the Latin Church, the Church of Rome, and all Writers
in the Church of Rome have held up this common faith until the Council of
Trent; which Council ended some fifty years ago. And then began these men,
whom now we call Papists, to change this rule of faith in the Council of Trent:
For whereas before the rule of faith was ever confessed to be in the doctrine
of the Scriptures; in that Council, unwritten Traditions were taken into the
rule of faith; and so they teach now that the Scripture is but one part of the
rule of faith, and unwritten Traditions of the Church of Rome another part: So
that the whole rule is in the Scriptures, and in Traditions. Whereby it
appears, that the rule of faith is by them changed: For I say that they are
not able to prove by any writer of the Church of Rome, (much less by
ancients) that the unwritten Traditions of the Church of Rome, were held to be
a part of the rule of faith, before the Counci^ of Trent. And because the
Church is certainly known by preserving the rule o^ faith (for that is the
true Church, which through al^ successions holds the same faith delivered by
the Apostles and Prophets, and that is no true Church which holds not the
same faith; an^ the same faith is known by the same rule) therefore the Church
of Rome that now is having changed the rule o^ faith, has assuredly change^
the faith: and having changed the faith, cease to be ^ true Church of Christ,
because the Church is known by the faith which the Apostles left to the
Church: An^ that Church, such as it is, following now a new rule of faith, can
prove their antiquity no ancienter then the rule: That rule being then
devised some 50. years ago, it follows, that when they seek out their
antiquity, they will find their Church to be according to the antiquity of
the rule of their faith of some 50. years standing, and no ancienter. In the
mean time they cosen the simple people that cannot judge, with great boasting
of their antiquity, and of the continuance of their faith from the Apostles.
But these be but vain brags, as it will further appear in the process
thereof.

But first, that we may know how faithful and peremptory the ancient Fathers
and Writers of the Church of Rome have been in this point, to prove that
nothing may be received into the rule of faith, saving only the Scriptures, of
many testimonies I will cite some.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Strom. lib. 6.
The Ecclesiastical rule, is the consent and conspiration of the old and new
Testament. By the Ecclesiastical rule, he declares what is that rule which
rules the Church: And speaking of the holy Scriptures, he says, There is no
other work but this only, that can bring salvation to men. Athanasius says,
Contra gentes.
The holy Scriptures inspired by God, are sufficient to instruct men in the
truth. Basil says, Ascet. de fide.
It is a manifest sliding away from faith, and an evident sign of pride,
either to reject any thing of that which is written, or to bring in any thing
that is not written: Where he proves this both by Scriptures and reasons: For
Christ his sheep hear his voice, therefore it must be the known voice of
Christ in the Scriptures that must rule our faith. And the Apostle says, That
though it be a Gal. 1. 15.
man's testament, yet if it be confirmed and ratified, no man may disanull it,
or add any thing to it. Whereby Basil most powerfully proves, that the
Testament of Christ being confirmed by his death, may not be disanulled, or
have any thing added unto it: For this were evident forgerie in a man's
Testament. And what then shall we call this adding of unwritten Traditions to
the Testament of Jesus Christ?

Constantine the great had learned this of the orthodox Bishops, and therefore
he says, as Theodoret delivers Theodor. lib. 1. ca. 7
his saying in the first Nicene Council: The Evangelical and Apostolical
books, and the oracles of the old Prophets, do fully Plene nos instruunt.
instruct us what we must understand of the will of God: therefore laying aside
all contentions, let us seek out the solution of those doubts that are
proposed, out of the holy Scriptures. S. Chrysostom In 2. Cor. Hom. 13.
says, Seeing we have a most exact rule, balance, and gnomon, that is, the
doctrine of holy Scriptures, I beseech you that you will not regard what this
^r that man says, but seek all ^hese things out of the Scrip^ures. Where S.
Chrysostom ^reacheth to the people, and ^rayeth them to read and search ^he
Scriptures. A clean contrary course take these Popish doctors, who debar the
people from reading the Scrip^ures in a known tongue, and ^o keep them in
ignorance, ^elling them, that they must believe nothing, but that which the
Church teaches: by the Church they mean themselves, who are their teachers.
And they never declare to the people, how by the rule of faith delivered in the
Scriptures, they should examine their doctrines: but the blind people must take
all at their hands, who are resolved to hold them blind still; As Cardinal
Caietan coming into Paris, and finding the people blind, was not desirous to
remove their blindness by instruction, but content to abuse their blindness,
and to leave them as blind as he found them: For when the people were desirous
to have the Cardinals blessing, and therein the Popes; the Cardinal at the
first refused, but finding the people earnestly set upon that motion, he
turned to them, and said these words: Quandoquidem hic populus decipi vult,
decipiatur in nomine diaboli: that is, Seeing this people will needs be
deceived, let them be deceived in the name of the devil; and so gave them the
Popes blessing. Thus do the Popish teachers come to save souls, making the
people blind, keeping them in blindness, and then profanely scoffing at that
blindness which themselves procured. But S. Chrysostom and the ancient godly
Fathers dealt far otherwise with the people, always exhorting them to read
the Scriptures. And Chrysostom in the same place does with great reason and
eloquence, both pull off this veil of ignorance, which the Papists labor to
cast over the eyes of the people, and does very effectually descry the fraud
and imposture of such teachers as these Popish teachers are: For, says
Chrysostom, would it not be thought a very absurd thing, if in borrowing and
lending of money, a man should trust him that brought him money, and not tell
it after him? how is it then that this is thought so absurd not to tell money
after another, and shall we in things o^ the greatest weight simply follow the
sentence of other men without examination seeing we have such an exac^ rule of
holy Scripture? Chrysostom proves that the learned Papists are couseners,
an^ the simple Papists sottish, lik^ them that will not see their money told.
This is the reason that in stead of gold and silver, they receive copper and
brass: The damage redoundeth to the destruction of their souls; and therefore
they ought to have a greater care and foresight, lest in the matters concerning
their souls, they be abused by such as dare change the rule of Faith;
delighting in the ignorance of the simple, and profanely scoffing the ignorance
which themselves have caused. This thing the simple people ought more carefully
to look to, more exactly to prevent, then any damage that can grow in their
worldly estate.

Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria Lib. de recta fide ad regni.
says; It is necessary for us to follow the holy Scriptures, and from their
prescript in no manner of thing must we depart. Tertullian says; The rule of
Faith Lib. de velandis virgini.
is instituted by Christ, and it is one and the same which none may change,
which none may reform. Then whether the Papists will call it an Alteration, or
a Reformation of the rule of faith, which in Trent they have done, it is
utterly denied, that the Church may either alter or reform that rule. S.
Hillarie says; The presumption, or Lib. ad Constan. August.
frailty, or error of some, (he speaks there against the Arrians, but his
words do no less touch the Papists) has either fraudulently confessed, or
impudently transgressed the unchangeable co^stitution of Apostolic doctrine.
So he calls the rule of faith, Indemutabilem Constitutionem Apostolicae
doctrinae.

S. Hierome says; The Church Lib. 1. in Mich. c. ^*
of Christ, which dwells well, possessing the Churches spread over the whole
world, is joined together in the unity of the spirit, and has cities of the
Law, and Prophets, of the Gospel and Apostles, and goes not out of her
bounds, that is, out of the holy Scriptures. Thus he calls the holy
Scriptures, the bounds and limits of the Church, out of which limits the Church
of Christ never goes: but the Church of Rome is gone out of these bounds. S.
Augustine Libr. de bon. vidutat. cap. 1.
says; The holy Scripture has fixed a rule for our doctrine, lest we might
dare to be wiser the^ we ought. I omit many for breuity. S. Gregory says, In
the volume of the Scriptures are contained In Ezekiel.
all things which do teach us, all things that edify And again, All our
munitio^ is contained in the holy Writ. To these Ancients agree the writers of
the Church of Rome. Peter Lombard says; Lib. 1. did. 1.
Matters of faith must be demonstrated according to the authorities of holy
Scriptures. T. Aquinas In 1. ad sim. c. 6.
says, The doctrine of the prophets and Apostles is called Canonical, because
it is the rule of our understanding, and therefore no man ought to teach
otherwise. The same might be proved out of others; but this may suffice.

From all which I conclude, that the doctrine of the Scriptures has ever bin
held to be the rule of faith, which must rule the Church in teaching: For these
men presume that they deal with simple men, that may not examine their
doctrines: and therefore they bid the people take doctrines at their hands, and
seek no further. And they tell us, that the rule of faith is that which the
Church teaches. These be mad fellows, that presume so much upon the
simplicity of others: for the rule of faith is a rule that rules the Church;
for deceivers may come into the Church: The Scripture has warned us of
deceivers, that such shall come. Antichrist with his deceiving Priests shall
come. Now lest these deceivers should abuse us with false doctrines, which they
may call the doctrines of the Church, the rule of faith is fixed, to rule them,
and all other. The ancient Fathers were all ruled by this rule: we are ruled by
the same rule; only these that have changed the rule, refuse to be ruled by
this rule. They tell us that their doctrine must be the rule to us: but they
tell us not what should rule their doctrine. Now here is the point which we
entreat learned and unlearned to consider, who seek out the true Church, and
are desirous to find it, and therein to rest. The Church is known by the
careful keeping of the true faith, that is, the true Church, which from the
Apostles in all successions has held the true faith: the true faith is known
by the rule of faith: the rule is the same in all ages. This rule has been
held inviolable from the Apostles times downward, in the Greek Church, in
the Latin Church, even in the Church of Rome, until the Council of Trent.
And in the Council of Trent we find this rule changed: For whereas before, the
Church held this rule always, to be the Prophetical and Apostolical
doctrine, contained in the holy Scriptures; now they have made the rule to be
Scriptures, and unwritten Traditions. These unwritten Traditions they call the
word of God, as well as Scriptures, and thus have they made a word of God of
their own invention. By this means they magnify the Popes authority, and
have turned the Supremacy into a Godhead, and will not understand that they
worship Antichrist in the Church: For these Traditions are the Popes word, as
the Scripture is Gods word. And they blush not to teach that the word of the
Pope, is the word of God. And thus have they set up in the church another God,
and another word of God. And what can Antichrist do more then this?

Then in seeking the true Church, we must follow the rule: we follow the same
rule, that all the fathers followed, and because we find the rule changed in
the present Church of Rome, therefore we are sure that it cannot be the true
Church, that has changed the rule of faith, by which the true Church was
always known heretofore, and must be known hereafter. And as they have
changed the rule of faith, so have they changed the Judge of the controversies
of faith: For before the Council of Trent, the Church never held the Pope to
be Judge of Controversies of faith. Before the same time, the Church never
held the Pope to be above general Councils; but his authority always (even
in the greatest ruff and pride of Popes) was yet held to be under the
authority of a general Council.

Concerning the judge of controversies of Faith, the ancient Writers, and the
writers of the Church of Rome, have written no otherwise, then as we write and
speak. In the Council of Nice, Theodoret Lib. 1. cap. 1.
declares how Constantine described the judge of controversies of faith: In
the disputations of things divine, says he, the Bishops have the doctrine of
the holy Spirit written: For the Evangelical and Apostolical books, and the
oracles of the ancient Prophets do fully instruct us: and therefore let us
take the determination of questions from the words of the holy Ghost. In which
words he declares, first, that in divine Disputations, or in Controversies of
Faith, we have the doctrine of the holy Ghost written: then let them tell us
from what spirit the vnwritte^ word of Trent proceeds? Secondly he says,
that the writings of the Prophets and Apostles do fully instruct us; then that
writing is the full rule of faith; for that which does fully instruct us, and
not in part, is the full rule, and not a part thereof. Thirdly he says, that
all determinations of doubts must be taken from this written word: Then he
proves undoubtedly that this written word does suffice to end all
controversies of faith: because the words of men may be subject to error, but
the words of the holy Ghost are not. This is the Catholic determination of
the judge of controversies in faith, which has been in all succession
preserved until the Council of Trent. Optatus an ancient Father holds the
same way in seeking a judge: for thus he reasons against the Donatists, Let
no Optat. lib. 5.
man believe you, let no man believe us, for all we are contentious men: Judges
must be sought, but if we take Christians, they cannot be held indifferent
for both sides, because the truth is encumbred by contentions: We must then
seek a judge without. But if he be a Pagan, he cannot understand our
mysteries: if a Jew, he is an enemy to Christian baptism. Therefore on earth
no judgment will be found for this: we must seek the Judge from heaven: But
what need we knock at heaven, seeing we have him here in his Gospel? Thus
Optatus sought a judge, and could find none but Christ speaking in his Gospel,
in his written word. How easy had it been for Optatus to have named the Pope,
if the Pope had then been esteemed the judge of controversies of faith? But
this is a late invention not known to the ancient fathers. Saint Augustine
speaks in like sort; This matter Libr. 2. cap. 33. de nupt. and concupisc.
(says he, writing against the Pelagians) requires a Judge, and therefore let
Christ judge. And then he produces the words of Christ as the words of the
Judge. He says also, Let the Apostle judge with him, for in the Apostle
Christ speaks: And then he produces the words of the Apostle, as being the
words of Christ the Judge. And in another place: It is not without great cause
that Ad Cresc. lib. 2. cap. 31.
the Canon of the Scriptures is ordained with such wholesome vigilance,
whereunto certain books of the Prophets and Apostles do pertain, which we
dare not judge at all; but according to them may we freely judge of other
writings, whether they be written by believers, or no believers. After this,
till the Council of Trent, the Church held the same determination still
concerning the Judge of controversies of faith. Indeed there were some Friars
and Canonists that flattered the Pope, and the Pope was as willing to make use
of their flatterings: But these flatterers were rejected as men odious, and
could never find any credit in the world before the Council of Trent; In so
much that the Popes themselves (and what is it that they durst not do?) durst
not claim this authority before that time. Pope Clement the first, has Did.
37 cap 14. This Pope lived anno 1047.
these words: You must not seek a strange sense, which may be adulterated and
inwardly corrupted, nor confirm such a sense by the authority of Scripture:
but a man must take the sense of the truth from the Scriptures themselves,
seeing that one may have the full and firm rule of faith and truth in the
Scriptures. Thus says a Pope: Integra and firma regula veritatis ex
Scripturis. Then there were no unwritten Traditions thought of at that time, to
be thrust into the rule of faith. Secondly he says, that the understanding of
the truth, must be sought out of the Scriptures themselves: So that he knew
no other Judge of the controversies of faith. Thus was the doctrine of the
Judge of controversies maintained until the time of the Council of Basil.

The Council of Basil does likewise maintain the ancient doctrine of the
Church concerning this point: For thus they say: Lex diuina praxis Council
Basil. Sess. 4.
Christi, Apostolica, and Ecclesiae primitiuae, vna cum Concilijs Doctoribusque
fundantibus se veraciter in eadem, pro verissimo and indifferente iudice in hoc
Basiliensi Concilio admittentur: That is, The divine Law (or holy Scripture)
the practice of Christ, of his Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, together
with Councils and Doctors, grounding themselves truly thereon, shall be
admitted for the most true and indifferent Judge in this Council of Basil. We
find by this, what was the sense and judgment of the Church in our fathers
days; for this was done about the year of Christ 1440. Then before the
Council of Trent there was no change in these things: but there they have
changed all, and made a new Church: but with such sleights and cunning, that it
is apparent, that it was not religion and conscience which moved them, but
ambition, and a singular estimation and pride of their own wit; holding such a
scorneful conceit of other nations, whom they call Tramontani, that they
presume that they can make all other men fools. This they practiced in the
Council of Trent, and through the simplicity and overmuch credulity which
they have found in some, have partly well confirmed their purpose: for there
were certain questions which were determined in that Council of Trent, and
yet never discussed: as namely, whether the Popes authority be above the
authority of a general Council: and, whether the Pope be the judge of the
controversies of faith.

These are now holden as things determined, and yet they were never discussed.
This made Gentiletus exclaim Innocent. Gentileti exam, concilij Trid.
in these words; Ecquis fando vnqua^ audiuit, vt quaestio in disputatione^ non
reuocata, non examinata, non tractata, fuerit tamen decisa, conclusa, rata,
approbata? tanta astutia hic tractata est quaestio de Romans Pontificis
authoritate supra Concilium: that is; Did ever any man hear of the like? that
there should be a question, which though it were never brought to disputation,
never examined, never handled, should notwithstanding be decided, concluded,
confirmed, approved? By such cunning was the question handled here,
concerning the Popes authority over a Council: by this let the world judge of
this Council, whether it was like other Councils. Is this a thing to be
tolerated in the Church, that a company of Italians, men without Religion,
without the fear of God, should in the pride of their wits put a trick upon all
the Churches in Christendom? Let the simple souls that are seduced lift up
their eyes, and see the snares that are provided to catch them: let them
understand, that the Priests and Jesuits, who now are employed about their
subversion, are instruments to drive and allure them into these nets, which
these Inginers have devised by subtilty and fraud. These trappes are laid with
great subtlety to inthrall their souls: let them at the least look up, and
open their eyes, and behold the danger that is before them: If they will
wilfully fall into these snares, then may they blame themselves for their own
destruction.

Thus have we found out, that the rule of Faith was changed in the Council of
Trent: That in the same Council, the Judge of Controversies of faith was
likewise changed: that all things were then changed; whereby the Church is
known to be a Church: For before that, the Church was known to be a Church,
by the Unity which it held with the Catholic Church. This was the Unity of
the Body, the Unity of the Head, the Unity of the Spirit, and the Unity of
Faith: These were in some measure all held, until the Council of Trent
changed all. Now all these things being changed and forsaken by the present
Church of Rome, it remains to conclude, that the present Church of Rome, is
no Church of Christ, but an assembly, I say, not of Heretics, but of far
worse, and more dangerous then any Heretics heretofore have been: For the
former Heretics, that have openly forsaken the Church, could never do so much
harm, as Antichrist with his creatures, who having secretly forsaken the
Church, yet make open claim to the Church, and to all the rights thereof.

Seeing now that the now Church of Rome is not the true Church, where then
shall we find it? The Reformed Churches, as now they are called, being the
generation of them that have lived of long time before, in the Communion of the
old Church of Rome, might have continued in that course, if the Church of Rome
had not bin notoriously changed from a Church to no Church. For in old times
we find a distinction observed, between the Church of Rome, and the Court of
Rome. The Church we may call all these Western Churches, that held Communion
with the Church of Rome then, and maintained the Popes Supremacy in things
spiritual, as then the Supremacy was understood, but not as now they
understand it: Now because they held in this point with the Pope, they were
therefore understood as belonging to the Church of Rome thus far. The Court
of Rome were they that flattered the Pope, and sought his greatness without
respect to truth or reason: Such were Friars and Canonists, which in the end
prevailed against the Church, and now call themselves the Church of Rome. These
with their adherents, (for some Bishops and Priests did leave the Church, and
adhere unto these) prevailed in the Council of Trent, by fraudulent sleights;
and forsaking the rule of faith, changing the Judge of Controversies, extolling
the Popes Supremacy above all that were before them, gave a just occasion unto
the Reformed Churches, which after this revolted from them, to seek the Church
wheresoever they could find it; because they saw evidently now, that in the
Popes communion it was no longer to be found. If any man object unto me, that
Martin Luther began to preach before the Council of Trent (for he began
first to preach against Indulgences in the year of Christ, 1517. and the first
Session of the Council of Trent was held in the year 1545. the last Session of
that Council was held in the year 1563.) Luther then having begun to preach
against the Pope before the Council of Trent, it may be thought that the
Council of Trent gave not occasion to the revolt which followed; seeing that
Martin Luther had in some sort begun it before. To this I answer, that when
Martin Luther began first to preach against Indulge^ces, he thought of no
reuolting from the Pope: For he preached the doctrines that he was sure the
Church had held before him, and which were agreeable to the rule of faith,
which stood at that time unchanged in the Church. And that Luther had no
meaning to revolt from the Church, himself does plainly confess: and it is
evident by the whole course of the Story of these times. Luther for a long
time after his preaching against Indulgences, sought peace with the Pope; and
therefore he appealed unto Pope Leo, nothing doubting, but that the Pope would
favor the truth which he had so clearly proved from the Scriptures. When he
saw that the Pope went directly from the truth; then he appealed from the Pope
to a general Council: For Luther never doubted, but that there was, and
always would be a Church that would favor the truth against the Pope and
his flatterers. So Luther fell away from the Pope, but still he held himself
sure in the Church, teaching nothing but such things as he offered to be
examined according to the rule of faith, which always ruled the doctrines of
the Church: And thus he continued until his death. He died after the Council
of Trent was begun. In appealing from the Pope to a general Council, he
followed the common practice of many that were oppressed by the Pope, or that
feared the Popes oppression in the Church of Rome: who appealed from the Pope
and Court of Rome, to the Church of Rome, or to a general Council. Such
Appeals were made sometimes by Emperors and Kings, which were wronged by the
Pope; as namely by Lodouike Bauare, Emperor, and by Philip the fair, the
French King: Sometimes by learned men of inferior degree, as by Michael
Caesina, with whom did then adhere William Occham, and others.

The same distinction between the Church of Rome, and Court of Rome, was very
apparent by the actions and process held by those two Councils, collected of
these Western Churches, the Council of Constance, and of Basil: which
Councils we find to be a body representative of a Church, which was opposite
to the Pope and Court of Rome: So that assuredly there was a Church which held
the rule of faith against the Pope and his flatterers. In that Church was
Luther, in that Church were the learned men of these two Councils; who
proceeded roundly against the Popes authority: they proved that the Popes
might err, and that in many things they did err: they maintained the rule of
faith, which stood inuiolated in the Church till their days: they maintained
the ancient Judge of controversies of faith, which before had always been
acknowledged: they protested that to give that authority to the Pope, (which
now since that time is given, and since the Council of Trent is confirmed to
the Pope by these flatterers) this say they, is to give an open entrance for
Antichrist into the Church to subvert Christian Religion. Then at that time the
truth was held up in some measure: there was then acknowledged an authority
in the Church above the Pope: there was a Judge of general Councils, the same
which the Church before received, and which we acknowledge: there was then no
alteration, no change made of the rule of faith: but since this time all these
things are changed in the Council of Trent.

This Council of Trent, (to give you some taste of it) was neither general,
nor free, nor lawful: Not general, for these Western parts, because diverse
Kings and Nations protested against it: namely, the King of England, and the
French King: and would not send their Bishops and Ambassadors to it. Many
Nations held it for a private conuenticle of a few gathered together against
the Church. For all England, Scotland, Ireland, all France, all Germany, that
held against that Council, will make a far greater part then all the rest,
that consented to that Council. It was not free; for none were admitted to
have voice therein, but such as should be bound by an oath of bondage and
slavery to the Pope. It was not a lawful Assembly; for so much as it was neither
called by a lawful authority: for against the first calling of it, the
Emperor himself dissented, and protested against it by his Ambassador
Vergas; the Kings also who had interst in these Western parts, protested
against it: Neither was the manner of proceeding in that Council lawful.
Gentiletus a French Lawyer proves the nullities of that Council: For by the
Imperial Constitution it is ordained, that the Decrees which are made against
Laws, are not only unprofitable, but void, and to be taken for things not
done. Cap. Imperiali 25. q. 2. l. non dubium: He proposes therefore, and
proves a great number of the nullities of that Council, which make the whole
to be void, and of no validity, as being done against the Laws.

This is that Council that has changed the faith of the Church, that was held
from the Apostles to that time unchanged: they have brought into the Church the
Popes word, to match the word of God: this was never done in the Church before.
And therefore the reformed Churches holding the ancient rule of faith, which
the Church had held from the Apostles, till the Council of Trent, must needs
prove themselves (...) stand in the true succession of the Church: For the
true Church must continue to the end of the world: And seeing it cannot
continue in them that have forsaken the Unity of the Catholic Church, and
the rule of faith, it must needs be granted, that it is continued in them that
hold the unity with the Catholic Church, and the rule of faith.

Thus then from the Unity of the Church, we have proved, that the Church of
Rome that now is, is not the true Church of Christ, because it is not one with
the true Church of Christ. It holds not the Unity of that Body, nor the
Unity of the Head, nor the Unity of the Spirit, nor the Unity of Faith: And
holding not Unity with the Catholic Church, it cannot be a church at all.
The Reformed Churches hold this Unity, and are thereby proved to be one with
the Catholic Church: from this which I have said, diverse trueths do apparently
ensue, which I will briefly open.

The consent of the Church, which is but one in the fathers and their children,
is proved to stand in the fundamental points of doctrine, before the Council
of Trent; I say, in the fundamental points: For diverse errors were crept into
the Church before: but these errors were such as did not raze the foundation;
for a Church may stand, and be a true Church, though some errors creep into
it. But if these errors change the foundation, (as the errors do which
change the rule of faith, which is the foundation of the Church) then without
doubt, it cease to be a Church. The errors which before this time did
creep into the Church, did not change the foundation, because all men in the
Church held the same old and true foundation in the rule of faith till then.
The Popes Supremacy, as men then understand it, was generally embraced: But
surely this was not a fundamental error: For we doubt not, but many good and
godly men were among them, and saved, though they did acknowledge the Popes
Supremacy in such a measure, as Saint Bernard, and the Council of Constance,
and of Basil did acknowledge the same.

It appears hereby also, 2
that the true Church of Christ, as before I have declared, did stand up in
some ^ort until this time of the Council of Trent: For the ^rue Church may be
proved ^y the unity with the Catholic Church, and by the ^ule of faith,
which till then was held in the Church.

It appears likewise, that 3
the reformed Churches, are in the succession and continuation of that true,
ancient, and only Church, which stood before the Council of Trent, and shall
endure to the end of the world: For before that time there were, as we may
say, two faces of a Church; the one of the court of Rome, the other of the
Church: But in the Council of Trent the Court o^ Rome prevailed: therefore the
Church fell off, and made a separation from the Court of Rome: But the Church
though falling away from the Court of Rome, continued still the same Church
because it held still the same rule of faith, and forsaked not the communion
which before it had with the Catholic Church: But the Court of Rome, which
now calls it self the Church, and the only Catholic Church, altered the
rule of faith, and fell away from the communion of the Catholic Church.

It appears also, that our 4
fathers which before us lived and died in the Church of Rome, had all
necessary means of salvation, because the rule of faith was held then
inviolable: And albeit the Friars, the Canonists, and flatterers of the Pope
had corrupted many things in the Church, yet the doctrines of the truth were
permitted to be preached according to the rule of faith: which proved that our
fathers living and dying in Popery before the Council of Trent, had the means
to be saved: which means are now taken away by these that are now in the
Church of Rome; because they have altered the rule of faith, which contains
the means to salvation. Now where they come with their declamations, and tell
us of the divisions that we have among our selves, some Lutherans, some
Zwinglians, etc. and that we can have no Church, because we have not unity in
the faith, and these divisions show the breach of unity: I answer, that there
may be some disagreement in some points of Religion, and the sides disagreeing
may ^oth hold the true Church, so long as these disagreements be not in
matters fundamental; and that they who so disagree, notwithstanding ^ll their
disagreement, hold one and the same rule of faith. We say that between
Luthe^ans and Zwinglians, as these ^all them, the same rule of ^aith is held
and acknowledged without alteration: And therefore both these sides may belong
to one and the same Church, because they hold one and the fame rule of faith
with the Catholic Church, with the Fathers, and with the Church of Rome before
the Trent Council. But if they can prove that there are some sects which do
not fully and entirely hold this rule of faith, then will we disclaim
communion with them as we do with Anabaptists with Zwinkfeldians, with
Papists for the same cause^ And therefore when our adversaries speak or write
o^ the Church, they must leau^ boys play in making idle declamations: let them
speak^ plainly and soundly to these points, and declare the vniti^ of the
Church, and open the rule of faith, wherein the tru^ Church has always had
^nitie, and will always hold^ to the end of the world. The should make
conscience of their writings not to deceive the simple with idle discourses of
by-points. They discourse of antiquity, universality, and consent, words in
show making for them as they suppose, in truth against them: They tell us that
the Religion which now is professed in Rome, is that Religion which converted
ENGLAND first to the true Faith: They tell us that we can have no true Church,
because we have so many divisions among us; and many such like discourses as
these, and very proper declamations: which when we read, we have reason to
suspect, that they who write thus, either are men of no learning and
understanding; or else write things against their own consciences, to hold
simple souls still in error, whom they have once bewitched with these silly
sleights and shows. They presume of ignorant souls, and seek to maintain
ignorance in the people: for without gross and in a manner wilful ignorance,
none can be deceived in these things.

That which I have spoken of the Catholic Church, is agreeable to that
Article of our Faith, I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints: Which words do prove, that the Church of Rome, as now it stands,
cannot be the Catholic Church, nor have communion with it. The Papists in
delivering the notes or marks of the Church, make long discourses of other
marks, and are afraid to speak of these true marks contained in our Creed.

First, the Church is holy: When these men speak of the holiness of the
Church, they tell us of a holiness which is in the Sacraments: which thing we
deny not; but we deny that the Sacraments make men holy without faith They
tell us also of the holy Martyrs that have been in the Church before, that the
Church is made holy by them. This indeed proves the holiness of them that
have lived and died in the faith, and for the faith; but this will not make the
Church after them to be holy. The present Church is holy, not by the holiness
of them that have lived before, but by the holiness of them that live in it.
The Church is holy, because it consists of Saints, of members who are holy:
these members are holy both by imputed sanctification from Christ the head, who
for their sakes did sanctify himself, as he says, For their sakes I
sanctify Ioh. 17. 19
my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth: and also by
inherent holiness; for the Apostle teaches, that the whole Church and every
member thereof, receives increase of the body from the head: So that men may
not so grossly flatter themselves as the Papists do, thinking that they may
be the Church, and yet live without holiness. They who have no part in
holiness, have no part in the Church; for the Church is holy. Saint John
says, Every man that has 1. Ioh. 3. 3
this hope in him, purges himself, even as he is pure. And again, If we say
that we have 1. Ioh. 1. 6
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
And therefore the Church of Rome, seeking a title of holiness, without
holiness of life, so falling away from true holiness, is assuredly fallen
away also from being a Church. It is called CATHOLIC, because it has been
spread in all places, and has been and shall be at all times: In which
respect it is distinguished from the Church of the Jews, which was but in one
nation, and for a certain time. The Church of Rome was always held by the
Ancients to differ from the Catholic Church, though it was ever held to be a
part of the Catholic Church: but that it differed from the Catholic, as a
particular from the universal, the ancient writers never made doubt. S.
Hierome writing of one that confounded the orders of the Church, preferring a
Deacon before a Priest (which confusion was practiced then in the Church of
Rome) proves that this was but a particular disorder suffered in the Church of
Rome, against the order of the Catholic Church spread over the world: And
therefore he declares, that though in respect of particular assemblies there
was one Church of Rome, another of France, another of Britain, etc. yet all
agree in one Church; and the authority of the Catholic Church is greater
then the authority of any part, though it be Rome it self. And therefore he
says, Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis mayor est vrbe: meaning, the authority
of the Catholic Church spread over the world, is greater then the authority
of the Church of Rome, being as then it was reputed, but the Church of one
City: Whereby he proves plainly, that the Church of Rome was not the
Catholic Church. Saint Augustine writing to the same purpose, observes that
in his time one Vrbicus a Roman began to spread new doctrines concerning
fasting; namely, that fasting did wash away errors and sins; that in fasting
there was merit; that men were compelled to sin who took a breakefast; that
the kingdom of heaven was not in meat and drink, but in fasting; and such
like novelties: which Saint Austin August. Epist. 86.
refuteth, and says, that this Vrbicus did blaspheme the Church dispersed over
the whole world, except the Church of Rome, and some few of the West: Then it
follows, that in his judgment the Church of Rome was not the Catholic
Church, because Vrbicus who blasphemed the Catholic Church, commended and
followed the Church of Rome. Many things might be brought for this purpose, but
I strive for brevity: This may suffice to prove that the ancient Fathers did
not hold the Church of Rome to be the Catholic Church.

In this Church there is a communion of Saints, which Communion the Papists
devise to be between the Saints in heaven, and the Saints on earth, and them
that be in purgatory. These be vain conceits without any ground: For the
Church has this Communion with GOD the Father, and with JESUS CHRIST, and
among themselves, as Saint John teaches; 1. Ioh. 1. 3.
Our Communion is with the Father; and his Son Jesus Christ. And declaring
this Communion, which the members of the Church have one with another, he
says: If we walk in the light, as he 1 Ioh. 1. 3, 7.
is in the light, we have Communion one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ does cleanse us from all sin. In which words he declares who are
partakers of this Communion; and consequently who are members of this Church:
For we have Communion one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin. Then they have this Communion, who by the blood of
Christ are cleansed from all sin: And therefore they who are in Purgatory,
can have no part of this Communion, because they are not cleansed from all
their sin by the blood of Christ. This Communion then is a Communion which
the Church of the redeemed have among themselves: These be they who sing that
new Song: Thou art worthy Apoc. 5. 9*
to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: For thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation. This is the Communion that the Church of the redeemed have;
and therefore it is called, The Communion of Saints; that is, of such as are
sanctified by the blood of Jesus Christ. But this Communion is not in the
Church of Rome: For the Communion which is in the Church of Rome, is such a
Communion, which by their own confession is held among such men as have no
inward grace, but only the external profession of Religion. This being their
own confession, it must needs follow, that the Communion of Saints is not
among them: For Saints have no Communion with wicked, who have no inward grace,
who are the members of the devil, and not of Christ: The reason is, because
between the members of Christ, and the members of the Devil, there can be no
Communion, as S Paul proves: For what fellowship 2. Cor. 6.
has righteousness with unrighteousness? or what Communion has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with Beliall? or what part have
believers with unbelievers? etc. Thus have we proved, that there is no
agreement between the Church of Rome, and the Catholic Church, because the
Church of Rome is neither holy, nor Catholic; neither in it is found the
Communion of Saints.

Then they who boast so much of the Catholic Church, the Catholic Church,
suffer themselves to be blinded by cosening companions who know not the truth:
For they think to hold the Catholic Church, before they will be acquainted
with a particular Church. Let them be entreated to understand, that if they
desire to be in the Catholic Church, without which there is no salvation, they
must betake themselves to some particular Church here on earth, which holds
Unity with the Catholic Church. And then shall they be sure to be in the
Catholic Church, when they are found in such a Church which holds Unity
with the Catholic Church: that is, by the ministry of the Church wherein you
live, and are taught: you must understand, that you are collected as members
into one body: that from the Head you may receive an increase of this Body, to
the edifying of your selves in love, and so be truly knit to the Head of the
Church Jesus Christ; that by one and the same Spirit you may be justified and
sanctified, and so hold the unity of the Spirit: that by one rule of faith
you may be taught and ruled, and that you may be sure that the same rule which
has been the rule of faith from the Apostles times, and continued ever in the
Church, be the rule of your faith. When thus by the ministry of a particular
Church, (in whatsoever place of the world that Church be) you are gathered into
one Body, under one Head, governed by one Spirit, holding one and the same rule
of Faith; then may you be assured, that you are in the Catholic Church: for
the Catholic Church being universal, and not particular, cannot be fixed to
any one particular place: but the men that must be gathered into the Church,
are particular men, and hold particular places, and therefore must use the
help of particular Churches to bring them to the Catholic Church, or else
they shall never find it. If thus men would seek the Church, they should be
sure to find it: there is but one way: they that receive not the love of the
truth, are justly deceived, and perish: that all might be damned, who believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So that when deceivers
come with their strong illusions, yet shall they be able to prevail against
none, but only such as love not the truth: But they who love the truth, and
seek it with care and diligence, as they would seek silver and gold, or
things that are esteemed more precious, shall by the great mercy of God
undoubtedly be saved from error and damnation: And all such by the free mercy
of God, shall be brought into the true Church, that therein, as in the Arc of
Noah, they may be saved: For unto the end of the world must that always be
verified which is written, The Lord added to the Church Acts 2. 47.
from day to day such as should be saved.

FOrasmuch as I have taken this as a thing granted by the Papists, That they
have added their unwritten Traditions, which they call Apostolical, unto the
Scriptures, to make up the total rule of ^aith, the Scriptures making ^ut one
part thereof, and their Traditions another; by which alteration of the rule of
faith they have forsaken communion with the Church, which till that time
always held this rule, and which to the end of the world must hold ^t; I have
here set down the words of the Trent Council, and of Car. Bellar. expounding
the same for their sakes, who being ignorant, may doubt whether this be true or
not.

COUNCIL. TRIDENT. Sess. 4. Decret. 1. Omnes Libros veteris and noui Testamenti,
nec non Traditiones ipsas, tum ad fidem, tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel
ore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritus sancto dictat as* and continua successione
in Ecclesia Catholica conseruat as, pari pietatis affectu ac reuerentia
suscipit, ac veneratu^ Tridentina Synodus.

That is,

All the books of the old and new Testament, as also the Traditions themselves,
pertaining both to faith and manners, as being either pronounced from the mouth
of Christ, or delivered by the holy Ghost, and by continual succession
preserved in the Catholic Church, the Council of Trent receives and
honors with like and equal affection of piety and reverence.

Card. Bellarm. lib. de verbo Dei non script. cap. 3. Asserimus, in Scripturis
non contineri express totam doctrinam necessariam, sieve de fide, sieve de
moribus, and proinde preter verbum De^ scriptum requiri etiam verbum Dei non
scriptum, id est, diuinas and Apostolicas Traditiones.

That is.

We affirm, that in the Scriptures is not contained expressly all necessary
doctrine, whether of faith or manners, and therefore besides the written word of
God, is required also the unwritten word of God, namely, Divine and
Apostolical Traditions.

Card. Bellar. ibid. cap. 4. Scripturae sine Traditionius nec fuerunt
simpliciter ne^essariae, nec sufficientes.

That is.

The Scriptures without Traditions, were neither simply necessary, nor yet
sufficient.

Card. Bellar. ibid. cap. 12. Dico, Scripturam, etsi non ^it facta praecipue,
vt sit regula fidei, esse tamen regulam fidei, non totalem, sed partialem.
Totalis enim regula fidei est verbum Dei, sieve reuelatio Dei Ecclesiae facta,
quae diuiditur in duas regulas partiales, Scripturam and Traditiones.

That is.

I say, that the Scripture, though it was not made especially to be the rule of
faith, yet is the rule of faith not in whole, but in part: for the whole rule
of faith is the word of God, or the revelation of God made to the Church, which
is divided into two partierules, Scripture, and Traditions.

These things the learned Papists make no doubt of; and ^herfore I take them as
things granted by them, because all their learned men grant the ^ame. For the
unlearned I ^aue set them down, that they may understand, that the rule of
faith, which the Church held before, and which holds ^he Church in unity, is
by them forsaken: And therefore if they will seek a true Church, they must seek
such a Church which holds still the same rule of faith with the true Church
of Christ, which was before the Trent Council, and must stand till the end of
the world.

FINIS.

