THE INSTITVTIONS OF CHRIstian Religion, written by that reverend Father, M.
John Calum, compendiously abridged By Edmond Bunnie Bachellour of divinity;
And translated into English by Edward May.

Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the Vine- tree, by Thomas Dawson,
for William Norton. 1580.

To the reverend Father in Christ, John, by the permission of Almighty God,
Bishop of London, Edward May wishes the true felicity of this life, and the
eternal happiness by the coming of Jesus Christ.
PErusing (Right reverend Father) the worthy soundnes of godly doctrine and
instruction, contained in this short, fruitful, and learned Compendium, drawn
out of Caluins Institutions: I supposed with my self that my labor should not
only be not evil bestowed, but also fruitfully employed in the englishing of
the same, as well for that the doing thereof might be a means, at those void
times which I found out, to translate this work, to expel idleness, wherein
homines male agere discunt, Men practice to do evil, and also to exercise and
increase with the good servants, the small talent of knowledge that God in
mercy has given me; as also the same being done, that those godly disposed
brethren that are not of ability to buie the whole Institutions, having this
(whereunto I have added the exposition of those places which the enemies of all
truth have falsely corrupted, to maintain their errors (not of my self, but
verbatim as it lies in Calvin) may enjoy and obtain some profit thereof. And
although we have much to praise God our heavenly Father for his great blessings
bestowed upon us, by the worthy travel of godly learned men, in setting forth
and translating diverse and learned books into our vulgar tongue, to the
increasing of the knowledge of almighty God in them, that have not the
knowledge of tongues, to their great profit, and singular comfort of al godly
men, which rather wish their knowledge in Gods word, to their salvation, than
their continual ignorance to their eternal damnation: yet I think that this
Epitomie as well for the brevity thereof, as the pithines of the same, will do
good unto as many as thirst after the true knowledge of Gods sacred word. And
albeit, all places of scripture are not there expounded, yet such places are
there opened, as may satisfy any Christian man to confirm his faith by, and
such light in the^ showed, as may easily show the way to the true meaning of
many other places, not there contained. Wherefore right Honorable and Reverend
Father in Christ, my humble suit is, that after this book be examined and well
liked, you would accept this rude translation, as the naked growthes of a
barreine soil, and first fruits of such an enterprise, and pass it under the
warrant of your Honors good protection, whose only name may privilege my
cause. Thus surceasing to molest your Honor with my gross and tedious style, I
pray God to direct and lead you in your godly course while life lasts, to
Gods honor and glory, who ever preserve you to your latter end, and send you
felicity in Christ, for ever to endure.

From London the 9. of August. 1579. Your Honors humble and obedient, Edward
May.

Of the knowledge of God the Creator.
The Argument.
GOing about to speak of the knowledge of God, because in the creation of man
the same chiefly does appear, for that cause also does he treat of man in
this Book: and so the special places which he handles herein, are only two:
the first whereof is the knowledge of God, the 2. the knowledge of man. In the
first Chapter he speaks of them both: and after particularly of either: yet
so that in the mean time he touches certain other small things, all which
notwithstanding may be referred to either of these: he treats also of the
scripture, of Images, to the knowledge of God: the other three of the making of
the world, of Angels, and Devils, to the knowledge of man. The last of all, of
the means whereby God governs the world, pertains to both. As touching
the knowledge of God, he shows first what knowledge it is that he requires.
Cap. 2. Secondly where it is to be sought for, from the 3. to the 9. truly not
in man, because (although naturally it be settled in man's mind, yet partly of
ignorance, partly of malice, it is choked, the 3. and the 4. nor in the making
of the world, because, although therein most clearly it appear, yet we are so
blockish, that such testimonies being never so clear, do always flote away
from us without profit. 5. but in the scripture, 6. and so being carried to the
Scriptures, he prosecuteth his treatise. 7. 8. 9. thirdly, what God is. 10.
fourthly, how wicked it is to attribute to God a visible form: where also he
speaks of Images, of the adoration of them and their beginnings. 11. fifthly,
he endeavors to prove that it is meet that God only be wholly worshipped. 12.
Last of all, he speaks of the unity of God, and the distinction of persons.
Cap. 13. As concerning the other, that is, the knowledge of man: first he
speaks of the creation of the world, of Angels, of Devils, that all these
were created for man's sake. 14. then coming to man him self, he examineth his
nature and strength 15. but that both, that is to say, the knowledge of God and
of our selves, may better appear, he descends against fortune and desteny,
to the government of all humane actions: and of the whole world. 16. 18.

The first book,
Cap. 1. That the knowledge of God and of our selves, are things joined
together, and how they agree the one with the other.
HE teaches that the whole su^me of al our wisdom consists of two parts,
that is to say, of the knowledge of GOD and of our selves: yet whether goes
before, it is hard to discern^, seeing they are linked together with so many
bonds. For first no man can look upon himself, but he must needs forthwith
turn all his senses to the viewing and beholding of God: Whether he consider
his gifts, with which distilling from heaven, he is led as it were by certain
rivers to God; or his own miserable slenderness or poverty, whereby he is
admonished of the infinite plenty of all good things which abide in God.

2 Again he shows by two similitudes, that man is deceived by false
imaginations, so long as he staieth in considering of him self either in
himself or in other creatures: and lifts not his eyes to God only.

3 A confirmation of the effects: For the brightness of God is such, Judge.
13.22. Esaias. 6.5. Exodus 2.1. Gene. 18.17. 1. King. 19.13. Esaias. 14.22. Esaias.
2.10.19.
that the most holiest of all are amassed with great horror, as often as God does
show them his glory: Which notwithstanding have greatly esteemed of
themselves, when he has been absent. The history of Job to throw men down
with a knowledge of their own folly, weakness and uncleanness brings always
this principal proof for describing Gods wisdom, strength and cleanness.

Cap. 2. What it is to know God, and to what end, tends the knowledge of him.
HE understands that knowledge of God, whereby we conceive not only yt there
is a God, but also know that which is profitable for his glory, and that which
is expedient for us to know. And since there are two kinds thereof, the one,
whereby we acknowledge

2 And for this cause it is expedient for us not so much to search what he is,
than what manner a one he is. But he is such, that his knowledge first should
instruct us to fear and reverence: moreover also it should work this, that we
learn to seek every good thing in him, and account them received of him. Where
upon rests both a desire to stick to him, and an assured trust in him
willingly,

Cap. 3. That the knowledge of God is naturally planted in the minds of men.
THere is in man's mind, eue^ by natural instinction, a certain feeling of the
Godhead, and the same so ample and large, that they are condemned by their own
testimony, that worship not God whom they acknowledge to be their maker: But
there is no nation so barbarous, that is not touched with the same feeling:
This also the Idolaters them selves do sufficiently confess, when they had
rather worship a block and a stone, then be thought to have no God.

2 Wherefore it is most vain, that some do say, That religion was devised by
the suttletie and craft of a few, to keep the people better in awe: yea and
the wicked them selves also do oftentimes feel, will they nill they, that
which they are not desirous to know of God, and would have extinguished.

3 This feeling of God is so engraued in the minds of men, that neither
forgetfulness nor malice can utterly at any time put it out: although
hereunto many bend their whole force, and seem to have nothing more in their
desires. And so all they do degenerate them from the order of their creation,
which bestow not all the thoughts and actions of their life to that scope.

Cap. 4. That the same knowledge is either choked, or corrupted, partly by
ignorance, partly by malice.
ALthough God have sown the seed of religion in all men, yet few cherish it
being conceived in heart, and there is none at all in whom it rypeneth: so
far of is it, that any fruit appears in due time, but there are two
causes thereof, that is to say, ignorance and malice. As touching the first, it
comes of this, that many are deceived even in their own superstitions: Romans
1.2^.
neither yet are they excuseable, that they fell into error: because their
error has first vanity joined with pride.

2 And moreover self will or stubbornness. Psalm. 141. and 36.1. and. 10.11.
and 2. Tim. 1.13.


3 Heerevpon he concludes that their defense is in vain, which they are wont
to pretend for excuse of their superstition: and that he confirms first by
reason, then also by authority: For Paul pronounces that the unstaid and
wandering opinion of the majesty of GOD, Gal. 4.8. Ephe. 2.12. Lactantius.
is not to know GOD, Therefore there is no lawful and allowable religion, but
that which is joined with truth.

4 As concerning the other, that is to say, malice, thereby it comes to pass
that they never come near unto God, unless when they hold back, they be
forcibly drawn to him, yet they labor by crooked compasses of their religion
whatsoever, to seem that they come near unto God from whom they fly. In them
therefore does remain a feeling of God: but so corrupt, that it brings forth
nothing but wicked fruit.

Cap. 5. That the knowledge of God does shininglie appear in the making of the
world, and in the continual government thereof.
IN this chapter there are 2. points: the first, whereof is that which is
prefixed in steed of a title, whereof from the first to the tenth, the other,
that we are yet so blunt, that these testimonies, although they be never so
plain, yet always they pass away without increase, whereof from the 11. to
the. 15.

As touching the first part, the better to prove that which he promises,
dividing all the works of GOD into two kinds: he proves that the knowledge
of God appears in both, from the first to the sixth: he assigns sexions to
the other, from the 7. to the 10. 1. Although Gods substance be
incomprehensible, Psalm. 14.2. Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.19.
yet so has he graven in his works certain marks of his glory, and those
so plain, and notably discerneable, that after a sort he shows himself
visible: But the same was done, first, in the beautiful building of the
world, or in the universal creation and order of all things.

2 And the same is witnessed, not only by that which the Philosophers do
behold in heaven and earth: and in the proportion and connection of man's body:
but also in those things which the common sort of people do perceive by the
only support of the eye.

3 But the same chiefly appears above all other creatures in man: Act.
17.27. Psalm. 8.5. Act. 17.28.29.
and therefore is called of some a Little world. and is had in great admiration
of David.

4 Filthy then is the ingratitude of me^, who while they contein within
themselves a noble shop with innumerable works of God, when as they ought to
burst forth into praising of him; contrariwise they are puffed up and swel
with so much ye greater pride, by ascribing to nature yt which is proper to
God. But so much more filthy is it, that man's soul is such, as the same but
only well considered, would leave no place to blindness: whose so swift
motions, so excellent powers, and rare gifts, must needs represent in
comparison of it self a divinity: neither is it any let, if in the soul he
set any isntrumental thing.

5 First he prosecuteth this same more at large, proving by many reasons, that
the powers and actions of the soul are such, as to every one may appear, that
the parts of the soul are separated from the body: Moreover he proves
that the knowledge of God in the government thereof does manifestly appear:
and therefore he takes away that, which some men do babble of Gods secret
inspiration that gives liveliness to the world, as though the world were his
own maker.

6 He concludes the former things: and proves yt we may learn the power,
eternity, and goodness of God, by this former kind of his works, following
the ordinary course, whether you look on the creation or government of them.

7 Moreover coming to the second sort of Gods works, which come to pass
beside the ordinary course of nature, in them also he would there should be no
less evident proof of his divinity: for in them appear Gods clemency
severity and mercy.

8 And also his providence, power, Psalm. 145.8. Psalm. 107.3.4.
and wisdom, Psalm. 113.7.
his providence in defending them that were past hope, 1. Cor. 3.19.
his power in subduing the ungodly, his wisdom in disposing every thing in
fittest opportunity.

9 Thereupon he concludes, that of such things may testimonies be easily
drawn to affirm his divine Majesty, and the self same things do inuit and
stir us up not to a naked knowledge of God, Acts 17.27. Psalm. 145.
but to that which is sound and joined with true religion.

10 Then also does he encourage and exalt yt godly unto hope of life to come:
but he putteeh the wicked in mind that such signs of Gods severity are made
greater punishments to them: and so he concludes all the former: yet so, that
he makes him self way to that which follows.

11 Entering into the second part of the Chapter, he proves that the
amazedness whereof he speaks, does not only happen to the common sort and
unlearned, but also to the learned and most wise that attribute the whole order
of things to nature, and the ordinary government to fortune.

12 Heerevppon issued out the huge heap of Gods, Ephesians. 2.11. Romans 1.21. Abac.
12.18.20. Ioh. 4.22. 1. Cor. 21.
and the opinions of the Philosophers of God, both infinite and contrary one to
an other.

13 And thus have all men departed from God, for they have been such as have
corrupted pure religion, although they have followed the custom of some City,
or the consent of some antiquity, to both which they have thought that all
religion was to be required.

14 The lamps therefore which give us light in the edifice of the world, Hebr.
11.3. Acts. 17.27. and 13.16.
and government thereof, do so lighten us on every side, that yet of them
selves they can not lead us to the right way.

15 Yet are we worthily excluded from al excuse, because we having within our
selves the vice of dullness, do wander hither and thither when as all things
show us the right way.

Cap. 6. That to attain to God the Creator, it is needful to have the
scripture to be our guide and maistresse.
ALthough the same brightness which both in heaven and earth shines in the
eyes of all men, does sufficiently spoil man's ingratitude of all defense,
that yet, whosoever would come unto the true God, had need of the light of the
word: but God has not only vouchsafed Adam, Noe, and Abraham this
prerogative, but also whom so ever it pleased him to gather more near and more
familiarly to him self.

2 But the same was first by oracles and visions: Moreover by publishing the
law: that the truth of the doctrine might remain continually in all ages:
whereunto after, Romans 10.4.
the Prophets were added: whereby we may the rather understand, that we ought to
take our beginning from the heavenly doctrine, that true religion may shine in
us.

1. Tim. 6.16. Psalm. 9.96.97.99 etc.
3 This same he confirms, first by the corruptnesse of our nature: that the
same is such, that necessarily he must come to the word, whosoever earnestly
coueteth to come to ye sincere knowledge of God: moreover by that which David
does often induce God reigning: Thirdly, Psalm. 19.21. Psalm. 93.5. John. 4.22.
by certain manifest places taken out of the Psalms: last of all by a
certain saying of Christ him self.

Cap. 7. By what testimony the scripture ought to be established, that is, by
the witness of the holy Ghost, that the authority thereof may remain certain:
And that it is a wicked invention, to say, that the credit thereof hangs
upon the judgment of the Church.
HEre because he falls into rehearsal of the scripture, he will have the
same to be the only mistress to lead us to the knowledge of God, to confirm
the authority of the scripture he does a little digress, from the seventh
Chap. to the nineth.

1 The scripture by no other means has full authority among the faithful,
then when we say it is the Word of God, and came from heaven even as though
the lively word of God were there heard: but to say, yt they hang upon the
authority of ye church, is a most wicked error, and injurious to the holy
Ghost, to miserable consciences full of doubt, and subject to the scorns of
the wicked.

Ephe. 20.
2 This false invention is very well confuted by one place of Paul: Moreover, if
they urge how we shall be persuaded that it came from God; except we fly to
the decree of ye church, it is as though a man should ask how we should
learn to discern light from darkness, white from black, sweet from sower.

3 In what sense that old saying of Augustine must be understood, where he
denies he would believe the Gospel, unless Because thou have seen me Thomas,
thou beleeuest, blessed are they that have not seen and believe. Ioh. 20.29.
the authority of the Church had moved him, which they maliciously wrest for
the defense of their error. Augustines meaning was in those words, that he him
self when he was a stranger from the faith, could not otherwise be brought to
embrace the Gospel for the assured truth of God, but by this, that he was
overcome by the authority of the Church, not meaning that the faith of the
godly is grounded upon the authority of the Church, nor that the certeintie of
the Gospel does hang thereon, but simply only that there should be no
assuredness of the Gospel to the Infidels, yt they might be won to Christ,
unless the consent of the Church drive them thereunto.

4 If then we will that not only by probable opinion, but by manifest and
plain truth it appears that the Scriptures came from God: this persuasion
must be sought for higher then from either human conjectures or reasons,
that is to say, from the secret testimony of the holy Ghost. For
confirmation whereof, although there be many arguments, yet they work
preposterously that contend by disputation to make the credit of the
Scripture sound, seeing that although by this means they deliver the word of
GOD from men's rebukes, yet they fasten not thoroughly that assuredness in their
hearts which piety requires.

5 Truly the Scripture does willingly procure and obtain reuerenc^ to it
self, by the proper majesty that is in it: yet then only it perceth our
affections, when it is sealed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, that now we
believe not by our own judgment or other men's, that the same is from God (as
many receive a thing unknown, or as wretched men are wo^t to captive their
mind to superstition) but because we most assuredly feel (which thing all the
faithful try) that the vndoubtful power of God does therein give strength,
Esai. 44.10.
Esai. 54.13. Deuteronomy. 30.12. Romans 10.5. Esai. 53.1.
and breathe forth: such persuasion requires no reasons whereon to stay.

Cap. 8. That so far as man's reason may bear, there are sufficient proofs to
establish the credit of the Scripture.
ALthough he now descend to arguments, yet unless there be an assurance, which
is both more excellent and of more force, than any judgment of man: in vain
shall the authority of the Scriptures either be strengthened with arguments,
or established with consent of the Church, or confirmed with any other means
of defense: as on the contrary part when we have embraced it devoutly, and with
true faith, when as things which were not of such force to fasten the assurance
thereof in our minds will become very fit helps. Which having spoken, he
sets himself to the arguments, and first although he begin generally to
handle this argument, yet he falls by little and little to those things which
are drawn only out of the old Testament: but the arguments are, that the
scripture is as well ordered, as disposed in every place heavenly, and nothing
sauouring earthly: that there is so beautiful agreement of all parts among
them selves, but chiefly that it should utter to us the high mysteries of the
heavenly kingdom under a contemptible baseness of words, 1. Cor. 2.4.
and so should bring to pass and enforce that the eloquence of his
Rhetoricians should sit in a far more inferior place.

2 Yet some of the Prophets want not their eloquence, as some of the false
Doctors want not their rude and unsavory speech, (but such as is a foolish
and a filthy desire) whereby they may insinuate and thrust in them selves into
men's minds under a deceiuable color.

3. 4 Furthermore, antiquity is not of small weight (where by the way he
plucketh up the fabulous antiquity of the Egyptians) and also while Moses
recites not the order in writing as every thing was done, Genesis 49.5.
which should deface his tribe and family with infamy and dishonor, Numb.
12.1.


Exo. 24.18. and 34.29. and 10.16 Numb. 15.24. and 20.10. and 11.9. Exodus 7.11.
Leui. 20. Exodus 19. Genesis 49. Sam. 11.15. and 16. Deuteronomy 32. Esai. 45. 1. ^ere.
25.11. Es. 42.
5. 6 The miracles also are both many and notable, whereof how unlawful it is
for any man to doubt, he shows by most strong reasons.

7 To conclude, some things were spoken of by the spirit of prophecy, long
before, that they were fulfilled, first by Moses him self.

8 Moreover, by certain other Prophets. Daniell does write concerning
prophesies of things to come for the space of six hundred years after, in
such sort as though he had compiled an history of things already done and
commonly known.

9 Here he stays, and before he come to the new Testament, he takes
away two objections: The first whereof is, how we may know that these things
were written by Moses and the Prophets, which are read under their names as
though their works had perished long before: this objection he merrily laugheth
at, and abundantly confuteth.

10 The other is: 1. Match. 2. Ma. 1.5.^.
that seeing Antiochus commanded all the books to be burned, whence are come
those Copies which we now have? this objection (being first very much
confirmed of them) he casts on their own pates: proving that it is such as
nothing ca^ be thought more apt for to establish the certeintie of the truth.

11 Which being finished, he comes to the new Testament, and from thence he
alleges the consent of the Evangelists, to confirm the certainty of the
scripture, disputing in an abject speech of heavenly things: John's speech as it
were thundering from heaven with grievous sentences: the heavenly majesty
shining in the writings of Peter and Paul: the singular calling of Matthew,
Peter, and John: and the marvelous conversion of Paul.

12 It is to be compted no small matter, that since the scripture was first
published, the wills of so many ages have constantly agreed to obey it:
moreover that of them which so agree together, many have excelled with singular
godliness.

13 That also ought worthily to be thought a great thing, that we see it
confirmed and witnessed with the blood of so many Saints, where also he
excellently describes martyrdom. And so concludes, that the certeintie of
the scripture ought to be grounded upon the inward persuasion of the holy
Ghost, yet such testimonies shall not be vain, if as secondary helps, for
weakness, we follow those chiefest and highest testimonies.

Cap. 9. That these fantastical me^, which forsaking Scripture resort unto
Revelation, do overthrow all the principles of religion.
IT is showed by many reasons, Esai. 59.21. 1. Tim. 4.13. 2. Tim. 3.16. John.
16.13.
that that spirit whose ministry certain giddie headded people do most
proudly pretend, is not the spirit of Christ.

2 If any spirit leaving the wisdom of the word of God, 2. Pet. 1.10.
does thrust unto us an other doctrine, the same ought worthily to be
suspected of vanity and lying. Neither is it unmeet as they say, that the
spirit, whom all things ought to obey, should be subject to the Scripture:
Seeing it is not to be tried by the rule either of men or of Angels, or any
other rule whatsoever, but by that wherewith it was his pleasure to have his
Majesty established with us.

3 But whereas they cavil that we rest upon the letter that sleyeth, herein
they suffer punishment for dispising of the Scripture, 2. Cor. 3.6.
while they betray their ignorance, not well understanding the words, neither
does it disagree with that which of late is said, that the word it self is
not much assured us, unless it be confirmed us by the testimony of the holy
Ghost: Luc. ^4.27. 1. These. 5.19.
For as we see that we are void of all light of truth or the spirit of God:
so we are not ignorant that the word is an instrument wherewith the Lord
distributeth to the faithful the light of his spirit. Where Paul says, that
the letter sleeth, there he contendeth against the false Apostles, which
commending the law without Christ, did call away the people from the benifite
of the new Testament, wherein the Lord does covenant that he will grave his
law within the bowels of the faithful, and write it in their hearts: the
letter therefore is dead, and the law of the Lord kills the readers thereof,
when it is severed from the grace of Christ, and, not touching the heart, only
sounds in the ears. But if it be effectually printed in our hearts by ye
holy Ghost, if it present Christ unto us, the^ is it the word of life
co^uerting souls, 2. Cor. 38.
and giving wisdom to little ones.

Cap. 10. The Scripture to correct all superstition, does in comparison set
the true God against all the Gods of the Gentiles, reckoning him for none of
them.
1 NOw returning to entreat of the knowledge of God, from which he was a little
digressed, he proves that the Lord does represent him self to us, such a
one in the Scripture as he showed him self to be in his works: neither does
he as yet speak of the knowledge of a Mediator, but of a Creator only, as
above said. Cap. 2. sect. 1.

2 That is to say, eternal and good, Ez. 34.6. Psalm. 145.3. Iere. 6.24. Mea
sententia, etc.
which works mercy, judgment, and justice in truth. And to no other end is
that knowledge of God set forth unto us in the Scripture, then that thereby we
should learn fear and faith.

Abac. 2.
3 The scripture to the end to direct us to the true God, does expressly
exclude all the Gods of the Gentiles: but the Idolaters them selves have
acknowledged after a sort the unity of God.

Cap. 11. That it is unlawful to attribute unto God a visible form: and that
generally they forsake God, so many as do erect to them selves any Images.
THe glory of God is corrupted with wicked falsehood so often as any shape is
feigned to represent him, Exodus 20.4.
neither does GOD make account whether the Image of man or any other creature,
as though the one would more, the other less agree: but he refuses all
without exception.

2 This he proves. Deuteronomy. 4.10.12.18. Esai. 40.18. and. 41.7. and 45.9. Acts
17.19.

3 That which may be objected, Deuteronomy 4.11. Exodus 30.3.13. Exodus 25.17. Esaias. 6.2.
that God sometimes exhibited the presence of his Godhead by certain signs,
and set forth his mercy seat with Cherubims, and also openly showed men of
his incomprehensible and invisible essence, does truly make nothing for
Images.

4 For confirmation of this matter, Psalm. 115.5. and 13.5.15. Esaias. 44.15. and
10.21. and. 2.8. and 31.7. and. 57.10. Ose. 14.4. Mich. 5.13. Psalm. 115.8.
an argument is drawn from the matter of Idols, neither yet are the Grecians
less deceived, which think they have well discharged themselves, if they
grave not God, whilst in painting they do more licentiously outrage than any
other nation.

5 That which they are wo^t to object out of Gregory, that images are laiemens
books, how vain and foolish it is, he shows by diverse arguments: Iere.
10.8. Aba. 2.18.
the first is taken from the authority of the scripture, which teaches that
it is vain and lying, whatsoever men learned by images concerning God.

6 The other is taken from the testimony of certain Fathers and of Varro, the
Ethnike. Lib. de ciuit. Dei. Cap. 9. ^1.
Augustine alleges out of Varro, and confirms it with his own assent that
they which first brought in the Images of the Gods, both took away the fear
of God, and brought in error.

7 The third, of the corrupted excess, and more then whoorish apparel of the
images, insomuch that the Papists if they had any honest shame, could not
further contend that they were books of any holiness. The last is from the
circumstances of the place: For howesoeuer it may be granted to Gregory that
in some places images were laymens books: yet this is not the way to teach the
faithful people in holy places, where the preaching of the word, and
administration of the sacraments ought to take force. Galat. 3.1.


8 Heerevpon he passes to the beginning of Idols, Sapi. 14.15.
which he will not grant did issue out of that fountain, which the book of
wisdom speaks of: but of man's blind infidelity, because they thought God
was not with the^, Gene. 31.19. Ios. 24.2. Exo^. 31.1.
unless they beheld some bodily sign of his countenance which should be a
witness to them of Gods presence.

9 After such invention was forged, by and by follows worshipping, and that
necessarily, but yet after a diverse sort. For some worship the Idol, because
they ascribed to the^ some divinity: But some, that by them they might pass
over all their worship to GOD himself (whose signs they would have them to
be.) Both these kinds of worship are abominable, and therefore the Papists
are most filthily deceived.

10 It is showed by many reasons, that the Papists for this cause are to be
reprehended.

11 That they either can escape from their old distinction of Dulia and Latria
service and worship, first it is showed by the signification of the word:
Moreover, howesoeuer they contend in words, yet is there no difference at all
in substance which only we seek for.

12 Yet he is not so superstitious that he thinks no images may be suffered
at all, but the majesty of God chiefly which is far above the sense of our
eyes ought not to be abused with uncomely devised shapes, but those things
only whereof our eyes are culpable, of this sort images are either historical
or personal only, the first of these has some use in teaching: the other
brings nothing but delight.

13 But Images ought not to be set in the Churches (no not those that are
historical truly) as is proved by two arguments drawn from the
unprofitableness and uncomeliness thereof. Augustine says yt images do more
auail to bow down an unhappy soul by this that they have mouths, In Psalm. 11^.
eyes, ears, and feet, then to amend it by this that they neither speak nor
see, nor hear nor go: 1. John. 5.1^.
and therefore John willed us to beware not only of worshipping of Images,
but only of images themselves.

14 But because the Papists brag so greatly of the Nicene Council which was
holden by the commandment and disposition of Irene the Empress, he shows
first, by how foolish arguments images were first placed in the Church. The
first was, Show me thy face, because it is beautiful: another was to prove
that Images should be set upon Altars, No man lights a candle and puts it
under a bushel: an other is, The light of thy countenance is sealed upon us
with diverse other most unsavory follies.

15 Moreover they have commanded them to be worshipped: And so those reverend
fathers did discredit themselves by either so childishlie handeling, or so
ungodly and foulie tearing the scriptures: as the worshipping of Pharao, and
the rod of Joseph, and the pillar that Jacob set up, which cannot be found in
the scripture. Again, worship his footestoole: worship his holy hill: All the
rich men of thy people shall worship thy countenance.

16 Lastly he shows into what devilish madnens and signs of ungodliness all
men are fallen, no man at all reclaiming back again, doubtless most wicked
patrons of a wicked cause. Constantius bishop of Co^stance in Cyprus,
professes as much reverence to images, as to the holy Trinity which gives
life. And John the legate of the East parts, affirmed that it were better to
bring all the Brothel houses into the city, then to deny the worshipping of
images.
It was decreed that worse then all heretics or the Samaritans, and worse then
Samaritans were the enemies of images.

Cap. 12. That God is severally discerned from Idols, that he may be only and
wholly worshipped.
SO often as the Scripture affirms yt there is but one God, it strives not for
the bare name, but with all commands this, that whatsoever belongs to the
Godhead be not given to any other: this is proved of the Etimylogie of the
religion, and of that place where God in publishing the law, to claim his
own right to himself, cries out that he is jealous, and that he will be a
severe revenger, if he be mingled with any feigned God.

2 The distinction of the Papists of Latria and Dulia of worship and service,
does make nothing for them: and that he may reprove them of greater impiety,
he shows it by the signification of the words. Gala. 4.8. Mat. 4.10. Reave.
19.10. Act. 10.25. Zach. 14.9.


3 Moreover also by diverse places of Scripture.

Chapter 13. That there is taught in the scriptures, one essence of God from
the very creation, which essence contains in it three persons.
IN this Chapter there are three parts: for first he delivers the doctrine
it self from the first to the twentieth. Moreover he confuteth certain
heresies from the 21. to the 29.

As concerning the first, the same also after a sort has two parts: for the
better to obtain that which he deserves, he pretermitteth 2. things before
he come to the matter, for first he shows what he means by the name of
Person, from the second to the sixth: and he proves the Godhead of the
son, from the seventh to the thirteenth: the^ also of the holy Ghost. 14. 15.
Moreover, he shows what is to be thought of the Trinity, from the 16. to the
20.

1 The Scripture when it teaches that the essence of GOD is incomprehensible
and spiritual, does not only ouerthrowee the foolish errors of the common
people, and the fine suttleties of profane Philosophy, but also does confute
the heresies of the Manichies, and Anthropomorphites, which imagined that God
had a body, because the Scripture ascribes to him, mouth, ears, eyes, hands
and feet.

2 There are in the essence of GOD three persons, so that neither God may be
threefolde, nor the simple essence of God rent from the persons: Heb. 13.
upon occasion whereof, he begins to entreat of the person. But because it
is a matter of no small weight, he briefly speaks against them which think,
that the name of the person is not to be admitted in this matter, from the 3.
to the 5.

3 It is no strange word, but only exhibited, that we may expound with
plainer words, such as in the Scripture are too our capacity, doubtful and
entangled: they that cannot suffer this, are unjustly grieved at the light of
the truth.

4 The godly doctors have been constrained with need to admit saucie words,
as well to affirm the truth against malicious persons, as to discover their
heresies and errors, which are tied and entangled with deceitfulness of
words.

5 No man ought to be so wayward and severe to strive about bare words: they
contrarily that refuse names not rashly invented, do give great suspicion
that they are either the scholars of Arius, or do nourishe the secrets poison
of Sabellius whosoever strives obstinately about words.

6 Leuing the disputation of words, he declares what he means, by the name
of Person, that is to say, a subsistence in the essence of God, which having
relation to the other is distinguished with an vnco^municable propriety, which
three parts of a diffinition, he severally expounds: Subsistaunce is an other
thing than essence: for if the word simply had been God, and had had nothing
severally proper to it self, John had said amiss, John. 1.
that it was with God.

7 As touching the Godhead of the Son, it may appear by this, that he is
God in that he is called the Word of GOD, seeing it were absurd to imagine it
only a fading and vanishing voice, which sent into the air comes out of God
himself, 1. Pet. 1.1^.
of which sort were the Oracles given to the Fathers, and all the Prophesies:
When rather it is meant to be the perpetual wisdom, abiding with God, Heb. 12.
Eccle. 24.14. John. 5.17.
from whence all the oracles and Prophesies proceeded. But chiefly because that
Word also was one and the same in work with the father from the beginning.

8 Certain dogs must also be taken heed of, which by no means will seem to
take away his divinity from him, Genesis 1.3. John. 17.6.
while they secretly steal away his eternity. Whereupon his eternity is
affirmed against them.

9. 10 That the Son is God, it is proved by many places of the old
Testament, both with a confutation of certain cauilles of the Jews, and also
of Seruetus. The Jews say that the word Elohim is applied to the Angels and
sovereign powers, but there is no such place yt raises an eternal throne to
any creature. Again this title is given to none, Psalm. 45.6.
but with addition. The Prophet Esaias does plainly describe the Godhead of the
Son, Exodus 7.1. Esa. 9.6. Iere. 23.6. Esaias 42.6. Exodus 17.15.
and Jeremy also, where it is said, The name of the city from that day
shall be called Jehovah. And that he builded an Alter, and called the name of it
Jehovah my exaltation; thereby is meant that the altar was builded for a monument
that God was the advancement of Moses; and that Jerusalem is not adorned with
the name of God, but only to testify the presence of God. Much a do also
they keep at this, where the Prophet says, that this is the name whereby they
call her Jehovah or righteousness: Iere. 33.16.
but this place confirms the truth: for whereas before he had testified
that Christ is the true Jehovah, from whom flows righteousness: now he
pronounces that the Church shall so verily feel the same, that she may
gloriously use the very name it self. In the first place is set the fountain
and principal cause of righteousness; in the other, the effect where it is
said, that the Angel appeared to the fathers, Iud. 6.7. Iud. 13.16.
and that he challenges to himself the name of the eternal GOD, it is not to
be understood as Seruetus says, who affirms, that it was an Angel and
worshipped in the place of God, but rather as the doctors affirm, namely that
he was the word of God, which began to execute the office of a mediator: for
though he was not yet clothed with flesh, yet he came down as a mean
between God and me^ to come more familiarly to ye faithful: Therefore his
communicating himself made him to be called an Angel, yet in the mean time
he retained that which was his own to be the God of unspeakable glory, which is
ye meaning of Ozeas, Oze. 12.5.
in which place of Ozeas Seruetus carpeth that God did bear the person of an
Angel, as though the Prophet did not confirm that which Moses had said: Gene.
30.11.29. 2. Cor. 10.4. Zach. 2.3. Esaias. 25.9. Mal. 3.1.
Why do thou ask of my name, and the confession of the Patriark does
sufficie^tlie declare that he was not a created Angel, but one in whom the full
Godhead was resident. Therefore Paul says, that Christ was ye guide of the
people in the wilderness, therefore Christ was the same GOD, that was honored
among the Jews.

11 This same is proved out of the new Testament: Esaias. 8.14. Romans 9.23. Romans
14.10. Esaias. 55.33. Ephe. 4.8. Psalm. 57.19.
and that first by such places, whereby the Apostles do attribute many things
to Christ, which in the old testament are spoken of the eternal God. Moreover
by certain other places which do simply and openly affirm the same. 1. Tim.
17. Philpi. 26. Ioh. 5.20. 1. Cor. 8.5. 1. Tim.., 16. Acts. 20.28. John. 20.28.

12 Then also by his works which are ascribed to him, that is to say, John.
5.17. Iere. 1.3 Esaias. 43.25. Mat. 9.6.4.
because he works together with his father, because he orders the world.
because he forgeueth sins.

13 Afterward by miracles, Matthew. 10.8. Mark 3.15. and 6.7. Act. 3.6. Ioh.
5.36. and. 10.37. and. 14.11. Matthew. 19.17. John. 14. and 14. Esaias. 26.16.
Esaias. 11.10.
not only because he does such things as argue his divinity: but also
because he committed the disposition thereof to his Disciples of his own
authority, whereunto in the last place he ioineth certain Arguments taken out
of the Scripture which do plentifully prove the divinity of Christ, that
without him there is no life, and in him was life, from the beginning: Joel.
2.32. Acts. 7.56. 2. Cor. 2. Heb. 9.24.
that we are taught to believe in him, and call upon him, that the Apostle
denies that he delivered any other doctrine to the Corinthians than the
doctrine of the Son: And in his Epistles, he wishes the same benefit from
the Son, which he wishes from the Father. All which when he calls a
practiced knowledge, he goes thither from whence he took these arguments,
that is, from those things which being far alienated from the creatures, the
scripture attributes to him, and which we learn by a certain experience.

14 As touching the Godhead of the holy Ghost, Gene. 1.2. Esaias. 48.16. 1. Cor.
2.10. and 12, 10. Exodus 4.11.
the same may be proved by two places of the old Testament, yet had he rather
learn the same by that practiced knowledge, that is to say, first, that he
gives all things growing, and life of his own proper strength both in heaven
and earth: moreover he regenerateth the saints into incorruptible life.

15 He also approaches to those things, 1. Cor. 3.17. and 6.19. 2. Cor. 6.16.
Act. 5.3. Es. 6.9. Esaias. 43.10. Matthew. 12.31. Mark 3.29. Luke. 12.10. Psalm.
33.6. Esaias. 11.4.
that when the Scripture speaks of him, it absteineth not from the calling of
God: And that he obteineth pardon which blasphemeth against the Son; yet the
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, is neither forgiven in this world, nor in
the world to come.

16 By these promises he prepares himself to establish the Trinity: Ephe.
4.5. Math. 28.19.
and first he proves that those three persons are one God, since that although
we are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, yet thereby we be entered into one faith and religion of one God.

17 Yet this unity in the essence of God must so be understood, that there
may be showed in the scripture a certain distinction of the father from the
word, and of the word from the spirit: John. 5.3. and. 8.16. Ioh. 14.16.
yet that is nothing more then a distinction: but no division, which doubtless
can by no means hold the cogitations distracted, but always bring it to that
unity.

18 If any man will search what this distinction is, he must beware of
similitudes of humane matters, and that for two causes: yet such distinction as
we have marked to be set out in scriptures, is to be sought for: where also
he shows briefly what it is.

19 This distinction does not stand against, but that the single unity of
God, may remain: as in every hypostasie is understood the whole nature, with
this that every one has his property which no difference of essence does
suffer the one to be severed from the other, but only to be distinguished by a
certain relation, and the sayings of certain old writers must be made to
agree, which otherwise would seem not a little to disagree.

20 But the sum of al is this, that we understand under the name of God one
only and simple essence, 1. Cor. 12.8. Act. 2.16. Joel. 2.28.
wherein we comprehend three persons or hypostasies, yet so that the name of
God for order sake be always referred in relation to the father, which yet
does nothing diminish the Godhead of the son, and the holy Ghost.

21 Hitherto he has led those that are willing to learn, as it were by the
hand, but now he contendeth with the obstinate and contentious, at the least
wise to this end, that the willing learners may have whereupon steadfastly to set
their feet. And here truly, if any where, he requires singular sobriety,
that neither our thought or tongue proceed any farther then the bonds of Gods
word do extend.

22 In the beginning he professes that he will neither make a register of
heresies, wherewith the pureness of faith in this point of doctrine, has in
times past been assailed: neither strive any more with Arius or Sabellius, but
only with Seruet, and certain other of our time. But Seruetus heresy he
takes away in this only Section, where John says, that the word was God,
Ioh. 1.1.
before ye world was yet created, he makes it much differing from a conception
or form whereof Seruetus dreameth. But if then also, yea and from ye farthest
eternity of time, that word which was God, was with the father, and had his
own proper glory with the father, he could not be an outward or figurative
shining: but it necessarily follows, that he was an Hipostasis that did
inwardly abide in God, and although there be no mention made of the Spirit,
but in the history of the creation of the world, Genesis 1.2.
yet he is not there brought in as a shadow, but as an essential power of God,
when Moses shows that the very unfashioned lump was sustained in him:
therefore he would not be an Image or representation of God, as Seruetus
dreameth.

As touching the other heresies, that is to say, that the Father is truly and
properly the only God, and he by forming the Son and the holy Ghost, has
powered his Godhead upon him, and so the Father is, as they say, the only
essentiatour or maker of essence. In confuting this, he is wholly to the end
of the Chapter, from the twenty two, to the twenty and niene.

23 And first truly, he many ways uncovers the vanity of this error, and
proves that it makes nothing for them, that here and there Christ is called
the Son of God. For though the name of God be common to the Son, yet by
reason of pre-eminence, that is sometimes given to the Father only, because
he is the fountain and original of the deity, and that for this purpose, to
make the single unity of the essence to be thereby noted. For if we mean
none to be GOD but the Father, we plainly throw down the Son from the
degree of God: therefore so often as mention is made of the Godhead, we must
admit no comparison between the Son and the Father, as though the name of
God did belong only to the Father and not to the Son, who is the word
begotten of the Father before all worlds: and that God which is mentioned of in
the old Testament, in many places is ascribed to Christ in the new Testament.
Esai 6.1. John 12.41. Esai 8.14. Romans 9.33. Esai 45.23. Romans 14.11. Hebr.
1.10. Psalm. 102.26. Psalm. 97.7. Esai. 44.6. Iere. 10.11.

24 Moreover he proves, that it is false which they hold, that so often as
there is in scripture mention made absolutely of God, none is meant thereby but
the Father: where first he wipeth away a certain objection of theirs. Moreover
by three places of Scripture he takes up three arguments: thirdly, he proves
that the place of Esai does make nothing for them. Esai. 44.6.
Last of all, he takes away two other objections, where they object this
saying of Christ, Mat. 19.17.
that none is good but God: Thereby is meant, yt for as much as he was after the
common manner saluted by the name of good, in refusing false honor, he did
admonish them, that the goodness wherein he excelled, was the goodness that
God has: Again, if they grant that the word of God be good, then must they
grant also that Christ is good. Where it is said, that Christ only is good,
immortal, wise, and true, thereby it is manifest that Christ is God, who is
immortal, and from the beginning was life to give immortality to Angels, who
is the eternal wisdom of God: and who also is truth it self, Phil. 2.10.
and he is to be worshipped, because he claims to have all knees bow before
him. And where they object that place of Esai, Esai. 44.6.
I am, and none but I, thereby they confute them selves, for as much as
whatsoever pertains to God, is given to Christ. Phi. 2.7. Esai. 25.9.
And although in respect of order and degree, the beginning of the Godhead is
in the Father, yet the essence is not proper only to the Father, for by that
means the essence should be in Christ begotten and fashioned, which in the
Father is unbegotten and unfashioned. Finally, Genesis 1.26.
where as Christ pronounces that God is a Spirit: it were inconvenient to be
restrained to the Father only, as if the word himself were not of spiritual
nature: If then the name of Spirit does as well agree with the Son as with
the Father, then the Son is also comprehended under the indefinite name of
God, but he adds by and by after, Job. 4.24.
that none are allowed for good worshippers of the Father, but they that
worship him in spirit and truth. Whereupon it follows, that because Christ
does under (...) head, execute the office of a teacher, he^ does give the
name of God to the Father, not to the intent to destroy his own Godhead, but
by degrees to lift us up unto it.

25 But in this they are deceived, that they dream of undivided singular
things: whereof each have a part of essence: and they think they gather of
our meaning, that we make a quaternitie: as though we did feign that by
deriuation there came three persons out of one essence.

John. 17.3. Ioh. 16.7. 1. Cor. 15.24.
26 He returns to the first objection, that if Christ be properly God, he is
not rightfully called the Son. It is neither lawful nor right so exclusiuely
to restrain the name of God to the Father, as to take it from the Son. For
this cause John affirms that he is true God, Ioh. 1.2.
that no man should think that he rests in a second degree of Godhead
beneath his Father.

27 How openly they betray their ignorance which heap up certain places out
of Irenaus: where he affirms that the Father of Christ is the only and
eternal God of Israel: but the same Irenaeus says that Abraham believed
God, Iren. li. 9. Cap. 12
because Christ is the maker of heaven and earth, and the only God.

28 Tertullian whom they make their Patron, makes nothing for them.

29 Iustine, Hilarie, and Augustine, are wholly ours.

Cap. 14. That the Scripture even in the creation of the world and of all
things, does by certain marks put difference between the true God and feigned
Gods.
Entering into the second part of the book which is of the knowledge of man,
in this Chapter he judges that certain things are to be pretermitted: for
which cause he first generally handeleth of the creation of the world, in the
first and second Chapters. Moreover of Angels from the 3. to the 12 Thirdly of
Devils, from the 13. to ye 19. Lastly, he shows what is the fruit^ which
ought to return to us by the history of the creation, from the twenti^ to the
two and twenty.

Although God may be known by the foundations of the earth, Esai. 40.11.
and round compass of the heavens: yet least the faithful should fall away to
the inventions of the Gentiles, he would have the history of the creation to
appear upon whom the faith of the Church staying it self, should search no
other God, the^ him whom Moses has declared to be the maker and builder of the
world. There is first set out the time, that may lead us to the true Creator,
where is confuted their profane folly, that it is marvel why that came no
sooner in the mind of God to make the heaven and earth: and by that occasion
their curiosity is reproved.

2 To that same end is it showed first, that ye work was not ended at one
moment, but in six days, that it should not grieve us to be occupied all the
time of our life in considering of it. Moreover also an order is described,
that Adam was not created before that God had stored the world with all plenty
of good things: truly a most sure testimony of Gods good will toward us.

Now he takes occasion to speak of man's creation and nature: but to the
intent he may send somewhat before of Angels and Devils, he rejects to
entreat of man until the next Chapter.

3 As touching Angels, he proves that this point of doctrine is necessary
in the history of the Creation (howsoever Moses speaking popularly and
applying him self to the rudeness of the people, does not presently from the
beginning make recital of Angels among the creatures of God) first, that by
them we may learn to known God: Moreover that we being armed against certain
errors, as well of them that attribute some divinity to the Angelical
nature, as of Manichaeus making two beginnings, which how foolish an
imagination it is, he shows at large.

4 To search of the time or order when they were created: is no point of
godliness or diligence, Genesis 1 2.
but curiosity and obstinacy. Dionysius Hierarchy is mere babbling: by
occasion whereof also he does very well bridle the curious again. The said
Dionysius writes such things in his Book, that he which should read it,
would think that the man were slipte down from heaven, and did tell of
things not that he had learned by heeresaye, but which he had seen with his
eyes: But Paul which was ravished above the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.2.
has uttered no such thing, but also protests that it is not lawful for a
man to speak the secrets that he had seen.

Dan. 7.10. Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 2.1. Genesis 18.32. Ios. 5.14. Iud. 6.14. and 13.22.
Psa. 8.2.6,
5 The Angels are heavenly Spirits, whose ministration and service God uses
not only generally to execute those things which he has decreed (and for
that cause are called armies, powers, and principalities, etc.) If this honor
be given to Princes and Governors, to be in stead of God that is sovereign
King and Judge, much greater cause there is, why it should be given to Angels,
in whom the brightness of Gods glory more abundantly does appear.

6 But also to testify his providence and care toward us, Psa. 91.11. and
34.8. Genesis 16.9. and 24.7. and 48.16. Exodus 12.2.19.
for our comfort and confirmation of our faith. Exo. 12.2.19. and 23.20. Iud.
21. and 6.11. and 13.10. Mat. 4.11. Lu. 22.43. Mat. 28.5. Lu. 24.5. Act. 1.10.
2. Kin. 19.31. Es. 37.36.

7 Neither yet is 't certain whether every man have a several Angel
appointed him: Dan. 10.13. and 12.1. Mat. 18.10. Lu. 15.7. Iu. 16.23. 2. King.
16.17. Act. 12.15.
but this is most certain that they all with one consent do generally watch
for our safety. But where it may be objected, that when Peter was brought out
of prison, and knocked at the doors, it was said to be Peter's Angel: it may
be answered that it was any one Angel to whom God had given charge of Peter
for that time.

8 This only will he say of the orders multitude, and form of Angels: Dan.
12.1. Iud. 1.9. 1. These 4.16. Mat. 26.55. Dan. 7.10.
whether one excel an other in certain degrees of honor, it can not be
gathered by the Scripture: and therefore he had rather leave it large. The
multitude is very great and many: their form is not seen with mortal
eyes: Psalm. 34.8.
although sometimes they ar^ said to have wings to paynt out their shape and
swiftness to help us.

9 Angels are not qualities or inspirations without substance, but very
spirits of nature, subsisting against the Saducees and such like. Act. 7.53.
Gal. 3.19. Matthew. 22.30. and 24.37. Mark. 13.27. Lu. 9.26. 1. Tim. 5.21. Hebr.
14. and 2. 16. and 12.22. Mal. 3.1.

10 As concerning that kind of adoration, which is wont to creep in by the
adoration of Angels, first he grants, that seeing the brightness of the
majesty of God does shine in them, there is nothing more ready then with a
certain amazedness to fall down at the admiration of them. But Saint Paul
teaches, Col. 1.16.
that Christ is not only to be preferred before all Angels, but that he is
also the author of all good things that they have, to the end we should^ not
forsake him and turn unto them, which cannot sufficiently help themselves, but
are feign to draw out of the same fountain that we do.

11 Moreover he shows how this danger may be avoided, that is to say, if we
consider that God is tied by no necessity at all, to use their work to help
us, as though he could not want them, but whatsoever he does herein, 2.
Ring. 6.17.
he does it for the comfort of our weakness.

12 And so whatsoever is said of the ministry of Angels, is spoken, not to
bring us from God to Angels, but to lead us by the Angels to God, and to a
more lively feeling of his presence. That which is described in the vision of
Jacob, ought to stick and be fastened in our minds, Genesis 28.12.
how Angels descend down to the earth unto men, and from men do go up to
heaven by a ladder, whereupon stands the Lord of hosts. Whereby is meant,
that by the only intercession of Christ it comes to pass, Ioh. 1.52.
that the ministeries of Angels do come unto us, as he him self affirms. The
servant of Abraham being committed to the custody of the Angel, does not
therefore call upon the Angel to help him, but helped with yt commendation, he
prays to the Lord, Genesis 24.7.
and beseeches him to show his mercy to Abraham.

To pray unto Angels, is but a heathens opinion, Plato in Epinonide.
that is to say, Platoes, who willed to seek the way to God by Angels, and to
honor them, that they may make God more gentle to us.

As touching Devils, first he shows to what end this point of doctrine
tends, from the 13. to the 15.

Moreover he prosecuteth three things more distinctly from the sixteen to the
nineteenth Chapter.

13 Whatsoever the Scripture teaches concerning Devils, they tend chiefly to
this end, that we may be careful before hand of their awaytes and
preparations, and furnishe our selves with such weapons as are meet to
sustain so great and dangerous a battle. 1. Pet. 5.8.9. Ephesians. 6.11.12.
To this end is set before us, first an enemy in courage most hardy, in
strength most mighty, in policies most subtle, in diligence and celeritie
unvariable, with all sorts of engyns most plentifully furnished, in skill of
war most ready, that we suffer not our selves by sloth and cowardice to be
surprised, but on the other side with bold and hardy minds set our feet
against him, and encourage our selves to continue.

14 The multitude of Devils is great (whereby we should be stirred up and
urged the more to labor) yet in an other good sense he is but one. Mar. 16.9.
Mat. 12.42. Lu. 8.30. Mat. 25.41.


15 Thirdly, it is the enemy both of God and us, which always labors
diligently in these two things, to ouerturne the kingdom of GOD, Genesis 3. Mat.
13.28. Ioh. 8.44.
and to drown men with himself in eternal destruction.

But now those two things which are hitherto spoken of, least they should
give occasion of error; he takes in hand as I have said, three things
more largely to expound: the one of the malice of the Devil, the other of his
power, the third of his nature.

26 As touching the first, for as much as the Devil was created of God, Ioh.
8.44. 2. Pet. 24. Iud. 1.6. Tit. 5.20.
this malice which we assign to his nature, is not by creation, but by
deprauation: yet in the mean space we must beware, that we curiously speak
not of the order, manner, time, and form of the Devils fall, seeing it was not
beseeming for the holy Ghost to feed curiosity with vain histories without
any fruit.

Job. 1.6. and 24.1. 1. Kin. 24.10. 1. Sam. 16.14. and 18.10. Psalm. 34.7.8.
etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
17 Moreover as touching his power, wherewith he is at discord and strife with
God, we must so take it, that although with will and endeavor and that of him
self, he be against the Lord, yet he can do nothing without Gods will and
consent.

Ephesians. 4.27. 1. Pet. 5.8. 2. Cor. 12.7. Genesis 5.15. 2. Sam. 24.1. Romans 16.20.
18 GOD also boweth the unclean Spirit hither and thither as pleases him, so
that he suffers the faithful to be only exercised thereby, but the wicked
and unfaithful to be only governed. Luke. 10.18. Luc. 11.21. 2. Corinthians
4.4. Ephesians 2.2. John 8.44. 1. John 3.8.

19 Last of all, to show what they are by nature, he proves that that is
false which some fondly say, that Devils are nothing else but evil affections
or perturbations of the mind that are thrust into us by our flesh: 1. John.
3.8. Job. 1.6. Matthew. 8.29. Matthew. 25.41. Judge. 1.9.
but they are minds or spirits endued with sense and understanding.

20 As concerning the last part of the Chapter, he briefly comprehends the
history of the creation: and he teaches us the knowledge thereof, because it
is our parts to have intelligence of God.

21 For the same serves to this purpose chiefly, that we should not pass
over, with not considering our forgetfulness, those virtues which GOD has
presented to us to be seen in his creatures.

22 Moreover also to that other part which comes more near to faith, Genesis
28. and 9.2.
that we should acknowledge them to be created for our cause, that the more
thereby we might be stirred up to the trust, invocation, praise and love of
him.

Cap. 15. What a one Man was created: wherein is entreated of the powers of the
soul, of the image of God, of free will, and of the first integrity of nature.
NOw coming to knowledge of man, he proves that he must speak thereof for
two causes, and the same also two ways: for to know, what we were made in the
first beginning; and what our state was before the fall of Adam. But first he
would have us consider very diligently of the perfection of nature, by
creation, least we ascribe our corruption, either to God or to nature. But in
that he was taken out of the earth and clay, a bridle was put upon his pride:
but forasmuch as God quickneth him with an immortal spirit, he might justly
glory of the great liberality of his maker.

1. Cor. 8. 1. Pet. 2.25. Matthew. 10.20. Luke. 12.5.
2 Man consists of a soul, and of a body: the soul also is not a blast or a
power divinely powered into the body which is without essence: but it is an
immortal essence, yet created. And yt is proved by many arguments: first, of
such as may be found among profane authors, moreover out of the Scripture.
Eccle. 12.7. Luke. 23.46. Acts. 7.59. Heb. 13.17. Heb. 12.9. Luke. 16.22 2.
Cor. 5. Act. 23.8.

3 Thirdly, that man is said to be created to the image, of God: for seeing
that this image although it appear after a sort in the outward shape of man,
yet it shines chiefly in the soul. But here because he sees, Gene. 1.16.
Matthew. 22.30.
that to stand against this doctrine, Oziander does stretch the Image of God
as well to the body as to the soul, first he confuteth this trifle.

4 Moreover, to confirm his own judgment, and to show with what virtues the
image of God ought to be judged; he would have that gathered by the repairing
by Christ, that the Image of God was nothing else then a perfect excellency of
man's nature which appeared in Adam before his fall. 1. Cor. 15.45. Collo. 3.1.
Ephe. 4.24. 2. Cor. 3.18. John. 1.4.
But that we may know of what parts it stands, we will speak of the powers
of the soul.

5 But before he do that, he meateth with the error of the Manichies and
Seruetus, which would have the soul to be the offspring of ye substance of god,
in this error Osiander entangled him self, while without the essential
justice, that is, except Christ did substantially power himself upon us, he
would not acknowledge the Image of God. But Paul alleges out of Aratus that
we are the offspring of God, Act. 1^.28.
but in quality, not in substance; inasmuch as he has garnished us with his
gifts: and in an other place, he entreateteh of the restoring of this image
where it may be readily gathered out of his words, that man was made of like
form to God, not by inflowing of his substance, 2. Cor. 3.18.
but by the grace and power of his spirit: for he says, that in beholding the
glory of Christ, we are transfourmed into the same Image, as the spirit of
God, which surely so works in us, that it makes us of one substance with
God.

6 And so coming to expound the powers of the soul, first he shows that
the doctrine of the Philosophers is diverse, uncertain, and obscure: which when
he has briefly declared, he shows what is to be thought thereof.

7 Moreover in his judgment, it makes more for perspicuitie and plainness,
to consider, that in the soul there are two parts, understanding, and will:
neither can there be any other power found in the soul which may not rightly
be referred to one of these.

8 These parts of the soul in the first state were so sound and perfect,
that a man could not only discern between good and bad, but also might have
free election in will of good and evil. Both which seeing through the fall
they are lost, because the Philosophers knew not ye, they sought in a ruin, an
upright building; and in an unjointed overthrow strong joints. And although
constancy to persevere was not granted, yet was he not excuseable, which had
received so much, that of his own will has wrought his own destruction.

Cap. 16. That God by his power does nourishe and maintain the world, which
him self has created, and by his providence does govern all the parts
thereof.
HOwesoeuer profane men do seem to acknowledge God to be the Creator, yet
the same cannot truly be done of them, seeing no man does rightly acknowledge
the Creator, but he which by faith does pass forward ever to his providence,
Psalm. 33.6. Psalm. 104.17. Acts. 17.28.
which either they are utterly ignorant of, or do only imagine a general
action, whereby generally all the parts of the world, are strengthened by Gods
secret inspiration.

2 The same providence whereof we speak, is contrary to fortune, and chances.
Matthew 10.30.
Whereby we affirm that every chance is governed by the secret counsel of
GOD: and as concerning things without life, this is to be thought (from the
section 2. to the 5.) that although every one of them have his own propriyet
naturally put into it, yet do they not put forth their power, Genesis 1.3. Joshua.
10.13. 2. Kings. 20.
but only so far as they may be directed by the present hand: this he
shows by examples, and alteration of the times of the year.

3 Then also that God does claim and will have us give him an almightinesse,
which we ought to imagine, not such as the sophisters do feign, vain, idle,
and as it were sleeping, but awaking, effectual, working and busied in
continual doing: neither such a one also as is only a general beginning of a
confused motion, Psalm. 215.^.
as he would command a river to flow by his appointed channels: but such a
one, as is bent and ready at his particular moouings. And so al they that would
include Gods omnipotency within the influence of nature, Psalm. 8.3. Iere.
1^.2.
do both defraude God of his glory, and deprive them selves of most profitable
doctrine, which brings double fruit.

4 The better to confute this, letting pass the mad error of Epicures and
other like, he deals with them which only grant a general providence of
God: or at leastwise do restrain it to certain particular Acts, showing
that God does not idly behold from heaven, what is done in the world, but
guides all things, holding as it were the stern, and so is appliable to rule
every event, that nothing can happen by chance, Gene. 22.8. Heb. 1.3. Psalm.
146.9.
but by Gods determinated counsel.

5 This he expounds, prosecuteth and confirms.

6 Now having talked of the singular providence of God, Hie. 10.23. Pro. 20.24.
Exodus 21.13. Psalm 75.7.
which is occupied in things without life, he goes to that which puts
forth it self in governing of mankind, proouing that both every action of
all men, and variety of every state is by Gods special determination.

Exodus 19.13. Iona. 1.6. Psalm. 10.4. and ^07.25.
7 And also the very particular successes, are generally witnesses of Gods
singular providence: for they are such as never arise without Gods special
commandment, as when he would cast Jonas into the Sea, he sent out a wind
to raise up a tempest.

8 Neither is this doctrine all one with the opinion of the Stoikes, about
Fatum or destiny. For he does not, as the Stoikes do, imagine a necessity, by
a certain perpetual knot, and entangled order of causes, which is contained
in nature: but he makes GOD the Judge and governor of all things, who now
executes by his power that which in time past he had decreed in his wisdom:
and so with God nothing does happen by fortune or chance: and chance and
fortune, are Heathen words, as by Basilius Magnus and Augustine appears.

9 Yet this does not hinder, that according to the manner of men, John 14.5. 1.
Sam. 6.9. 1. Sam. 23.26.
it may neither be said, nor be in many things both chance and happening.
Because the order, reason, end, and necessity of those things which happen,
does oftenlye hid in Gods counsel, and comes not under man's knowledge. Such
is ye reason of the happening of things to come, as is showed by most clear
examples.

Cap. 17. Whereunto, and to what end this doctrine is to be applied, that we
may be certain of the profit thereof.
IN this Chapter there are two parts, whereof in the former, he delivers the
doctrine from the first, to 11. in the last he takes away two objections from
the 12. to the 14.

As touching the doctrine, although in the beginning of the first sectio^ he
set down three things, yet he does it not to this end, to assign to every one
his proper place in the handling thereof (which therefore I show that no man
should look for that, and so make his labor weerisome to him) but only as it
were to draw out all that he has gathered together, as it were out of a
fountain whatsoever afterward he shall disput^ of in the former part of the
Chapter.

1 Although the causes thereof which happen, are hidden from us, yet is it not
meet, that we should think man's matters to be turned and whirled about
with the blind sway of fortune: and be stirred up to murmr against GOD,
Psalm. 40.^ Job. 9.3.
as though he did rashly cast all men's matters hither and thither: but we
should reverence his secret judgments, and rest upon his will, as upon a most
just cause of all things.

2 Neither does that hinder which some object that it is wicked, Psalm. 36.8.
Romans 3.11.35 Deuteronomy. 29.2^. Job. 26.14.
that in governing the world we imagine an other will in God after his secret
judgments, then is declared us in the Law and the Gospel: for we must
distinguish between the wisdom that abides in God, and the manner to be wise
which he prescribes to men.

3 Yet, this doctrine does neither maintain their impiety, that lay the
fault of their wickedness upon God: nor yet their arrogancy which leave it
in the midst.

4 And that this may the better appear, Prou. 6.^
seeing al those things which they are wont to object against this point of
doctrine may be referred to ye time to come, or time past, first as touching
things to come, he shows that men's deliberations do agree with Gods
providence. The heart of man, says Solomon, purposes his way, but the Lord
does direct his steps: meaning, that we are not hindered by ye eternal
decrees of god, but that under his will we may both provide for our selves, and
dispose all things belonging to us, and that is not without a manifest reason:
for he that has limited our life within appointed bounds, has therwithal
left with us the care thereof, has furnished us with means and helps to
preserve it, has made us to have knowledge before hand of dangers, that they
should not oppress us unware, he has given us provisions and remedies.

5 Moreover as touching things past their reasoning is unsavory and foolish,
which would have wickedness too be unpunished in the authors them selves,
because they are not committed without Gods disposition.

6 Such therefore is Gods providence, that the mediation thereof may easily
shake away all cauillations or frantike errors, Psalm. 55.2^. 1. Pet. 5.9.
Zach. 2.8. Esaias. 26.2. Matthew. 10.29.
and also brings to pass, that whosoever is munited heerewith can attribute
nothing to fortune: But much more whether he have to do with men, or with
other creatures, on both sides he doubts not, but Gods providence does
wait to preserve him.

7 Moreover, (being sufficiently persuaded of Gods goodwill toward him) he
also adioineth those testimonies, Exo. 3.21. 3. King 22.20. 2. Sam. 17.7. Job.
1.12.
which teach, that all men are under his power, whether it be to win their
minds to GOD his will, or to restrain their malice that it may do no hurt
(of which sort some examples are recited. And so being likewise persuaded of
his power also, first whatsoever does prosperously happen, he ascribes that
wholly to be received of God.

8 And also if any adversity hapened, Genesis 45.8. Job. 1.21. 2. Sam. 16.10.
Psalm. 38.10. Ephe. 6.12.
by and by also would he here lift up his mind to GOD: that by this means
chiefly he may acquaint himself to patience and moderation of mind by the
example of Joseph, ^. (...) 10.12.
Job, and David.

9 Neither yet in the mean time would he wink at inferior causes, but would
also reckon them in such place as he ought to do: and first he entreats of
things past, then of things to come.

10 In this point does the inestimable felicity of a godly mind show forth
it self: for although innumerable are the evils that do beseege man's life,
and do threaten him so many deaths (a good part whereof he there calls to
mind,) otherwise worthily to be feared, as things which should come unto us.

Psalm. 118.6. 1. These. 2.18. 1. Cor. 16.7. Esaias. 7.4. Ezech. 29.4.
11 But when the light of Gods providence has once shined upon a godly mind,
he is now relieved and delivered not only from that extreme anguishe and
fear wherewith he was before oppressed: but also from all care. As he that
is so persuaded of Gods fatherly care toward him, and his omnipotent power,
that he can neither fear nor doubt, and so the ignorance of his providence is
the extremity of all miseries: and the chief blessedness stands in the
knowledge thereof.

12 Here he comes to the second part of the Chapter, Gene. 6.6. 1. Sam.
15.11. Iere. 28.5. Job. 3.4. Esaias. 35.35. 1. King. 20.5. 1. Sam. 15.29. Numb.
23.29.
that is to expound certain places which seem to point that GOD has not
appointed men's matters, by an eternal decree, but as every one has deserved,
or as he thinks meet and just, every year, day, and hour, to decree this
or that. Of such places there are two sorts, whereof the first does ascribe
repentance unto God, the other does show as it were a certain abolishing of
his decrees as of the destruction of the Ninevites and the death of Ezechias.
As touching ye first, he denies any repentance to be in God.

13 And such manner of sentences are nothing else, then certain speeches
drawn from our sense and framed to our capacity the better to understand that
which our weakness cannot otherwise attain unto.

14 As touching the other of the Ninevites and Ezechias, Jonas. 3.10. Esaias.
35.5. Genesis 26.9. Esdr. 24.14.
such speeches co^taine a secret condition although not expressed in
syllables, as is proved by their end, and that like speech of God with
Abimelech the King.

Cap. 18. That God does so use the service of wicked men, and so boweth their
minds to put his judgment in execution, that yet still himself remains
pure from all spot.
THeir modesty is not excusable, who cannot abide to hear that God directs
the malice of Satan, Psalm. 115.3. Job. 1.2. 3. Kin. 22.20. Acts. 4.28. Iere.
50.25. Esaias. 5.26. and. 10 5. and. 19.25. 8. Sam. 10.10. 1. King. 11.31.
and the wicked, to what end it pleases him and uses their wicked doings, to
execute his Judgments: wrongfully doubtless giving back, that these things
are done by Gods sufferance, but not by his will, which how false a defense it
is, he plentifully proves by certain examples.

2 This power of GOD is not only in external works, but also in inward
works, Prou. 21 1. Ephe. 2.29. 1. Sam. 26. Exo. 7.3.
neither does he only harden men's hearts by permission, but does also cast upon
them, madness and blindness, by his just judgment, neither does this
hinder, Psalm. 105.25. Esai. 10.6. Eze. 14.9. Romans 12.^.
that Satan also bestows his diligence, and that God him self does not
only deliver them into a reprobate sense, but also so deceives some, that the
power of our effectual working of error is far from God.

3 Whosoever therefore receive not this doctrine, Psalm. 51.6. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
John. 1.21. 1. Sam. 2.25. Psalm. 115.3. Esai. 45.7. Amo. 3.6. Deu. 19.5. Act.
4.28. Ephesians. 3.10. 1. Tim. 6.16.
do either show their ignorance, or if they openly curse, they do as it
were openly assail heaven in vain with their spitting, that is, they throw
their blasphemies against the holy Ghost: The plainlier that this may appear,
he confuteth those two objections which they are wont to allege. The first
whereof is, that therefore it follows, that in God there are two contrary
wills, if nothing happen without Gods will: because in his secret counsel he
deserves that, which openly he forbad in his law.

4 The other is: if God do not only use the work of the wicked, but also
governs their counsels and affections, he is the author of all mischief:
and therefore men are unworthily commended if they execute that which God has
decreed, because they obey his will. But they do ill to confound his will and
his commandment together, for although when Absolon abused his fathers wives,
it was Gods will to punish David's adultery with that dishonor, 2 Samuel 16.22.
yet did he not therefore command the wicked Son to commit Incest, unless
perhaps they mean it in respect of David, as he speaks of the railings of
Semey, for when he confesses that Semey rayleth at him by the commandment of
God, he does not therefore commend his obedience, as if the froward dog
did obey the commandment of God, but acknowledging his tongue to be the
scourge of God, he patiently suffers to be corrected. When God performs by
the wicked ye thing which he decreed by his fecrete judgment, 1. Kin. 12.20.
O^^. 6.4. and 13.^1. 2. Ki^. 11.23. and 2. ^i^. 10.^.
they are not to be excused although they did obey his commandment, which in
deed of their evil lust they do purposely break. The saying of Augustine is
sufficient to content a godly mind, that sometimes man with good will wills
that, which God wills not: Enchi. ad Law. Cap. 101.
as if a good son, wills to have his father live, whom God will have to
dye. Again, that it may come to pass, that man may will the same thing with
an evil will, which God wills with a good will. As if an evil son wills
to have his father dye, and God also wills the same, now the first of these
two sons wills that which God wills not, and the other son wills that
which God also wills, and yet the naturalnes of the first son does better
agree with the will of God, although he will a contrary thing, then the
unnaturalness of ye other son that wills the same thing. So great a
difference is there what to will does belong to man, and what to God, and to what
end every one is to be applied, to have it either allowed or disalowed, for
those which God wills well, he brings to pass by ye evil wills, of evil
men. But a little before, he had said, yt the angels Apostates in their falling
away, and all ye reprobate, in as much as concerns themselves, did ye which
god would not, but in respect of ye omnipotency of God, they could by no
means so do, because while they did against the will of God, the will of God
was done upon them. Whereupon he cries out, Great are the works of God, Psalm.
111.2.
and to be sought out of all them that love him: that in marvelous manner the
same thing is not done without his will, which is also done against his will,
because it could not be done, if he did not suffer it, and yet he does it not
against his will, but willingly. And he being good, would not suffer a thing to
be done evil, unless for that he is omnipotent, he could of evil make good.

The second Book entreats of the knowledge of God the Redeemer in Christ:
which knowledge was first opened to the Fathers in the time of the Law, and
then to us in the Gospel.
The Argument.
GOing about to speak of the knowledge of God the Redeemer: first he reasons
of the occasion of redemption, that is, of the fall of man: and after that he
comes to entreat of redemption it self: to the former he assigns five
Chapters; to the last the rest.

As touching the first, he speaks not only generally of the fall: but also
of certain other things which belong thereunto: Such are original sin, the
bondage of will, and how God works in men's hearts, from the first Chapter to
the fifth. As concerning the last, first he shows, who it is, in whom
salvation is to be sought for of the lost man, even Christ only. Moreover how
this Christ is opened to the world, from the seventh to the eleventh, and that
two ways, first under the law (by occasion whereof he both expounds the ten
commandments, and shakes of certain other things of the law, from the 7. to
the 8. Moreover under the Gospel, where also he disputes of the similitude and
difference of both Testaments, from the 9. to the 11. Thirdly, what God and man
ought to be, from the 13. to the 14. Fourthly, to what end he was sent into the
world of the Father, 15. Last of all, how, and by what degrees he fulfilled the
parts of a Redeemer, and his office enjoined him, by occasion whereof, he
expounds a good part of the Creed, from the 16. to the 17.

Cap. 1. That by Adams sin and falling away, mankind became accursed, and
did degenerate from his first state: wherein is entreated of original sin.
IT is a thing most necessary to know our selves, whereby it comes to pass
that we must diligently take heed that we use it The II. Table of the 11.
Book.
First he treats of the occasion of redemption, that is, of the fall of man,
and that First in general, where also he treats of original sin. Cap. 1.
Secondly he descends specially to the handling of the servitude of will, yet
so that First he proves specially that will is spoiled of liberty, and
subject to miserable bondage. Secondly he confirms the same by the effects.
Chap. 3. Thirdly for more plainness sake he shows how God works in the
hearts of men. cap. 4 Last of al he confuteth the objections which they are
wont to allege for defense of free will. Chap. 5.
Last of all how and by what degrees he has fulfilled the office of a
Mediator: where He expounds a good part of the Creed Chap. 16. And treats
specially of the merit of Christ. Chap. 17.


not disorderly, least by vewing our own goodness, only we minister matter
(as the Philosophers are wont to do) to our selves to be puffed up with pride:
Genesis 2.7.
We ought truly to look upon our own goodness, that thereby we may stir
up our minds to godliness: yet so that we forget not our necessity and
deformity: whereupon grows a hatred and loathing of our selves, and true
humility: and a new desire to seek God is kindled and enflamed: in whom every
one of us may recover those good things, whereof we are found altogether
void and empty.

2 Truly it is a more plausible and pleasant opinion that allureth us rather
to the confidence of our own power, and admiration of our selves: because it
more aunsweareth our nature, but the other is more safefer.

3 Although there be no man but will grant that the second part of wisdom
consists in the knowledge of our selves, yet in the very manner of knowing,
there is much disagre^ment, while some trusting to the iudg^ment of the flesh
encourage themselves t^ the duties of virtues, bidding battle t^ vices:
othersome being spoiled of al^ confidence, think there is nothing le^^ to
frame their lives well: there are tw^ parts, therefore of knowing our selves,
that is, to what end we are made, an^ how unable we are to perform ye same.

As touching that, he professes that he will speak of both, as the order o^
teaching shall require, it must not so be understood, as though he would begin
a new tractation, which should consist in these two parts, but because as a
little before he disputed of the first, Li. 1. Cap. 15. so now he will also
speak of the other.

4 As touching the second part, he sets down two things to be confuted:
Romans 5.19.
first how it came to pass, how Adam wrapped him self in so great misery:
which he shows happened not by the vnmoderatenesse of gluttony, but by
infidelity: in which only is set that last end of his felicity.

5 Moreover, Romans ^.
how far this disease crept: which part is showed to the end of this
Chapter. And first he proves that those innocent creatures (which were made
for Adams use,) are subject through his defalt to the curse. Moreover also, and
that especially, this curse spread abroad over all his issue, as is proved by
three arguments. Psalm. 51.7.
And this is the corruption that comes by inheritance which the old fathers
have called Original sin, Job. 14.4.
meaning by the word Sin, the corruption of nature, which before was good
and pure: where also the Pelagians and Celestians are confuted.

6 It is proved by three arguments, that this corruption passed not only by
imitation from Adam upon the whole issue, as the Pelagians dream, Romans 5.1^.
1. Cor. 15.2^. Romans 8.10. Ephe. 2.3.
but also by propagation: First by a comparion of Adam with Christ: Moreover
that we are the children of wrath: Last of all, that it is flesh, Ioh. 3.6.
whatsoever is borne of flesh.

7 That which some object, follows hereof, that the souls are of deriuation,
because chiefly in them the infection rests, belongs nothing to this
question, seeing the corruption has not her cause in the substance of the
flesh or of the soul, but because it was so ordained of God, that such gifts
as he had given to the first man, he should both have them and lose them, as
well for him self as for his. As for those that the Pelagians do cavil, that
it is not likely that the children do take corruption from godly parents, has
no force seeing they descend not of their spiritual regeneration, but of their
carnal generation.

8 Original sin therefore may well be defined thus, that it may be called an
inheritable descending peruersenes and corruption of nature, Gal. 5.19. Romans
5.12.
powered abroad into all parts of the soul, which first makes us guilty of
the wrath of GOD, and then also brings forth the works of the flesh in us:
both which parts he largely declares severally.

9 How also this corruption is powered into all the parts of the s^ule, he
now briefly shows (referring a more fullen treaty thereof, Ephesians. 4.27. Romans
12.^ Romans 8.7.
till the next Chapter) least we should very grosely with Lombard assign the
seat only to be in the flesh.

10 Last of all, he proves that this does more plainly appear, after he
has set these so in order, which he spoke of in the first Book. Chapter 18.
sect 4. Eccle. 7.3^.
That God is not the Author of sin, sith all mankind is corrupted with his
natural and proper corruption.

11 Yet this corruption is so natural as proceeded not from nature: but
ra-rather a quality come from some other thing, which may appear is happened
to man, the^ a substantial property that has been put into him from the
beginning. Ephesians. 2.^
And by this means is rooted up the false lie of the Manichies, of
substantial malice in man's nature.

Cap. 2. That man is now spoiled of the freedom of will, and made subject to
miserable bondage.
AFter he has showed in a former Chapter, that man is brought to miserable
servitude, now he thinks it meet to search and discuss whether we are
spoiled of all liberty: and if a parcel be of force, how far the power
thereof does proceed. But to this Chapter he assigns four Chapters next
coming. As touching this Chapter it may be divided into three parts: For
first he lays as it were a foundadatio^ of this translation. sect. I. He
moreover shows the opinion of others, from the second to the nineth. Last of
all, he shows what is to be determined of this controversy, from the tenth
to the seven and twentieth.

1 In the beginning he admonishes us to beware of two rocks: first yt we
attribute nothing to our selves, least Gods honor be thereby taken from him, and
that we fall with rash confidence. Moreover also on the other side, that least
when we deprive our selves of all government, and that truly we take thereby
occasion of sloth, although nothing did belong unto us, it is spoken of the
study of justice.

2 As touching their other opinion, first he brings the Philosophers, then
the Ecclesiastical writers to be examined. The Philosophers place will as a
mean between reason and fear, that is to say, having authority over her
own power and liberty, whether it please to obey reason, or yield it self to
sense to be subdued: and how soever it be corrupted and perverted, when it
has given it self subject into the bondage of sense, that if it sustain to
obey reason, it is carried to the study of virtues, and holds the right way.

3 Yet being convicted by experience it self, they confess that without
great difficulty they cannot establish a kingdom for reason, and that
sometimes they are haled hither and thither into diverse parts by sense: yet so
that in their opinion they have always free election, neither believe they
that their will can be let, but if it will, it may follow reason in all
points for their guide.

4 As touching the Ecclesiastical writers, albeit there have been none, that
did not acknowledge both yt the soundness of reason in man, has been sore
wounded by sin (wherein they differ from the Philosophers) and his will
entangled with perverse desires: yet many of them have too much assented to the
Philosophers (whereof two causes may be assigned) and truly all the ancient
(only Augustine excepted) have either varied herein or else wauered, so that
almost no certainty may be gathered of their writings. More newer writers one
after an other continually fell by little and little from worse to worse, but
first the Grecians. And first as touching the signification of the word, he
shows what some as well of the fathers as of the new writers have thought of
free will. The sum whereof is, that the name of free will is rather to be
referred to reason, whose part is to discern between good and evil things,
and the Adjective free, pertayneth properly to will, which may be turned to
either of both.

5 Moreover, what things they put under the free will of man: and (which is
very near this) how many ways free will is after them taken.

6 Thirdly, whether a man be, after their judgment wholly depryued of power to
do well, or whether he have as yet some, but little and weak while he seeks
this of more sounder schoolmen, he finds them much halting: Did. 25. li. ^
but Lombard plainly confessing that we have not therefore free will, because
we are alyke able either to do or think good or evil, but only that we are
free from compulsion.

7 Herevppon he concludes, that so small a matter ought not to be garninished
with so proud a title, especially seeing it drives of the own accord into
error. Neither is that strong which they say, that such danger is taken away,
if the people be diligently admonished of the true signification.

8 For that the fathers have done, and first of all Augustine: yet this
interpretation of ye elders omitted, all ye posterity almost have stuck in ye
signification of the word, Job. 15.5.
and so has bin brought into deadly confidence. Our Savior Christ says.
Without me you can do nothing. And Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 3.8.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And Augustine says,
Aug. ad Bonesa. Li. 3. Cap. 8. and Cap. 7.
That cannot be made free, which the grace of God has not made free. And
again he says, That the justice of God is not fulfilled, when the law
commands, and man does of his own strength, but when the holy Ghost
helps, and man's will not free, but made free by GOD, obeys.

9 The Fathers have spoken of this matter so doubtfully and diversely, that no
certainty may be had in their writings, yet this may truly be affirmed, that
they in this doutfulnesse of speech, nothing or very little esteeming man's
strength, have given praise of all good things to the holy Ghost.

I^^. 17.5. Psalm. 147.10.
10 He has hitherto spoken of other men's judgments, but now coming more
near to the simple expounding of the truth in considering man's nature, he
would first have it set as it were, Esaias. 40. Jacob. 4.6. Esaias. 44.4.
in steed of a foundation, that as every man is most discouraged, and thrown
down with conscience of his own misery, needinesse, nakedness, and shame, so
has he best profited in the knoweledge of the same: but this he confirms
first by the scripture.

11 Moreover by the Fathers; while they make humility the fountain of our
Philosophy: and that it is not when a man knowing some small virtue in
himself, does abstain from pride and hautinesse of mind: but when he truly
feels himself to he such a one, as has no refuge but in humility.

12 And so prosecuting the matter it self, to show both what is to be given
too the understanding in man after the fall, and also to man's will: first, he
affirms generally of both (and that according to Augustine, and the
schoolmen) that the natural gifts are corrupted; but the supernatural
utterly lost: moreover he takes upon him to expound both severally, first,
examining the strength of understanding, from the twelfth to the 25. then also
of will. 26. 27. Furthermore those things which he has to speak of
understanding, he so handeleth, that in the first he places certain general
things: for he is not so condemned of perpetual blindness, (...). 1.5.
that there is no understanding left in any kind of thing, yet whatsoever he
has it is troubled with a double vanity.

13 Moreover, after he has made a distinction of things earthly, and heavenly
he shows first how much it avails in earthly things, from the 13 to the 17.
then in heavenly things, from the 18. to the 25. And first as concerning those
middle things or earthly things, there remains as yet great power of
intelligence, as appears, first by those, that al men do so embrace policy,
and governance of household, that they do not only understand that all
companies of men ought to be kept in order by laws, but also conceaueth in his
mind ye principles of those things.

14 Moreover that in arts, as well liberal as handicraftes, we are only apt
although this also is not to be let slipped, yt this light of reason whereof we
speak, is so universal good, that therein every man nevertheless ought for
him self to acknowledge the peculiar grace of God.

15 This middle way therefore must be held that by such things, we are
admonished that man's mind howsoever it be perverted and fallen from his
integrity is yet still clothed and garnished with the excellent gifts of God.

16 Yet in the mean time let us not forget that these are the most excellent
good gifts of the spirit of God, Exodus 31.2 and 35.30.
which for the common benefit of mankind he deals abroad to whom it
pleases him, sometime also to the wicked, which notwithstanding obtain no
praise thereby, because they leave off to be pure in a polluted man, and in one
that wants the foundation of the truth: and for that cause are made before
God, brittle, and unprofitable.

17 He comprehends both: that is to say, that there is nothing left in our
nature, Iud. 6.34. 1. Sam. 10.6. and 16.13.
and whatsoever it be, it ought wholly to be ascribed to Gods kindness,
because if it had not spared us, our rebellion had drawn with it the
destruction of our whole nature.

18 Moreover, as touching heavenly things or the kingdom of God, first he
shows what he means by the kingdom of God: and that he divides into two
parts, the knowledge of God, the certainty of his benevolence: and the order
of a well framed life. In the two first, he first shows how there can be no
truth nor soundness.

19 Moreover, he confirms by the authority of the Scripture, from the 19.
to the 21. to wit, in this order. Man's soul is lightened with the brightness
of Gods light, John. 1.4.
so yt it is never altogether without some small flame, John. 13. Matthew. 16.17.
or at least some small spark of it, but yet with such a light, he
comprehends not God. Because man's quickness of wit, as toward the
knowledge of God, is but mere darkness, for flesh is not capable of ye high
wisdom of God, to conceive GOD, and that which is godly, unless it be
lightened with the spirit of GOD, as Christ testified, that this was a
special revelation of the father that Peter did know him.

20 Moreover, that many places of the scripture deny those things to our
nature, whereof we speak. Psalm. 34.10.1. Cor. 12.3. Ioh. 3.27. Deu. 29.2. Ier.
24.7. Ioh. 6.44. Esdr. 44.13. 1. Cor. 2.14. 1. Cor. 1.20.

21 And are wont to give it to God only, Ephesians. 1.15. Psalm. 119.18. Iac. 1.17
Ios. 14.26.

22 Now examining the will (wherein chiefly freewill is occupied, Romans 2.14. 2.
Cor. 3.5. Psalm. 94.11. Ge. 6.3. and. 8.2^. Psalm. 119.3.4. Phil. 1.4. Col. 1.9.
in the beginning he shows, that that natural desire of God wherewith all
things are ended, does nothing to prove freewil: for it rather proceeds
from the inclination of the essence, then from the deliberation of the mind:
but this whereof we speak, does require that every man should discern with
right judgment that which is good: and being known, choose it; and being
chosen, follow it. And the more clearer to escape this, there is to be noted
in the other (...) double sophistical argument, in Appetite and Good.

Romans 7.15. Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.22. 2. Cor. 3.5. Genesis 8.21. John. 8.34. Psalm.
51.2.
27 Moreover that also is not sound^ that the schoolmen say, attributing to the
first grace of God, that we will effectually, by this they say secretly that
there is in the soul power of it self to aspire to God, but it is more weaker
then may grow to a perfect perfection or raise up any endeavor, but rather it
is to be granted, seeing man is wholly subject to the government of sin,
that that will truly which is his chief seat, must ready be bound with most
straight bonds: and nothing is ours but sin.

Cap. 3. That out of the corrupt nature of man proceeds no thing but damnable.
ALl this Chapter seems to apperteine to both: yet so, that it comes nearer
to will then understanding.

1 Whole man does easily appear, by the titles wherewith the Scripture does
set them out, to be corrupted on both sides. First, for that he is called
flesh, John. 3.6. Romans 8.6. Ephe. 4.13.14.17. Esaias. 40.2. Psalm. 42.1^ Iere.
17.9. To. 3.10.15. etc.
this word does not only appertain to ye sensual part but to the higher
part of the soul, that is the mind.

2 The heart it self also is entangled in this corruption, so that there can
be found in none at all, either integrity or understanding, or the fear of
God.

3 That which may be objected, that in all ages there have been some which by
guiding of nature, have been bent to virtue in all their life: and which not
only have excelled with ^oble acts, but also in the whole course of their life
have behaved themselves most honestly: he answers that this comes by the
grace of God, which although it purge not that corruption, as in the effect,
yet it does inwardly restrain it, Romans 1.10.
by putting the bridle in their mouths as much as he feeth meet, and
expedient for the conservation of the university of things.

4 If any man urge, that this yet remains, either Camillus was no better then
Catelin, or else in Camillus we shall have an example that nature, if it be
framed by good diligence. is not altogether without goodness: Kings, some are
created notable by some singular mark, because God providing for man kind,
furnishes them with a principal nature, wherein he appoints to bear
government as appears in Saul.
it may be answered, first that these were not fit arguments of purity,
seeing the mind remains perverse and crooked, which will follow any thing
else rather then upright straightness: Moreover these are not common gifts of
nature, but special graces of God, which he diversely and by certain measure
deals among me^, that are otherwise ungodly. Which gifts as in pollitike
courts, they have their commendation: so before the heavenly Judgment seat,
they shall be of no value to deserve righteousness. Esaias says, That upon Christ
rests the spirit of the fear of GOD. Esaias. 11.3.
Whereby we are taught, that so many as are strange from Christ, are without
the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom.

Iere. 3^.18.
5 Will was so held bound with the bondage of sin, since the fall, that it
could not once move it self to goodness, much less apply it self: but he
both enclineth and hastes to evil with most ready affection. Will remains
in man: but the soundness of will does not: because he has willingly cast him
self into that necessity. Neither ought this to seem absurd to any man,
where we say that will put from liberty is by necessity drawn or led into
evil, except there be any which with Lombard know not to distinguish between
necessity and compulsion: for many of the fathers have been affirmers of this
necessity.

6 The better that this doctrine may appear, he assignet^ ^he other part of
this Chapter to this one thing, to show what it is, or wherein consists the
remedy of Gods grace, whereby the corruptnesse of our nature is both amended
and healed. Phil. 1.^. Ezeb. 36.1^. Phi. 2.13. 2. Cor. 12.6. 1. Cor. 8.6.
Psalm. 95.6.7.
For hereby it does better appear, what our needinesse is, if on the contrary
part we see what it is that God bestows upon us when he helps us. But
there is no doubt, but ye God in the beginning will both begin and also
perform every good work in us, that no piece, be it never so little, can be
given to man.

7 There are some, that grant that will being of her own nature turned away
from good, is converted by the only power of the Lord, John. 6.45.
that yet they attribute not all things to God only, but to man himself,
after he has a prepared will: moreover it has also her own part in doing:
where also he speaks of grace going before and following after.

8 Against these men, because he is in hand with the chief point whereon the
matter hangs, Iere. 32.19. Esd. 11.19.
first he promises that he will bring forth the scriptures, and then
Augusti^^ And first by two reasons confirmed by ye scriptures.

9 Moreover he shows by certain other testimonies of scripture, that the
Lord did not so make man, 1. Reg. 8.58. Psalm. 119.36. John. 15.1. Matthew.
15.13. Phil. 2.13. 1. Cor. 12.6. Psalm. 86.11.
that afterward he should do any good of himself: but yt it may be thought
his only, because his will conceaueth a love of that which is right, that it is
inclined to ye desire thereof, and that it is stirred up and moved to endeavor
of following it. And then that our choice, desire, and endeavor faint not, but
do proceed even to the effect: Last of all that man goes forward constantly in
them, and continues to the end.

10 He moves also the will, Esa. 11.19. John. 19.45.
not in such sort as has in many ages bin taught and believed, yt it is
afterward in our choice either to obey or withstand the motion: but with mighty
strengthening it, not only that we may walk in his precepts but that we may
walk in deed.

11 Perseverance also and going forward is not of our selves, but of God:
therefore their double error is to be refuted, which think it is distributed
according to the deserts of men, as every man has showed himself not
unthankful to ye first grace: Matthew. 25.2^ Luke. 10.17. Phi. 2.13.
now grace also does not alone work in us, but is also a worker together with
us: there is handeled of both severally.

12 And objection is wiped away which they wrest out of Paul for the
seco^derrour of grace working together. 1. Cor. 15.10
Where S. Paul does not write that ye grace of the Lord labored with him to ye
intent to make himself partner of the labor, but rather by ye correction he
gives away all the praise of the labor to grace only. Augustine says, that
the will of man goes before many gifts of God, but not before all, but of
the^ which it goes before it self is one. Then follows his reason, Psalm.
59.11. Psalm. 33.6.
because it is written, His mercy has prevented me, and his mercy shall follow
me. It preuenteth man not willing, to make him will, and follows him
willing, that he will not in vain. Bernard in Cant. Ser. 2.3.
With whom Bernard agrees, bringing in the Church to speak thus, draw me in
a manner unwilling, that thou may make me willing; draw me being
slothful, that thou may make me run.

13 It is showed by many places that this was the opinion of Augustine: that
grace is not offered of the Lord, which is either received or refused by every
man's free choice, ^. Cor. 12.9.
but the same is also such as forms choice and will in the heart.

14 Neither is that any contrariety which in an other place he says, that
will is not taken away by grace, but of evil is changed into good, and when
it is good, it is helped. How this must be understood, he teaches out of
Augustine.

Cap. 4. How God works in the hearts of men.
IN this Chapter, he shows how much is to be attributed to every one in
every work. But first how much is to be attributed in evil actions both to
the devil and to man, and to God himself, from the first to the fifth.
Moreover, how much is to be attributed to God in middle things, and how much
is to be left to man, from the 6. to the 8.

In every work must be attributed to every one that which is theirs, 2. Cor.
4.4. Ephe. 2.2.
both to Satan and to man. For the Devil does so work in ye children of the
disobedient: that their will being bewitched with the deceiptes of Satan, it
does not resist: and so without man the cause of sin is not to be sought for.

2 But far otherwise is the doings of God in such things, Job. 1.
as may appear in Iobes calamity For the same does manifestly show, how GOD
in such doings may have his work, neither yet may Satan be excused by the
company of God, neither may god be reported to be the author of evil, and
that two ways, first by the end, moreover also by the manner of doing. Here
also he entreats not of Gods universal, but only of his special moving.

3 The old writers sometime have alleged these not to the work of God, but to
his foreknowledge and sufferance: and to what end have they done it, when as
notwithstanding the scripture does plainly show, that there is therein
somewhat else of God besides his foreknowledge, that is, he hardneth the
reprobate, blinds, and moves, and that two ways: first, by forsaking them
or taking from them his holy Ghost: Moreover also, by directing the^ as it
semeeth him good, Deu. 2.30.
by Satan the minister of his wrath.

4 And he shows both by many places of scripture, that he takes away the lip
from the speakers of truth, Job. 12.10.
and takes away the reason from the elders, he takes the heart away from them
that are set over the people, Esaias. 63.17.
he makes them to wander where no way is. Again, Lord, why have thou made us
mad, and hardened our hearts, that we should not fear thee? Exo. 3.19.
Because they judge rather of what sort GOD makes men, by forsaking them, then
how he forms his works in them. The Lord did not only harden Pharaos
heart, in not susteining it, Deuteronomy. 2.30.
but he committed his heart to Satan to be confirmed with obstinacy,
whereupon it is said, I will hold his heart. The people went out of Egypt.
the inhabitants of the country came forth and met them like enemies, but
they were stirred up as Moses reports, by the Lord yt hardened their hearts.
Sometime the Lord threatens that he will call the wicked out with his whistle,
Psalm. 105.2^ Esaias. 5.26. Eze. 12.13. Iere. 50.23. Es. 10.15.
sometime that they should be like a net for him to entangle them, sometime like
a mallet, to strike the Israelites, but specially he declares that he is not
idle in them when he called Zennacherib an are, directed and driven by his
hand to cut. Augustine says, Aug. de pr^dest. ^^^cto.
that inasmuch as they sin it is their own: in as much as sinning they do
this or that, it is of the power of God that divides the darkness as
pleases him:

1. Sam. 16.18.29. ^. These. 2.9.10.
5 Yet so that the ministry of Satan should come between, to prick forward
the reprobate, and God should remain free from all wickedness.

6 As touching external and middle things, Exo. 11.3. Ge. 43.14. Psalm.
106.46. 1. Sam. 11.6. Joshua. 2.9. Leuit. 26.3.6. Deuteronomy. 28.63.
which of themselves are nether just nor faulty, God so works in the hearts
of men, that so often as he will make way to his providence, he turns and
enclineth our wills as pleases him, neither is the choice of our will so
free, but the will of GOD may rule his liberty as is showed by many examples.

Pro. 20.12. Prou. 21.1.
7 Neither is that a let which some object, that al things universally ought not
to be reduced to some singular examples.

8 Here must we take heed that we esteem not the power of man's choice by
the issue or strange success as some unskillful vnorderlie do, but it it is
to be considered within man, by the free election of judgment, and affection
of will.

Cap. 5. A confutation of the objections that are wont to be brought for
defense of free will.
THere are two kinds of objections which they do allege: the first whereof
conteyneth certain absurdities, the other many places of Scripture which seem
to repugne in form: he entreats of the first, from the first to the fifth:
but of the other, from the sixth to the nineteenth.

1 As concerning the absurdities, the first is, if sin be of necessity, then
it ceasseth to be sin: if it be voluntary, then may it be avoided: both
which he denies. First, that to sin is not of creation, but of the corruption
of nature, that men being made bondslaues of sin can will nothing but evil,
that also is voluntary which is not subject to free election.

2 The second is, that if both virtues and vices proceed not of free choice of
will, it is not reasonable that either punishment should be laid upon man, or
reward given him. To this argument he answers, that as touching reward, he
proves that it is not absurd, but as touching punishment, he shows how little
force their argument has. Romans 8.26.30. 2. Cor. 4.7. 1. Cor. 4.7.
Augustine says, that God crowns not our deseruings, but his own gifts,
and that they are called rewards not as due to our deseruings, but such as are
rendered to the graces already bestowed upon us.

3 The third is: If this be not the power of our will to chose good or evil,
the^ those that are partakers of the same nature must either all be evil or
good: Romans 4.23.24.
he denies the argument.

4 The last is, that exhortations are taken in hand in vain, yt the use of
admonitions are superfluous, if it be not in the power of the sinner to obey.
He denies the argument, Job. 15.5. 1. Cor 3.3. Romans 9.16. 2. Cor. 3.7.
and shows why he denies it, first by Augustines example, Christ and Paul.

5 Moreover, that although it be not in the power of the sinner to obey, Eze.
10.1^.
yet obiurgations and exhortations are necessary as well for the reprobate as
the elect, and they have their end in both. Though Christ pronounce, Job. 6.44.
that no man comes to him, but whom the father draws, and that the elect
do come when they have heard of the Father: 2. Cor. 2.16.
yet does he not neglect the office of a teacher, but with his voice diligently
calls them, whom it necessarily behooved to be inwardly taught by ye holy
Ghost. Those testimonies which they bring out of the Scriptures, although they
be many, yet a great part of them may be divided into a few places, whereunto
he speedely answers, from the 6. to the 15. then he descends also to
certain other particulars, from the 16. to the 19.

6. 7 As touching their places, the first is of them which belong to the law,
and require of us perfection, whereby they think they may conclude, yt either
God does mock us, when he requires godliness, and forbids iniquity.
Here first he shows, that whatsoever happen under this kind, may be
divided into three parts: The first whereof conteyneth such testimonies, as
requires our first conversion to God: the second, which simply speak of
keeping the law: the third, which command us to continue in the grace of God
which we have received. Gal. 3.10. Romans 3.20. Romans 7.7. ^. Ti. 1.5. ^. Th. 3.12.
Moreover, he confuteth that argument of the law generally of vanity, for
there are other limits of pronouncing the law, as appears out of Paul.
Augustine says, In Euch. ad Lau. de gra. and li. Ar. Cap. 18. Hom. 29. in
Ioh. ^pist. 24.
that the Lord commands those things which we can not do, that we may
know what to ask of him. Great is the profit of the commandementes, if so
much be given to free will that the grace of God be the more honored. Faith
obteyneth that which the law commands, yea the law therefore commands
that Faith may obtain that which was commanded by the law: yea, God
requires Faith it self of us, and finds not what to require, unless he
give what to find. Again, let God give what he commands, and command what
he will.

Ioh. 2.12. I^^. 31.1^.
8 Then also he shows by many testimonies of Scripture how it may be
answered to all those places, Deu. 10.1^. Eze. 36.26.
which come under those three sorts. Augustine says, that we do not by free
will of nature: but he him self does it by nature. Of the third sort was that
exhortation of Paul and Barnabas, Esd. 16. and 4.30. 2. The. 1.3. 2. Cor. 8.11.
which is rehearsed by Luke, that they should abide in the grace of God: but
that constancy Paul witnesses, does come from the Lord.

9 Neither must the Adversaries be suffered to cavil, that those testimonies
are so to be understood, that there may be no impediment, that we may not join
our strengthes, and God help our weak endeavors: as though the effect of our
conversation must be parted in half between God and us. Zach. 1.3. Ier. 13.3.
How weak also this is, it is showed before in the 2. Chapter, sect. 27.

10 The second sort of their arguments is, Am. 5.14. Esa. 5.16. Ier. 4.1.
Deu. 28.^. Leu. 26.1.
which do allege certain promises wherewith God does covenant with our
will, whereby they conclude vnconueniently, and in mockery, that those benefits
which the Lord does offer in his promises are assigned to our own will,
unless it were in us to stablish them, or make them void. But contrariwise it
is showed when promises are offered both to the faithful and to the wicked,
they have their use with both sorts: as in those particular benefits, If you
will; If you will hear: neither yet does the Lord give us free power to will
or hear, neither yet does he mock us for our weakness: for to the
promises he adioyneth this condition to the wicked that are bound with the
fetters of sin, that they shall then only enjoy his benefits if they depart
from their wickedness: or for this purpose only, that they may understand yt
they are worthily excluded from those things that are due to ye true
worshippers of God. And he stirs up the faithful to call upon his grace.

11 The third sort of their arguments is, whereby God reprocheth the unthankful
people, Number. 14.43. Ier. 32.13.
that they only were the cause that they received not of his tender love all
kinds of good things: whereupon they conclude that these evils are vainly
laid to our charge which are not in our power to avoid. Here therefore it is
proved that it is not only a foolish and weak defense, in pretense of
necessity, but also when sinners by their own fault, not by others are
deprived both of Gods benefits, and also chastized with punishments (as they
that find within themselves the spring head of evils, how so ever they gape
to find them in foreign causes) That is enough truly to lose this knot, Dan.
9. Ier. 7.27. Psalm. 78.8. Psalm. 119.112. Phi. 2.1. 2. Pet. 1.5. 1. The. 5.19.
2. Cor. 7.1.2. 1. Ioh. 5 18. Ioh. 17.15. 1. Pet. 1.22. 1. Ioh. 3.9. 1. Ioh. 5.4.
yet the use of such reproaches is two manner of ways: Where also he wills
us to take heed that we seek not the fault without our selves, or else
attribute to our selves the office to do well, because many times the
Scriptures to stir us up, do transfer unto us by permission, that which
yet in very deed and properly they teach, to belong to God only.

12 The place of Deuteronomy is not against this solution. Den. 30.1^.
For after the publishyng of the Law, he protests unto the people in this
manner. The commandment that I command thee this day, is not hid from thee,
neither far of: it is not in heaven but hard by thee, it is in thy mouth and
in the heart, thou should do it. Which Paul here affirms, Romans 10.8.
that Moses spoke of doctrine of the Gospel: for if Moses had only spoken of
the commandments, he should have puffed up the people with a most vain
confidence to have thrown down them selves hedlong in taking upon them the
keeping of the law by their own strength, as a thing not hard for the^.
Wherefore there is nothing more certain then that Moses in these words did
mean, the covenant of mercy, which he publishing together with the straight
requiring of the law, for in a few verses before, he had taught that our
hearts must be circumcized by the hand of God, Deu. 30.8.
that we may love him.

13 The fourth place of their arguments is, where is showed, that God
sometimes withdrawing the succor of his grace, tries men, and wayteth to see
to what end they would apply their endeavors: O^r. 5.1^
that also makes nothing for them. The Lords going far away, signifies the
taking away of prophecy: His lokyng what men will do, signifies that he
keepyng silence, and as it were hyding him self, does for a time exercise
them with diverse afflictions: both those things he does to humble us the more.
For we should sooner be dulled then amended with the scourges of adversity,
unless he did frame us to the tractablenes by his spirit.

14 The fifth and last of their arguments is, which they bring of a continual
manner of speaking (which is used both in the Scriptures and in the talk of
men) that good works are called ours; and they no less say that we do the
thing that is holy and pleasing to God, then that we commit sins. Neither
kind of speech does make any thing for them. For it were against reason that
it should be said, that we do those things, to the doing whereof, being
unable of our own motion, we are moved by God like stones: (...). 6.11.
the bread is called ours which we pray to have given us of God: what will they
get by this title of possession, but that by the bountifulness and free gift
of God, the same thing becomes ours, which otherwise is not due to us?
Augustine says, Thou will say unto me, then are we wrought and work not: yea
thou both workest and art wrought, and thou workest well, when thou art
wrought of that which is good: the Spirit of God that works thee, helps
them that work, and gives him self the name of a helper, for that thou also
workest somewhat, so man's working is not taken away by the mouyng of the holy
Ghost, because will is of nature, but to will well is of grace.

15 The grace of GOD works all things in us, yet so that two ways they may
be called ours, whatsoever good we work, although our will bring nothing of it
self, that may be severed from his grace: first it may be said to be ours,
what soever by his goodness he works in us, so that we understand it to be
not of our selves. Secondly, because the mind is ours, the will is ours, the
endeavor is ours, which are by him directed to good.

16 Now he comes to certain singular places, which aptly and properly are
referred to none of these places: which he says can not much trouble men's
wits, that have well conceived the promises above said. And first how it
may be aunsweared them in that place which they cite out of Genesis: Genesis 4.7.
Thine appetite shall be under thee, and thou shall bear rule over it, although
it may have a double meaning, yet it makes nothing for them, in what sense so
ever it be taken.

17 Moreover, Romans 9.16.
and that which they gather out of the place of Paul, that it is not of him
that wills nor runs, how weak it is he shows, how so ever they have
Origin and Hierome on their side. First by enterpreting, then by bringing
Augustines authority again. 1. Cor. 3.^.
Thirdly, he takes that out of their hands, where we are called workers with
God. First by Paul's words they gather that there is will in man, but Paul's
meaning is more simply. It is not will, it is not runnyng that get us the way
to salvation, herein is only the mercy of God, Augustine says, Tit. 3.4.5.
that there is no good will of man, unless it be prepared of the Lord, Aug.
Epi. 107. ad Vita.
not but that we ought both to will and to run, but because God works both
in us. The other place of Paul is restrained to the ministers: and that they
are called workers with him, not that they bring any thing of themselves: but
because GOD uses their service after he has made them meet and furnished
with necessary gifts.

18 Fourthly, he answers to a common place of Ecclesiasticus, Ecc. 15.14.
Behold I have put before thee fire and water, etc. But it may be aunsweared
by Solomon in Ecclesiastes, Eccl. 7.30.
who affirms that man in the beginning was created vpryght, and he forged to
him self many inventions.

19 Lastly, he aunsweareth to an objection which they draw out of an
allegorical sense of a Parable of the wayfaryng man wounded and half dead:
Lu. 10.3^
First by reasonyng by the rule of Allegories. Moreover, by expoundyng that
place by other places. Last of all, by showing by Augustines authority how in
an other sense he may be said to be half alive, where also he joins a
conclusion of the whole tractation. Allegories ought to go no farther then
they have the rule of Scripture going before them.

When Paul speaks of our redemption, he does not say that we are healed
when we were half dead and half alive, Ephesians. 2.1.
but that we were raised up again when we were dead: he calls not upon
them that are half alive to receive the light of Christ, but that sleep and
are buried. Ioh. 5.25.
In like manner speaks the Lord him self, when he says, The hour is
come, when then the dead shall rise again at his voice. Augustine says, that
the freely given goods whereupon salvation hangs after man's fall, are taken
away from him, and that his natural gifts are corrupted and defiled.

Cap. 6. That man being lost, must seek for redemption in Christ.
ALL that knowledge of God the creator, whereof we have entreated, is
unprofitable, as our condition and estate is after the fall, unless there
followed Faith also, 1. Cor. 1.22.
setting God forth unto us a Father in Christ. And this doctrine from the
beginning of ye world has taken place in all ages among the children of God,
Ioh. 17.3. Ioh. 4.21. Ephesians. 2.12. Job. 16.4.
and they are filthily deceived which set open the hope of salvation to all
profane and unbelieving men which never learned Christ, but are illuminated
only with some general knowledge of God.

Gal. 3.16. 1. Sa. 2.10.
2 Of those three members of the section going before, the second only follows
to the end of the Chapter, Psalm. 2.12. Job. 5.23. 1. Kin. 11. 1. Kin. 15.4.
Psalm. 78.60.67. Psalm. 20.11. Psalm. 80.18. Lament. 4.20.
for to convince, that God never showed him self merciful to the old people,
nor never did put them into any hope of grace, but so far forth as Christ
should be their Mediator. This he proves was grosely portrayed out, first
in the use of Sacraments, moreover in the chief of one people, or in the
separation of the seed of Abraham. Last of all, in the person of David and his
posterity.

3 From no other place but from this same fountain, Aba. 3.13. Es. 7.14. Es.
55.3. Ier. 23.6. Eze. 34.23. Osc. 7.12. Am. 9.11. Za. 9.9. Mat. 21.9. Ioh.
14.1. Coll. 1.15. Romans 10.4. 1. Job. 2.31.
is comfort promised in affliction, and the banner of affiaunce and hope is
advanced in him alone.

4 And so it was Gods will to have the Jews instructed with this discipline,
that to seek for their deliverance they should bend their eyes directly to
Christ, and the same was confirmed again by Christ's own approbation or
ratification, therefore that common saying, that God is the object of Faith,
has made of sin correction.

Cap. 7. That the law was given not to hold still the old people in it, but
to nourishe the hope of salvation in Christ, until his coming.
FIrst he generally shows that the law, yt is, the whole form of religion
delivered from God to the old people, by the hand of Moses, does many ways
direct us to Christ, as by sacrifices, Heb. 8.5. Act. 7.44. Exo. 28.11. Exo.
10.6. 1. Pet. 2.9. Gal. 3.14. Esai. 5.3. Dan. 9. Psalm. 1.10.14. Romans 10.4. 2.
Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.19.
washings, and a great heap of ceremonies, the use whereof must needs be
condemned of vanity, if they should be considered without Christ.

2 By the Priesthood also in the Tribe of Leuy, and by the Kyngly digninitie
which was advanced in the house of David, and by the Moral law.

3 Moreover seeing the Moral law does make the same plain, he orderly
staieth in the same. The same vndoubttedly does drive us far from life, and
adiudge to eternal death after that perfect righteousness before GOD is
showed, Deu. 30.19.
because we cannot attain thereunto that it may encourage, us to seek
remedy in Christ.

4 Yet the promises, of the Moral law although they be condicionall, yet were
they given for good cause.

5 Neither ought it to seem absurd to any man, that he proves, that the
keeping of the law is impossible, how soever Hierome, but chiefly the
Pelagians have otherwise thought. Not one of the holy men that have been
clothed with the body of death, has ever attained to the full perfection of
love, to love GOD with all his heart, with all his mind, with all his soul,
1. King. 8.46. Psalm. 100.43. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Matthew. 19.25.26. Liber de
Spiritu and Littera.
and with all his power; there has been none that has not bin troubled with
concupiscence. Augustine says, that in this flesh we never yield to God the
dear love that we owe him. Love, says he, so follows knowledge, that no
man can perfectly love God, but he that has first fully known his goodness:
we while we wander in this world, see by a glass and in a dark speech: It
follows then that our love is imperfect, let this therefore remain, Romans 8.9^
that in this flesh it is impossible to fulfill the law.

6 But that the whole matter may be made more plain, that is, how the law does
bring us to Christ, let us deligently behold the office and use of the Moral
law, which he thinks must be divided into three principal places: the first,
whereof is, that while it shows to every man the righteousness of GOD, that
is the righteousness which only is accepted to GOD, it does admonish,
certify, prove guilty, yea and condemn every man of his own
unrighteousness. Paul says, That he knew not lust, Romans 7.7.
except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust, because except it be by the
law disclosed out of her lurking hooles, it destroys miserable man so
secretly, that he feels not the deadly dart thereof.

2. Cor. 3.11.
7 The law therefore, seeing it is as a certain glass, wherein we behold
first our weakness, and by that our wickedness, and last of all, by them
both, Romans 3.22. and 5.20.
our accursednesse, does arm the wrath of GOD to the destruction of the
sinner: Romans 4.15.
Yet it does not thereby follow that the law either should be reproched, or
loose any thing of the excellency thereof.

8 Yet the iniquity and condemnation of us all, is not therefore sealed by the
testimony of the law, to cast us down in desperation, and with discouraged
minds to tumble down headlong (although the same be wrought in the reprobate)
but that leaving the fond opinion of our own strength, Romans 3.19. Romans 11.33.
being naked and Empty, we may flee to the mercy of God. And how that may be
done, that is to say, that we rest upon it, hide our selves in it, take hold
of it alone in steed of righteousness and merits which is laid open in Christ
for all men. For God in the co^mandementes of the law, appears but a rewarder
of perfect righteousness, whereof we all are destitute, and on the other side, a
rigorous judge of evil doings. But in Christ his face shines full of grace
and lenity even toward the wretched and unworthy sinners.

9 This profit which it has toward the faithful. Augustine both manyfestly
and often has noted, but the other which it has toward the reprobate, he
does not, albeit the same is to be marked.

10 The second office and use of the law is, that they which are touched which
no care of that which is just and right, unless they be compelled when they
hear the terrible penal ordinances, may be restrained, at least with the
fear of punishment. And although hereby they become never the better before
God, ^. Tim. 1.9.
yet is it very necessary for the public state of men, not only for the
reprobate, but also for the elect, before they are regenerate.

11 First, for every man to show his own misery; moreover, to keep every one
in his duty: at leastwise that they loose not the raines to the
lasciviousness of their flesh, that they fall altogether from the study of
righteousness. ^al. 2^.


12 The third office of the Law (which is the most principal and proper)
concerns only the faithful. And the same is first, to instruct them
faithfully, or more assuredly, Psalm. 19.7.8. Psalm. 119.10^
daily more and more of the will of God: Moreover to stir them up by
exhortation to obedience.

13 Therefore that profane opinion ought to depart far out of our mind, that
is, that it is not agreeable for Christians to clean to the doctrine of the
law, which contains the ministration of the death: for Moses taught
excellently well, Deuteronomy. 31.6. Psalm. 119.97.
that that same law which with sinners can engender nothing but death, ought
in the holy to have a better and more excellent use.

And taking this occasion he disputes of the abrogation of the Law, first of
the abrogation of the Moral law 14. 15, then of the Ceremonial. 16. 17. where
also by yt way he gives to note that he speaks nothing of the abrogating of
the civil or judicial laws.

14 In what sense the Moral law is said to have strength as yet, that is to
say, inasmuch as it has the power toward the faithful to exhort, whereas it
were by withstanding it shakes off Mat. 5.1^.18.
our sluggishnesse, and pincheth our imperfection: then he shows in what
sense it may be taken away: that is, in as much as we are delivered from the
curse, wherewith it stroke our conscices.

15 A confirmation of the former opinion that is, Gal. 3.10. Deu. 27.20. Gal.
3.12.
that Paul taught that the law was abrogated for no other cause, it is very
plain, in that he places curse for the cause, which all men know, does not
perteine to instruction, but only to the force of binding the conscience.

16 The ceremonies as touching their use, but not their effect are abrogated,
and this makes them more honorable: Coll. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. Luke. 16.26. John.
1.15.
For as they should have given but a vain show to the old people, unless
the power of the death and resurrection of Christ had been showed therein: so
if they had not ceased, we could not at this day discern to what purpose
they were ordained, we see now how in the abolishing of them, the truth
shines better than if they did still a far of and as it were in a veil spread
before show a figure of Christ, that has already plainly appeared.

17 But the reason which Paul assigns, Col. 2.13.14. Ephe. 2.14.
does not belong to the Moral law, but only to ceremonial observations,
they also are not therefore abrogated, Heb. 7.16, 19.
because they were as it were a certain partition, wherewith the Jews
differed from the Gentiles, or a let whereby the Gentiles in time past were
driven from the society of the Israelites, but much more because they were
nothing but certain solemn instruments: which witness our giltines and
uncleanness: both which since Christ by his death, has taken away, he is
worthily said to have taken away the hand writing that was against us, and
fastened it to the cross.

Cap. 8. An exposition of the Moral law.
TAking in hand to expound the Moral law, first, he sends before certain
general things from the 1. to the 5. secondly, he sets down three
observations from the sixth to the twelfth, thirdly he expounds the law
from the 13. to the 50. last of al he shows to what end the universal law
belongs, that is, not only to teach rudiments, but also perfection, from
the 51. to the 59.

The law was written to teach us more fully and perfectly, that profitable
and wholesome knowledge both of GOD and of our selves, wherein the natural law
did instruct us weakly and darkely.

2 The Law therefore does deliver us a knowledge both of GOD and of our
selves, that of the first we may learn that God of right holds the place of
a Father and Lord toward us: He delights in righteousness and
uprightness, but he abhors wickedness, both which being laid, that must
necessarily follow, that with vnweeried labor, we flee disquietnesse, and
obey righteousness, howsoever we as wasted detters, be not able to pay.

3 By the other we behold our filthiness and weakness, that being deceived
and ashamed in our selves we may seek some other help.

4 From hence it comes and from no other place, that God, not contented to
have set before us naked precepts, has also joined promises and threatninges,
and both not only contain earthly and momentary things: but also heavenly and
eternal. Eze. 184.10. Leuit. 26.4. Deuteronomy. ^8.1.
To conclude, the threats and ordinances do signify Gods sovereign pureness
that can abide no iniquity, but the promises do both witness his love to
righteousness and his bountifulness toward us.

5 But whereas the Lord giving a rule of perfect righteousness, Deuteronomy. 12.8.
Deuteronomy. 4.11.
has applied all the parts thereof to his own will, therein is declared al
fained works of vanity, and a profanation of true righteousness not to be
suffered; and that same approves ye things that are prescribed: seeing that
obedience ought to be the mother and spring of al virtues.

6 Now he comes to observations, the first whereof he would have that we
determine that ye life of man is instructed in the law, not only too o^tward
honesty, but also to the inward and spiritual righteousness: and herein he
disputes from the commandments or laws Romans 7.14.
of Magistrates.

Matthew. 5.21.
7 This he confirms by Christ's authorite.

8 The second note is, that there is always more contained in the
commandments and prohibitions, then is by the words expressed, yet so that we
have it, not as a Lesbian rule to make of every thing what we list, but to
search the end of the commandment, till we find what the Lawgiuer does
properly witness does please or displease him, then also that by him, we may
be led to a contrary reasoning.

9 If it be prohibitorie it does not only forbid evil, but also does
manifestly command contrary duties. This does Christ himself plentifully and
plainly teach, when he brings back all ye commandments of ye law to Love,
which is much more greater then not to kill, not to hate, or any such like.

10 And therefore God has set down that which is most wicked in every kind of
transgression, to show what abomination there is in every one.

11 The third point is, that the law is rightly and aptly divided into two
tables: Matthew. 22.1^. Luke. 10.27.
the first whereof contains religion, without which nothing can stand
perfect; the other charity to our neighbor.

12 Moreover into ten commandments: whereof the first four are of the first
table, the six other he assigns to the second table.

13. 14. Romans 11.36. Iere. 31.33. Matthew. 22.32. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Leui. 19.2. Exo.
3.6. Amos. 12. Psalm. 80.2. Esaias. 37.16.
15 Now expounding severally the commandments of the law: he shows to what
end the preface is prefixed in the beginning, that is to say, to deliver the
law from contempt: and to this end he uses three arguments. For to this end
is it, that first he takes from them the power and right of the swoorde:
secondly he sets before them the promise of grace: Last of all by calling to
mind of a new benefit to bind them to him only.

16 The first commandment has not only this end, that god alone should have
prehemine^ce among the people: but also does command, first, that al impiety
and superstition be taken heed of; secondly that God may be worshipped with
true endeavor of piety.

17 In the second commandment there are two parts, the first restrains our
liberty: that we presume not to make subject, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
or by any form represent God who is incomprehensible: The second part
forbids us to honor any Image for religions sake.

18 The penal ordinance, which follows, is set to shake of our
sluggishnesses: and the Lord does induce us to himself being clothed and set
out with four titles, strange, jealous, a severe revenger and merciful, Iere.
3. Oze. 2.
where also he specially speaks of fervent jealousy.

Eze. 18.20. Iare. 32.18. Esaias. 39.7. Eze. 18.20.
19. 20 In what sense it is to be taken, first, yt he says, he will visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth
generation. When the Lord takes away from the house of the wicked, his grace
the light of the truth and other helps of salvation: in this that the
children being blinded and forsaken of him do go on in the steps of their
fathers, they sustain curses for their fathers offenses. But in as much as
they are put too temporal mysteries, and at last to eternal destruction, of
they are punished by the just judgment of God, not for the sins of others, but
for their own iniquity.

21 Moreover in what sense that also is to be understood of enlarging ye mercy
of God to a thousand generations. Gene. 17.7. Pro. 20.7.


22 The end of the third commandment is, that we should take heed of all
profanation of Gods majesty, and that we reverence him with holy worship: but
those things which belong to this commandment, may be divided into three
parts: that is to say, that we worship God himself, and his mysteries and his
works with all reverence. Therefore this commandment does condemn utterly
magical arts, but here is namely entreated of an oath, because therein the
froward abuse of Gods name is most detestable.

23 But he entreats not here of cursings, which contain manifest reproach
against god (as things which are unmeet to be reckoned amongst others) but of
an oath: that is, Es. 19.18. Iere. 5.7. Sopho. 15.
of taking God to witness, to confirm the truth of our speech, which if it
be rightly used, ought to be counted a kind of godly worship, if not, a
wicked profanation thereof.

Leuit. 19.12. John. 9.24. 1. Sam. 14. 2. Cor. 12.3.
24 But herein we offend 2. ways: first, if in calling ye Lord to witness, we
forswere our selves, and so reproach him.

25 Or when in using any superfluous oaths we make him vile and contemptible:
Moreover if in his steed we put in our oaths the holy servants of God or some
other thing, whosoever will make promise of any thing by an oath, he diligently
does, or at leastwise seems to labor that the truth which lies hidden,
should come unto light. But forasmuch as he cannot do it of himself, because he
sees no credit is given to him of the hearers, he sets his mind in
calling to record of some true witness: but here it must needs come into
mind that man is a Lier, and all other things, corrupt and wicked, so that ye
truth can be found in none but in god only. Herevpo^ it comes to pass by
good reason ye honest and godly me^, so often as need requires, do reuere^tly
call god to witness, and count it a heinous offense to appoint any other thing
in his place.

26 He uses three arguments against the Anabaptists which detest all oaths
without exception, Matthew. 5 34. Iac. 5.12. Exo. 22.11. John. 7.16.
because Christ said, Swear not at al. first because Christ cannot be contrary
to his father, that he should forbid or condemn the same which his father
permits and commands. Moreover by enterpreting ye place. There is only
forbidden vain oaths: and where it is said, Swear not at all, this word All,
is referred not to Swear, but to the forms of oaths: neither does Christ in
that place where he forbids them to swear by heaven and earth, and
Jerusalem, speak it to correct superstition, as some men falsely think, but he
rather confuteth their sophistical subtlety, which thought it no fault
babblingly to throw out indirect oaths, as though they spared ye holy name of
God with is ingraue^ in all his benefits.

27 Last of all by the example of Christ and his Apostles. Not only, Heb.
6.16. Gene. 214. Ruth. 3.13 1. King. 18.1^.
public oaths are lawful, but also private, adioining offenses which ye law
prescribes, which are there also recited.

28 The fourth commandment tends to this end, yt we being dead to our own
affections, should be busied in the meditation of the kingdom of God, and to
the same meditation should be exercised by such means as he has ordained, yet
it has a peculiar and several consideration from the rest, because in some
respect it is shadowish, and therefore abolished with ye other figures:
nevertheless there may be three causes assigned of this commandment: first, God
meant under a figure to set out to the people of Israel the spiritual rest,
whereby the faithful ought to cease from their own works that they might
suffer God to work in the^, secondly to have one appointed day to meet
together, to hear the law, and execute ye ceremonies, or at least to bestow it
to the meditation of his works: thirdly for servants that lived under
government of others.

Number 23.22. Eze. 20.21. Iere. 17.12.27. Exo. 31.13. Nehe. 9.14. Eze. 20.12.
Heb. 3.13.
29 The shadowing of the spiritual rest, was the principal point in the
sabbath, wherein is showed that God is our sanctifier, whereupon this follows
that we must keep holy day, least we hinder God working in us.

30 If any man require some secrets signification in the nu^mber seven: the
meaning is that the Lord by the seventh day pointed to his people the future
perfection of the Sabbath in the last day: Esai. 66.23. 1. Cor. 15.38.
whereby our whole life might by continual meditation of the Sabbath aspire to
this perfection.

31 If any man mislike this secret observation of the number, Esai. 58.13. Romans
6.4. Col. 2.16.17.
as a matter too curious, and had rather take it more simply: it makes small
matter: so that the Mystery remain which is therein principally set forth,
concerning that perpetual rest of works: yet so that the superstitious
observing of days ought to be far from Christians.

32 The two latter are the causes whereby we are enduced, Deu. 5.14. Ex. 25.12.
1. Cor. 14 40.
the Jews Saboth being abrogated, to observe the seventh day, first because
necessity requires that at appointed days we meet together to hear the
word, to break^ the mystical bread, and to public prayers. Moreover, that to
servants and laborers, yea and to cattle also, be granted their rest from
their labor.

33 Against certain unquiet Spirits which at this day complain that Christian
people are mainteyned in Iudaisme, Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.10. Romans 14.5. 1. Cor.
16.2.
because there is kept some observing of days.

Esai. 1.13.58.13
34 The old fathers have not without choice put in place of the Sabbath day the
day that we call Sunday: although superstitious necessity ought here also to
be far of: which shall be, if it be referred to the only observing of
discipline, and of well settled order.

35 The end of the fifth commandment is, that we reverence them whom the Lord
has set over us, and that we yield to them, honor, obedience and
thankfulness: 1. Tim. 5.17.
whereupon it follows, that it is forbidden us, to withdraw any thing from
their dignity, either by contempt obstinacy, or unthankfulness: and to what
end he makes mention of father and mother only.

Ex. 21. Leui. 20.9. Leui. 10.9. Pro. 10.10. Deuteronomy. 21.1^. Mat. 15.4. Ephe. 5.1.
Col. 3.20.
36 It makes no difference whether they be worthy or unworthy, to whom this
honor is yielded. where also is confirmed that those three kinds of honor are
due to him.

37. 38 To what end the promise is added, and in what sense it is to be taken
and how far also we must obey our elders. But I think that this promise is
not only to be extended to every singular person, but much more to every one
universally. As this may be ye meaning besides the common sense, that they shall
have a happy state of a commonwealth, so long as they obey their Magistrates:
but then shall they have it most miserable, so sone as they break this
commandment which after happened to the Israelites, as all men know.

39 This is the sum of the sixte commandment, that not only all outward
violence and wrong, but also anger, hatred, and inward desire to hurt: 1. Ioh.
3.15. Mat. 5.22.
but of the contrary part, every one ought to meditate in his mind, and
procure with all his power, the health, safety, and quiet, of every one.
Seeing that of anger and murder rises murder. When namely, he forbids this,
he does manifestly forbid all those things also, from whence they are wo^t to
take beginning. Moreover, if he kill, which when he can save, does not save:
and no man saves, whom either he hates, or does not love: hereby also it
follows, that we are murderers also of all them whom either we hate or do
not love. And to this rule is the meaning of the three Chapters next following
to be required.

40 But of this thing there are two causes (to speak nothing here of the
arguments which may be drawn from our redemption in Christ) that is, because
man is both the image of GOD and our flesh.

41 The sum of the seventh commandment is, that we be defiled with no
uncleanness or lustful intemperance of the flesh: and that we chastely and
continently order all the parts of our life: but chiefly seeing the Lord
helps us in this behalf when he instituted marriage.

42 The gift of continency is only in the hand of God: to some men altogether
denied, Mat. 19.12. Cor. 7.7.
to other granted, but for a time.

1. Cor. 7.2.9. 1. Cor. 6.24.
43 So long every man may abstain from marriage, as he shall be meet to live
to keep single estate: if he go beyond, he strives with God, and nature
appointed by him.

44 Married folks also must take heed, that they lose not the raynes to filthy
lust, so that they ought rather to be compted adulterers of their wives, the^
husbands: to conclude in this commandment is condemned whatsoever they offend
in mind, with their eyes, or with wanton attire, or with the tongue, or with
immoderate use of meat or drink, against the laws of chastity. To this
place does belong this, either to give ear to filthy talk, to live idly,
to make a show of single life, to refuse marriage, when thou can not live
chastely, and what so ever may be thought, whereby incontinency may rise, or
occasion to pollute the same.

45. 46 The sum of the eight commandment is, that we gape not after other
men's goods, and therefore we are commanded every man to employ his faithful
travel, to preserve to each man his own goods, and not that only, but whom
we see fallen in poverty, to communicate to their necessities, and in sum to
pay what so ever, that which every one in his order and place, either private
or Magistrate, owes to his neighbors.

47. 48 The end of the nienth commandment is, that we neither hurt any man's
name either with flaunders or false reports, nor hinder in his goods by lying.
Finally, that we hurt no man by lust to speak evil, (...). 23.1. Leui. 19.15.
or to be busy, but that we employ our faithful endeavor to every man, as
farrefoorth as is lawful, in affirming the truth, to defend the safety both
of his name and goods.

49. 50 The end of the last commandment is, that no thought creep into us
which may move our minds with a concupiscence hurtful and turning to an
others loss, but whatsoever we conceive, purpose, will, or study upon, be
joined with the benefit and commodity of our neighbors. And this
commandment may easily be distinguished by a distinction of purpose and
concupiscence (which yet on the other side ought to differ from a naked
fantasy. They also do foolishely, which divide this commandment into two
parts.

51 The ten Commandments being now expounded, Deu. 10.12. Deu. 6.5. and
1^.13. Matt. 22.37. Romans 13.10. 1. Tim. 1.5.
he shows to what end the whole law does belong: that is, to the example
of pure godliness, to the fulfilling of righteousness: not to deliver only the
rudimentes and first introductions of righteousness.

52 Where as Christ and the Apostles in rehearsing the sum of the Law, do
leave out the first Table: Mat. 5.13. Mat. 19.2^
and stand only upon the second, they do it to this end, because therein is
more perceived the study of righteousness and integrity, than in the first.

53 Yet it is not more auailable to the Son of righteousness to live
innocently with men, Psa. 1^.2. Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 3.14. Romans 13.8. Gal. 5.14. Mat.
7.12.
then with true godliness to honor God. But because a man does not easily
keep charity in all points, unless he earnestly fear GOD: therefore it is
thereby proved that he has godliness also.

54 Then at length shall our life be well ordered to Gods will, and the rule
of his law, when in all points it shall be profitable to our brethren. we are
far from granting the chief parts to self love, with the Sorbonist
Sophisters.

55 And although as every one is most near us, so ought we more familiarly to
help them with our endeavors: yet the most stranger and every kind of man is
to be imbrased without exception, with one affection of charity: and therefore
it is meet that we cast not our eyes upon men, but upon God.

56 The schoolmen therefore in these things have two ways been swallowed up
from the right way: First because of the commandments touching not desire of
reuengement and loving of our enemies, they have taken counsel: posting over
their necessary obedience, not to all Christians, but to Monks only.

57 It is showed by the Scriptures and the Fathers, that they are therefore to
be blamed, in this name, and both do confute the reasons they allege (that is)
because they are too heavy and weighty: Moreover because it becomes not
Christians which are under the law of grace, to be tied with so straight a
bond. The Monks ascribe the place of Matthew, Love your enemies, etc. to
themselves only: and so belike send all other Christians to the Gentiles and
Publicans. For Christ says, if they be friendly to your friends, etc. Mat.
5.46.
So we shall be in good case no doubt, if the title of Christians be left unto
us, and the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven taken from us. Augustine
says, August. de doc^^. Christi. Cap. 30.
When the Lord forbids to commit fornication, he no less forbids to
touch the wife of thine enemy, then of thy friend: When he forbids theft,
he gives leave to steal nothing at all, either from thy friend or from thine
enemies. But these two, not to steal, and not to commit fornication, Romans 13.^
Paul brings within the compass of the rule of Love, and teaches that they
are contained under this Commandment, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy
self.

58 Moreover because they call it venial sin, both secret ungodliness
which is against the first table, and also the direct transgressyng of the
last Commandment, Romans 6.23.
both are confuted, by plain reasons, first severally:

59 Moreover jointly: and there is no venial sin but that in the elect,
Mat. 5.19. ^ze. 18 20. Romans 6.23.
and that not of the nature thereof, but because they obtain pardon by Gods
mercy all other are mortal.

Cap. 9. That Christ although he was known to the Jews under the law, yet
was delivered only by the Gospel.
CHrist is more plainly revealed to us in the Gospel, Mal 42. 1. Pet. 1.12.
Ioh. 5.46. Mat. 13.16. Luc. 10.23. Ioh. 8.56. Ioh. 1.18. Hebr. 1.1. 2. Cor.
4.6. 2. Cor. 3.11. 3. Cor. 4.4.
then he was to the Fathers under the law, but yet many of detestable
unthankfulness and perverseness are more blind now at midday, than the
Fathers were because their mynds are darkened by Satan, that they should not
see the glory of Christ shining in the Gospel, though there be no veyle set
between them and it.

2 How so ever the word of the Gospel being largely taken, Mat. 4.9. Mar.
1.1. 2. Tit. 1.10. Ioh. 1.11.
comprehends under it those testimonies which the Lord in times past bestowed
of his mercy on the Fathers, yet the Gospel properly and specially ought to be
called the publishing of grace given in Christ. 1. Tim. 4.^.
Where Paul calls the Gospel the doctrine of Faith, he compares Faith
against those terrors wherewith the conscience should be troubled and vexed, if
salvation were to be sought by works. Again all the promises that we here and
there find in the law, concerning free forgiveness of sins, whereby God
reconcileth men to him self, are accounted parts thereof.

3 Here we must take heed of the deuilish error of Seruetus, which utterly
abolisheth the promises, Romans 8.24. Col. 8.27.
as if they were ended together with the law, and that by Faith of the Gospel
there were brought unto us the accomplishment of the promises: 1. Tim. 4.8. 2.
Tit. 1.1. 2. Cor. 7.1.
as though we should otherwise wholly enjoy Christ, but so far as we
embrace him clothed with his promises, although Christ offer unto us in his
Gospel present fullness of spiritual good things, yet the enjoying thereof
lies still under the keeping of hope, till being unclothed of the
corruptible flesh, we be transfigured into the glory of them that go before
us.

4 And hereby also is their error convinced, Romans 1.16.
which do otherwise never compare the law with the Gospel, but as they
compare the merits of works with the free imputation of righteousness. Mat.
11.11. Ioh. 1.23. Mal. 4.5. Job. 5.35.


5 John Baptist obtained an office, which was a mean between the Prophets and
Apostles.

Cap. 10. Of the likeness of the new, and old Testament.
HE judges that in the mean time we must look, because of Seruetus and
certain Anabaptists, and what resemblaunce, and what diversity that covenant
has, which the Lord made with the Israelites in the old time before the
coming of Christ, and what covenant he has now made with us, since Christ
has been openly showed.

2. 3 First he teaches the same in general, that is, that they are all one in
matter and substance, but diverse in administration, but that the matter may be
more plain, he severally speaks of both, first, Romans 1.2. and 3.21. Ephesians.
1.13. Col. 1.4. 1 These. 2.14. Romans 3.19.
he proves that there are things wherein in all points they do agree. The
first is, that the old Testament as well as the new, did not only belong to
the carnal wealth and felicity, but much more to the hope of immortality and
life to come.

4 The which being constituted, Ioh. 8.5.6. Heb. 13.8. Lu. 1.5.4.7.2.
the other two follow of them selves, that is to say, that both stood upon the
free mercy of God, and also was confirmed by the mean of Christ.

5 But seeing that the two last depend of the first, he stands to the end of
the Chapter in proving the same only. And first he proves the same by the
testimony of the Apostle: which reasons with a like signification of
Sacraments: ^. Cor. 10.3
that their estate was like unto ours.

^ob. 6.49.
6 And because many to mock this argument, are wont to object that which Christ
says: Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead
nevertheless: but they that eat his flesh shall never dye. He shows that
this place does make nothing against him: For Christ tempereth his talk
somewhat according to their capacity, because they desired only to be fed
with the food of their belly, but cared not for the meat of the soul,
desiring him that he would approve his power with miracles as Moses did in the
Wilderness, who obtained Manna from heaven: but he answered that he is the
minister of a much higher grace, in the communion whereof, the carnal feeding
of the people which alone they so much esteemed, ought of right to be nothing
regarded: but Paul because he knew that the Lord when he had reigned Manna
from heaven, did not only power it down for the ^eeding of their belly,
whereunto they had respect, but also did distribute it for a spiritual
mystery, to be a figure of the spiritual quickenyng that is had in Christ,
did not neglect that part as most necessary. Whereupon it follows, that the
same promises of eternal and heavenly life, which now the Lord vouchsafes to
grant unto us, 1. Pet. 1.23. Esai. 11.6.
were not only communicated unto the Jews, but also sealed with the spiritual
Sacraments.

7 Moreover out of the old Testament that so the adversaries may more certainly
be convinced: First, Leu. 26.12. Psalm. 144.15. Psalm. 33.12. Aba. 1.12. Esai.
33.21. Deu. 32.29. Leu. 26.12. Exo. 6.7.
because such effectual force of life is in the word of God, that whosoever
God vouchsafes to be partakers thereof, he separateth them into hope of
eternal life.

8 Moreover by the words of the covenant that God promises that he will be
their God, and they shall be his people. He did not declare yt he would be a
God to their bodies only, but principally to their souls. But souls unless
they be joined to God by righteousness, remain estra^ged from him by death, but
let yt joining be present, it shall bring everlasting salvation with it.

^en. 17.7. Ex. 20.6. and 3.6. Mat. 22.23. Luke 20.32. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
9 That he does not only promise that he will be their GOD, but he does
also promise, that he will be so for ever.

10 Fourthly, that the Lord did exercise our fathers with every kind of
temptation, yt they should not hope that they should receive their blessing in
this life: but that they might know that a better life was laid up for them,
Genesis 3.17. Genesis 4.8.
and leaving the earthly life should meditate upon the same. This he shows by
many examples, first of Adam, Abell, and Noe.

11 Moreover of Abraham.

Genesis 12.1^.
12 Thirdly, of Isaak and Jacob. Genesis 26.35. and 28.1.5. and 29.20. and 31.23.
and 32.11. and 35.16. and 37.35 Ge. 34.2. and 35 12 and Ge. 36.18. and 42.32.
Ge. 47.9.

13 Whereby he concludes that they looked for the accomplishme^t of ye lords
promises, not in the earth, but in place elsewhere: Heb. 11.9. Genesis 47.9.
and for yt cause, they have showed that this life was nothing but a
pylgrimage, and they greatly esteemed the burial of ye land of Canaan: both
which was a figure of eternal felicity.

14 Fifthly, that by the example of Jacob so much desiring the birthright: Genesis
49.18. Number. 23.1^ Psalm. 34.22.
it may appear that all they had the felicity of the life to come set before
them in all the studies of their life, and not only the Saints, but also Balaam
him self wanted not a taste of such understanding.

15 Sixthly, that David him self promised him self so great and excellent
things from the Lord: Psalm. 39.13. Esaias. 51.6.
who notwithstanding will have this life to be nothing else but vanity: whereupon
it follows, that he has his felicity laid up in an other place, and looks
for that salvation which is joined with gods eternity.

16 Seventhly, that ye may no otherwise take that which here and there he
speaks of the prosperous success of the faithful, Psalm. 97.10. Psalm.
112.7.9.
but as they may be applied to the open showing of the heavenly glory: Seeing
here they are oppressed with all kind of evil.

17. 18 And in this sense have all the faithful received these promises,
Psalm. 17.15. Job. 21.13. Psalm. 49.7. Prou. 10.7.
that they might lift up their eyes to Gods Sanctuary, wherein they had that
laid up in store, 2. Sam. 29. Eze. 2. l. 10.33.
which appears not in the shadow of this present life.

19 Eighthly, that Job has openly disputed hereof, Job. 1^.25.
neither can any man here carpe and say, that these were the sayings but of a
few, and for that cause it cannot plainly be proved hereby that such
doctrine was not among the Jews received: which how foolish it is he shows.

20 Last of all, if I come down to the latter Prophets, the victory is very
easy, because how much the nearer it drue in process of time to the full
performance thereof, with so much greater increasments of revelation, he did
day by day more brightly show it, but chiefly if this one thing be observed,
that so often as the Prophets do call to mind, the blessedness of the faithful
people, it was not to the intent they should search the same, in this present
life: but that in temporal benefits, as by certain portraitures, they should
conceive such in their minds as might ravish them, out of the elements of the
world, and the age that shall perish.

21 This he plainly shows by one example taken out of Ezechiell of the dry
bones which served to correct their incredulity at ye time, Eze. 37.4.
Esaias. 26.19.
and to show how far the power of the Lord extended beyond the account of
the people.

22 There are also some places in the Prophets that without any covering do
show the immortality to come, Esaias. 66.22. Dani. 12.1.
that is prepared for the faithful in the kingdom of God.

23 The conclusion of the whole chapter where again are alleged certain
testimonies of scripture for a more fuller confirmation, Matthew. 8.12. Acts.
3.29. 2. Cor. 3.14.
and as well the Saduces as the Jews are reprehended.

Cap. 11. Of the difference of the one testament from the other.
THere are five differences between the old and the new Testament which
rather belong to the manner of ministration, then to the substance of them. The
first was that in the old testament the Lord exhibited and showed the
heavenly inheritance to be viewed and tasted of under earthly benefits: but
now he straightly directs our minds to the same forsaking such inferior
helps.

Gal. 4.1.
2 This does better appear in a similitude which the Apostle has put of a
young heir within age, which being not able to govern him self, follows
the guiding of ye Tutor to whose custody he is committed. The same
inheritance was appointed them that is appointed us: the same custom was among
them: but whereof the age was childish, Gene. 15.1.10. Psalm. 37.26. Psalm.
106.5. Job. 18.17
therefore the Lord kept them under his scholing that he gave them not the
spiritual promises so naked, and openly, but as it were shadowed with earthly
promises.

3 And for this cause the fathers esteemed this life, and the blessing thereof
sometime of great price.

4 The difference is, that the old testament, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7.11. Matthew.
26.20.
while it shadowed all things in Ceremonies in the absence of the truth, it
did show only an image, and shadow in steed of a body: but but the new
Testament gives the truth present, and the sound body it self.

5 And hereupon it comes to pass that we are saved by the scholing of the
law to be led unto Christ. Gal. 3.24. Matthew. 11.13. Col. 1.9.


6 Neither does that make against us, that there can scarcely any one be found
in the Christian Church that in excellency of faith, Matthew. 13.17. Luke.
10.13. 1. Pet. 1.2.
may be compared with Abraham: or that the Prophets excelled in such force of
spirit, that even at this day they lighten the whole world withal.

7 The third difference is that which is taken out of Jeremy and Paul, Iere.
31.31. 2. Cor. ^.5.
of putting the law of God in ye bowels of the faithful, and writing those
things in their hearts, whereof he generally entreats first.

8 Then he compares every thing by it self by peecemale, where also you may
find a good and substantial comparison between the Law and the Gospel: The
old, is literal, because it was published without the effectual working of
the spirit: the new is spiritual, which the Lord has spiritually engraven in
the hearts of men. The old law is deadly, because it can do nothing but wrap
mankind within the curse. The new is the instrument of life, because it
delivers from the curse and restores into favor with GOD. The old law is
the ministry of damnation, because it condemns all Adams children of
unrighteousness. The new is the ministry of righteousness because it reuealeth
the mercy of God by which we are made righteous.

9 The fourth difference is that the scripture calls the old Testament, Romans
8.18. Heb 12.18. Gal. 4.21.
the testament of bondage, for that it enge^dereth fear in men's minds: but
the new is called the Testament of liberty, because it raised them up to
confidence and assurednes. When the same is showed by three arguments he wipeth
away the objection.

10 Those three last differences are comparisons of the Law and the Gospel:
but the first is farther extended, that is, to the promises which were showed
before the law, which he shows out of Augustine are not to be reckoned
under the name of the old testament, seeing they which had them were directed
to the mediator: as also the Fathers which afterward lived under the old
testament. Augustine had regard to the saying of Jerome and Paul, where the
old law is severed from the word of mercy and grace. Iere. 31.31. 2. Cor.
2.3.4.5. Matthew. 11.13.
Our Savior Christ does make distinction between the clearenesse of the
Gospel, and the darker distribution of the word that went before.

11 The fifth difference that the old Testament did belong to one people only:
Deuteronomy. 31.8. Acts. 14.16.
The new Testament to all men. For he suffered other nations to walk in
vanity, as though they had not any intercourse, or any thing to do with him:
neither did he to help their destruction give them that which was only the
remedy, namely the preaching of his word: Israel was then ye Lords son, his
own darling other were strangers: Israel was known to him and received into
his charge and protection, other were left to their own darkness: Israel was
sanctified by GOD, other were profane: Gal. 4.4. Ephe. 2.14. Psalm. 2.8.
Israel was honored with the presence of god, other were excluded from coming
nigh to him till the fullness of time.

Phi. 2.9. Matthew. 15.24. Col. 10.11.
12 By occasion whereof he ioineth rather a substantial than an excellent
declaration of the calling of the Gentiles.

13 But that these things may better appear, he answers to two objections
wherewith this doctrine of the difference of the old and new Testament is wont
to be trobled. The first whereof is, that it is not likely ye God which does
always agree with himself, could suffer such alteration, that he should
disalowe that which once he has allowed, to which he answers in this
place: in this wise, if ye father of a household do instruct, rule, and order
his children of one sort in childhoode, of an other in youth, and of an other,
in man's state, we can not say, that he is fickle and forsakes his own
purpose. Paul makes the Jews like unto children, and christians like unto
young men: what disorder is there in this government of God, Gal. 4.4.
that he held them in their childish lessons, which according to the capacity
of their age were fit for them. and enstructed us with stronger and as it were
more manly discipline.

14 The last is, that from the beginning he could deal as well with the
Jews, as nows after Christ's coming, with us. Against this objection he
entreats generally: Moreover he prosecuteth those two parts of abrogating
Ceremonies and calling of the Gentiles.

Cap. 12. That it behooued that Christ to perform the office of the Mediator,
should be made man.
FIrst he proves generally, that it was necessary, not absolutely, 1. Tim.
^.3. Heb. 4.1^.
but by Gods decree, that whosoever should be Mediator should be GOD and man.

2 Moreover by the office that the Mediator had to do, that is, that he should
so restore us into Gods favor, that he should make us of the children of men
the children of God; and of heirs of hell fire, John. 10.17. Romans 8.17
the heirs of the heavenly kingdom: and to bring this to pass, it was
necessary, first that he should be God:

3 Then that he should be man.

Col. 1.15 Esaias. 53.45. John. 19.14 Matthew. 9.12. Heb. 5.1 Romans 8.3 Luke. 24.26
John. 3.14 Col. 2.3 ^. Cor. 2.2
4 This cause of Christ's incarnation ought to suffice, to restrain al vain
speculations: of which sort he recites one, that Christ should have been man,
although there had been no need of remedy to redeem mankind. This vanity
(which a little after he ascribes to Osiander) the better to take away, first
he teaches that all the scriptures do witness, that he was promised from
the beginning to restore the world fallen into ruin, and to succor men being
lost, and this he shows very plainly, and in order, first by the law: then
by the Prophets: thirdly by Christ him self: fourthly, by the Apostles: last,
by all together.

5 Moreover how vain and wicked rashness it is, that such tickle headded
spirits, do imagine that none of these do prove the contrary, Ephe. 4.5. 1.
Tim. 1.15. Tit. 3.9 Ephe. 4.22
but that the same Christ that redeemed men being damned, might also in putting
on their flesh, testify his love toward them, being preserved and safe.

6 After he confuteth the principle of Osiander, that is to say, that man was
to this end created to the image of God, because he was fashioned after the
pattern of Christ to come, that he might resemble him, whom the father had
decreed to cloth with our flesh. Whereupon he gathers, that if Adam had not
fallen, yet Christ should have been man: which is false, for man was created
after the image of GOD, Genesis 1.27 Col. 3.10.
in whom the Creators will was, to have his glory seen as in a looking glass:
to this degree of honor was he advanced by the benefit of ye only begotten
son, who is a common head to angels as well as to me^.

7 And he confuteth certain other objections and absurdities: Heb. 4.10 1.
Cor. 15.47. Luke. 3.38 Ephe. 3.30
That Christ should be borne man by an accident cause, contrary to the
scriptures: that he should not be head over Angels, unless it had been
purposed by GOD to his son with flesh, which is false.

Cap. 13. That Christ took upon him the true substance of the flesh of man.
Genesis 17.7. Psalm. 45.7. Matthew. 1.1. Romans 3. Matthew. 4.4. Heb. 1.11. John. 16.16.
FIrst the simple truth of the thing is proved by many places of scripture, for
the blessing is promised neither in a heavenly seed, nor in the counterfeite
shape of man, but in the seed of Abraham, and Jacob, neither is the eternal
throne promised to a man of the air, but to the son of David, and the fruit
of his womb.

2 Moreover the Marcionites, which imagined that Christ had put on a
fantastical body in steed of a true body; and the Manichies, which framed
Christ a body of heaven, or of the air are first confuted. The Marcionites
maintain their error by this, that in some places it is said, yt he was made
after the likeness of man, and that he was found in shape as a man. But the
Apostle there does not teach what manner of body Christ took upon him, but that
whereas he might have showed forth his Godhead, Phi. 2.7. 1. Pet. 3.18 2. Co.
13.4.
he made none other show of himself, but as of an abject and unregarded man.
He teaches not what Christ was, but how he behaved himself, the Manichies
framed Christ a body of the air, because he is called the second Adam,
heavenly of heaven. But the apostle in that place does not bring in a heavenly
essence of the body, but a spiritual force, which being powered abroad by
Christ does quicken us. 1. Cor. 15.16 Psalm. 8.4. Heb. 2.14. Romans 8.29 Genesis
3.15.
If Christ had not all one nature with us, Paul had reasoned in vain that if
Christ be risen again, we shall also rise again, etc.

3 They are also proved to do no less foolishly then wickedly, Gal. 3.18.
Romans 1.3. Psalm. 132.11. Matthew. 1.5.
while they entangle with Allegories, these testimonies, where Christ is called
the seed of Abraham: and the fruit of the womb of David, by occasion whereof
certain things are noted of the Genealogy of Christ: and first of all that
is confuted which some new Marcionits go about, that women are without seed.

4 Last of al there is answered to certain their absurdities wherewith this
doctrine is troubled with men of that sort. Romans 5.12 1. Cor. 15.47 Romans 8.3


Cap. 14. How the two natures of the mediator, do make one person.
FIrst he delivers the doctrine of the two natures in Christ, from the first
to the fourth. Secondly, he enwageth battle against the accursed error of
Seruetus, of Christ being a son.

1 As touching the first part of the Chapter, he proves that there may be
two natures in Christ, the first, drawn from a similitude, which is of the
conjunction of the body and soul, where it is said, John. 1.14
That the word is made flesh, that is not so to be understood, as though it
were either turned into flesh, or confusedly mingled with flesh: but because he
chose him a temple of the virgins womb to dwell in. He that was the son of
God, became also the son of man, not by confusion of substance, but by v^itie
of person, the similitude of man is fittest for this mystery, who consists
of soul and body, whereof neither is so mingled with the other, but that
either keeps his own nature, for that may be spoken of the soul, which
cannot be spoken of the body, and that may be said of the body, that cannot be
said of ye soul.

2 Moreover from the testimonies of scriptures, and first such as do severally
express both. Ioh. 58. Col. 1.15. Io. 17 5. Ioh. 5.17. Es. 42.1. Lu. 1.52.
Ioh. 8.50. Mat. 13.32. Ioh. 14.10. Luke 24.39.

3 Moreover of many other which teach neither severally, but both jointly.
John. 12.29. John. 15.5. Ioh. 12.46. 1. Cor. 15.24. Phi. 2.8. Heb. 2.6. Phi.
2.10. 1. Cor. 8.6.

4 These things tend to this point, that we, with certain frantike spirits,
deny not Christ to be God, because he is man; or man, because he is God; or
neither man nor GOD, because he is both God and man; neither yet with Nestorius
we so draw asunder the natures of Christ, that we should make a double Christ;
or with Eutiches, confound ye natures, so yt when we would declare the unity, we
destroy both natures.

5 As touching the other, since Seruetus does not acknowledge him to be the
son of God, Romans 8.15. Psalm. 82.7. Col. 1.15.
but in this that he was begotten of the holy Ghost, in the womb of the
virgin: first he proves that he was the son of God from eternity.

6 Moreover he confirms his judgments, that is, because otherwise i^ should
necessarily follow, Romans 1.2. 2. Cor. 13.4 Romans 9.2
that he in respect of humane nature, is the son: although in mean time he
grant that the man Christ is called, and is the son of God: but not as the
faithful are, yet the son of God in respect of duty, as also he is called
man according to flesh.

7 Thirdly he shows two testimonies of scriptures, which Seruetus alleges
for him self, Romans 8.32 Luke. 1.32 1. John. 1 1 Miche. 5.2 Ephe. 4 15 ^rou.
30.4
to prove that he in respect of his humanity, is called the son of God does
make nothing for him. He shows also ye an other false malitioous allegation
whereby he imagines that before Christ appeared in the flesh, he was never
called the son of God, but under a figure, is vain: to conclude all the
Fathers stand with us howsoever they dare object to Irenaeus and Tertullian.

8 Last of all, he concludes that all they which acknowledge not the son of
God but in the flesh, do no otherwise acknowledge the Son, but as he is
conceived of the holy Ghost, as though he had human nature by deriuation from
God, because he breathed into Adam the breath of life. As the Manichies
sometime did imagine. Genesis 2^. Thus the eternal begetting of wisdom is
destroyed. Eccle. 2.14.
And as touching certain of Seruetus errors which tend to this point, he
accompteth it vain, to open their just confutation. Notwithstanding he
briefelye touches many of them.

Cap. 15. That we may know to what end Christ was sent of his Father, and what
he brought us: three things are principally to be considered in him, his
prophetical office, his kingdom, and his Priesthood.
The Papists being content with vain pretense of the name, spoil him of his
power and dignity, and therefore are without a head. Col. 2.19. Ioh. 4.25.
Esai. 55.4. Hebr. 11. Psa. 24.9 Dan. 9.2 Esai. 61.1 Mat. 3.17 Joel 2.22 1. Cor.
1.30 Col. 2.3. 1. Cor. 2.2.
CHrist is found out not in deed, but in name, unless it be among them, which
acknowledge him effectually and not coldly, a Prophet, a King, and a Priest. As
touching the first, all other Prophets, they did in the mean time so lighten
the Churches with their prophesies, that yet after a sort they kept it in
suspense till the coming of the Mediator, which should teach al things.

2 Although by peculiar consideration and respect of his kingdom, he be called
anointed, yet in him the prophetical and Priestly anointing, have their
place. He is therefore anointed and Prophet: and truly not so much for him
self, as for us. And to this end tends his prophetical dignity, yt we might
know that in the sum of the doctrine which he has taught, are contained all
points of perfect wisdom.

Luc. 1.33 Psalm. 89.36 Es. 53.8 Psalm. 1.34 Psalm. 110.1 Ioh. 18.36
3 Speaking of his kingdom, first he affirms it to be spiritual, not earthly
or worldly, yet is it of such force, that it always defends ye universal
church, and every member against every preparation of the devil, and also
establishes and confirms to every and singular Christian, immortality, as
those yt are grounded upon the eternal seat of God.

4 And because it is spiritual, therefore it is to be known, that whatsoever
felicity is promised us in Christ, it consists not in outward commodities,
Luke 17.28
but it is spiritual, and lifts us up to eternal life. Romans 14.17
And there are two things which thereby come unto us: first that he enricheth us
with all good things necessary to salvation: secondly, that he makes us
vnexpugnable against all the assalts of the spiritual enemy.

5 Therefore was he anointed, Esai. 11.2 Psalm. 45.8 Ioh. 3.34 Ioh. 1.16. Ephesians.
4.7. Ioh. 1.32. Luc. 3.22 1. Cor. 15.2^ 1. Cor. 15.28 Phi. 2.9 Esai. 33.22
Psalm. 29 Psalm. 110.3
not with earthly oil, but with heavenly oil, that is to say, with the holy
Ghost, and that not for him self, but to power his plenty upon us, being
hungry and dry, the spirit undoubtedly chosing his seat in Christ, that from
thence the heavenly riches might largely flow out unto us.

In that it is said, that he will yield up to God and the father his kingdom, it
must be understood in this sense, that it derogate nothing from the eternity
of his kingdom; but it does only show that the administration and government
of his kingdom shall not be such in the world to come, as it is now, but
immediately by God him self, when the office of ye Mediator shall be fulfilled.

6 As concerning the Priesthood, it is showed that he is the only Priest which
is pure from all spot, and deserved both for him self and us an entrance, and
he is the only expiation, whereby he has both satisfied for our sins, Psalm.
110.4.
and wiped away our guiltiness. And that is of great weight, that he is
appointed a Priest for ever, with that solemn oath spoken without repentance.
And for this cause not only arises an assurance to pray, but also quiet in the
godly consciences: for because we obtained by the power of his Priesthood,
Romans 1.6. I^^. 17.15. Dan. 9.24.
that we being made Priests in him, may enter freely into the heavenly
Tabernacle that all the sacrifices of prayers and praise, that come from us,
may be acceptable and sweet smelling in the sight of God. Finally, the Papists
do offend in this point of doctrine, that brag that Christ offers him self
in their Mass.

Cap. 16. How Christ has fulfilled the office of a Redeemer to purchase
salvation for us: wherein is entreated of his death and resurrection, and his
ascending into heaven.
IN this Chapter there are four principal parts. For first he speaks
generally of the whole matter, and shakes off a question very near of
alliance, from the 1. to the 4. Secondly, he shows severally how Christ has
fulfilled the office of a Redeemer, from the 5. to the 18. Thirdly, because he
has recited a good part of the Creed, he expounds what is to be thought
thereof. 18. Last of all, he joins the conclusion. 19.

1 Such sound salvation is set before us in Christ, Act. 4.12. Mat. 12.1.
that what so ever is necessary for us to search the same, we may find it
plentifully in him. Barnard says, that the name of Jesus, is not only light,
but also meat, yea and oil also without which all the meat of the soul is
dry, and also salt, without the seasoning whereof, all that is set before us
is unsavory: Finally, it is the honey in the mouth, melody in the ear,
ioyfulnes in the heart, and also medicine and what so ever is spoken in
disputation is unsavory, but where his name sounds.

2 Therefore by the way it is here to be seen in what sense it is to be taken,
that God was our enemy, till he was reconciled to us by Christ, Romans 5.10 Gal
3.10 Col. 1.21
when notwithstanding his mercy does both prevent, and also he did not delay
to give Christ willingly, which ought to be reckoned manifest signs of love:
such manner of speeches are applied to our capacity, that we may the better
understand how miserable and wretched our estate is without Christ.

3 Yet is that not falsely said: But God by means of his office and nature of
just righteousness, finds in us that which he may worthily hate till ye
guiltines be abolished through Christ, how so ever of his goodness he loves
that in the mean time which is his own. ^. Ioh. 4.29


4 This he confirms by the Scriptures and by Augustine, which are these. Ioh.
4.16 Romans 5.10 Aug. Trat. (...) Ioh. 1.10
The love of God is incomprehensible, and unchangeable: for he began not to
love us, since the time that we were reconciled to him by ye blood of his
son: but before the making of the world he loved us, even before that we
were any thing at all, that we might also be his children, with his only
begotten son, therefore where as we are reconciled by the death of Christ,
it is not so to be taken, as though the son did therefore reconcile us unto
him, that he might now begin to love us, whom he hated before: for we are
reconciled to him that already loved us, to whom we were enemies by reason of
sin. And whether this be true or no which I do say, Romans 5.^
let the Apostle bear witness, He does comme^d, says he, his love toward
us, because when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, he therefore had a love
to us, even the^ when we were enemies to him, and wrought wickedness. Therefore
after a marvelous and divine manner he loved us, even then when he hated us:
for he hated us, in that we were such as he had not made, and because our
wickedness had on every side wasted away his work, he knew how in every one
of us, both to hate that which we our selves had made, and to love that which
he had made.

Going into the second part of the Chapter, first he entreats of his death
from the 5. to the 7. Secondly, of his descending into hell, from the 8. to the
12. Thirdly, of his resurrection. 13. Fourthly, of his ascension into heaven,
and sitting at the right hand of his Father, from the 14. to the 16. Last of
all, of his return unto judgment, 17. and 18

Romans 5.19. Gal. 4.4. Mat. 3.25. Romans 4.25. Job. 1.29. Romans 3.24. 1. Cor. 5.21.
Phi. 1.7. Ioh. 10.15. Esai. 53.7. Ioh. 18.4. Mat. 27.11. Hebr. 10.5. Psalm.
40.9. Esai. 53.9.21. Mat. 15.18. Psalm. 69.5. Ioh. 18.38.
5 As concerning the death of Christ, he proves that the work of our
redemption does chiefly shine therein, how so ever he has brought it to pass
in the whole course of his life. In ye same death also his willing subjection
has the first degree, which notwithstanding was not utterly void of all
strife: as in the action he brings in two things to be considered. First
that he was condemned as a guilty person, bearing our person. Secondly, that
he was nevertheless acquitted, by the mouth of the Judge, that it might more
manifestly appear, that he was punished not for his own, but for our defalt.

6 This manner of death is not without a great mystery, since when it is both a
curse it self, and also the sign of a curse, it does manifestly show, that
we for whose cause he was accursed, are set free from the curse of the law.
Esai. 53.5.2^ 1. Cor 5.2^ Romans 8.3 Esai. 5.3.6 Gal. 3.13 Deu. 27.26 1. Pet.
2.24 Col. 2.19 Hebr. 9.17
But he so became accursed, that he was not overcome thereof: but rather in so
taking it, he brake and destroyed the whole force thereof, that our Faith
conceiueth an acquital in the condemnation of Christ, and blessing in his being
accursed: because in this his death we have the sacrifice for sins, the washing
from filthe, by the sheading of his blood.

7 He also delivered up him self in our stead, into the power of death, Heb.
2.9 Romans 6.45 Col. 3.34.^
that the same being subdued, double fruit might thereby come unto us, that is
to say, that he might deliver us from death, and kill our old man by
interpartening of him self with us.

8 The article of Christ descending into hell, was not altogether but by little
and little used in the Churches, neither yet is it utterly to be refused, as
many do, or as other would have it to be confounded with the former Ar^^cle.

9 They also are deceived which inte^prete that Christ did nothing but
descend to the souls of the Fathers, which were shut in Lymbo, but Limbus is
nothing else but a Fable. And those three places of Scripture do nothing make
for them, Psalm. 10.1^. Zach. 9.11
which of the unskillful are wont to be alleged for the establishment thereof.
For the Prophet David speaks of their deliverance, that in far countries are
cast captive in bonds. And Zachary compares the Babylonical overthrow wherein
ye people was oppressed, to a dry pit, or bottomless depthe, and therewithal
teaches, that the salvation of the whole Church is as it were a coming out of
the deep Helles. Most true it is that Christ shined to ye godly by the power
of his holy spirit, that they might know that ye grace which they had only
tasted of by hope, 1. Pet. 3.1^
was then delivered to the world: on the other side that did more plainly
appear to the reprobate, that they were excluded from all salvation.

10 11 The true and natural meaning is, Esai. 35.5 Act. 2.24 Hebr. 5.7 Psalm.
22.2 Mat. 27.4^
that in steed of the wicked dooers, it behooved him to wrestle as it were hand
to hand with the armies of hell, and the horror of death, and feeling the
rigor of Gods vengeance, and all the signs of God when he is angry and
punishes, to suffer in his soul the sharp torment of a damned and forsaken
man, which God lays in his anger upon the wicked: this one thing only
excepted, that he could not be held bound of those sorrows. This he
confirms by the testimonies of the Scripture and ancient Fathers.

12 This exposition he defends against them, Hebr. 4.15 Mat. 26.39 Act.
24.2.24 Mat. 27.47 Job. 12.7.
which maliciously cry out that by this means not only vnordinat and troubled
affections, but also desperation it self is ascribed to the son of God,
showing that Christ was so tempted in all points like unto us, that yet he
suffered not these things by violence, or compelled, neither did he at any
time sin, neither fell into any vntemperancie.

13 Coming to the resurrection, he proves that it is imperfect whatsoever we
have of his death, unless the doctrine of his resurrection be had in mind,
although sometime our salvation be only ascribed to his death, and so of the
contrary. 1. Cor. 15.17. Romans 8.34. Romans 6.4. Col. 3.5. Col. 3.2.
Therefore so often as mention is made of his death only, there is also
comprehended that which properly belongs to his resurrection: and ye like
figure of comprehensio^ is there in the word Resurrection, as often as it is
used severally without speaking of his death. Finally, there arises a triple
commodity thereof, that both he has gotten us righteousness before GOD, and
are even now by his life renewed unto newness of life, and also that it is an
earnest to us of the resurrection to come.

Ephe. 4.10 Ioh. 7.37. Ioh. 16.7. Mat. 28.20 Act. 13.19
14 As concerning his ascension into heaven: thereby he begins at length his
kingdom: Seeing also, after he was ascended into heaven, when he had
forsaken the earth, Mar. 16.1^ Hebr. 1.1.
he powered a more greater abundance of his spirit, and advanced his power
more greater, both in helping his, and also in overthrowing his enemies, yet so
is he now absent according to the presence of his body, that he is every
where present according to his Majesty, and with more present power does
govern, heaven, and earth.

15 Hereupon it follows, Ephe. 1.2^ Phi. 2.9 1. Cor. 15.2^ Ephesians. 4.15 Act. 2 39
Heb. 1.7 Act. 7.50
that which is presently added, that he sits at the right hand of his
Father, spoken by way of similitude, taken of Princes, whereby his blessedness
is signified: but much more those offices to rule and govern are committed
unto him, that both heavenly and earthly creatures may with admiration look
upon his Majesty, be governed with his hand, behold his countenance, and
be subject to his power, and it forces not that Steven saw him standing,
because we speak not here of the gesture of his body, but of the majesty of
his dominion: so that to sit, is nothing else but to be chief Judge in the
heavenly judgment seat.

Ephesians. 2.^ Hebr. 7.25 Romans 8.34 Ephe. 4.6
16 Hereof Faith gathers a triple commodity. First the Lord by his ascending
into heaven, has opened the entrye of the heavenly kingdom, which was shut
up by Adam. Moreover, that he sits with his Father as a Patron,
Intercessour, and continual Advocate, etc. Finally, that his power being
powered from thence unto us, he works many things excellently in us.

Act. 1.11 Mat. 24.30 Mat. 25.31 Hebr. 9.27 1. Tim. 4.1
17 As concerning the return of Christ to judge the quick and the dead, First
he briefly expounds the doctrine it self. Secondly, he shows in what
sense they are called quick, which shall be found alive at that day: because
some of the old Fathers have doubted in the exposition of the same word.

18 What a singular comfort thereof arises to us, Romans 5.33 Ioh. 5.22
when we hear that judgment is in his power which will be our gentle Prince,
head and Patron. And what is to be thought of this Apostles Creed.

19 Of these things which are before spoken, Act. 4.1^ Hebr. 12.17 Gal. 3.1^
it is manifest that the whole sum of our salvation, and also every part are
comprehended in Christ. And therefore we must so much the more heedily beware
that we draw not away from him any part thereof, be it never so little. And
the same is to bend from the right way, if we bend any part of our thought
any way, although we chiefly respect him.

Cap. 17. That it is truly and properly said, that Christ has deserved Gods
favor and salvation for us.
CHrist is not only the instrument or minister of salvation, Act. 3.10
but also the Author and Prince, neither is Gods grace obscured by so saying,
because the merit of Christ is not set against the mercy of GOD, but
hangs thereon, that both may well stand together, for those things which
are orderly set one under an other can not disagree.

Aug. li. 1. de pra^^st. Sanct.
The most clear light of predestination and grace, is our Savior him self, the
man Christ Jesus, which has obtained so to be, by the nature of man which is
in him, without any deserving of works, or of Faith going before, he that
made of the seed of David a man righteous, that never should be unrighteous
without any deserving of his will going before, Aug. de bon^ perseuerent. Cap.
vlt.
even the same does of unrighteous, make them righteous, that are the members
of ye head.

2 These two (that is to say, the grace of God and the merit of Christ) may
well stand together, Ioh. 3.16 Col. 1.20 2. Cor. 5 19 Ephe. 2.16 2. Cor. 5.21
as is proved by diverse places of Scripture, which knit them together, and so
truly that they grant that Christ does give somewhat of his own: because
this praise is given him severally from his Father, that it is his grace, and
proceeds from him.

3 As concerning the beginning of the cause, ^^m. 5.11.19
he proves by certain witnesses of Scripture, that Christ by his obedience
has deserved favor for us with his father.

4 The better that this same thing may appear, 1. John. 15. Luke. 22.20. Ioh.
1.29 Heb. 9.22 Gal. 3.13 Esaias. 53.57 1. Pet. 2.2^
he shows that it happens to us by the death of Christ, or the sheding of
his blood.

5 And so truly, that he has not obtained it freely, but has paid a price to
deliver us from the giltinesse death. To. 3.24. 1. Pe. 1.18. 1. Cor. 6.20. Col.
1.14 Col. 5.2.14. Gal. 2.21. Leui. 18.5. Act. 13 38. Gal. 4.4. Rom 4.5. Ioh.
6.55. Ephesians. 3.2. To. 4.25. Ioh. 6.57. Phi. 1.29.

6 It is a foolish curiosity to search with the schoolmen whether Christ
deserved for him self or no: Romans 8.3^ Esaias. 9.6 John. 17.19 Phi. 2.9 Luke.
24.26
seeing it was neither needful that he should be careful for him self:
neither do the Scriptures teach that he was given for him self, but for us.

The third book entreats of the manner how to receive the grace of
Christ, and what profit does grow unto us, and what effects thereof.
The Argument.
THE principal places which he entreats of in this book are seven: all
which notwithstanding after a sort, yet the chiefest part clearly do belong
to the entreating of faith. And first he shows how it comes to pass,
that those things profit us which are spoken of Christ, that is to say, not
by our own power, but by the secret and special working of the spirit,
Chapter first. Moreover because the spirit works this good only, by no
other means then by faith, he joins a just entreatie of faith, Chapter 2.
Thirdly, to the intent that this wholesome faith may the better be made known,
showing what fruit does necessarily come thereof, he proves that true
repentance does always proceed from it, and reasons much thereof, from the
third to the tenth. First, entreating generally of repentance, Chapter 3.
Moreover of papisticall repentance, and for that cause of Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction Chapter 4. Of indulgences also, and Purgatory,
Chapter 5. Last of all, that he may specially speak of true repentance, that
is, the two parts thereof, of mortification of the flesh, and quickenyng of
the spirit: so descending to the life of a Christian man, which consists in
both of them, from the sixth to the tenth. Fourthly, more plainly to show
what the profit of this faith is, and what effects follow, First he
entreats of justification of faith, from the eleventh to the eighteenth.
Moreover, of Christian liberty, which is as it were an appendix of
justification, Chapter 19. Fifthly, he descends to prayer, because the same
is the principal exercise of faith, and as it were the mean or instrument
whereby we daily take hold of Gods benefits Chapter 20. Sixthly because before
he had said (in the first Chapter) that all men do not indifferently embrace
the communication of Christ, which is offered through the Gospel, but they
only whom GOD vouchsafes by the power of the holy Ghost, and special grace.
Least this should seem absurd, he joins a special treatise of Gods
Eternal election, from the one and twenty, to the four and twenty. Last of
alll, because many ways it may be grievous unto us to be exercised under
this hard warfare which always accompanies the life of a Christian man, he
proves the same may be pacified by meditation of the resurrection: and for
that cause he joins an entreatie thereof Chapter 25.

Chapter 1. That those things which are spoken of Christ, do profit us by
secret working of the holy Ghost.
Howsoever the father bestows those gifts which we have spoken of, upon his
only son, he has not done it for his private commodity, but to enrich us
which were without the^, and needed them, Ephe. 4.11 Romans 8.29. Gal. 3.16. 1.
John 5.^ 1. Pet. 12.
yet they do not apperteine unto us, till we grow together with him in one:
Which albeit we obtain by faith, yet when we see yt al men do not
indifferently embrace the enterpartening of Christ which is offered by the
Gospel, we must climb somewhat higher, and confess also that it is brought to
pass by the secret and special working of the holy Ghost, that we enjoy
Christ Jesus and all his good things.

2 Hereupon also it comes to pass that Christ came furnished with the holy
spirit after a certain peculiar manner, ^oel. 2.28 Romans 8.9.11 John. 7.37
Ephe. 4.7 1. Cor. 15.45 Romans 5.5
not only to quicken and nourishe us with his general power: but much more to
sever us from the world to form in us an heavenly life: and gather us together
into the hope of eternal inheritance, this also he does not in that he is the
eternal word: but also according to the person of a Mediator.

Gal. 4.6 2. Cor. 1.21 Romans 8.10. John. 7.17 Eze. 36.25 1. John. 2.20 Luke.
3.16 Acts. 1.21 Ephe. 4.15 Gal. 3.27 Ephe. 5.30
3 That the same power of the holy ghost is in us either ye titles wherewith he
is maruellously set out do manyfestly prove, as in that he is called the
spirit of adoption, the pledge and seal of our inheritance, the water, oil
and ointment, fire, spring, and hand of God. All which do manifestly teach
that we are his members by grace, and power of the holy ghost, and for that
cause only he brings to pass that he should contain us under him, and we
again possess him.

John. 1.23 Ephe. 1.13 2. The. 1.3 John. 14.17 ^^ke. 3.16.
4 But coming to entreat of faith by this means he makes himself way.
Faith is ye principal work of the holy Ghost: to it for the most part are
referred all those things that we commonly find spoken to express his force
and working. This he proves many ways, before he entreat of the next
Chapter of faith.

Cap. 2. Of faith wherein is both set the definition of it, and the properties
that it has.
THis Chapter has three principal parts, for first he briefly touches
certain things: which otherwise would let the entreatie of faith, from the
1. to the 13. by occasion whereof he entreats of the object of faith, cap. 1.
Moreover of faith, wrapped and hidden, by occasion whereof he shows the
difinition of faith, from the 2. to the 7. Thirdly of an unformed faith, or of
the reprobates, from the 8. to the 12. Last of all, of the diverse
signification of the word 13. Moreover that it may appear to all men, what
that faith is which is entreated of, he shows particularly the definition
which he showed before from the 14. to the 40. Last of all by the apostles
authority, he briefly confirms his own definition: and by that occasion he
shows against the schoolmen what relation faith, hope, and charity have
between them selves, from the.41. to the 43.

1. Tim. 6.16 John. 8.12 Luke. 10.12 Acts. 20.17 2. Cor. 4.6 2. Pet. 2.2^
1 First as touching the object of faith, the schoolmen have barely made. God
the object of faith, leaving Christ, when the scripture teaches, yt the
invisible father is no otherwise to be sought for tha^ in Christ, as in his
own proper image.

2 Moreover as touching their fained devise of an hidden faith, that is,
obediently to submit our selves to ye Church, and to be ready to embrace for
true, what soever the Church appoints, committing to it the office of
searching and knowing: but these sa^^e is no faith, but that which consists
not in ignorance but in knowledge, and that not only of God, but also of the
will of God. For when Paul says, That with the heart we believe to
righteousness, and with the mouth, confession is made to salvation; he
shows that it is not enough if a man vnexpressedly believe that which he
understands not, Romans 10.10
nor seeks to learn, but he requires an expressed acknowledging of Gods
goodness, in which consists our righteousness.

3 Howsoever many things (such is the ignorance wherein we are compassed) are
wrapped and hidden from us in this mortal life: yet is it most absurd, under
this color to entitle ignorance tempered with humility, by the name of faith,
which truly lies in ye knowledge of God and Christ, John. 17^.
not in reverence of the Church.

4 Our faith is also wrapped and hidden so long as we wa^der in this world, not
only because many things are yet hidden from us: but also because we are
compassed about with many mists of errors, for the highest wisdom of the
most perfect is this, to profit more and proceed on further, with gentle
willingness to learn: Ephe. 3.1^
therefore Paul exhorts the faithful, if upon any thing they differ one from
another, to abide for revelation.

5 Faith also may be called wrapped and entangled, which notwithstanding is
properly nothing else, but a preparation of faith, whereof he brings two
examples: Moreover he concludes that such willingness to learn, John.
4.46.47 2. Tim. 3.7
with a desire to proceed further, differs far from the gross ignorance
of the Papists.

Ephe. 4.20 Romans 10.4 Esaias. 55.33 John. 10.13 Psalm. 150.8 Phi. 2.17
6 Such is the relation of the word to faith, that the word is the fountain
and pillar of faith, and as it were the glass, wherein we may behold God: to
conclude without the knowledge of the word, there can be no faith.

7 Neither yet at every word of God is faith boulstered up (although in all
things it subscribe to the truth of God) neither does it so much respect his
will only whatsoever, Psalm. 40.11
as his kindness or mercy: yet the same which is offered with his word, and
joined with his will and truth, does easily exclude all doubt. Faith therefore
is a steadfast and an assured knowledge of Gods kindness toward us, which
being grounded upon the truth of the free promise, in Christ is both revealed
to our minds and sealed in our hearts by ye holy ghost.

8 Now as touching their deformed faith, that is to say, Romans 10.10 Romans 1.5
John. 3.25
such assent whereby every despiser of GOD, receives that which is uttered out
of the scripture, although there be no access made of a godly affection to the
same assent, vain is their false invention, seeing one and the self same
spirit makes every one to rest in the certentie of faith: and does also
furnishe them all with his sanctification, so that faith can by no means be
severed from a godly affection.

9 He shakes the place of Paul out of their hands, 1. Cor. 13.2 This word
Faith, is taken for power of doing miracles which every ungodly man alusiuely
has: for the gift of prophesies and tongues, and other gifts, of graces, are
as well with the wicked as with the godly.
wherewith they are wont to defend their ignorance: moreover he points as
it were with the finger, what it is that drives them into error, that is,
that when the word of faith has diverse significations, they not considering
the diversity of the thing signified, dispute as though it were taken for one
thing in all places alike, they also for teaching sake, do willingly grant
that there are diverse sorts of faith, besides that only faith of the godly:
There may undoubtedly be two sorts of men to whom the testimony of faith
abusiuely is attributed: the one of them which acknowledges nothing else than
Christian religion: the other of them which come to this point also, that they
are touched with great reverence thereof.

10 Such persuasion of the faith of the wicked, is rather a shadow or an
image, then faith it self: seeing it differs so far from the sound truth
of faith. Acts. 15.18
Howsoever therefore such persuasion does not only deceive others, but also
them selves some times, yet these last have the same common with the Devils,
and the first inferior. Simon Magus being overcome with the majesty of the
Gospel, had a certain faith, such as it was, and so acknowledged Christ to be
the author of life and salvation, that he willingly professed himself to be
one of his: ^uk. 8.7.13
after which manner it is said in Luke, that they believe for a time, in whom
the seed of the word is choked up before it bring forth fruit, or before it
take any root at all, that by and by withers away, perishes, and though it
seem to have taken root, yet those are not lively roots: the heart of man
has so many secret corners of vanity, is full of so many hidyng holes of
lying, is covered with so guilefull hypocrisy, that it often deceives it
self: Iac. 2.1^
but let them that glory in such shadows of faith, understand that therein
they are no better then the Devil.

11 Neither ought it to seem hard, if such faith be attributed to ye reprobate
seeing experience teaches, that the reprobate are sometimes moved with the
same feeling that the elect are. So that in their own judgment they differ
nothing from the elect, when notwithstanding he differs much from the
peculiar testimony which the spirit gives to the elect: for their feeling is
frail, and vanishing away, but the feeling of the elect is not so.

Where Paul affirms that faith is the fruit of election, 2. The. 1.4
it is thereby meant that none do receive the light of faith, nor do truly
feel the effectual working of the Gospel, but they ye are foreordeined to
salvation, and although the reprobate have a feeling, yet that feeling is not
the true effectual working of the Gospel. Heb. 6.1
The Apostle ascribes to them that taste of the heavenly gifts yt Christ
ascribes to them a faith for a time: not that they soundly perceive the
spiritual force of grace, and assured light of faith, that they may with the
elect with full mouth cry out, Romans 8.15
Abba, Father: but because the Lord the more to condemn, and make them
inexcusable, conueieth him self into their minds, so far forth as his
goodness may be tasted without the spirit of adoption.

12 The reprobate are but for a time, because they abide not in the will and
truth of GOD, but in a vanishing feeling, and are not thoroughly soked, but
only lightly washed over with the knowledge of the Gospel, they are with no
other faith or light sprinkled, than with ye which may perish: but the elect,
are never deprived of their faith, although it be little and weak. The
reprobate also are sometimes so touched with the feeling of Gods grace, that
they have raised up a certain desire of mutual love (such as was in Saul,
who had in him a godly affection, to love God, by who^ he knew himself to be
fatherly handeled, and therefore was delighted with a certain sweetness of
his goodness) yet they do not soundly love as children, but are led with a
certain affection like hired servants: but so that they do not counterfeite a
faith, which yet lack true faith, while being carried away with a sudden
violent motion of zele, John. 8.3 Tit. 1.1 Matthew. 15.^3
and possessed with sluggishnesse, deceive themselves with false opinions. But
there are other some which are not ashamed to mock both God and men, while
falsely they imagine yt they have faith, Iam. 2 1. Tim. 15.19
from which they know themselves to be very far of.

13 Now as touching the signification of the word, 1. Tit. 3.9 Col. 2.3
the same is diverse and and many ways, for sometime under the name of Faith,
is entitled the sound doctrine of godliness, sometime that particular
doctrine which is restreined to some particular object, Matthew. 9.2 1. Cor. 13.10
sometimes the gift of miracles, sometimes the ministry or doctrine, whereby
we are instructed in the faith.

Now coming to the definition and expounding every part thereof, he chooses
aside to him self six principal members to be expounded: to the first
whereof he assigns sections 14. to ye second, from the 15. to the 17. to the
third 28. to ye 4. from the 29. to the 32. to the fifth 32. to the last, from
the 33. to the 40.

14 As touching the first, he shows what is the knowledge which he requires
in his definition: Ephe. 3.18 Col. 1.28 1. Ioh 3.3 2. Cor. 5.6
undoubtedly not such as is wont to be in man's understanding, but in all points
infinite, and far higher than all other understanding: and that rather by
Gods persuasion, than by natural demonstration.

15 It is called Sure and steadfast, to express thereby a more sound constancy
of persuasion, and that by this means, a doubting and rouling opinion, on ye
one side may be excluded: on the other side a doubtful and an entangled
conception: for we by nature are very ready to distrust and misbelief, so yt
the thing which we al confess with mouth (that God is faithful) no man can
persuade himself thereof, without great strife, specially seeing in every one
there is doubt of themselves. Psalm. 19.31. Pro. 30.5. Ephe. 3.12 Psalm. 119.
through out.

16 The chief stay whereon Faith ha^geth, is turned to this, that we should
not think that the promises of mercy which the Lord offers to be true
beside us, and not at all in our selves, Romans 5.^ Hebr. 3.1^ Romans 8.38 Ephe.
1.1^
but rather that inwardly imbrasing them we make them our own, neither is
there any truly faithful, but they that come to that confidence.

7 He wipeth away an objection, that the faithful do find by experience a
far other thing, that they are not only tempted with unquietness, but also are
sometimes shaken with most grievous terrors: but he teaches no such security,
as is assailed with no carfulness, but rather he confesses that the
faithful have a perpetual strife with their own distrustfulnesse: Psalm. 42.6
Psalm. 31.21 Psalm. 116.7 Esai. 7.3
yet so that they faynte not or turn their backs, but they always follow
their strife, and at length go away conquerors, as may be seen in David, who
always was not of quiet mind: and also by comparing of David with Achas.

18 This contention whereof he speaks, arises of the contrariety of the
flesh and the Spirit, yet so it shakes us, that although we be stricken, we
are yet never driven from our place.

19 He shows by two similitudes, that although our faith be not very perfect,
yet it is vndoubtful and certain. As a man that is in prison shut up, The last
similitude.
has the beams of the Sun shining in, sidelong at a narow window, or as it
were, but half glimering, wants indeed the free beholding of the sun, yet
sees with his eyes an undoubted brightness thereof, and receives the use of
it: so we being bound with the fetter of an earthly body, how so ever we be
on each side shadowed with much darkness, yet we are sufficiently enlightened
unto perfect assurance by the light of God, exte^ding his beams of light upon
us, though it be but little, to show forth his mercy.

20 And both may stand very well. 1. Cor. 13.9


21 The faithful so often as they are stricken with fear, do so labor by Gods
word, Mat. 8.25 Job. 11.1
and betake themselves again into Gods bosom, that they fly not from God,
when he punishes, but trust in him. Neither does unbelief reign in the
hearts of the godly, but outwardly assaileth them, neither does she deadly
wound them with her weapons, but only trouble them, or so hurts the^ that yet
the wound is curable. Ephe. 6.1^
For faith serves us for a shield: that being holden up against weapons, does
so receive the force of them, that it either utterly drives the^ back, or at
least so breaks their violence, that they can not pearse us to danger of
life. Therefore when faith is shaken, it is like as if a strong soldier wc
the violent stroke of a dart be compelled to remove his foot and give ground a
little: and when faith it self is wounded, it is like as if his buckler by some
stroke be in some part broken, but yet so that it is not stricken through. for
always ye godly mind will attain to rise thus high: Psalm. 23.4. 1. Ioh. 5.4
If I walk in the midst of the shadow of death: I will not fear any evil,
because thou art with me.

Augustine says, how great Engines so ever the Devil rayseth up against us,
so long as he possesses not the place of the heart, where Faith dwells, he
is cast out of the doors.

22 The other kind of fear, which the faithful learn by the examples of
Gods vengeance showed against the wicked, does nothing diminish the safety
of their Faith, but does more confirm the same. And they set such examples
before their eyes, not to beat down their consciences with terror, that they
rest not upon the assuredness of Gods mercy, but diligently to hold down, the
rash presumption, which out of the remnantes of the flesh creeps sometimes
even into the holy ones, that with vain confidence it wax not outragiously
wanton. When the Apostle in setting forth the scourges wherewith the Lord in
old time, had punished the people of Israel, puts the Corinthians in fear
that they entangle not them selves with like evils, 1. Cor. 10.11
he does not thereby abate their affiance, but only shakes away the dullness
of the flesh, by which Faith is wont more to be oppressed then strengthened.
And when he takes occasion of the Jews fall, to exhort him that stands, to
take heed that he fall not, Romans 11.^^
he does not therefore bid us waver, as though we were not thereby assured of
our steadfastness, but only he takes away arrogant presumption, and rash
trusting too much in our own strength, yt after the thrusting out of the Jews,
the Gentiles being received into their place, should not too much outragiously
triumph against the^ Albeit he speaks not only to the faithful, but also in
ye same saying comprehe^deth the hypocrites that gloried only in the outward
show.

23 Neither does this hinder, Phi. 2.12 Psalm 5.7 Pro. 2^.14
that we are commanded with fear and trembling to work our salvation when he
requires nothing else of us, but that we should accustom us, with much abasing
of our selves, reverently to look upon ye mightiness of God. And there is no
cause to the contrary, but that the faithful may at one time both be in fear,
(...). 3.^
and also enjoy most assured comfort, in respect that sometime they turn their
eyes to behold their own vanity, and sometimes they cast that thought of their
mind upon the truth of God, as also on the contrary, insensibleness and
carfulness has place in the reprobate.

24 Yet do we not so make room to them, which how soever they grant, that
so often as we look unto Christ, we find in him full matter to hope well, yet
would they have us waver and stagger in beholding our own unworthiness: for they
so place conscience between hope and fear, that it alters from the one to
the other, by enterchaungeable times and courses, Faith therevppon giving place
to desperation: but it is sure that Christ with his worthiness has brought to
pass, that our unworthiness should never come in the sight of God: Romans 8.10
therefore of our unworthiness there can arise no despair or doubt, that at
any time it should hold any government in the minds of the faithful.

25 This he confirms by the testimony of Bernard, who says, that in
studiyng the benifit of God, upon the soul, he finds two things, as it were
contrary. If I behold says he, the soul it self, as it is in it self, and
of it self, I can say nothing more truly of it, than that it is utterly
brought to naught: it is laden with sin, covered with darkness, entangled wc
deceitful entiseme^ts, itching with lusts, subject to passions, filled with
illusions, always inclined to evil, bent to all kind of vices, finally full of
shame and confusion. Esai. 64.^
Now if all the very righteousness of it being looked upon, by the light of
the truth, be found like a cloth stained with flowers, the^ what shall the
unrighteousness thereof be accounted: If the light yt is in us, Mat. 6.^3
be darkness, how great shall ye very darkness be? What then? man is mad unto
vanity, is brought to naught and is nothing: But how is he nothing whom God
does magnify? Barn. in H^nai. 5. of the dedication of the Temple.
how is he nothing toward whom Gods heart is set? brethren let us take heart
again. Though we be nothing in our own hearts, peradventure there may
somewhat of us lie hidden in the heart of God. O Father of mercyes, O Father of
the miserable, how do thou set thy heart toward us? for thy heart is where
thy treasure is: But how are we thy treasure that are nothing? All nations are
so before thee, as if they were not, they shall be reputed as nothing. Even
before thee, not within thee: so in ye judgment of thy truth, but not in the
affection of thy pity. Thou call those things that are not, as though
they were. Therefore both they are not, because thou call those things that
are not, and also they are, because thou call them: for though they are not
in respect of themselves, yet with thee they are according as Paul says, Romans
9.12
not of the works of righteousness, but of him that calls.

Pro. ^.7 Psalm. 100.1^ Pro. 10.5.14 Mal. 1.7
26 This fear also proceeds from a double understanding, that is to say, to
honor or reverence God as a father, to fear him as a Lord, how so ever he
puts a difference between them, yet he confounds both together.

27 That which John says, ye fear is not in charity, 1. Ioh. 4.8
etc. makes nothing against this: for he speaks not of willing or childlike
fear, but of constrained and servile fear: for the wicked fear not Gods
displeasure, Ephesians. 5.6 Col. 3.6
but his punishment and wrath, and that truly as though it did hang every
hour over their necks: but the faithful, fear not so much punishment as
displeasure, neither do they that truly, as though some punishment did hang
over them, but they beware, least they procure it.

28 After he has made perfect the second member of the definition, he comes
to the third, that is to say, to that which he said, had respect unto Faith
(Gods good will) in which word he enterpreteth is assigned whatsoever belongs
to perfect felicity: Es. 80.4 Esai. 2.^^
Seeing the Scriptures do determine in this one, the salvation, because God
banishing away all enmities, has received us into his favor. The grace of God
then is the spring of all good things, as well belongyng to this life, as to
the life to come: and those things are brought to pass in this life, Psalm.
63.4 Romans 8.35
that not only prosperity, but also adversity are blessed, because they are
turned to helps of our salvation.

29 The fourth member he has made the free promise of God, sheweing that it
is the foundation of Faith: whereof he rendereth a reason, for because Faith
although in all points it embrace the word of God, yet properly it begins
at a promise, therein continues, Romans 10.8 Romans 1.6 2. Co. 5.18
and thereupon ends: and in that sense is not the law but the Gospel called
of the Apostle the word of Faith.

30 Neither yet is Faith in this restraint divided, and one only peace taken
hold off, (as some maliciously allege) seeing it is granted that Faith has
respect to all the parts of Gods word, Hebr. 11.7
neither is it our meaning to show any other then these two: that Faith never
steadfastly stands, until it come to the free promise: and that we are no
otherwise reconciled to God by it, Romans 10.8
but because it coupleth us to Christ, freely offering salvation.

31 Herevppon may be gathered, Psalm. 9.11. Psalm. 109.43 Romans 4.21 2. Tim. 1.18
Psalm. 43.1
that Faith does no less need the word, then the fruit does need the
lively root of the tree: and yet in the mean time the power of God is not
excluded: but the beholding thereof, in this cause necessary: but no idle but
an effectual power must be conceived. Last of all, we must take heed that we
pass not beyond the limits of Gods word, that the zeal of Faith does
enforce us beyond our bonds into some vice, as Sara, Rabecca, and Isaac, I
see not why Jacob should not be reckoned among those of whom look lib. 2.
Cap. 10. sec. 14.
whose fall and weakness did darken Faith, but not put it clean out, yet we
in the mean space are admonished not to despair, although it be never so
little from the word.

32 The fifte member is, that he concludes all the promises in Christ: which
he proves by this means: There is no promise which comes not of love, but
there is no love but in Christ, therefore there is no promise but in him: Mat.
3.17. Ephe. 1.6 Ephe. 2.14 2. Kin. 5.17
his mayor he fortifieth against two objections, the first neither makes it
any matter, etc. the last neither does it any more, etc. The minor, first, he
confirms by testimonies of scriptures: moreover also he makes defense
against certain examples that may be objected. First Naama^ the Sirian, when
he required of the Prophet the manner how to worship God aright, it is not
like yt he was instructed concerning the Mediator: yet his godliness is praised.
But it may be answered, that it had been an absurdity for Elizeus when he
taught him of small things to have said nothing of ye principal point:
therefore although they had a dark knowledge, yet it is like that they had
some knowledge, because they did use them selves in the sacrifices of the law,
which must have bin deserved by the end of them, that is Christ, from the false
sacrifices of the Gentiles: and whereas Namans sacrifices were allowed by the
Prophet, Act. 8.13
it could not have been done but by Faith. And so ye Eunuke to who^ Philip was
carried, if he had had no faith, he would not have taken the travel and
expenses of so long a journey, to worship an unknown God, and although when
Philip examined him, he bewrayed his ignorance of a Mediator, and his Faith was
partly unexpressed, not only concerning Christ's person, but also concerning his
power, and the office committed to him of the father, yet it is certain that
they were instructed of such principles as gave them some taste of Christ,
although but small. Act. 10.4
Neither did Cornelius when he had once embraced the Jewish religion, spend so
much time without being acquainted with the first grounds of true doctrine.

33 The sixth and last member is, that Faith is no otherwise revealed in our
minds, nor sealed in our hearts, 2. Tim. 1.14 Gal. 3.2
then by the holy Ghost: but seeing this member is in two parts, he shows
both in this place, that is, that Faith is both ways the singular gift of God,
and that ma^s mind is purged or cleansed to taste the truth of God, and that
the mind is stablished therein. The holy Ghost also is not only a beginner of
Faith, but also does by all and singular degrees increase it, till that it
bring us unto the kingdom of heaven.

34 First he proves the former member both by reasons and testimonies: 1. Cor.
2.11 Mat. 11.25 Luke 10.21
Moreover he opens ye same with certain examples and a similitude, showing
that man's understanding receiving brightness by the light of ye holy Ghost,
does never til then truly begin to taste of those things that belong to the
kingdom of God, being before altogether unsavory and without judgment of
taste, to take assay of them: therefore when Christ did notably set out unto two
of his Disciples the mysteries of his kingdom, Lu. 24.1^
yet he nothing prevailed till he had opened their senses that they might
understand the Scriptures. When the Apostles were so taught by his godly
mouth, yet the Spirit of truth must be sent unto the^ to power into their
minds ye same doctrine which they have heard with their ears. Job. 16.15
The word of God is like unto the Son that shines unto all them to whom it
is preached, but to no profit among blind men, but we are all in this behalf
blind by nature, therefore it can not pearce into our mind but by the inward
Master the holy Ghost, making by his enlightening, an entry into it.

35 Wherefore the Spirit of Faith is called Faith it self, 2. Cor 4.1^. 2.
These. 1.11
it is the work and good pleasure of God, and the pattern of the holy Ghost.
God also the more to show his liberality in so excellent a gift, does not
repute all men worthy thereof, without difference, but by singular privilege
does imparte it on whom he will. Augustine cries out, that it would please
the Savior to teach him, and that the very believing it self is of gift and not
of deserving. No man says he, comes to me, unless my Father draw him, and
to whom it is given of my Father. It is marvelous that two do hear, the one
despises, the other ascends up. Let him that despises, impute it to him
self: let him that ascends, not arrogantly assign it to him self.

36 Taking in hand the last member, he draws his confirmation from the
former, as it were from the less to the more, that is to say, that ye
distrustfulnes of the heart, is greater then the blindness of the wit, and it
is far more harder to have the mind furnished with assurednes, then the wit to
be instructed with thinking. Ephe. 1.15 2. Cor. 1.21
The Spirit also for this cause is called the seal, earnest, and spirit of
promise.

37 Yet the Spirit does not so co^firm the minds of the faithful, Psalm. 46.3
Psalm. 3.5 Esai. 30. Psalm. 37.7 Hebr. 10.36
but, as before is declared, sometime they are tossed, and yet stand they sure.

38 Hereby we may judge how pernicious and pestilent is that doctrine of the
scholemen, that can no otherwise determine of the grace of God toward us, the^
by moral conjecture: for nothing is more contrary to Faith, then either
conjecture, or any thing near unto doubting. And do very ill wrythe to this
purpose, Ecle. 9.2
this testimony of ye Preacher: No man knows whether he be worthy of hatred
or love: that is to say, if any man will judge by the present state of things
whom God hates, or who^ God loves, he labors in vain, and troubles him
self, to no profit for his pains, since all things happen a like to the
righteous, and to the wicked; to him that offers Sacrifices, and to him that
offers none. A little before it is written, that the soul of man differs
not from the soul of a beast, as may be gathered, Eccle. 3.^
because it seems to die in like manner, Shall we therefore gather that the
immortality of the soul stands upon conjecture, shall we gather that there
is no certentie of Gods grace, because we can conceive none by the beholding of
present things.

39 That which they object, 1. Cor. 2.12
that it is rash presumption, to profess an undoubted knowledge of Gods good
will, or that we are endued with the spirit of Christ: and therefore for
modesty and humility sake, Romans 8.14 2. Cor. 13.5 Esaias. 34.3 John. 14.17
in assuring this certentie they would have us more doubtful, he encountereth
with most strong testimonies of the scripture, and declares the same with an
excellent Antithesis, of them and Paul.

40 Then he also wipeth away that which they object: that although to our
present state of righteousness we may gather a judgment of the grace of God,
yet ye knowledge of perseverance to the end abides in suspe^ce, especially
seeing the Apostle fears us, Romans 8.38
with making mention of our weakness and inconstancy, Saying, let him that
stands, beware that he fall not: but Paul means not such a fear, 1. Cor.
10.12
whereby we should be overthrown, but whereby we may learn to humble our
selves under the mighty hand of GOD, 1. Pet. 5.6
as Peter expounds it.

41 Now after he has declared the definition, in this sort he handeleth it,
to show that the same is not contrary, ^eb. 11.^
but does very well agree with that which the Apostle delivered: which while
he opens or expounds, he shows also this, Romans 8.24 2. Cor. 1.12
that faith is the most sure fundation of those things which are promised to
us of the Lord, (which does well agree with the former argument) moreover also
it is mere dotage, in which the schoolmen say, that charity is before faith
and hope.

42 Yet it cannot be, but this lively faith, Romans 8.24 Heb. 2.3
has with it the hope of eternal salvation as a sure companion, the help of
hope is many ways necessary to confirm faith, as is showed by diverse forms
of temptations.

43 For the conjunction and affinity which faith and hope have together, 2.
Pet. 3.8 Phi. 1.20 Gal. 5.5.
the Scriptures sometimes confound the names of faith and hope. Peter Lombard
has vnsauourly laid a double foundation of the faith, that is to say, the
grace of God, and merit of works, but let us cast away the confidence of
works, be bold to hope well, Matthew. 9.27
for he will not deceive us, that said, Be it unto thee according to thy
faith.

Cap. 3. That we are regenerate by faith, wherein is entreated of repentance.
ALthough the title seem to promise some declaration of faith, yet he
entreats only of repentance, which always acco^panieth true faith. And the
chapter in my judgment may aptly be divided into five parts: for first he
shows certain opinions of others about repentance, from the first to the
fourth. Secondly he shows what is to be determined thereof in his own
judgment, from the fifth to the nienth. Thirdly he assigns the cause why he
would the same should be extended to the last end of life, which he
affirms in the declaration of his definition, from the tenth to the
fourteenth: Fourthly, he shows either to what purpose, or to what end the
fruit of repentance tends, from the 15. to the 20. last of all, how it may
profit us, from the 21. to the 25.

As touching the first, there are three things which he reckons in this
place out of other men's judgments, whether should be first, faith or
repentance, on how many parts it stands, and how manyfolde it is. No man
has faith, which applies not his whole endeavor, to the meditation of
repentance: yet they are all deceived, that think that repentance does rather
go before faith, than flow or spring forth of it.

2 How vnforcible their reason is, Matthew. 3.2 Acts. 20.21 Esa. 40.3 Psalm.
130.4 Oze. 6.2
which think so, that faith is not yet before repentance in time: and from
whence they take occasion to err. The Anabaptists and Jesuits do wickedly
dote, which prescribe certain days of repentance, before they receive their
companions into the communion of grace. The cause of repentance, is fet from
the grace and promise of salvation, if it had been said, Because the kingdom
of GOD is at hand, therefore repent.

3 They which have taught, that repentance stands on two parts:
Mortification, and Vivification, the last part they have wrongfully
interpreted, while they call it comfort, which rather signifies a desire to
live well, which grows of regeneration, as if it were said, that man dies
to himself, to begin to live to God.

4 Some others have made two sorts of repentance, the one of the law, the
other of the Gospel, where also are set examples of both. The repentance of
the law, Genesis 4.12 2. King. 15.13 Matthew. 27.4
by which the sinner wounded with the searing iron of sin, and worn away
with the fear of the wrath of God, sticks fast in that trouble, and cannot
wind himself out of it, for albeit he acknowledges the greeuousnes of his
sin,, and is afraid of the wrath of GOD, yet in thinking upon God only as a
revenger, and judge, he faints at the feeling, so that their repentance is
nothing else but an enterie of Hell. But the repentance of the Gospel, 2.
King. 20.4 Esa 7.38.1 2. Sam. 12.13 Acts. 2.36 Matthew. 26.75
is when the sinners being galled with the spur of sin, is recomforted and
refreshed with confidence of Gods mercy, and is returned to the Lord.

5 Coming to expound his own meaning, first he proves, that repentance and
faith, albeit they cannot be separated, Acts. 20.21
yet must they so be distinguished, that by no means faith may be set under
repentance: Moreover, after he has expounded the Etymology of the word, he
joins a true definition of the thing also, that it is a true turning of our
life to GOD proceeding from a pure and earnest fear of GOD: Matthew. 3.2 1. Sam.
7
which consists in the mortifiyng of the flesh, and of the old man, and in
the quickening of the spirit.

6 His definition stands on three parts, the first, because he will have it
to be a conversion or turning: Eze. 18.31 Iere. 4.3
it consists not only in outward works, but in transfourming of his soul.

7 The second is, that it ought to proceed of an earnest fear of God: and
this fear partly is stirred up by the remembrance of the judgment of God:
Acts. 17.30 Exo 2.9 2. Cor. 7.10
partly, by the punishments already extended, otherwise such is the
stubbornness of our hearts, that unless it be pricked up with threatening,
as with mallets, the dullness of our flesh would not be corrected.

8 The third stands of two parts, Psalm. 34.14 Romans 8.4
Mortification and Quickening, both which are severally expounded.

9 Both these things do happen unto us by ye partaking of Christ, therefore at
one word, Romans 6.6 2. Cor. 3.18 Ephe. 4.24 Col. 3.10
repentance is nothing else then a renewing of Gods image in us, neither is the
same performed in some short time, but extended to the last end of life.

10 But in that he would have it extended to the last end of every man's life,
it is for this cause, that there remains in the regenerate a feeding of
evil, and matter of strife. This same feeding Augustine oftentimes calls not
sin, but infirmity: which notwithstanding is sin, and sometime is called
by that name of Augustine.

11 Neither is this any let to the contrary, Ephe. 5.26
that God is said to purge his Church from all sin, for the same ought
rather to be referred, to the giltinesse of sin, than unto the matter of
sin: although sin always dwell in us, yet it bears no dominion: but that
there remain some remnantes as yet in the regenerate, Romans 7.6
and does greatly trouble them, it is manifested out of Paul.

12 But so those desires are universally condemned, wherewith man naturally is
moved that those things are excepted, which God has so engraven in the mind
of man, at the first creation, that they cannot be rooted out without
destroying the very nature of man, and none but only unnatural and unbridled
motions, that fight against the ordinance of God, are stroke^ with this curse.
And albeit we are all infected by reason of the corruptnesse of nature, yet are
they not condemned in respect they are natural, but in respect they are
inordinate. Augustine is of that judgment.

13 It is showed by many testimonies taken out of his works, Iam. 1.15
that he thought so: that which they object out of James on the contrary is
weak. Augustine says, That the law of sin is both released by the
spiritual regeneration, and abides in the mortal flesh: released herein,
because the guiltiness is taken away in the Sacrament, whereby the faithful
are regenerate, Romans 6.10
and it abides because it works the desires against which the faithful do
fight.

14 Against the Anabaptists, which will not have the regenerate careful to
bridle the lust of the flesh, as though after they have received the spirit of
god, they could never sin again, 2. Cor. 12.15 Romans 7.6
or as though they proceeded further then the Apostle.

15 Going about to speak of fruits which ought to follow repentance, he
takes beginning of those places, which the Apostle in another place
describes: yet in the mean time keeping in doubt whether they ought to be
counted causes or effects, or parts, or affections, Heb. 12.3
yet all are very necessary to be known. As concerning sorrowfulnes, he
counsels to keep measure, least such sorrow and loathing of our selves do
swallow us up: and this he counsels by the holy advise of Bernard, Ser. 11.
in Canti.
which is this, Sorrow for sins is necessary, if it be not continual, I
counsel you sometime to return your fault from grievous and painful
remembrance of your own ways, and to climb up to the plain ground, of
cheerful remembrance of the benifits of God, Let us mingle honey with
wormwood, that the wholesome bitterness may bring us health, when it shall be
drunk tempered with sweetness, and if you think of your selves in humility,
think also of the Lord in goodness.

16 Heerby it appears, what be the true fruits of repentance, for as
touching outward testimonies, although they always follow repentance (as to be
in filthiness, mourning and weeping) yet must we beware that we lay not the
force of repentance upon them, Joel. 2.13 Jacob. 4.8 2. Cor. 7.1^
neither set it out with old and unmeasurable titles, or more rigorous in
executing them, than ecclesiastical mildenes may bear.

17 Weeping, fasting, and ashes spoken of by Joel, are not ye principal parts
of repentance, but turning to god, yet some of these were used at ye time,
Ioell. 2.12 Matthew. 9.15
and now may be, and the same not to be contemned.

18 The name of repentance is improperly applied to this outward profession,
as that which ought rather to be called a confession of the fault, which
desiring discharge of the punishment of guiltines, yet this external
profession, is a godly exercise as well private as public: Matthew. 1.21 Luke. 13
Psalm. 51.7 2. Cor. 12.21
the public is not always necessary, but to confess privately to god, is
always necessary for all men, not only faults newly committed, but also
faults passed. But this ordinary repentance, differs from that which is
specially required of them which more grievously offend.

19 The end of repentance is, that having overcome our corrupt and wicked
affections, Matthew. 11.10. Mark. 1.4 Luke. 3.3 Romans 1.30
we be restored to true righteousness by the sanctifiyng of the holy Ghost,
as is showed by the form of the preaching of John, Christ, and the Apostles.

Esaias. 61 1 Matthew. 11.5 Luke 4.18 Acts. 2.38
20 Because God howesoeuer he offers remission of sins, he almost uses
again to require repentance (signifiyng that his mercy ought to be a cause
that men should repent: but not of the contrary, that our repentance were a
foundation to deserve pardon,) all man's life ought to be the perpetual study
and exercise of a Christian man, to mortify his flesh, till the same being
overcome, the Spirit of GOD may reign in us.

21 As in the last he teaches from whence repentance is, Acts. 11.18 E^he.
2.10
so now he proves that it is not of our power, but a singular gift of God:
and they only are endued therewith, whom God will deliver from destruction. As
repentance therefore is a sign of salvation, so hardening is a sign of
reprobation, as out of Esaias, and the Apostle appears. Heb. 6.6
Yet this place of the Apostle, which only denies remission of sins to the
willing Apostataes does make nothing for the Nouatians.

22 By this occasion he shows that that is so horrible an offense, the sin
of the holy Ghost, that it shall not be pardoned: bringing a true definition
thereof, and proving, and showing the same out of the scriptures. They sin
against the holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32 Luke. 12.10 Acts. 6.10
which of set purpose resist the truth of God, with ye brightness whereof they
are so dazeled, that they cannot pretend ignorance, which they do only to this
end, to resist. They yt stumble unawares against the truth of God, not knowing
it, which do ignorantly speak evil of Christ, having yet this mind, that
they would not extinguish the truth of God, disclosed unto them, or once with
one word offered him who^ they had known to be the Lords anointed: these
men sin against the father and the son: such ignorance was in the Jews
which were carried wc zeal of the law to stone Steue^ to death; Acts. 6.10 1.
Tim. 1.13
and also in Paul himself, as he testifies. 23 But the better that ye place
may be enterpreted, he shows yt he speaks not of one particular fall or
other, but of the universal defection or departing. whereby the reprobates do
forsake salvation. 2. John. 1.19
And ye Nouatians are deceived in the paralogisme of the word, falling and
sinning: For they imagine that they that have stolen or committed fornication,
Heb. 6.4
after they have been taught by the law the contrary, may not be forgeuen. But
it is to be understood of them that with advised ungodliness, have choked the
light of the holy spirit, have spit out against the taste of the heavenly gift,
have estranged them selves from the sanctification of the holy ghost, have
trodden under foot the word of God and the powers of the world to come. And
where he says, there is left no sacrifice for them that sin willingly after
the knowledge of ye truth received, he does not deny that Christ is a
continual sacrifice to purge the iniquities of the holy ones, which he shows
in the whole Epistle: but he says, Heb. 10.16
that there remaimaineth no other when it is once forsaken: and it is forsaken
when ye truth of the Gospel is of set purpose renounced. 24 In that it seems
very hard to some yt any at al are put away from remission which fly to beseech
gods mercy, is thus wiped away: Pardon is not denied to the^ that repent, but
by the just judgment of god it is denied ye reprobate for their unthankfulness,
Zac. 7.42 Eze. 18.2^
yt they should at any time rise to repentance. If on ye contrary they seek
that ye reprobate sometimes do cry unto ye Lord with howling and weeping, ye
same is no true repentance or invocation, but only a miserable carfulness and
horrible torment, which does constrain them unwillingly to God. 25 If on the
other side, may be objected that the wicked sometimes obtained pardon by their
fained repentance: and God was appeased, yet must it be understood that god
spares no hypocrites at any time, 1. Kings. 28.29 Genesis 27.18 Psalm. 78.36.37
any otherwise, but that the wrath of God should continually lie upon them:
and the same is done not so much for their sakes, as for common example,
whereby the godly undoubtedly are more easily encouraged to an earnest
correction of life, and their pride is more grievously condemned that
stubbornely kick against the prick.

Cap. 4. That all that the Sophisters babble in their schools, of penance; is
far from the pureness of the Gospel: where is entreated of confession and
satisfaction.
FIrst, in general and in sum, he touches the doctrine of the schoolmen,
Chapter 1. Moreover, he examineth all the parts thereof, Contrition, 2. 3.
Confession from the 4. to the 24. Satisfaction, from the 25. to the 39.

The schoolmen do unluckily abide in the doctrine of repentance. For first
they wrongfully define it: secondly, they foolishly divide it: thirdly, they
raise Tragedies of light matters, and with troublesome questions they entangle
the minds of the readers: Last of all, they entangle themselves so with a
certain saying of Hierome, that they can never unfold them selves out.
Furthermore they too grosely betray their own blockishnes.

2 When they divide repentance into contrition of heart, confession of mouth,
and satisfaction of works, and would have remission of sins to depend thereof:
First it is showed that there can be no such contrition, as may deserve us
pardon: secondly that such contrition ought not to be laid upon men's minds,
specially to that end, that they should not leave of before they had paid the
debt.

3 No man has at any time bin helped by such contrition: yet he willingly
acknowledges, and teaches a certain sorowfulnesse or contrition: but such as
may teach us to hunger and thirst after the mercy of Christ: but not such as
may teach us to discerue remission of sins by just and full contrition, Mar.
11.18 Esai. 6.1 Luke 4.18
which no sin did at any time discharge.

As touching confession, first he sercheth whether it be by Gods law or no,
from the 4. to the 8. secondly he shows what the same is, which we have
delivered in the word of God, from the 9. to the 14. Lastly how foolish and
unseasoned things they are, that they brable about confession, from ye 15. to
the 24.

4 Concerning confession, there has bin great strife between the Canonists
and the School Divines, Genesis 3.9 Mat. 8.4 Luke 5.14 Deu. 17.8 Heb. 7.11
these affirming that confession is by Gods law, they deniyng. But the Divines
have wickedly wrested the Scriptures, to draw their arguments to confirm their
error: and the first is the place of the Lepers, whom Christ sent to ye
priests, to whom that he may answer, he shows the reason of that true fact,
Christ sent that man that was healed of the leprosy to the Priest, not to
confession, for he was not thertoo appointed, but to be purged with the offering
of sacrifice, that the Priest might not cavil that he did break the law,
Mat. 20.14 Mat. 10.19
but rather pronounce the miracles of Christ, yt he was healed. Ioh. 11.54


5 The second argument is also drawn from an Allegory, that is, from that,
where they say that the Lord commanded his Disciples, that when Lazarus was
raised up, they should unbind and lose him from his bonds: to this he
answers two ways, first, that it is more likely that Christ spoke unto ye
Jews then to the Disciples: secondly yt that Allegory cannot so much be drawn
to confirm confession as to counsel us, yt we be ready to forgive them whom
the Lord had acquitted.

6 The third argument is drawn from authority, and from words spoken, Mat.
3.6 Iac. 5.16
to whom he severally answers. First to the place of Mathewe in this wise. No
marvel if they that would be baptized, did confess their sins, for it was
said before that John preached ye Baptism of repentance, and baptized in water
to repentance: who^ should he have baptized the^, but those that had confessed
themselves sinners? Baptism is a toke^ of forgiveness of sins, and who
should be admitted to this token but sinners, and they that acknowledged them
selves to be such, therefore they confessed their sins yt they might be
baptized. Where James does bid us confess one to an other, he adds, Pray
one for an other: he joins together mutual confession, and mutual prayer:
therefore if we must confess to Priests only, we must also pray for Priests
only, and so should others be smally beholding to us, but to let pass such
trifles, Gal. 3.22 Romans 3.9
the Apostles meaning is, that we should lay our weakness one in an others
bosom, to receive mutual counsel, mutual compassion, mutual comfort one of
an other: then that we be naturally privy to ye weakness of our brethren,
should pray for them to the Lord.

7 Confession therefore whereof he speaks, is not of the law of God, but
although the use thereof be very ancient, yet was it always free, till the
time of Innocent the third, who was about a thousand two hundred years after
Christ: but it is showed what and how foolish a law it was: but in old ryme
the use thereof was free: and afterward in the Church of Constantinople, was
utterly forbidden, by means of a Matron that played the whore with a Deacon,
under that pretense and color.

8 This kind of confession did greatly displease Chrysostom. Tell, says he,
Hom 2. in Psalm. 25
thy sins, that thou may do them away: if thou be ashamed to tell to any
man thy sins that thou have done, tell them daily in thy soul. I do not
say, confess them to thy fellow servant, that may reproach thee: tell them to
God that takes care of them: confess thy sins upon thy bed, that there
thy conscience may daily recognishe her evils. And again he says, Hom. 4. de
La^^.
I do not lead thee into a stage of thy fellow servants, I do not compel
thee to disclose thy sins to men, rehearse and utter thy conscience before God,
show thy wounds to the Lord thy best Surgeon, and ask salve of him: show to
him that will reproach thee with nothing, but will most gently heal thee.

9 But as concerning that kind of confession which is taught us in ye word of
God, the old translator is worthy great reprehensio^, because he has so often
turned confession in ye stead of praise. Moreover, Psalm. 42.5 Dan. 9.5 1. Job.
1.9 2. Sam. 12.13 Leu. 16.19
the scripture does direct all men to God only, which will confess their sins.

10 The secret confession which is done only to God, does easily bring the
voluntary confession with men, if it be sincere, so often as either the same is
profitable for Gods glory, for for ye humbling of our selves. Such voluntary
confession also before men, has taken beginning from Gods ordinance.

11 There are two kinds of voluntary confession, the one public, the other
private, Neh. 1.7
there are also two sorts of public confession, the one ordinary, the other
extraordinary. The use of the last is, when we are afflicted wc plague, war,
etc. the use of the first is, when we stand in all holy assemblies in the sight
of God.

12 There are also two fourmes of private confession, one, that is made for our
own sake: Iac. 5.16
the other which is made for our neighbors sake. The use of the first is, so
often as any of the faithful is so troubled and afflicted with the feeling of
his sins, that he can never wind him self out without the help of an
other. It is also meet, that he freely chose some which shall seem most meet
in the flock of the church (as are the ministers that for the most part are
judged most meet) to whom he may confess, Mat. 16.19 Mat. 18.18 Ioh. 3.23
and in whose bosom he may unload him self.

13 The other is yt, which is commended to us by Christ him self, to appease
our neighbor, and to reconcile us, if by any means he be hurt through our
default: under this sort is contained their confession which have sinned to the
offense of the whole church. The other order or form of confession ye scripture
is utterly ignorant of, and it is not our duty to bind the consciences of the
faithful with new bonds. Mat. 5.23 2. Cor. 2.6


14 In these three kinds of confession (he speaks of the public and two
forms of private) the power of keys has place: and what profit comes thereby
to the confessors: but when we speak of keys, Mat. 18.19 Ioh. 20.23 Mat. 9.2
we must take heed that we dream not of a certain power, severed from the
preaching of the Gospel.

15 Now coming to the examining the false inue^tio^s of the Romanists, first
he briefly shows what necessity of confessing they have assigned all men:
secondly, how many keys they feign themselves to have, and what they are:
thirdly, how crookedly they rather wrest than enterpret to bind and to lose:
Last of all, to whom they assign this office, to the Priest and not to God,
for they dare not expound these words to bind and to lose, to forgive and put
away sins, which ministers do by preaching the Gospel, Mat. 18.19 Esa. 43.11.25
to all them that are penitent and sorry for their sins.

16 Answering in few words particularly to every one, and first to the
necessity of reckoning up of all their sins, which by law they have
confirmed, he shows that the same is such, as by no means can be observed
and kept. David had well studied upon the confession of his sins, yet he
cried out, who shall understand his errors. Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins, mine iniquities have passed above mine head, and like a weighty
burden have waxed heavy above my strength. Psalm. 19.12 Psalm. 38.4
Truly he understood how great was the depth of our sins. how many were the
sorts of our mischievous doings: how many heads this monster Hidra did
bear, and how long a tail she drew after her: he went not about to reckon up
a register of the^, but out of the depth of evils he cried unto the Lord, I am
overwhelmed, I am buried and choked, the gates of Hell have compassed me, let
thy hand draw me out, which am drowned in the pit, and am fainting and
ready to dye.

18 He most elegantly describes how miserably their souls were vexed with
this butchery, that have been touched with any feeling of God, and that two
ways: First that that thing which they most severely and rigorously do
demand, can by no means be brought to pass. Moreover the mitigations or
medicines which they apply, do rather increase the sorows, tha^ diminish them:
whether they require no other thing tha^ that every one should do that which
lies in him, or grant to the penitent pardon for their negligence, so it be
not idle. Here let the readers consider how possible it is to bring in account
all the

doings of an whole year, 1. Job. 3.20
etc. It is a confirmation of the things that go before.

18 He shows by two similitudes, for what cause some rested upon so cold
comfort: That the law is also unjust for two causes. Also what is the most
sure rule of confession, that is to say, in a brief sum to confess that the
depth our iniquity is such, as far passes our understanding: Luke 18.13 Eze.
18.21
yet so, that we discuss also every falt particularly as much as may be, and
as shall seem expedient, where otherwise they deny ye sins may be pardoned, is
by no means to be granted. The confirmation which they allege, that
judgment may not be given upon unknown things, he proves to be weak two
ways.

19 We do not then unworthily condemn auricular confession, so pestilent and
so many ways hurtful to ye church in ye they attribute to it this profit, that
shame should humble the sinner: yt it is otherwise we are taught by experience.

20 In that they allege the power of keys, it makes nothing for them: first
because they are not the Apostles successors: secondly because they have not
the holy Ghost, Mat. 18.28
which is the only judge and governor of the keys, which if they had, they
could not without choice (as oftentimes they do) lose ye which the Lord would
have bound, nor bind that which he commands to be losed.

21 In that they say they usurp power without knowledge, and define their
keys to be the authority of deserving, and the power of execution: not
professing knowledge, but to have it as a cou^sellour to good use (that by this
means they may deliver their boldness and rashness from hatred, because
without difference they lose and unbind both by it self too odious) if it
happen to be as though they should say they have an imagination, power, and a
frivolous disposing. How so ever peradventure they will deny that they
otherwise limitte Christ, saying then according to the merits of him which is
bound and losed, but contrariwise the messe^gers of the gospel, have a sure and
certain dispensation, who being enstructed in the Word, have knowledge,
whereby they may measure every ma^s worthiness as need shall require. ^. Cor. 6.9
In this word the Church pronounces that fornicatours, adulterers, etc. have
no part in the kingdom of heaven, which the same word the Church loses,
whom it comfort being repentant.

22 If any man take exception, and say, that the lawful ministers of Christ
shall be no less doubtful in their office, because the absolutio^ that hangs
upon Faith shall always remain doubtful: And then that sinners them selves
shall have either none or cold comfort, because the minister him self, which
is no competent Judge of their Faith, can not be assured of their absolution:
the answer is easy and in readiness: Because we say not as they say, that
forgiveness depends upon the judgment or person of the Priest: (which makes
the Popish absolution doubtful, and many ways perplexe) but upon the Faith
of him whom we lose: neither do we profess any other remission, Mat. 9.29
but condicionally.

23 A more full entreatie of these things being referred to an other place, now
he briefly touches certain other of their errors. And first because they do
preposterously draw to auricular confession, those things which are partly
spoken of the preaching of the Gospel, and partly of excommunication:
secondly, in that they deny that it suffices to confess sins, either to God
only or to lay men, unless a Priest be the hearer of them: Thirdly, that
albeit they rightly confess (because absolution always accompanies repentance)
there properly remains no bond, when a man is touched with repentance
(therefore the Priest does not then so much forgive sins, as pronounce and
declare them forgiven) yet in the word of declaring, they slily bring in a
gross error, and they overthrow this their moderation by enioyning of
penalty and satisfaction.

24 A brief sum of that which has bin said of this pontifical confession.

25 Coming to satisfaction, to which the schoolmen assign the third place in
their definition: first he shows what satisfaction is feigned of them: Esai.
52.3 Es. 43.25 Act. 10.43
secondly he proves that the same may easily be turned over, by setting of
free remission of sins against it, chiefly as the scripture declares it,
that is to say, by the name of Christ only,

26 That which contrarily they allege that remission of sins and
reconciliation were made at one time: when we are in Baptism received into the
favor of God by Christ. That after Baptism if we sin, we must rise again
by satisfactions. 1. Pet. 2.24 ^ Hob. 2.2
And yt the blood of Christ does nothing profit, but so far as it is
distributed by the keys of the Church, is by manifest authority of the
scripture confuted.

27 There are two things that here are to be taken heed of, first that
Christ may have his due honor kept unto him whole and undiminished: lastly,
that the consciences being assured of the forgiveness of sin, may have peace
with God: first it is severally proved, that it is violated by the false
imagination of satisfaction. Esai. 53.4 Romans 8.3 Col. 1.20
Moreover that also is taken away, wherein they trifle that those places
wherewith remission of sins is affirmed, do only belong to yonglinges, not
unto them which long have been nourished in the bosom of the Church.

28 The distinction whereunto they fly, yt some sins are venial, some mortal
and deadly, does nothing help them: Romans 6.23 Eze. 18.20 Romans 8.1 Pro. 24.16
(neither yet does it follow, that all sins are a like) seeing there is a
greater heap of sins then may find issue or passage to make satisfaction.

29 Their other distinction of forgiving the fault and not the penalty, Ier.
31.32 Es. 38.17 Psalm. 52.2 Ier. 5.20
is overcome and beaten down by manifest testimonies of scripture and strong
reasons.

30 He prosecuteth the same argument in the former part of this section, 1.
Pet. 2.24 Col. 1.14 Oze. 14.3
proving that Christ has done nothing for us, if yet punishment for sin be
required, in the last part, he shuts up the way against them that would
escape some other way by a distinction of eternal pain and temporal pain.

31 And so coming to the testimonies of the scripture, 2. Sa. 12.13 Dan. 4.24
Pro. 16.6 1. Pet. 4.8 Luke 7.47
whereby they think them selves armed, after these subtle distinctions: first
he lays them forth: secondly going about to answer them, he sends before
a few of Gods judgments: making two sorts thereof, the one of reuengement,
the other of chastisement. The son says Chrysostom is beaten, and the
servant also is beaten: but the one is punished as a bondseruant, and the
other is chastised as a free man, as a son needing correction. To the one his
correction serves, for proof and amendment, to the other for a scourge and
punishment.

Job. 3.17 Heb. 12.2 Psalm. 118.28 Ier. 10.13 Abac. 3.2
32 By consideration of both, he brings forth two distinctio^s, ye first
whereof he will have to be, is, that whersoeuer punishment is to revenge, there
shows it self the wrath of God, which he always holds from the Faithful:
contrariwise chastisement is both the blessing of God, and also bears
witness of his love: both he confirms by many places of scripture.

33 The other is, Esaias. 1.5 1. Sam. 15.23 1. Cor. 11.32 Esaias. 40.2
that when the reprobate are stricken with the scourges of God, they do already
after a certain manner begin to suffer pains by his judgment. But children
are beaten with Ferelawes or rods, not that thereby they should be punished
of God for their sins, but that they should thereby profit to amendment. Both
he confirms by the testimonies of the scriptures, and the fathers. Lib. de
pecca. merito ac remiss. 11 Cap. 33. and. 34.
Augustine teaches that the pains wherewith me^ are chastized by God, are
diuersely to be considered: because to the holy ones, they are battles and
exercises after the forgiveness of their sins: to the reprobate they are
without forgiveness, pains of wickedness: Chrysostom says, that God does
lay pain upon us not punishing our sins past: but correcting us against time
to come. Augustine says, That which thou suffer, that for which thou
lamentest, is a medicine to thee, and no pain, a chastisement, and no
damnation, put not away the scourge, if thou will not be put away from the
inheritance.

1. Pet. 4.17 Iere. 25.29 Psalm. 18.17
34 First it is necessary that the faithful be furnished with these thoughts
in bitterness of afflictions, least they conceive God angry, and against them.
The curses of God are not only external, but also temporal punishments.

35 He answers to the places of Scripture in these three next sections,
which they alleged for confirmation of their lie in the premises of the
consideration of gods judgments. And first as touching that place of Samuel he
interprets that that correcting of David was but a chastisement, 2. Sam. 10.25
whereby he and all others might be made more wary, Iere. 5.3 Luke. 18.14
Matthew. 9.2
but not a pain to make a certain recompense to GOD. All the absolutions in
the scriptures are set out, as given freely, but there is no Satisfaction read
of.

Dani. 4.24 Pro. 16.6 Matt. 23.35
36 As touching the second, third, fourth, and the fifth, he answers to
every one severally, Daniell in his exhortation where in he councelleth
Nabucadnezer to redeem his sins with righteousness, and his iniquities with
pitiyng of the poor, his meaning was not to say that righteousness and mercy
are satisfactorie appeasementes of GOD and redemptions of pains, but to
refer this word redeeming to men rather than to GOD. As if he should have
said, O King thou have used an unrighteous and violent government, thou have
oppressed the humble, thou have spoiled the poor, thou have hardly and
unjustly handeled the people: for thy unjust exactions, for thy violence, and
oppression, now render to them mercy and righteousness. Likewise Solomon
says, That with charity the multitude of sins is covered, not before GOD,
but among men themselves: he does by way of comparison of contraries, compare
the evils that grow of hatredes, with the fruits of Charity. In such sense
is the place of Peter to be taken. But where he teaches that sin is purged
with mercifulness and liberality, he does not mean yt there withal
satifaction is made for sin before the face of the Lord, but after the
accustomed manner of the scriptures, he declares that they shall find him
merciful to them, that leaving their former vices and iniquities, do turn to
him by godliness and truth, as if he should say, the wrath of God does
cease, and his judgments rest when we cease from evil doings, neither does
he declare the cause of pardon, but the manner of true conversion. The Prophets
do declare that hypocrites do in vain pester GOD with forged Ceremonial
vsages in steed of repentance, Heb. 13.16 Matthew. 23.25 Luke. 11.39
whereas it is uprightness of life, with the duties of charity that
delights him.

Luke. 7.36
37 As concerning the last place, he shows, that Christ did not make the love
of the woman the cause of remission, but a proof and argument of the
forgiveness of her sins, by that which follows.

38 After he has expounded the places of scripture, he comes to the fathers,
whereof many he confesses, have in this point either erred or spoken too
crabbedly and hardly, which notwithstanding make nothing for the school
doctors opinion.

39 For they have so spoken of Satisfactions, that it appears that
satisfactions in those days, and repentance were appointed, not a recompense
for God, but a testimony to the Church, that they were truly and heartily
weery of their former life. But Lombard and the residue have gathered out their
unsavory dotages out of some bastard writings.

Cap. 5. Of the suppliynges which they add to satisfactions, as pardons and
purgatory.
OVt of this doctrine of Satisfaction, do flow indulgences or pardons, whereby
they feign and imagine that they dispense the merits of Christ, and martyrdom
to them which want their own proper power to make satisfaction.

2 It is showed by many testimonies of Scriptures, what pardons are by their
own doctrine, that is, they are nothing else in very deed, than an unmeet
profaning of Christ's blood: for how could the blood of Christ be more
filthily profaned, than when it is denied to suffice the remission of sins,
to reconciliation and satisfaction, unless the want thereof, as being withered
and wasted, should be otherwise supplied and profited. Acts. 10.43 1. John.
1.7 Heb. 10.14 Reave. 7.14
This is Satan's mockekery to lead away the Christian people from the grace of
God, from the life that is Christ, and to turn them from the true way of
salvation.

3 Both Leo Bishop of Rome, and Augustine have wrote against such sacrilege.
The confirmation is naught worth which they allege: that is to say, that the
Martyrs have by their death done more to God, and deserved more then was
needful for themselves, and that they had remaining so great plenty of
deseruings as did ouerflowe unto an other, neither ought so great goodness to
be superfluous, Leo. Epist. 81 Le. 16.15
Leo says, Although ye death of many saints has been precious in the sight of
the Lord, yet the killing of no innocent has been the perpetuatio^ of the
world. The righteous received, but gave no crowns; and out of the valiantness
of the faithful, are graven examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness,
for their death were every one singular to themselves, and none of them did by
his due, pay the det of another, forasmuch as there is one Lord Christ, in whom
are all crucified, all dead, buried, and raised up again.

As only the son of god was made the son of man, Aug. lib. 4. ad Bonifa.
Cap. 4.
to make us with him the sons of God, so he alone for us has taken upon him
punishment with out evil deseruings, that we with him might without good
deseruings obtain grace not due unto us.

4 They very maliciously wrest the place of Paul, Col. 1.24
as is showed out of Augustine and certain other places, where the apostle
says, that he supplieth in his body those things that wa^ted of the sufferings
of Christ, he refers not ye default or suppliyng, to ye work of redemption,
satisfaction, and expiation: but to those afflictions wherwithal the members of
Christ: that is to say, all the faithful must be exercised so long as they
shall be in the flesh, he says therefore, that this remains of the
sufferings of Christ, that he daily suffers in his members, the same that he
once suffered in himself. Christ vouchsafes to do us this honor, to reckon
and account our afflictions his own, where Paul adds these words, For the
Church, 2 Timothy 2.10 1. Cor. 1.6
he means not for the redemption, for the reconciliation, or satisfaction of
the Church, but for the edifiyng and profit of the Church, which immediately
after he expounds in the verse following. August. says, that the sufferings
of Christ, are in Christ only as the head, and both in Christ, and the Church
as in the whole body: whereby Paul being one member, says, I supply in my body
that which wants in the sufferings of Christ. Therefore if thou whatsoever
thou be that hear this, art one of the members of Christ, what soever thou
suffer of them that are not the members of Christ, the same wanted in the
suffering of Christ, not that any thing wa^ted in the sufferings of Christ as
concerning all fullness of righteousness, salvation, and life, Romans 5.14 Acts.
15.11
or that he meant to add any thing thereunto.

5 The Pope ought not to enclose in Lead and Parchment, 2. Cor. 1
the grace of Jesus Christ, which the Lord would have distributed by the
word of the Gospel. And what has been the beginning of indulgences.

6 As concerning their Purgatory, this it is, The satisfaction yt the souls
of men departed do pay after their death, for their sins, we must not agree to
the^ which would have passed ye over in silence for avoiding of contention,
seeing it does euacuate and make void the cross of Christ. But it is
certain that the opinion of making satisfaction being overthrown, Purgatory
is utterly overthrown by the roots. The Lord gives not leave to man's
presumptuousnesse to break into the secret places of his judgments: and
has severely forbidden men to enquire for the truth at dead men. Deuteronomy. 18.12


Matthew. 12.32 Mark. 3.28 Luke. 12.10
7 He answers to certain places of scripture, whereby they go about to
establishe their Purgatory. Where the Lord speaks of the falt of sin, now
what is that to their Purgatory, forasmuch as by their opinion the pain is
there suffered, of those sins which they confess are forgeuen in this
present life. But the Lord meaning to cut of all hope of pardon from so
heinous wickedness, thought it enough to say, that it should never be
forgeuen, but the more to amplify it, he uses a division wherein he
comprehends, both the judgment that every man's conscience feels in this
present life, and the last judgment, that shall be openly pronounced at the
resurrection, as though he should have said, Beware ye of malicious
rebellion, as of a most present damnation. For he that of set purpose shall
endeavor to quench the light of the holy Ghost, shall not obtain pardon,
neither in this life which is given to sinners for their conversion; nor in the
last day, when the Lambs shall be severed by the Angel of GOD from the
Goats, and the kingdom of heaven shall be cleansed from all offenses. Matthew.
5.25
As concerning ye place of Matthew the fifth it is evident that Christ meant
there to show into how many dangers and mischiefs they cast them selves,
that had rather obstinately pursue the extremity of the Law, than deal
according to equity and right to the end to exhort his Disciples the more
earnestly to agreement with equity.

8 Where Paul says, that the things of heaven and earth, and Hell shall bow
to Christ, thereby is not meant the true godly worshipping, but that there is a
dominion given to Christ whereby all creatures are to be subdued, yea the
very Devil shall be brought to acknowledge him their judge with fear and
trembling, like as Paul expounds elsewhere. As for the Machabees it is not in
the number of the holy books, Romans 14.10.11. Romans 5.15 2. Macha. 12.43
and he that thinks best, confesses that his writing needs pardon, and
says plainly, that they are not the Oracles of the holy Ghost, The writer of
the History did not refer that which Judas did, to be a price of redemption,
but that they might be partakers of the eternal life, with the other faithful
that had died for their country and religion, this was not without
superstition and preposterous zeal: But it is more folly to draw a sacrifice
of the law so far as unto us pertains forasmuch as we know that things
do cease by the coming of Christ, that then were in use.

9 They have an invincible bulwark in Paul as they think, 1. Cor. 3.12.15.
but easy to be battered: For Paul uses a Metaphor when he calls the
doctrines invented by men's brains, wood, hey, and stubble, which so soon as
they are cast into the fire, consume and wast, and cannot continue, like as
those doctrines cannot continue when they come to be examined. Therefore to
follow the true cause of his Metaphor, and match the parts together with just
relation, he calls the trial of the holy Ghost fire, for even as the nearer
that gold and silver are put into the fire, so much the surer proof have
they of their goodness and finesse: so the Lords truth, the more exactly it
is wayed with spiritual examination, so much the greater confirmation of
credit it receives.

10 In that that they say, that it is an ancient usage of the Church: it
cannot altogether be denied: yet the old fathers did it both without the word
of God, and to avoid reproach, and of a perverse zeal, and an unadvised
lightness (least they should differ from public custom and common
ignorance) and that which is sufficient to confute the thing it self, they did
it not without great doubting: neither yet have they done so, that by these
their errors, they could defend either their doings or sayings: Finally
many testimonies of the old Fathers may be alleged, which will manifestly
subvert al those prayers for the dead, which are in use among us. The rest he
lets pass in silence of set purpose.

From the 6. to the 10. Chapter.

Those things which he disputes of in these next five Chapters, about the
life of man, seem to be heaped up in this order, that they may be referred to
two principal points: first that this one thing be confessed of al men, that
there is no Christian man, which is not affected with a certain singular love
of righteousness. Chap. 6. Moreover, as touching the rule wherein every one
ought to frame his life, albeit the same seem to be contained in the next Cap.
only, yet all the rest that follows, belong unto the same. For those 2. which
he teaches to be performed of a Christian man, seeing so hard matters are so
suddenly taken hold of, that in perfourming them, he confesses there requires
great patience, Chap. 7. For this cause he describes the utility of the
cross, by a thing professed, Cap. 8. And he calls back to the meditation of
a life to come, Cap, 9: And that which is not little profitable to this matter,
he openly shows how we should use in this life the helps thereof, least by
any means we offend therein, Chap. 10.

Cap. 6. Of the life of a Christian man: And first by what arguments the
scripture exhorts us thereunto.
GOing about to speak of the life of a Christian man, he shows in the very
beginning for what cause he knitteth the same to the declaration going before
of regeneration, ye is to say, because the mark of regeneration is such, that
in the life of the faithful there should appear an agreement and consent,
between the righteousness of God, and their obedience, and so they should
confirm the adoption, whereby they are received to be children: then also he
expounds in what order he will speak thereof.

2 The instruction of our life stands of two parts, as the scripture
painteth it out to us: the first is, yt the love of righteousness be powered
into our minds. The other that we may have a prescript rule, that may not
suffer us to go out of the way in following righteousness. In commendation of
righteousness, the scripture has very many and very good reasons, whereof
seeing some are general, and some special, he describes one general here
two ways. First, we must be holy, because God is holy: for when we were
scattered abroad like straying sheep, and dispersed abroad in the maze of the
world, he gathered us together again, to join us in one flock with
himself: when we hear mention made of our joining together with God, let us
remember that holiness must be ye bond. He admonishes us also to the end we
may be reckoned among the people of God, that we dwell in the holy city of
Jerusalem, which as he has hallowed to himself, so it is not lawful that yt
be vnholily profaned by ye uncleanness of the inhabitants, Psalm. 35.8 Psalm.
15.21.23
because it is not meet that ye sanctuary wherein he dwells, should be like a
stable full of filthiness.

3 First, he sets down the other general, that is to say, that we may be
made like to Christ: secondly, he calls to mind many special reasons, if
the Lord has by adoption made us children, with this condition that our life
should resemble Christ, the bond of our adoption, or if we do not give anew our
selves to righteousness, we do not only with most wicked breach of allegiance
depart from our Creator, but also forswear him to be our Savior. Mal. 1.6
Ephe. 5.1 1. Ioh. 3. 1 Heb. 10.25 1. Cor. 6 Ioh. 15.3 Col. 3. 1. Cor. 3
Since God has showed him self a Father unto us, we are worthy to be condemned
of extreme unthankfulness, if we do not show our selves to be children: since
Christ has cleansed us, with the washing of his blood, and has made us
partakers of his clensing by baptism, it is not seemly that we should be
spotted with new filthiness: sith he has graffed us into his body, we
must carefully take heed that we sprinckle not any spot or blot upon us that
are his members: since he him self that is our head, is ascended into heaven,
it behooves us, that laying away earthly affections, we do with all our heart
aspire to heaven ward: since the holy Ghost has dedicated us temples to God, we
must endeavor that Gods glory may be honorably set out by us, and must not
do any thing whereby we may be profaned with filthiness of sin: since both
our soul and our body are ordained to a heavenly incorruption, and an
vnperishing Crown, we must diligently travel that the same may be kept pure
and uncorrupted unto the day of the Lord.

4 Those are not Christians, which do savor of nothing less in their life
and manners, Ephe. 4.20
then of Christ, yea, they reproach Christ wonderfully.

5 Neither does he acknowledge the^ for Christians only, whose manners breath
nothing but an absolute Gospel, (which notwithstanding is both to be wished
and labored for of every one:) but all those which in pure simplicity have a
desire diligently to proceed in the way of the Lord.

Cap. 7. The sum of a Christian life: where is entreated of the forsaking of
our selves
THe first degree is, Romans 12.2
that man shall depart from him self, and apply him self wholly to the
obeying of God. This renewing of mind all the Philosophers were ignorant of,
Romans 23.8 Ephe. 4.22 Gal. 1.20
that they think that the government of the mind is in all points most
perfect.

2 Thereupon follows that other, that we search not the things that are our
own, but those things which be according to the will of the Lord, and that
make to the advancement of his glory: But where so ever the first degree does
not go before, there either most filthy vices do raunge without shame: or
else if there be any spice of virtue, it is corrupted with perverse desire of
glory.

3 He lays a general description thereof out of Paul, Tit. 2.11
but such as more plainly he may divide the whole into certain special
parts, Paul to lose our minds from all snares, calls us back to the hope
of immortality, admonishyng us not to strive in vain, because as Christ has
once appeared the Redeemer, so at his last coming he shall show the fruit of
the salvation that he has purchased, and thus he drives away the entisements
that blind us, and make us not to aspire as we ought to the heavenly glory:
yea he teaches that we must travel, as men being from home in this world,
that the heavenly inheritance be not lost or fall away from us.

Romans 12.20 Phi. 2.3
4 The forsaking of our selves, which is the first part, does partly respect
our neighbors, but chiefly God. But as concerning our neighbors it is hard:
because it commands chiefly two things of difficulty, 1. Cor. 4.7
that is to say, that we prefer them before us in honor, that we faithfully
employe our selves wholly to procure their commodities: here he first
entreats thereof.

1. Cor. 13.4 Heb. 15.16
5 And the^ of the other, and by what arguments the Scripture does exhort us to
the same part of our office.

Gal. 6.10 Luke 17.3 Mat. 5.44
6 In perfourming these offices, first there is required patience, least we wax
weary with well doing: and by what arguments the same may be brought to pass,
that patiently we may honor and love others, although they either be
unworthy or have evil deserved of us.

7 This is no mortificatio^ til we fulfill the duties of charity, although we
leave none of them undone, but do it of a sincere affection of love, for
otherwise it is wont to happen that we do fill our duties with arrogancy or
with vpbrayding, or we subdue him whom we have done good unto: as bound to
us, or having discharged one kind of duty, we think we are delivered from
the rest.

8 The deniyng of our selves, in as much as it respects God, does chiefly
frame us to quietness of mind, and first in searching those things which belong
to this present life: where we must resign our selves and all that we have to
the will of the Lord, and yield him the affections of our heart to be tamed
and subdued.

9 Thereupon it follows, that neither we seek evil gains to enrich us, nor
burn in immoderate desire of earthly things, nor yet to be troubled, Psalm. 13^
if the end answer not to our desires.

10 Moreover the quietness and sufferance which he has spoken of, ought
farther to be extended, Psalm. 79.12
that is to say, to all chances whereunto this present life is subject, for
this is very necessary.

Cap. 8. Of the bearing of the Cross, which is a part of the forsaking of our
selves.
EVery man ought to bear his own cross, that is, to prepare themselves to a
hard, laborsome and unquiet life, and full of many and diverse kinds of
incommodities. The heavenly Father taking beginning at Christ his only begotten
Son, proceeds with this order toward all his children. Mat. 16.24 Mat. 3.17
Romans 8.2 Act. 14.22 Phi. 3.10
Therefore there comes great comfort to us, that we communicate with
Christ's passions.

2 We have need for many causes to live under continual cross: first that by
this means the foolish and vain confidence of the flesh, be beaten down:
and that we be exercised to humility, Psalm. 30.6
whereby we may the better resort to Gods grace.

3 By which only he plainly shows how much good is engendered. Romans 5.3


4 Moreover that our patience may be tried, and we enstructed to obedience he
briefly expounds both, we can use no other obedience toward him than that
God has given us, which he makes approved by witnesses, and to set forth the
graces that he has bestowed upon his holy ones, that they should not lie
idly hid within us. And therefore in bringing forth into open show the
strength of sufferaunce and constancy, Genesis 12 1. Pet. 1.7
wherewith he has furnished his servants, it is said, that he tries their
patience.

5 And the better to perceive how necessary this obedience is, he also lays
forth to be considered, how wanton our flesh is, to shake of the yoke of God
so soon as it has been but a little while dayntily and wantonly handeled.

1. Cor. 11.8 Pro. 3.11 Heb. 12.8
6 Thirdly, God does afflict us to correct our faults past, and to hold us in
lawful obedience toward him, least we be condemned with the world.

Mat. ^.10
7 Last of all, this is great comfort if we suffer for righteousness sake.

8 This kind of cross is chiefly proper to the faithful. Therefore ought we
willingly and gladly to receive at the hand of God, neither yet is such
gladsomenesse to be required, which should take away all bitterness and feeling
of sorrow: but which may be ouercomme by valiantly resisting.

2. Cor. 14.8 Mat. 5.4 Lu. 22.44
9 He sets a description taken out of Paul, against the vanity of the
Stoikes, and sets forth the same by an example of Christ.

10 Least the good minds should therefore utterly renounce the study of
patience, because they can not put of the natural affection of sorrow, he more
fully shows, that which before he lightly touched, what is the patience that
is required of us. The scripture gives to the holy ones this praise of
patience, when they are troubled with hardness of adversity, that yet they be
not overcome nor thrown down with it: when they be so pricked with
bitterness, that they be also delighted with spiritual joy, when they be so
distressed with grief, that yet they receive courage again being cheared
with the comfort of God. Ioh. 21.15


11 By this which is spoken it appears what difference is between the
Philosophical and Christianlike patience, the same brings no other reason
but because it must be so: but this does so depend upon the consideration of
Gods will, that to suffer grief in this life he acknowledges it to be just
and healthful; and therefore does take it patiently.

Cap. 9. Of the meditation of the life to come.
THis is the Lords advise when he exercises us with any cross to use us to
the contempt of this present life: (which otherwise would please us more than
meet) and thenceforth to stir us up to the meditation of a life to come,
that we finding here nothing else but a strife, may aspire to heaven for
release of our labors.

2 Between these two there is no mean: either the earth must become vile unto
us, or hold us bound with immoderat love of it. Moreover because it much
avails with us, greatly to esteem of our selves, we must therefore be now
and then called away, least we be bewitched with such allurements.

3 He faineth not such a contempt of this present life, which should either
breed hatred and ingratitude against God: for this life is of great estimation,
and a singular gift of Gods goodness.

4 This present life is so to be contemned, 2. Cor. 5.6 Romans 7.24 Phi. 1.23
that whatsoever we take from the wrongful desire thereof, we ought to add it
to the desire of a better life: neither are we simply weary thereof, but when
we make comparison with a better Otherwise the place wherein ye Lord has placed
us, ought so long to be kept of us, till he call us away.

5 When we hear of the dissoluing of us, it may quake natural sense: but the
same infirmity must so be ouercomme with the desire of a life to come, yt faith
should compel us earnestly to desire that, which nature fears. And no man
has well profited in Christ's School, but he that looks for, with joy, 2.
Cor. 5.1. Romans 8.19. Tit. 2.12. Luke 22.18
both the day of his death, and also resurrection, not only with wishing, but
also with groaning and sighing, as a thing most happy of all other to be looked
for.

6 The cause being taken as well from the consideration of this present life,
Romans 8.37. 1. Cor. 15.16. Esai. 25.18. Reu. 7.17. 1. These. 1.6. Psalm. 73.2.
as of the life to come.

Cap. 10. How we ought to use this present life, and the helps thereof.
WHat is the right use of earthly benefits, which is a thing not to be
neglected in the framing an order of life. The same is described of ye Lord,
when he teaches that this life is a certain pilgrimage, whereby we labor to
the heavenly kingdom, for heerevppon it follows, that so far forth we
must use his benefits, either to our necessity or to our pleasure, that they
may be rather helpefull, than hurtful to our course: Here therefore too much
severity on the one side, but on the other, unbridled lust must be taken
heed of.

2 So God has made all things for our commodity, Psalm. 104.14
not only to provide for our necessity, but also for our delight and pleasure.

3 It is unnatural Philosophy then, which grants no use of his creatures,
but a necessary use. But on the other side, we must with no less diligence
provide a stay for the lust of the flesh; which if it be not brought into
order, ouerfloweth without measure. To this brideling, first we must know that
all things are made to this end, Romans 13.14
yt we should acknowledge the Author, and give him thanks, for his tender
kindness toward us: neither of which they can do, which immoderately do abuse
these earthly befites.

1. Cor. 7.3
4 Secondly all these things ought so far forth to be contemned, as shall be
expedient to the perpetual and lively meditation of the heavenly kingdom: but
this is utterly extinguished two ways, by their ouermuche love: first by
immoderate using the things wherein they abou^d, because by that means they
make of helps, lettes and impedimentes. There is great carfulness of
trimming the body, and as great carelessness of virtue: for they that are
careful of the body, are unmindful of their soul.

5 Moreover by grievously wanting, if they be absent, Phi 4.12
or by immoderat desiring: for this is a great hinderance to piety. The
scripture also tempereth the use of earthly things after another sort, that is
to say, when it teaches that they are so appointed for our use, that we shall
render an account of them, and that to him who has condemned all abuse with
his own mouth.

6 Last of all, the same also serves to no small purpose to judge what is the
right use of earthly things, because the Lord bids every one of us in all
the doings of his life to have an eye to his calling, that we take nothing in
hand rashly, or with a doubtful conscience. From the 11. Chapter to the 18.

These eight Chapters of justification of Faith, which follow, seem to me,
that they may most aptly be knit together in this order: that first he does
affirm the thing it self, in the 11. but the four which next follow, by
destroying righteousness by works, do confirm every thing according to that
order which every one does show in their titles: the twelfthe is of the
description of perfect righteousness, 13: and from two things which are to be
taken heed of, 14. of the consideration of the beginning and going forward of
sanctification in the regenerate, 15. from two wicked affectes which always
accompany righteousness of works. The three other, do beat down, first the
slanders, than the arguments of the adversaries: first those which are drawn
from the promises either of the law or the Gospel, 17. tha^ those things
whereby righteousness of works is gathered by promised reward.18.

Cap. 11. Of the justification of Faith, and first of the definition of the
name and of the thing.
THere are three principal parts of this Chapter: for first he disputes of
the word, from the 1. to the 4: secondly, he beats down Osianders dotage of
essential righteousness, from the 5. to the 12. Last of all, against
righteousness of works he sets up righteousness of Faith, from the 13. to the
23.

1 After he has briefly recited those things which are before spoken of
regeneration, he comes to the doctrine of justification, the knowledge
whereof he proves to be very necessary for two causes.

2 But that we stumble not at the first entry, he shows what it is to be
justified, first before God, secondly by works, thirdly by Faith.

3 This his interpretation of ye word he confirms by many testimonies of
Scripture: first where Luke says, that the people when they had heard Christ
did justify God, and where Christ pronounces that wisdom is justified by
her children, he does not mean there that they do give righteousness, which
always remains perfect with God; Luke 7.12.37
nor to make the doctrine of salvation righteous, which has ever that of it
self: but both these speeches serve to give to God and his doctrine the praise
that they deserve. when Christ reprocheth ye Pharisees that they justify them
selves, he does not mean that they obtain righteousness by well doing, but
do vaingloriously seek for the fame of righteousness whereof they be void.
Luke 16.15
They are not only called wicked dooers, that are guilty in their
consciences of any wicked doing, but also they that come in danger of
judgment of condemnation: 1. Kin. 1.21
for when Barsabe says that she and Solomon shall be wicked doers, she does
not therein acknowledge any offense, but co^plaineth that she and her son
shall be put to shame to be numbered among the reprobate and condemned. Gal. 3.8
Where Paul says, yt God justifies, it is meant yt he imputes righteousness
by faith. And where he says, that he justifies the wicked man, it is meant
that by the benefit of faith, he delivers and makes them free from
damnation, Acts. 13.38 Luke. 18.12
which their wickedness deserved, as Paul concludes in an other place.

4 Moreover he applies the thing it self to the same out of Paul, Ephesians. 1.5
Romans 3.24 2. Cor. 5.18
where he expresses justification by the name of acceptance.

5 As concerning Osianders dotage, he proves that his foundation is, in that
he peruersly did enterprete certain places of the Union that is between
Christ and us, that is to say, mingling an essential union, as though the
essence of Christ were mingled with ours, which is false: heerevpon it comes
to pass that Christ is to us righteousness, not in respect, as his righteousness
is ours by faith, but because Christ is the eternal God, the fountain of
righteousness, and the very righteousness of God, imagining that we are
substantially righteous in God: as well by essence as by quality powered into
us: moreover that not only Christ, but also his father, and the holy Ghost
dwells in us, by a certain substantial mixture, as though GOD should make
us a part of himself.

6 This dotage is more wicked and pernicious, then may with silence, be passed
over. For from thence proceeds those two, first, to be justified is not only
to be reconciled to GOD with free pardon, but also to be righteous, ye
righteousness be not a free imputation, but a holiness and uprightness,
which the substance of God remaining in us does breath into us, the other, that
Christ is not our righteousness, in respect that being a Priest, he had with
satisfactory purging sins, appeased his father toward us; but in respect that
he is the eternal God and Life. The first of these that Osiander may prove
he both alleges a reason (which by a most fit similitude is wiped away)
and also manifestly corrupts certain places of scripture. 1. Cor. 1.30 Romans
4.5


7 That which he obiecteth will follow by our doctrine, that the power of
iustifiyng should be of it self in faith, by no means may be wiped away. In
that he says, that faith is Christ, it is a crooked figure, and not be admitted
for faith, which only is the instrument to receive righteousness is unfitly
mingled with Christ, which is the material cause, and both author and
minister of so great a benefit.

8 As concerning the proof of that other, he contendeth, that the inward
word is so of us to be received by the ministration of the outward word,
that he may draw us from the person of the Mediator, to his eternal
divinity: and seeing Christ is both God and man, he would have him
righteousness to us, in respect of his divine and humane nature, which is
confuted: for if this belong properly to the Godhead, then it shall not be
peculiar to Christ, but common with the Father and the holy Ghost, forasmuch
as there is not one righteousness of the one, and an other of the other, and
that which is naturally from eternity, is not conveniently said to be made to
us: Therefore properly it belongs to the person of the mediator. Whereas
Osiander braggeth of a place of Jeremy, that the Lord Jehovah shall be our
righteousness, Esaias. 53.11
he can get nothing by that, but that Christ which is righteousness, is God
openly showed in the flesh. In an other place, where it is said, that God
purchased to himself the Church with his blood; Act. 20.21
it cannot thereby be gathered, that the blood wherewith sins are purged,
was divine, or of the nature of Godheade. Christ then was made righteousness,
when he did put on the form of a servant: he did justify us, when he showed
himself obedient to his father, and therefore does not this according to his
nature of Godhead, but according to the office of dispensation, committed unto
him. For although God alone is the fountain of righteousness, and we be made
righteous by no other mean, but by the partaking of him, yet because we are by
unhappy disagreement, estranged from his righteousness, we must needs come
down to this lower remedy, that Christ may justify us, with the force of his
death and resurrection.

9 If he object, that this is a work of such excellency, that it is above the
nature of man, and therefore cannot be ascribed, but to the nature of God: this
also he plainly shows of how little weight it is, Romans 5.19
and how maliciously he contendeth, that the righteousness of God can be
nothing else, but his essential righteousness, which Paul denies, and
Christ himself when he means to seal the righteousness and salvation, to
which he has brought us, sets before us an assured pledge thereof in his
flesh, Job. 6.51.55
he does in deed call himself the lively bread, but expressing the manner
here he adds, that his flesh is very meat, and his blood is very drink:
which manner of teaching is seen in the sacrament, which although they direct
our faith to whole Christ, and not to half Christ, yet they do therewithal
teach, that the matter of righteousness and salvation remains in his flesh,
not in that he is only man, he either justifies or quickens of himself;
but because it pleased God to show openly in the Mediator that which was hidden
and inco^prehensible in himself: wherefore Christ is as it were a Fountain set
open for us, out of which we may draw that which otherwise should without
fruit lie hidden in that close and deep spring that rises up unto us in the
person of the Mediator.

10 Yet he confesses that we want this incomparable benefit, till Christ be
made ours: where also he shows, what this union, should be truly a notable
and an effectual union: but mystical not essential. Then he shows to what
end Osiander requires so importunately essential righteousness: and
essential habitatio^ of Christ in us, that is to say, first, to obtain that
God has powered himself into us by a gross mixture (and that to establish a
carnal feeding of Christ in the Sacrament) moreover to win that God does
really breath his righteousness into us: whereby we may be really righteous
with him. Through Christ, says Peter are given the precious and most great
promises that we should be made partakers of the nature of GOD: As though we
were now such as the Gospel promises, 2. Pet. 1.4 1. John. 3.1
that we shall be at the last coming of Christ.

11. 12 He severally wipeth away all the reasons wherewith he labors to
overcome this: and the obiectio^s wherewith he endeavors against the truth
that we are not justified by free imputation, 1. Cor. 5.12 Romans 4.7 Psalm. 32.1
Gal. 3.18 Exodus 21.9
which the Apostle plainly affirms, his first objection is this, that Christ
is made wisdom, which belongs to none, but to the eternal word, Therefore
Christ in that he is man, is not wisdom. But the answer is, that the only
begotten Son of God was in deed his eternal wisdom, but the name is of
Paul diversely given, because all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
laid up in him: that therefore which he had with his father, Col. 2.^
he disclosed unto us: and so that which Paul says is not referred to the
essence of the son of God, but to our use, and is rightly applied to Christ
his nature of manhood, John. 8.12
because although he shined a light in the darkness before that he did put on
flesh, yet it was a hidden light, till the same Christ came forth in the
nature of man the shining Sun of righteousness, which therefore calls
himself the light of the world. It is foolishly objected that the power of
iustifiyng is far above both Angels and men, Gal. 13.3
forasmuch as this hangs not upon the worthiness of any creature, but upon
the ordinance of God, for Angels can prevail nothing to satisfy God that are
not thereunto appointed, but that belongs to Christ being man: and albeit
Christ is called ye author of life, in respect that he suffered death, Heb.
2.14
to destroy him that had the power of death, yet the honor is not taken away
from whole Christ, as he was openly showed God in the flesh; but a
distinction only made how the righteousness of God is conveyed unto us, that
we may inioye it. Neither do we deny that, which is openly given us in
Christ, to proceed from the secret grace and power of God; Phi. 2.15
and the righteousness which Christ gives, to be the righteousness of God,
that proceeds from God: but we hold this, that we have righteousness and life
in the death and resurrection of Christ: and we hold this also, that God
works in us both to will and perform, and refourmeth with his spirit unto
holiness of life and righteousness: but he does not this by himself, and
immediately, but by the hand of his son, with whom he has left all the
fullness of his holy spirit, that with his abundant store he would supply the
need of his members. And although righteousness come unto us out of the
secret fountain of the Godhead, yet it follows not ye Christ which
sanctified himself in the flesh, for our sakes was righteousness unto us
according to his nature of Godhead. John. 17.19
In redeeming the Church, Esaias says, God did put on his righteousness as a
harness, but he did it, not to spoil Christ of his armor which he had
given him to make him no perfect redeemer: but the Prophet meant nothing else but
that God borrowed nothing out of himself, Esaias. 59.15 Romans 3.25
nor was helped by any aid to redeem us.

13 And so coming to other that imagine righteousness to be made of faith
and works, Phi. 8.3 Romans 2.4
he shows that the righteousness of faith and works do so differ among
themselves, that when the one is established, the other must needs be
overthrown.

14 The subtle shift that the Sophisters think they have, when they attribute
this to those works only, Gal. 3.11
which are done of those that are regenerate, but not to those works which
men do not, yet regenerated without the grace of Christ, is nothing worth.

15 The school men are more gross which teach that man is justified, not by
imputation of free righteousness, but by the holy Ghost helping to the endeavor
of holiness.

16 The scripture when it speaks of justification of faith, does lead us to
a far other end, that is to say, that turning away from the looking away of
our own works, we should only look unto the mercy of God, and perfection of
Christ.

17. 18 And the better to show ye same he alleges two places out of Paul
to make for his purpose. Romans 10.5 Gal. 3.18


19 Thereupon he concludes that we are justified by faith only, although this
word Only be no where in the scripture to be found, and it is a foolish shift,
Romans 4.2 Gal. 3.10
that they say Paul does only exclude Ceremonial works, as though life had
bin promised to the keepers of Ceremonies only: and a curse threatened only to
the breakers of them.

20 In what sense works are counted worthy the title and reward of
righteousness; Gal. 3.17 Romans 4.6
and yet come not into account of justification. And although we obtain
righteousness, not with a fained, but with a true faith, which works through
love, yet it works not righteousness by charity.

21 The righteousness of faith is reconciliation with GOD, Esai. 59.7 Romans 5.8
and therefore it consists upon only remission of sins.

22 That is proved both by the testimony of the Scripture, 2. Cor. 3.19.28.
Romans 4.6
and of the Fathers. Augustine August. de ei^d. Dei. cap. 27
says, The righteousness of the Saints in this world stands rather in
forgeuenes of sins, then in perfection of virtues. Bernard Bernar. in Cant.
Ser. 22
says, Not to sin, is the righteousness of God: and the righteousness of
man, is the merciful kindness of God.

23 Heerevpon follows that also, that man is not therefore justified by
faith, ^. Cor. 5.21 Romans 5.19
because the same does take part of the spirit of God; but because he
apprehends the righteousness of Christ: as Jacob having not of him self
deserved the pre-eminence of the first begotten son hyd him self in the
apparel of his brother; and being clothed with his brothers Coat, that
sauoured of a most sweet smell, he crept into the favor of his father, and
received the blessing to his own commodity, under the person of another: so
do we lie hidden under the precious pureness of Christ our elder brother,
that we may get a testimony of righteousness in the sight of God. (...) de
Iaco and ^ita beata.
Ambrose says, that whereas Isaac smelt the savor of the garments;
peradventure this is meant thereby, that we are not justified by works, but by
faith: because fleshly weakness hinders works, but the brightness of
faith which meriteth forgiveness of sins, ouershadoweth the error of
deeds: and truly so it is, that we may appear before God unto salvation, it
is necessary for us to smell sweetly with his odor, and to have our faults
covered and buried with his perfection.

Cap. 12. That to the end we may be fully persuaded of the free justification,
we must lift up our minds to the judgment seat of God.
HE speaks not here of a worldly judicial court, Esaias. 33.14 Psalm. 130.3
Job. 4.17 Deuteronomy. 27.26
but of a heavenly judgment seat, before yt which nothing is acceptable,
unless it be in all points whole and perfect.

2 It is easy truly, while the comparison stays on men, that every man
should think he has that which other men ought to contemn. But when we rise
to have respect unto GOD, then suddenly that confidence falls to the ground,
and comes to naught, which he shows by a similitude, and certain places of
Scripture. In the same case altogether is our soul in respect of god, as man's
body is in respect of heaven: Luke. 18.15 Psalm. 43.2 Job. 9.8
The sight of the eye so long as it continues in viewing things that lie
neeere unto it, does show of what pearsing force it is: but if it once be
directed up to the Son, then being daseled, and dulled, with the great
brightness thereof, it feels no less feebleness of it self in beholding
of the Son, then it perceived strength in beholding inferior things.

3 And out of the Fathers, but chiefly out of Augustine and Bernard: Augustine
says, Ad. Boni. lib. 3 Cap. 5
All they which groan under this burden of corruptible flesh, and in this
weakness of life, have this only hope, that we have one Mediator Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the appeasement for our sins. Super Cant. Ser. 61.
Bernard says, Where is safe and steadfast rest and assuredness for the weak,
but in the wounds of our Savior? and so much the surer I dwell therein, as
he is mightier to save. The world rages, the body burdeneth, the Devil
lies in wait: I fall not because I am builded upon a sure rock, I have
sinned a grievous sin, my conscience is troubled, but it shall not be over
troubled, because I shall remember the wounds of the Lord. Therefore my
merit is the Lords taking of mercy, I am not utterly without merit, so long
as he is not without mercies. Shall I sing my own righteousness? Lord I will
remember only thy righteousness, for he is made unto me, the righteousness of
God. Again he says, Ser. 13. in Cau^.
Why should the Church be careful of merits which has a surer and safer way
to glory upon the purpose of God: So there is no cause why thou should ask
by what merits we hope for good things, specially, when the Lord says, Eze.
36.22.32
I will do it, not for your sakes, but for mine own sake.

4. 1. Cor. 4.5 Job. 15.16
5 There is no sanctuary of saftie wherein the consciences may quietly rest
them, unless they have to do with ye judgment of god, but because our
hypocrisy is such, Esaias. 35.6 1. Pet. 5.5
that until we come unto it, we stroke and flatter our selves through an
outward show of righteousness, and examine not the uncleanness of our heart
with egall balance.

Psalm. 18.27 Soph. 3.11 Esaias. 66.2
6 And this is at length true humility, as by certain testimonies is proved.

Luke. 18.13 Matthew. 11.28
7 And is declared by the example of the Publicane.

8 Arrogancy and carelessness ought therefore to depart from us, because every
man so much hinders his receiving of the liberality of God, as he rests in
himself.

Cap. 13. That there are two things to be marked in free justification.
THE first of them that is to be marked in free justification, Romans 3.25 Eze.
20.42 Iere. 9.13
is this truly, that the Lord have his glory remain undiminished, and as it
were, wholly and perfectly maintained: for this is due unto him of good right.

2 But they are all deceived in this point, that glory in them selves: Romans
2.19. Romans 3.26. Ephe. 12.8.
and no man can chale^dge to him self any iotte of righteousness which he
does not wrongfully pluck from the glory of Gods righteousness.

3 The second is, that there should be peaceable quietness before God in our
consciences; Pro. 20.9. Romans 4.14.
but the same can be sought for by no righteousness of works, nor by no other
mean than by free righteousness: first otherwise Faith is made void.

4 Moreover the promise is void, Psalm. 119.76.
if the fulfilling thereof do hang upon our deserving, as by that other reason
it is taken away, that is to say, if thou take away Faith: for if Faith be
fallen, there shall remain no force for the promise; but if Faith stand, the
promise also is abundantly confirmed: first he proves this out of Augustine:
In Psalm. 58. Trac. Priore.
Augustine says, that Christ shall reign for ever in his servants, God has
promised, God has said it, and if that be not enough, God has sworn it:
therefore forasmuch as the promise is stablished, not according to our
deseruings, but according to his mercy, no man ought to speak fearfully of
that of which he can not doubt. Bernard says, that the Disciples of Christ
say, who can be saved? but he answered: this is impossible with men: but it is
not impossible with God. This is our confidence, this is our only comfort,
this is the whole ground of our hope, but being assured of the possibility,
what say we of his will: Eccle. 9.1. 1. Cor. 2.16
who knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred? who has known the Lords
meaning? or who has been his counselor? Here now Faith must of necessity
help us, here must his truth succor us, that that which is hidden from us; may
be revealed by the spirit, and his spirit testifiyng it, Romans 8.16 Zach. 3.9
Esai. 9.6 Ephe. 2.14 Romans 5.1
may persuade our hearts that we are the Sons of God.

5 Moreover out of Paul, where also he declares this self same thing by a
contrary, that is to say, that we are not therefore just, because being
regenerate, we live spiritually, because our Romans 8.35
regeneration is always imperfect in this flesh: but Faith as touching
justification, is a thing mere passive, Psalm. 25.23. Gal. 4.6
and it brings nothing of our own to the recovering of Gods favor, but
receives of Christ that which we want.

Cap. 14. What is the beginning of justification, and the continual proceeding
thereof.
TO the intent yt these things which are spoken may ye better be understood,
he takes in hand to discuss what righteousness may be in ye whole course of
man's life, and he divides all men in to four parts, and entreats severally
of every one: of the first, from the first to the sixth: of the second and
third, jointly, in the 7. and 8: of the fourth, from the 9. to the 21.

1 The first of them is, Ier. 17.9 Genesis 8.21
that they that are endued with no knowledge of God, are drowned in idolatry,
in the^ is found no spark of goodness, from the crown of the head to the sole
of the foot: The outward show also of godliness, is of no price and
estimation before God.

2 There is great difference between some of a better note, and other some
most lamentable: they are also the gifts of God whatsoever excellent gifts
appear in the unbelievers, and God blesses them with the blessings of this
present life, that among men do follow virtue.

3 What so ever is done of the unbelievers, although it seem laudable, is yet
for two causes corrupted, that is to say, by impuritie of heart: and because
they despise the right end, Augustine says, Lib. 4. cont. Iulianum.
that all they that are strangers from the true religion of the one God, how so
ever they be counted worthy of admiration for opinion of virtue, are not only
worthy of no reward, but rather are worthy of punishment, because they do
with defiling of their heart, bespot the pure good things of God. For though
they be instruments of God, to preserve the fellowship of men, with justice,
continency, temperancie of mind, valiantnes and wisdom; yet they do very
euilly execute these good works of God, because they are restrained from evil
doing, not by sincere love of goodness, but either by only ambition, or by
love of them selves, or by some other crooked affection.

4 Which thing also he otherwise shows, first because they have not Christ.
Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5.12.
that there is no life without the son of God: who so have no part in Christ,
what manner of men so ever they be, what so ever they do or go about, yet
they run forward with their whole course into destruction, and the judgment
of eternal death. Aug. ad Bonifa. in Cap. 5. Heb. 11.6.
Augustine says, Our religion discerns the righteous from the unrighteous,
not by law of works; but by the very law of Faith: without which, those that
seem good works, are turned into sins.

5 Moreover, Ioh. 5.25. Job. 41.2. Ephe. 2.10. 1. Tim. 1.9 Romans 11.6.
by wonderful setting the grace of God directly against the natural state of
man, that is to say, first because we are dead: secondly, because we are
nothing, till being lightened with his grace, we be raised, and as it were
made a new creature.

6 Last of all, (albeit he fear least he should do wrong to the mercies of
God, which does so carefully travel in proving of this thing, as though it
were doubtful and dark) by the testimony of Esai, Es. 59.15 Romans 5.6 Col. 1.2.
1. Cor. 6.11 1. Pet. 1.2
and a most strong reason: and that to take away the error of the common
people: who although he confess that no man has deserved, that Christ should
perform our redemption, yet that they may enter into possession of
redemption, they think they are helped by their good works. Seeing there is
no righteousness at all, but that which is acceptable to God, what acceptable
thing can there proceed from his enemies, whom he wholly abhors with all
their doings? And most certain it is yt we are deadly and professed enemies of
God, till being justified, we are received into friendship, then if
justification be the beginning of love, what righteousness of works can go
before?

7 Those who^ he had divided into the next three parts, they truly which
beginning with Sacraments, deniyng God with their deeds by the uncleanness of life,
whom they confessed in mouth are only in name Christians, and they which hyde
the wickedness of the hypocrisy of ye heart with vain shows, he puts both
under this reason: No holy thing undoubtedly comes from them, but utterly
damnable, first out of Haggee. Hag. 2.12


8 Moreover out of Esai and Augustine, who says, Esai. 1.14. Pro. 15.8.
That favor with God is not procured to any person by works, but
contrariwise, that works do then please, and never til then, when the person
has first found grace in the sight of God.

9 Coming to the fourth place, that is to say, of them which being regenerate
by the holy Ghost, do meditat true holiness, he confesses that they do walk in
the way of the Lord by the guiding of the holy Ghost, 1. Kin. 8.5.
yet there comes nothing so perfect from them, which is not sprinckeled and
corrupted with some rottennes of the flesh, especially when we have to deal
with the judgments of God.

10 Moreover, although it might be that we should have some thoroughly pure
and perfect works, yet one sin is enough to blotte and quench out all
remembrance of the former righteousness: Eze. 18.24. Iam. 2.10.
and therefore we can be justified by no means by our works.

11 Last of all, the Scripture does manifestly teach that the faithful, Romans
4.13. Hab. 4.7. Romans 4.7.
how so ever they excel in good works, are justified by only Faith, and free
imputation of righteousness.

12 The starting hole, wherewith the schoolmen seek to escape by, when they
say that good works are not by outward worthiness in themselves of so great
value, that they be sufficient to purchase righteousness; but this, that they be
of so great value, is of grace accepting the^: is confuted.

13 No works of ours can of themselves make us acceptable and pleasing to God:
for it is proper to Christ only. And by so much more are they deceived in
those things which they teach, about making satisfaction: Leui. 18.5. Genesis
3.17. Phi. 3.13.
first, by the works of satisfaction, because satisfactions being once taken
away, those things must needs fall down.

14 Moreover because that saying of Christ does betoken far otherwise, Luke
17.10
When you have done all, etc.

15 He shows yt the objection which they take out of Paul, that among the
Corinthians he did of his own will yield of his right, which otherwise he might
have used, if he had would, makes nothing for them: first by enterpreting the
place, secondly by a general doctrine taken out of Chrysostom, Lu. 17.7.
Esai. 1.12.
That all our works are due to the Lord, even as the possessions of bondmen:
thirdly, that their supererogations are nothing else but vain trifles.

16 In this behalf there are chiefly two pestilences to be driven out of our
minds: Psalm. 143.^ Job. 10.11.
that we put no affiance in the righteousness of works, and that we ascribe no
glory to them: but when our affiance is driven away, al glory also must
necessarily depart.

17 It is severally showed, that in the four kinds of causes, none does
accord with works in the establishing of our salvation: but the cause of
procuring the eternal life to us, is ye mercy of the heavenly Father, and his
free love toward us. Job. 3.16. Romans 3.23.24.
The material cause is Christ with his obedience, by which he has purchased
righteousness to us, ye formal or instrumental cause is Faith, and the final
cause is ye showing of ye righteousness of God, and the praise of his goodness.

18 He takes away two objections that may be objected: first that holy men
do oftentimes strengthen and comfort themselves with remembrance of their own
innocence and vprightnes, and sometime also forbear not to report of it:
which although it may two ways be done, yet it makes nothing for them, and
first seeing the godly ones do not this, to rest upon the affiance of works,
and to derogate any thing from free justification.

Genesis 24.10. Pro. 14.26. 2. Kin. 20.4. Ephe. 3.18.
19 Moreover because they do nothing but by the fruits of their vocation, call
to mind yt they are adopted of the lord, into the place of children.

20 Therefore he concludes that they attribute nothing to their deserts: nor
derogate any thing from the free righteousness which they obtain in Christ,
which also he shows by a notable example of Augustine, which is this: I do
not say to the Lord, despise not the works of my hands, or I have sought the
Lord with my hands, and have not bin deceived. But I do not commend the works
of my hands: for I fear least when thou have looked upon them, thou shall find
more sins then merits. Only this I say, this I ask, this I desire, Despise not
the works of thy hands, behold in me thy work, not mine: for if thou
beholdest mine, thou damnest me: if thou beholdest thine, thou crownest me: for
whatsoever good works I have, they are of thee.

21 The other, yt the Scripture shows, that the good works of the faithful
are causes why the Lord does good to them, they are causes truly, but
inferior causes, Romans 8.3. Romans 6.13.
and those things which depend of free justification, are not against it.
Moreover, in these speeches he rather noted the order, then the cause.

Cap. 15. That those things that are commonly boasted concerning the merits
of works, do overthrow as well the praise of God in giving of righteousness,
as also the assurednes in giving of salvation.
AFter he has showed that works are not available to justification, he now
sets to be discussed whether they deserve favor with God or no.

2 The name of merit was evil applied to works by the old fathers, yet they
had a godly meaning, as appears by Augustine, Chrysostom and Bernard.
Augustine says, Psalm. 88. Eze. 36.31.
when man sees that what so ever good he has, he has it not from him self,
but from his God: he sees that all that which is praised in him is not of his
own merits, but of the mercy of God.

3 Good works do both please God, and are profitable to the doers of them,
that they may receive for reward the most large benifits of God, not because
they so deserve, but because the goodness of God has of it self appointed this
price unto them: as that which bestows good works and their commendations
upon us, that they may nevertheless seem after a certain manner to remain with
him.

4 How two places must be understood which ye Papists abuse, to co^firm their
error: and except they take that sense, they offend two ways against the
common doctrine of the scripture, the very words of Ecclesiasticus are these:
Eccle. 16.14. Heb. 13.16
(...). He shall make place to every mercy: and every man shall find according
to his works. In the words of the Apostle is nothing else, but that such
sacrifices do please and are acceptable to god. Mat. 25.21. Esai. 55.1.
And albeit Christ says, that to him that has, shall be given: and that the
faithful servant shall be set over many things, that has bin faithful over
little: yet he shows that the increase of the faithful are the gifts of his
free goodness.

5 Which he proves by that yt Paul calls Christ the only foundation: 1.
Cor. 3.11. 1. Cor. 1.10.
for he is so, the foundation that we have all things in him, but nothing in
our selves, as he severally shows.

6 The Schoolmen have long time taught the world far otherwise: that is to
say, that Christ has deserved for us the first grace, that is the occasion of
deserving: but now it is our part, not to let go the occasion offered, as
though he only had opened the gate, in the mean while, leaving to us to go in
by our own power.

7 Hereupon followed certain other things, first that they take from us the
justification of Faith: Moreover, that drawing good works from the power of
free will, they steal from God somewhat to give to man in the praise of good
works: thirdly, that although they continually call upon good works, yet in
the mean time they so instruct their consciences, Ephe. 2.10.
yt they never dare have affiance, that they have God well pleased, and
favorable to their good works.

8 He concludes, that the foundation which he has laid, does plentifully
suffice both to doctrine and exhortation, and also to consolation.

Cap. 16. A confutation of the slanders, whereby the Papists go about to bring
this doctrine into hatred.
HE does not therefore abolish good works, 1. Cor. 1.3^.
because he denies them to be justified by good works.

2 That also is most false, that the minds of men are withdrawn from the
affection of well doing, when we take from them the opinion of meriting, he
proves by two reasons: Heb. 9.14. Romans 6.6.1 S. Tit. 2.11. 1. Cor. 3.16.
first if this only be intended, when men serve God, that they look to
reward, or let out to hyre, or sell their labors to him, they little prevail,
for God will be freely worshipped, freely loved; He allows yt worshipper,
which when all hope of receiving reward is cut off, yet ceasseth not to
worship: Moreover, if men be to be pricked forward, no man can put sharper
spurs unto them, than those that are taken of the end of our redemption and
calling.

Romans 12.1. Mat. 5.16. 2. Cor. 9.7. Psalm. 130.4.
3 This Method of teaching is more auailable to the pureness of life, then if in
thrusting in of merits, thou should beat out some servile and constrained
obedience of the law, although this kind of exhortation be profitable, and
used in the Scriptures.

4 It is a most vain slander yt men are allured to sin, when we affirm
that free forgiveness of sin wherein we say righteousness consists, which is
freely given us in Christ, who bought it with a price: for our filthiness is
such as is never washed away, but with the fountain of his most precious
blood: now if we once have received any good thing, how can we but dread,
being once cleansed, to wallow our selves again in the mire, as much as in us
lies, to trouble and infect the pureness of this fountain? I have washed my
feet says the faithful soul, Ca^^. 5.3.
how shall I again defile them.

Cap. 17. The agreement of the promises of the Law and the Gospel.
THey which allege the promises of ye law to overthrow justification of faith,
and so thereby do reason, Deuteronomy. 7.23 Iere. 73.23 Deuteronomy. 11.26
that either such blessings, are idle and fruitless, or that justification is
not of faith alone, he beats down in this order: that whosoever will obtain
justification, must needs leave the law, and as it were brought into liberty
from the bondage thereof, not that carnal liberty which should draw us from
keeping of the Law, should allure us to think all things lawful, and to
suffer our lust, as it were the stays being broken, and with loose raines to
run riot: but the spiritual liberty which may comfort and raise us, in a
dismaide and overthrown conscience, showing it to be free from the curse, and
damnation, wherewith the law held it down fast bound and tied. This
deliverance from the subjection of the law we obtain, when by faith we take
hold of the mercy of God in Christ, whereof we are certified of the
forgiveness of sins, with the feeling whereof the law did prick and bite us.

Gal. 2.16 Psalm. 19.12
2 This he confirmed by an example, of Paul and David, If the faithful remove
from the law into faith, that they in faith find righteousness, which they
see to be absent from the law: truly they forsake the righteousness of the
law.

3 Therefore the promises of the law, if they be considered in themselves,
Leuit. 18.5 Eze. 20.11 Romans 10.5
or have respect to ye merits of works, utter not their effectualnesse
toward us, and are after a sort abolished: but when the promises are put in
place of them, they not only bring to pass, that we our selves are acceptable
to GOD, but that our works also have their thanks: and that for three causes
of Gods liberality: whereby it comes to pass, yt the works of the faithful
are acceptable to god, first that GOD turning away his sight from the works of
his servants, which deserve reproach, embraces the^ in Christ, and by the
mean of faith, reconcileth them to himself without the mean of works.
Secondly, of his fatherly love and tender mercy, he lifts up works to great
honor, not waying the worshinesse of them. Thirdly, he receaueth the same
works with pardon, not imputing the imperfection wherewith they are defiled.

4 The place of Peter which they allege of Cornelius, to make for their
purpose, does prove nothing less then that man is prepared to receive the
grace of GOD by the endeavor of good works, but by contrariwise (seeing there
is a double accepting of man with GOD) first when finding nothing in man but
only misery, Gal. 5.5
yet of his great liberality he receives him freely.

5 Last of all, when by the same he has new begotten him, and newly fourmed
him into a new life, he now imbraceth him as a new creature, garnished with
the gifts of the holy spirit, (whereof Peter speaks in this place) he
sets down plainly and shows that Cornelius was freely accepted, before
that his good works could be accepted: and this is the meaning of other
places which witness that God is gentle and merciful, Hebe. 1.5 Deuteronomy. 29.18 2.
Sam. 22
to the obeiers and followers of righteousness.

6 But that such places may better be understood, first he wills us to
consider whether it be a promise of the law or a promise of the Gospel, for
both these two may not be understood in one sense: for the promises of the
law, always under condition, Psalm. 1.5 Esaias. 33.14
if we will do it, etc. do promise reward: but the promises of the gospel
although they are pronounced almost with such like words, as when it is said
that the Lord keeps the covenant of mercy, with all them that love him, etc.
yet he rather shows what are his servants, which have faithfully received
his covenant, then they do express the cause why GOD should do good to them.

7 Moreover he entreats specially of two such kinds of speeches: first, of
them yt garnish good works with the title of righteousness, that is to say,
they do respect such works, not so much in respect of them, that they are
done of me^, as that they are commanded in the law: for in the same sense, it
is no marvel if they be garnished with the title of righteousness, Deuteronomy.
6.6.26 Deuteronomy. 24.13 Psalm. 106.30 Luke. 1.6
seeing that both the obedience of the same law, does contain an absolute
righteousness, and the keeping of every commandment a part of righteousness.
Genesis 4.4 Psa. 106.30.3^


8 Then also he speaks of the other that is of them, which affirm that man is
justified by good works, and first he determines that works in themselves
prevail nothing at all, and that we are justified by only faith: But when the
faithful have obtained this freee justification, now the good works which
follow, have another valuation, then after their own deserving: neither are
they falsely counted unrighteous, or imputed for righteousness.

9 The better to confute the same, he wringeth his adversaries so on every
side with a horned argument, that by no means they can escape, for if they
object the righteousness of works to assail the righteousness of faith,
they may many ways be driven, to be forced to confess that there is no work
that is not both corrupted with transgressions adjoined with it, and with the
corruptnesse of it self, that it can not have the honor of righteousness:
but if they grant that they come from the righteousness of faith, that works
otherwise vnpure, Deuteronomy. 2.7 Job. 4.8
should be imputed to righteousness, or else acknowledge only the
righteousness of faith, without the which righteousness of works, is nothing,
or else by their righteousness of works, they must needs make a vipers birth.

10 He prosecuteth this argument more at full, granting that by this means,
Romans 3.7
there is not only righteousness in parts, as our adversaries would have it,
Iam 1.12 Psalm. 11.6
but also that it is allowed of God, as if it were a perfect and full
righteousness: Matthew. 5.3
yet because the justification of faith is the fundation, the same ought not to
be lifted up to destroy this: for by only faith, not only we our selves, but
also our works are justified. And this is the righteousness of works which
the Scripture so often speaks of.

11 Because they are diligent to allege much out of James against this
doctrine, first he merrily laugheth at their boldness, which while they gnaw
at justification of faith, and so draw Paul to fight with James, in ye mean
space they determine no mark of righteousness, where consciences may stay at
rest. Moreover he shows what was the scope of the Apostle, and where the
adversaries are deceived, that is to say, in a double deceit: first of faith.

12 Moreover of justification, for the Apostle speaks of the declaration of
righteousness, but not of imputation, (as they have thought) neither does he
dispute by what reason we are justified, but he requires of the faithful a
working righteousness.

13 That which they object out of Paul; that the doers of the law, Romans 2.1^
not the hearers are justified, does tend to none other end, but yt the
Apostle may cast down ye Jews from foolish confidence, which boasted
themselves of the only knowledge of the Law, when in the mean time they were
the greatest despisers of it, and it may be cast upon their own pates.

14 In these places where the faithful do boldly offer their righteousness to
the judgment of God to be examined, and require that sentence be given of
them according to it: two things are to be considered. Neither would they
bring into judgment the whole life, 1. Sam. 26.13 2. Cor. 2.12 Psalm. 36.9
but some special cause, neither do they claim to themselves righteousness,
in respect of the perfection of God, but by comparison of wicked and naughty
men, so they stand not against free justification of faith. David when he
required the Lord to render to every man according to his righteousness and
truth, meant not yt the Lord should examine by himself, and reward every man
according to his deserts, but he took the Lord to witness, how great his
innocence was in comparison of the wickedness of Saul. So Paul defends his
faithful and honest dealing, which he knew to be pleasing to the merciful
kindness of God against all evil speaking of men. Paul says also, that he
knows no evil by himself, but that he is not thereby justified, because he
knew that the judgment of God far surmounteth the bleare eied sight of men,
and howsoever the godly defend their innocence against the hypocrisy of the
ungodly, yet when they have to do with God alone, they cry with open mouth.

15 In that by certain other places they would ascribe to the ways of the
faithful righteousness and life, Pro. 20.5 Eze. 18.9 Ephesians. 1.4
they do very evil reason, that the uprightness of the faith is a step toward
immortality, but the same is of fatherly kindness, not that their works as the
schoolmen dream, are by the accepting of GOD advanced to the price of
equality.

Cap. 18. That by reward, the righteousness of works is ill gathered.
THose sayings, which affirm that God does render to every one according to
their works, do rather show the order and consequence, then the cause,
Matthew. 16.27 2. Cor. 5.10
but it is out of doubt that God does accomplish our salvation by these degrees
of his mercy, when those who^ he has chosen, he calls to him; those whom he
has called, Ios. 5.29 Matthew, 25.34
he justifies; those whom he has justified, he glorifieth. Although he do
by his only mercy receive them that be his, into life: yet because he brings
them into possession thereof, by the race of good works, Phi. 2.12 John. 6.27
that he may fulfill his works in them, by such order, as he has appointed:
it is no marvel if it be said that they be crowned according to their works,
by which they are prepared to receive the crown of immortality.

2 Those sayings also, which call life everlasting, Matthew. 25.34
the reward of works, do not make works, the cause of salvation: Genesis 15.5
it is showed by the nature of inheritance, and confirmed by a notable example,
that the Lord rewards the works of the faithful, with those benefits,
which he had already given them before the works were thought of, having no
cause why to do good to them, but his mercy.

3 Yet the Lord does not deceive or mock us, when he says, yt he rendereth for
reward to works, Col. 1.4 1. Pet. 1.5
the same thing which he had before works freely given: the fruit of the
promises is also rightly assigned to them, Matthew. 10.30
to the ripenes whereof they do bring us, in order as he has set it: Romans 8.18
yet we must take heed that we think not yt the reward which the Lord
promises us, is reduced to the measure of merit: it is a thing also worthy
to be noted in these places, where eternal life is called, the reward of
works, that it is not so much to be taken for the communicating which we have
with God, which goes before, as for the possession or enjoying of blessedness
which follows.

4 When the Scripture does call, eternal life the reward of works, it does
it not to set forth the worthiness of our works, ^. Cor. 15.19 Romans 8.30
as if they deserved such reward, but to succor our weakness which
otherwise it does exercise with many miseries while we live here.

5 The Scripture besides that, it forbids to rejoice in works, because they
are the free gifts of God, it therewithal teaches that they are always
defiled with some dregs, 2. Tim. 4.8
that they cannot satisfy GOD, if they be examined by the rule of his
judgments: but least our courage should faint, Hab. 2.4
it teaches that they please by only pardon, and are sustained with the
promise of a crown. August. ad Valen^. de. gra. and lib. arbit.
Augustine says, To whom should he being a just judge, render a crown, if he
had not being a merciful father, given grace: and how should there be
righteousness, unless grace went before, which justifies the unrighteous?
how should these due things be rendered, unless these undue things were
first given? Calvin.
yea how should he impute righteousness to our works, unless his tender
mercifullnesse, did hide the unrighteousness that is in them? how should he
judge them worthy reward, unless he did by immesurable, bountifulness take
away that which is worthy of punishment?

6 The former places being expounded he descends to other more particular,
Luke. 16.9 1. Tim. 6.17
and first he answers those two places in Luke and Timothy, yt they signify
nothing else but to teach us that it is our parts, if we believe that heaven
is a Country, to send over our riches thither, rather then keep them here,
where we must loose them with soden remoouing.

7 That which they object out of two other places, Heb. 6.10 Romans 8.19 Luke.
24.25
that the faithful through afflictions are counted worthy the kingdom of
heaven, and that it is righteous with God, to render rest to the^: and yt God
is not unjust, yt he should forget their works; and that works ought not to
be extended to the worthiness of desert; but only because they bear their
marks of the Lord which are the signs of the children of God, neither is
this righteousness, whereof he speaks referred to the rendering the equity
of due, but to the truth of Gods promise.

August. Psalm. 32 and.109
The Lord, says Augustine, is faithful which has made himself debtor to us,
not by receiving any thing of us, but by promising al things to us.

1. Cor. 13.2 Col. 3.14
8 He answers to three other places, the first place speaks not of true
faith, and so it belongs to this matter: the second does not so give the
chief place to charity, as though it should be more meritorious to
iustificatton, (for this is not due to faith according to the dignity of
work, but only to the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ.) The third
does both yield to charity the bond of perfection in another sense, and does
make nothing for them howsoever they take it.

9 Leaving ye rest (because he thinks the^ too ridiculous) in yt they object
that Christ has commanded a certain man to search the kingdom of GOD by the
keeping of the commandments, Matthew. 19.17
he teaches that it is meet for two causes that he should so answer: yet
it makes nothing at all for the justification of works. The lawier being
filled with the persuasion of the righteousness of the Law, was blind in
confidence of works. Again, he sought nothing else but what were the works of
righteousness, by which salvation is gotten, therefore he is worthily sent to
the Law, in which there is a perfect mirror of righteousness, for if we
seek salvation in works, we must keep the commandementes which none is able
to do, Matthew. 11.35
therefore we must resort to an other help, namely to Faith in Christ.

10 Last of all, he answers to a cavil in that they object, that we
wrongfully set faith as contrary to works, Ioh. 6.29
because faith in some places is called a work, and that common rule of reason
that of contraries is all one rule he proves, does nothing prevail here,
James. 2.10
seeing they would wrest it to this end, yt as every sin is imputed to us for
unrighteousness, so it were meet, that to every good work should be given
the praise of righteousness.

Cap. 19. Of christian liberty,
Lucian an ungodly man.
THis doctrine is so necessary, yt albeit the wicked and Lucianicall men do
pleasantly taunt it with their scoffs, yet the defense thereof, must not be
given over, that we may cut of occasion from such perilles.

Ephe. 1.4 1. The. 44.5
2 Christian liberty consists in three parts, the first, that the
consciences of the faithful, while the affiance of their justification before
God is to be sought, may raise and advance them selves above the law, and
forget the whole righteousness of the law.

3 The whole Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 3.13
does prove the same, as manifestly appears, by those three principal
Chapters, wherein he stands.

4 The second part hangs upon the first, that consciences obey the law,
not as compelled by the necessity of the law: Deu. 6.5.
but being free from the yoke of the law it self, of their own accord they
obey the will of God. that can not be so long as we are under the law.

5 But when we are delivered from this severe exacting of the law, Malac. 3.17.
we may merrily and with great cheerefulnes answer his calling and follow his
guiding.

6 The Apostles have touched this part of our liberty. Kin. 11.2. Romans 6.12.
The end thereof is not to kindle us to evil, but to encourage us to good.

7 The third part is, yt we be bound with no conscience before God of outward
things, which are by themselves indifferent, but that we may indifferently
sometime use them, and sometime leave them unused. The knowledge of this part
is very necessary, least we be either carried by desperation into a co^fused
devouring pit, or else despising God, and casting away his fear, we make our
selves away through destruction, which we have not ready.

Romans 14.14.
8 This same he prosecuteth, and more largely expounds.

9 This Christian liberty is spiritual, Tit. 1.26. Luke 6.24.
and the whole strength thereof consists in appeasing fearful consciences
before God. There are two kind of me^ that offend against it, the one of them
is, that cover the same with their own desires, that they may abuse the gifts
of God to their own use.

10 The other sort is, which think their liberty is nothing, unless it be
used among men: and therefore in using the same they have no regard of the
infirmity of their brethren.

Romans 14.1.22. 1. Cor. 8.9.
11 By this occasion speaking of offenses, he makes two sorts of them, the one
given, the other received: the one whereof he calls of the weak, the other
of the Pharisees, and he shows what both are.

Act. 16.3. Gal. 2.3.
12 He shows both by doctrine and also by Paul's example, who they are that
are to be counted weak, and who Pharisees: but some peruersly imitate Paul.

13 Whatsoever he has taught of avoiding offense, ought to be referred to
mean and indifferent things: but those which are necessary to be done, 1.
Cor. 3.2.
are not to be left undone, for fear of any offenses.

14 By this prerogative it comes to pass, 1. Pet. 1.18. Gal. 5.1.4.
that the consciences of the faithful are not to be entangled with any snares
of observations in those things, whom the Lord willed that they should be
at liberty, and exempte from the power of all men: yet both ought not so to
be taken, as though man's whole obedience were also taken away and cast down.

15 Least any man should stumble at that stone, we must consider, that there
are two sorts of government, spiritual and polityke, and how these are to
be distinguished the one from the other.

The laws also which belong to spiritual government, are to be considered,
whether they are agreeable to the word of God or no: But leauyng of the
declaration both of Civil government, Romans 13.1.5. Romans 2.15.
and also of Ecclesiastical laws, till a more fitter and convenient time be
given to speak thereof, the better to show, to what end the consciences are
bound to humane constitutions. first he shows what a conscience is.

2. Tit. 15.
16 Moreover what relation it has to outward obedience: first in those things
which in them selves are either good or evil: secondly in mean things.

Cap. 20. Of prayer which is the chief exercise of Faith, and whereby we daily
receive the benifites of God.
IN my judgment we may divide this Chapter into three principal parts. for
first he sets down certain rules from the 1. to the 16. secondly he
entreats of invocation of dead Saints, from the 17. to the 27. thirdly, he
shows how manifold prayer is, and disputes of every one: 28.29. Fourthly he
entreats of certain accidents of prayer, from the 30. to the 33. fifthly, he
declares the Lords prayer, from the 34. to the 49. Last of all, he joins
certain other things of prayer, from the 50. to the 52.

1 Going about to speak of prayer, he knitteth the proportion of his
declaration to the former: seeing it appears by those things which are
spoken, both that man is so empty of all good things, and also that God does
give in his son Christ, that which we stand in need of: that if any would
search help to succor his necessity, he must go beyond him self, and strive
unto God only. Romans 8.26.
Herevppon it follows, that whatsoever we want in our selves, we must search
in him, and require of him by prayer.

2 Prayer is very necessary: 1. Kin. 18.42. Psalm. 145.18.
and by the benifite thereof, we obtain to come unto those riches that are
laid up for us with the heavenly Father.

3 The Lord must be called upon, albeit he need no admonisher, and he is
ready of his own accord to give us that we need.

4 The first rule is, to frame prayer rightly and well, that we be no otherwise
framed in mind and heart, then becomes them, that enter into talks with God.

5 Here therefore it is to be noted, that casting off all lightness, Psalm.
25.1. Psalm. 62.9.
we earnestly apply our studies and senses to pray: secondly, that we pray not
but as the lord permits, because we can not do these things of our selves,
God to help our weakness has given us his spirit to teach us yt which is
right, and to rule our affections: yet not giving over the charge of praying to
the Spirit of God, we our selves in ye mean tune should wax dull.

6 The other is, that in prayer we truly feel our own want, and earnestly
thinking that we stand in need of those things that we ask, we join with our
prayer an earnest, yea seruent affection to obtain: therefore two vices must
be taken heed of, least remisly or slightly we recite prayers after a
prescribed form, or without meditation we mumble up prayers to GOD, because
they would obtain.

Iae. 5.13. Psalm. 32.6.
7 Neither is this any thing to the contrary, that we are not always driven
with the like necessity to pray: for our condition is always such, whether we
behold our temporal riches, or much more our spiritual, that we should
always have like opportunity: so that unless the most righteous do earnestly
repent him of his sins, his prayer should be accursed.

8 The third is, that who so ever presents him self before God to pray,
should forsake all thinking of his own glory, put of all opinion of
worthiness, Dan. 9.18. Psalm. 144.2.
and finally, give over all trust of himself, giving in the abasing of him
self, the glory wholly to God: lest if we take any thing be it never so
little to our selves, we do with our own vain swelling fall away from his
face: which also he shows by certain examples.

9 Hereupon it follows, that the beginning and also the preparing of praying
rightly, is to flee to ye mercy of God, Psalm. 25.6.18. Psalm. 51.7.
and to crave pardon, with an humble and plain confession of the fault: but
this is wont to be done two ways, first, in general, which belongs to all
men. Moreover, specially when any man prays to have his sins forgiven, when
he desires release of pain, that the cause being taken away. the effect may
be taken away.

1. Ioh. 3.22. Job. 9.21.
10 Neither does it hinder that the holy ones seem sometime, for the
entreating of God, to allege the help of their own righteousness, and the
same may be done two ways.

11 The fourth rule is, that being so thrown down and subdued with true
humility, we should nevertheless with certain hope of obtaining, be encouraged
to pray, Psalm. 5.8.
that ye only goodness of God may raise us up, being oppressed in our own
euilles. Affiance therefore is very necessary, not such as excludes us from
all care, but such as certainly labors with the mercy of God.

Heb. 4.15. Ephe. 3.12.
12 The adversaries do account this doctrine of assured hope of praying, for
absurd: but the holy Ghost has so enstructed us, neither is it contrary with
it, because this assurednes is knit together with the knowledge of our misery,
needines, and filthiness.

13 Seeing the Lord first commands to pray, Psalm. 50.24. Mat. 6.7.
and then joins a promise to the commandment, they are both Rebels and
Infidels, whosoever they are that turn their backs and come not the right way
to the Lord, howsoever certain hypocrites under the color of humility and
modesty, do by that means get praise.

14 He shows by certain selected promises, Pro. 18.10. Ioe. 2.32.
how earnestly we should embrace the liberality of God freely offered us.
Neither is this any let that we excel not with equal holiness, as is
commended in the holy Fathers, to whom these promises were made: and
whosoever call not upon God when occasion is offered, are Idolaters, what
color so ever they pretend: that a dreadlesse Spirit to pray, agrees well
with fear, reverence, and carfulness, and the godly are well said, both to
fall down, and lift up their prayers.

15 It makes nothing against this doctrine that God answeareth to certain
desires, Judge. 9.20. Judge. 6.28.
whereof some break forth of a mind not quiet nor well framed: Other
endeavored by no word of God: Other conceived against the manifest prohibition.
And although such examples are not set before us to imitate and follow, yet
thereby proceeds large fruit unto us: and in what sense such easines of God
is to be taken.

16 These four rules of right prayer are not so exactly required with extreme
rigor, Psalm. 1^.18. Psalm. 85.5.
that God refuses their prayers, which have offended much against those
rules, as is showed by certain examples taken out of every sort, yet not that
the faithful should carelessly pardon themselves any thing, but that in
sharply chastising themselves, they should travel to overcome those stoppes.

1. Ti. 1.5. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
17 Therefore for our unworthiness Christ is given us an Advocate and
Mediator, and we shall obtain what so ever we ask in his name. And God must
be called upon by no other name than by his own.

Ioh. 16.26.
18 Albeit, all the Fathers from the beginning were heard by his name only, yet
this favor is chiefly to be restrained by good reason, to the ascension of
Christ.

19 Who so ever swerve from this way, and forsake this entry, 1. Tim. 2.^.
for them there remains no way, nor entry to God: yet by this means the
mutual intercession of Saints is not excluded in the earth.

20 It is a mere trifling of Sophisters, 1. Ioh. 2.12. Romans 8.32.
that Christ is the Mediator of redemption, but the faithful are Mediators
of intercession: which he rooteth up by most plain authority of the
scripture, and Augustine: Christian men says he, do mutually commend them
selves in their prayers, and he for whom none makes intercession, but he for
all, he is the only and true Mediator.

Paul the Apostle although he were a principal member, Li. cont. Bat. 2 Cap.
8.
under the head (yet because he was a member of the body of Christ, and knew
that the greatest and truest Priest of the church, entered not by a figure into
the inward places of the veil, to the holy of holy places, but by express
and steadfast truth into the innermost places of heaven, to a holiness not
shadowishe, but eternal) commends him self also to the prayers of the
faithful.

21 That we may not make or appointe the Saints that are dead, intercessours
for us, first he proves by most strong reason: secondly, because it is not
only without the authority of the Scripture, but also all other authority:
Thirdly, by the filthy effects: Moreover he declares the same by the
authority of Ambrose: and he takes away a certain starting hole. Christ,
says Ambrose is our mouth, Amb. de Isa and Anima.
by which we speak to the Father: Our eye by which we see the Father: Our
right hand, by which we offer us to the Father, otherwise then by whole
intercession neither we nor all the Saints have any thing with God.

22 There arise out of this one error so many signs of error, that here we
have the nature of superstition expressed always, falling from worse to worse,
and this he shows by three degrees, Ier. 2.18.
the last of them declared by their examples, and the refusal of the counsel
of Carthage.

23 Coming to their arguments, Heb. 1.14.
first because they reason, from the office and duty of Angels, secondly,
from the place of Jeremy, he wipeth away both. Ier. 15.1.
If they will compare holy men departed, to Angels, Esai. 10.11. Psalm. 34.7
they should prove that they are ministering Spirits, to whom is committed the
ministry to look to our safety, to whom the charges given to keep us in
all our ways, to go about us to admonish and counsel us, to watch for us, all
which things are given to Angels, but not to them. No man dare execute the
office of an Aduocat before an earthly Judge, unless he be admitted: Why
should worms then have so great liberty to thrust unto GOD those for Patrons,
to whom the office is not enjoined? As for the place of Jeremy we may reason
of the contrary, that neither Moses nor Samuel made intercession for the
people of Israel, therefore there was no intercession at all of the dead men,
therefore no other make intercession at all, seeing they are so far from that
gentleness, goodness, and carfulness of Moses: therefore the meaning of the
place is, that if Moses had been alive to have been their Patron, Eze. 14 14.
Act. 13.36.
or Samuel to whose prayers the Lord showed him self so tender, they should
have but only delivered their own souls.

24 And that likewise he wipeth away wherein they strive, that they doubtless
pay for us: Ecclc. 9.5.6.
and that we take from them all desire of godliness, which in ye whole course of
their life breathed nothing else but charity and mercy.

Genesis 28.16. Esai. 4.1.
25 Then he wipeth away this also, that Jacob prayed that his name and the name
of his father Abraham and Isaac, might so be called upon over his posterity:
First by enterpreting the place, then as it were by casting again upon them,
where also an other not very unlike, that is to say, how God is prayed unto,
to have mercy on the people for David's sake, he casts upon their own
pates. Jacob because he knew that the whole blessedness of his posterity
consisted in the inheritance of the covenant which GOD had made with him, he
wishes that which he sees, should be the chief of all good things to them,
that they accounted in his kindred: for that is nothing else but to convey them
the succession of the covenant. They again when they bring such remembrance
into their prayers, do not slye to the intercessions of men, but do put the
Lord in mind of his covenant, whereby the most kind Father has promised
that he will be favorable and beneficial for them, for Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacobs sake. In that which was spoken of David, the covenant is rather
considered then the man, and under a figure the only intercession of Christ is
affirmed.

26 Last of all, Psalm. 22.4. Psalm. 142.7.
he wipeth away that which many do object: that the prayers of the Saints are
oftentimes heard, preposterously reasoning, that none shall be heard, but they
that have once been heard: this first he enterpreteth, secondly, he confirms
his interpretation by the authority of the Scripture, and shows it by
examples.

Psalm. 44.10. Iac. 5.8.
27 And so he concludes, that this calling on of Saints, is many ways
sacrilege. The beginning of praying rightly, springs out of Faith, and Faith
comes of the hearing of the word of God: therefore prayer must be made
according to the word of God, where no such superstitious intercession is
mentioned.

Iac. 4.14. Es. 30.1.
28 Prayer, whereof hitherto he has spoken, albeit properly it be restrained to
vows and petitio^s (and so all those things which hitherto he has taught,
do belong chiefly to that special sort) yet is it not restrained to those
things only, but they ought also to be extended to praise and giving of
thanks: for this is an other kind of Prayer, and it ought continually to be
used of us, to our profit: no less then the former of vows, which he
plentifully proves by many reasons, testimonies and examples.

29 When he has spoken these things of every one severally: 1. Cor. 15 Matthew.
6.7
now knitting together both the special sorts, he speaks of public and
private prayers. Continuance, 1. Tim. 2.7 Esaias. 25.7
albeit it belong most to private, Psalm. 65.2
yet it also belongs and is expedient to public, that for them we may have
appointed hours. Vain babbling, and ostentation must be taken heed of, and a
secret place must be sought out: we may pray in all places, yet private or
public are not to be neglected, but both always to be joined together.

30 The common assemblies are to be had in honor, Esaias. 66.2
the use of Churches is lawful, that holy assemblies may be executed in them:
but we must take heed of a double superstition.

31 A loud voice and singing in prayer, are of no value, Esaias. 29.13 Matthew. 15.8
unless it proceed from the deep affection of the heart: a loud voice does
more belong to public prayers, then private.

32 It is an old custom to be taken heed of, 1. Cor. 14.13
but it ought to be disposed to that gravity which becomes the presence of
God and Angels, and we must diligently take heed that the time lead us not
from spiritual sense.

33 Both public and private prayers must be used not in a strange, but in a
vulgar tongue. 1. Cor. 14.16
A loud voice, and knee bending are then convenient when they proceed from
the earnest affection of the mind. 1. Sam. 1.13
To bend the knee and to uncover the head are exercises by which we endeavor
to rise up to a-greater reuerencing of God.

Matthew 6.9 Luke. 12.2
34 Coming to the Lords prayer he proves two ways, that the same does
paint unto us gods unmeasurable kindness toward us: and that great fruit of
comfort does come thereby.

Exo. 32.32 Romans 9.3
35 The same consists of six petitions only, and may be divided into two
parts. The first three are peculiarly appointed to Gods glory, the other have
care over us and are properly assigned to ask those things that are for our
profit.

36 In that he will be called our father it ought to deliver us from all
disstrust: John. 1.12 Esaias. 43.16
neither may we seek help any where else, but from him, unless we reproach
him with poverty, want of ability, or with cruelty, or too extreme
rigorousnesse. When we name him father, truly we allege for us the name of
Christ, for by what boldness might any man call God father, who should burst
forth into so great rashness to take to himself the honor of the Son of
God, unless he were adopted to be the child of grace in Christ, which being
the true Son is given of him to us to be our brother: that ye which he has
proper by nature, may by the benefit of adoption be made ours, if we do with
sure faith embrace so great bountifulness.

37 Neither may we allege that we are worthily made fearful, by ye
conscience of sins, which may make a father be he never so merciful and
kind, daily to be displeased at us, first he confuteth it by reason, then by
the example, last of all, in that he would be called our father.

Matthew. 23.9 Ephe. 1.24
38 Whereas we are taught every one in common to call him our father, thereby we
are put in mind, how great affection of brotherly love ought to be amongst
us, which also he sets out by a similitude.

39 Yet this withstandeth not but that we may specially pray, both for our
selves, and for certain other specially, so that yet our mind depart not from
having an eye to this co^munitie, in bestowing of goods, albeit this reason
differ a little from prayer.

Act. 7.24.49 Heb. 11.6 Esaias. 33.18
40 In what sense he may be said to be in heaven, and as well how much
comfort, as also instruction does thereby grow unto us: He is said to be in
heaven, not that he is enclosed and compassed with the circle of heaven, but
because our minds could not otherwise conceive his unspeakable glory. It is
signified to us by heaven, than which there can nothing come under our sight
more able or fuller of Majesty.

41. 42. 43 He opens the three first petitions, adding that also in the
end, that in asking thereof, 1. Cor. 15.2^
we ought to have the only glory of God before our eyes, and they are not his
children that endeavor not as much as in them lies to set forth his honor.
Ios. 24.14
Gods name is sanctified when we acknowledge his strength, power, goodness,
wisdom, righteousness, mercy, and truth: and when all ungodliness is
destroyed, Eze. 36.20 Romans 2.24
all slanders driven away, sacriledges subdued, and his glory more and more set
abroad. The kingdom of God then does come when he corrects with the power
of his spirit, Matthew. 9.3^
all corrupt desires of the flesh, which do by multitudes make war against
us, 1. John. 3.8.9 Psalm. 103.29
and when he frames all our senses to the obedience of his government, and
then the will of God is done, when willingly in all things we resign our
selves to Gods will without murmuring and grudging.

44. 45. 46 The three other he severally declares. In the fourth petition, we
desire God to give us all things necessary for our necessity, and where we are
commanded to ask our daily bread, thereby is meant that we must be content
with the quantity which our heavenly father vouchsafes to give unto us, and
not to seek for gain by unlawful crafty means. Again it is made ours by
title of gift, because neither our diligence, nor our travel, nor our hands
do by them selves get us any thing, unless the blessing of God be present,
yea the plenty of bread, should nothing at all profit us, unless it were by
God turned to our nourishment: finally, our Savior Christ has set the
inferior things in the first place, to the intent to lift us up by degrees:
to the other two petitions which do properly belong to the heavenly life,
wherein he had regard to our grossness. In the fifth petition, we desire that
our sins may be forgiven us, Iere. 31.33 Romans 3.29
that he will not lay them to our charge, nor the punishment due for them: But
that he will accept the death and passion of Christ as the full satisfaction
for our sins, that we may have a full assurance hereof in our consciences,
that the punishment of our sins is fully discharged in Christ only, and
therefore that we need no other satisfactorie means, and that they are as
freely forgiven us, as we forgive others: and that we may love one another from
the bottom of our hearts all revenge set aside. In the sixth, we pray to be
furnished with such weapons, Romans 16.20 1. Tim. 4.17
and defended with such succor that we may be able to get the victory for
we stand in need not only of the grace of the Spirit, which may soften,
bow, and direct our hearts to the obedience of GOD, but also of his help
whereby he may make us invincible against all the traitorous entrappings and
violent conflictes of Satan.

47 The form of these petitions do show that the prayers of Christians ought
to be common. That which follows, because Thine is the kingdom, etc. is cause
why there should be such boldness in us to ask, and affiance to obtain:
Finally, in what sense Amen is added whereby is erpressed our feruentnesse of
desire to obtain those things which we have asked of God, and our hope is
confirmed that all such things are already obtained, and shall be surely given
us, because they are promised of God.

48 Whatsoever we ought, yea or in any wise may ask of God, is set forth in
this form, Matthew. 17.5
and they which go further, do three ways offend: first, they will add of
their own, to the wisdom of god which cannot be done without mad blasphemy.
Then they hold not themselves under the will of GOD, but despising it, do with
greediness go further: finally they shall never obtain any thing, forasmuch
as they pray without faith, and all those prayers are done without faith,
which are not grounded upon the word of God. Tertullian calls this a lawful
prayer, De ^uga. in persecutiones.
secretly signifiyng that all other are lawless, which are not framed
according to this order. De. orat. ad Probam.
Augustine says, that Christ has set down in this fourm, what is meet for
him, and what is acceptable to him, what is necessary for us, and what he will
grant unto us.

49 Yet may we pray if we will in other words, if as touching the sense there
be no difference.

50 There may be appointed, and it is meet there be appointed certain
hours, for our weakness sake, so that superstition be away, yet in the mean
while we must carefully take heed that we pray at every proffered occasion,
yet we ought not to bind God to certain circumstances.

51 If we, with minds framed to this obedience, suffer our selves to be
ruled with the Laws of Gods providence, we may easily learn to continue in
prayer: and we must take heed that we murmr not against GOD if he answer
not to our requests.

52 We always obtain in our prayers that which was most expedient for us,
though our senses feel it not, yet our faith shall assure us of it, and this is
very necessary to be known, God will make us to possess abundance in
poverty, comfort in affliction, and howsoever all things do fail us, yet God
will never fail us, which suffers the waiting and patience of them that be
his, not to be disapointed, he alone shall suffice in steed of all things,
forasmuch as he contains in him self all good things, 1. John. 5.15 ^. Sam.
11.6
which he shall one day disclose unto us, at the day of judgment when he shall
plainly show forth his kingdom.

From the Chapter 21. to the 24.
In these four Chapters he so entreats of election, ye first he may deliver
ye doctrine, Chap. 21: Secondly, confirm it, Chap. 22: Thirdly, confute the
slanders, Cap. 23: Last of al, he shows by what reason we may determine
whether we may be elected or no, if we behold our vocation. Cap. 24.

Cap. 21. Of the eternal election, whereby God has predestinate some to
salvation, and other some to destruction.
THis doctrine of Election or Predestination is very necessary and most
pleasant, Romans 11.5 John. 10.25
it has three singular commodities: but the curious must first cast a bridle
upon their rashness, when that they make inquisition herein.

2 Which is by the opinion of Augustine, Pro. 25.27
and admonition of Christ and of Solomon declares.

3 Moreover, there are other some that are wrongfully modest, which do offend
therein, because they teach men to flee from every manner of questioning, no
otherwise then from a rock It is the best bond of sobriety if in learning we
follow the Lord going before us, Pro. 25.2 Deuteronomy. 29.29
and when he makes an end of teaching, we cease to will to learn.

4 It is of small force which they allege from themselves, that profane men
stumble against it: but it is always our part not to neglect that which the
Lord has manifestly declared, as on the contrary part we ought not to search
after those things

which of the Church is a most clear mirror of free election. De corre. and
gra. ad Valen. Cap. 15 De bono perse. Cap, vlti. De verb Apost. sermo. 8
Least it should trouble us in the members, and that he was not by righteously
living made the Son of GOD, but that he had so great honor freely given
him, that he might afterward make others partakers of his gifts.

2 And that the proof may be more strong, he expounds every part of that
place, and brings it to his purpose. Where he names Elect, he means the
Faithful: Ephe. 1.4
when he says, that they were elected before the beginning of the world, he
puts away all respect of worthiness. Now if we be elect in Christ, it
follows, that not only every man is severed without himself: but also one of
them from another, forasmuch as we are not all the members of Christ, that
which is added; that they were elect, that they might be holy; confuteth the
rerour that deriueth Election from Foreknowledge, forasmuch as Paul affirms
that whatsoever virtue appears in men, it is the effect of election. Now if
further cause be sought: Paul says that God has so predestinate, yea and
that according to the good pleasure of his will, where he overthrows
whatsoever means of their election men do imagine in them selves, for he
teaches that whatsoever things GOD gives toward Spiritual life, they flow
out of this one Fountain, because God has chosen who^ he would, and ere they
were borne, he had severally laid up for them, the grace which he vouchsafed
to give them.

3 The pleasure of GOD does so reign in election, 2. Tim. 1.9
that there may no works come to be considered, neither past nor to come. If
he chose us that we might be holy: then he chose us, not because he
foresawe he would be holy: Ephe. 1.5 John. 15.16
for these two things are contrary the one from the other, that the Godly have
it of election, Romans 11.35
that they be holy: and that they come to it by mean of works. The grace of
God deserves not to be praised alone in in our election, unless our election
be free, but free it shall not be, if God in electing his do consider what
shall be the works of every one.

Romans ^6.11
4. 5 Moreover, he proves the same out of the place of Saint Paul to the
Romans.

6 That which they accept that we must not by these inferior and small
benefits, determine of the sum of the life to come, Romans 9.15
he answers that God minded by an earthly sign to declare the spiritual
election of Jacob: but the power of election belongs, 2. Tim. 2.19
not to the whole multitude, but to the faithful, whom Paul calls, a
people foreknowne, where by that occasion he expounds what that foreknowledge
or prescience of God is, not speculatiue, but active as they say.

John. 6.37.44 John. 17.9
7 Last of all, he shows this same out of the word of Christ himself, that
is to say, that Christ did so make him self author of election with his
father, yt he excludes the world, and grants no man to excel in his own
power and labor.

8 Against Ambrose, Origin, Hierome, and Augustine in time past which
wrongfully thought of this matter, he confirms this same doctrine by the
authority of Augustine (who cited Ambrose also for this purpose; Exo. 33.15.
) and by a most strong reason out of Paul, that is to say, that the grace of
God does not find men fit to be chosen, but makes them.

9 He confuteth a certain foolish cavil of Thomas of Aquine, that the
foreknowing of deserving albeit it is not in deed the cause of predestination
on the behalf of the act of him that does predestinate, but on our behalf,
it may after a certain manner be so called, that is, according to the
particular weying of predestination, as when it is said that God
predestinateth glory to man by deseruings, because he has decreed to give to
him grace, by which he may deserve glory.

10 That which they object, that God should be contrary to him self, if he
should universally call all men to him, and receive but a few elect: he
answers, that the promises of salvation are not without difference appointed
to all men, Amos. 4.7. Esai. 54.1. Job. 1.22.
but particularly to the elect: neither is this contrary the one to the other,
that he calls all me^ by outward preaching, but gives to a few the Spirit
of repentance and Faith: and the same being expounded in an other place, that
is to say, in the Cap. 17. he proves by many testimonies as well taken out of
the Scripture as out of certain Fathers. Bernard says, friends do severally
hear, to whom he also says, fear not them small flock: for to you it is
given to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven. Who be those? even they
whom he has foreknowne, and predestinate to be fashioned like to the image of
his Son: a great and secret counsel is made known. The Lord knew who be
his: but that which was known to God, is made manifest to men: neither does he
vouchsafe to make any other partakers of so great a mystery, but the self same
men whom he has foreknowne and predestinate to be his. Then he concludes,
The mercy of God is from eternity, even to eternity, upon them that fear
him: from eternity, by reason of predestination: to eternity, by reason of
blessed making; the one without beginning, Romans 9.13.
the other without ending.

11 And so the foundation of predestination, whether it be to life or to death,
consists not in works, but in the will of God.

Cap. 23. A confutation of the slanders wherewith this doctrine has always
been wrongfully burdened.
THeir modesty, Romans 9.20. Mat. 15.13. Romans 9.22.
which to drive envy from God: do so confess election that they deny that God
has forsaken any, is ignorante and childish. The better the same may appear,
he shows that reprobation is from no otherwise but from God. Augustine
says, Contra. Iuli. Li. 5. Cap. 5.
that where power is joined to sufferance, God does not suffer, but govern
with his power. Again he says, when God of Wolves makes sheep, he does
with a mightier grace refourme them, that their hardiness may be tamed, Lib.
de praede sanct. Cap. 2.
and therefore God for this cause does not convert the obstinat, because he
does not show forth in them the mightier grace, which he wants not, if he
would show it forth.

2 Against this doctrine many things are wont to be objected: first there is
cause why men should charge God, if he be angry with his creatures of who^ he
has not been first provoked by any offense, and without their own deserving
to predestinate them to eternal death, to this he answers in the four next
sections: first seeing it was his will, there is no doubt but it was most just,
for the will of God is the highest rule of righteousness, not that he would
feign to him an absolute or tyrannical power, Psalm. 51.6.
but because he is a law to him self, and can not be unrighteous.

3 Moreover because the reprobate in that they are men, are all in such sort
corrupted with sin, that they can no^ be but hateful to God, and that by mos^
upright reason of justice, and in their ow^ consciences are so adjudged worthy
o^ eternal death, that will they nill they they are compelled to acknowledge
the cause of their damnation in the^ selves, how so ever of set purpose they
sometime do suppress it, and lay the fault upon God.

4 If against this answer they arise as they are wont, striving that it is
unmeet that they should dye in this their corruption, seeing they are
predestinate by the ordinance of God to the same corruption, which is now
alleged for the cause of damnation, he shows how it may be aunsweared out
of the place of Paul, Romans 9.20. Pro. 21.10. 1. Tim. 5.22.
that the reason of Gods righteousness is higher then that it is either to be
measured by the measure of man, or comprehended by the slender capacity of
man's wit.

5 This same he confirms by Augustines authority, and sets it out with an
excellent confirmation: Augustine says, Thou being a man, seek an answer
at my hand: and I also am a man: therefore let us hear him that says, O man
what art thou? Better is a faithful ignorance, then rash knowledge. Seek
merits: thou shall find nothing but pain. O depth, Peter denies, the thief
believes: O depth, seek thou a reason? I will tremble at ye depth. Reason
thou, I will wonder: Dispute thou, I will believe. I see depth, but I reach not
the bottom. Paul rested, because he found wondering. He calls the
judgments of God unsearchable: and art thou come to search them? He says
that his ways are impossible to be traced out: and do thou trace them? With
proceeding further, we shall nothing profit, etc.

6 Their second objection is, when they demand, why God should impute those
things for sin to men, whereof he has by his predestination, laid
necessity upon men, Pro. 16.4
whom that he may fully satisfy, he brings forth two answers and
rejects: he approves the third, taken out of Valla.

7 It was decreed of God, that man should perish by his falling away: this he
confuteth by two reasons, and the authority of Augustine. Augustine says, Ad
Laur^n^.
we must holsomely confess that which we most rightfully believe, that the God
and Lord of all things, which created all things very good, and foreknewe
that evil things should spring out of good; and knew that it more perteyned
to his almighty goodness, even of evil things to do well, then to suffer
them to be evil; that he so ordered the life of Angels and men, that in it he
might first show what free will could do, and then what the benefit of his
grace and judgment of justice could do.

8 Neither did God only permit this thing, but also willed it, and appointed
it: neither yet does this necessity, wherewith they be bound by Gods
predestination make them excused, Genesis 1.3^.
seeing it is nothing else, but a dispensation of the righteousness of God, which
is hidden in deed, but yet without fault. And man deserves eternal death,
not by Gods creation, but by his own willing corruption.

9 This answer may suffice to take away not only all reason, but also all
color of gainesaying, howsoever impiety do grind and murmr.

10 That which in the third place they object, that by this doctrine of
predestination does follow, that there is with God acception of persons; he
answers two ways: first by enterpreting what acception of persons is,
secondly, showing that there is no contrariety herein. By the name of person
is signified not a man, but those things which being seen with eyes in man,
are wont to procure either favor, grace, and dignity, Act. 10.34. Romans 2.10.
Gal. 3.28.
or hatred, contempt, and shame, as riches, wealth, power, nobility, office,
country, excellency of beauty, and such other: on the other side poverty,
need, baseness, vileness, contempt, and such like. Where God choseth one
man, refusing an other, this comes not of respect of man, but of his mercy
alone, which ought to have liberty, to show forth and utter it self, where
and when it pleases him.

11 He wipeth away the confirmation which they allege for their opinion, not
only by reason, but also by the authority of Augustine, Epist. 106. d^ praede.
and gra.
whose words are these. Since in the first man the whole mass of mankind fell
into condemnation, those vessels that are made of it to honor, are not the
vessels of their own righteousness, but of the mercy of God: and where as others
are made to dishonor, the same is not to be imputed to unrighteousness, but to
judgment: That to those whom he refuses, God renders due pain; to those
whom he calls, he gives undeserved grace: that they are delivered from all
accusation after the manner of a Creditor, in whose power it is to forgive, to
the one, and ask of the other. Therefore the Lord also may give grace to
whom he will, De bono Pers^. Cap. 12.
because he is merciful: and give it not to all, because he is a just Judge.
He may by giving to some, that which they do not deserve, show his free grace;
and by not giving to all, declare what all deserve: for where as Paul writes,
Romans 11.31.
that God enclosed all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all, it is
therewithal to be added, that he is dettor to no man: because no man first
gave to him, that he may require ye like of him.

12 That which they object in ye fourth place, that all carefulnes, and
endeavor of well doing, falls away, while the doctrine of predestination
stands, Ephe. 1.4.
it is not true, although certain Hogs wallowe them selves by that color
in their filthiness.

1. These. 4.7. Ephe. 2.5.
13 The same also is very near this, that they maliciously slander, that this
doctrine does subvert all exhortations to live godlily: how false it is, he
manifestly shows out of Augustine.

14 The order of true teaching must so be tempered, that offense be wisely
avoided, so far as it maybe lawful.

Cap. 24. That election is stablished by the calling of God: but that the
reprobate do bring upon them selves the just destruction whereunto they are
appointed.
IN this Chapter there are two parts, Romans 8.29. Romans 8.15.
yea he plainly shows the argument it self, in the first whereof, he treats
of the elect, from the 1. to ye 11. In the last, of the reprobate, from the 12.
to the 16.

1 This election which otherwise God has hidden with him self, he does at
length disclose it by his calling, and in the same is nothing to be required,
besides the free mercyes of God: that is, as he has freely chosen them whom
he would: so does he freely call, whom he has chosen. Every one yt has
heard of the Father, and has learned, comes to me: but there is none that
hears and learneth of the Father, and comes not to me, for if every one
which has heard of the Father, Aug. de praedest. sanct. Cap. 8.
and learned comes: truly every one yt comes not, has not heard of the
Father, nor learned: for if he had heard and learned, he would come. This grace
which is secretly given, to the hearts of men, is received of no hard heart: for
it is therefore given yt ye hardness of heart may first be taken away: when
therefore the father is heard wtin, he takes away ye stony heart and gives a
fleshy heart: for so he makes the children of promise, and vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared to glory. Why therefore does he not teach all, that
they may come to Christ, but because all whom he teaches, by mercy he
teaches: whom he does not teach by judgment, he does not teach, because
he has mercy upon whom he will, and hardens whom he will?

Esai. 60.51. 1. Ioh. 5.24. Act. 13.14.
2 The nature and dispensation of calling, does clearly show that it comes
from no other place tha^ from the free mercy of God.

3 Here we must beware that we make not our selves fellow workers with GOD:
or reputing our election doubtful and ineffectual, till it be confirmed by
Faith as by a Seal, Deu. 30.14.
we hang the same of the latter: albeit on the other part it be confirmed by
Faith as toward us, and that which was before unknown to us, by this means
begins to shine out.

4 While we search the certainty of our election, we must not break into
the hidden secrets of the wisdom of God, to understand what is determined
of us at the judgment seat of God: but rather we must begin at our calling,
Esai. 25.1.2.
whereby God as by a token will confirm to us so much as is lawful to be
known of his counsel.

5 Seeing we are chosen in Christ alone, Mat. 3.17. Ephe. 1.4.
in him alone the certainty of our election is to be sought: and no man can be
sure of his election, but he that rests upon Christ only.

6 If we be assertayned of an undoubtful calling, Ioh. 6.37. Romans 8.30. Mat.
22.14.
we may certainly determine that we are the elect: but seeing against this
assurance certain places are alleged: before he aunsweare them, he
confirms by many testimonies that Christ has delivered us from all care and
doubt.

7. 8. 9. Moreover, Ioh. 16.12. 1. Ioh. 2.19. Ioh. 3.16.
he answeareth to certain places where they that seemed to be Christ's, did
revolt and fall back from him, and that was because they cleaued not to him,
with that affiaunce of heart wherewith the assuredness of our election is
stablished: for all though they have the like signs of calling, that the
elect have, yet have they not that sure stablishement of election, which the
elect fetch out of the Gospel. The saying of Christ, of many being called,
and few chosen, is evil taken of many: for there are two sorts of calling,
the one general, whereby through the outward preaching of the word, God
calls altogether unto him, even them also to whom he sets it forth unto
the savor of death, and unto matter of more grievous condemnation. The other
special which he vouchsafes to give only to the faithful, when by the
inward enlightening of his spirit, he makes that the word preached, is
settled in their hearts: this special calling brings with it the Spirit of
regeneration, which is the earnest and seal of the inheritance to come,
wherewith our hearts are sealed against the day of the Lord.

10. 11 The Elect before they are called, Phi. 3.5. Act. 10.2.
differ nothing at all from the rest. It is far of, that, as some dream
there should be planted in their hearts from their very nativity, any seed
of election, by the virtue whereof, they are always inclined to godliness and to
the sear of God.

12 Coming to the second part of the Chapter, he proves that God has his
certain judgments against the wicked, Mal. 4.1. 1. Cor 4.7.
whereby he does execute his counsel of them, by depriuyng some from the
power of hearing his word, and by blinding and amazing others the more, by the
preaching of his word.

13 There can no other cause be rendered why he does so, Act. 13.48. Act.
16.14.
but because they are vessels of wrath to dishonor.

14 If we go further and search why the Lord from the beginning has blinded
the reprobate, Romans 9.17. 1. Sam. 2.25.
we must needs come to this one thing that he may show his name in all the
world, yet this can not so be understood as though GOD did abuse his poor
creatures with inordinat power, for a sport to his cruelty.

15 He answers to a few places of Scripture by interpreting them, wherein God
seems to deny that it is done by his ordinance, that the wicked do perish:
but by this, that he crying out against it, they wilfully bring death unto them
selves. They allege the place of Ezechiel, Eze. 34.11.
that God will not the death of a sinner, etc. If they will extend this to all
mankind, why does he not move many to repentance, Mat. 13.23.
whose minds are more pliable to obedience, then theirs which at his daily
allurementes wax harder and harder. The meaning therefore is, that the death of
a sinner pleases not God, that the godly may have affiance, that so soon as
they shall be touched with repentance, there is pardon ready for them with
God, and the wicked may feel that their falt is doubled, because they answer
not to so great merciful kyndnesse, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and mercifulness of God: therefore the mercy of God does always meet
repentance: where they allege Paul, Deuteronomy. 4.7 Psalm. 115.3 Exo. 33.19. Eze.
36.26
that God would have all to be saved, thereby is signified nothing else but
that he has stopped up the way unto salvation, to no degree of men, but rather
he has so powered out his mercies, that he wills no man to be void of it.

16 He wipeth away certain other objections taken out of the Scripture, Matthew.
33.27
and concludes with Paul, Ephe. 3.10
O man what art thou that contendest with GOD?

Cap. 25. Of the last resurrection.
FIrst, he sets down the doctrine, and confirms it from the first to the
fourth: secondly he takes away certain errors, from the 5. to the 9. Last of
al he descends to certain, from the 10. to the 12.

Albeit we have now passed from death unto life, 2. Tim. 1.20 John. 5.24
Ephe. 2.19
yet least it should be a grief to be yet exercised under this hard warfare,
we must look for the blessed hope, and coming of the glory of the great GOD;
our slownesse, the mockes of profane men, or violent temptation
notwithstanding.

Phi. 3.8 Romans 8.19
2 Perfect felicity which was doubtfully disputed upon of ye Philosophers, was
yet known to none of them that it was yet set before us in the resurrection.
Therefore our minds must be lifted up thereunto, especially seeing the dead
elements do after their manner desire the same thing.

1. Cor. 15.14 2. Cor. 4.10
3. 4 By the very weight of the thing our endeavor should be whetted, seeing
that except the dead do rise again the whole Gospel is deceiptfull and
doubtful: but because the thing is hard to be credited, that faith may
overcome al lettes, Luke. 24.6 1. Cor. 15.6 Acts. 9.4
the scripture ministers unto us two lettes: the first, the similitude of
Christ, the other the omnipotency of God, the first whereof, is handeled 3. the
last in the 4. section, where it teaches yt our senses must be directed to the
infinite power of god, Phil. 3.20 1. Cor. 15.36.37
in proouing the resurrection, and that it is unmeet to have respect what may
naturally be done where an inestimable miracle is set before us, which with
the greatness thereof swaloweth up our senses, yet Paul in setting forth an
example of nature reprooueth their dullness which deny the resurrection.

5 As concerning errors, first he co^futeth ye error of the Ethnicks, Eccle.
5.4 Mark. 12.18 Luke. 20.27 Acts. 2.8
and Saduces which denied the resurrection and immortality of the souls, and
also of the Chiliastes which limited the reign of Christ a thousand years.
The place of the Revelation makes nothing for the^, Reave. 20.4
where John entreats not of the eternal blessedness of the church, but only of
the diverse troubles which were to come upon the Church while it yet traveled
in earth: but the scripture cries out that there shall be no end of the
blessedness of the elect, nor of the punishment of the reprobate.

6 Moreover after he has called to mind two other doting errors: 2. Pet.
1.14 2. Cor. 5.1 Heb. 12.23
the first of them, that the souls shall rise again with the bodies as though
the whole man died first, he confuteth it: secondly that that may better
appear, he shows what their estate is, after the dissolution of the body,
till the day of the last judgment.

2. Cor. 5.2
7 The last of them which imagine that souls shall not receive the same bodies
wherewith they are now clothed: but shall have new and other bodies, the better
to root it up, first he takes away the objection of the Manichies deniyng
the resurrection of the flesh, Matthew. 17.52
because it is unclean: Secondly he proves that no other body shall rise
than this.

Col. 24.6 Romans 8.11
8 This argument he prosecuteth, and by that occasion he girdeth him self to
expound the manner of the resurrection.

9 Neither is it any thing to the contrary, John. 11.25 Matthew. 25.31 Acts. 24.15
that the resurrection does pertain to the wicked, and the accursed of God,
no less then to the Saints, although not in the same manner.

10 After he has laid these things, he passes from the resurrection to the
eternal felicity, Ose. 13.14 1. Cor. 15.54
which is the end of the resurrection, thereof he affirms two things, that
the excellency thereof far surmounteth our capacity, and that the measure of
glory shall not be equal to all the sons of God, because he does diversely
distribute his gifts to the Saints in this world, and does unequally
enlighten them.

11 We must beware of crabbed questions in this matter: Romans 8.22
albeit he himself answer to some, yet so, that in the mean space he
admonishes us that we desire not as well to know before the time what is done
in heaven, as which way to go thither.

12 He descends from the felicity of the faithful, Matthew. 8.12 Es. 66.25
1. The. 1.9 Psalm. 9.9
to the miserable state of the reprobate, which is both great and eternal.

Of the outward means and helps wherewith God does allure us to the
fellowship of Christ, and holds us in the same.
The Argument.
THere are three places only, which he discusseth chiefly in this book, the
first is of the Church, from the 1. to the 13. the other of the sacrament^ from
the 14. to the 19. The third, of politic administration. 20.

But the first which is extended to the end of the 13. Chap. contains many
things, al which notwithstanding may be referred to four principal Chapters,
for first he reasons of the order whereby the Church may be known, because
necessarily with it we must have unity in reverence, 1. and 2. Moreover of
the regiment and government of the Church, from the 3. to the 7. where first
he shows what is the order of governing the Church which he shows is
delivered out of the pure word of God. 3. Moreover what form was used of the
old fathers. 4. Last of all, what it is which florisheth at this day under
papistry. 5. By which occasion he specially speaks of Supremacy, 6. And
shows by what degrees he exalted himself to the height, 7. Thirdly he
speaks of the power of the Church, from the 8. to the 11. And first as
touching the opinions of faith which either in singular or universal councils
is resident, 9. Moreover in Suffragans. 10. Last of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. 11. Fourthly he descends to the discipline of the Church, and
first entreats of the matter it self. 12. Then also of a certain vice like to
it, wherein many have offended, while namyng vows they would publysh to
themselves a certain voluntary kind of discipline. 13.

The second place of sacraments has three parts, for first he entreats of
sacraments, generally 14. Moreover of both severally, from the 15. to the 18
and first of baptism, 15. By occasion whereof he entreats of, also apart of
baptising of children. 16. Moreover of the Lords supper, 17. by occasion
whereof he entreats of the Mass. 18. Last of those five which were falsely
counted a little before Sacraments. 19.

What is to be said of the third, the Chapter it self will declare. 20.

Cap. 1. Of the true Church with which we ought to keep unity, because it is
the mother of the faithful.
FIrst, he briefly expounds the article, and also shows by what manner
names the Church is commended to us, from the first, to the sixth. Moreover,
by what means it may be known, from the 7. to the 9. Last of al how ungodly,
it is to fall from it, from the 10. to the 29.

Ephe. 4.1^
1 Now will he speak of ye Church because the Lord has delivered with, it
whatsoever might be necessary to ye holy consent of faith, and right order,
because she is the mother of the faithful, and does not only by her ministry
nourish them, while they are infants, but also by her motherly care nourishes
them, till they grow to riper age, Matthew. 10.9
and at length come to the mark of faith: for it is not The IIII. Table of the
IIII. Book.
There are only three places which he treats of chiefly in this book,
whereof The first is of the Church, which contains many things, al which
notwithstanding may fitly be divided into four parts. For First he disputes
of the reason whereby the church may be known, because we must keep unity with
it. Cap 1. and 2. Secondly of the regiment of the Church, where First he
shows what the order is of governing the Church, which is delivered us out of
the pure word of God. Cap. 3. Secondly what form of government the Fathers
used. Chap. 4. Last of all what it is which at this day is used with the Pope,
Cap. 15. by occasion whereof He treats of supremacy specially. Chap. 6. And
he shows by what degrees he is advanced to that height. Chap. 7.

Thirdly of the power of the church: and First as touching the opinions of
faith, which Is set upon either in every particular or universal council.
Cap. 8. Or universal counsel. Cap. 9.
Moreover in bearing laws. Cap. 10. Last of all in Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. Cap. 11.
Fourthly, he discendeth to the discipline of the church: and First he treats
thereof. Chap. 12. Then also he handles a certain vice near to the same,
wherein many offended while showing vows, would as it were publish to them
selves a certain voluntatie kind of discipline. Chap. 13.

The second is of sacraments, which has three parts: For First he treats
generally of sacraments. Secondly of both severally: and First of Baptism, and
of that First generally. Chap. 15. Secondly of the baptism of Children. Cap.
16.
Secondly of the supper of the lord, and First of true love, and natural
institution thereof. cap. 17 Secondly of a contrary Sacrilege, that is, of the
popish Mass. Cap. 18.

Last of al of those five which a little before are counted Sacraments. Cap. 19.
The third of political government, whereof First in general he treats of
Secondly of every particular part of The Magistrate. Chap. 20. The Law. Chap.
20. The (...) Chap. 20.



lawful that those things be severed which GOD has conjoined, Gal. 8.29
that to whom he is a father, the Church is also mother.

2 In what sense the articles of the Creed are of the Church to be
understood: where namely also he treats of the preposition (in) and of the
Epitheton, Catholic or universal, that all the elect of God are so knit
together in Christ, that as they hang upon one head, Ephe. 4.15.16
so they may grow together as it were in one body. Wherefore although sorrowful
desolation: cries out, that there is nothing left of the church, yet let us
know that Christ's death is fruitful, 1. King. 19.18 Apo. 12.6
and that God does meruellously in secret corners pursue his Church.

3 In what sense the communion of Saints is added, Acts. 4.32 Ephe. 4.4.
and with what props and stays it is preserved: first it stands by Gods
election, and stands also together with his eternal providence: then is it
joined with the steadfastness of Christ, who will suffer no more his faithful
to be plucked from him then his own members to be rent, and torn in pieces:
Joel. 2.32 Psalm. 46.6
besides we are assured that truth shall always abide with us, so long as we
are holden in the bosom of Christ: Last of all we feel that the promises
belong to us, so much can the partaking of the Church do, that it holds us in
ye fellowship of God, neither is it needful to see the Church it self with
our eyes, or feel that with our hands.

4 The Church is not unworthily called our mother, for she conceaueth us in
her womb; brings us forth; feeds us with her breasts; and keeps us under
her custody, Matthew. 22.30 Esaias. 37.31
until being unclothed of mortal flesh, we be like unto Angels, neither is
there any salvation out of her bosom. As contrarily they are said to write
their names among the Citizens of Jerusalem, Psalm. 106.4
yt turn them selves to the following of true godliness, so that the
departing from the Church is always damnable.

Ephe. 4.11
5 He more at large expounds by what means she is appointed us in steed of
a mother, because the Lord has delivered with her such ministry which
should be greatly to our edification, Gal. 8.29
till by her education we grow to man's age. Therefore this manner of education
is not to be despised which is profitable for us two ways, and to this end
the use of the Churches is very necessary, which is not only called his face
(but also to take away al superstition) his footestoole.

6 The ministry notwithstanding it is very forcible, is not yet separated
from GOD.

7 As touching the second part of the treatise of the Church, first he
shewweth that the Scriptures speak two ways of it, that is to say, visible
and invisible: In the visible Church are contained many hypocrites, covetous
persons, ambitious persons, etc. The invisible likewise, but the true Church
is such, wherein none are received, but they that by grace of adoption are ye
children of God, and by sanctification of the spirit the true members of
Christ, and comprehends generally all the elect from the beginning of the
world, to the worlds end, scattered through the face of the whole world.

8 Also yt it is Gods singular prerogative to know with are truly his, yet has
he marked out by certain notes to us (as much as he saw expedient for us) what
they are that are counted for children, but the same not by certentie of faith,
but by judgment of charity.

9 Last of all the ministry of ye word and sacraments are notes of the church
there is not a like reason of every man for although they profess true
godliness, yet may they be strangers from the Church.

10 As touching the third, he counts him for a traitorous runaway and
sorsaker of religion, that estraungeth himself from such christian fellowship:
the Church is counted a pillar and strong stay of truth, and the house of God
his spouse and fulness: neither can there be imagined any fault more heinous
then with wicked breach of faith to defile ye marriage which the only
begotten, 1. Tim. 3.15 Ephe. 5.27
has vouchsafed to contract with us.

11 We must be so much the more diligent to imprint these marks in our minds,
as the devil labors to take away either these marks of ye Church, or else
if he may not do it, by defection and falling away forcibly to take us from the
Church.

12 There is not sufficient cause why any man should estrange himself from the
Church, yea although the common profession be corrupted with certain
corruptions, for diversity of opinions about matters not necessary ought to be
no ground of disagreement among christians: Phil. 3.15 1. Cor. 14.30
in the mean time every member ought to amend yt which is amiss.

13 Or much more because the life of some is stuffed with many vices, Matthew.
13.4^
for although the Church of Christ be holy, yet is it mingled with good and
evil men: it is like a floor wherein the wheat is gathered together that
lies hidden under the chafe, till being cleansed with Fan and Sieve, it be
at length laid up in garner: therefore in vain seek they a Church sprinkled
with no spot, since the Lord has pronounced that the Church, till the day of
judgment shall be troubled with evil.

14 But seeing that is not equally received of al men, 1. Cor. 1.11
first (which chiefly belongs to the vices of manners) he proves, ye same to
be sufficiently declared by the example of the Corinthes, who notwithstanding
yt they are infected with many vices, do not only not strike them with extreme
thunderbolts of division, or banishment from the kingdom of Christ, but also
reports it a church of Christ and a fellowship of saints, so he found a
Church among the Galathia^s which almost were utter forsakers of the Gospel.
Galat. 1


15 Moreover that which they object out of Paul, 1. Cor. 5.2
that wicked me^ must not be suffered in our company, he plainly shows it, yt
it does belong nothing to the matter, because ye judgment of such separation
belongs not to every man, but to the Church only.

16 Thirdly by Augustines authority, and most firm reasons, he conuinceth such
waywardnes not to proceed of a true study of holiness, but of a proud and false
opinion. Thereof Augustine gives this counsel to godly and quiet men, that
they mercifully correct that which they can, and that which they cannot,
patiently to bear, and groan, and mourn with love, Cont. Par. lib. 3. Cap. 1.
until God either amend them, or at harvest root up the tares, and fan out
ye chafe.

17 Fourthly, Ephe. 5.25
because they pretend that the church is called holy, and therefore may not be
counted as a Church which flows with such corruptions: this also he takes
away, showing yt of holiness is no otherwise, the^ such as is always very far
in this world from their perfection, although one Prophet says, Joel. 3.17
That there shall be a holy Jerusalem, through which Strangers shall not
pass: and another says: There shall be a holy temple, Esaias. 35.8
whereunto unclean shall not enter: they are not so to be understood, as though
there were no spot in the members of the Church: but for yt with their whole
endeavor, they aspire to holiness and sound pureness, and by the goodness of God
cleanness is ascribed to the^ which they have not yet fully obtained. And
although al mankind is defiled and corrupted by Adams sin, yet out of this, as
it were out of a polluted Mass God always sanctifies some vessels unto
honor, that there should be no age without feeling of his mercy. Psalm. 89.4


18. 19 Fifthly, he proves that such corruptions were of great strength in all
ages in the Church: yet did neither the Prophets depart from their old Church
nor the Apostles, nor Christ himself, from that which was in their time.
therefore says Cyprian, Lib. 3. Epist. 5
Though there be seen tares or unclean vessels in the Church, yet there is
no cause why we should depart from ye Church: we must only labor that we may
be wheat, we must use diligence and endeavor as much as we can, that we may be
a golden or silver vessel, but to break the earthen vessels is the only work
of the Lord to whom is given an iron rod.

20. 21 Last of all he confirms this hereby, yt in the Creed remission of
sins is so aptly joined yt it is mamifest it belongs to the Church, and the
same is such that not only remitteth sins once when the Lord receaueth us into
the church, Esaias. 33.14 Oze. 2.18
but also so often as we offend.

22 Yea this may sufficiently appear by this one thing, Mat. 16.19. Job. 20.23.
that the keys of the Church are principally given to this end, to bestow
daily upon us this goodness.

23 But seeing the Nouatians and certain Anabaptists against these things
which in the last place he disputed of concerning the blemishes of the church,
do feign that ye people of God in baptism are regenerate into a pure and
Angelical life which can not afterward be corrupted with any filth of vices:
but to them that are fallen, after they have received grace, there is no hope of
pardon left. Mat. 5.11.
First he manifestly confuteth this error by that form of prayer, which was
instituted of the Lord, whereby they confess them selves detters.

24 Moreover, Genesis 33.18. Deu. 30.3.
by certain examples taken out of the old Testament and by Moses authority,
when the people were fallen into an Apostasy.

25 And by certain testimonies of the Prophets. Ier. 1.3. Eze. 18.23.


26 Afterward also by the new Testament, and reason and testimonies, 1. Tim.
1.9. Mat. 10.38.
and first by particular examples.

27 Moreover he confirms and shows by general, a singular testimony out of
the Psalms and the order of the Creed, whereby we are taught there remains
continual pardon of sins.

28 Thirdly when to confirm their error, they cry out saying, they mean not
every sin, but voluntary only, he also overcomes this by three arguments:
the first whereof is taken from the sacrifices of the law, where the lord
commands one sort of sacrifice to be offered for clensing of the wilful
sins of the faithful, an other to redeem their ignorance, Leuit. 4. Genesis
33.18. 2. Sam. 11.4.
an other argument from the sum of the Gospel, as of ye Corinthians: the
third of examples as of Peter.

29 Last of all, least they should think that some of the fathers make for
them, because they would not that solemn repentance should no more be
iterated then Baptism, first this, their severity is enterpreted. Moreover he
sets against and prefers the moderation and facility granted in his
word to the severity of the fathers.

Cap. 2. A comparison of the false Church with the true.
WHere falshoode and lying has usurped the dominion, there is no Church,
Ephe. 2.20.
for the foundation of the Church is laid upon the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, 1. Tim. 3.15.
Christ being him self the head corner stone, therefore if the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets by whom the faithful are commanded to repose their
salvation in only Christ, be taken away, the Church must needs fall down.

2 Since the case stands in such state under Papistry, there is no church here
remaining, yet they buckle up themselves and their Church highly with
commendations to us, and dare decree that all those are Schismatikes and
Heretics, which think the contrary: speaking therefore of both, first their
succession wherewith they boast their Church, he proves is of no weight.

3 Succession is nothing auailable, unless it have true imitation joined:
first by examples and testimonies of Scripture: In vain they cry, the Temple
of the Lord. Ier. 7.4. For the Lord does acknowledge no where any thing for
his, but where his word is heard, and reuere^tly observed. Eze. 10.4. Gal.
4.22. Genesis 2.1. Ioh. 18.37. Ioh. 10.14.
Moreover, by reason drawn from a similitude of Emperors: Last of all, he
confirms it by Augustines authority, who says, the church is sometime
covered with multitude of offenses as with a cloud; sometimes calmness of
time appears quiet and free; sometimes it is hidden and troubled with want of
tribulations and temptations.

4 Whatsoever the^ they do pretend, there is no Church where the word of God
appears not.

5 Moreover as touching their reproach and false accusation whereby they accuse
us of Schism, and Heresy, he wipeth away the same clean by an argument taken
from a definition, as well out of Augustine as out of the Scripture, for they
are Schismatikes and Heretics, which making a division break in sunder the
communion of the church, which is holde^ together with true bo^ds, that is, the
agreement of true doctrine and brotherly charity. Whereupon Augustine puts
this difference between Heretics and Schismatikes, that Heretics indeed do
with false doctrines corrupt the pureness of Faith, but the Schismakes sometime
where there is like Faith, break the bond of fellowship, for this conioyning of
charity so hangs upon the unity of Faith, that Faith ought to be the
beginning, the end, and only rule, for so often as the unity of the Church is
commended unto us, this is required, yt while our minds agree in Christ, Ephe.
4.5. Phil. 2.25.
our wills also may be joined together with mutual well willing in Christ.

6 The same he also confirms by Cyprians authority, and shows that their
execrations, wherewith they accursse us, have no power or strength: for Christ
foretold his Apostles that they should be cast out of ye Synagogs for his
names sake. Ioh. 16.2.


7 The better to deliver al those from crime which have fell from the
corruptnes of Papistry, to the purity of the gospel, he denies that the
Romish church is otherwise to be esteemed then the Israeletical Church, for
they had the true Church among them when they continued in the laws of the
covenant, till they went out of kind, to Idolatry and superstition,
estraunging them selves from Iudaysme under Hieroboam.

8 But what it has been, he after more at large declares: ^. Kin. 12.
for Jeroboam first made Calves, the Jews defiled them selves with wicked
superstitious manners, so among the Israelites to King Achabs reign, there was
no amendment, and from thence they became worse and worse.

9 Thereupon he concludes, that they did unjustly, while they would drive us to
the communion of their Church: and there are two things which by this means
they desire to wreste from us, first, that we should communicate with their
prayers, Sacraments, and all their Ceremonies: Moreover, that whatsoever
honor, power, and jurisdiction Christ has given to his Church, the same we
should give to their church. The first of these he handles in this place,
namely, that God comdemned all forged forms of worshippings, ^. Kin. 12.31.
so yt there was not one Prophet or godly man that once worshipped in Bethel.

10 Of the last, 1. Tim. 3.15.
where he proves that if they were of the church, then ye church is not the
pillar of truth, but the stay of lying: not the Tabernacle of the living God,
but the receptacle of Idols.

11. 12 Neither yet is the whole title of the Church to be denied them, where
also is showed as much as may be granted, Dan. 9.27. 2. These. 2.4.
that after a sort the Church is with the^, although it want the lawful form
of a Church. For it is foretold that Antichrist should sit in the temple of
God: therefore they have a Church, but such as is profaned with ungodliness,
full of sacrilege and damnable doctrines, such wherein Christ lies half buried,
the gospel overwhelmed, godliness banished, ye worship of God in a manner
abolished.

Cap. 3. Of the teachers and Ministers of the church, and of their election and
office.
FIrst, he permits certain things after a sort, from the 1. to the 3.
Moreover in part he speaks of every one, from the 4. to the 9. Last of all,
he handles of the ordinatio^ and vocation of Ministers, from the 10. to the 16.

Mat. 26.
1 Professing that he will speak of the order wherewith the Lord would have
his Church governed, he descends only to Ecclesiastical orders (as they are
called) first he speaks of them generally, that is to say, that God who only
rules and bears pre-eminence over the Church, and who can teach us by him
self or by Angels, yet he does it by the ministry of man, first to show his
good will toward us: Moreover to accustom us to humility and obedience. Last
of all, that men being bound by this bond, may better learn to mayntaine
mutual charity between themselves.

2 The ministry of men is the chiefest sinewe whereby the faithful cleave
together in one body. Ephe. 4.10.
Christ is gone up on high to fulfill all things, which fulfilling is, by his
ministers to whom he has committed office, and given grace to execute that
work, he disposes his gifts to his Church, Ephe. 4.13.
and after a sort gives him self present: extending the power of his Spirit
in this Institution, that it should not be vain or idle, so the restoring of
all things is performed, so the body of Christ is edified, so we in all things
grow into him that is head.

3 And to this end is ye dignity thereof commended to us by the Lord, Esai.
52.8. Mat. 5.15.
with so excellent testimonies, and the necessity with many examples.

4 When he has set these things in order, Ephe. 4.12.
he prepares to entreat of every order, and first of Apostles, Prophets,
and Evangelists, all whose offices are but for a time, but the Pastors and
Teachers were such, as the Church could never want them.

5 If we join the Evangelists with the Apostles (as almost they are one) we
shall have two couples after a sort, answering one to an other, for our
Teachers and Pastors have almost all one office, with the old Prophets and
Apostles, for all were sent to preach the word, Luke 6.13. Gal. 1.1.
but the Apostles and Prophets were garnished with a particular title above the
rest.

6 That he shows more at large in the Apostles and Pastors, that is to say,
Mat. 28.9. 1. Cor. 4.1.
that the ministration of the word and Sacraments pertains to both.

7 Albeit we assign to every Pastor his several Church, yet so in the mean
time every man is not bound to one Church, Act. 14.2. Tit. 1.5.
but also he may help others, so that public profit so require, if it be
rightly done, and in order.

8 Bishops, Priests, Pastors, and Ministers with the Apostle are one and the
same: Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.7.
he omitteth other temporary functions: but there were two which always
remained, besides them that belong to the Ministry of the word, and are
mentioned of before: that is to say, government, whereof he speaks afterward,
and the care of the poor.

Romans 12.8. 1. Tim. 5.10. Act. 6.3.
9 As concerning the care of the poor, the same was committed to Deacons and
widows, whereof they served the Church in distributing to the poor, the other
in healing the poor.

10 In the holy assembly all things must be done decently and in order, and so
he makes him self way to entreat of Ministers calling.

11 But the discourse thereof stands in four points, that is, what manner of
Ministers, how and by whom Ministers ought to be instituted, with what usage
and ceremony they are to be admitted: 1. Cor. 12.7.
but he speaks not here of an outward (which notwithstanding is most
needful) but of an inward and solemn calling.

12 What manner of Bishopps, Tit. 1.9. 1. Tim. 3.1. Gal. 1.12. Act. 1.13.
and how they must be called.

13 As touching the third, that the Apostles were called by the Lord: but
herein is some peculiar thing.

14 Our Ministers, Pastors, and Bishops, must be appointed of men, Gal. 1.^.
Act. 13.^*
and many also of the Apostles, although they were called of the Lord, yet
were they appointed by men.

15 To whom then may this election apperteine, not to any one truly, Act.
14.2^.
but that by Elders by the peoples consent and allowance they might be created,
which might be thought meet, yt which Paul said to Titus and Timothy, is
meant that they went only before the people in doctrine and wholesome counselles,
not that they only excludyng all other, Leui. 8.6. Nu. 20.26.
and should do what they listed, which was performed in the Levites, that
the people should have their consent, and in Matthias and the seven Deacons.

Genesis 49.14. Mat. 19.15.
16 As touching the last, the form of ordering was no other then Imposition of
hands, but for the same there is no commandment. but it seems to come from
the Hebrews, which would present to God, by laying on of hands, that which
they would have blessed and hallowed, which our Lord followed when he prayed over
Infants.

Cap. 4. Of the state of the Church and the manner of governing that was in use
before papacy.
FIrst he shows what they should be, from the 1. to the 9. Moreover he
entreats of the calling of Ministers and Bishops, from the 10. to the 15.

1 All the Ministers yt the old Church had, are divided into three orders,
Priests, Elders, and Deacons.

2 In every City there was one company of Priests which had charge of
doctrine and Sacraments, they chose one of their company whom they called
Bishop, that dissentions should not grow of equality, as it is wo^t to come
to pass, to them sometimes were appointed country Bishops, Tit. 1.9.
all which notwithstanding were occupied in the word and Sacraments, and in
teaching youth.

3 This last he prosecuteth more at large by Hierome and Gregory's authority.
The Priest, Epis. 4. Han. in Eze.
says Gregory doteth, if there be no sound heard of him because he asks
against him self the wrath of the secret Judge, Act. 20.16.
if he go without sound of preaching, and in an other place when Paul
testifies that he is clean from the blood of all, in this saying we be
convinced, we be bound, we be showed to be guilty which are called Priests,
which besides the euilles we have of our own, add also the deaths of other,
because we kill so many, as we being luke warm and silent, do daily see to go
to death.

4 There have been Archbishops and Patriarchs, but their use was rare, which
were appointed to discuss matters in prouincical synodes, which could not be
ended by a few.

5 The Deacons under the appointment of the Bishops, did distribute the goods
of the Church, partly to the Ministers, partly to feed the poor: ye
Subdeacons and Archdeacons had place in the Church.

6 There was such distribution of the Church goods, that neither the
Ministers wanted nourishment, nor the poor were neglected.

7 When Faith and uprightness of the Deacons began to wax cold in ministering
the goods of the Church, it was decreed by Canons, that they should be divided
into four parts.

8 Albeit, one part should be bestowed upon the garnishing of holy things,
1. Tim. 3.^.
yet the same remained for the poor, when and as often as they stood in need
thereof.

9 Besides these orders some are called Clerks, to shut and open the doors,
some Ostiarij, doorekeepers, and other some Acoluthi, followers, which are the
offices they are appointed unto. These offices are not so much functio^s, which
are kindled by true Ministers of the Church, as certain exercises, and as it
were the Rudimentes of younglinges.

10 As concerning their solemn calling, out of those four which before he
has put to be considered of in the Cap. 3. sect. 11. The two first must
faithfully be observed from the old Church, Contrary to Paul. 1. Tit. 3.2.
unless because by success of time with vnmoderate severity they required
single life in those that were chosen, but in the third they differed much.

11 In choosing Bishops the people had their liberty long preserved them,
whereupon came this saying, Let him that shall bear rule over all, be chosen
of all.

12 But afterward it was included in certain Councels, least the matter
should be permitted to the unadvised multitude.

13 This order of choosing continued, afterward the decrees could not repugne
against it, which Gratian gathered together to an other end.

14 As concerning the fourth, that is, by what form the Ministers were
admitted into their office after election, the Bishops were wont to assemble
together.

15 After by little and little a diverse manner grew, that they which were
chosen, should resort to the Metropolitan City, to fetch their ordering, but
there was no custom, but imposition of hands, but that the Bishops had some
decking in a solemn company.

Cap. 5. That the old form of government is utterly overthrown by the
tyranny of the Papasie.
THe Chapters being divided into parts, first he thinks to discuss both,
who and what men, and in what order they should be called under the papasie to
this ministry: and that he does from the first to the seventh. Moreover how
faithfully they may execute their office, from the 8. to the 19.

1 As concerning the first where he grants the first to the Bishops, in
this disputation for honors sake, first he shows who, and what men must be
chosen, that is, the unlearned, dissolute, boys, Sodomites.

2 Moreover as concerning the third member, that is to say, the order of
chosing, all that right of the That he complains the peoples right to be
abridged, it is doubtful whether it were but for a time, and tied to certain
circumstances, I truly cannot be persuaded to grant such right to the people,
as our churches are now governed.
people in chosing, is taken away, against Leo, Cyprian and many decrees of
Synodes, neither can they be excused with that collar they allege.

3 They have violently gotten to the^ selves those turns, not (as they feign)
to remedy miserable things, but to establish their own tyranny, at length the
Notwithstanding since that Papasiie prevailed, certain Emperors have
withstoode the Popes, concerning such rites and reasons, as apperteining to
them only, as Henry the 4. and the 5. and Edward the 3. King of England in an
Epistle to the Pope, proves that the Bishops election did appertain to his
Progenitors.
Princes obtained of them to name the Bishops an example no less filthy then
the other, and that which ought to be far from a good Prince.

4 When he has spoken of election of Bishops, coming to the election of
Priests and Deacons: he reprooueth the same for two causes: first for yt they
are ordained to an other end: Moreover, because none are appointed to any
certain place, besides a thousand other deceites.

5 In the ordinances of these how diverse abuses do burst out.

6. 7 In the collations of Benefices are also many abuses.

Coming to the second part of the Chapter, that is to discuss how faithfully
they fulfill their duty: first, he speaks of Priests of what sort soever,
from the 8. to the 14: Then also of Deacons, from the 15. to the 19. In that
they divide their Priests into monks and Seculars, Hom. 17.
first he denies that those former have any place in the presbitery.
Moreover, if they have, they do not their duty which is commanded them to
do.

9 Of the Seculars some have certain stipends whereby they are nourished, as
Bishoprikes or Parishes, some live, as hirelings by letting their daily labor
of a stipend gathered therevppon, these are nothing less by the nature of
their offices then Priests.

10 Canons, Deanes, Chaplins, Prouosts, and all that are fed with idle
benefices, must be accounted in the same degree.

11 Bishops and Teachers have a godly and excellent office, if they did execute
it, they forsake their Churches committed to them and cast the governance
thereof far from them.

12 This did Gegory consider of in his time: but Bernard being somewhat after,
much more. The world, says Gegory, is full of Priests, but yet in harvest
there are seldom workmen found. Again, what do we O Priests which
receive reward and are no work men? Acts. 20.28
we leave the ministry of preaching, and to our punishment, as I see, we
are called Bishops that keep the name of honor, and not of virtue.

13 The whole form of Ecclesiastical government, which at this day florisheth
under Papisme, there is nothing else but a spoiling place where in thieves
licentiously raunge without law and measure, howsoever they brag them selves
with the couller of the Apostles authority.

14 Their manners are most vile and wicked of all men, so that in them the
light of the world, which Christ requires the salt of the earth, Matthew. 5.14
true holiness which should be as a perpetual rule to judge by, can by no
means be found, but riot wantonness, daintines and al kind of lusts.

15 As touching the deaconship there is not at all among the^, although they
hold a certain shadow thereof:

16 The goods of the Church are distributed to other uses, then according to
old custom they ought to be, and they are not to be suffered.

17 It is to small purpose, which they allege for themselves, that the dignity
of the Church, is bewtifully vpholden by earthly magnificence, and they
wickedly wrest many places of Scripture, to defend their beastliness, for in
those places of scripture, the Prophets under the image of earthly things do
paint out unto us the heavenly glory of GOD that ought to shine in the Church.

18 They are wickedly careful in adorning ye Church, when in the mean time
they are touched with no care of the poor.

19 Neither only those things which others give to Ecclesiastical uses, but
also the rentes which they receive of their lands and proper possessions does
fill them with no less superfluity and riot contrary to Gods word. Titus. 2.7


Cap. 6. Of the Supremacy of the sea of Rome.
WHat Supremacy the Pope challenges to himself.

2 The state of the question is, whether it be necessary for the true force of
Ecclesiastical order that one sea, be above the other both in dignity and
power, that it may be head of ye whole body, that the high Priests may prove
this, they draw an Argument from the high Priest with the Jews: But it is
weak two ways, because the Jews were on each side compassed with idolaters:
yt they should not be diversely drawn with variety of religions. God appointed
the place of worshipping him in the midst part of the land, where he ordained
over them one head Bishop, whom they all should have regard unto, that the
better they might be kept in unity. But now that religion is spread into all the world, it were an absurdity that the East and West should be given to
another nation. Heb. 7.12
The Priesthood was a figure of Christ, but the Priesthood being removed, the
right is also removed, not to the Pope, but to Christ. 10.

Matthew. 36.18 1. Pet. 5.2
3 First he briefly confuteth those places which they cite out of the new
Testament, and that which Peter received of ye Lord, he gives by way of
exhortation to all other Priests, whereby we may gather that either there was
nothing given to Peter, more then to the rest: or that Peter did egally
communicate with other the power he had received, which may also appear out of
Christ's own mouth, when he says, John. 20.2^
That to bind and to lose, is too retain and forgive sins, which Paul also
in an other place very well declares, where he says That the Ministers of the
Gospel have commandment to reconcile men to God, 2. Cor. 5.18
and power to punish those that refuse it.

4 Morouer he ouerturneth the fundation wherewith they chiefly labor, that is,
that heavenly answer of Christ to Peter, first by his own true and natural
exposition, and also by the Fathers authority, Matthew. 18.1. John. 20.23
proouing that this was not only said to Peter, but to others also for yt he
gave to Peter at one time, he at al other time gave to ye rest. And Augustine
says, De simpli. cle^^.
That Christ did it not to prefer one man before another, but so to set out
the unity of the church. In an other place he says, When they were all
asked, only Peter answered, Thou art Christ, and it is said to him, I will
give thee the keys, as though he alone had received the power of binding and
loosing, whereas both he being one, said the one for all, and he received
the other withal as bearing the person of unity.

Matthew. 16.18
5. 6 Although it were spoken to Peter only, thou art Peter etc. yet it does
little help them: for that which Christ said of Peter: Ephe. 2.20 1. Pet. 2.5
Paul and Peter speaks of all Christians: it may as well be said, that
Andrewe is supreme, because he went before him in time, and brought him to
Christ. John. 1.40
Peter confessed in his own and his brethrens name, that Christ is the Son
of God, Matthew. 16.16
upon this rock, Christ builds his Church, because it is the only fundation,
1. Cor. 3.11
beside which there can be laid none other.

7 This he confirms by many plales of scripture which how that Peter was
nothing else then one of ye twelve, like fellow with the rest; not Lord, he
propounded to the counsel, Acts. 15.5
if any thing be to be done, and gives warning what is not to be done, but
there withal he hears other, he commanded the^ not by authority, but as
his fellows, 1. Pet. 5.^
when he was accused he answered for himself, when he was commanded by his
fellows to go to Samaria with John, he went.

8 But although Peter excelled the other Apostles in dignity, yet it makes
nothing for supremasie in all the world.

1 But if this were granted, that it is good and profitable that the whole
world be held under Monarchia: Yet it may not therefore be granted that the
same should take place in the government of the Church, howsoever ye Pope
challenges nothing else for him self then that he may be the Priestly head
or chief vicar. But it is nothing, unless they shewit was ordained by Christ,
Ep. 1.2^ Col. 1.18
for ye Apostle teaches yt the whole mininistration is dispersed through the
members, and that the power flows from it heavenly.

10 Paul sometimes depainteth unto us a lively image of the Church, Ephe. 4.10
and commends the unity thereof, yet he makes no mention of one head,
which if it had been true, the place did greatly desire.

11. 12. 13 Although we grant them this also, that the Supremasie of the
Church was so established in Peter, that it should always remain in
perpetual succession, yet they can never win this, that the Sea of Rome is
so settled, that whosoever is Bishop of that City, should bear authority over
the whole world: although we grant them this, that Peter was Bishop there, as
they say. Christ himself the Prince of Pastors, the sovereign bishop the
head of the Church, while he lived, exercised his Bishoprike, and in dying,
fulfilled the office of Priesthood, at Jerusalem, yet could he not purchase
honor to the place, if Peter got supremasie to Rome, because he sat there,
why may not the Israelites set the seat of supremacy in the wilderness, Deuteronomy.
34.5
because Moses sat there?

Gal. 1.8
14. 15 Much less if we deny that Peter sat at Rome, and that more then
likely, for about 20. years after Christ's death he was at Jerusalem, and
from thence, he went to Antioch where he remained 7. years as Gregory
mentions: And Eusebius 25. years. Now from the death of Christ to the end
of Neroes Empire, in whose time they say he was slain, there is but 37. years.
Now if he sat at Rome, it was a very little while, as more plainly may
appear: For Paul writing to the Romans, as he iourneied to Jerusalem, where
he was taken and brought to Rome, wrote nothing of Peter, and yet is it likely
that he wrote the Epistle four years before he came to Rome, Romans 15.15
neither does he make mention of Peter when he rehearses a great number of the
Godly. Romans 10.4. Acts. 28.16 Now if Peter were at Rome, it were a foul shame
^im for to fors^ke the gospel.


16 Although in old time the fathers have given great honor to the Church of
Rome, and have reverently spoken thereof, and that chiefly for three causes,
yet they acknowledge no supremasie.

17 The unity also which so often they speak of, as is meet, does never tend
to that end.

Cap. 7. Of the beginning and increasing of the Papasie of Rome, until it
advanced it self to this height, whereby both the liberty of the church was
oppressed, and all right government overthrown.
THE Nicen Synod gave the first place to ye Bishop of Rome among the
Patriarchs, and it was commanded to look unto the Cities adioining to it: but
in Councels which followed not the Bishop of Rome, but others, held the
Supremasie.

2 In the Council at Calcedon although it took the chief place, yet was it by
an extraordinary means, and not observed of the Successors and other Councels.

3 Yea the ancient Fathers did not vouchsafe him such titles. For Cyprian
making mention of Cornelius, Lib. 2. Eist. 2. and lib. 4. Epist. 6.
sets him out with no other name, then Brother, fellow Bishop, or in fellow
office.

4 But Gregory stoutly impugneth it, when the Bishop of Constantinople would
have circumuented him, neither yet did he challenge it to himself by the
right of his own seat.

5 The authority of the Bishop of Rome grew, when not only the godly being
too much grieved in other parts for succors sake: but also the wicked being
condemned of their own Bishops, for an unjust defense did fly thither: al
which the chief Bishop continually did greedily receive.

6 The Ecclesiastical power is contained in four points, none of these
perteine to the Bishop of Rome, that is neither the appointment of the Bishops:

7 Nor admonitions or Censors:

8 Nor the calling together of Synodes:

9. 10 Nor the right of hearing appeals.

11 Notwithstanding those Decretall Epistles which they allege for themselves.

12. 13 Although in Gregory's time the authority of Rome was much increased,
yet it tended to no other purpose then to help other Bishops, not to hinder
them. Moreover it greatly displeased Gregory, that by such mean it was
distracted.

Cap. ^.
14. 15 In the Counsel at Loraine it was decreed, that those Cities which in
the Civil government, were the chief Cities of every Province should be the
chief seas of Bishops, and if it happned the honor of the civil government to
be removed from one City to another, that then the right of the Metropolitan
City should therewithal be removed thither. Hereupon rose great strife of
the second place between the Bishops of Constantinople and Rome.

16 Within a little after John Bishop of Constantinople aided by the favor of
Maurice the Emperor, usurped the name of universal Patriarch. But then
Gregory did constantly set himself against him (yet not so that he would
challenge to himself that which he denied to an other) and was also angry
with the Bishop of Alexandria, Lib. 7. Epist. 3^.
by whom he was saluted by such a title.

17 But at length Boniface the third obtained of Phocas, that Rome might be
head of all Churches: but this was almost of no weight, till at length France
by evil ways came into his power.

18 From that time things by little and little fell to worse, as Bernard with
grievous complaints bewayleth the Church of his time.

19 And that it may better appear, if we grant to the Bishop of Rome that
dignity and pre-eminence which he had in the time of Leo and Gregory, yet it
makes nothing for the Supremasie, which at this day they challe^ge: first, he
shows that there are four principal: points, wherein they are wont to
exercise their tyranny. Moreover, also he adds certain other things
belonging to this self same argument.

20 Nor those things which they father upon the old fathers, as they falsely
imagine, must be granted them: neither was Gregory the nienth, Martin, and
other content with them which have invented them selves certain new things,
and those utterly unmeet.

21 Although Cyprian might be set against this so great insolency, the
council of Carthage, and many things out of histories, Synods and books of
old fathers: yet by this one they may sufficiently be urged, but if they have
any shame in them, they can never defend their tyranny which so often Gregory
condemns, which not only rejected the title of universal Bishop and head,
but also the power to command.

22 The present state of Papistrie cannot without shame be defended, as also
manifestly appears by that that Gregory and Bernard very lamentably
complained of the malice of their age, which is certainly known does abound
a hundredth times more now.

23 To conclude, that he may more vehemently wring them, and make himself way
to the treatise following, of Antichrist: Look Cap. 2. Sect. 11.12.
he denies yt at Rome there is either a Church or Bishop; all things are at
this day so corrupted.

24 That he confirms, and thereupon includes, that there is no Apostolic
sea, where we can see nothing but horrible Apostasy: the same is not the
mother of all Churches where we see the seat of Antichrist set.

25 The Bishop of Rome is Antichrist him self. 2. These. 2.4. Dan. 7.25.


26 Therefore the Supremasie may not be bound to the place, although in times
past it has bin chief of all, chiefly seeing the Church is now turned to a
Court.

27 Hitherto having spoken of ye thing it self, now he comes to the persons,
and first as touching religion, he accounts all in general, none other then
Lucians and Atheists.

28 Then also John the 22. namely erred in the doctrine of the immortality of
the soul: and therefore necessary i^ be wiped out, yet they say, that because
it was said to Peter, Luke 22.32.
that his Faith should not faynte, they can not err, but if they will be
Peter's successors, they must all be Satan's, Man. 16.23.
and herein more then he, because they follow Satanisme continually, which he
forsook.

29 Moreover as touching their manners, they are most filthy both in the
wickedness of others and their own.

30 Cardinals were nothing else in times past, then Priests of the Romish
Church, and much inferior to Bishops, but as they are now, they have no
true and lawful office in the church.

Cap. 8. Of the power of the Church, as touching the articles of Faith, and
with how unbridled licentiousnes it has in the Papasie been wrested to
corrupt all pureness of doctrine.
FIrst he shows what bonds and ends they are, which the Church ought to
appoint it self in such matters, from the 1. to the 9. Moreover he blames
the Church of Rome, that it dare transgress them, from the 10. to the 16.

1 The third place is of the power of the Church, but the same partly is
contained in every Bishop, partly in Councils, and it partly consists either
in doctrine or in jurisdiction, or in making laws, the place also of doctrine
has two parts, authority to deliver rules and to expound them: but
whatsoever is taught concerning the power of the Church, 2. Cor. 10.^.
must be applied not to destruction, but to edification: the only way whereof
is, to preserve to Christ his authority which can no otherwise be, unless
that be left unto him which he received of his Father, that is, that he be the
only schoolmaster of the church, Mat. 17.5.
for it is written not of any other but of him only, Hear him.

2 Whatsoever authority or dignity the scripture gives to the Ministers of
the Church, all the same is given not properly to the men them selves, but to
the Ministry over which they are appointed, that same first is showed in in
the Priests, all the Ministers had authority to teach, in the name of the
Lord.

3 Moreover in the Prophets.

4 Last of all, in the Apostles.

Mat. 28.9. Job. 7.16.
5 Christ taught always his church, yet by diverse orders, for diversity of
time: first by Revelations, but the same not doubtful. They that will come to
the knowledge of God, must be directed by the eternal wisdom of the Father.

Mal. 2.7.
6 Moreover, by the law and the Prophets.

Heb. 1.5.
7 Last of all by him self manifested in the flesh.

Mat. 28.20. Mat. 24.8.
8 No man ought to teach any other thing in the Church, than that which is
contained in the law and the Prophets, and Apostolical writings.

9 Neither is it lawful for their Apostles nor their successors, 1. Pet. 4.21.
2. Cor. 10.4.
no not for the whole Church to pass these bounds.

10 Bishops and Prelates have exercised very great tyranny, for they both
permit themselves power to make new laws, and acknowledge no man for a
Christian, that does not certainly consent to their doctrines, as well
affirmative as Negative.

11 That which they allege for them selves, Mat. 27.20. Ioh. 14.16.
that the Church shall never be forsaken of her spouse, but that it shall be
guided by his Spirit into all truth; he shows in what sense it must be
understood: the same undoubtedly contendeth unto daily increase more then to
glory in perfection, for no man has attained the mark.

12 When they except that whatsoever particular thing is attributed to every
one of the holy ones, the same does thoroughly and fully belong to the Church it
self: and that which they draw out to this, and are dilligent to prove by two
places of scripture, he shows in what sense as well the foundation of their
argument, Ephe. 5.25. 1. Tim. 3.15.
as the places of scripture must be understood, that is they declare what
Christ daily works, for he daily purges, sanctifies, abolisheth, and wypeth
all them that are his from all spots: the beginning of that sanctifiyng is
here seen, but the end and full accomplishment shall be, when the holiest of
holy ones shall truly and fully fill it with his holiness, as elsewhere he
teaches that Christ gave Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers, that we should no
more be carried about with every word of doctrine, or be mocked of men, but
that being enlightened with the true knowledge of the son of God, ^ph^. 4.1^.
we should altogether meet in the unity of Faith.

13 In what sense the adversaries deny that the Church may err, and what is to
be determined thereof, that forasmuch as it is guided by the Spirit of God, it
may go safely without the word, that whatsoever it speaks or thinks it is
truth: but we say that the spouse and scholar of Christ must be subject to
her husband and schoolmaster, that she continually hangs on his mouth, and
they that do so, shall be sure to have the Spirit to guide them into the right
way, and to stay them in their Faith, for there is nothing to be looked for of
his Spirit, Job. 16.12.
but that he should enlighte^ our minds to perceive the truth of his
doctrine, but they have not the Spirit, that pretend that they have of their
own.

14. 15 These two beginnings does nothing help them which they take, Ioh
16.12. When the Disciples were well instructed of the holy Ghost, they left all
in writing necessary to salvation, how so ever their rudenes was before.
that the Church may add some things to the Apostles writings: and whatsoever
the Church teaches and decrees, is without controversy.

16 Examples which they use for confirmation of the first, one for baptism of
Infantes, an other that the Nycen Council pronounced, that the Son is
consubstantial with the Father, does help them nothing in this matter.

Cap. 9. Of Councels and their authority.
Here because he is somewhat more rough, it is not either because he would
diminishe the authority of the old Councels, or for that he is afraid of
them, as though they made for the adversaries side, and were against us.

2 From whence the Councels have their authority, that is, Mat. 18.20.
if they be gathered together in Christ's name: and what it is, they are not
gathered together in Christ's name, which casting away Gods commandment,
wherein he forbids to add and take from it, decree what they will. God
requires of the Prophets to teach out of his mouth.

3 Against them, which the more they affirm their tyranny by counsels, they
think there remains no truth in the Church, Esai. 56.10.
unless it be among the Priests: first it is showed, that the Pastors among the
Israelites were void of the Spirit of knowledge and truth.

4 Moreover, in the new Testament it was foretold, that our age should not be
free from that evil.

5 Not that he would every where, and that rashly without any choice, diminish
the authority of Ministers: but that no man be ignorant, Ier. 18.18.
al are not Pastors which brag them selves to be Pastors, as the Papists do,
which prepare them selves against the truth, saying as the Prophet mentions,
Come, we will imagine, etc.

6 An other thing also which they imagine to the same end, yt the Church can
not stand, Ier. 4.9. Eze. 7.26.
unless it show her self in general councels, it is showed by examples;
first out of the old Testament, that notwithstanding it may err from the
truth.

7 Moreover out of the new Testament, Ioh. 11.47. 2. The. 2.3.
in the council which the Scribes and Pharisees held against Christ.

8 There is no absolute power to be granted to Councelles, because they have
brought forth many things very wickedly: and in what state and condition they
are to be counted, according to Augustine.

9 Councelles have been disagreeing from Councels, as is proved by the examples
of Constantinople, and Nicen about Images, and of Calcedon also, and the second
of Ephesus, about the impiety of Eutyches.

10. 11 Some infirmity may be found in the purer Councels, and they such,
as therein may be gathered, yt they are not so governed by the holy Ghost, but
that some thing happens to them according to the manner of men, least we give
too much credit to men.

12 The Romanistes are miserably deceived, when they resort to that extreme
and miserable shift, that although the men them selves be blockishe in wit and
counsel, and most wicked in mind and will; yet the word of God remains,
which commands to obey rulers, but the rulers ought to take no more upon
them, than Joshua had, they shall therefore be spiritual rulers to us that bow
not from the Lord, neither on the one side nor to the other: as for the false
rulers we need not, Ier. 23.16. Mat. 7.15.
neither ought we to obey.

13 That which is hitherto spoken, does chiefly tend to this end, to show
how much the authority of Councels is of force in the former Chapter of
doctrine, 1. Cor. 14.29.
that is, in erecting new doctrines: but now he shows what force they have
in the last, that is, in the interpretation of the Scripture.

14 To whom although he grant very much herein, yet he denies that the
Romanists can overcome ye which they would, whether they belong to
interpretation or approbation of Scripture. Christ commanded all should
drink of one Cupp, Mat. 26.26. 1. Tim. 4.1.
but the Council of Constance forbadde it, and willed the Priest only to drink
of it. Paul calls the forbidding of marriage, Hebr. 13.4.
the hypocrisy of Devils, and pronounces it holy among all men, but they
forbid it.

Cap. 10. Of the power of making laws, wherein the Pope and his have used a
most cruel tyranny and butchery upon souls.
FIrst he treats, as it were generally, of humane restitutions, from the
first to the eight: secondly of Papisticall ceremonies, from the nineth to the
six and twenty: thirdly, of good, and lawful, from the seven and twenty to
the two and thirty.

1 Now in that he enters this disputation whether it is lawful for the
church to bind consciences by their laws, Mat. 23.6.
this is the state of the question, to contend against Ecclesiastical
traditions, lately brought in, not the politic laws.

2 Which although they feign them to be laws of liberty, a sweet yoke, and a
light burden, yet indeed they are not only hard, but also impossible to be
kept. Paul durst not lay any snare upon men at all, 1. Cor. 7.25.
for he saw what a wound of consciences would thereby proceed.

3 But the better to expound this question, first he shows what a
conscience is, Romans 13.1.
which is also bound with politic laws: the definition may be gathered of
the proper deriuation of the word, as when the mind does conceive the
knowledge of things, it is said to know: so when we have a feeling of Gods
judgment, as a witness joined with them, which does not suffer them to hide
their sins, but they brought accused before the Judgment seat of God, that
feeling is called conscience, for it is a certain mean between God and man.
Romans 2.15.


4 And as works have respect unto men, so the conscience is referred to God:
this he excellently painteth out by two examples, 2. Tim. 1.5.
so that conscience is nothing else but the inward pureness of the heart.

5 But seeing he will not have consciences tied with such humane laws, he
shows in what sense Paul teaches, that we must obey Magistrates for
conscience sake, distinguishing between the general and the special.

6 But coming to the question, where again he shows more plain, what the
state of the question is, he denies that the Bishops are appointed law
makers over the faithful, that may of them selves prescribe a rule to live by;
or compel to their ordinances the people committed to them.

7 Seeing the Lord has contained Iam. 4.12. Esai. 35.22.
in his law the perfect rule of well living, and for two causes does keep
it to him self only to be our law maker, and therefore he is the King of
souls to whom belongs the power to save, and destroy.

Iam 4.12. Esai. 33.22.
8 Which severally he expounds more at large, that by consideration of both,
he may teach that such constitutions of men are contrary to the word of God.
The first of them is, that his will may be a perfect rule of all righteousness
and holiness, this Paul uses: in contending against false Apostles. The other
that he may only have authority over our souls who^ we ought to obey. As
touching the Popes constitutions, there are two sorts of them, for some belong
to ceremonies and rites, and some to discipline: and first he proves that both
abound with many vices, from the nineth to the sixteenth. Moreover he
answeareth their arguments, wherewith the authors are wont to defend them
selves, from the 17. to the 26.

9 As concerning the former, first this vice is found in them, that they would
be counted for the true worship of God: but Paul taught that it was
intolerable that the lawful order of worshipping God, Col. 2.20. Gal. 5.1.
should be reduced to the will of men.

10 Moreover, Gal. 4.^.
that the commandment of God is wont to be void, for the traditions of men.

11. 12 Thirdly, that they are unprofitable and foolish, but the flesh lyketh
them that it thinks the Church is utterly deformed, when they be taken away,
which Paul writes, has a resemblaunce of wisdom, but that deceives.

13 Fourthly, Col. 2.23.
that they have grown into such a number that they are more intolerable then
a multitude.

14 Neither can this multitude be excused, because they say that they were
instituted for ye instruction of rude men, seeing also they reduce us to
Iudaisme, and declare not Christ, (which ought to be the end of ceremonies)
but hyde him. a child is ruled of his Schoolmaster, and kept under custody,
according to the capacity of his age, so the Jews are kept under the law,
but we are men grown, Gal. 4.1.
set at liberty from tutorship and government, and need no childish
introductions.

Ier. 7.22. Esai. 55.2.
15 Fifthly, because they force the simple into error, that they may think them
expiatorie or Purgatory, and meritorious Sacrifices: sixthly, because being
separated from doctrine, they resemble nothing else then a Maskyng Ostentation.
Last of all, because they all are abandoned to filthy gain.

16 Neither do those Papistical traditions burst forth only with such vices,
but also all other of what age so ever are guilty of such vices, because the
Lord always is wont to stryke them with blindness and amazedness which
worship him with such observations, Esai. 29.13.
and they are such observations as ought to be thrust out of the Church.

17 Coming to their arguments, he calls to mind five, whereby they defend
themselves forgers of these traditions: the first is that they cry out, that
these traditions are not of them selves, but of God, because they would have
them invented of the Church which can not err, and is governed of the holy
Ghost, but by this means they imposed to the Church of God, a notabler
reproach, and were too bold, to add so much to the word of God contrary to
Gods word.

18 It is an impudency not to be born, continually to cry out of ye power of
the Church: but in the mean time, to dissemble both what is commanded her by
the Lord, and what obedience she owes to the commandment of the Lord. The
second is, when they say that these trifles came from the Lord. This also is
mere deceit, and not only the histories, but also reason it self does show,
that they crept in by little and little.

19 This he shows in the Supper of the Lord, and he opens the place of
Augustine which they think does make for them.

20 But when they cry out that there is no Ceremony among them which came not
from the Apostles, he shows how false it is by an example of holy water.
Moreover, he labors, that if any were found out of them, or of the Fathers,
yet there is great difference between them, and ours.

21. 22 The third is, that to excuse their tyranny, they pretend the decree of
the Apostles of things offered to Idols, and strangled, and from blood: but he
plainly shows how the same makes for them: Acts. 15.29
First by interpreting the place: moreover by their own confession.

The meaning of the Apostle was nothing else, but in taking away the matter of
offense, to call up the law of God: ^. ^or. 8.7
concerning the avoiding of offense it was not to make a new decree of their
own authority, for Peter pronounces that the Lord is tempted, if a yoke be
laid upon the necks of the Disciples, Acts. 15.27
which himself should have overthrown, if he had consented to have any yoke
laid upon them.

23 This tyranny which they have taken to them selves by this example of the
Apostles, is for two causes to be improoued: first because they miserably
crucify not only the bodies, but also the consciences. Moreover because it
takes from the Lord his Dominion, which afterward he shows at large how
worthy great repre^hesion it is, Esaias. 29.1^ Matthew. 15.^
and that in those in whom no manifest impiety appeared.

24 No marvel because man's inventions did always so displease the lord, Col.
2.4
that first they were esteemed for his worship.

25 The 4. is from the examples of Samuel and Menoha, 1. Sam. 7.17
but they make nothing for them. For although Samuels sacrifice were against
the law, and yet it pleased God, yet was it not a second altar to set against
the only altar, but because the place was not appointed for the Arc of
covenant, he appointed and ordained the Town where he dwelled, for
Sacrifice, but his mind was not to make invocation in holy things where as GOD
has forbidden any thing to be added or diminished. As for Manoha it was an
extraordinary and singular case: he being a private man offered Sacrifice to
God, and not without Gods allowance, Iud. 8.27
because he interprised not of a rash motion of his own mind, Matthew. 23.3
but by a heavenly instinction, but God abhors those things that men devise.

26 Last of all, because Christ would have these intolerable burdens to be
borne: that also does help them nothing.

1. Cor. 14.40
27 Coming to the third part of the Chapter, that he may speak of those
constitutio^s which ought to be counted holy: first by a general rule of Paul,
he proves that all the matter must be brought back. Moreover by yt he
sets two things before us to be taken heed of, least either they should
think them necessary to salvation, or bestow them to the honor of God.

28 Then also he denies that these stand with the comeliness, and order of
Paul: and he shows of what sort they are, which in these words he requires.

29 Prosecuting at large all those severally with examples adjoined, 1. Cor.
11.22
he concludes that all Ecclesiastical orders which we receive for holy and
wholesome do respect either rites and ceremonies, or discipline and peace.

30 No foundations are such, 1. Cor. 14.40
but they which are founded by Gods authority, and are taken out of the
Scripture, and they ought to be divine according to the generality, although
as touching the specialtie they are appointed by man: but charity is the best
ruler thereof.

31 Therefore it is the office of Christian people, 1. Cor. 11.16
neither to despise nor neglect such constitutions, but faithfully to keep
them, and that may be done with a free conscience.

32 Of ye otherside we must beware least any error, or any superstition or any
necessity, do at any time creep in, always to keep the same.

Cap. 11. Of the jurisdiction of the Church, and the abuse thereof, such as is
seen in Papasie.
THE Church of God needs her certain Spiritual policy, and it is necessary
that we give it some jurisdiction: Romans 12.^
This jurisdiction proceeds from the power of keys, but what that power of
keys is, that first he may show it, 2. Tim. 5.17
he divides it into two parts, the one is perteinent to the ministry of the
word, Matthew. 18.17
which he denies ought to come into this account, and therefore what it is and
what places they are which make for them in many words he shows.

2 The other which belongs to the discipline of excommunication, Matthew. 18.17
is now the thing whereof he will speak, and therefore he shows upon what
places it should be found, and what it ought to be.

3 The same is not for a time, but continual, and is not only profitable when
the Magistrate is estraunged from the profession of our religion, but also when
they are Christians.

4 That same he confirms.

5 The scope of this is, that offenses be prevented: but in the use, That is,
by the preaching of the word. 2. Cor. 10.4
two things are to be considered: first that his spiritual power be altogether
separated from the power of the sword.

6 The last, that it be ministered not by one man's judgment, but by a lawful
council, which is also showed was done in old time, till at length a Bishop
had drawn to him only yt which was given to the whole Church.

7 At length also the Bishops put over to other men, whom they call officials,
that which they had given to themselves only, and converted the spiritual
jurisdiction into nothing better then into profane judgment.

8 Yet it is certain, Matthew. 20.25 Luke. 12.25
that Christ would debar the ministers of his word from ^iuill dominion and
earthly government. For Christ not only signifies that the office of a
Pastor is distinct from ye office of a Prince, but that they ^e things so
severed, yt they cannot meet together in one man: for where as Moses did bear
both offices together: first that was done by a rare miracle: ^xo. 18.16
again it was but for a time, till things were better set in order, but when
a certain form was once prescribed of God, the Civil government was left to
him, and was commanded to resign the Priesthood to his brother.

9 In that they doubt not to brag in their defense, that the glory of the
kingdom of Christ, by this means does flourish according to her worthiness,
and that they themselves in the mean time are not drawn away from the the
duties of their vocation, Matthew. 20.25
how weak it is he shows both: first they have occasion to quarrel with
Christ, who has pinched their honor: Luke. 22.25
yet he laid no harder law upon his servants then he first received himself.

2. Cor. 10.4
10 Not at the first step, but by little and little, of small beginninges, they
have made great increases: where also is showed by what degrees they clymed up
hitherto.

11 The Bishop of Rome not contented with mean Lordships, first laid hand upon
kingdoms, and afterward upon the whole Roman Empire: but this was reprehended
of Bernard, and utterly denied to the Apostolic right, against the degree of
Orleance. Bernard says, That Peter could not give that which he had not, but
he gave to his successors that which he had the care of Churches. And again,
he says to Pope Eugenius, thou art a superior: but whereunto? not to bear
lordship as I think. Therefore how much soever we think of our selves, let us
remember that there is a ministry laid upon us, not a Lordship given us.
Learn that thou have need of a weedhooke, not of a Scepter, that thou may
do the work of a Prophet.

12 The gift of Constantine is both frivolous and ridiculous, therefore of no
importance to establish his Imperial dignity.

13 At what time, and by what means they came to it. In Henry the Emperors
time, the 4. of that name and by Hildebrandes means.

14 By what means they invaded the City of Rome, and other Dominions: Eze.
34.4
and how such rauennousnesse does dishonor them: for they thought nothing
safe, unless they might bear rule with rigor, and with power, as the Prophet
says.

15. 16 The immunitie which they also take to them selves, was unknown to
ancient Bishops, howsoever they would not suffer to their knowledge the
matters of faith, or whatsoever belonged properly to the Bishops to be taken
from irreligious Princes.

Cap. 12. Of the discipline of the Church, whereof the chief use is in the
Censures and excommunication.
THere are two parts of Ecclesiastical government therein, ye one whereof
respects the people, the other chiefly respects the Clergy. of the first,
from the first to the 21. of the last, from the 22. to the 28. There are two
parts also of that which respects the people, and is called common, the
first is which depends of the power of Keys, whereof from the 1. to the 13.
The last is of sommoning fastinges and prayers whereof from the 14. to the 21.

1 The first of these is so necessary, that the same being taken away, there
remains nothing but extreme dissipating and wasting.

2 There are four degrees, Matthew. 18.15
and what they are, whereby we ought to proceed in appliyng the same.

3 Of sins, some are private, Matthew. 18.15
some public, and how we must proceed in punishing them both.

4 Some also are defaults, other some are wicked doings, 1. Cor. 5.4
and heinous offenses: the last are severely to be punished.

5 There are three ends of discipline: the first, least the wicked by their
lewd and sinful life, Ephe. 5.25 Col. 1.24.
do cause some reproach and slander to redounde to Christ, if they be named
among Christians, and admitted to the participatio^ of the Lords supper. The
second, least they corrupt others: The third, that they may repent. 1. Cor.
5.6.11.
Chrysostom inueieth greeuouslie against the Priest, which while they fear
the power of great men, dare debar no man.

1. Cor. 5.5
6 With what moderation, as well public sins, as secret; light, as grievous
are to be corrected.

7 No man, no not the Prince truly is to be exempted: then of what, and in
what order of doing it ought to be executed.

8 This severity ought to be enioined with the spirit of Gentleness, 1. Cor.
1
and mildness, and this moderation does very well appear out of these 3.
ends, although many of the fathers have bin very cold heerin; but now after
they have received a custom more then with their own power.

9 Not only the whole Church, but also every member ought to yield it self to
this moderation, least from discipline we presently fall to murdering.

10 Neither may it otherwise be drawn which Christ pronounces of binding and
loosing, Matthew. 18.18
where by they may send themselves somewhat more harder.

11 Too much rigor also must be taken heed of, as well in private men, Matthew.
13.23
as in pastors, least otherwise if all things happen not according to their
mind, they rashly depart from the communion of the Church.

12 The Donatistes and Anabaptists have grievously offended herein. 1. Cor.
11.14


13 This moderation ought then chiefly of all to be used, Ephe. 4.2
when not only the contagion of sin has invaded a few, but also a
multitude.

14 The other part of discipline stands in this, that according to the
necessity of times the Pastors should exhort the people, either to fastinges
or other solemn supplicatio^s, or to other exercises of humility, repentance,
and faith: this part is profitable and proceeds from the Apostles and
Prophets.

15 Therefore speaking of fasting, he recites three ends thereof, and
expounds them.

16 The Pastors were wont to publish public fasting joined with faith, Acts.
14.3
so often as they prayed to GOD for any great matter.

17 Also as often as any public calamity began to range abroad. Joel. 2.2.25


18 But fasting consists in three things; in time, in quality of meat, and
sparing.

As touching fasting, truly I have read none, neither of ye old, nor of ye new
writers that can satsfiie me, or that may seem sufficiently to consider the
nature thereof. For as often as they speak of fasting, presently they fall to the
abstaining from meat, and therein only they rest very much: but I think it
should be otherwise: for as soon as we can, let us come unto the fountain
it self, and after let us with diligence pursue the rivers: but this is the
only fountain of fasting, a sincere and earnest, and a singular desire either
of Righteousness or newness of life, in general, or some part thereof: which
does either sufficiently appear by this one thing, that when the Disciples
could not cast out a certain Devil, because they as it were, to a sporting
bickering, descended rashly and unadvisedly: and a little after they enquired
how it came to pass that they were deceived of their opinion. Matthew. 17.21
Mark. 9.29
Christ calls them to fasting: signifiyng undoubtedly thereby, that such
victory is so hard and difficill, that except they strive with all their
force, they could do nothing at all. But there are two things that are wont
always to spring and flow out of this fountain: The first is, that we
wisely and diligently avoid all occasions. Moreover that on the other side
whatsoever occasion of godliness we seek, labor for, or violently snatche,
we be always inclined to yt, and stay thero^, being weeried thereby. Heerevpon
we may very well descend to the use of meats, as to one of the rivers: and
there may we find fasting, as touching nourishment, to be no other then so to
use them, either in taking or refusing, as shall seem most meet to root out
vices, and to advance virtue. And so fasting does not only respect the use of
meats, but also all other things that fall under that kind: which truly if
we use wisely, either vice may be diminished, or virtue increased.

19 But least any superstition should creep in, there are three things which
the Pas^ours ought diligently, always to inculcate, or rehearse: first, that
they teach the people, that they rent their hearts, Joel. 2.11
and not their garments: that is, that there be an inward affection of heart, a
true mistiking of sin, true humbling, and true sorrow, through the fear of
GOD. For God abhors when men in setting signs and outward shows in steed
of innocence of heart, Esaias. 58.5
do labor with false color to deceive them selves. The other is, that it be
not taken for a meritorious work. The third is, that we keep it not too
precisely, as it were one of the chief due.

20 The observation and keeping of Lent is very superstitious, as is showed by
three reasons, but yet was it used amongst the old fathers, but after a diverse
sort. The fasting of Christ forty days and forty nights, did not
prescribe an example to other: but in so beginning the preaching of the
Gospel, Mat. 4.1.
he might prove that it was not a doctrine of me^, but descended from heaven:
and since the miracle was showed in Moses, to establish the authority of the
law, Exo. 24.18.
it ought to have been omitted in Christ, lest the Gospel should seem to
give place to the law. That which is said of Elias, fast forty days without
meat and drink, tended to no other end, but yt the people should know that
he was stirred up to be a restorer of the law, from which almost all Israel
had departed.

21 Afterward laws were made, 1. Kin. 19.6.
which forbad the eating of meat and diverse abuses crept in.

22 The second part of Discipline was, that peculiarly belo^ged to yt
Clergy, and it is showed what and how severely in times past it was, and how
miserably it is performed now at this day.

2. Tim. 3.2.
23 In this one thing they are untreatable at this day, yt they give not priests
leave to marry, who notwithstanding may use whoredom unpunished: by which
occasion he shows out of the Scripture, how wickedly matrimony is forbidden
them.

24 He answers to certain of their objections, that is to say, that the
Priest ought to differ in some note from ye people, and that marriage is
nothing but an uncleanness and pollution of the flesh.

25 Moreover that the Leuiticall Priests ought for a time to lie from their
wives: but seeing that Pastors of the Church do not bear this person at
this day, therefore are they vainly compared with them. The Apostles did not
only keep wives, Hebr. 13.4. 1. Cor. 9.5.
but also carried them about.

6 Thirdly that they think it a necessary thing, which is nothing but comely,
and that is proved by the example of the old Church. In old time also there
was motion made of commanding unmarried life, but no such thing was decreed:
Histori Tripat. Lib. 2. Cap. 14.
for Paphnutius sentence was agreed to, who pronounced that a man lying with
his own wife, is chastity.

27 At length there followed more rigorous and clubbishe times in which too
much superstitious observation of single life grew in force: but if the
adversaries obiecte this antiquity, they may be aunsweared three ways.

28 The better to show the same, he teaches what is to be excepted, as often
as under the color of antiquity, they defend their filthy unmarried life.
The Fathers also are not utterly against us: for Chrysostom says, Hom. de
Invent Crucis.
that the first degree of chastity is virginity: the second, faithful
marriage.

Cap. 13. Of vows by rash promising, whereof each man has miserably
entangled him self.
FIrst, he treats generally of vows, from the 1. to the 7. then namely of
monastery vows, from the 8. to the 21. but first of monastery profession and
manners, from the 8. to the 16. the^ of vows themselves, but chiefly of the
vow of chastity, from the 17. to the 21.

1 He shows by certain general foundations, in what place vows may be had,
and how superstitiously not only the Ethnikes, but also the Christians have
offended in declaring hereof.

2 The better to show the same, he sets down three things to be
observed: Col. 2.2^.
who it is to whom we express a vow; who we be that make the vow; Last of
all, with what mind we vow. Out of the consideration of the first, this
appears, that we vow nothing to God, but that he requires: what so ever is
not of Faith is sin, and Faith is in respect of the word.

3 Secondly, we are admonished that we measure our strength, Romans 12.3. 1. Cor.
12.11.
and have an eye to our vocation, otherwise we may easily offend, as he
shows by two examples: and therefore the vow of single life is to be
improued.

4 The third, Genesis 28.20. Psalm. 22.27.
does admonish us to respect the end: for there are only four good ends,
whereof two are referred to the times past, and they are exercises of giving
thanks: the other to time to come: and they are exercises of repentance, where
also he speaks of ye first two.

5 The two last tend to this end, partly that we be made more warier, partly
that we may be stirred to our duties as it were with certain pricks.

6 Of these which are spoken, every man may easily gather what is to be
thought of vows. That general vow which is made in Baptism, of all men ought
to be of great force with us, but the particulars must be examined according
to the rules above said.

7 Thereby it is plain, with how great superstition the world has in
certain ages been possessed, which first he generally shows.

8 Moreover that he may not reckon up all the particular fourmes, he speaks
namely of Monkishe vows: and so being brought to Monkishe vows, first he
shows what the life of Monks was in times past, and what institution, that
he may show him to be otherwise then at this day the Papisticall Monks be
with us.

9 That more manifestly appears out of Augustine.

10 Moreover making comparison between that old Monkerie, and that which is
at this day: he shows by three principal notes, how much this differs
from that: that is to say, in unadvised roughness, in unprofitable idleness,
and in false chalenging of perfection.

11 The last whereof more diligently examining: he first shows how unjustly
they chalendge them selves, the title of perfection, although it be done with
such moderation as they falsely pretend.

12 Moreover he shakes of two things wherein they think the perfection does
stand, the first whereof is general, Mat. 14.
because they preach that they observe not only all commandments, but also
the Evangelical Councels.

13 The other special, Mat. 19.21.
because they have forsaken all. which that it may be granted them, 1. Cor.
13.3. Col. 2.14. Luke 10.25.
yet the perfection which they dream of, can not be found therein.

14 But seeing their words (which make their profession, some second baptism)
and the thing it self does speak, that all they which at this day go into
Monasteries, do depart from ye Church, ^ruely how many Monasteries there ^e at
this day, so many Conuenticles ^r assemblies of Schismatikes are ^here.

15 Neither only is that profession ^orrupted, which is at this day, but
their manners are most corrupted.

16 In that old Monkerie there was very much which ought not to please us,
and the same is chiefly showed in four vices.

17 As touching ye Monastery vows which this day are in use, first he
generally condemns all for three causes: Romans 14.23. Deu. 31.17.
Moreover he plainly teaches how far the vow of single life is estranged from
all religion.

18 That does little help them which they allege out of Paul, concerning
widows, 1. Tim. 5.12.
for they did not profess unmarried life, for any other reason, but because
marriage agreed not with the Ministry which they took in hand, because they
could not bear that office, but being at their own liberty and loose from
the yoke of marriage: therefore if they once looked back and gave them selves
to new marriages, what was it else but to shake of the calling of God, and to
break their first Faith made in Baptism, which is, that every man should
answer his calling? yet were they not so far bound, but that if they were
troubled with pricking of the flesh to fall into any uncleanness, they might
better marry again. That age wherein they were chosen, was commonly out of
danger, specially since they were chosen such as being content with one
marriage, have already showed a token of their continency.

19 Their example also is most foolishly wrested, 1. Tim. 5.9. Romans 14.21.
to the newnes which he ouerturneth by three reasons.

20 Such vows are for two causes to be cut off.

21 They are unworthily accused of breach of Faith and perjury, Gal. 3.^
which depart from Monkery to some honest kind of living, and they have a
triple defense.

Cap. 14. Of Sacraments.
FIrst he treats generally of Sacraments, from the 1. to the 17. Moreover
he comes to distribution, and continues therein, from the 18. to the 26.

As touching the first, he sets down the sum of the doctrine, from the 7.
to the 17. first against them which weaken the power of Sacraments, from the
7. to the 13. Moreover against them which attribute too much to them, from the
14. to the 17.

1 What a Sacrament is, that is, a visible sign of a holy thing, or a visible
form of an invisible grace.

Ephe. 19.3.
2 Of the signification of the word, Mysterion a Mystery: of old writers it is
translated a Sacrament.

3 The Lord closes up and seals to us his promises by Sacraments: yet to
speak properly, not so much to confirm his holy word, as to establish us in
the Faith thereof.

4 Therefore we must understand that this word, that is, the promises of God,
Romans 10.8. Act. 15.9.
not to be an unpleasant noise, when we say, that the Sacrament consists of
the word and outward sign.

5 Sacraments are signs, by whose aid we give credit to those things that
are witten in the word. Romans 4.11.


6 To this end also, Genesis 6.18.
are they called seals of covenants, and are unto us as pillars and glasses.

7 Neither is this fitly for ye purpose, When Paul speaks to the faithful,
he includes the communion of Christ in the Sacraments. Gal. 3.27. 1. Cor.
12.12.13 But when he speaks of the wrongful use o^ Sacraments, he gives no
more to it than a cold and void figure.
that they are given to the wicked: for they are nevertheless testimonies of
Gods grace, the reasons which they are wont to object against this sentence,
are trifling and weak: the one truly because by this means it would follow,
that our Faith seeing otherwise it is good, may yet be made better (which they
account as absurd) for they say it is no Faith: but which without shaking,
steadfastly and without withdrawing rests upon the mercy of God, but it had
been better for such to pray with the Apostle that the Lord would increase
their Faith, then to pretend such a perfection, which none of the sons of men
have obtained: for that Faith howsoever it was begun, was a good Faith, and
taking away incredulity might be made stronger.

8 They confirm that, because Philip required of the Eunuke, Act. 8.37.
yt he should believe with all his heart (then yt which faith say they, none can
be greater) before he should be baptized: but he clearly shows how vain as
well their reason is, as the confirmation thereof. This place To believe with
all the heart, is not perfectly to believe Christ, but only from the heart
and with sincere mind to embrace him: Psalm. 119.10.
not to be full with him but with fervent affection to hunger and thirst, and
sighe toward him.

An other objection, if Faith be increased by Sacraments, the holy Ghost is
given in vain: whose work is to begin, maintain, and to make perfect, makes
nothing for them.

9 Neither is this so assigned to any secret power of the Sacraments, nor by
any means to the Sacraments, but all the same depends of the inward power
of the holy Ghost.

10 These being thus established two other objections will of them selves fall
to the ground: the first whereof is, that if we ascribe to creatures the
increase or confirmation of Faith, there is wrong done to the spirit of God,
who^ we ought to acknowledge the author thereof, this he refuteth first by
clear declaration of his judgment, declared by an excellent similitude.

11 Moreover as concerning increase, Mat. 13.4. Luke 8.15.
by an argument taken from the like, that Christ him self, and after him his
Apostles taught the same properly to be in the outward word.

12 As touching the confirmation by an argument borrowed from the contrary, that
many times when ye Lord means to take away the confidence of the very things
that are by him promised in the Sacraments, he takes away the Sacraments them
selves. Last of all, if we give them such virtue, the glory of GOD must needs
be derived to creatures: this also he answers, when he spoiled and thrust
away Adam from the gift of immortality, he says, Genesis 3.3.
Let him not eat of the fruit of life, lest he live for ever, not that the
fruit could restore to Adam his uncorruption, from which he was now fallen, but
least he should enjoy a vain confidence, if he kept still the sign of the
promise, and therefore that was shaken away from him, which might bring him some
hope of immortality, in this manner puts the Ephesians in remembrance,
that they were foreine gestes of the Testaments strangers from the fellowship
of Israel, without God, without Christ, whereby he signifies by a figure of
Transnomination, that they were excluded from the promise it self, Ephe. 2.11.
which had not received the sign of the promise.

13 Last of all, because some bring an argument out of the very name of a
sacrament, and would have the Sacraments to be nothing but certain naked
signs, he shows also how weak it is.

14 As hitherto he has disputed against them which weaken the power of
Sacraments, and utterly subvert the use thereof: so now he comes to others
which of the contrary part attribute too much to them, and against the
schooleme^, he shows yt it is false which they affirm, that sacraments of
the new law do justify and give grace, so that we do not lay a stop of
deadly sin.

15 The better to overthrow this, he distinguishes between the sacrament,
and the thing of the Sacrament, yt we may understand that how much we profit
by the sacraments in the communion of Christ, so much profit we take thereby

16 This he declares more plainly, that is to say, Sacraments are not causes
but parts of our righteousness and salvation, and although the matter of the
sacrament be not received of the unworthy, yet the matter or thing of the
Sacrament is always present with the sacrament, so often as it is rightly
offered.

17 This last he declares by a most apt similitude, and generally admonishes
not so to understand those things which have bin written by old writers
somewhat too gloriously, to amplify the dignity of sacraments, that we
should think that there is some secret power knit and fastened to the
Sacraments, which is separated from Christ, or the work of the holy Ghost.

18 Coming to the second part of the Chapter, that he may treat specially of
Sacraments: first he proves that the name of Sacrament does so plainly lie
open, that it generally contains all signs which GOD at any time commanded
to man, to make them more assured and safe of the truth of his promises, Genesis
2.17.
whether he has exhibited the same in natural things, or in miracles: and he
sets down examples of both.

19 Moreover coming to those things which the Lord would have to be ordinary
in his Church, to nourish his worshippers into one Faith, first he shows how
necessary those signs are, partly to confirm our Faith, partly to witness
our religion with men.

20 Moreover these things whereof he now speaks, Genesis 17.10.
he deuideth into two kinds, that is to say, of the old and new Testament, but
both tend to this end, to lead us as it were by the hand to Christ.

21 First he shows the same in the Sacraments of the old Testament,
Circumcision was to the Jews, Genesis 22.2. Gal. 3.16. Romans 5.19.
whereby they were put in mind that what so ever comes of the seed of man
is corrupt, and has need of pruning: and a remembrance to confirm them
selves of the blessing promised to Abraham.

22 Moreover by the Sacraments of the new Testament, where is signified our
washing and satisfaction.

23 Therefore that school doctrine is utterly to be rejected, whereby there is
noted so great a difference between the Sacraments of the old Law, and the new
Law, as though those did nothing but shadow out the grace of God, and those
do presently give it, but the Apostle speaks no less honorable of those
then of these, 1. Cor. 10.3
what power our Sacraments have, the same had theirs, they were seals of Gods
good will toward them into hope of eternal salvation. Heb. 10.10


24 He expounds certain places, whereby they would defend their opinion:
first, 1. Cor. 10.5
those which seem to extenuate or diminishe Circumcision. Paul shows that
God regards not the outward washing, whereby we enter into profession of
religion unless the mind within be both cleansed and continue in cleanness
to the end. Nothing is abated in these places of ye dignity of Circumcision.
Paul disputes either against them which required it as necessary when it was
now abrogate: therefore he warns the faithful, that leaving the old
shadows, they would stand fast to the truth, these masters call upon you that
your bodies may be circumcised, but ye are spiritually circumcised according
to ye soul and body, ye have the deliverance of the thing in deed, which is
better then the shadow: and least it be objected that the figure now of
Circumcision is not to be despised, therefore because they had ye thing in
deed, forasmuch as yt putting away of the old man, which he there spoke of,
was also among the fathers: the Apostle says, We are buried with Christ by
Baptism: that is, Baptism is the same to Christians, that Circumcision was to
the old people.

25 Moreover those which seem to condemn the whole Law, with all the
Ceremonies and Sacrifices, which they falsely gather out of ye Hebrews, where
Paul disputing against false Prophets shows what value Ceremonies are of
themselves: John. 6.27
so did Christ also, appliyng his speech to the gross opinion of the people.

26 Last of all, those whereby the old Fathers did immoderately exalt our
Sacraments, so often as they compared ours with the Israelites. But such their
Sentences are both hyperbolicall: and also to be understood, not of the
power; but of the manner of signifiyng.

Cap. 15. Of Baptism.
FIrst he speaks of the two ends of Baptism, of the first, from the 1. to
the 12. of the last 13. Moreover of the lawful use thereof, and certain other
things that proceed thereof, from the 14. to the 22.

1 What Baptism is: it has two ends, the first is, that it serve our faith
with God, Mark. 16.16
and the same chiefly consists in three things, the first is, that it
witnesses remission of sins.

2 What remissino of sins he approoueth by certain places of Scripture.
Ephe. 5.26
Baptism promises no other clensing, but by sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, which is figured by water.

3 Neither is it of things to come only, Romans 3.25
but also of things past: but here we may not take leave to sin afterward.

4 They which so divide between Baptism and Repentance, that they would
assign remission of the former to Baptism, and the last to repentance, are
foully deceived.

Romans 6.3
5 The second is, that we may understand that we are grafted together with
Christ into mortification and newenesse of life.

6 The third, that we may know that we are so united in Christ, Matthew. 3.13
that we might be partakers of all his goodness: And the more plainly to
approve these two last: Matthew. 3.6 Luke. 3.16
first, he proves that both are plain and manifest, as well in the baptism
of John, as of the Apostles.

Acts. ^.28
7 Moreover to this end the baptism of John and the Apostles are one and the
self same.

8 Neither makes this any thing that more abundant grace of the spirit is
powered out since the resurrection of Christ, for the Baptism which the
Apostles ministered while he was on the earth, was called his, yet it had no
larger plentifulnesse, of the spirit then the Baptism of John: yea, even
after his ascension, the spirit was not given to the Samaritans above the
common measure of the faithful, Acts. 8.14
before the ascension, although they were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 3.11
till Peter and John were sent to lay hands upon them.

9 Thirdly, 1. Cor. 10.2
those same are shadowed out to us in the people of Israel, by their passing
over ye Sea, and refreshing. The cloud was a sign of cleansing for as then
the Lord covered them with a cloud cast over them, and gave them refreshing
cold, least they should faint and pine away with so cruel burning of the
Sun: so in Baptism we acknowledge our selves covered and defended with the
blood of Christ, Number. 9.14
least the severity of God, which is in deed an intolerable flame should
lie upon us.

10 We may not agree to the^ which have taught that we are delivered by
Baptism, Col. 5.19
from the corruptions of nature, and are restored to the same purity of
nature, which in the beginning Adam had before the fall. For the self same
original corruption remains.

11 And does never cease in us, but continually works in us.

12 This last he confirms both by example and testimony of scripture.

13 The other end of Baptism is to serve our confession with me^, he shows
by what reason this is. Hereunto had Paul respect, 1. Cor. 1.2
when he asked the Corinthes, whether they had not been baptized in the name
of Christ: meaning that even in this they were baptized into his name, if they
vowed themselves to him, swore to his name, bound their faith to him before
men, that they could confess none other but Christ alone.

14 As touching this second part of the Chapter: first he treats of the use
of Baptism, Romans 7.14
14. 15. Moreover of the unworthiness, or worthiness of the minister, from
the 16. to the 18. Thirdly of the Corruptions, wherewith this Sacrament has
been defiled, 19. Last he shows, to whom this administration belongs, from
the 20. to the 22.

14 As touching the first of these which are spoken of the ends of Baptism,
he takes occasion to teach what way we have to use, and to take it first for
confirmation of our faith.

15 Which he declares by the example of Cornelius, and Paul: Moreover, Acts.
10.4^
for confession of our faith.

16 There is nothing added or taken away from baptism, either by ye
worthiness or unworthiness of the minister: therefore they are not to be
baptized again, which are baptized under popery. For Baptism is not in ye
name of man, but in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Josias, Matthew. 28.19
and Ezechias when they had gathered out of Israel them that had departed from
God, did not call them to a second Circumcision.

17 Neither is that argument strong enough, which they seem to draw as it were
from the effects, because after Baptism we remain certain years blind,
and unbelieving, yet the promise it self continues always true and steadfast.

18 That same also is very weak which by the example of Paul they defend
themselves, Acts. 19.3
as though he rebaptised certain disciples, which he shows must otherwise
be understood, that is to say, the visible grace of the spirit was given them
by the laying on of hands, which may well be expressed by the name of Baptism.

19 This sacrament as touching the outward administration is many ways and
meruellously corrupted many ages ago, with men's inventions.

20 Of whom it ought to be administered, that is to say, of the Ministers of
the Church, not by private men, or women, Genesis 17.10
and from whence this abuse took his force. There is no necessity to drive any
to the usurping of that which belongs not to them, for God promises that he
will be a God to us, and to our seed after us.

21 Tertullian and Epiphanius have not allowed this corruption: yea and wisely
does impugn it.

22 The example of Sephora makes nothing for them, Exo. 4.25
neither are infants deprived of the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 28.19
who pass out of this life before they are baptized, if contempt and
negligence be away. Sephoraes Circumcising was not to do service unto God:
for seeing her son in danger, she grudged and murmured, and not without
stomaking, threw the foreskinne on the ground, and so taunted her husband,
that she was also angry with GOD, as appears by that she said she was
compelled to shed her sons blood. It was also presu^ptuous rashness, her
husband being present to take it in hand. Again, it is unlawful to pluck
asunder those things that God has coupled.

Cap. 16. That the Baptism of infants does very well agree with the
institutions of Christ, and the nature of the sign.
FIrst, he confirms the doctrine, from the 1. to the 9. Moreover he generally
confuteth the arguments of the adversaries, from the 10. to the 30. Last of
all, he severally debateth with Seruetus. 31. 32.

1 Baptising of children was not brought in by the bouldenesse of men, but by
the institution of Christ.

2 This he approoueth may easily be showed by the consideration of the
promises.

Genesis 17.10 Matthew. 22.32
3 But what these promises are, which are joined to this sign, can no better be
perceived, than in the institution of Circumcision.

4 The promises and the thing signified, are so all one in both, that no
difference at all may be found, but in the outward Ceremony. Paul wills to
examine the exposition of Scripture by the proportion of faith.

5 Thereby he concludes that Baptism does no less belong to the children of
the faithful, then Circumcision to the Jews: neither ought they to be kept
from the sign, which are partakers of the thing signified.

6 He urges the same with the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham, Genesis
17.1^
because at the coming of Christ it would not be brought to pass, that the
grace of God should be darker and less approved to us, than it was before to
the Jews.

7 He draws another argument (to confirm the former also) from the example
of Christ, Matthew. 9.13
courteously imbrasing infants, and muniteth the same against the gainsayers,
that say, that it makes nothing for baptism. But the place diligently wayed,
must needs condemn the^, when Christ comanded infa^ts to be brought to him,
he added a reason why, because of such is ye kingdom of heaven, and after he
witnesses his will with deed when he imbrasing the^, he commends them to
his father with his prayer, and blessing: if it be they be brought to
Christ, then is it meet for them to be received to Baptism, the sign of our
communion and fellowship with Christ. If the kingdom of heaven be theirs,
then the sign shall not be denied them: whereby there is as it were an entry
opened into the Church, that being admitted to it, they may be numbered among
the heirs of the heavenly kingdom. Their argument to prove they were good
big children, because Christ said, Let little ones come to me is to small
purpose, for the Evangelist calls them Brephe and Paidia, which does signify
Babes, yet hanging upon their mothers breasts: Therefore this word to (Come)
is simply to have access.

8 That they deny that it was ever done of the Apostles, therein they say,
more then they are able to prove, and it is more likely that they did baptize
Infants. Acts. 16.15
And all antiquity, do refer the beginning of baptising children to the
Apostles.

9 The fruit that comes by this observation, as well to the parents them
selves, as to the infants which are baptized with holy water, is not be
despised, but rather damnation ought greatly to make us afraid that GOD will
take vengeance of it, if any man despise to mark his son with the sign of
the Covenant, because by such contempt, the grace offered is refused, and as
it were forsworn.

10 As touching their arguments, first he examineth that which they are wont
to take of the dissimilitude of baptism and Circumcision, and when seeing they
put the dissimilitude in three, he shows severally how foolishly they may
do it, to wit, neither are diverse things signified:

11 Neither is the governance diverse in any thing. Col. 2.11


12 And the naming of children is not figurative, but simple, Gal. 4.22
and the same to both.

13. 14. 15 The last, that he may more certainly convince in the three next
sections, he prosecuteth the same. 1. Cor. 6.14. Romans 15.8. Acts. 2.39. Ephe.
2.11,

16 All other differences which they labor to cast between Baptism and
Circumcision, are nothing at all: which he shows by two examples.

17. 18. 19. 20. 21 Their other argument is, while they allege that infants
are not meet by means of age, to attain to the mystery there signified: to
whom he assigns the five sections following. Romans 14.11. Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12.
Gal. 3.27. 1. Pet. 4.21.

Ephe. 5.26
22 He professes that he will prosecute certain other of their arguments: this
he discusseth in the next place, because they deny baptism to belong unto
children, 1. Cor. 12.17
because it is given in remission of sins, as though all infantes were free
of all sin.

23. 24 The fourth argument is, that they reason of the practice of the
Apostles time, that none were admitted to Baptism, Acts. 2.37
but such as had professed their faith and repentance before. to this he
answers, in these two sections. Eze. 16.20. Ephe. 2.12. Matthew. 3.6.

25 The fifth Argument is, John. 3.31
that of Christ's words evil understood, they strive that present
regeneration is required in baptism. To this first he answers, that there is
no mention made of Baptism, but that Christ shows the manner how God does
regenerate us, namely, by water and the spirit, as though he should say, by
the spirit which in cleansing and watering faithful souls, does the office
of water: therefore water and the spirit is simply to be taken for the
spirit, which is water. Matthew. 3.31
The like speech is used in Matthewe.

26 Moreover he proves by a natural sense of that place, Matthew. 19.14 Matthew.
28.19
that their false invention is to be rejected, which adiudge all those that are
not baptized to eternal death.

27. 28 The sixth argument they take of the commandment and example of Christ
because in the former place we are commanded to teach, Matthew. 28.19 Mark. 16.16
and after to baptize, and because Christ would not be baptized before he was
thirty years old: to both parts of this argument he answers in the first
sectio^.

2 Thessalonians. 3.5
29 And in the next section also.

30 The 7. argument is, that they deny there is greater cause why Baptism
should be communicated to infants, 1. Cor. 11.28
then the supper of the Lord, albeit he proves Although Musculus in his common
places thinks otherwise: notwithstanding M. Calvin, does say that the Supper
may be given also to infants: but he uses such modesty therein, that he
cannot be blamed.
there is a difference expressed in them.

31 After he has thus performed these things, he descends to one Seruetus,
and answers severally to all his Arguments: and that both plainly and
briefly. This Seruetus obiecteth, that all they abide in death, which believe
not the Son of God, and yt the wrath of God abides in them: John. 3.36
and therefore Infantes which cannot believe, lie in their damnation. But
Christ speaks not of the general giltinesse wherewith all the posterity of
Adam are wrapped, but only threateneth the despisers of the Gospel, which do
proudly and stubbornly refuse the grace offered them. Again he says, that
whosoever is bo^ne of the Spirit, hears the voice of the Spirit: which is
nothing else but that the faithful are framed to obedience, according as the
spirit which works in them. Although they which are borne of the faithful
are by nature damned: yet by supernatural grace, they are saved: 1. Cor. 7.14*
but he alleges an Allegory, 2. Sam. 5.8.
that David going up to the Tower of Sion, did lead neither blind me^ nor lame
men with him, but strong soldiers: but the Parable may be set against it,
wherein God calls to the heavenly banquet, blind men and lame men.

32 To what end Satan does lay siege against Baptism of children, by the
Anabaptists, that is to say, to deprive us of the singular comfort which
comes thereby, and by little and little should take the witness of grace from
us.

Cap. 17. Of the holy Supper of Christ, and what it avails.
FIrst he delivers the sum of the doctrine, from the 1. to the 11. And
moreover, he vnloseth certain knots, from the 12. to the 50.

But as touching the first: first he shows what it is that God does
exhibit, from the 1. to the 4. Moreover, how and in what sort it is ours,
from the 5. to the 11.

Ioh. 6.51. 1. Cor. 11.24.
1 What signs they are, and to what end they were instituted for us, that is to
say, to testify the Ministry of the union of Christ with the faithful.

2 A great fruit then of affiance and sweetness there is, which by this
Sacrament returns to godly minds: and what it is.

Mat. 26.26.
3 The whole witness thereof is commended to us in the Supper of the lord: and
the same does manifestly appear in the words themselves.

4 The efficacy thereof is such, as not only simply or without higher
consideration, does reach to us the body of Christ, as it does give us the
same for our nourishment.

5 Having briefly comprehended again by the former, Ioh. 6.31.
what one he offers him self to us, and by what reason wherein the first
part of application consists, he comes to the other, that is to show how
we ought to receive him: truly, by Faith, yet so that we must reach a little
further, not only to faith, but also to the effect of Faith.

6 Which last member he confirms by the authority of Augustine and
Chrysostom. Augustine says, Ham. in Ioh. 31. Act. 2.40.
that three thousand men which were converted at Peter's Sermon, did drink the
blood of Christ by believing, which they had shed by cruel dealing.

Chrysostom says, Hom. ^.
that Christ does not only by Faith, but also in deed make us his body:
meaning that we do not from any other where, then from faith obtain such a
benefit.

7 Neither is it sufficient that many acknowledge this our communion with
Christ to be nothing else then spiritual, without making mention of the flesh
and blood, yet the Mystery of this thing is such, as he confesses, he can not
comprehend how to determine thereof.

8 But that it may be such, There is no life at all but in Christ: Ioh. 6.4^.
but he has this two ways: first of him self, as he is God. Moreover by
pouring the same into his flesh which he put on, that thereby the communication
of life might flow forth unto us.

9 When he has taught the same out of Cyril, Ciri^.
and by a similitude, that the flesh of Christ is by that means lively:
therevppon he shows what our Communion is with him, as the father has life
in him self: so he has also given to the Son to have life in himself:
whosoever the^ enjoys the partaking of his flesh, enjoys also the partaking
of life, for as out of a fountain water is sometime drunk, and sometime
drawn, and sometime is conveyed by furrows to the wateryng of grounds, which
yet of it self does not ouerflowe into so many uses, but from the very spring
it self, with which everlasting flowing yeldeth and ministers unto it, from
time to time, new abundance: so the flesh of Christ is like a rich and
unwasted fountain, which powers into us the life springing from the Godhead
into it self.

10 This Communion is let by no distance of place, 2. Cor. 10.16.
and the same is so sealed in the Supper of the Lord, yt therein we may
apprehend not a vain sign, but the thing it self.

11 A conclusion of the things that go before, and so of the whole part of
this Chapter, that is to say, that the mystery of ye Supper consists of two
parts: of corporal signs, and spiritual truth: and they also contain three
things, the signification, matter, and effect.

The former part of the Chapter performed, he comes to the other: that is, to
examine the excessive mixtures which superstition has brought into the Church.
And first he handles transubstantiation, from the 12. to the 15. then of
consubstantiation, from the 16. to the 19. thirdly he shows yt that
institution makes against those excessive Doctors, from the 20. to the 25.
fourthly by other reasons taken out of the word of God, he confirms his
judgment, from the 26. to the 27. fifthly he takes away the authority of the
fathers from them.28. sixthly he subuerteth their presence, which they imagine,
and brings in an other, from the 29. to ye 32. seue^thly he shows what
communication ours ought to be.33. 34. Eighthly, he reproves Adoration, and he
shows to what end the Sacrament is instituted, from the 35. to the 39. Last
of all, he entreats of certain other things that happen, which belong to that
participatio^, from the 40. to the 50.

12 As touching the first, he shows what a presence of Christ those Bishops
do imagine, that is to say, gross and carnal, but some amongst them have been
ashamed thereof: neither need we any such participation. S. Paul teaches us
that Christ dwells in us, Romans 8.9.11.
none otherwise than by his spirit, whereby yet he takes not the communion of
the flesh and blood, but teaches that the spirit alone works that we
possess whole Christ, and have him dwelling with us.

13 The schooleme^ thought more shamefastly, but he calls to mind afterward
the reason whereby they place Christ in the form of bread, as they term it.

14 Hereupon came forth the error of tra^substantiatio^ fained against ye
scripture and old consent, but many have used the word of conversion, but in ye
sense which admits no transubstantiation, neither can the signification of
the Supper otherwise agree, Ioh. 6.
except the substance of the outward signs remain, for there must be visible
bread used for a mean, whereby that spiritual bread may be figured, which in
the scripture is mentioned.

15 This also did help very much to drive them into this error: that
co^secratio^ was as much among them, as Magical enchantment, not knowing in
the mean while this principle, that the bread is a Sacrament, to none but to
men, to whom the word is directed: their starting hole which they take out of
the word of Moses and place of Jeremy, is of no weight. The water springing
out of the Rock in the desert was to the fathers a token and sign of the same
thing which the wine does figure to us in the Supper, Ex. 17.6. 1. Cor. 10.4.
1. Cor. 10.16. Act. 2.4.
for Paul teaches that they drunk the same spiritual drink, but it was a
common watering for beasts and cattle of the people, so that the earthly
Elements when they are applied to a spiritual use, there is made no other
turning but in respect of men, insomuche as they are to them seals of the
promises. Where they allege that which the Prophet complains of, Ier. 11.9.
that wood is put in his bread: thereby is meant nothing else, but that by the
cruelty of his enemies his bread was infected with bitterness, the like
complaint has David, Psalm. 69.21.
that his meat was corrupted with gall, and his drink with Vinegar.

16 Other seeing them selves constrained with the proportional relation of the
sign and the thing signified: nor yet sustaining to enterprise or conceive any
other then a gross participation, flee to the succor of consubstantiation.

17 And that they may maintain their error, some of them contend that the
measures of Christ's body does extend so far and wide as heaven and earth
reaches, some somewhat more subtly say, that this body that is given in the
Sacrament, is glorious and immortal* but it may be asked what manner of body
Christ gave to his Disciples the day before he suffered: do not the words
sound that he gave the same mortal body which was within a little after, to
be delivered? but he had, say ye, Mat. 17.^*
showed his glory to be seen to three disciples. true it is, but his will was
by ye brightness, to give them a taste of immortality for an hour.

18 But of this error of consubstantiation, it must necessarily follow, yt the
body and blood of the Lord (because the signs are distant, the one from ye
other by space) must be severed the one from the other: but the same
participation which we stand upon, does very well shut the gates against this
error.

19 On the contrary, he shows what presence of Christ's body we should assign
in the Supper of the Lord: which also he thinks it needful, diligently to be
defended and assured.

20 The better he may perform the same, he takes upon him to entreat of this
institution, specially to show with how false envy the adversaries do burden
us, Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22.
when they cry out that we depart from the words of Christ: but this reproach
may be cast upon their own pates, as he manifestly shows by a natural
interpretation of the words, and certain other arguments.

21 For no other cause then for affinity, which the things signified, have
with the signs, is the name of ye thing given to the sign, which he shows
by certain places of scripture and by Augustine. Circumcision is a covenant:
the Lamb is the Passover, the sacrifices of the law are expiations, the rock
out of which water flowed in ye deserte was Christ: God appeared to Moses in a
bush, the arc of covenant is called God the face of God, and the one is called
the holy Ghost. Meruellous says Aug. is the patience of Christ, that he
received Judas to the banquet, Aug. in Psalm. 3.
when he committed and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his body and
blood.

22 How little it helps them, ye they stand so much upon the word (this is)
and by many examples conuinceth the^: because they say that the vehemency of
the verb substantive (is) is so great, that it admits no figure, which is
false, 1. Cor. 10.16.
as by many places of Scripture is proved. In the words of Paul is the
substantive verb, where he calls the bread, the communicating of the body
of Christ, but the communicating is an other thing then the body it self.
Again, this shall be to you a covenant with me. This Lamb shall be to you a
Passover, the Rock was Christ. Genesis 17.13. Ex. 1.12.43.
The holy Ghost was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified: Ioh. 7.39.
if they abide fastened to their rule, the eternal essence of the holy Ghost
shall be destroyed, as though it took beginning at the Ascension of Christ. 1.
Cor. 11.12.
Paul says that the Church is Christ, for bringing a similitude of the body
of man, he adds so is Christ, in which place he understands, the only
begotten son of God, not in him self, but in his members.

23 Those labor no otherwise in silables than the Anthropomorphites. truly ye
Apostles thought not of so prodigious a matter. there will also follow an other
absurdity, if they stand so precisely in words.

24 But the better to purge the infamy of this lie, he wipeth away an other
like crime: that is to say, that we are so addicted to humane reason, that we
may attribute nothing more to the power of God, than the order of nature
suffers, and common sense, treats: and he shows that they do very evil,
because preaching the power of God besides his will, they do peruerte the
order of Gods wisdom.

25 Which he prosecuteth more at large, where he shows that they have no
word, whereby to be taught of that will of God: reproouing them also of a mad
prejudice.

26 Now to prove the doctrine which he delivers out of the pure word of God,
he proves that the body of Christ has so left the earth according to the
scriptures, and so to remain in heaven, Job. 14.22. Mat. 26.11.
that by no means he can have ye carnal presense which they dream of in the
earth.

27 The name of ascending so often repeted, Act. 1.9. Luke 24.2.
and the admonition of the Angel at that time he did ascend, does manifestly
declare the same.

28 And because they brag ye the Fathers are of their side, avoiding
tediousness sake, this one thing he says, whatsoever they scrape out of
Augustine, the same does make nothing for them but for us wholly: Augustine
says, In Psalm. 3.
that bodies if spaces and places be taken from them, shall be no where, and
because they shall be no where, they shall not be at all.

29 But seeing what so ever is alleged out of the scriptures and Fathers
against their mind, Luke 3.21. Luke 24.39. Ioh. 20.17.
they are wont to deceive in this lurking hole, saying that the presence which
they determine, is invisible: first this starting hole he shuts close from
them, by certain arguments which are in number four, and they begin [And
when: Moreover if: Or to conclude, for to what purpose. Moreover he washes
away those arguments which they do obiecte, but chiefly the fourth, and
concludes that they by trifling, although not by one word in deed, yet by
circumstance do make the flesh of Christ a Spirit.

30 That we may give them yt which they prate of the invisible presence, yet do
they in vain assay to include Christ under the bread, unless they overcome or
convince the unmeasurableness or the vbiquitie of his body, but the same is
very near the heresy of Eutiches and Seruetus. He answers also the places
which they are wo^t to cite for themselves.

31 There can be no other presence of Christ's flesh, than that gross presence
which they imagine, while they place the same in bread by a secret union of
the holy Ghost.

32 He shows what the same is, where he confesses that he dares affirm
nothing of the manner.

33 And so having contained those things which seemed to belong to the holy
Supper on Gods behalf exhibiting: Now he comes to those things which
moreover belong to our parts, that is to say, our communicating is brought to
pass by the work and power of the holy Ghost, although that be set against
the true and real eating, what so ever we teach of spiritual, yet the same
respects nothing else but whatsoever we teach of the spiritual: here upon it
follows, that dogs and reprobats as they would have it, receive not ye body of
the Lord.

34 And although they brag that Augustine does favor them, because he has
written, that nothing is abated from the Sacraments by the malice and
infidelity of men: yet by many such places he proves that he far otherwise
thought, and Cyrill is of the same judgment. Augustine upon these words, Ioh.
6.1. Hom. in Ioh. 26.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, shall not dye for ever,
says namely, the power of the sacrament, not only ye visible sacrament and
verily within, not without, he that eats it with heart, not he that presses
it with toothe: Whereupon he concludes, that the Sacrament of this thing, that
is to say, of the unity of the body and blood of Christ is set before men in
the supper of the Lord, to some unto life, to none unto destruction, whosoever
be partakers of it. Hom. Ioh. 59. Hom. 62. ^. Cor. 12.^.
August. says, What maruellest thou, if to Judas was given the bread of
Christ, by which he might be made bound to the Devil; when thou see on the
contrary side, that to Paul was given an Angel of the Devil, by who^ he
might be made perfect in Christ?

35 From thence he goes to reprove adoration, and first he shows how weak
their conjecture is of accompaniyng together. Moreover what rashness it tastes,
and how far of it is from true humility to fall down flat and worship the
signs.

36 Those things that are above said, the Nycen council, old council, and the
whole order of scripture do fasten our minds, not with signs lift up to
heaven, to seek Christ: but the adoration of the Sacrament is manifest
Idolatry. Col. 1.1.2.


37 He goes further, and first he denies that that form of Adoration is
agreeable to the Sacrament. Moreover through their own default, it is no
sacrament, Psalm. 50.1^
because they have no reverence of the commandment, whereby only the promise
is boulstered and borne up: Therefore this Sacrament is not given to be
adored, but for certain other profitable ends: first, Luke. 2.1^
to stir up our minds to giving of thanks. Moreover to exercise us in
calling to mind the death of Christ.

38 Thirdly to encourage and flame us both to pureness, 1. Cor. 10.1^
and holiness of life, and also to charity, and peace toward all men: the
last, whereof he only entreats in this place. Augustine calls this
Sacrament the bond of charity.

39 Hereby it appears how far it is from the nature of the Sacrament
which they make a dombe action, and lay up I know not how often that which they
distribute to the sick.

40 Passing to them which come to the Supper of the Lord: Titus. 1.15 1. Cor.
11.29
first he shows what they are that come unworthily, and how great judgment
hangs over them. Moreover he thereby concludes that every man must examine
him self: ^. Cor. 11.28
and what that examination is.

41 The examination which commonly the Papists had, was rather a cruel
torment, than an examination, and debarred altogether from the Supper of the
Lord.

42 What that true examination is, and who are they that come worthily.

43 As concerning the outward vs^ of doing, there is much difference, and
therefore of some euilly restrained to a certain necessity: Luke. 22.17
and how the Supper of ye Lord may most decently be administered.

44. 45 The participation of the supper ought to be had in often use of all
Christians, Acts. 2.24
as is showed by the practice of the old Church, and the decrees of the old
Fathers: and how severely some of the Fathers did condemn in this behalf, the
sloth of the people.

46 The custom that commands to communicate once every year, is a most
certain invention of the Devil, albeit it could not arise at the first, of a
very evil fountain.

47 It was also an invention of the Devil, that in the Supper of the Lord, the
cup was denied the layitie: and it does nothing avail them, that by this
means they say they avoid many dangers, neither is it needful for the
accompaning of the blood in the body to distribute both.

48 He shuts against them two other starting holes, and the last thereof is,
that the cup did belong to the sacrificers only: this he prosecuteth to the end
of the Chapter, setting before them five requests: two in this place.

49 The second whereof, he expounds at large, and strongly confirms it.

50 The other three.

Cap. 18. Of the Popish Mass, by which sacrilege the Supper of the Lord,
has not only been profaned, but also brought to naught.
FIrst, he shows how many ways the Mass is a wicked Sacrilege, and not to
be borne with, from the first to the seventh. Moreover of the beginning of the
Mass. 8. 9. Thirdly, he treats thereof, specially because it is called a
Sacrifice, from the 10. to ye 12. Fourthly, he joins by that means a more
ample treaty of the sacraments, from the 13. to the 18. Last of all he makes
himself way to the next treatise of five Sacraments. 19. 20.

1 The very action of the Mass was so instituted, that under what color of
good soever it lay hid, yet it was most wicked sacrilege, as appears
plainly by the five properties which it has.

2 The first is, that whosoever ministers the Mass, Heb. 5.5 Psalm. 110.14
must necessarily be a Priest, but that cannot be without Christ his great
reproach, which is ordained the only and eternal Priest.

3 The second, because it treads under foot the cross and passion of the
Lord, Heb. 9.11
while it erecteth another Sacrifice, and when they think to have two starting
holes, yet they can escape neither of both.

4 The place of Malachie does make nothing for sacrificing Mass: for it was no
new thing among the Prophets, when they speak of the calling of the Gentiles
to express by the outward ceremony of the Law, the spiritual worshipping of
God, to which they exhort them: that they might the more familiarly declare to
the men of their age, that the gentiles should be called unto ye true fellowship
of religion. Like as also they are wont altogether to describe by figures of
their law, the truth that was delivered by ye Gospel. Esd. 19.2^
As for the place of Esdras, it is fulfilled in Christ.

5 The third, because it puts out of remembrance the true and only death
of Christ, and thrusts it out of man's mind. Heb. 9.16
The Mass shows it self a new Testament, therefore it requires his death.

6 The fourth, because it takes from us ye fruit which returned to us by the
death of Christ.

7 The fifth, because it weakeneth and breaks the Sacrament, whereby the
remembrance of Christ's death was left and that many ways.

8 From whence the name of Mass came, 1. Cor. 10.16
it does not sufficiently appear: but the same repugneth directly with the
institution of Christ.

9 The better to convince the same, first he generally affirms that such
pureness was unknown to the purer Church. Heb. 5.4
Moreover he shows how wrongfully it is thought to be a sacrament.

10 Many of the old writers have called the supper a sacrifice, but not in that
sense, which mainteineth this sacrilege for they understood nothing else, but
a remembrance of the true and only sacrifice, which Christ acomplished on the
cross.

Gal. 3.1
11 Yet some of them bent too much to the shadows of the law, and therefore
they lean themselves wholly upon nothing more safe, then on the word of God,
whereof is this a Supper.

12 There is great difference between Moses Sacrifices, and the Lords Supper,
and in what they differ.

13 But to the intent this disputation should be more manifest and plain, and
free from the false and malicious allegations of the envious, he takes upon
him to dispatch in few words, what hitherto he signifies by a sacrifice, and
what by a Priest: the Sacrifice, that is to say, another washing away of sins,
another giving of thanks, Exo. 29.70
according to the former sense, is nothing else, but the death of Christ.

14 In this sense, neither the Supper of the Lord is a Sacrifice, Heb. 5.4.
nor their Priests can be said to administer it.

15 That vanity Plato does sufficiently rebuke, where very merrily he laugheth
them to scorn, who leaning to such Sacrifice, live carelessly, that think
their punishments are redeemed by such Sacrifices.

16 Under the other kind, all the duties of Godliness belong to God, and the
offices of charity to our neighbor: Mala. 1.11 Romans 12.1
but it is occupied only in the magnifiyng and exalting God, and may not be
separated from the Church.

17 Such works were not only notable in the new Testament, Psalm. 141.2
but also in the old name of Sacrifices: in this sense all the faithful are
Priests.

18 After he has thus laid these things, he concludes that the
abomination of the Mass is more clear, that no man can be ignorant thereof:
the cup is such, as has made the kings of the earth drunken, and Helen
herself.

19 He repeateth briefly, a sum of them which is profitable to keep of the
two sacraments: and also shows why the Supper should so often be iterated,
Esaias. 40.13 Romans 11.34
and not the Baptism: and that no other may erect new Sacraments.

20 The faithful ought to be contented under the kingdom of Christ with these
2, Exo. 26.13 1. Cor. 10.3
howsoever diverse were given to the Jews: and to this end, these are called
new times, least any man deceive him self with a vain expectation of some
new doctrine or revelation.

Cap. 19. Of the five falsely named Sacraments: where is declared, that the
other five which have been hitherto commonly taken for Sacraments, are not
Sacraments: and then is showed what manner of things they be.
FIrst, he sends forth generally certain things of the universal, from the
first to the third: and then he descends to the special disputing
severally of every one, from the 4. to the 37.

1 He takes not in hand this contention about the name, for desire of
striving, but he is lead for weighty causes to fight against the abuse of it.

2 It is not in men's power to institute sacraments, and the same is in no man's
power, but Gods. Moreover it is profitable that some difference be kept
between Sacraments and other Ceremonies, least all things pass into
Sacraments. A Sacrament ought to be a witness of the good will of God
toward us, whereof no man nor angel can be witness, forasmuch as none has
been of Gods counsel.

3 There can no where be found amo^ng ye ecclesiastical writers the number of
7. sacraments. And Augustine acknowledges 2. only of this sort.

4 Descending to the forms, and first to confirmation, he shows what in
times past it was.

5 Moreover what afterward was brought in, and how falsely they named it a
Sacrament: It may be demanded of them, Mat. 12.25
as it was demanded of John by Christ, whether it be from heaven, or from men:
if from men, then it is vain and trifling: if from God, then it is to be
allowed, but they can never do.

6 But seeing there are two things wherewith they are wont to defend this
their rightnesse, that is to say, the examples of the Apostles, Acts. 8.15
John. 7.37
and custom of antiquity: As touching the first, the example of the Apostles
set down, he proves that it has no similitude with their wrongful
imitation.

7 He sets out the same more plainly by the like example of Christ, and more
briefly urges it: because beside the example of the Apostles which they cite,
they add not only oil, Gal. 4.2
but also name it with a Sacrilegious title, while they call it, The Oil of
salvation. As the breathing of Christ upon his disciples was but for a time,
for he did it but once: so also the manner of the Apostles laying on of hand,
was but for a time, Acts. 8.15
wherein it pleased the Lord that the visible graces of the holy Ghost should
be distributed at their prayers, not that they which came after, should pray
like, and without the thing in deed, counterfaite an empty cold sign, as
these apes do. As for their Oil, Gala. 4.^
Paul has taught to beware of such beggarly trash, and they that call it the
oil of salvation, forswere the salvation which is in Christ, they deny Christ,
and have no part of his kingdom. In the sacraments two things are to be
looked for: the substance of the bodily thing which is set before us, and the
form that is by the word of GOD printed in it, wherein lies the whole
strenth in respect therefore that the bread, wine, and water, that are the
sacraments offered to our sight, do keep their own substance, this saying of
Paul is always true, Meat for the belly, and belly for the meat, ^. Cor. 6.13
GOD, shall destroy them both, for they pass and vanish away with the fashion
of this world. But in respect that they are sanctified by the word of God yt
they may be Sacraments they do not hold us in the flesh, but do truly and
spiritually teach us.

8 But more plainly to teach the same, he exhorts more nearly to behold
their confirmation, and more diligently to examine the same: for from hence
forth will their wicked, false inventions proceed: first, because they say
the holy ghost is given in Baptism to innocentie; in confirmation to increase
of grace: In Baptism we are new begotten to life; in confirmation we are
prepared to battle, so they say that Baptism cannot be done without
confirmation. A most filthy wickedness: for we are in Baptism buried
together with Christ, being made partakers of him, that we may be all
partakers of his resurrection, Romans 5.4
which fellowship with the death of Christ, is the mortifiyng of the flesh, and
quickening of the spirit: for that our old man is crucified, that we may
walk in newnes of life, this is to be armed in battle. Acts. 8.16
Where Luke says, That they were Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, which
had not received the holy Ghost, he does not simply deny that they were endued
with any gift of the holy Ghost, which believed in Christ, in heart, and
confessed him in mouth: but he means of the receiving of the holy Ghost,
whereby the open powers and visible graces were received. So the Apostles
received the spirit on the day of Pentecost, where as it had bin long said of
Christ: It is not you that speak, but the spirit of my father which speaks
in you. Acts. 2.4
The word of God is that they which are baptized in Christ, have put on Christ
with his gifts. Gal. 3.27 De Cons. did. Cap. S. P.
The word of the Anointers is, that they received no promise, by which they may
be armed in battles.

9 Another is, yt as they say, they cannot be fully Christians, but by this
means, their words are these: But I had thought that whatsoever things
pertained to Christianity were al set forth in writing, and comprehended in
the Scriptures. Now as I perceive, the true form of religion is to be sought
and learned from else where then out of the Scriptures, ^erb. Cap. 1. ^onse.
Did. 5 ^on. Aurelium, Cap. vt. Ieiun.
therefore the whole wisdom of God, the heavenly truth, the whole doctrine
of Christ does but begin Christians, and oil makes them perfect. The
Apostles and many Martyrs were in poor state which had no oil at that time
made.

10 Thirdly, because they would have this their anointing to be had in more
reverence then Baptism: and that first, because it is bestowed of a more
worthy manner, by reason whereof they bewray themselves for Donatistes, which
measure the force of the Sacraments by the worthiness of the Minister.

11 Moreover, because it is in the more worthier part of the body, which
brings more force of virtue, as they babble,

12 As touching the antiquity of this custom, first he denies that this can
defend them, if it were so: Moreover, he shows that no such thing was
known to the Fathers, and when they spoke of confirmation they were of a far
other mind then these are.

13 That old confirmation was such as it ought to be restored, which was
catechizing.

14 As touching repentance, first he shows what the solemn use of laying on
of hands was with the fathers, which they make as it were a foundation of this
Sacrament.

15 Moreover it is not agreeed upon among themselves, by what reason and in
what sense repentance should be called a Sacrament, whatsoever it be, the
definition of the Sacrament does not agree to it.

16 They may much more colourably call absolution of the Priest, a Sacrament
then repentance, notwithstanding that which they fear, may be objected on the
contrary.

17 In what part soever they have set the Sacrament, it is not truly a
Sacrament, and so much the more lice^tiously they offend, when they set it out
with such report, calling it a second board after shipwreck.

18 The third fained sacrament is extreme unction: James. 5.14 Mark. 6.13
first, he discusseth what it is. Moreover what it is by the place James, which
they call for their defense to be perceived, after which manner the Apostles
did: but after the grace of healing was vanished away, and al other miracles
which the Lord commanded to make the new preaching of the Gospel marvelous
for ever, the signs also were taken away.

19 They can by no other reason make a Sacrament of this ointment, then of all
other signs, which are rehearsed to us in the Scripture: neither is there any
power in their anointing at this day. They may as well appoint some S^loath to
swim in, whereunto at certain ordinary recourses of times, sick men may
plunge themselves in: they may as well lie along upon dead men, Ioh. 9.7. Act.
20.10.
because Paul raised up a dead child with lying upon him: They may make claye
made of spittle and dust, a Sacrament as well.

20 They are injurious to the holy Ghost, which make a stinking oil, and of
no force, to be his power: but whatsoever it be, it is no sacrament. The
Apostles by the sign of Oil openly testified, that the grace of healing
committed to them, was not their own power but the power of the holy Ghost.
They might as well prove that every Dove is the holy Ghost, Mat. 3.16. Ioh.
1.32.
because he appeared in that form, as to say, all Oil is the power of the
holy Ghost.

21 What difference is between James anointing and their fatness: Iam. 5.14.
James wills that sick men be anointed, but they anoint them half dead:
James wills ye Elders to anoint, they ye pety sacrificing Priests: James
wills the sick to be anointed with common Oil, they vouchsafe to have none
other Oil, than that which is by the Bishop hallowed, that is to say, warmed
with much breathing, enchaunted with much mumbling, with knee bowing nine times
in this manner thrice, Hayle holy Oil: thrice, Hayle holy Chrisme: thrice,
Hail holy Balm.

22 The fourth place in their register has a Sacrament of order, but ye same
is so fruitful, that it breeds out of it self seven little Sacraments:
speaking whereof, he sets down two things to be discussed: first how many
and how unsavory absurdities they thrust in unto us, when they go about to
comme^d to us their orders for Sacraments: and first that they make seven, he
shows that it proceeds of ignorance and too much unadvisedness, neither
do they agree among them selves how many and what orders they be.

23 Moreover how wrongfully in every one of them they make Christ fellow with
them, Ioh. 2.15. Ioh. 10.7.
whereby they may the more commend their folly: first they say, Christ executed
the office of a doorekeeper, he signifies him self to be a doorekeeper, and
a reader, an Exorcist, an Acoluth or follower of a Subdeaco^, and a Deacon, and
a Priest. Ephe. 5.2*
They call the name of Acoluth a Ceroferar a Taper bearer, a word of sorcerie
as I think: for in no language was it at any time heard of: for Acoluthos in
Greek signifies simply a follower.

24 Thirdly, that a great part of the^ are nothing else than vain names,
drawing with them no certain office.

25 Moreover coming to the second, that is to say, whether the Ceremony which
they use in ordaining Ministers, ought to be called a Sacrament: first he
shows with what vanity they shave them in the crown.

26 Where also he shows how foolishly they draw this their crown from the
Nazarites, from Priscilla, Acyla, Act. 18.18. 1. Cor. 9.20.
and Paul. It is no where read of Priscilla and of Acyla, it is doubtful, and
Paul did it not for satisfaction, but for to serve the weakness of his
brethren.

27 From whence this their shauyng had beginning, he teaches out of Augustine.
Moreover when he has sufficiently spoken of shauing, he recites certain
other foolish Ceremonies whereby they consecrate their door keepers readers,
Exorcists and followers prouyng that all these are unworthy to be honored by
the nature of a Sacrament.

28 Thirdly coming to Priests or Presbiters, first he shows that that
office as it is among them, is injurious to the Priesthood of Christ, because
they themselves profess that they offer the sacrifice of apeasement. Psalm.
110.4. Heb. 5.6.
Christ commanded distributers of his Gospel and Mysteries to be ordained, not
sacrificers to be consecrated.

29 Moreover coming to the Ceremonies, first he shows how unadvisedly they
have imitated, Ioh. 20.22.
blowing by the example of Christ: but the Lord did many things that he willed
not to be examples to us: he showed a proof of his divine power, when in
blowing upon the Apostles, he filled them with the grace of the holy Ghost.

30 Moreover he repr^ueth their anointing, Exodus 30.30.
which they allege out of Exodus. For following yt, they must also follow many
other Jewish ceremonies which God then commanded.

31 Last of all, he denies that their impositio^ of hands has any place here.

32 Fourthly, he rebukes the Ceremonies, whereby Deacons at the first were
ordained.

33 Moreover Subdeaco^s. And concludes of all in general, that ye holy Ghost
is not included by such foolishnes: and for that cause they deserve not the
name of Sacraments.

34 The last is Matrimony: that is no Sacrament. And ye better to prove it,
first he takes away their reasons, and proves that many Sacraments would
ensue, if a man might reason as they do: they say it is a good and holy
ordinance of God, therefore a Sacrament, so are all honest occupations, yet no
Sacraments: they say, it is a sign of a holy thing, that is of the spiritual
conioyning of Christ with the Church: Hereby may many Sacraments arise, for
Paul says, as one Star differs from an other in brightness, 1. Cor.
15.41. Mat. 13.31.
so shall the resurrection of ye dead be: there is one sacrament. Christ
says, the kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustarde seed: Ioh. 15.1.
there is an other Sacrament, the kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven: there
is the third. The lord shall feed the flock as a shephearde: the fourth. The
Lord shall go forth as a Giaunt. the fifth. So many parables, so many
Sacraments: yea, and theft must be a Sacrament also. It is good so often as we
see a Vine, to call to mind, which Christ says, I am a Vine, ye are the
branches, my Father is the Vinedresser. And so often as we see a shephearde with
his flock coming toward us, Ioh 10.11.
to call to mind, I am a good shepherd, my sheep hear my voice: but if any
man add such similitudes to the number of Sacraments, he is meet to be sent
to Antycira to gather Hellebor to purge his frantike head.

35 Moreover he teaches by interpreting the place of Paul, Ephe. 5.29.
that it makes nothing for them to make a Sacrament. Paul to show to married
men what singular love they ought to bear toward their wives, sets the
Church to them for example. for as he powered out the bowels of his kindness
upon the church which he had espoused to him self: so ought every man to be
affectioned to his wife. when Eve was brought into his sight, whom he knew to
have bin shapen out of his side: this woman, says he, is bone of my bones,
Genesis 2.23.
and flesh of my flesh, which Paul testifies was spiritually fulfilled in
Christ and us, when he says, that we are members of his body, his flesh, and
of his bones, yea and one flesh with him: then he adds, this is a great
Mystery: whereby he expresses that he speaks not of the flesh conioining
of man and woman, but of the spiritual marriage of Christ and his church. and
truly it is a great mystery that Christ suffered a ribbe to be taken from
himself, whereof we might be shapen: that is to say, when he was strong, he
willed to be weak, that we might be strengthened by his strength, Gal. 2.20.
that now we may not our selves live, but he may live in us.

36 Thirdly, he shows how it came to pass that they fell into such error,
that is to say, by the word of the Sacrament evil understood: And moreover he
reckons up three absurdities, which presently break in, that at the first it
is granted that marriage is a sacrament. These giddie heads after they have
called marriage a Mystery or Sacrament, do call it uncleanness defiling and
fleshly filthiness. Some have found out two Sacraments here: the one of God and
the soul, in the betrothing man and woman, the other of Christ and the Church,
in the husband and the wife. an other absurdity is this, that they affirm
that in the Sacrament is given the grace of the holy Ghost, they teach that
that copulation is a Sacrament, and they deny that at copulation the holy
Ghost is at any time present.

37 Last of all, when they had once obtained the same, they drew to themselves
the hearing of causes of Matrimony: and made laws whereby they might establish
their tyranny, partly manifestly wicked against God: and partly most unjust
toward me^, whereof many are there recited.

Cap. 20. Of Civil government.
FIrst he sends forth certain things in general, from the 1. to ye 3.
Moreover dividing the whole matter into three parts, he prosecuteth every one
severally, from the 4. to the 32.

1 After he has abundantly spoken of spiritual government, Gal. 5.6. 1. Cor.
7.2^.
which respects the soul, he does necessarily descend to that other, which
tends to the government of a civil life: and to the intent he may meet with
a double evil, whereof the first is, that Barbarous and mad men do
furiously go about to overthrow the order established by God, but since they
do it for this cause, as though Christian liberty could not stand, it is
showed against them that politic administration is not against Christian
liberty.

2 And when they cry out, that the civil administration is unmeet for
Christians, and that such in it self, that it repugneth Christian profession
on both parts: Against both which it is showed that it is such as either in
this life does begin after a sort immortality, and is very profitable for us.

3 This same he prosecuteth, proving that civil government is not only
profitable for us in earthly matters: but also to defend and increase the
kingdom of Christ. Moreover that the matter may more plainly go forward, he
divides this government which he speaks of, into three parts: that is to
say, into the Magistrate, ye law and the people, speaking of every one in
order.

Exo. 22.8. Psalm. 82.1.6
4 The Magistrates office is both commended to us of the Lord with most
honorable titles, and with the examples of the godly, which continue holily
therein: As David, Josias, and Ezechias, Joseph and Daniell, in Lordship Moses
and Joshua.

5 Neither is that firm enough which they obiecte that the same in times past
was appointed to the rude people, Psalm. 3.12.
but not so unto us at this day, for the state of the Church at this day is
committed to ye defense and sauegard of Magistrates.

6 By this consideration great fruit returns to the Magistrates themselves,
Ier. 48.11. Deuteronomy. 1.16.
seeing that both may very well instruct them with what equity and diligence
they ought to be occupied in their duties, and also may sustain them in
singular comfort.

7 They that rail at this holy Ministry do not refuse the Magistrate, 1.
Sam. 8.7.
but cast away God, yt he should not reign over them. Luke 22.25.
Notwithstanding yt which they object, that dominion is forbidden by the mouth
of Christ: neither is there any difference what form of government it be:
when we reason of giving obedience, seeing it proves that all are ordained of
God.

8 There are three special fourmes of civil government: but whether is better
it can not be defined. The state of the chiefest men tempered with common
government is the best, by ye Princes defalt, yet all are of God.

9 Speaking of ye office of a Magistrate, that is, ^udg. 21.25.
to what end he is set of God, he shows that his office is extended to both
tables: neither is he instituted only to attend on civil judgments, but much
more to have regard of religion, and for that cause he is armed with power,
both for reward and punishment.

10 Against them that strive, that revenge and sheading of blood is of that
sort, that it becomes not Christians: he shows that Magistrates do not
offend in punishing the wicked, that it should be one of the Kings virtues, and
an approbation of their godliness: too much desire of clemency is very
pernicious; but on the other side always they must take heed that gentleness
be not abse^t.

11 Hereupon it follows, yt all wars are just and lawful, that are taken in
hand to execute public vengeance.

12 That hinders not, which is objected out of the new Testament, that there
is no testimony or example which teaches that war is a lawful thing for
Christians, which he proves by three reasons. but here on both sides they
must take heed that they be not led by their own desires or proper
affection, more than public sense: hereupon also it follows, Garrisons,
Leages, and other civil fortifications are lawful.

13 And that the Magistrate may lawfully demand tribute or yearly revenue
although here also they must take heed, Eze. 48.21. Romans 13.6.
that whatsoever they be bold to do, they be bold before God with a pure
conscience.

14 Coming to ye second part of the treatise, to treat of laws, where in few
words he shows what the profit and necessity thereof is, he reproves them
of error, which deny a well governed common wealth, which neglecting the
civil laws of Moses, is governed by the common laws of nations: first he
distributeth ye law into three parts, into moral, ceremonial, and judicial.

15 Moreover he concludes, after the scope of every thing is diligently
searched, that to every nation liberty is left, Gal. 4.4.
to make such laws as they saw profitable for them, so they were finished
according to perpetual rule of charity.

16 This would be plain, if in all laws two things were considered, that is
to say, the equity and constitution of the law, the first whereof, is one and
the same, and therefore ought never to vary: the other, because it ought to
depend of circumstances, will sometimes necessarily be diverse, and that he
shows by diverse examples. Exo. 22.1. Deuteronomy. 19.18.


The third part of the treatise is of the people, where first he expounds
what profit of laws, of judgments of Magistrates returns to the common
society of Christians, from the 17. to the 21. Moreover, how much private
men ought to yield to Magistrates, and and how far their obedience ought to
proceed, from the 22. to the 32.

17 As touching the first, that he may show that the Magistrates office is not
superfluous among Christians, Romans 13.4.
he proves that is it divinely ordained, that by his hand and succor we
being defended against the maliciousnes and injuries of wicked men, we may live
a quiet and a safe life: but here must we have to do with two kind of men,
the first of them is, which in striving by the weakness of the mind exceed
measure.

18 What that government is, to the rule whereof, men ought to direct themselves.

19 The other is of them that precisely condemn all contendinges at law. but
they do also refuse and despise the ordinance of God: Act. 22.1.
and seeing by the principal places they are wont to defend their opinion:
first that they say, that to Christians is forbidden revenge. Christians may
not with affection or boiling heat of revenge to be corrupted, nor be touched
with displeasure of private injury, but only may have a mind to withstand the
enterprises of a mischievous man, that they may not hurt the common weal. We
must think that the Magistrates revenge is not the revenge of man, but of God,
Romans 13.4.
which he extends and exercises by the ministry of man, for our good.

20 Moreover because Christ seems to forbid to resist evil: Mat. 5.39.
whereby is meant that men should patiently bear all the injuries and reproaches
of the malicious, so far forth that when they have received one injury, they
should be ready to receive an other, promising themselves all their life long,
nothing else but a continual cross, Mat. 5.39.
not mindful to seek eye for eye, or tooth for tooth, as the Pharesies taught
their Disciples to desire revenge, but as they are taught by Christ, to suffer
their bodies to be mangled, and their goods maliciously to be taken from them:
and of their own accord to forgive and pardon those evils that are done unto
them, Romans 12.19.
committing vengeance to the Lord, to whom it belongs. but yet this euennes
and moderation of minds, shall not withstand but that the friendship toward
their enemies remaining safe: they may use the help of the Magistrate to the
preserving of their goods, or for zeal of a public commodity, may sue a
guilty and pestelent man to be punished, whom they know can not be amended
but by death.

21 Last of all, because they say Paul did wholly condemn, 1. Cor. 6.6.
in the Corinthia^s, contentions and strifes: but this was because among the
Corinthians in their Church unmeasurable rage of striving at law that they made
the Gospel of Christ, and whole religion open to the cauillations and evil
speaking of ye wicked which is the thing yt Paul blames them of, first,
because by their intemperance of contentions they brought the Gospel in
slander of the unbelievers, and also they striued among themselves, brethren
with brethren.

22 As touching the last, 1. Pet. 2.17 Pro. 24.21 Romans 13.5
there are two things principally which private men owe unto magistrates: first
that they think honorably of their office.

23 Moreover that they declare obedience not making commotion, nor rashly
breaking into the office of the Magistrates.

24 Howsoever that all men do confess that they owe them selves to good
Princes, yet there are many that cannot be persuaded that they owe such
things to tyrants.

The Prince is the pasture of the people, the keeper of peace, the protector of
righteousness, and the revenger of innocence.

25 But the word of God commands that we be subject not only to good princes,
Ioh. 34.30 Ose. 15.11
but also to all which have dominion in possession, although they perform
nothing less, then that which pertains to the duties of Princes.

26 That he may obtain ye same, he proves two things out of ye scripture:
first that kings are not appointed, but by the providence and singular doings
of God. Daui. 2.21
Moreover, from them are admonitions drawn, that we should obey them: first
out of Daniell, Nabuchodonozer, he that conquered Jerusalem, 1. kings. 24
was a strong inuader, and destroier of other: yet it is said, That the Lord
gave him the land of Egypt, for the service he had done to him in wasting it.

27 Moreover out of Jeremy.

Iere. 27.5
28 Neither does that avail which they object that that commandment was
peculiar to ye Israelites, Pro. 28.2 Ioh. 12.18
seeing he teaches all men of right that to whom soever the kingdom be given,
they serve him. this he proves by certain testimonies, and by David's example.

29 By what cogitations they ought to bridle their impaciencie, Ephe. 6.1. 1.
Pet. 3.7
which live under wicked and mischeuous tyrants for in the Lords hands are
kings, and the bowings of kingdoms, and he only will revenge their evil
doings.

30 Yet in the mean time, the Lord is wont to bridle the licentiousness of
Tyrants: and that he does two ways. So he delivered the people of Israel out
of ye tyranny of Pharao by Moses, and out of the violence of Chusa king of
Syria, by Othoniel, and out of other thraldomes by other kings or judges. So
he tamed the pride of Tyrus, by the Egyptians; the insolence of the Egiptians,
by the Assyria^s; the fierceness of the Assyria^s, by the Chaldees; the
boldness of Babylon, by the Medians and Persians; When Syrus had subdued the
Medians, and the unthankfulness of the kings of Judah and Israel.

31 Howsoever this one thing always lies on private men, yt they obey their
princes whatsoever they be, yet this lets not, but yt there may be some
popular Magistrates, in whose power it is to resist the cruelty of Kings, and
to defend the liberty of the people.

32 So far forth must Magistrates not be obeyed, Daui. 3.2 Oze. 5.13.
as their will, are understood to strive with the word of God. The
displeasure of the King is the messenger of death, but we must listen to the
heavenly Harolde Peter, who says We ought rather to obey God than man. Acts.
6.22
And Paul spurreth us forward with this, that we are therefore redeemed with
so great a price, as our redemption cast on him, we should not yield our
selves in thraldom to obey the perverse desires of men, 1. Cor. 7.13
but much less should be bond to ungodliness.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON AT THE THREE CRANES IN THE VINtree by Thomas Dawson, for
William Norton, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Queens
arms. 1580.


