A REPLY TO A RELATION, OF THE CONFERENCE BETWEEN WILLIAM LAUD and Mr. FISHER
the Jesuit.

By a Witness of JESUS CHRIST.

JOB 38.2. Who is this, that darkeneth Council by words without knowledge?

1 KINGS 18.21. How long halt you between two opinions? If the LORD be GOD
follow him: but if Baal, then follow him.

CANT. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines: for our
Vines have tender Grapes.

IMPRINTED, Anno MDCXL.

A SAD AND SERIOVS CONSULTATION OF A DISCONSOLAE MOTHER ( CHRIST'S
VIRGIN-Spouse) with twelve of her Children about her, whose names are Faith,
Hope, Charity, Zeal, Humility, Prudence, Piety, Patience, Justice, Mercy,
Verity, Prayer: whose several judgments the Mother requires in a doubtful
case.
MOTHER. MY Dear Children, how does the very sight of you revive my doleful
spirits, almost drowned in the Rev. 1^.
Dragons flood? You are to me as that verse. 1.
twelve-starred Crown upon my head. But to the purpose, for which I have
called you together: (though indeed you are never asunder, nor absent from me)
and it is this: You have taken notice of a notorious Book lately published by
the Prime Prelate of England, which he calls a Relation of a Conference etc.
And how to that Relation a Son of mine (no less known to you all, then
assisted by you in the work) has made here a Reply, and presented it to me.
But now how to improve and dispose of it for the best, is the doubt. The
Relator (the Prelate) ingageth the King in it by two bonds; the one of
Patronage, the other of Command; as if the King had first commanded it to be
published, and now did give it Patronage and protection: which if true, it puts
me in a straight, what to do with this Reply. For who so fit to take notice of
it, yea and to give it Protection too, if both the matter and the consequence
of it (being of so high a nature) be well and wisely weighed? It has much
perplexed me. Now therefore give me your best advice. And first,

Faith what say thou?


Faith. Dear Mother, put away from you all such perplexed thoughts. It Is true,
If we look on worldly means with a carnal eye, we are all in a straight. But
this is our safety. It Is well the world has never an object to allure our
confidence to pitch upon it. And best of all, when all the world is banded
against us, and our Christ. Is not he alone sufficient to cope with them? Does
he not Psalm. 2.
laugh at their proud, but vain attempts, which are no less against him, then
against us? Is not the Cause then his? And are not we his? And is not Romans 8.32
he for us? Who then shall be against us? What though Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual wickednesses in high places, be, with all the power and
policy of the world, with all the craft and cruelty of the Dragon and Devil
armed against us? why, still Christ is for us. That Is sufficient. Therefore
there be more with us, then against us. We are a little flock against a world of
Wolves and Foxes, Lions and Bears: but we have a watchful and powerful
Shepherd, whose Legions of mighty Angels those heavenly Hosts, do pitch their
tents round about us. We are his Paradise on earth, which he defends
continually with his Cherubims flaming sword, that proud Apostates cannot so
invade us, as to take one Tree of life from us. Let the wild Beasts then rage,
and war upon us: let the Egyptian troops pursue us, as with open mouth to
devuore us: but stand we still and see the salvation of the LORD. He that led
his people through the Sea, never wants power to deliver his, when in most
desperate straights. Mother, Cheer up. Not a hair of your head shall perish.
The faithful and True has said it. As for outward means, if we have them we
use them, as Gods ordinances* if we have them not, nay, if all be against us,
yet our Faith in GOD is the same, and ever greater, stronger and nobler,
without and against means, then with them. And much more is our GOD the same,
and his glory most shines, where outward means are either least helpful, or
most opposite. My resolution then is this: The Reply in my judgment is very
necessary to be published, and withal (as most pertinent and important) to be
presented to the King. But whether he will read it or no, leave that to GOD. We
shall neither loose our labor, nor reward. For great is the Truth, and shall
prevail, what ever opposition Men or Devils make against it. And in this Reply
the true Faith is defended against the Prelates false and counterfeit Faith. I
have said.


Mother. Well, Hope, what say thou?


Hope. Dear Mother, I am of the same mind and spirit with my Sister Faith. By
all means cast away all anxious and perplexed thoughts, and be of good
comfort: though our Ship be shrewdly weather-beaten, and shaken, yet Christ
is at the stern. And I have already cast Heb. 6.19
Anchor in the Havens mouth, on a firm ground within the Veil. When Noah's
Arc floated over the tops of the highest Mountains in that dreadful
Deluge, when the world was a Sea: what Pilot safely guided and steered its
course, that it should rest upon the Mount Ararat? Even the same Pilot we have,
to conduct us through these Floods to the Haven where we would be. Let the
Reply for truth against falsehood be published, under Christ's Patronage and
protection: that is sufficient. As for Men, the less we hope in them, the less
we fear them. And while we do our duty with the one hand, we lay hold on the
Crown with the other. I have said.


Mother. Charity, what say thou?


Charity. Dear Mother, as my Sister Hope is the Anchor both sure and steadfast,
So I am the threefold Cable not easily broken: and therefore be of good
comfort. For Cant.
Love not all the floods can drown it. Now for the Relation, were those many
passages in it (noted by the Replyer) some common slips of ignorance, or humane
frailty, I would cast my large mantle over them: but being of a high nature,
and full of impiety against GOD and CHRITT, and the Holy Ghost, and the holy
Scriptures, and against your holy Spouse-ship, and against Faith, and against
Charity, and so against all true Religion: yea proceeding also from a Prime
Prelate pretending great learning and knowledge, and professing such singular
eminency and dexterity of wit and judgment, as being the only able Champion
of the Church of England, to defend the truth against a Jesuit, and all this
under the fair white veil of hypocrisy, only his Black-moores skin too
grossly appearing in his malignant practices in persecuting the Truth, and in
those malicious and impious passages in his Book, so as he is left altogether
naked of all plea of ignorance: therefore I hold it fit, that his hypocrisy
should be unmasqued, his bold falcities confuted, his insollencie suppressed,
his impiety rebuked, and the Truth maintained against him before all the world:
and therefore that the Reply be published. And if it shall be thought fit to be
dedicated to the King, I wish that mine own hand might present it. For (to say
no more) how highly does the Cause concern the King and his Kingdom, did he
but truly know it? And how he should come to know it, but this way, I know
not. And I hope his Majesty will not refuse it at Charities hand. I have said.


Mother. Zeal, what say thou?


Zeal. Dear Mother, can we see our God so highly dishonored, our Christ so
belyed, his Spirit so despised, his Word so disparaged, his Worship so
depraved, his Saints so destroyed, his true Spouse unchurched, and
excommunicated out of the Creed, and a false Church, fasle Faith, false
Religion, false Gods set up in Christ's Throne to be Judges in matters of Faith,
and proud men to usurp over the Consciences and Souls of his people, and the
like: and are we not to set a work all the irons in the fire that may be, to
arm us against such an all-daring Philistin, who dare so desperately defy the
Hosts of the living God? And blessed be our God, who has raised up and enabled
such a Replyer; and blessed be the Replyer, who ever he be, that takes up
David's sting and stone to throw at that Gyant-like Mushrumme. And were there an
hundred such Replies, let them all be published, and all be presented to the
King, to the confusion of all Babell-builders, or Ierecho's rebuilders. And if
men will wilfully close their eyes, and stop their ears against the Truth, at
their peril be it. I have said.


Mother. Humility, what say thou?


Humility. Dear Mother, I humbly pray, that the Reply be published; and if my
Sister Charity do present it to the King, all my ambition is to weight upon
her as her handmaid, to bear up the Train of her manyfold sin-covering
Mantle. This is all I can do, or say.


Mother. Prudence, what say thou?


Prudence. Dear Mother, although I accord with all that my Sisters have here
said, yet seeing it pleases you to impose this task upon me, I shall give you
a faithful and just account, what I further conceive to be not altogether
unworthy our serious consideration, about the dedicating and presenting the
Reply to the King.

First, we all know what reward others have had for the like service, and that
of fresh memory* as a Minister, appealing from the Prelates, to the King for a
just and equal hearing of his Cause, which was about the discharge of his
Ministry in Preaching: was delivered over to the Censure of a Court, wherein
his maine Adversary sat a Judge, and the Censure was accordingly so terrible,
as no age can parallel.

And, Secondly, the same Adversary that was the Prime instigator to inflict the
said Censure, continues still in the same power and favor in Court, so as if
my Sister Charity her self, together with Humility, should present the Reply,
I know not what security she can have from the like Censure of being both
Schismatic and Seditious, because she thus appears against a most notorious
Adversary of CHRIST and his Word, but such, whose power and favor in Court,
can so far prevail to the abusing of the sweet and unsuspicious nature of
Princes, as to make them believe that they cannot possibly be misled by such a
Leader, although the Prelate himself confess, that Worth once misled, proves
of all other the greatest Misleader; and the Replyer has detected and proved
him the most notorious blind Leader, that ever sat in Canterbury Chair.

And, Thirdly, who sees not the maine work, that so many arrows of
persecution against Gods Ministers and people, and so the Gospel it self (as
appears too palpably by the Prelates usual practices) do aim at? As,
namely, the rooting out of the Gospel, and the erecting of all Popish
Superstition and Idolatry, and so the bringing in of Atheism and Infidelity,
with Antichristian Tyranny, and all to reduce England to a Reconciliation with
Rome, as also the Relation it self does unblushingly discover. And the
Merchants do tell us from abroad, how the Priests and Friars can tell them
(upon occasion of the Scots first standing out) that this course was by the
Prelaticall Faction reaching as far as Rome, resolved on before yesterday.

And, Fourthly, when we look upon the hideous outrages of the Prelates,
against which no complaint can take place, nor find better success, then as
when a man casts stones upward, which fall down again upon his own head: does
it not argue the Estate of things to be desperate, and at the height, when such
men as the Prelates are mounted on a throne of iniquity, framing mischief as
by a Law? But yet,

Lastly, (notwithstanding all this) when I consider, how mercifully God has
heard the earnest prayers of his people, in moving the Kings heart to such an
accord with Scotland, as of late (although those bitter Roots, which GOD never
planted, and which po^son the very ground they go on (the Prelates I mean, so
fast are they rooted in the earth) are left still unplucked up) and that the
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of waters, and that if he
were once rightly possessed of the State of things, wherein he has been by the
Prelates extremely abused, and his State exposed to the wrath of heaven, we
should be in good hope of Reformation: so as what lawful means may be most
likely and probable to conduce hereunto, is worth the putting in practice,
though full of hazard; saving that the same GOD, who mightily and mercifully
moved the Kings heart so far to yield to his Scottish Subjects, as to enjoy
in a good measure (the Prelates onley excepted) their liberty of Conscience:
can also persuade him to do as much, and more, for his Subjects, Christ's
people, in England. And therefore my conclusion is: I am so far from
Sacrificing to humane discretion, or carnal reason, in this point, that I
could be content to accompany my Sisters, Charity, and Humility, in presenting
the Reply, resolving with Hester, And if I perish, I perish. And this is all I
have to say for the present.


Mother. Piety, what say thou?


Piety. Dear Mother, I owe a duty, as to GOD principally, and in the first
place, so to the King Gods vicegerent, in the second place: and therefore what
may conduce to the happiness and welfare of the King in this kind, I would
for it hazard all. And I am for the pubilshing and presenting of the Reply to
the King, in hope he may possibly read and understand the true State of things,
being of such high importance, as in the world there cannot be a greater. And
if this be not done, things going on as they have done, there will be no longer
abiding for us in this place. I have said.


Mother. Patience, what say thou?


Patience. Dear Mother, what your self and my loving Sisters here do, or
shall resolve of, my office is to prepare my back to bear whatsoever the
malignity and iniquity of the Times shall lay upon me* which I am most willing
to undergo for his sake, who suffered death, that we might live. And never had
I more employment to exercise me in any age.


Mother. Justice, what say thou?


Justice. Dear Mother, I hold it both just and necessary that the Reply be
published; both for the beating down of the insolency of the Relator, and the
raising up of the drooping spirits of Gods people, and the settling them in the
Truth. As for presenting it to the King, though I be not against it, yet for my
part I have engaged my self in an Appeal to the High and Right^ous Judge of
all the world for Justice in this Cause, where I shall be sure to have it. So
as I resolve not to descend to any inferior Court, and there too, where the
like Cause (inferior to none for pure innocence) and that also upon Appeal,
so foulely miscarried. So as I am altogether taken up in waiting for an Answer
from my Righteous Judge, wherein I shall desire my Sister Patience to lend me
so much of her virtue, as may preserve my Attendance from fainting.


Mother. Mercy, what say thou?


Mercy. Dear Mother, I am engaged with my Sister Justice in the same Petition
to the throne of Justice and Mercy, that the Righteous Judge will for his mercy
sake to his people give righteous judgment between them, and the Relator; for
else they, and the Cause must fall to ground. And this course I stick unto; not
that I dissent from my other Sisters, but what your self and they shall
resolve on in this case, my Petition with my Sister Justice may stand in no
small stead, when GOD shall be pleased to move the Kings heart to vindicate the
Cause of Christ, and of his innocent people, from the unjust and unmercifull
dealing of the Relator: against whom I stand a daily Petitioner, with my Sister
Justice, not departing from the Court-gate of heaven, till we have a full
Answer.


Mother. Verity, what say thou?


Verity. Dear Mother, I would willingly accompany my other Sisters to the
Court in presenting the Reply to the King, but that there, I am better known
then trusted. So as I could never yet have any good success there. Insomuch as
I have made my self (as they have made me) altogether a stranger at Court,
because my naked simplicity can no way suit with the garb of the
Court-fashion, which can turn themselves into all forms, but mine, which is
unchangeable. Yet if my Sister Hope could lend me her habit, I durst adventure
with my Sisters once more within the Court-gates, in hope the Courtiers would
not reject me, as not knowing me to be Verity. And should they by my language
descry me, yet seeing me in Hopes habit, they might perhaps turn Truths
Disciples in hope of some gain or preferment, so much affiance they have in
hopes. But (alas!) their hope is nothing a Kin to my Sister Hope; for her
object are things spiritual and eternal; but theirs only temporal. And
besides, the Relator has forced his Pack with such a deal of trumpery, and
painted stuff, gilded over with the glittering Titles of Truth, and Peace, and
Piety, and Devotion, and the Church, and the like, that these his fair
polished Bristow-stones are preferred by his Court-Disciples before the true
and precious Diamonds, because presented in their ragged, or russet Coat, so as
these prove not merchantable there, where otherwise even Truth it self is
bought and sold. And therefore it shall be sufficient, that my Sisters, so many
as go, wear me (as always) as a Jewel in their bosoms; so I shall not be
taken notice of; and the fewer they appear, the better, least the Prelate
conjure them down for a sort of Factious Spirits, as he did those THREE of late
in the Star Chamber. I have said.


Mother. Prayer, what say thou?


Prayer. Dear Mother, and all my dear Sisters here present, come I pray you,
and kneel down here, and assist me by joining in earnest supplication to our
GOD, that he would direct and lead us in that way, which in this business may
most conduce to the advancement of the Cause of Christ, and the honor of the
King.


Prayer. O Lord God Almighty, Who shall not fear thee, thou King of Saints?
Great and marvelous are thy works; just and true are thy ways. Thou art the
great King over all the Earth, the righteous Judge of all the world, the GOD
that hear Prayer, and helpest thy People, when they cry unto thee, and
judge their cause when thou see their strength is gone. But how long, LORD,
Holy and True! when will thou arise, and have mercy upon Sion? Is not now the
time, the set time come? Is it not now a day of rebuke and blasphemy? Are not
the children brought to the birth, and there is none, to deliver? How long
shall thy people cry, and thou answerest not? How long shall the enemy roar,
and thou regardest not? How long shall he blaspheme thy Name? For ever? Why
pluckest thou not thy right hand out of thy bosom? Art not thou our King of
old, working Salvation in the midst of the Earth? Did not thou divide the Sea
for thy People to pass through? And art not thou the same GOD of Israel still?
Or is thine arm shortened, that it cannot save? And do thou not remember
this, how the enemy has reproached, O LORD, and blasphemed thy Name? And will thou deliver the soul of thy Turtle Dove unto the Beast? Will thou forget the
Congregation of thy poor for ever? Remember thy Covenant O Lord, for we are
thy People, and thou art our GOD. Other Lords besides thee have had dominion
over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name. And yet do thou
not see, the dark places of the Earth full of the habitations of Cruelty? O
let not the oppressed return ashamed. The poor and needy cry unto thee, they
trust in thee, they weight for thee, that they may praise thy Name. Arise
therefore, O GOD, plead thine own Cause, remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine enemies; the tumult of
those that rise up against thee, increases continually. And now behold here
spread before thee, a Book of Reproaches and Blaspemies against thy Majesty,
and against thy Son Jesus Christ, and against thy Holy Spirit, and against
thy Holy Word, and against thy Holy Ministers, and against thy Holy People, and
against thy Holy and Pure Worship, yea, and against the Kings Sacred Majesty,
whom thou have set over thy People to govern them according to Truth and
Equity, under whose Patronage and Authority, notwithstanding, the Relator is
bold to shroud this his Book with all the Blasphemies and Falsities therein
contained; So as hereby, not only the exterpation of all true Faith and
Religion in the Land is threatened, but consequently the utter ruin and
extermination of the Nation it self hastened, already fitted as dry fuel for
thy wrath, by this Incendiary. For behold Lord what havoc is made in the Land?
What superstitions in will worship? what oppression of the Gospel? what
persecution of thy Ministers? what effusion of their innocent blood? What
dispersion of their poor families? What profanation of thy holy Sabbaths?
What erection and adoration of Antichristian Altars and Images? What suspension
of the doctrines of Grace and Salvation? What usurped Tyrannical Domination
over thy Ministers and People? What imposition of the intolerable yoke of
Ceremonies upon their necks, bringing them again under Antichristian bondage,
whom Christ by the shedding of his precious blood has made free? And what
urging and pressing with furious rage reaching up to heaven, the observation of
all humane Ordinances, while, yea and whereby thy divine Ordinances are cast
out? And what will thou now do to thy great Name? Thou have of late by
terrible signs from heaven, as it were by sound of Trumpet, summoned the whole
Land, threatening to destroy it. Surely the provocations are great, were not thy
Patience greater. But thou expectest Repentance, with Reformation of all these
abominations. But little appearance as yet, and as little hope, while such
Books as this, are Patronized and Authorized. What then Lord? Will thou
therefore proceed to judge the whole Land for these things? Surely the whole
Land is defiled, and so the cause were just. But yet remember Lord, that thou
have a remnant yet left therein, that have not bowed the knee to Baal. And
consider withal, that they are a Faction principally of some few persons, as
the Prelates, that have caused such confusions in the Land. And will thou
destroy the righteous with the wicked far be that from thee. Shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? And even now do not thy People lift up strong
cries unto thee against their Egyptian Taskemasters, and Babylonian Lords? And
behold Lord what a desperate Leader this Faction has got (even as Judas was to
the Rowt) the Primate and Metropolitan of all England (those Antichristian
Titles he so much vaunteth of) who because he walks in Factious and lawless
by-ways, therefore has this Fox for his better defense gotten upon him the
Lions skin, pretending the King for the Author and Patron of all his practices.
Now the Foundations being thus cast down, what can the Righteous do? But thou
art in the holy Temple. Thy Throne is in heaven, wherein and whence thou
swayest all Scepters here below. Thou art the King of Kings, and in whose band
the Kings heart is, as the rivers of waters, turning it which way it pleases
thee. And thou have of late mercifully turned his heart to grant to his
Scottish People their ancient Christian liberty, both by freeing them from
Ceremonies, and from the High Commissions, thereby cutting shorter at least the
Horns of the Beast, in the exercise of Prelaticall Tyranny. Now o Lord be
pleased to perfect this thy work, both in Scotland and England, and throughout
all Christendom, by causing the Kings of the Earth (that formerly were as
horns to the Beast, and had given their power unto him) to hate the Whore and
strippe her naked, and that by throwing down the Hierarchy, the maine Pillar of
the Antichristian Throne, which is advanced above and against the glorious
Kingdom and Throne of our Lord Jesus Christ. And for this cause, o Lord, open
the Kings eyes clearly to see the notorious hypocrisy of his Prelate, who
under a Color of Peace and Truth, goes about to overthrow all true Peace and
Truth in his Kingdom. Let him see, o Lord, how dangerous it is to maintain or
countenance an Antichristian Faction within his Kingdom. Let him see, how
naked his Kingdom lies at this time, exposed to all the storms of heaven,
through so many crying Sins, and desperate iniquities, which the whole Land
groaneth under, ready to sink to the bottom of hell. Let him see, and be
rowsed up to a more watchful Care, and diligent attention upon the grave and
weighty affairs of a King, and especially not to commit the Care of Religion
to Romish Prelates, which are no members of the true Church of Jesus Christ.
And withal, o Lord, quicken the Kings heart with a Coal from thine Altar,
even with the zeal of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, to enter into a present
strict examination of the State of Religion, as it now stands in his Kingdom.
And because thou have in mercy stirred up, and strengthened a Servant of thine,
to discover to the King not only the great dishonor his Name sustaineth, but
the great danger his Kingdom incurreth, while such intolerable things are
suffered, as thy Servant has in his Reply laid open: Now, o Lord, let it be
thy pleasure to bring this work to a full perfection by the publishing of it,
that so both the King and his People by taking knowledge thereof may come to
see what a miserable condition they are brought into by one blind guide, and
bold Prelate. And let thy Spirit o Lord awaken and quicken the minds of the
Lords and Nobles of the King and State, to consider what a base vassalage all
those are brought under, who suffer themselves to be made slaves to serve the
lawless lusts of one domineering Primate: and at length wisely to foresee the
mischiefs, which the Altering of Religion to the worse, and reducing all back
again to Rome, may and will certainly bring upon the Land, and upon themselves
too, if not the more speedily prevented by a sound and serious through
Reformation. Make the great ones of the world, o Lord, sensible, that there is
a judgment to come, and that there is a terrible GOD above them, that shall
call them to a strict reckoning for all those ungodly practices, wherein
themselves have either been Agents, or Instruments, either Principalls, or
Accessories, as in oppressing thy Word and Truth, in persecuting thy faithful
Ministers, and the like. And Lord stir up all thy people to fervent and
continual Prayer, and strengthen them therein to persevere and watch, until
an Answer come forth from thy Throne to all their Petitions, and Supplications,
which from day to day they have and do and shall present unto thee. Oh, let not
our God be angry with his people, that pray unto him with unfeigned hearts and
lips; nor let their enemies Say, Where is now their GOD? But Lord stir up thy
strength and come and help us. Put the wicked in fear, O Lord, that they may
know themselves to be but men. And show some token upon thy servants for good,
that they which hate us, may see it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have
helped us, and comforted us. And let the Atheistical Scornful world see, that
it is not in vain to serve God, and to call upon him, and to wait for him. And
now Lord avenge the Cause of Jesus Christ against Antichrist: and break down
Antichrists throne, and exalt Christ's Throne, that himself alone may sit, and
rule, and reign over his People, and the show^ of that King may be heard among
them. And for us thy poor handmaids here humbly suppliant before thee, let thy
holy Spirit, direct, lead, and assist us in the way, which may be most
acceptable to thy Majesty and profitable for thy People, and comfortable to us
all in our distressed estate. And show unto thy Servants what thou would have
us to do in this difficult business about the presenting of this Reply to the
King, which with our selves and all thine we humbly commend to thy grace and
blessing through Jesus Christ, to whom with thee o Father, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory now and ever, Amen.


Mother. Now my dear Children, I will tell you what resolution GOD has put
into my heart, upon the very close of this Prayer: namely, that we address our
selves to the King with this Reply, together with an humble Petition. And
because all of us perhaps would be too many, let as many of you as are willing
to attend me, go with me to the King: the rest, let them go and be humble
suitors at the Throne of Grace, that our GOD would give us to find Grace in the
eyes of the King, so as hearkening to our Petition, he may do accordingly.
Such therefore of you as are willing to accompany me, stand on this side: and
the rest, stand on that side. Well, I see you are equally divided: Six with me,
and Six for me. With me, Charity, Humilty, Prudence, Piety, Patience, and
Verity: For me, Faith, Hope, Zeal, Justice, Mercy, Prayer. Now my Gracious
Children, be strong and of a good courage. Our Cause is good, and GOD is for
us; and though our enemies be great, yet they shall not prevail against us.


TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. THE TRVE CHVRCH AND CHILDREN, THE TRUE
FAITH AND RELIGION OF JESUS CHRIST do humbly present their Petition of Right.
THAT whereas a Book entitled, A Relation of a Conference between WILLIAM
LAUD, and Mr. FISHER the Jesuit, has been by the said WILLIAM, now of
Canterbury, lately republished, and that, under your Majesty's Patronage, and
in the publishing whereof (as he says) he has obeyed your Majesty: And
whereas A Reply to the said Relation is now, under the Patronage of JESUS
CHRIST, and in obedience to his Word, and by assistance of his Grace, here
published and presented to your Majesty and before all the World; in which
Reply are detected and clearly evinced, by manifold and infallible Testimonies
sundry particular passages and Doctrines of the Relator, which directly
overthrow all true Christian Faith and Religion: And whereas in this Reply is
clearly proved, that Prelaticall Government of the Church, or the Hierarchy
(as they call it) is mere Antichristianisme, and the very Mystery of Iniquity,
branded by the Apostle, and expressly forbidden by Christ himself to his
Apostles, whose Successors the Prelates falsely pretend to be; and that all
Prelates, even as they are Prelates, are both by their Profession and Practice,
so many Anti^hrists, adversaries to CHRIST, who (as the Great Antichrist) sit
as Gods in the Temple of GOD, Lording over the Faith, Soul, and Conscience of
GODS People, thrusting CHRIST out of his Throne: And whereas notwithstanding
the manifest truth hereof confirmed by most clear Testimony, and undeniable
Proofs of Scripture, the Relator, or Prelate, has in his said Relation
uttered sundry blasphemous Speeches, belying the Wisdom, Counsel, and
Providence of GOD, and of CHRIST, as making Him the Author and Ordainer of such
a Hierarchicall Government of his Church, which is to Father upon GOD and
CHRIST, a most notorious Lie and Falsehood; where he adds withal a blasphemous
New Article of Belief of the Church of England, that this is a truth: And
whereas the Holy Scriptures is and has been in all Ages, and by all Sound and
Orthodox Divines, both Ancient and Modern, both Foreign and Domestic,
universally received, held, and constantly believed and maintained against all
Adversaries of the Truth, to be the Only Rule of Faith and Judge of
Controversies in Divinity, and alone Selfe-sufficient to give Testimony to it
self, that it is the undoubted Word of GOD; as in this Reply also is fully
prooved: And whereas the Relator notwithstanding has loded the Scripture with
many intolerable repr^ohes, and blasphemous words of disgrace, censuring it as
an insufficient witness to it self, and an incompetent Judge of Controversies
in Faith, as being both a blind, dumb, and dead Judge, and that it has no
light in it self, but is as a Candle in a box without light, till, Tradition
of the present Church do light it; and the like, the very ground of all
Infidelity and Apostacy. And whereas notwithstanding all such his blasphemies
against the Scripture, wherewith he has stuffed some 30 leaves in Follio,
besides many other the like, scattered all along his Book, he, the same Relator
out of his gross hypocrisy adds this proud Blasphemy to all the rest, That
he has given the Scripture all honor, and ascribed unto it Sufficiency more
then enough: And whereas also (as appears in this Reply) the Relator belyes
and blasphemes the Holy Ghost himself, making him the Author of most notorious
lies and vanity: And whereas the Relator does define a mere false and
counterfeit Catholic Church, contrary to that Holy Catholic Church, believed
in the Creed, whereby he overthrowes both that Article of Faith, and with all
the Communion of Saints, teaching, that his Catholic Church, though it cease
to be holy, yet is a true Church of CHRIST still: And whereas of and in this
his new Catholic Church which the Relator believes, he makes the Church of
England and of Rome to be one and the same Church, and both to hold one and the
same Faith of that his Catholic Prelaticall Church (which Faith is declared
in the Reply not to be the true saving Faith) and that they both do set up and
profess one and the same Religion, not different, in which Faith and Religion
of the Church of England and of Rome (he says) as he has lived, so he
resolves to dye; as much to say, as he will live and dye an
English-Romish-Catholicke: And whereas the Replyer proves (and which no Papist
denies) that the maine substance of the Romish Religion is the Mass: And
whereas the Relator confesses, that (though a simple Papist may, as he says)
yet no Romanist, as a Romanist, living and dying in the Roman Faith can be
saved, and yet this Faith of Rome is the same with that of England, wherein he
will end his days; So as the Church of England may hereby see in what a case
she is, and how highly she is preferred by her Primate, as to be brought to be
of the same Church, the same Faith, the same Religion with Rome; enough to
startle all your Majesty's Subjects, that till now thought themselves to bo
Protestants, and no Papists; and to cause all zealous Christians to abandon all
communion with such a Church, as is the same Church, of the same Faith and
Religion with Rome: And whereas this Relator professes and teaches a blind
Charity (suitable to his Faith) which he boldly affirms to be not a mistaken
Charity, in granting, that a silly ignorant Papist, so living and dying, may be
Saved by his Ignorance in that Religion, conforming himself to his Religious
life: and on the contrary condemning such Protestants of stiffenesse and
churlishness, that are not of the same Charity with him, though the Replyer
proves, that there is no true Charity without true Faith and Verity: And
whereas the same Relator is showed in this Reply to give much more liberty to
your Majesty's Protestant People to go^ to the Romish Mass (as being with him
one and the same undiffering Religion with that of England) then the Jesuit
does to his blind Romanist, to come to the English Church: And whereas the same
Relator has many passages, wherein he makes a General Council of Prelates,
Judge in all Controversies of Faith, ascribing unto them an Infallibility; and
in case they shall err, and that even in gross things, and points of Faith,
yet that all men are bound to yield obedience, at least external, till another
General Counsel equal to the former reverse those Errors; whereupon by
Consequence of this Prelaticall doctrine (as the Replyer does instance) the
Church of England it self is bound to observe the worship of Images, and the
forbearance of the Cup in the Sacrament, etc. decreed in General Councels, and
not yet reversed by other General Councels equal to those: And whereas the
Relator calls Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and the forbearance of the Cup but
disputable and Improbable Questions (the nature of which is, to be taken
indifferently Pro and Con: And whereas he never once in all his Relation calls
the Romish-worship of Images, and of the Sacrament, or any other Idolatry in
all the Romish Church, but only by the name of Superstition, abstaining
altogether from the name of Idolatry, as if with him the Roman Church were no
Idolatresse: And whereas he much lamenteth the Separation and rent between the
Protestants and Rome, with the continuance of it; although with the Jesuit, he
confess, that error in Faith is just cause of separation: And whereas he the
same Relator does cunningly, yet palpably enough, in sundry passages of his
Book (as also he has openly done viva voce at the High-Commission-Board)
exclude all the Reformed Protestant Churches beyond the Seaes, as no Churches
of Christ, as not admitting the Hierarchy; Finally also in his Book quipping
Luther, and in him all the Reformed Churches, as having made a rent not only
from Rome with her corruptions, but even from the Catholic Church it self;
which indeed (in the Relators sense and difinition of the Catholic Church) is
most true, to wit, from the universal Hierarchy: And whereas he, the Relator,
does every where highly extol his Ceremonies in Gods worship, as without which
(he says) there is no light left to shine before men that they may see his
Devotion, and so glorify GOD, (therein most foulely and odiously perverting and
abusing the holy Text of Scripture uttered by CHRIST to a clean other purpose
as the Replyer has noted) all which Ceremonies, being a will worship after the
Tradition and Commandment of men, the Apostle does utterly condemn, as whereby
the very merits of Christ's death are made of none effect, who in his death
destroyed All Ceremonies in Religion obliging the Conscience, and not only the
Levitic^ll, but all other whatsoever of humane Ordinance, as the Replyer
clearly proves; So as it is not left to any Power on Earth to impose the
least Ceremony, (yea though it be of nature indifferent) to bind the Conscience
in the service of GOD, seeing all such imposition is Antichristian Tyranny: And
whereas all Prelaticall, Heretical, and Antichristian Faction erected by the
Prince of darkness against Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom, as is apparent
both by their profession and practice, wherein they have nothing at all, yea
not any one thing to show, wherein they resemble either Christ, or any one of
his Apostles (except Judas) Christ's Kingdom being altogether spiritual, and
not of this world, but the Hierarchy a mere carnal and worldly Kingdom,
only gilded over with the bare name of spiritual: And whereas the Relator
throughout his whole Book bewrays his most palpable and profound ignorance,
and notorious blindness in the whole mystery of Faith and all true divinity,
in so much as when ever he Cites Scripture, he still perverts it to a wrong
sense, and is not able to bring any proof either from Scripture, or Common
Reason (except from some of his Jesuiticall Authors) for any of his Paradoxes
and strange doctrines, delivering all without Book, tanquam e Cathedra, as but
of some Papal unerring Chair, upon the Authority of his bare word, and upon
mere trust: And whereas the Relator says, That worth once misled, is of all
other the greatest misleader, and who of greater worth in the Church of
England, and in the Esteem of Great ones too, then the Great Primate himself,
whose very word with many is taken as a divine Oracle; So as if the Church and
State of England will but pin their souls upon this Leaders sleeve, he will
not fail to lead them in that way, the issue whereof (seem it never so right
in the eyes of credulity) will certainly prove to be (as Solomon says) the
ways of death: And whereas by the Relator, sundry occasions are ministered to
the Replyer of instancing diverse practices charged upon the Prelate, as the
principal Agent or Instrument of setting up sundry Innovations in Religion in
the Church of England, all which have been done under his Primacie; as, The
republishing under your Majesty's Name, the Book for liberty of profane Sports
on the Lords day, with pressing Ministers to read the Said Book in their
several Congregations, and upon refusal, extremely persecuting them, and
thrusting them from their Ministry and means, with their poor wives and
children; The authorizing and licencing of some Doctors Books, which cry down
the Morality of the 4 th Commandment for the Sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath
day* The setting forth of a New Order to restrain Preachers from Preaching in
the Afternoones on the Lords days, much pressed by the Prelates and their
Officers in all their visitations: The setting forth of a Declaration in your
Majesty's Name, prefixed to the Articles of Religion, which the Prelates
practices plainly interpret to be for the restraining, and prohibiting
altogether the Doctrines of Saving Grace to be preached, and wherein the
genuine sense of those Articles touching Grace (which formerly were universally
interpreted to have but one sense agreeable to the Scripture) is confounded
with the heterodox heretical doctrines of the Pelagians and Arminians, so as
none can tell what to make of those Articles, saving that by this means the
Orthodox Ministers must not preach the truth, and the Adverse party and Faction
may find footing and countenance for their groundless and graceless heresies,
and all this to the manifest dishonor of the Word of Grace, the distraction of
good Ministers, and the destruction of many thousand souls; The pressing and
setting up of Altars, attended with sundry adorations, images, crucifixes, to
the open Scandal of many, and for non-admittance whereof, with other
Innovations, or rather Renovations of old Popish Relics, many good Ministers
and people of GOD have deeply suffered; by all which practices and sundry more,
the Replyer has plainly and particularly proved, how the very Foundations of
Faith and Christian Religion are not only terribly shaken, but razed, and
ruined, so as the very Foundations of the earth do tremble withal, and more
especially, how not only by unmoralizing of the 4 th Commandment (whereby the
Floodgates of all profaneness are broken up) and the uncannonizing (as it
were) or making void of the doctrines of grace, but by the setting up of
Altars, with all their Service and Ceremonies, is an absolute denying and
renouncing of Jesus Christ our only Altar, as the Replyer has showed at
large: And whereas notwithstanding terrible persecutions (if it be lawful to
call a Spade a Spade) have followed upon these Innovations, which have fallen
most heavy upon the faithful Ministers and their Families, yet the said
Relator (whether out of notorious hypocrisy* or egregious malice, or both) is
not afraid to abuse the Sacred Name of GOD, nor ashamed to cast a mist before
the open eyes of all the world, saying, * GOD forbid, I should ever offer to
persuade a Persecution in any kind, or practice it in the least; whereas, if
Persecution be Persecution, whether he has persuaded to it, or diswaded,
perhaps your Majesty can tell; and how little he has practiced it, thousands
have sufficiently felt: And whereas the Replyer upon occasion by the Relator,
has declared fully the Tragical Story of the Cause, Censuring, and suffering
of a late Minister of the Gospel (depriving him of his Ministry and all
worldly comforts) and all for the mere discharge of his Ministerial duty, in
admonishing his people of such dangerous Innovations, as were then creeping,
yea and crowding into many Churches; for the which he has been so terribly
censured, and still suffers both closse Imprisonment and Punishment, with
Divorcement and Separation from wife, and children, and all friends whatsoever,
as a man buried quick in a Marble Tomb of perpetual Calamity, the very Image
of hell; such an Example as no age, no history, sacred or profane is able to
parrallell, that a man should be so terribly Censured, and that upon this very
ground, that he would not do that, whereby he should assent to the condemning
of his Cause before the hearing his Answer in Court for Defense of his Cause
being wholly precondemned by the two Judges, as impertinent and Scandalous: And
whereas notwithstanding the Relator does still insult, trample upon, and
imbitter his ink with gall, blacking the innocent with foul reproaches, whom
all the Court could not charge with the least offense or crime, but that they
said, he was too bitter, which he gave good reason for: And whereas the cry of
innocent blood both of that Servant of Christ, and of his Companions, is gone
up to heaven against the whole Land, pleading and clayming Justice at that High
and righteous Throne, so as heaven and earth are troubled with the cry, which
will not be appeased, till Justice be done: And whereas GOD has put into your
Majesty's hand, both the word of his Truth, as the only Rule whereby to
reform all errors and corruptions wherewith his worship is profaned; and the
Sword of Justice to vindicate the Cause of the oppressed Innocents: And whereas
so great a work, as the Reformation of Religion is above the Spheere of any
ordinary Court of your Kingdom, so as even the Honorable Board of
Star Chamber disclaymed that Office, where the said Innocent standing before
them desired Justice in that behalf; yea and is too heavy a burden to lie
upon the Kings shoulders alone, and much more as the case now stands in such a
perplexity of things, and universality of corruptions, which as a leprosy has
overspread the whole body of the Land: And seeing Christian, Prudent, Grave and
Pious Princes use not upon the first sound or sight, to slight, or reject as
fables or flashes of some brainsick man, such deep charges as the Replyer
here presents, and presses hard upon the Relator by such sound and
demonstrative arguments, and which do so nearely concern the State of the
whole Land, which (by reason of Prelaticall outrages, seconded with the
publication of the said Relation, the very Portent of Confusion) lies now a
bleeding: And whereas the contempt of just complaints, and neglect of Justice
in such Cases of so high a nature, would necessarily argue, that men have sold
themselves, as having made a covenant with death (as the Prophet speaks) and
an agreement with hell, being justly given up of GOD to d^struction, as in the
case of Amasiah King of Judah, who threatening the Lords Prophet for reprooving
him, 1 Chronicles. 25.
the Prophet replied, Now I know that God has determined to destroy thee,
because thou have not hearkened to my Counsel; even as it came to pass a
little after in the same Chapter, Amasiah would not hear; for it came of God,
that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought
after the Gods of Edom: as the Prelate professes for the Church of England one
Faith and Religion with Rome: And whereas the Hierarchy being an Antichristian
Kingdom, shall perish with Antichrist, and all they together, that support and
confederate with it against Christ's Kingdom, his Gospel, and Truth, as the
Relator does in his Book; So as to suffer such a Rebel against Christ (as the
Replyer has proved him to be) and much more to Patronize him and his work,
were to maintain open war against heaven, and to make your Majesty guilty of
all those blasphemies and heresies in it; which GOD forbid: And whereas to whom
much is committed, of him much shall be required, and the Office of Kings is of
all other highest on earth, and therefore God will require the strictest
account of them, and the more, where the light of the Gospel has also
clearly shined forth, leaving no place for pleading ignorance, it being lo the
honor of Kings to search out a matter (as Solomon says) thoroughly to inquire
into the Cause brought before him, and therein to do exact and impartial
justice, much less committing the Cause to be judged by the Adversary or
Party, but to judge righteous judgment: And whereas GOD has sent of late
sundry fearful signs from heaven, as warning-pieces to England, to awaken
the State thereof to a more deep consideration of the condition, wherein it
stands obnoxious unto, and naked before that dreadful Judge for her most
notorious and hideous crying sins, iniquities, transgressions and impieties in
all kinds, and in the highest degree, and to lay down her high pride, and
selfe-confidence, and gyant-like daring in lifting her self up against Jesus
Christ and his High-Throne, in oppressing and trampling upon his sacred Word,
and Ministers, and People; least by standing out in open defiance against God,
and in the defense and maintenance of her Rebellion with a high hand, God be
provoked altogether to confound her; So as (if a more mature Reformation of
such hideous enormities, whereof the Relator is here, by the Replyer,
convinced, be not seriously thought of, and speedily and effectually put in
execution) to be secure in looking for Peace, or any Good, (not having thus
made peace with God) were but to bewray a mind desperate, and past all hope of
remedy: And lastly, whereas the Replyer to all these his high Charges upon the
Relator has (for some special reasons to himself) not set his Name (it being
neither out of any distrust of the goodness of his Cause, nor yet fear of men
by others Example) when as your Majesty shall be pleased to send forth your
Royal Edict, commanding that the Repyer (whoever he be) come forth and appear
to make proof of all his Allegations against the Relator, assuring him of an
equal, just, and fair unpartiall hearing in such a Court of Justice, as the
Replyer himself shall nominate, and appeal unto, which is not, cannot be
less, then the most High and Honorable Court of Parliament, which the
necessity of things, so nearely concerning the whole Land, does with all
importunity call for; he (the Replyer) will then be ready ( God giving him life
and health) in all humble duty and allegiance to present himself, and
personally face to face, before the Honorable Court (by the assistance of that
Grace, which first set him aworke, and enabled him to finish it) make good his
whole Reply against the Relator.

It would therefore please your most Excellent Majesty (the weighty Premises
seriously consi^ered, and upon your mature Revisall of this Reply, or at least
of the brief contents thereof prefixed to the Reply, with the eye of your
soundest and sollidest judgment, directed by the wisdom of Gods own Spirit,
which has the hearts of Kings in his all-swaying hand, and for vindicating of
Gods glory, and your own honor, so deeply suffering in the forenamed respects,
and for staying of Gods hand stretched out, and the preventing of further
calamities) not only to take to heart, and into your Royal hand the speedy
reformation of such things, as have been done (and all in your Majesty's Name
still; for that must bear all the burden) since the Relators Primacy: as
namely in the first place, to send forth your Royal Edict for the taking down
of all Altars (which where ever they stand, do stand in open defiance against
Christ) another, for the calling in of your Book for Sports on the Lords days:
a third, for the calling in of your Declaration before the Articles of
Religion: a fourth, for the calling in of all Orders for the restraint of
Preaching: a fifth, for the restoring in Integrum, that is, not only to their
Ministry and Charge, but to their liberty in Christ from the bondage both of
Prelates and Ceremonies, all those godly Ministers, who out of Co^scien^e and
duty toward God, and not out of any disrespect, or much less disloyalty
toward your Majesty, for refusing to read the said Book, have been by the
Prelates thrust out of all: a Sixth (if not the First) for the quite releasing
and setting at full liberty your three poor banished Prisoners, that the loud
cry of their oppressions break not through the walls and bars, and roofes of
their straight enclosure to the piercing of the heavens, and the provoking of
their wrath to dart down the thunderbolt of Divine revenge to the blasting of
the beauty of your State, while (as a tall Ceder, or sturdy Oak) it stoutly
lifts it self up on high, as if it would threaten heavens throne: and lastly,
all this done (without which what can prosper?) and that you may make your
Peace with GOD, as you have done with Scotland, to Proclaim a Public Fast
with Prayer and Humiliation, for the deprecating of Gods high displeasure for
what is past, and the procuring of his favor and blessing upon you and your
Kingdom: and thereupon send forth your Royal writs for the calling of a
Parliament for the redressing and removing of the maine Causes of all the
disorders and enormities in the Church and State: So shall your Kingdom be
established, and your Crown flourish in abundance of Peace and Prosperity to
your Majesty, and your Royal Posterity, which the Petitioners, the true Church
and Children, the true Faith and Religion of Jesus Christ will never be wanting
to solicit the throne of Grace for.

THE CONTENTS OF THE PRINCIPAL PASSAGES IN THIS ENSUING REPLY; For the King.
AND first to the Relators Epistle Dedicatory.
The left hand Figure notes the Page of the Relators Book: the right hand the
Replyers.

L. page 1. HOw the Prelate by pinning his Book upon the Kings Patronage, does
thereby expose him to the peril of being guilty of patronizing all the
blasspemies and falsities therein, page 2. 2. What Truth, and how the Prelate
seeks it, ibid. 7. What use the Prelate makes of Gods restoring him from his
Fever, p. 3. 7. What he means by the Scandalous and Scurrilous pens of some
bitter men, with a short Narration of their Cause, and Tragical suffering,
ibid. Notorious Hypocrisy of the Prelate, and taking Gods name in vain, page
3, and 4.6.8. Prelates mercies exceed all Heathen cruelty, 6. A strange
Precedent without Precedent, to censure a Man, because he would not consent to
the condemning of his Cause before the Hearing, 7. The Prelate Shrewdly put to
it for his blood-guiltinesse, and shameless hypocrisy, 7, 8. A newfound Art,
under color of Answering Jesuits, to strike a leagve with Popery, 9. 7. The
Prelates notorious perverting of Scripture, which is retorted upon himself by
a true Application, 10, 11, 12. 7. Gods Ministers for sharp, and particular
reproving of sin and sinners, proved not to be Libellous, nor Scandalous; by
many examples, 11, 12, 13. How Prelates, with the High Priests and Pharisees
are guilty of all the blood of the Saints, shed from Abel hitherto, 15, 16.
True marks of a Minister of Christ extraordinarily raised up of God, ibid. 7.
What kind of Men the Prelates Divines of worth and Note be, 16, 17. How the
Prelate publishes his Book to vindicate his Reputation, and with whom, ibid.
7. A Prosopopaeia, representing the Prelates Divines speaking to him, 17, 18.
7. The Prelate selfe-deluded by the unanimous Councels of his Divines, as Ahab
was by his false Prophets, 19. The Prelates Book like Caesar's sacrifice, ibid.
The Replyers Council to the Prelate, 19. The Prelates Book how reprobate
Silver, 21. The Mystery of burning Salis his Devotions opened, 20. How the
Prelates Tract needs leading into the light, 21. 11. Notorious hypocrisy of a
most persecuting Prelate, detected as most detestable, 21, 22. worse then that
of Stephen Gardener and Bonner, ibid. The Prelate sore pressed with sundry
Scriptures by the Replyer, 23, 24. A notable Prophecy of Scripture against the
Anti Sabbatarians in these days, 24. How the Prelate takes Gods Name in vain,
25. Difference between Romes Fishermen, and Christ's, 26 to 30. The Prelates
subtle laying all the Load upon the King, what ever be amiss, 29, 30. Good
Laws may sleep, ibid. What he means by the wakening of Discipline, ibid. 12.
The Prelates meaning of Anglers in a shallower water fished out, 29. And how
they differ from Romes Fishers. The Prelates Council to the King how perilous
in his sly and subtle enticing him against godly Preachers. The Prelates sly
Speeches in some Cases, how best interpreted by his Practices. And how and what
he Councelleth the King, 29, 30. Perilous Consequences of Prelates practices
in altering of Religion, how considerable for States. 30, 31. The Prelate put
to his proof, whether he loves the Kings Crown, or the Prelates Miter better,
32. 13. Prelate how condemned of the Same Scripture by himself alleged, 32,
33. How the Prelate is an Enemy to the Gospel, and to the preaching of it, 33.
What be the Prelates Foundations of Faith, and how shaken, 34. How the Prelates
Practices not only shake, but quite overthrow the true Foundations of Faith:
and that by his own Instances, wherein he is selfe-condemned, and his palpable
hypocrisy detected, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Altars overthrow the Foundation
Christ, 35. 13, 14. The Prelates comparison of the Church to a Hive of Bees
Scanned: so as nothing is left him but the Sting, 40, 41, 42, 43. Prelates and
their Clergy no true Order of Priesthood, 41. The Prelate calls his
Hypocrisy, Integrity and Sincerity. The great difference between the King, and
the Prelates Priest, about the Be hive, 41, 42. And how perilously they are
joined together by the Prelate, 43, 44, What Integrity of the Church in
Doctrine and Manners we may expect, when the Prelate, or his Priest, is joined
to the King in Reformation, 45. Two places of Scripture vindicated from the
Prelates perverting of them, and whereby himself is stung, for being too busy
about the Bee-hive, 46, 47. For what good Service the Prelates Priest, meddling
with the Bee-hive, is stung by the true Bees, 48, 49. The Prelates Church in
England, together with Rome, wherein fallen from the ancient Catholic Faith, in
maintaining Doctrines of Devils: And what the true Catholic Faith i^, 51. The
Prelaticall Church in England how Antichristian, and what Antichristianisme is.
52, 53, 54, 55, 56. The Mystery of Iniquity in the Prelacy, ibid. The place in
John (1 John 2.22.) vindicated against Jesuits and Prelates: and thereby
Prelates proved to be Antichrists, in that they deny Jesus to be the Christ,
that is, King, Priest, and Prophet: distinctly proved, 56, 57, 58, 59. No
Priest, but Christ, ever had power to forgive sins, 58. The true Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas vindicated to be true Churches of Christ, against the
Prelate, 62. And Prelaticall Churches proved to be false Churches, ibid. 16.
Who have cause to cry out of persecution, the Prelat's Jesuit, Or his
Seperatist, 63. What Cause the Prelate gives of Separation from his Church,
which he says is the Same with Rome, 64. And wherein, ibid. The Prelates
Riddle, 65. In how many paritculars these two Sisters are alike, yea one and
the same, 64, 66, 67, 68. And so how the Prelates Church in England being one
and the same with that of Rome, must needs be a false Church, 69. How the
Prelate overthrows all the learned works of the Orthodox English Divines,
ibid. 17. The Prelates blasphemous putting a most notorirus lie upon Christ,
70. What Interpretation of Scripture we may expect from Prelates, whereof his
Church consists, 71. The Prelate selfe-condemned, as a most notorious forcer,
and perverter of Scripture, where ever he does but touch it with his finger,
ibid. What need there is of the Prelates Oracle in settling the true sense of
the 39. Artcles, which under his Primacy have been declared doubtful, and of a
double sense, 72. What cause we have to expect an Index Expurgatorious from the
Prelate to purge the writings of all our Oxthodox Divines against the Church of
Rome, ibid. 18. How the Prelate without his Prophesying, does by his practice
hale in Atheism and Irreligion, 73, 74. What we are still to understand, when
the Prelate names Truth, etc. 74. What he He calls an unworthy way of
contending for Truth: which we must contend for notwithstanding against such
Adversaries, 75. What is that Atheism, and Irreligion properly which the
prelate names and means, 75. 19. The Prelates external will worship, what
it is a Great Witness of, 76, 77. The prelates swelling pride and conceit of
His Will Worship, 77, 78. All Will Worship expressly forbidden in the Scripture.
It is no Service of God, but of man's lust, ibid. The prelates upright heart
down right hypocrisy, 79. The prelates notorious and bold perverting of
Christ's words to His own blind Devotion, 78. How God is dishonored by the
prelates will worship, 79, 80 The prelates Sincerity in Religion how it drives
conscientious men from Communion with His English Church, 81. The prelate how
clearly he deals with His Majesty, 82. What is with the Prelate Decent, and
what orderly Settlement in the worship of God, 83, 84, 85. Sundry Innovations,
or rather Renovations under the primat. ib. Of Ceremonies in Gods worship. Of
Natural, Moral, and Religious Actions, how they differ in point of Ceremony,
87. Prelates Ceremonial worship Heretical, 88. What Heresy is, ibid. Christ
the only Master of Ceremonies in Gods service, 88. How this is an Article of
our Faith, 8^. Christ never imparted this His Prerogative, or any part thereof,
to any Humane Power, 90. The Apostles words for Deceny and Order (1 Cor. 14.40)
cleared from Prelaticall perverters, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94. Prelates Pretense for
Antiquity of His Ceremonies absurd, 94, 95, 96. Prelates Cerremonies will fit
neither Time nor Place, but as they are forced, wherein the Prelate is too
zealous and forward, 97. What rubbes and tough knots the Prelate meets withal
about His Ceremonies, 98. And how He has been crossed since his Crucifying of
His Three bitter men, and why? and how? 99. The Prelates practice not so
politic, as Julians was, 98. Even Mediocrity in Ceremonies is an Extreme, 99.
So as the very least overburthens the Church of Christ, ibid. How the Prelate
had need to fit His Ceremonies, some for Summer, and some for Winter, for
overburthening His Priest, 100. The Replyer requires of the Prelate a just
number of so many Ceremonies, so as they may neither overburthen, nor leave his
Service naked, 100, 101. The Prelate like the Pharisees in binding burdens on
others, ib. How the Prelate needs many Ceremonies, as Herbs to straw the way to
the celebrating of the marriage between England and Rome, ibid. How the
Prelates Service is naked, without his Ceremonies, 1^2 Prelates pompous Service
condemned by the Heathen, 102, 103 The Leviticall Pomp, as a Type, altogether
abolished by Christ, 105. Adam more glorious in his innocent nakedness, then
with his devised Fig Leaves, how applied to the Prelaticall Church, 103, 104.
Prelates Service sensual and heathenish, as done to an unknown God; fully
displayed, 104. Prelates pompous Ceremonies like the Cardinals Sumpter, 105. No
necessity of Prelates Ceremonies, since both Superstitious, and Superfluous,
saving that they are all the Substance of their Religion, 106, 107. True
Reformation ought to have no Ceremonies at all to bind the Conscience, 107.
Prelates Ceremonies strengthen Superstition and Idolatry, and destroy true
piety. 108. What is that Substance of Religion, which Prelates Ceremonies do
fence, 106, 107. And what strength they add to his Religion, how it is
weakness not to see, 108. Prelates Ceremonies are beggarly Rudiments: yea
Egyptian bonds, and Babilonish Chains, 108. How by the Prelates Ceremonies so
eagrely urged, the Jesuits win ground. 108, 109. Romes Reconciliation hastened
by hossing up wodden Altars, and hurling down golden Ministers, 109. The
Jesuits hale in Popery through the Prelates broad Gates he has laid open,
ibid. 21. How the Prelate has laid open the wider-gates of his Catholic
Church by pulling down the walls and bulwarks of Christ's true Church, 109. The
Prelates wider-Gates whither they lead, 110. The Prelate has nothing to do
with the true Faith, nor Communion with the true Saints, ibid. He perverteth
the Scripture (Jude 3.) falsely applying the Saints Faith to his boundless
Catholic Church, 110. What Truth the Prelate professes, and with what
singleness of heart, 110, 111. And his notorious hypocrisy in deluding the
King, 111. The Prelate puts all his Book upon the King, as published in
obedience to his Majesty's command, ibid. What we may expect from the Prelate,
who resolves to dye in that Faith, wherein he has lived, ibid. And so what
hope he can have of Gods favor, 112.
THE CONTENTS OF THE MAINE POINTS AND PASSAGES IN THIS ensuing Reply to the
Relation it self.
2. WHat is that Church, whose judgment the Prelate would have the people to
depend upon, 113. And not to be too busy with Seripture, but moderately, in
things obvious, 114. How the Prelate yields the Jesuit this, that the Church
of Rome is a true Church, on whose judgment people must depend, 115. The
Prelate a Subtle underminer of the Truth. 116. 4. The papal Church holds no
one point of Saving Truth, ibid. 23. How the Prelate vants himself for the
great Champion of the Church of England, 117. 29. How the Prelate overthrows
Christ, while he makes things, not Fundamental in the Faith, necessary to some
men's Salvation, but tells us not who those be, 117, 118. 31. How the Prelate
can bind all men to peace by his Churches Declaration: yea though it be not the
Churches, 118. The dangerous Consequences hereof, 119. 32. The Prelate
selfe-condemned, for adding things contrary, and detracting things necessary,
120. 35. How (against the Prelate) things considered in the manner of Being
only, are fundamental in the Faith. Instanced in sundry particulars, 120,
121. The many absurd consequences of Popish Reall-presence, ibid. 37. How the
Prelate makes things, which are fundamental in the Faith, not to be so to all
men, 122. See 117.118. If the Prelate do at all discern what the true Faith
is, what use he makes of it, 122. 39. How the Prelate falsifies Lyrinencis, and
is loath to English some of his words, 123. If the Church of Rome be Lupanar
Errorum, a Stews of Errors, 'twere good that all should know her in plain
English to be so, to avoid her, though the Prelate be loath English men should
know it, ibid. How the Prelate applauds the Jesuit Stapleton in a gross point
of Popery, whom Dr. Whitakers in the Chair at Chambridge confuted, 124. How
therein the Prelate prefers Stapleton before Bellarmine, who comes nearer to
the Truth, ibid. 40. How the Prelate is justly as an Enemy to Assurance of
Salvation, and so of true Saving Faith, 124. 43. How the Prelate makes it
whether for a penny, Belief of Scripture, or the Creed, has the Precedencie
of a Prime Principle of Faith, 125. 44. The Prelate allows some Traditions for
Apostolic, though not fundamental in the Faith, ibid. 45. The Prelates Faith
of Christ's Descent into hell; which Article is by the Replyer discussed, 126,
to 129. 47.48. For default of examining the Articles of the Creed by Scripture,
the Prelate overthrows two Articles, The Catholic Church and the Communion of
Saints, 129. 51. Notwithstanding the Prelate, we ought boldly and publicly to
affirm The Truth against error, 132. 53. The Prelate submits the Faith of the
Church of England, to the judgment of the Fathers, whether her Articles be
according to Scripture. How by those Fathers he is condemned, 132, 133. With
what limitation the Church, within the first 400, or 500. years may be said to
have been at the best, 133, 134. How the Replyer declines the occasion of
entering into a comparison between the truly Reformed Protestant Churches, and
that within the first 500. years after the Apostles, 134. Conformity to Popish
Rites a Pretense to bring Papists to Church, as the Christians anciently
entertained Heathen manners, to draw them to be Christians, 134. Augustine
complained of Ceremonies then, when (if the Prelate say true) the Church was at
the best, ibid. 62. The Prelates false professed Faith concerning the
Catholic Church in the Creed, which he defines to be the Society of all
Christians, 135. 66. How the Prelate jumpes with Bellarmine, for a word of God
as well unwritten, as written, 135, 136, 137. Baptism of Infants a Doctrine of
Scripture, not an unwritten Tradition. We ought to repair to Scripture in all
doubts of Faith, 137. 72, 73. How the Prelates words, not well examined, may
make us believe, he is no Arminian, but Orthodox in the Doctrine of Grace:
while he abuses the Scripture most palpably and grossly, 138, 139. 75, 76. What
the place and office of natural Reason is in judgeing of Scripture: against
the Prelate magnifying natural Reason to the vilifying of Scripture: the
blindness and vanity thereof in judging of Divine things, and matters of
Faith, 140, 141, 142, 143. Unsanctified Reason how it judges the Scripture to
be false, 143. How the Prelate is put to his natural Reasons pregnancy in
matters of Faith, 1^2. 77. The Prelates extreme blindness or malice, in saying
The Scripture is strengthened with probable Arguments from the light of Nature,
and humane Testimony to convince men, without which it is not so
demonstratively evident of it self, 144. At large confuted, 14^, to 149. A
secret power in Scripture convincing a natural man in the reading or hearing
of it preached, that it is the very word of God, 148, 149, 150. See also, A
motion of the Replyer to the Prelate, how he shall make trial of the
Scriptures powerful sufficiency, to convince him, that it is the word of God,
149. A comparison of the Scripture with the Sun, 151. Gods word preached, and
not Church-Tradition, the ordinary prime motive and instrument of Faith.
Illustrated by pregnant Comparisons. ib. 83. How the Prelate hangs the Belief
of Scripture to be the word of God, necessarily upon the Authority of the
present Church, and other such poor inducements, all but mere probabilities,
which may beget opinion, but never belief, 152, 153, 154, 155. All examined,
and proved to be mere vanity: in all which the Prelate destroys all Faith,
and hope of Salvation, 156. also 157. In what sense and way only a Natural
Man being led by the Prelates hand, as of the present Church to read the
Scripture, may be induced to believe it is the very word of GOD, 154. 84.
Further notorious blasphemies of the Prelate in derogating from Scripture, as
having no light, but as a candle in a box of 12 in the pound, till Tradition of
the present Church do light it: Examined, 157 158, 159. How the Prelate
perverts the Scripture, and puts out the light of it, 157. Other blasphemies of
the Prelate against the Scripture, Gods word, and the Holy Ghost, making his
Church-Tradition the eyes inlightner, 159, 160, 161. Gods own voice in
Scripture read and preached, begets belief, that it is Gods word, 161.
85. The Prelates prosecution of this Argument in advancing his present Church
Authority, further confuted, 162, 163. 85, 86. A Subtle and Sly evasion of the
Prelate from the Jusuites true objection, 164. A pretty trick of Legerdemain,
195. Scriptures full light teaches a perfect knowledge: against the Prelates
Evasion, 165, 166. 87. The Prelates perverting of Scripture in his Babylonish
confounding the Historical, with the Saving and justifying Faith (as he
always does) and another Scripture, in confounding the regenerate with the
unregenerate, 166. to 170. Whereupon the Replyer adds a notable Discourse of
the nature of true Saving Faith, 170, to 174: as namely of its admirable
operations in the several faculties of the Soul, with its excellency, etc.
The Prelate Contradicts himself, not knowing whereof he affirms. Saving that
by Faith he ever means a false Faith, whereby he destroys the true, 173.
The Sure belief of Scripture is a Christians sure comfort in trouble, 172,
173. 88. Hookers Sensible Demonstration so applauded by the Prelate, thoroughly
scanned, and soundly proved to be false by most evident Demonstrations, proving
the Scripture to prove it self Gods word, 174, to 177. The Prelates Ground
from Nature, being applied to Scripture, proved false: and Christ's Saying,
which the Prelate objecteth, cleared, 177, 178. 89. Hookers stating of the
Question, commended by the Prelate, for Tradition, as the Key to open the
Entrance to Scripture, proved false in the Prelates sense, and that Key to be a
false pick-lock, 178, 179. 91. How the Prelate in charging the Pope for
usurping Lordship over the world, is taken tardy for doing the like himself
over All England contrary to S. Peter's rule, alleged by the Prelate 180. 93.
What assistance Lawfully sent Pastors and Teachers have ordinarily of God,
180.181. 95. The Prelate selfe-condemned, ibid. 98. The Prelate belyes the
Scripture, to credit his Church-Tradition, 182. Scripture little heholden to
the Prelates Church-Tradition, ib. His bold belying the Scripture, as if that
gave Authority to his usurped Church-Tradition, ib. The Prelate caught in his
own Delemma, or Net, ibid. A Solecisme of the Prelate, ibid. 100. The Prelate
maliciously yoakes the precise party (as he calls it) with the Jesuit, only
making that 10 times worse, 183, 184. The precise party, with the Prelates
factious silence Ministers, vindicated from his wicked and false reproaches,
184, 185, 186. The Prelates 3 marks of his imagined Author of Ipswich News,
186. The Prelates hypocritical words, and desperate deeds for Preaching, how
they agree, and his cursed hypocrisy cried shame of by his infamous practices,
187. The Prelate knows not what true Preaching means, 188. Difference between
true Sermons, and the Preachers, for infallibility, ibid. The Prelates
Diabolical malice against the true Preachers of Gods word, 189. The Replyer at
length forced by the Prelate to answre his compari-tween the Ancient Fathers,
and the best modern Reformed Dison be vines, for Preaching, 190, 191. Other
Cavils of the Prelate answered, 192, 193. 104. The Prelate perverteth the
Fathers, to uphold Tradition still, which they were against, to the Prelates
sense, 194, 195, 196. Prelates Popish pretense of Scriptures deepnesse, to draw
men from them, to seek to the Oracles of the present Church Tradition, 196, to
199. With the mischiefs that may follow upon it, ibid. The Prelates Popish
zeal noted by occasion, in his forcing all Bibles to be bound with Apochrypha,
196, 197. How the Prelate overthrows a true Principle and Maxim, by a false,
198. Grace makes Supernatural truth more evident, then Nature does the
Natural, 199. 106. Another excellent discourse of Saving Faith, occasioned by
the Prelate, bewraying his profound ignorance herein, 200, 201, 202. The
Prelates bold belying and blaspheming Gods secret Councels, 202. The Prelates
broad blind Popish way, 203. Fully confuted, 203, 204. 109. Prelate again
blasphemeth in belying Gods Councels, 205. 1^6. The Prelate hangs the Credit of
Scripture upon man's opinions of Gods sufficiency, ibid. Man's opinion of Gods
sufficiency how vain, blind, and impotent, 206. The Prelate himself proved
to have a blind opinion of God, and of his Sufficiency, and consequently he is
an Infidel, not believing the Scripture to be Gods word, 207, 108. as which
(says he) depends on man's opinion of Gods sufficiency. 111. The Prelate still
detracts from Scripture all along. 208. 113. By the Prelates Doctrine, the
Faith of all the Apostles, Martyrs, ancient Fathers, and Doctors, which know no
such Tradition of the present Church as a necessary prime inducement to lead
them to the belief of Scripture to be Gods word, is Heretical and
Schismatic, 206, 210. Ergo the Prelaticall Church Schismatic and
Heretical. 115. Most notorious blasphemy of the Prelate against the Holy
Ghost, making him the Author of falsehood: as is showed, 211, 212, 213, 214.
Sundry probable Reasons laid down by the Replyer, why the Prelate should, as he
does, choose the light of nature, as the Second to his Church Tradition, to
introduce belief of Scripture to be Gods word, and of God to be God, 212, 213.
No reverend persuasion of Scripture had, till first the Tradition of of the
present most Reverend Father commend it as Laudable, 212. How the Prelate
dallies with Romish Idolatry, 211. How the Prelate hangs man's belief of God,
as of Scripture, upon his Church Tradition, 212. 116* The Prelates good
inclination to man's free will in believing. The Prelates notorious and gross
hypocrisy pretending respect to the Scripture to be the motive of his tedious,
vain groundless and gracec^ss^ discourse in disgracing and vilifying of it
altogether, and that as g^osly, as ever any ^esui^e did, 215, 216. The Prela^es
most wick^d perverting and abusing of Scripture, 216 W^o are his Christianly
d^sposed men, whom in his Discourse he ^nd^avoureth to satisfy, ibid. 118. A
nimble shift and put off of the Prelates, 217. The absurbity of his Comparison
of his Church-Tradition to the morning Light detected, and showed to halt
downright of all four, 217, 218. The Prelate still unreasonably inculcates
his Church-Tradition, 218, 219. He is brought into a Circle, 219. 121. The
Prelates Whimsey, sucked in from the Popish School, That Divinity has a
Science about it: confuted, 219, 220. What true Divinity properly is, ibid.
122. The Prelate selfe-condemned, while his leaning too much upon Tradition,
may mislead Christians, 221, The Prelate still prosecutes his Tradition, ibid.
His misapplying of his Schoole-distintion, 222, 223, 224. Shoole-distinctions
must be well examined by Scripture, 224. 125. The Prelate calls the Protestants
Separation from Popery a miserable rent, which he lamenteth with a bleeding
heart, 225, 226. His vanity discovered, ibid. A most shameful, or rather
shameless lie of the Prelate detected, 226. His blasphemous lie that he has
given the Scripture more then enough, 227. The Prelate confesses he goes the
same way with the Jesuit for Church-Tradition, ibid. A subtle and sly
insinuation of the Prelate detected of vanity, ibid. The only difference
between the Prelate and Jesuit about Tradition noted, 228. 128. The Prelate
vaunting the Roman Church to be a true Church with his reasons confuted, 229,
2^0, 231, 232, 233, 234. Rome holds neither Word nor Sacraments: Ergo no true
Church. 131, 132. The Prelates privy nipping, and pretty quipping of Luther,
and in him all the Reformed Protestant Churches, as seperating from Rome not
only as it was then false, but as once formerly true, 236. And so he shuts
them out as Seperatists from the true Catholic Church as ^e accounts ^t,
ibid* 133. How tenderly the Prelate touches Rome for her Superstition and
error, and not once in all his Book charging her with Idolatry* 23^. Who be
the Prelates best men, who (he says) most bemone his miserable rent, ibid.
Reconciliation of true Protestants with Rome impossible, ibid. The vanity of
the Prelates Apology for the Protestants about the Rent, 238. The Synagogue of
Rome and her Corruptions are grown into one entire body, ibid. 135. The Prelate
no observer of his own Law, in interpreting of words, ibid. The Prelates vain
condition to the Jesuit about Reconciliation with Rome, 238, 239. Why the
Prelate so names The Great Sacrament of the Eucharist, 239. 136. True
Protestants protest against such damnable Corruptions of Rome, as the Prelate
accounts essential parts of his Catholic Church, ibid. 138. Why the Replyer
has so sharpened his style against the Prelate, 241 The Example of Irenaeus
arguing with Victor, declared and retorted upon the Prelate concerning
Ceremonies, 241, 242, 243. 140. The Prelate believes, that though his whole
Militant Church cease to be holy, yet she is a Church of Christ still, 245,
confuted to 251. The Prelates Militant Church, why so called. It is the
Malignant and Antichristian Church, 251, 252. The Prelate implies, his Militant
Church may fall from the Foundation, and cease to be holy, and become
Heretical, and an Assembly of Heretics, ibid. The true difference between the
Prelates false Militant Church, and of the only True, ibid. Christ's true
Militant Church connot fall from the Foundation. A notable instance and
demonstration, showing that denyers of the Christian Sabbath day to be
commanded in the 4th Commandment, is an overthrowing of a fundamental point
of Faith, and consequently of the whole Faith, 248, 249. A clear Declaration
of the Sabbath day commanded in the 4th Commandment, and applied to us
Christians, 248, 249, 250. How far in this and other points of faith the
Prelates Church of England is fallen, is put to the Prelates consideration,
250. 141, 142. Romes errors being dyed in grain, cannot (by the Prelates
confession) consist with holiness, 251, 252. 142. A peremptory Speech of the
Prelate, 252. The Prelate plainly enough blames the Protestants, both for
making and continuing the Separation, and that most perempt^rily, ibid. How
Jesuits are by the Laws of England to be disputed with, and where, 253. The
Prelates honesty wherein it consists, 254. namely in excluding the Scripture
as Judge an disputation, ibid. 148. The Prelates Faint confession, that Romes
errous do only endanger Salvation, 254. The Prelates tender Heart, loath to
make the rent wider, ibid. Not so tender to Christ's Lambs, as to the Romish
wolf, 255. How by the Jesuits Confession alleged by the Prelate, the
Protestants can abandantly justify their Separation from Rome, ibid. The Ten
Tribes under Jeroboam how no true Church against the Prelate, 255, compared
with Rome, 256. 153, 154. The Prelates notorious hypocrisy detected, in his
calling Pelagianisme that great bewitching Heresy. As also in naming some
Councels, as setting the Church right therein. Retorted upon the Prelate. 259,
260, 261. 1^5. The Prelate confuted by those examples himself alleges, about
his Princes and Clergies power and direction for Reformation of Religion, 261,
262. Of Englands halfe-Reformation now made a whole Deformation, 262. To whom
Reformation of Religion belongs, and how, ib. The Replyer justifies his
answering the Prelate by his own confession, 262. 157. The Prelate still
persists in his obstinacy, not allowing the Scripture for Judge in doubtful
Cases, 263. 171. The Prelate glories in the Title of Patriarchate of the other
world, which the Pope gave to his Prdecessor Anselme, 263, 264. An honest
Cobbler to be preferred before all the Prelates Pontifical and pompous Titles,
264. 175. Authority of Prelates over the Clergy no Calling from God, 264, to
268. Of what known use and benefit they be for unity and peace. Hieromes words
omitted by the Prelate: That Prelates were brought in by humane presumption,
and not by Divine Institution, 264. Scripture has no Diocesan Bishops, 267,
268. 2. but they are usurpers and Tyrants. 177. Domination Prelaticall, with
Subjection thereto, confessed by the Prelate to be grounded on Canon, and
Positive Law, 267. How the Prelates are fallen between two Stools, 268. 2.
They call themselves Princes, 269. 2. What kind of Princes they be, 270. And
who be the true Princes, 269*2. 183. The Prelates necessity of one Ordine
Primus, and confession that the Popes Principality was the very fountain of
Papal Greatness: do prove, that of necessity the Prelaticall Catholic Church
is the very Head and Body of Antichrist, confederate against Christ, and his
true Church, 268, 269, 270, 271. 182. How, and whereupon the Prelate would
reduce all to Rome, 272, 273. Where his subtilty anent the Popes Supremacy and
Infallibility i^ detected. He is selfe-condemened, 274. 199. How by the
Prelates confession, the Pope (and so other Prelates) cannot prosper, because
they have no Authority from God, 274. Proud Prelates are none of Christ's privy
Council, 276, 277. 200. The Prelates blasphemy against Christ, making him the
Author of the Antichristian Hierarchy: detected, and confuted, 275, to 289.
Prelates Ecclesiastical Government not Aristocraticall, but Tyrannical, 275,
276. How Prelates differ from true Bishops in Scripture, 278, to 281. For
Prelates to be Viceroys, how impious and absurd, 28^, to 286. How unlike they
are to Christ, 282. Their Kingdom merely Temporal, 283. Their Government
Oligarchicall, ibid. Christ's Congregations have no need of Prelates to visit
them, having their own lawful Pastor to feed them, 285. The Govenment of
Christ's Church is most perfect of all other, as consisting of the 3 States of
good Polity, or Government, to wit the Monarchiall, the Aristocraticall, and
the Democraticall, 286. Prelates Lordly Tyranny expressly condemned by Christ,
as Heathenish, 287, to 290. 204. The Prelaticall Church in England no less
Tryumphant, then the Prelate taxes Rome to be, 290, 291. 205. By the Prelates
own allegation, nor Kings, nor Priests may do any thing in Reformation of
Religion, besides Gods prescript Law, 291, 292. And so by his Confession
implicitly, where the foundation of Faith and Good Manners are shaken, therein
Magistrates are not to be obeyed in which respect the Prelate is shrewdly put
to it in sundry instances, 293, to 297. 210. The Prelate again blasphemeth
Gods Name, as if a favourer of the Prelaticall practices in England, 297. A
blasphemous Article of Faith of the Prelates pinning upon the Church of
England, ibid. Prelaticall Canons, yea and Papal too, yoaked and equalled by
the Prelate with Scriptures in Governing the Church. We must not join in Prayer
with notorious profane Hypocrites, and Enemies of Christ, and of his Truth,
298. A special Prayer for the King in these perilous times, ibid. King and
State abused, and endangered by the Prelates practices, and putting forth of
this his Book, ibid. The Prelate proves all his Speculations with his bare
word, 199. What a Polititiant he Chapter of Eng. is grown under such a Primate.
Prelates no visible Judges of Gods Institution, proved at large against the
Prelates Blasphemy, 399, 300, 301. Prelates Canons such Law Books, as wherewith
Christ's Law-book cannot consist, but is made of none effect. They are
Antichristian bondage, ibid. No more necessity of one Primate over all England,
then of one pope over All, 302. A Special duty of Christian Magistrates, ibid.
212. How uniny and certainty of Faith is preserved by the Prelates, 303. 194.
The Prelate makes the Scripture a blind, dumb, and dead Judge, 303, 304. Of
General Councels sundry notable Passages scattered along his Book, and
collected by the Replyer, and detected to be some of them ridiculous, and all
of them most impious and detestable: from 304, to 324. How by the Prelates
Doctrine, both himself and his Church of England are bound to worship Images
and to forbear the Cup in the Sacrament, as being decreed by General
Councels, and not yet reversed by any other equal to those, 312, 313. The
Apostles Assembly (Act. 15.) no Precedent for General Councels in after Ages
to be Judges in Controversies of Faith, 314, 315. and therefore that example not
prudently, but surreptitiously taken up by the Prelaticall Church. The Prelate
confesses, that General Councels have no Authority by Christ's Institution,
312, 313. How unlike Prelaticall Councels are to that Act. 15. whereof not only
the Apostles, but the Presbyters, and the Brethren, the People of God, were the
Body, 313, 314. How the Prelate holds the Difinitions of General Councels to
be infallible, and that there is no more question to be made of the assistance
of the Holy Ghost in them, then that the Holy Ghosts assistance is without
error, 325, 326. The Prelate boldly professes, that he absolutely makes a
General Council Judge of Controversies, 327. Wherein he is abolutely fallen
from the Catholic Faith. His sundy assertions, some ridiculous, some
contradictorious, some blasphemous, some dark riddles, which he propounds, and
leaves unresolved, and can never Resolve, 321, 322. He is caught fast in his
own Net. And the more he struggleth to unwind himself out, the m^re he is
entangled. 213. Though the Council of Trent were not General, yet it is so
General, as the Decrees thereof do bind all Papists under Anathema, 328. 227.
Another Reason of the Prelates, why a General Council erring, yet should stand
in force; namely for the peace of Christendom: confuted. He is content to
forgo the Truth, for Peace sake, 328. The Prelates Heresy, in holding it a
branch of Heresy to say, The Church Militant is without spot or wrinckle,
according to Ephesians. 5. confuted, 329, 330. The Prelate overthrows an Article of
the Faith, 331. The Prelates Key of Doctrine primely in the Church, wherewith
he shuts out Truth, and lets in Error, 329. He makes it but a supposition for
the Key of Doctrine to let in Truth, ibid. The Prelates subtle, but futile and
vain Distinction of Transubstantiation, confuted, 332. He makes Christ's
Institution not to be clear against Transubstantiation, as against Communion
in one Kind. Confuted fully, 333, 334. Romish Adoration of Images minced by the
Prelate, set forth by the Replyer in its full proportion, and showed to be more
gross Idolatry, then that of the Heathen, 334, 335, 336. 280. The Prelates
notorious hypocrisy in confessing Images in Churches, and other Romish
Superstitions to have given great Scandal to many, so as to drive them quite
away from them; detected and selfe-condemned by his practices, 337, 338.
Will Worship in Altar-Service and the like, a Service of the Devil, 340, 341.
The Prelates hot zeal in pressing more of Romes Ceremonies, makes the old
justly suspected, as smelling rank, 341. Ilustrated by a similitude, ibid. The
Prelates Ceremonies condemned by the Same Testimony, which he alleges, 343,
344. the By being put for the Maine See before. 280. The Prelate stands stiffly
in this That a silly ignorant Papist living and dying in the Romish Faith, may
thereby (conforming himself to his Romish Religious life) be saved: with his
Reasons, his so learning of Christ, and his Charity not mistaken: confuted,
345, to 350. That which the Prelate calls Churlishness in the Protestants is
better then the Prelates Charity, ibid. 294, 295. The Prelates quoting of 3.
Martyrs, for the Name of Real Presence, which he would feign have to be
brought in use, answered, 350, 351, 352, 353. Reasons why we ought not to name
the Real Presence in the Sacrament, 351. 297. The Prelate dallies with
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Forbearance of the Cup, in saying, they are
Disputed, or Disputable, and Improbable Questions, 353, 354. Romes Tyranny
confessed by the Prelate, the Image whereof is proved to be in the Prelacy of
England, 356, 357. How he dawbes with the Jesuits about their Salvation, 357,
358. 299. The Prelate contradicts himself, and so overthrows his Faith and
Charity, concerning a silly Papists Salvation, in Saying, That as a Romanist he
cannot be saved, 357, 358. The Prelates vain ridiculous and absurd hope of the
Salvation of some Papists living in the Church of Rome 358, to 363. The
Prelates confession of the Romanists Faith crosses his hope of their
Salvation, 372. The Prelate still has a Reservation for the Salvation of his
silly ignorant Papists. 302. The Prelates worth misled, the greatest misleader,
363. The Prelates Rule, It Is safest to believe the Article of Christ's Descent
into hell, as both the Churches of England and of Rome, do agree upon 363,
364. He contradicts himself, ibid. 307. Jesuits Commendation of the English
Liturgy, whether it be a good sign, 364. 318. How the Prelate rewards the late
Dr. White for his Deserts, and what they were, 364, 365. The true Church of
Christ proved against the Prelate not to be always visible, and conspicuous;
by many Instances. Though the Prelaticall be always conspicuous, 366, 367,
368. Most pitiful and perplexed contradictions, and confused and false
Speeches of the Church of Rome, by the Prelate, 369. Rome a Tree wholly
corrupt, without so much as the Bark of a true Church, 370. 321. Dr. Whites
Errors Fundamental reductive, confuted, 371, 372. 325. Wherein the Prelates
Church of England is departed from the Foundation, 373. The Prelates Latitude
of faith in reference to different men's Salvation, which he can no more fit to
them, then a coat for the Mo^ne, 373, 374. True Preachers must teach all, what
and how to believe though it be no work for the Prelates pen, 373. 327. The
Prelate confesses that Romanists dare not believe, but as the Church of Rome
believes, which (says he) believes not aright. How then can his Ignorants be
saved? 374, 375. 332. Apocrypha by the Prelate how neatly brought in as a
Co-witnesse with the Scripture to prove points of Faith, 375. 336. The Prelates
Resolution to live and dye in the Faith of the Primitive Church, confuted by
sund^y Instances, 375, 376. 338. The Prelate holds not the Saving Faith, as not
acknowledging other, then Romes Faith, 377, 378, 379. And the Saving Faith is
not in the Church of Rome, 377 The Prelate holds a false Hope and Charity,
together with a false Faith with Rome, wherein he will live and dye an English
Romish-Catholicke, 379, 380. 339. The Prelates ha^ting, and halfing with the
Jesuit, 380. In charging Rome he checketh himself. 340. His halting again,
381. Yet he confesses, that the now Roman Faith is not the Catholic, which
Roman Faith he will live and dye in, 380. What Contradiction is, ib. His
contradiction noted, 382. His halting downright all along, 382, 383. 342. How
the Prelates Saving Faith of Rome is by himself proved to be Infidelity, 384.
So as (compared with the former) he will live and dye in the Roman Infidelity.
Confer 375, 376, 377. His Collusion, 382. 349, Who the first Founder of
Purgatory, 386. 365. The Prelates false root of the true Churches existence;
and true root of the false, 387, 388. 370. The Church of Rome how yielded by
the Replyer to be visible, yet not Apostolic; against the Prelate, 387, 388.
371. Of Peter's being at Rome, 388. The Church of Rome for what preserved of
God, 389. 375 How the Prelate gives more liberty to his Protestants to go to
the Romish Church to hear Mass, which he calls the Service of God, then the
Jesuit does to his Roman Catholics to go to the English Service, 390, 391,
392. 376. The Prelates Assertion, That the Church of Rome, and the Protestant
Church (of England) do not set up a different Religion, 392. (And so no great
difference of going to either) yet, that both accuse each other of gross
corruptions, indangering Salvation, 393. Ibid. Who are the Prelates Indifferent
Readers, to whom it appears by his Discourse (as himself says) That the
Religion professed in the Church of England comes nearest to the Primitive
Church. And what Readers will judge the contrary, 394. 377. Not only
Superstition (as the Prelate stints it) but gross Idolatry in Adoration of
Images, in Invocation of Saints, in Adoration of the Sacrament, 395. 378. By
the Prelates confession to the Priest, A. C. there should be but little pride
in his heart, 396. 379. The Prelates wan hope of mercy to the dead Lady, 396,
397. 388. The Prelates Close, or Conclusion: wherein he excuses himself by
reason of his other weighty affairs: and of his Age: His misnaming of the
Penman of the 90 Psalm (least he should through all his Book, but touch or
name any one Scripture, and withal not mistake, misapply, or pervert it) His
fearful and desperate condition laid home unto him by the Replyer. His
mocking and abusing Gods Name and Mercy in his hypocritical Prayer, and
impenitent heart. His blaphemy in Fathering all his Book (written and
published for the meeting of his Popish Truth and Peace in a Reconciliation
with Rome) upon Gods Free Grace. His wicked and false hope, that God will bring
to pass that his Diabolical Design and Desire; which cannot come to pass,
but with the utter confusion of the whole Land. His hypocritical and
faithless giving Glory to God, after all his black mouthed blasphemies and
disgraces throughout his Book cast upon the Majesty of God, of Christ, and of
the Holy Ghost; also upon Gods holy word, the Scripture: as if he would in the
close of all with this one plaster heal so many broken heads, 397, to 405.
This suffice for a rude Model. But what is that to the House it self? Enter
therefore, and take a free and full view Consider what thou read, and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things.

TO THE AVTHOR AND PVBLISHER OF THE RELATION.
MY Lord, that you find not my Name in Front, the Reasons are to my self. And
when you find it, 'twill appear, that fear of your displeasure (though
terrible enough) was not the Cause. But whoever I be, you will Say perhaps I am
some mad fellow, and too bold to make a Reply to your Relation. But your own
words will (I hope) excuse me for that. For you Say: Page 138.
A right sober m^n may without the least touch of insolency or madness dispute
a business^ of Religion, with the Roman either Church or Prelate; so it be with
modesty, and for the finding out or confirming of Truth, free from ^anity, and
purposed opposition against even a Particular Church. So you: Now my manner in
disputing with one so Great, though a single Prelate, and no Church, being with
modesty, and (...) from vani^y, and purposed opposition against your Person;
and the end, for finding out and confirming the Truth, which God himself
knows: I h^pe (I Say) your Lordship will be as good as your word, not to cast
upon me an aspersion, or Censure of the least touch of Insol^n^ie or madness.
But this indeed I must confess unto you, and profess before all the world,
that in a Cause so weighty as this, wherein I find my Lord Jesus Christ so
deeply engaged, so much dishonored, and his only true Faith and Religion so
much depressed and disparaged, and that by so great a Prelate: I must crave
pardon, if herein I be both zealous, and plain with you. And that so much the
more, that one so Great (I say) so high in favor in Court, and so potent and
prevalent in the State, should so do. And to this purpose, I remember another
Speech in your Book: Page 302.
Worth is no necessary concluder for Truth; For worth once misled, is of all
other the greatest misleader. And such is your worth, in the esteem of Great
ones too, that misled, it is the greatest misleader. But there you add: And
yet God forbid, that to worth weak men should not ye^ld in difficult and
perplexed Questions. Certainly, my Lord, what ever my weakness be, it will
hardly yield to your worth (though never so great) where I find your worth
misled, and so to become the Great Misleader, and that of no less then the
whole Church of England. You know it is every good Subjects part to be zealous
of the Kings honor, when he sees it wounded or wronged. And shall not every
good and faithful Christian be zealous for the honor of his Lord Jesus
Christ, and of his Kingdom, when he sees them either openly opposed, or
secretly undermined by Any; though never so Great, and honorable in the world?
And this I shall make manifest, and (I hope) convince your Lordship of (if
clear evidence of holy Scripture, and Reason will do it) that you have, as in
your common practice, so in this your Last Book, not only bewrayed, but
confirmed to the world (at least to all that have their Eccle. 2.14*
eyes in their head, as the Preacher says) your amity with the Church of Rome,
and enmity against Jesus Christ, and his true Church, and so to the Salva^ion
of men's souls. This, by Gods Grace I shall make clear in my ensuing Reply.
Wherein I shall observe no other method, but as I meet with such Passages all
along (though perhaps not all as are worthy of Animadversion, to tell your
Lordship plainly my mind of them. And although (as the Proverb is) Plain
dealing is a Jewel (that is, for the rarity of it) yet it is not so highly
esteemed in Court, as others of a more glistering luster. And whereas you may
imagine and hope (as you have expressed your self) that this your Book will make
for your Reputation, as being interlaced with some ^arger Discourses, or
Disputes against the Jesuit, which may be a goodly broad Genesis 3.7.
Figge-leaves to cover the nakedness of the rest: yet many things in it are so
palpably gross and directly opposite to the Truth, that when you have laid on
never so much varnish and guilding, All will prove but as a Mat. 23 27.
painted Sepulcher. The Deuteronomy. 22 9.
Law of God forbids the Jews to sow their field with diverse kinds of seeds,
least the whole fruit be defiled. This was to teach them, and us, not to mingle
Truth with Error, nor to 1 Ki. 18, 22.
halt between GOD and Baal, for so, all their Religion comes to be defiled. But
your field here is sown, with many Tares, mingled with some grains of Wheat,
which Mat. 13.27^28.
o^^ekthros Anthopos, the enemy having sown, and being grown up to such a
rankness, and ripeness, marvel not, that I have brought so Rev. 14.18.19.
Sharp a Sickle to cut it down.

The letter L. is to no^e your Lordships words: p. the page: and P. the
Replyers Answer. And in all I shall be somewhat brief, though perhaps tedious.
And I suppose your Lordship so formidable by That Late Censure, and so secure
by the Sure and Closse cooping up of those 3 once troublesome men, expected
not, that any should be left of that metal, so hardy, as to take up, and
maintain such a quarrel against the Great Metropolitan of all England. But my
Lord, deceive not your self: The Lord Jesus Christ, rather then fail, will
out of the very dust raise up witnesses, to stand up against Antichrist, or any
of his Confederacy. And so in the first place I come to your Epistle
Dedicatory to his Majesty.

THE REPLY TO THE RELATORS EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE KING.
L. p. 1. THIS Tract will need Patronage, as Great as may be had: and that is
yours.

P. Thus you begin your Epistle. But you might have added, on Earth. On Earth,
no doubt, the greatest Patronage you can have, is the Kings But happily you
neither thought, nor hoped of any higher Patron of this Tract, then on Earth.
And therefore it will so much the more need some humane Patronage, and that as
Great, as may be had; and all little enough, you will find in the end. But I
hope, when once your Tract shall be well trodden out and beaten, that you will
find but few that will travel your way, or follow such a Leader, and much
less hazard their own both honor and safety, by Patronizing such a perilous
Tract, as this will appear to be. And though you should find some to protect
you from the Courts of Civil Justice, yet never from Christ's dreadful Throne,
where you shall certainly be judged, Romans 2.6.
according to your work. And let me tell you, in putting forth this your Book
under the Kings Patronage, you lay a greater burden upon his shoulders, then
he is able to bear; and should he undertake it, it would break his back. For
then he must Patronize all your blasphemous lies against GOD and his Word, and
against all Truth; which when he comes once to know, instead of Patronizing,
he will Anathematize both you and your Book.

L. p. 2. He that seeks it (Court Truth) with a Roman Bias, or any other, then
for it self, will run counter, when he comes near it, and not find it, though
he come within the Kenning of it.

P. Sir you say true. And for proof hereof, it will appear, and that too
palpably, that this Roman Bias has too much wheeled you about from the Truth,
which you pretend to seek, but neither come near it, nor within the Kenning of
it. Or if within Kenning, so as you have been at any time by its clear light
convinced of it, the greater is your sin, and the more desperate your case, not
to confess it, but how much more to fight against it? And think not my L. that
your plausible naming of Truth here, will so blind men's eyes, as to believe all
is truth, that you have written in your Book. If you seek Truth, it is but as
those Genesis 19.11.
Sodomites sought for Lots door, to violate his Angel-guests. For where you
find the Truth sincerely preached and professed, do you not lay violent hands
upon Gods Angels, the Messengers of his Truth, and break into the houses of
those righteous Lots, those Preachers of Righteousness, to cast them out? And
then mervaile not, if GOD smite you with blindness, that you shall never find
the Truth, for the end you seek it, namely to destroy it.

L. p. 6. He did but skip up and down, and labor to pick a hole here and
there, where he thought he might fasten; and where it was too hard for him, let
it alone.

P. What the Jesuit did, let him answer for himself. But perhaps, you will
say the like of me here. For I touch not every particular passage, as where for
your reputation sake you speak some truth, thereby to gain credit to what is
contrary, as you know Math. 4.
who uses to do* and therefore Mark 1.34.
Christ would not suffer the Devils to confess him at all: nor need I labor
to pick holes here and there, when every where I find such wide gappes, wherein
you lie so open, that you give me advantage to fasten at pleasure. And I have
unmasked such dark holes, as your self have made with such artifice, as
through which men may easily pass thick and threefold to Rome. So as I fear
you will rather complain of me, as for being too busy in reading some of your
dark and mystical Riddles, which perhaps you would not have had all men to
have known.

L. p. 7. I fell into a most dangerous Fever, but it pleased GOD, beyond all
hope, to restore me to health.

P. This was (as you there tell us) upon your thoughts of giving A. C. an
Answer. But how ever, surely your Fever was as well sent of GOD to admonish you
to desist from such an Enterprise, as you had then in hand, which was, under
pretense to Answer a Jesuit, to overthrow the truth, and to reconcile the
Church of England with that of Rome: as your restoreing was, to oblige you to
walk more worthy of that mercy for the future, and not to renew and prosecute
this your Design. Or else it pleased GOD so to restore, and reserve you, to be
not only a scourge to his People for their further trial and humiliation, for
a time, until he had (as now he is in hand) Isa. 10.12.
performed his whole work upon his Sion: but also to be a plague to that
sinful Land, upon which, since that your restoring, you have been an
Instrument to bring so many and grievous sins, as open profanation of the
Sabbath, Altars, sheding of much innocent blood both of souls and bodies, and
of terrible discontents, and divisions in the State, and the like: and so at
length, that he might call you Ier. 20.3.
Magor Missabib, Fear- round-about, making you a terror to your self, when
you shall come to feel the fire of his fiery indignation to kindle upon you.

L. ibid. How of late I have been used by the Scandalous and Scurrilous Pens
of some bitter men ( Notable Hypocrisy.
whom I heartily beseech God to forgive) the world knows; little leisure, and
less encouragement given me, to Answer a Jesuit, or set upon other Services,
while I am under the Prophets affliction, Psalm. 50.19, 20.

P. And what those Scandalous, and Scurrilous pens are, and who those some
bitter men, the marks you have set upon them are sufficient to show, the
Scarres whereof they will carry to their graves, to be a witness against you
in the great day of doom. And bitter men you may well call them, as whose lives
you have filled with all manner of bitterness, and that in a high degree, as
hell could invent. Of these THREE Remarkable bitter men, one was a Minister, of
your own Coat, saving that his was not of the Rev. 17.3.
Scarlet couloured-Dye. He preached against the Scarlet-sins of the Land,
especially in the Church, which touched your Lordship not a little, and
therefore Bitter. For this, he was extraordinarily summoned to the Court of
High Commission; from whence appealing to his Majesty he was notwithstanding
proceeded against by suspension in the same Court: his house violently broken
open, and searched, his person neither flying nor resisting) seized on, and
carried away late in the night to prison, and made a closse prisoner; his very
Wife debarred from him: brought into the Star Chamber, and there Censured to
be degraded, deprived of his living, of his Liberty, of his Ears on the
Pillory, fined in five thousand Pounds to the King, and to endure perpetual
Closse imprisonment, in Lancaster-Castle, whence he was after 12. weeks
imprisonment there, in the base Common Goal, where his Wife might not come to
him, nor any Physician in his necessity; closely conveyed to the Sea side, and
thence by a Sea-voyage of six weeks space in a stormy winter, and dangerous
Seas, to be carried to Guersosey Castle, where ever since he has endured
Banishment in Closse prison; where nor wife, nor children, nor any friend, nor
acquaintance, are permitted to visit him; and where he is not allowed the use
of pen, and ink, and paper, a little to deceive time withal in his solitary
muse, the solace of a Scholars life. And what was the Cause of all this sharp
and teerrible Censure? In sum this: He had put in his Answer to the Bill into
Court, and that by special Order of the Court, where it was, upon his Oath to
be a true Answer, admitted. But about a week after, the main body of his
Answer, which contained his defense of what he had confessed upon Oath to be
his (which was one only Book, entitled, For GOD and the King, containing the
effect of his two Sermons, preached in his own Church, on November 5 th. 1636.
for which, he was first questioned by the High Commission; together with an
Apology of an Appeal, all in one Book) which was by the two Lords Chief
Justices wholly expunged (containing about foure-score sheets of paper) as
Impertinent and Scandalous, and all this, before the Interrogatories were
brought to him in his Closse Prison, to Answer* the Answer whereunto was to be
reckoned as a part of his Answer in Court, such as now it was left. So as the
Interrogatories coming at length to be tendered to him (for I have all
circumstances by credible intelligence) he refused to make Answer to them,
alleging, that his Answer, which he had put into the Court, being expunged as
Impertinent and Scandalous, he saw not himself any further bound to Answer
Interrogatories; for so doing, he should assent to the condemning of his Cause
before the heareing, by assenting to the expunging of his true Answer, as
Impertinent and Scandalous. Hereupon his Censure was drown up in black and
white, and concluded on, before the Day of hearing came, in which he tendered to
the Court a Copy of his Entire Answer, as it was f^rst put into the Court,
desiring the Court it might be there publicly read, but it was refused; then
he tendered a Copy of his Reasons (seven in number) of not Answering the
Interrogatories, desiring they might publicly be read in Court; but that was
also refused. And in all the Kings Attourneys Pleading (which was his Special
Task against BURTON) he could allege or object nothing at all, in his Book
confessed, against him, but some Few Passages, wherein they said he was too
bitter. To which he Answered, there was Cause for it; and that he had not
exceeded the Latitude or Liberty of a Minister in reprooving of Sin: and for
any thing in his Book, he was there ready (as he told the Court) to make it
good, if he might be heard. But his Doom was already set down in the black
Book, before the Censure came, which (for all he could say) must not be
reversed: So he was Censured (as before) as one holding Seditious and
Schismatic opinions, though none was or could be proved against him. And the
like censure had the other two with him, the one a Physician, the other a
Lawyer. Now my Lord, do not you well enough know all this to be true, and
better then I can tell you? I know you do: but I tell you, to rub over your
memory, and awaken your sleepy Conscience, who were the main moving cause of
all this, as All the world knows. And how far you we^e an Instigator of the
Court, so to censure, and of the King to inflict; you very well know. Who? Your
Lordship? Far be it. For your Piety does heartily beseech GOD to forgive
them. Indeed in the conclusion of that your Pamphlet which you read then in the
Court after the Censure was past, Notorious Hypocrisy of the Prelate.
you had these words, or the like, whom I leave to the Mercy of GOD, and the
Justice of the King. But if indeed you do heartily and unfainedly beseech GOD
to forgive them: why do you not (if indeed they have justly offended GOD, and
the King, in transgressing any Law, divine or humane) both your self from your
heart forgive them, if they have done you any wrong, and testify it by a
serious soliciting of the King, and that now after two whole years, and more
Imprisonment, and Banishment, yea and Divorcement from their Wives, to release
and acquit them? Or why do you not (if you be as you pretend, one of Christ's
Ministers) at least inform the King, how contrary it is both to Gods Law, and
Man's Law, and the Law of Nature, to separate Man and Wife in this sort, without
any just cause given on either part? But the King, in his Clemency had granted
to their Wives liberty and leave to go to their Husbands: And do not you know,
my Lord, whose piety and charity, and equity, and policy it was to reverse and
hinder it? Well my Lord, let me deal freely with you, and that from the mouth
of the Great Judge, Iam. 2.13.
There shall be Judgment without Mercy, to him that shows no Mercy. Yea,
Suppose the Cause of that most terrible Censure had been just: yet should there
be no place for Mercy, and that now after so long a time, and so sharp a
Trial? What? Not one drop, nor crumb of Mercy? That Is enough for hell. But you
will say (as you have done) Mercy was showed in sparing their lives. How I pray
you? They were never questioned for their lives, much less was any Sentence of
death passed upon them; nor was there any Cause found, although perhaps
narrowly searched for, but no preced^nt was found. Again, Suppose they had
been in a legal way, and justly sentenced to dye: yet so to spare life, as to
make and leave it worse then any death can be, as being a continual and
languishing death: Call you this a mercy? Take heed, least herein that be
verefied of you, which the wiseman says, Pro. 12.10.
The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Or shall the examples of Heathen
cruelty be justified by theirs, who profess to be Christians? Prelates Mercies
exceed all Heathen Cruelty.
But what Heathen example can you parallel to this? Indeed I remember one, and
but one, that comes somewhat near it. The Roman Verres, Praetor in Cicily,
closse imprisoned one Apollonius a rich Citizen there, so as neither his old
Father, nor young Son might, for the space of one whole year and a half, come
to see him; and this for no other cause, but that he was rich; a punishment
(says the Orator) to be redeemed with a man's very life; when life has nothing
left Praeter Calamitatem, but mere Calamity. Whereupon the Author says (who
was himself no mean Statesman) Haec cum accidunt, nemo est, quin intellegat
ruere illam Rempub. Haec ubi veniunt, nemo est, qui ullam spem salutis reliquam
esse arbitretur. I need not English it to your Lordship, Yet I will: When such
things happen, there is none but understands that Commonwealth to be falling:
when these things come to pass, there is none, that can imagine any hope of
safety to be left. And what have you left to those THREE remarkable Men,
Praeter Calamitatem? What, but a miserable life? As the Prophet says of
Ierusalem's Captivity in Babylon: Lam. 4.6.
The punishment of the daughter of my people, is greater then the punishment of
the Sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hand Stayed on
her. And verse. 7.
They that be slain, with the sword, are better then they, that be slain with
hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the
Field. So as a life, stripped of all the outward comforts of the world, yea and
of the means of spiritual comfort, which one Friend should minister unto
another, having nothing left Praeter Calamitatem, but Calamity, is it not a
greater punishment, then death it self? How is it then a mercy, instead of
death undeserved, to grant such a life. But you say, it is just. For they were
Censured pro Confesso. Pro Confesso? Of what? Of all charged in the Bill. Why,
they did Answer, and it was condemned before hearing. And, Si sat est
accusasse, quis innocens erit? If it be enough to have accused, who shall be
innocent? And again, let the Court-Records be searched, if there be ever such
a Precedent, that a man should be so censured, for not assenting to the
condemnation of his Cause, before the hearing? Or that ever any Defendants
whole and entire body of his Answer, containing his just Defense, yea and when
he could not expect any Counsel to plead for him, that either would, or durst:
should unalitura, at one dash be expunged, as Impertinent and Scandalous, and
that after it was orderly admitted upon Oath into the Court? Or if this be
found to be the Custom of such Courts, may not a man here apply the foresaid
Speech of that Roman Orator: When such things happen, there is none, but
understands that Commonwealth to be falling: when these things come to pass,
there is none that can imagine any hope of Safety to be left? Were not these
things Prognostications and Presages, if not rather immediate forerunners, and
causes of some terribl^ imminent and impendent Storms, that should shortly
after fall upon the Land? Is^. 26.11.
But, O Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see. But they shall
see, and be ashamed, etc. But how ever you are so charitable, Prelates notable
Hypocisie.
as heartily to beseech GOD to forgive them. Now, suppose you did this from
your heart, as some natural man may do: do you think it a sufficient
discharge to your Conscience, or holy water enough to wash you clean from the
guilt of the blood of these men, which you have so shed? Is not this a mere
mocking of GOD and Men, to pretend piety in praying for those, whom you still
most cruelly persecute with all the damnable malice and hatred which you could
learn of none, but of the Schoolmasters of Hell? And does not your notorious
hypocrisy appear in this, that you still pretend piety in praying GOD, and
that heartily, to forgive those, as Malefactors and Offenders, whom your own
Conscience knows to be innocent, and of whose punishments (at least some of
them) you cannot give so much as the least color of reason, or just cause,
other then such, as the very Heathen do hiss out of all Courts of justice, as
the bane and ruin of Commonweals? So as while you heartily beseech GOD to
forgive those that be innocent persons, you forget once to pray to GOD to
forgive your self, who have been the main Instrument of committing such an
example of Diabolical cruelty and iniquity, as is without all example either
in the Christian or Heathen world.

And yet running on furiously in this desperate course, you say Page 388.
after in the very Conclusion of your Book, that you are now 65. years of age:
and yet you tremble not to think it cannot be long, before you must appear
before that strict Judge, from whose Tribunal and Sentence not your Greatest
Patron in the world can rescue you. And if this be all your Charity, thus to
pray for these men, whom you desist not to plague, they may say to you, as
Christ did to those women, that Luke 23.28.
wept for him, Pray not for us, but pray for your self, that GOD would pardon
your sin, in not taking vengeance on you for the blood of his Servants, which
you have shed. And consider how you have used Christ's Minister, with what
horrible and detestable cruelty, and all for the faithful discharge of his
duty, in reprooving such enormities, and impieties, as your self cannot be but
guilty of; the very remembrance whereof were enough to shake all the veins of
your heart, and to cause your Conscience to quake and tremble, had you but the
least spark of common grace in you. Oh, the blood and members of a Man's body
are precious: and do you think they were made, and Redeemed with such a price,
as Christ's own blood, for any Man to satisfy the lust of his Diabolical and
damnable malice upon, in taking them away gratis, and so easily? And especially
the blood of Christ's Servant (which you have shed for no other cause, but for
bearing witness unto the Truth) is it not Psalm. 72.14.
precious in Gods sight? And When he Psalm. 9.12.
makes inquisition for blood, will he not remember, and not forget the
complaint of the poor? Without doubt my Lord, his Great King and Master will
utterly shame and confound you for ever, unmasking all your hypocrisy, and
leaving you naked before all the world, if you still desperately go on in this
course. Nor is it your Fine-spun-cob-web-Lawne-veile, that can hide the
grossness and foulness of your actions from the worlds eyes. And though you
could mock men, yet God you cannot; Gal. 6.7.
but, Whatsoever ye sow, ye shall reap. Do you believe the Scripture? What
says it? A man that does violence to the blood of any Person, shall flee to
the pit, Let no man stay him. But I leave you to GOD, whom Pro. 28.17.
because you have no changes, you do not fear: yet one day shall you feel.

But you tell us, that you have little leisure, and less encouragement
thereby, to answer a Jesuit, or to set upon other Services. To answer a
Jesuit. Oh glorious word! A Sound Protestant sure, that Answers a Iesuite^
What may we not expect? This one word were enough to vindicate that reputation
of yours, which you tell us anon of. But the mischief is, I have observed a A
New found Art.
New-found-Art of Late-dayes, that which our Protestant Doctors of the Now
Church of England, have practiced, and grown great Proficients in: namely,
under the name and color of Answering a Jesuit, or so to meet him at least
the halfe-way between England and Rome, if he go not further. So did your
Brother of Chichester in his Appeal to Caesar, his Answer to the Popish
Gagger. How finely jumpes he with the Jesuit, and comes closse to his doors?
A pretty veil, to bring that old Hagge into request again, and to set up her
Throne in the Church of England. And whether your Lordship do thus or no, in
this your glorious Answer to the Jesuit, we shall see at after. But why you
should complain of little leisure, when you have so many Chapleins and Doctors
at hand, and command, to set a work: and, of less encouragement, when for
such services, you have gotten the Metropolitanship of all England: I cannot
see.

But before I pass further, I may not balke the close of your words,
complaining, You are under the Prophets affliction: Psalm. 50.19, 20. And what
is that? Between the mouth that speaks wickedness, and the tongue that sets
forth Deceit. And whose affliction was this? The Prophets you say. What David's?
Yes. How prove you that out of that Psalm? It Is true, David had many
afflictions in this kind; which he in other Psalms much complains of: but he
speaks not a word of his own proper afflictions in this kind in that Psalm,
which you quote. Therefore to pass by both your forced expression of the
words, and false application of the sense: Let us take the Prophets own word:
But unto the wicked, GOD says what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee? When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers. Thou gave thy
mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit, and speak
against thy Brother, and thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest, that I was altogether
such a one as thy self: but I will reproove thee, and see them in order before
thee. Now consider this, ye that forget GOD, least I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver. Thus far GOD speaks in that Psalm. In all which
you see plainly, that the Prophet complains not of his own suffering such
things of wicked tongues. It is GOD that speaks here to wicked men. And if you
had well and wisely looked ^our face in that Glass, you might far sooner
have discerned your self to be one of those to whom GOD speaks, then to be
as the Prophet so afflicted by them. And because you are so brief in
perverting the Scriptures, to make them a veil for your iniquity, and a
Vergula Censoria to argue and accuse Gods own innocent Servants, as if their
mouth spoke wickedness, and their tongues set forth deceit: lend your patience
a little, while we do truly interpret, and impartially appy the forecited
words of this Psalm. Here GOD speaks to the wicked, and sets him forth by
sundry marks and properties: as First, his notorious and audacious, shameless
hypocrisy, in pretending to be for GOD, and for his true Religion: For he
takes upon him to declare Gods Statutes, and takes his Covenant in his mouth,
but for all this, he hates instruction, and casts Gods word behind him.
Secondly, his taking part with Thieves and Adulterers. Thirdly, his giving his
mouth to evil, and framing his tongue to deceit. Fourthly, his sitting and
speaking against his Brother, and slandering his own Mothers Son. Fifthly,
his carnal security, and vain and wicked thought concerning GOD, as if he
favored him, and his wicked practices, and all because GOD was silent and
patient, in forbe^reing to reprove and punish him. Now to apply this. If you
can find any, to whom these things may more fitly and truly be applied then
your self, do you apply them home unto them. But till you do, give us leave
to apply them so far to your Lordship as we have sufficient warrant, and good
evidence for. First, do not you in this your Book in particular pretend at
least to declare Gods word, and speak of his Covenant, as if you would become a
Champion to maintain the holy Scripture, against the Roman Adversaries thereof?
This you profess, and willingly grant. But in the proof hereof, you set us up
Man's Authority above the Scripture, as we shall see in the due place. And do
you not withal hate instruction, and cast Gods word behind you, when being by
Gods Minister (as of late) reprooved and convinced of such things, as you
neither could, nor can deny to be true, as being written in Capital Letters in
your forehead, and on the palms of your hands: yet you not only hated and
despised the reproof, and instruction, which was according to Gods word, and
the duty of a Minister, whose strict charge is among other things, to Tit. 2.15.
reproove with all authority: but also have manifested this your hatred and
contempt, in persecuting this poor Minister beyond all measure and example,
yea and still continue persecuting him to this day, and that most
Antichristianly; and not only him, but his Wife and Children, who have done
you no offense at all, not suffering the one to go see her Husband, nor the
other their Father. O my Lord, heaven rings of this your fury, and the earth
groaneth under such more then Heathenish inhumanity, not sorting with the Law
of common humane nature. O Math. 23.38
How shall you escape the damnation of hell? And what plagues may not the Land
expect, for being guilty of such innocent blood, and of such unheard of
Barbarism, and that also maintained and continued in cold blood? Yea and does
not the spirit of the Beast in you breath out persecution, and blast many other
of Gods faithful Ministers, never leaving them, till you have rooted them out?
And this you neither fear to practice, nor shame to profess. And then again,
verse. 19.
Do you not give your mouth to Evil, and frame your tongue to Deceit? You
frame it as having a special art and Ephesians 4.14. Kubeia, Ka^ournia, methoda.
Method in it, as the Apostle spekas: which you express in the fourth mark
especially. Sitting and speaking against your brother, and slandering your own
Mothers Son; as will further yet appear, and does by your continual and daily
practices, and specially in or at your High Commission chair or Board, where
(as else where) you have a power to do what you list without control or
contradiction. And for carnal security, in an impious and Atheistical conceit
of GOD, as if a favourer of wicked practices, because a patient forbearer to
punish them presently: examine your own heart; nay may we not both read it in
your courses, and understand it by your speeches, in sundry places of your
Book, where you would seem to have a special interest in Gods favor; as in
his admirable restoring you (as you say) from your dangerous Fever, though you
there forgot (as those nine Lepers that Christ cleansed) to return him thanks,
so much as verbal. And for the further and fuller clearing of the verefying of
all this in your self, I shall call your Book to witness. In the mean time
here, Hear Gods doom against this wicked Man: But I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thee. Eccles. 12.
He will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether good
or evil. And as David elsewhere says, Psalm. 10.13.14, 15.
Wherefore does the wicked contemn GOD? He has said in his heart, Thou will
not require it. Thou have seen it O GOD, for thou beholdest mischief and
spite to require it with thy hand: the poor commits himself unto thee,
Thou art the helper of the Fatherless. Break thou the arm of the wicked, and
the evil man: Seek out his wickedness, till thou find none. But, Romans 6.10.
How long, Lord, Holy, and True? Surely, when he makes inquisition for blood,
he remembers them: he forgets not the cry of the Humble. There is a day of
Gods visitation a coming, and it hasteneth, yea we may see it even at the
doors. Therefore David's inference hereupon will sort well in this place. O
consider this ye that forget GOD, least I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver.

Thus you may see what need you have to beware how you meddle with such edged
tools, in misapplying the holy Word of God: for it is a sharp two edged
sword, which not skilfully handled (as a Sword in a mad man's hand) but applied
to a wrong use and object, will rebound back upon you, and wound you. God give
you Grace to repent, if possible, if you be not come to that Rom* 2.5.
Sklur^tata kai ametanamton kardian (as the Apostle speaks; hardness, and
impenitent heart, treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. I am plain, you
see, if there may be hope, and surely it is no time now to spare, when we hear
Gods Trumpet sounding the Alarm. You proceed:

L. p. ibid. In the midst of these libellous outcryes against me, some Divines
of great note, and worth in the Church of England, came to me* one by one, and
no one knowing of the others coming (as to me they protested) and persuaded
with me to reprint this Conference in my own Name. This they thought would
vindicate my Reputation, were it generally known to be mine.

P. What libellous outcryes, my Lord? Of Scandalous and Scurrilous pens? If
Scurrilous, I approve not: If Scandalous, is not that in your sense only,
because against you? But the Authors names were to the Books, which they
avowed to be theirs. How then libellous? And Master BURTON in special offered
to the full Court at his Censure, to prove all his Book to be true. And how
then Scandalous? And if just reproof of Iniquity and Enormities, and that by a
Minister of GOD in his own Charge, be Censured for Scandalous: then how shall
the writings of the Apostles, and Prophets, and the words of Christ's own
mouth, escape this Censure of being Scandalous? For Master BURTON was a
Minister of CHRIST, which under the Gospel is called a 1. Cor. 14.4.
Prophet, whose Office is to convince and reproove sin. But he named your
Lordship, and some other of your Brethren in his Book. True. And what of that?
Do you make this to be Scandalum Magnatum? Then what say you to the Prophet
Elias, telling King Ahab to his face, 1 Kings 18.18.
Thou art he, that troubles Israel? And in his 2 Chronicles. 21.12, etc.
writing to King Iehoram, he told him his own, which he shortly after found
too true. So the Prophet Elisha, when he spoke to the Elders of Israel, and
called this Iehoram (Ahabs Son) a 2 Kings 6.32.
Murderers Son, was at least Scandalous. The Prophet Jeremy is sent to the
King and Queen, to admonish them to repent, and to humble themselves. It Is true
indeed the Ier. 38.4.
Nobles incensed the King against Jeremy, as a troubler of the Land. The
Prophet Nathan told King David, 2 Samuel 12.
Thou art the Man. The Prophet Isaiah named Isa. 22.15.
that Treasurer Shebna. The Prophet Hosea said of the company of Priests (Chap.
6.9.) They make the King glad with their lies; as also verse. 5. All these
Prophets of the LORD, it seems were Scandalous men. And was Christ's tongue
Scandalous, when he spoke to some, saying, Luke 13.32.
Go and tell Herod that Fox? Or Paul's, in naming Demas and Alexander the
Copper Smith, and Hymeneus and Philetus? And John for telling of 3 Ioh 9, 10.
Diotrephes his ambitious pride, and prating against the Apostle, and playing
other Prelaticall pranks? Alas* Sir, you want either leisure, or the spirit of
right judgment, to observe and discern the nature of such things. And what
then will you say of the Prophet Isaiah, who thus thundereth against the State,
and against Jerusalem. Isa. 1 21.22.23.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of Judgment*
Righteousn^sse lodged in it: but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross:
thy wine mixed with water. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves: Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not
the Fatherless, neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them. And what
of the Prophet Micah? Who says Mic. 3 8.
Truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
might, to declare unto Jacob his transgressions, and to Israel his sin. Hear
this I pray you, ye Heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of
Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity, that build up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money: yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? None evil
can come upon us. And again: Mic. 7.2*
The good man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright among
men: They all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man his brother with a
net. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly: The Prince asks, and
the Judge asks for a reward, and the Great man he utters his mischievous
desire: so they wrap it up. The best of them is as a briar: the most upright is
sharper then a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen, thy visitation comes,
now shall be their perplexity. And what of the Prophet Zephanie? Zeph. 3.1.
Woe to her, that is filthy and polluted, and to the oppressing City: She
obeyed not the voice: she rec^ived not correction: she trusted not in the Lord:
she drew not near to her God: Her Princes within her are roaring Lions: her
Judges are evening Wolves, they gnaw not the b^nes till the m^r^ow: Her
Prophets are light and treacherous persons: her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary: they have done violence to the Law. And what again of the Prophet
Isay? Isay. 29.2^.
For the terrible one is brought to naught, and the Scorner is consumed, and
all that w^^ch for iniquity are cut off. That make a man an offender for a
word: that lay a snare for him that reprooveth in the gate, and turn aside the
just for a thing of naught. Infinite are the Instances in this kind, both in
the Prophets, and elsewhere, as in the New Testament. This is the very dialect,
and usual language of the Prophets, when they reproove sin, and especially,
scarlet and predominate sins of the Court, and of Great ones. They deal
plainly, roughly, and home. So John Baptist. So Christ: Mat. 3.7. and 23.33.
O Generation of vipers, how shall ye escape the vengeance to come, the
damnation of hell? So Paul to Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.10*
O full of all Subtilty, and all mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou enemy
of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the
Lord? And Paul here is said to be full of the Holy Ghost. And Elymas the
Sorcerer was of great power with Sergius Paulus the Governor. Now my Lord, to
recollect all, with some application: Suppose either your Lordship had lived in
those times of the Prophets, and of Christ, and his Apostles, or they had lived
in these our times, and had used the like language to you, and your Compeeres,
which they used to the wicked Priests, Prophets, and Princes of Israel: what
would you have done? Would you not have been one of the foremost in Act 7.57.
stoning some, in Heb 11.37
sawing some, in Rev. 20.4*
beheading some, in Math. 27* 20.35.
crucifying some, in Heb. 11.
imprisoning some, in scourging some; and (if it had been, then in use, as it
is not much unlike the Cross) in pilloring some, and cutting off of the Ears
closse to the stumps, with many other grievous things? And when ye had done all
this, would ye not have laden them with the infamous reproaches of Bitter Men,
Scandalous tongues Libellous pens, and Seditious persons? But perhaps you
will say, as the Pharisees did, Math. 24.30, 31, 32, ^3.
If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the Prophets. But Christ tells them wherefore ye be
witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the Children of them, which killed the
Prophets. Fill up then the measure of your Fathers. Ye Serpents, ye generation
of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Wherefore behold I send
unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes, and some of them you shall kill
and crucify, and some of them shall you scourge in your Synagogues, and
persecute them from City to City. That upon you may come all the righteous
blood, shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of
Zacharias, the Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar.
What, did these hypocritical Pharisees ^lay Zacharias, which was many hundred
years before? So faith Christ here. Why, but they professed the contrary.
True: and so will you. But did not those Pharisees crucify the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Prince of the Prophets, and afterward persecuted and slew his
Apostles, and that for no other cause, but for that truth which they preached?
Thus hereby they prooved themselves guilty of all the blood of the Prophets
shed by their murtherous Forefathers; So as if they had then lived, they that
crucified Christ himself, would also have slain his Prophets, who spoke
before of him. Now what fence has your Lordship against this Sword of Christ,
to ward off the like imputation of guilt of the bloodshed of the Saints and
Servants of God? Have you not shed the blood of a Minister of Christ, and that
for no other cause, then for beareing witness to the truth, in discharge of
that Embassage committed unto him? And so consequently have you not brought
upon your soul the guilt of the blood of JESUS, who under Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession, and so of all his Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs?
But you will say, BURTON had no such special mission, and commission as the
Prophets had. No? Could not you see, that he was extraordinarily raised up by
GOD, and by him extraordinarily assisted, both in his Sermons, and in his Book,
and in his free and undanted Spirit in his appearance and Answer before so many
Ier. 15.20* 21.
Terrible ones in that Court, and in that fiery trial on the Pillory, and
other trials, wherein he carried himself from the First to the Last with that
constant magnanimity, that he seemed rather a Triumphant, then a Patient? Can
you ascribe this to any humane strength of a poor impotent Man, wrestling and
warring against such a dreadful and direful host of Adversaries: and not to
the sole and extraordinary support of the Spirit of Christ in him? So as, when
being a Spectator of the Tragedy (as you had been the maine Author) wherein you
thought to glut your eyes with such a Spectacle, and to make your self even
drunken with his blood: were you not on the contrary amazed and confounded, to
see a Man on the Pillory triumphing over your incomparable cruelty? Did not
your Conscience then at least check you, and tell you, that you did then
Pillory Jesus Christ in his Act. 9.4.
Servant, as it were nayling him Heb. 6.6.
afresh to the Cross, and putting him to an open shame? But you go on: Saying:

Now in the midst of these Libellous outcryes (what?) some Divines of great
note and worth in the Church of England, etc. It Is no hard matter to Divine of
what stamp, your Notable and worthy Divines in the Church of England be. But I
pass them by, as unsaluted, it being obvious to all men, what kind of Divines
do merit to be accounted of you of Note and Worth in the Church of England:
who are, and must be either Arminian, or Popish, or both, Flatterers and
Sycophants, Proud and Profane persons, by which they are most noted and known,
and whose worth is valued according to the rate of the magnitude or multitude
of their Fat Benefices, Prebends, Deaneries, Prelacies, or other dignities, and
according to their great Scholarship showed in their seldom preaching in their
own Cures, and their curious and quaint Rhetorizing in the Court, where the
plainest part of the Sermon is down-right-rayling against the Puritans, and the
base and gross flattering of the Court. ^ut what of these your worthy divines?
First they come to your Lordship. Well, that's but good manners, to express
their officiousness, though but with a complement. Secondly, not together, but
one by one, not one knowing of another coming. Every one thinking perhaps to
prevent other in so notable a piece of Service, and so to promerit all the
thanks. Well, thirdly, What Is the matter of this casual, or rather miraculous
confluence? To persuade with you to reprint this your Conference in your own
name. But cui bono? To what purpose? For it would vindicate your Reputation,
being generally known to be yours. Now least your Lordship may run into a
strong misconceit, as if this strange concurrence of persons and Spirits, not
one knowing of another coming, or occasion, were from some Constellation of
the Stars, or rather from Divine Providence for your good: you know your
Brother of Chichester protested in his Appeal, that he had never read
Arminius: and yet how pat did he hit upon, and hold all the Arminian Points, as
if he had been an old Disciple of Arminius his School? By what Spirit trow you
was this? But to the point: All this was to vindicate your Reputation. With
whom? With Jesuits? Certainly not with any good Christians. Yet this you
labor too, with laying on colous enough. But this Art of writing against
Jesuits is now grown so stale, and trivial, as in these days it begets new
Suspicions of a Popish Spirit, especially when it once comes forth under the
Authority, or Name of Canterbury. Yet happily your Divines are Astrologers,
observing the Constellations of the times, and thereupon divining or
conjecturing, what fearful events might come of it, and those perhaps
prognosticating and ominating little good to your Lordship upon whom they saw a
general bad and malignant Aspect to be cast: might strain their wits, and use
their strongest reasons to persuade you to use the best means to prevent the
worst, whereof they imagined this their motion to be the best. And therefore
they might perhaps frame their Speech in such a like form, as this: My Lord,
we observe abroad what discontents possess most men against your Grace, about
these late Innovations in the Church (as they call them) and you know, the
Truth of Religion (as they apprehend it) as also the Liberty of their
Consciences, are with the Puritans of high estimation: and men will not easily
part with them, especially those that be Zealous indeed; as accounting them
their best freeholds; Such especially, as acknowledge no other King over their
Souls and Consciences in matters of Faith and Gods worship (as we have heard
them say) but only CHRIST. And they have shroud Arguments herein for
themselves: And you see what necessary occasions and exigents may constrain the
King to call a Parliament, and how far that (being a means to fasten and
confirm the Subjects affections to his Majesty now especially upon this
Defection of Scotland) may draw the King to be willing to give his People
contentment, in permitting them that purity in Religion in Faith and
Discipline, which Christ and his Apostles (they say) have taught, and left
them, without which (they say) they cannot be freed from the Yoke of
Antichristian or humane Ordinance (for we use but their words) and how
dangerous this may be to your Grace, whom they have marked out, as the maine
Active Agent, or Instrument in disturbing their peace, and distracting their
minds, and trenching upon their said Liberty, as they account it: And
considering how the whole Land generally groaneth under many heavy Grievances
(as People now adays account Grievances) as their deep Sighs do interpret
their minds: and of these your Honor is reputed one of the Prime Movers: And
however your Lorship may happily conceive, that if ye be put to a pinch, your
Book* your late Conference set forth against Fisher, will prove sufficient to
ward off, and beat back all accusations annent Religion: yet my Lord, it is not
put forth in your own Name, they may Question whether it be yours, or no, and
say, that, being namelesse, you may in time disclaim it, if ever you can bring
your pious purpose for peace to pass: And besides, it is now a long time since
it was Printed, and so is forgotten: Wherefore our humble advise (with all due
Submission to your Lordships pregnant wisdom) is, that your Grace would
revise, correct and more fully express your self in some things, in the said
Book, and so republish it in Print under your own Name: This in our poor
opinions, will mightily take with the vulgar, and easily vindicate, and set
upright your Graces Reputation. And because we are not ignorant of your
multiplicious and weighty affairs in Court, not permitting your thoughts that
vacancie, which such a work would require: let not that trouble your Lordship,
our Service shall not be wanting. Thus, or so your Divines. Well, now that you
hear your friends Counsel, what is your Resolution.

L^ ibid. I confess I looked round about these men, and their motion; and at
last my thoughts working much upon themselves, I began to persuade my self,
that I had been too long diverted from this necessary work: And that perhaps
these might be in voce hominum tuba Dei, in the still voice of men, the loud
Trumpet of God.

P. And perhaps my Lord (and that whereof it may be ye will be the rather
persuaded) the unanimous cons^nt of these Divines, might be by the instigation
of that same Spirit, in which those 2 King. 22.
400. Prophets by their unanimous vote prevailed to persuade King Ahab, to go
up to Ramoth Gilead, that so according to Gods own purpose he might there
perish. But it might be, you say, Gods loud Trumpet. What, to hasten you to
Judgment? Certainly, that lying Spirit in those Prophets was sent from GOD, to
prepare the way of executing vengeance on that Ahab the more speedily, as who
had sold himself to work wickedness, in sheding Nabaths blood. And surely
when I looked into the intrals of this your Book (as the Roman Southsayers of
old did into the bowels and entralls of their Sacrifices) and found them so
exceedingly vicious and corrupt, and withal (like to Caesar's Sacrifice,
wherein was found no heart, which the Astrologers took for a bad sign) no
heart at all to the true Religion indeed: it suggested these conceits into my
mind, about this very passage of yours. But time will try all things. And if
you will have my poor opinion, I am persuaded, if you had never put pen to
paper (it having been supersufficient to have expressed your mind in your other
handyworks, or Practices) and so had reserved your Apology (when requisite) to
your persuasive Language, and powerful Rhetoric, men might have had less
hold to take off you, when you might have put all your other Actions upon a
higher moving Cause, as usually ye do. But for writing, you know Litera
Scripta manet. Or else it had been better to have reprinted your First Copy,
as it was at first, without Alteration, and in your Chaplains name still; for
so you should both have vindicated it from obscurity, lying hid, and lurking in
the belly of Dr. Whites Works, and also at pleasure have either owned, or
disclaimed it, as you found occasion. Or might have excused any thing, that
might be taken in it as offensive, either imputing it to your Chapleins
mistake, or to want of leisure to revise it, or (which is the surest and most
beaten way) to the Printer* as was lately done about that notorious Popish Book
of Salis his Devotions. And hereof (if your Lordship knows it not) I will tell
you a pretty Tale. This Book of Devotion of Salis, A pretty tale.
bearing the Title of Bishop of Geneva (although the Church of Geneva have no
such Bishops) had been so long ago translated into English, and being purged
from those gross points of Popery, which were in the Original Copy, was by
Authority published in Print, and sold well. But of late days, since you came
to sit in that Chair, one undertook to translate the Original anew, and
entire, as it was at first set forth by the Author, without altering any thing,
as the Translator professed in his Epistle Dedicatory to Mris Anne Roper, a
notorious Recusant. This Translation being brought to your Chaplein to license,
it past for current, as containing nothing in it against Faith and Manners, and
so was licensed without the least correction of the grossest things in it. It
came to the Printer, who falling aworke upon it, began to stumble at some no
small Popish blocks, that lay in his way, insomuch as he was afraid to go on,
but went and showed them to your Chaplein* who making a tush at it, bad him go
on, and he would bear him out in it. So Printed it was. And coming abroad,
some began to find fault with it; and the stink of the Book more and more
increasing with stirring, it came at length to be smelled by your Lordship.
Hereupon what serious examination you used about it, I know not: but there
being some Jealousy, that some one of those THREE forementioned troublesome
bitter men (whose Cause was then shortly to be heard) might happily among other
things (might they have been permitted to speak freely (cast that Book in
your Lordships dish: the next news we heard of it, was, that a Proclamation is
published for the burning of the Book in Smith-field, wherein also all the
blame was laid upon the poor Printer, for which he must to prison, and you and
your Chaplein were acquitted and cleared, as no way faulty. So easy is it with
the least breath to blow away the blackest clouds, when they threaten a storm
either against you, or your Chaplein in such cases. But now in this your Book,
so exactly Reprinted, and revised, and republished, wherein also you have
ratified and avowed all in your former Book for yours, you have for ever fast
bound your hands, that you cannot help your self at a dead lift. Well, it is
too late now either to prevent, or remedy what is past. Yet one thing there is,
which you may perhaps deem to be operae pretium, worth your pains, as wherein
lies your maine Confidence of vindicating your Reputation with good men: and
that is, some Large Discourses in your Book, wherein you seem to be point
blanke against the Papists; as about the Scripture Transubstantiation, etc.
This indeed might say well to it, and pass for current, were there not in some
of them so much gross allay, as makes the whole to be Ier. 6.30.
reprobate Silver, as the Prophet says; and also, did you not commit a gross
Solecisme in writing a seeming Truth, and practicing apparently contrary; and
did you not overballance seeming Truths with too much Popish Truth throughout
your Book, as will all along appear. And you know that if one Eccles. 10.1^
dead Fly will corrupt a whole box of ointment, how much more a Swarm? And a
little poison corrected, and infused in a Potion, proves medicinal: but if
uncorrected, and of two great a quantity it becomes mortal, and so instead of
bealing, kills the Patient. But to proceed.

L. p. 9. I have thus acquainted your Majesty with all occasions, which both
formerly, and now again have led this Tract into the Light.

P. And not without cause needs your Tract to be led into the light. I will not
here apply that speech of Christ, Blind needs leading.
If the blind lead the blind, but leave it to the event.

L. p. 11. GOD forbid, I should ever offer to persuade a Persecution in any
kind, or practice it in the least.

P. How? What do I hear? GOD forbid? What, neither persuade, nor practice
Persecution, no not in the least? And must GOD be named in it too? What means
then (as 1 Samuel 15.14.
SAMUEL said to SAUL) the bleeting of the Sheep, and the bellowing of the
Cattle in mine ears? Or you mistook the word, when instead of GOD forbid, you
should have said, GOD forgive me both for persuading Persecution, and for
practicing it, and that in as high a measure as possibly I could, the times
considered. And GOD forgive, should be from your Heart; whereas GOD forbid, is
but from the lips outward, and spoken out of mere Hypocrisy, shameless
grown with Impiety; Or else Persecution is with you, as sin is with many, so
frequent and habitual, as the custom of Persecuting takes away, the sense of
it. Or else as Paul, before his conversion, was Act. 26.11.
mad with persecuting the Saints: So you are so intoxicated with drinking the
blood of innocents, that you know not what either you say or do. Or, in a word,
notwithstanding you have been so long a Practitioner in this kind of Trade, yet
you know not what persecution is, nor what or who the Saints of GOD be, nor who
are the true Ministers of Christ, nor who are his true members. It Is well, if
Ignorance will excuse you: that you might come once to say with Paul, 1 Timothy
1.13
But I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly through unbelife. But can
you say so? Or rather do you not sin against the light of Gods Word, against
the light of your Conscience, against the light of natural Reason, and the Law
of Humanity, and against Gods Law, and against Man's Law, and (I had almost
said) against the Holy Ghost it self? Unless you be one of those, that for
blindness stumble at noon day. How many godly and able Ministers of Christ,
together with their Wives and Children, are cast out, and undone by you, and
all for not daring to obey you in those things, wherein of necessity they must
have dishonored GOD? Or for omitting one of your Ceremonies, perhaps but once,
or twice, and the like? Yet this with you is no persecution, no not in any
kind. What is it then? Only a punishing of the Puritans, that so they may be
rooted out. This you blushed not to say openly in Star Chamber, when you with
your Brethren were charged for casting out above a hundred Ministers in
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent, Surrey, and where not? But you neither
practiced, nor persuaded to it. Why did you not dissuade? Why did you not
enterpose? Why did you not relieve them, when upon Petition to the King, they
were referred to you? No such thing. They are a sort of Puritans: they must be
rooted out, This is enough to wash your hands of persecution: as Pilate did of
his condemning of Christ: for they are Puritans. So the Popish Prelates in
Queen Mary's days, in burning the Martyrs, were no persecuters; for those
Martyrs were Heretics. Nor will the High Priests and Pharisees prove
persecuters, and murderers in Crucifying of Christ, for they could say, He was
a seducer and deceiver. And so in sum, There will be found no such thing in
rerum natura, not in the whole world, as persecution is. Now what patience can
refrain it self at these things? O notorious, impious, shameless, graceless
Hypocrisy. Or Hypocrisy shall I call that, which has not the least veil, or
cloak, or vizard, or pretense, or color, or shadow of a shadow to overshadow
it withal, but mere shameless impiety daring God to his face, using his
Sacred name as a white veil to lay over the black-butchery of Gods own dear
Saints, saying God forbid, when his own wicked heart, and blood-guilty
Conscience, and foul bloody practices, cannot but convince him of a more
impious and shameless lie, then the Devil himself, (except he were incarnate)
durst make? Not practice Persecution in any kind, no not in the least? What
kind of persecution is there, o Prelate, whereof thou art not an Actor, and
that in the highest Degree? Do thou not persecute Gods Ministers with
Suspention, Silencing, Excommunication, Deprivatoin, Degradation, spoiling
their dwelling place, Confiscation of their goods by intolerable Fines,
Imprisonment, dismembring of their bodies, shedding of their blood, banishment,
or driving them to seek for refuge from thy cruel Tyranny among the wild
Beasts, and wild Woods, and wild Salvages, in Countries not inhabited, in
desolate Deserts, the worst of which is to be preferred before thy
all-destroying Cruelty? Nay when they have escaped thy Lions Claws with their
Skin, do thou not ( Rev. 12.
as the Dragon) vomit after them a Flood of persecution with thy venomous
tongue? So insatiable is thy blood-thirsty Cruelty: and yet after all this have
thou a Forehead to say, God forbid, that I should practice Persecution in any
kind, no not in the least. Now I call heaven and earth to witness against
thee; and that holy and righteous God, the Father and King of Saints, whom thou
persecutest, and whose Sacred Name thou dare profane with tongue and pen,
judge thee for all thy Cruelties, and Lawless persecutions of the poor
Servants of Jesus Christ. Lawless indeed, wherein thou outstrippest the
persecutions of Stephen Gardener and Edmond Bonner, who had a Law for what they
did, but thou have none. O what punishments in Hell shall be sufficient for
these things! I must confess my zeal is here transported, but it is not
beyond the Cause provoking it. I will conclude with this hearty Prayer, though
in your words, but not with your Spirit. God forbid that you should ever, to
wit, for ever, persuade Persecution in any kind or practice it in the Least.
God forbid you should Ever do it: Ever? Amen. Ever. Nay what says the Lord?
Psalm. 12*
For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, Now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.
Now: even Now from him that puffs at the godly? Who is that? The
Tongue-master, he that speaks with flattering lips, and a double heart, and
proud things, saying, Who i^ Lord ^ver us? Now, Now will the Lord arise against
such as are in the highest and ruff of all their wickedness. And do not you
think you are one of these, yea and a Prime one too? You think? Say I? Does it
ever enter into your thought, that you shall be judged for these things, and
that, Now, even Now? The Scripture tells us No. For David Says, Psalm 92.6.7
A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this, (what this?)
when the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish, it is, that they shall be destroyed for ever. Even Then in the top of
their flourishing estate they shall be destroyed. Yea their flourishing estate is
the immediate cause of their perishing: when the wicked spring and flourish: It
is that they shall be destroyed for ever. But wicked is a General word, and
perhaps it has no reference here to you in particular. Yes certainly, you in
particular; the Holy Ghost does in this Psalm point you out as it were with
the finger. How? Note but the Title of the Psalm: A Psalm for the Sabbath
day. But it may seem strange that David should hear speak of the wicked, and
of their flourishing estate. What coherence has this with the Sabbath day?
Surely hereby the Spirit of Prophecy notes out unto us a special time or age
of the Church, wherein ungodly men should most notoriously oppose themselves
against the sanctification of the Sabbath day, and wherein they should
extraordinarily flourish and prosper, even as the green and goodly bladed Psalm.
129.6.
Grass, that grows on high upon the house tops: but in that their
flourishing estate, they should suddenly perish. And of all other times and
ages of the Church, ever was this Prophecy so extraordinarily and remarkably
verefied, for ungodly and desperate offenders in this kind, as in this present
age, and especially in the Church of England, now since your springing up and
flourishing upon the tops of Canterbury Palace? For show us any age, wherein
the sanctification of the Sabbath, or Lords day was by public Edict dispensed
with, and by sundry Printed Books cried down, and you shall be excused from being
of those men, whom the Holy Ghost notes out here for wicked and ungodly. But
you cannot. Therefore this Psalm for the Sabbath day speaks of you in
special, as being a professed enemy of the sanctification of the Sabbath, and
so of all true holiness, and yet you do so flourish and prosper in this your
wicked and impious opposition to all Godliness as never any have done more,
nor so much in man's memory. But what is the issue of this? These wicked enemies
of Godliness, and of the sanctification of the Sabbath in special shall be
destroyed for ever? But when? Even then, when they are in the top of their
flourishing estate. But how shall we know this? First, GOD has said it, and
therefore it is sure enough: and Secondly, this their flourishing estate is an
immediate both sign and cause of their utter ruin. But does your Lordship
believe that this shall ever be verefied of you? Why should you not? For are
not you the great Instrument and Agent in advancing the Edict for Sports to its
full execution; And why should you not then believe the rest, that in the
height of your present prosperity you shall be destroyed for evermore? And why
do you not believe it? For David says, A brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this: to wit, when he wicked spring as the Grass, and
when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed
for ever. And do you not know, do you not understand this* Then you fill up
the Prophecy to the full, as verefied of you wholly.

L. p. ibid. But on the other side, GOD forbid too, that your Majesty should
let both Laws and Discipline sleep, for fear of the name of Persecution, and
in the mean time, Let Master Fisher and his fellows angle in all parts of
your Dominions for your Subjects, etc.

P. Here (I hope) you speak it seriously, GOD forbid. At least in part. For
you name two things: Laws, and Discipline: Laws, against Jesuits, as Fisher
and his fellows. And herein it may be questioned perhaps by some, whether you
speak seriously GOD forbid, that such Laws should sleep. For you know they
have slept so long a time, and so soundly, Taking Gods Name in vain by the
Prelate.
that I fear your God forbid will not prove loud enough to awaken them. And as
for Discipline, that is for your Puritans. And for that you need not trouble the
King to break his sleep, your self I trow, can look well enough to the
keeping of that awake. For in truth it can take no rest for you. And therefore
neither in this respect need your God forbid to be serious, as being altogether
superfluous. Only the best use, that you can make of it (as you know it better
then I can tell you) is, is that your God forbid here may prove so happy (for
the vindicating of your Reputation) as to persuade the misdeming world, that if
the Laws against Jesuits do sleep, you are not the cause of it, who ever else:
God forbid: and if Dissipline be over wakefull and too quick, and exceed all
bounds, as having no Law to confine it (alas!) you are not the Man, God forbid.
For wake or sleep your [ God forbid your Majesty should let them sleep] argues
plainly, that the keeping of the Discipline awake, is his part, whose it is not
to let them sleep? It Is well, my Lord you have so strong a back to lay your
burdens upon (as is touched before) especially when they press too hard upon
you, as in the clamours and outcryes against your outrages. But what? Do you
come here with your God forbid your Majesty should suffer Discipline to sleep,
when but a little before, and almost with the same breath, you said God forbid
I should ever offer to persuade a Persecution in any kind? Do we not know what
the awakening of Discipline is? Is it not like the awakening of a sleeping
Lion? Does not then the rigorous and incessant restless execution of
Discipline (so as it can never be suffered once to sleep) trench upon
Persecution at least as near, as you say at after, sundry errors of the
Church of Rome come near the overthrowing of the Foundation, or as their
worshipping of Images comes too near heathenish Idolatry? But in your Close,
you apply your God forbid only against the Jesuits. That Is well, that you
press it not with your Discipline upon your Puritans, as you do the Laws
against Romes Fishermen. And I note here, that for Jesuits you have Laws: but
for Puritans you have Discipline, without Laws: or as it stands in opposition
to Laws. But what follows? Alas! what do I find saluting me in the very
front of your next page?

L. p. 12. Now as I would humbly, beseech your Majesty to keep a serious watch
upon these Fishermen, which pretend S. Peter's, but fish not with his net: so I
would not have you neglect an other sort of Anglers in a shallower water.

P. Yet your words seem to import a greater zeal in you against the Jesuits,
then against your Puritans. For touching those, you humbly beseech: but
concerning these, you only would have. And yet what you only would have, is
somewhat, and perhaps as prevailing (especially when you set it on in private)
as your open humbly beseeching. Yea being Primate of all England, or Patriarcha
Alterius Orbis, I know not whether you may speak it in the Popes style,
Platina in ^ita Bon. 3.
Volumus and jubemus, as much to say, I would have: and then by this reckoning
it would surmount, I humbly beseech. But what is this other sort of Fishers,
that you would not have his Majesty to neglect? Or what these Anglers in a
shallower water? or what their bad nets? This has relation to Discipline, as
the former to Laws; and so though for your Reputation sake you modestly spare
to name them, yet they are in plain English, your Puritans, and those,
Puritan-Preachers especially, because Anglers. But where are there any such
creatures, as Puritan-Preachers now adays? Do not all conform, and submit to
your Discipline? And are not all Non-Conformists put to perpetual silence, as
in the grave? O, but you say, there is a sort of Puritan Conformists which are
worse then the Non-Conformists, whom you have often said, you would worm out.
And to worm out, is as men tread out the worms out of the ground. Only we
must not call this Persecution, to set your feet with all your weight, upon
Gods Ministers. God forbid. But who are they? Such as will not conform to your
New Discipline and Ceremonies: Such as will not read in their congregation the
Edict for Sports on the Lords day: Such as will not observe the Kings order for
not preaching of Predestination, and other doctrines of Grace: Such as will not
observe the order for bare Catechizing out of the Book, by Simple Question and
Answer, without any exposition: Such as will not forbear preaching in the
Afternoon, and that often times beyond their hour, the people standing on
thorns the while, to be at their Sports, considering that Afternoone-Sermons
are forbidden, but not afternoon-Sports: Such as though for fear they submit
to their Prelates domination, yet you suspect them to be disaffected with your
Church Government, as being an intolerable Tyranny. These are that Serious
Sort of Fishers you mention. But what are those Shallower waters, which you say
they Fish in? Perhaps you mean, they are a Sort of Shallow-braind fellows,
poor Snakes, that angle in shallow waters, that is, have but a poor
Vicaridge, or Stipend, or preach to Shallow-simple people, (the Great-Fishes
being in your deeper Seaes taken with your Long-lined Angle, or Sweep-net) or
in a Shallow water, and that of force, because you forbid them to Fish in the
Deep waters of Election and Predestination, leaving them only the Shallowes of
moral Divinity to fish in, whereby they shall never be able to catch one good
Fish, but only such small Gudgions, as when the net is drawn to shore, or cast
away. And the Shallower waters ye oppose to these Deep waters the Jesuits Fish
in. For they Fish in all the deep Rivers, and Ponds in the Land, yea and most,
in the Bishops Seaes, or Cathedrals, where they find and enclose whole Sholes
of Fish; and they Egkathetoi.
Fish in the Deeps of men's hearts, and leave not a Creek unfished, and those
no simple ones neither, I will not say, Lords and Ladies in the Court, though
themselves dare profess it So as they can Episcari.
Fish out of them the discovery of all the Mysteries of State, whereby they
maintain a rich Trade of such Commodities, by way of intelligence to Rome and
Spain and other Foreign parts. Whereas your other sort of Anglers have
indeed an Angle and Line, that will dive into the secrets of Man's heart, and
that is the plain and powerful preaching of Gods Word, which pierces even to
the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart: but happily, this is that which you call their bad
nets, which they Fish withal. Indeed they Fish not with the Golden-nets of
Heliogabalu^; they use not to bait their hooks with guided Flattery, nor with
the glittering show of humane learning, in pouring forth Greek Sentences, which
the Fish only gaze upon, but never bite, only (as Nihil est facilius, quam
imperitam multitudinem volubilitate verborum decipere, quae quicquid non
intelligit, plus miratur. Nabis sine Cortice* Her.
Jerome says) most admiring, what they least understand; and which every
novice newly cropped out of the shell of Grammar School, with the help of Books
can con, and recite: which is not to Fish with Peter's net, not to preach sound
Divinity to the edification and Salvation of Gods people, but to Fish for a
Whale, for some great Cathedral, or so. And therefore perhaps also you call
the nets of these men, bad nets, as being either broken with age (preaching the
good old Saving Truth) such as will not hold a good Fat Fish, or benefice, as
when they take to themselves such a liberty in Preaching the truth, and against
sin, as they come to loose all: or too small, such as will not enclose a
plurality of great Fishes, though they be in Several Seaes or Diocese. Or not
like to the Monks net, which he used to spread his Table withal, till under
this veil of humility he crope up to the Lord Abbots chair, and rich Table,
where he used his net no more, having taken the Fish he looked for. Thus I
suppose by this time I have fished out your meaning of that other sort of
Fishers and Anglers, whom you would not have his Majesty to neglect. But if he
do, I hope your Lordship will not neglect to hinder such Fishers from setting
up their Busses in your Seaes, or to have the least private Pond or Chapel to
angle in. You said well to such fellows (when the time was) when with the help
of Noy's Arc you suppressed that great Busse of the Feoffees in Trust, which
had it gone on, would have in time drawn many Fishes out of the Devils 2 Timothy
2.26 Ezogremenoi
nets, of whom they are taken captive at his will, and have translated them out
of your brackish and bitter Seaes, into those Fresh Rivers of the waters of
life, where they should have bin out of danger to be caught with your carnal
baits, though they could hardly escape your tearing Hooks. But enough of
this. Yet one thing more here I cannot but note, and that is this: you humbly
beseech his Majesty to keep a serious watch over the Romish Fishers: and
withal you add, The Prelates Counsel to the King perilous.
that another Sort of Anglers be not neglected. Who this other sort is, is
showed, namely your Puritan Preachers: that is to say, The most godly,
painful, zealous Ministers in the Land; and so the most vigilant watchmen to
preserve the flocks of Christ from Wolves and Foxes, that seek to devour
them. And who are these Wolves and Foxes, but these Romish Fishers you speak
of? that I may not say also, your homebread Wolves and Foxes, the Prelates, and
their Faction. Now if the Laws against these Wolves and Foxes do sleep, and
if the faithful watchmen be removed, and none but a sort of dumb Isay. 56.10,
11.
dogs left, that either cannot, or will not, or dare not bark, but
themselves help to devour the flocks, as the Prophet speaks: do you think,
that though the King should keep never so serious watch, it were possible to
preserve his people from perishing by these Wolves? Certainly the case being
so, though the King should watch both night and day, and had Argus his eyes,
yet he should but weary himself to no purpose, yea although he had the help of
your many-eyed dogs your Pursuants (who are cunninger at fastening upon the
Shepherds, then upon the Wolves) to boot. For then how easily and quickly may
the Wolves and Foxes devour all the Flocks in the Land, when the faithful
Shepherds and wathmen (as your Lordship knows Leo-well) are taken away; and
when those Fishers can show the people this your Book, which as a vast net were
able at one draught to enclose multitudes, by ex^rting them to be reconciled to
Rome, and that upon this one ground, that the Church of England and of Rome is
one and the same Church, no doubt of that? of which anon.

But yet, me thinks, I have not all this while dived deep enough to sound the
bottom of this word, Not neglect. Somewhat of a moderate Speech, in the
smoothness of the bark. Not neglect, as if you should say, I would not have
your Majesty to be too rigorous against the Puritan Ministers, good men, but
yet I would not have you to neglect them. But we cannot better find out the
full meaning of this word, but by the large Commentary of your Practices, which
summed up together, amount to thus much. I would not have your Majesty to
neglect, that is, I would not have your Majesty neglest means, that can
possibly be devised, for the utter rooting out of these Puritans, that do so
pester your Kingdom. And for that you must make your main aim at the
suppressing of the Puritan Ministers. For smite the Shepherd, and the sheep
will be Scattered. Now forasmuch as all Non-conformists, are put to perpetual
silence, wherein we have been helped by your good Laws: and we want Laws to
deal^ with your Puritan Conformists: therefore we must supply that with
policy, backed with your Royal Power. Your Majesty must set forth Edicts,
laying a straight charge on us Prelates, to see them executed. For instance:
That all Ministers, yea and that in their own Persons* not by their Curates, do
read in their several Congregations respectively your Book for Sports on
Sundays and Holy Days. This will pack away a good many of them, who I know
will never read it. Le^ another be made, for setting up of Altars in all
Churches, as that for S. GREGORY'S under S. Paul's, which would be pulished in
Print, although in the mean time it be safely kept among the Records of the
Counsel Board; and your Proclamation since enjoynes all Orders for Religion to
be observed, whether Public, or Private, being made at the Counsell-Board. A
third, to prohibit all Lectures on the week days, and also preaching on the
Afternoones on Sundays. A fourth, prohibiting Controverted points to be
preached on at all, or Predestination, etc. which will mainly pinch the
Puritans. A fifth, That whatsoever Rites we Bishops do or shall impose upon the
Churches, may be ratified under your Majesty's Broad Seal, both for the
preventing of Premunires, and suppressing Clamours of the People against the
Prelates, and enforceing Ministers to obey them. A sixth, That a Proclamation be
published, to inhibit all men from speaking or writing against the Religion of
the Church of England, As it is now established, leaving out that other Phrase,
as it was in Queen Elizabeth's time, and turning into, As it is Now established.
And to all these add, Under pain of your Majesty's most heavy Displeasure; not
nominating any particular punishment, because of the Laws, but leave that to
us* for so long as you do but give us power, we shall not want means and
ways to punish them, so long as either the High Commission, or Star Chamber
do stand. And thus in short time, there should not one Puritan be left in the
Land. And all this I mean, by, I would not have you neglest.

Thus we know your mind, But in the mean time, my Lord you might do well to
consider and consult, what may be the Consequences of these things, that you
thus load the King withal, What? Thus to root out the Puritans, and so by your
Innovation of the State of Religion by Law established, to make way for your
Reconciliation with Rome? Take heed what you do. Have you not learned that
principle in the Politics, That Sudden Changes in the Civil Government, and
most of all in Religion, is full of peril? And another notable point of
prudence I have read of, For a Prince (how ever he may happily connive, yet) not
to appear the prime Author of such projects and practices, as may breed a
heart-burning in the people. For as the Heathen Poet sung, Invidia Siculi non
invenere Tiranni
Majus Tormentum --.
And the Wiseman says, Pro. 27.4.
Who can stand before Envy? Not Caesar himself And therefore if you tender the
Kings honor, and the peace and weal of his Kingdom, do not lay too great a
burden upon him. Give way, that some things may be imputed to your zeal, so
as if you should come to be questioned for it (as you have no such fear, so
long as there is no Parliament, which I hope you will look too well enough) the
King may have opportunity to show his favor, in spreading his Royal wing over
you. But my Lord you profess great love to his Majesty, and to the peace and
prosperity of his Kingdom: Will you now show how zealously and sincerely you
love the King and his people at this time? At this calamitous and dangerous
time, when you see a whole Kingdom, even his Native Country fallen off at one
clappe. And for what cause? Some say, It Is for Religion, because they cannot
enjoy it in that purity, nor their Consciences in that liberty, as anciently
they did, before the Prelates came to be set over them; but by that their
means, they are more and more pressed (as they complain) to bring them to a
full conformity to your Church of England, as now you have made it, which you
say, is all one with the Church of Rome, and which in your Book you labor to
reconcile to Rome. And can there be any thing more offensive to true Christian
Stomachs, then the burthening of their Consciences with such things as are
against Gods Word, and Christ's Kingdom, and their Christian Liberty? Or is it
not for this Cause* that they are thus fallen off? But the Late Proclamation
given at White Hall Febru. 27. 1639. seems to intimate, that one maine Cause
of the Scots discontent, is the Hierarchicall Government. For there it is said,
We neither can, nor will permit Episcopal Government established by many Acts
of Parliament in that our Kingdom, to be abolished. And again, the
Proclamation says, And further we think to declare unto you, and to the
Christian world, that by our Intention of introducing the Service Book into
that Kingdom, we had not the least thought of Innovation in Religion, in this
or that, but merely to have a conformity with that Worship of God, which is
observed within both our other Kingdoms, though il-minded men have wrested
some things in it to a Sinister Sense. Thus it seems to me, that the Scots are
discontented with Episcopal Government, and Ceremonies; which usually go
together. Now were it not a worthy and admirable piece of Service in your
Lordship to his Majesty to study, how the State may be reduced, and that in the
most peaceable and safe way, that may be? Will you be pleased to take a Fools
Counsel? Would you purchase to your self an immortal name, and become a
Mirror and Miracle of this age, and an example to all posterity (the King
having past his word) and so do the best service to the King, that ever any of
his Subjects has done? Do no more but this: Cast away your Rochet and Miter;
Divest your self of all Episcopal Ornaments and Titles* Utterly renounce and
relinquish your Hierarchy, as being not only against Christ's word and Kingdom
(as afterward shall by Gods Grace appear) but also as being most pernicious
to the Peace and Welfare of Civil States, most Antichristian, and one
particular cause expressly of the defection of a whole Kingdom from his
Majesty. Now show hereby, that you so love the King, that rather then he shall
loose one of his Kingdoms thus, you will utterly and voluntarily depose your
self from your Hierarchicall throne. And I know your Lordship does every where
profess your love to peace, and tell us very much of it in your Book. Now can
there be a more peaceable way then this to reconcile Scotland, and reduce them
under the Kings Government? And as for ceremonies, if they stand in the way, I
assure my self, were your Hierarchy but once removed out of the way, either
his Majesty would take an Order for them, or they would even sponte sua of
their own accord fall, as having now no more Masters to wait upon. But enough
of this. It shall be my daily prayer in the mean time, that GOD would establish
his Majesty's Kingdoms with the Gospel of peace, and the Peace of the Gospel
in our days, and to our Posterity till the coming of Jesus Christ. You proceed.

L. p. 13. It Is truth, I must tell it, it is the Gospel I must preach it. 1 Cor.
9.16.

P. 'Twere well, if you told nothing but Truth, and that not only, of
necessity, with a must, but of Phil. 1.15.
love, and of a ready mind. But your Book will further show what truth you tell
And for the Gospel, when do you preach it? Or how? What? As the Apostle did
whom you quote? And if you must preach it, why do you restrain others from it?
That your self only might preach? Why then preach you no oftener? Surely your
restraining of others from preaching, puts the greater necessity upon your
self (if indeed you be a Minister of the Gospel, and not a dumb Priest) to
preach the more frequently. For indeed you Prelates take upon you to be as so
many Popes, or universal Pastors over all the Churches in your Diocese
respectively (though you seldom or never preach in any) and the Ministers must
be but your Curates; So as they also must preach no more, nor oftener, nor
otherwise, then you their good Lords and Masters do prescribe and limit them,
by virtue of their oath of Canonical obedience. Thus have you taken away the
Luke 11.
Key of knowledge, and hanged it at your own girdle, so as neither ye go into
heaven your selves, and those that would enter, ye hinder. But what do I say?
Have you and your Prelates reserved to your selves (as one of the Papal
Reserved Cases) the power of preaching the Gospel? My Lord under correction you
forget your self. Do you not remember the Kings Order for preaching, or rather
for not preaching, that no Ministers, of what degree or rank soever they be,
Archbishop, Bishop, and all under them, shall not preach of the Doctrines of
Election, Predestination, Redemption of the Elect only, Effectual vocation of
the Elect only, Justification of the Elect only, Assurance of Salvation to
the Elect only in Grace, all which Doctrines are the maine and sole Doctrines
of Grace, and of the Gospel, So as for Ministers not to preach of these, and
maintain them against the Adversaries thereof, and especially in these times
of opposing and undermining the truth of Grace, and of the Gospel, is to cease
to be Ministers of the Gospel? According to which reckoning (if the said Order
be strictly observed, as you Prelates in all your Visitations do charge the
Ministers, inquiring of those, that be Delinquents in this kind, to suspend or
admonish them) you have no preachers of the Gospel left in the Church of
England. And do you not remember, that one Lent, after the said Order was come
forth, two of the learned, Du^ham, Sarisbury.
and most Orthodox Prelates of the Church of England for preaching before the
King of such points, were both checked for it, since which time, I do not
hear they have transgressed the said Order? And therefore I conceive, that his
Grace of Canterbury is by the same Order inhibited to preach the Grace of the
Gospel, or the Gospel in these days. King James indeed gave out an Order,
inhibiting all inferior Ministers only to preach of those points, but
reserved a liberty to Prelates and Deanes, to preach of them, as being men of
more discretion, then ordinary. But now Bishops, nay Archbishops, and all are
involved. Therefore had not your Lordship forgot your self, I suppose, you
would not have told the King to his face, That the Truth you must tell, and the
Gospel you must preach. Therefore correct that word, my Lord.

L. ibid. And when the Foundations of Faith are shaken, be it by Superstition,
or Profaneness, he that puts not to his hand, as firmly as he can, to support
them, is too wary, and has more care of himself, then of the cause of Christ.

P. A Speech Surely, which without any more ado were sufficient to vindicate
your Reputation with all good men* had your words but a right meaning. But your
Foundations of Faith are laid so low in the Earth, Polosus versatur in
universalibus.
in Generalibus, that no man can come clearly to discern them, or what you
mean by them. And besides, did you in this place mean the true Foundations of
Faith indeed, yet being not constant to this in other of your passages, and
much less in your practices, this is of the less credit, to obtain even of
Charity it self any favorable interpretation. And having read over your Book,
we come to be so well acquainted with your Foundations of Faith, that we may
say truly, It no more belongs to you to put to your hand to support the true
Foundations, then it did to 2 Samuel 6.6, 7
Vzzah to stay the Arc, when the Oxen shook it. For which his meddling, the
Lord smote him. And I fear little better will be your reward. Nay what reward
shall you expect, who instead of supporting the Foundations of Faith, do put
your heart, and head, and hand, and all you can to supplant them? (As we shall
see all along.) And I am persuaded, the more you speak in this kind, the more
you rub and gall your own Conscience, and make it so tender in this respect,
that the least touch of conviction goes to your heart.

But stay: Do I not mistake, Foundations of Faith, instead of Superstition and
Profaneness? For Them, here, may have for Antecedent as well Superstition and
Profaneness, as Foundations of Faith. And so the sense runs thus, He that
puts not to his hand as firmly as he can to surport them, that is, Superstition
and Profanesse, is too wary, etc. And now that I consider it better, this must
be your meaning, if your words and deeds agree. And for proof, let us come to
particulars. You give us two general instances, whereby the Foundations of
Faith are shaken. The one, Superstition, the other Profanesse, Answerable to
these two, I will help you out with two particular instances, the one of
Superstion, the other, of Profanesse; by both which the Foundations of Faith
are shaken; which we shall see how firmly you Support.

First, For Superstition, I instance in Altars. These you erect: these you bow
unto. Now to set up, and bow unto, or before, or pray toward an Altar of wood
or stone, overthowes Christ, the Prime and maine Foundation of Faith; and that
by your own Confession. For Altars in the Old Testament were ordained of GOD
to be Types and Figures of Christ, as also were the Sacrifices, and the
Priests. But now Christ being come, our only Sacrifice, our only High Priest,
and our only Altar, those Types do all cease. And in the New Testament, as
Christ is called our Sacrifice and High Priest; So also our Altar. Heb. 13.10.
We have an Altar (says the Apostle) whereof they have no right to eat, which
serve the Tabernacle. Why so? For the Levites or Priests, which still served
the Tabernacle, rested still in the Typical Altar, denying Christ to be come,
and so they have no right to Christ the true Altar, he being come, and having
abolished all Types. And the Apostle there does clearly prove this our Altar
to be Christ. For (says he in the very next words, as a reason annexed) The
bodies of those Beasts, whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the High
Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp: Wherefore Jesus also, that he
might Sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. Let
us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach For
here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come. By him therefore let
us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his name. In which words taken together, Christ is set
forth unto us both as our only Altar, and as our only High Priest, and as our
only Sacifice. First, as our only Altar, verse. 10. Secondly, as our only
High Priest; For so he stands in relation to the Leviticall Priesthood, as the
Truth to the Type, v. 11, 12. Thirdly, as our only Sacrifice, in offering his
own blood, v. 11. And thus he is said to Sanctify us. And this sanctifying
has special relation to Christ, as the only Altar. For in the Exodus 29.37.
Law, no Sacrifice, or Offering was sanctified, but by the Altar. being offered
up upon it. As Christ says to the Scribes and Pharisees those blind guides.
Math. 23.19
Ye Fools and blind: whether is greater the gift, or the Altar, that
sanctifies the gift? Thus every gift, every Sacrifice is sanctified by the
Altar, on which it was offered up. This Altar is only Christ, whose blood
being offered up upon the Altar of his Divinity, Person, or Nature, was thereby
sanctified, and accepted of GOD, for an All-sufficient Sacrifice for our
sins. And thus both the persons of all true believers, and their Spiritual
Sacrifices are Sanctified, being offered up, and presented to GOD on the Altar
Christ. Our Persons, as, Heb. 13.12. and our gifts, or Sacrifices, v. 15. By
him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. Thus through Faith in Christ's
Name, all our Sacrifices of Prayer, of Praise, of Alms, and of a Contrite
heart, are Sanctified and accepted of GOD, as Testimonies of our Faith,
Charity, Repentance, Thankfulness, and Obedience, as being offered up upon
our only Altar Christ. This only Altar it is, that Sanctifies the gift. Thus
we see how these three, Altar, Priest, Sacrifice, are equally, and inseparably
resident in Christ. So as he is as well our only Altar, as our only High
Priest, and our only Sacrifice of expiation. And Bellarmine himself
confesses, that these three, Altar, Priest, Sacrifice, are Relatives, and
always go together. He therefore that sets up another Altar besides Christ,
may as well set up another High Priest, and another propitiatory Sacrifice, as
Antichrist does in the Mass. And to set up any one of these, not only shakes,
but quite overthrowes the maine Foundation Christ. And for the Altar, the
Sanctification of all Sacrifices and offerings is so proper and peculiar unto
it, that one of your Dr. P^^klinton in his Sermon of Christian Altars.
Divines, going about to maintain your Christian Altars (as he calls them, but
indeed Antichristian) says expressly, that of necessity there must be an Altar
in every Church, as of wood or stone, to Sanctify the Sacrifice, otherwise it
should be altogether unsanctified. And how comes this Altar of his and yours to
have such a treasure and overplus of holiness in it, as to communicate such
holiness to the Sacrifice, yea to the Sacrifice of Christ's body upon it (as he
puts it) but by the Bishops Consecration of it, as the same Author says, whose
Book is by your Chapleins license published in Print. So as it seems your
Episcopal consecration of the Altar infuseth a holiness into it, and the
Altar communicates and imparts its holiness to the Sanctifying even of the
Sacrifice of Christ's body it self, which you would not have to be far off
from the Altar. But now it being most evident hereby, that your Altars do
quite overthrow the Foundation Christ, who is our only Altar: how firmly you
put to your hand to support this Foundation, I call heaven and earth to
witness against you; who being on the contrary a Supporter of Altars, and so a
Supplanter of the only true Altar Jesus Christ, you give sentence against your
self, as one that is too wary, and has more care of himself, then of the
Cause of Christ. And forasmuch as you are so zealous in promoting your Altars
in every Church, I do here in the Name of Jesus Christ, protest against you, as
a most notorious Adversary of Christ, and so an Antichrist, a setter up of
Judaisme or Heathenisme in your Altars; and I do utterly renounce all
communion with you in your services, the principal part whereof you place in
your Altars, which are so many damnable Idols, which you adoring, are damnable
Idolaters, and which are set up and upholden to the intolerable reproach of
Christ, and whereby he is altogether denied and renounced. And thus you give
just cause to all true Christians to separate themselves from your communion,
in your worship of a false Christ, as your false Altar, if they will hold their
communion with Christ.

Now for the second Instance of shaking the Foundation Christ, which is
Profanesse. Tell me, are not the ten Commandments Fundamentalls, as being the
principles and rules of our Sanctification. So as the Popes Parasites are not
so impudent, as in their Decretals, and other writings, to affirm, that he can
dispense with the moral Law, although they say of him in the Decretalls, That
Papa aliquando nimium Papaliter dispensat, The Pope sometimes dispenses too
papally, or Pope-like. What say you then of the 4 th Commandment, touching the
Sabbath day of the Lord our God, and the Sanctification thereof? Dare you say,
the Commandment is not Moral, being placed in the midst of the Ten? And
though that seventh day (being the Last of the week, as wherein God rested
after the finishing of the work of Creation, which he therefore appointed to
be the Sabbath day, of the Old Testament) be now abrogated, as giving place to
a new Sabbath day, the First of the Week wherein our Lord Jesus Christ (having
finished the work of a New creation) rising again, entered into his Rest,
namely the State of Rest, Immortality, and Glory: is therefore the 4 th
Cammandements Morality so abrogated, as it is not still in force to injoyne us
Christians the Sanctification of that day of the Week, which is the Sabbath day
of the Lord our God, Jesus Christ? Or does it not as well, and by the same
Reason bind us Christians to the Sanctification of the first day of the week,
as whereon the Lord our God Jesus Christ rested from a greater work of
Creation: as it did the Jews to the Sanctification of the 7 th or last day of
the Week, as whereon the Lord God rested from his work of the Creation of
Heaven and Earth? It is so demonstrative and clear, that to deny it, argues
not only gross ignorance in the knowledge of Christ and of Divinity, but also
a mind destitute of grace and true sanctity, that dare imagine the least
imperfection or mutability to be in that, or any other of the Moral
Commandments. Now if the 4 th Commandment bind us Christians (as it is clear
it does, and as hereafter I shall take occasion to be a little more large in
it) to the Sanctification of the Sabbath, or rest day, of the Lord our God,
which is now the First day of the week, upon the same Reason, that it obliged
the Jews of the Old Testament to keep the 7 th or last day of the week: then
is not the open profanation of the Lords day by sports and pastimes, a shaking
of a foundation of Faith? Nor do I mean only a Profanation thereof de facto,
in practice, either through ingnorance, or custom, or frailty: but by open and
professed Toleration and Dispensation, and that by public Edict, encouraging
people to such vain sports, and pastimes, as do most Heathenishly profane not
only the Day, but the very name of Christianity and Christian Profession. So
as this Profanation and so violation of the 4 th Commandment, is of a very
high nature, and a sin of presumption, as wherein humane Authority lifts it
self up against and above the Lawgiver himself, daring to dispense with his
holy and eternal Law, and that in giving liberty to the flesh to commit sin,
even with greediness. Now this Foundation of Faith, whereby the Communion of
Saints, and all true sanctification of life, is supported, and maintained, to
wit, in the due sanctification of this day, in all holy duties, public and
private, being thus not only shaken, but with high contempt trodden under
profane feet, through intolerable pride of men: have you put to your hand as
firmly as you can to support it? Did you interpose your self, that that Book
for Sports might not be revived out of the Ashes, wherein it had lain so long
buried, as it was all, rotten, and forgotten? Or, that it might not be
reprinted, with a new Enforcement? Or at least (if it must needs be so) that it
might not be pressed upon Ministers, to read it in their Congregations to the
manifest dishonor of GOD, and their holy Ministry, and to the great offense of
their Consciences, and of their People? And when the fear of GOD, and their
own Conscience withheld some from reading of it: did you spare any of them
from suspension at least? Did you spare Mr. Wilson of Kent, from Suspending him
with your own mouth? Nay were not diverse Ministers, in Surrey and else where, as
in Kent, Essex, etc. so prosecuted, as either they were put out of their
livings, as Mr. Snelling of Kent, or else for fear of worse, did voluntarily
quit their livings, and got them gone? And when upon petition some were
referred to you, what relief had they? Did you put to your hand, as firmly as
you could to support the poor men? Or did you show them the least mercy or
favor? Nay, on the contrary, are you not the Grand, if not the Sole Instrument
both of reviving, republishing, pressing it upon Ministers, punishing and
oppressing them, yea and undoing them about it? Is this to put to your hand as
firmly as you can to support such a Foundation of Faith, when you not only
shake, but break down the Pillars, by whose Ministry such a foundation is
maintained? Are you not then not only too wary, and one that has more care of
himself, then of the Cause of Christ: but too unreasonably bold, and impious,
in not only not supporting, but putting to your hand as firmly as you can to
the utter demolishing and ruinating of these holy Foundations of Faith, both by
your Antichristian superstition, and Heathenish profanesse? Nay, in so shaking
one Foundation, the 4 th Commandment, in the open toleration of the profanation
of the Lords Sabbath day, you shake all those ten Foundations, overturning all
holiness, all duties to God and Man, as Infidelity against the first
Commandment; Setting up your May-Idol-Poles against the second Commandment:
taking Gods name in vain, in breaking that Baptismall vow of Christianity, in
renouncing all vanity, against the third Commandment: despising and abusing
Gods Ordinances against the fourth: teaching irreverence and disobedience to
Parents and Masters, and that expressly against the fifth Commandment: giving
occasion of murder, against the sixth: of adultery, against the seventh: of
drunkenness, and so of theft, and opening the very flood gate to all
wickedness. To conclude this point, Either your Lorship is most grossly
ignorant of the Foundations of Faith, what they be, or you are extremely self
blind in imagining, that the world will not suspect any Serpent lurking under
the green leaves of your goodly words, having too much tasted of your bitter
fruits; so as your fair words, and foul actions, must needs make men as much
abhor your graceless hypocrisy, as they do your shameless impiety, while
under a fair color and mere pretense of holding and upholding the
Foundations of Faith, you undermine them, and blow them up.

L. p. [13, 14. Comparing the Church to a Hive of Bees, you say] Now the King
and the Priest, more then any other, are bound to look to the Integrity of the
Church, in Doctrines and Manners, and that in the first place. [And a little
after] Now in this great and busy work, the King and the Priest must not
fear to put their hands to the Hive, though they be sure to be stung. The
Kings case (as King David's) is to be stung with Bees: but when it comes to the
Priest, the case is altered: they come about him like Waspes, or like Hornets,
rather; All sting, and no honey there. And all this for no offense, nay
sometimes for service done them, would they see it, etc.

P. However you may please your self in your conceits, in playing with this
your similitude of Bee-hive: yet perhaps upon a review of all circumstances,
you will begin to discern no small incongruity, except you can salute it with,
Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus: A Similitude runs not upon all four.
For first, A Hive of Bees you know, is a kind of complete Commonweal within
it self. Such is Christ's true Church. The Chief and great Master-Bee in this
Hive, is Christ, and his holy Spirit: A Christian King, who is in and of the
Hive, is under Christ, a kind of Subordinate Master-Bee; whose Office it is, to
see, that the express voice and Law of Christ, and that alone, both touching
Doctrines and Manners, be duly observed both by the Ministers and People, and
that the Delinquents and Offenders be either reformed, or punished, according
to the same Law of Christ. As for the Priest, whom you name, and set Cheek by
Jowle with the King, and that twice here for failing: let me tell you, that the
New Testament, and so the true Christian Church knows not, neither
acknowledges any Priest, besides Christ, who is, as the only Altar, so the
only Priest of his Church; as is noted before. And did not I say, That Altar
and Priest would ever go together? Here you are up with your Priest. And who
is this Priest? Even no less, then the Metropolitan of all England. Poor
humble Priest! But a Priest, however. Otherwise what should you do with your
Altar, we spoke of, if you had not a Priest to it? And having an Altar and
Priest, you must needs have a Sacrifice too, else all would be lame. As Isaac
said to his Father, Genesis 22.7.
My Father, here is fire and wood, but where is the Sacrifice? So you may Say,
we have here an Altar, and Priest; we must have a Sacrifice too. But (I say)
the true Church of GOD acknowledges no Priest, but Christ, as no Altar, no
Sacrifice but Him. Only indeed all true believers are called, and made of GOD
Rev. 1.6.
Kings and Priests and 1 Pet. 2.5.9.
a royal Priesthood, as were also the believing Exodus 19.6.
Jews under the Old Testament, to whom Moses says, Ye shall be unto me, says
God, a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nati^n. As for Aarons Priesthood, it is
abolished and swallowed up in our only High Priest, Jesus Christ, Heb. 7.17.
made a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Yet every believer is
a Priest, to 1 Pet. 2.5.
offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. Which shows a plain
difference between Christ's Priesthood, and our royal Priesthood. For We offer
up Spiritual Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ, but he by himself offered the
Sacrifice of himself to GOD for us. So as not even Ministers of Gods word are
otherwise Priests, but as they are believers only in their public Ministry
they are the mouth of Gods people, in offering up to GOD Spiritual Sacrifices
of Prayer and thanksgiving by Jesus Christ. But your Priesthood, my Lord is a
new Order, of humane Ordinance, and Ordination, not found in, nor founded upon
Gods word, and therefore a false, and unlawful Priesthood. Heb. 5.4.
For no man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of GOD, as was
Aaron. But your Priesthood has no calling from GOD. Nor does the New Testament
once call a Minister of the Gospel hierus, Sacerdos, Priest. It calls them
Presbuterous indeed, Presbyters, or Elders, but never hiereis, Sacerdotes,
Priests; for hiereus, is properly such a Priest, as offers a slain
Sacrifice, as hiereion, is a Sacrifice that is slain. And thus are you
Priests, in Sacrificing either Christ's body, as in the Mass, or else the Bodies
of his Saints, who are in this respect accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter.
Romans 8.36. Let therefore the Church of Rome, (and yours of England, if ye will)
have her Priests, Altars, Sacrifices: as for the true Church of Christ, she
admits none of all these. And though you yoke your Priest, or (as at P. 155.
after) your very alias, the Archbishop of Canterbury with the King: yet we
must put kasma mega, a vast difference and disparity between them. For first a
Christian King, or Magistrate Supreme is (as we touched before) both within,
and of the Hive: but the Priest you speak of, is quite without the Hive, and
none of the Hive, no Priest of Christ's true Church, but an intruder, Droane,
Waspe, or Hornet.

Secondly, good Christian Princes, executing their office aright, are Isa.
49.23.
Nursing Fathers to the Church, and help to bring in supply to the Hive, and
guard it from vermin and weather: but your Priest, even the whole Generation,
and swarm of them, are Step-fathers to the Bees, and are Droanes, eating up
the Honey, as you confess here of some; if not Waspes and Hornets also,
Stinging and Killing the Bees, or chasing them out of the Hive, into some
hollow tree in the Desert.

Lastly, the King doing his office in, and to the Hive, is loved, reverenced,
and ob^yed by the Bees, and they yield him a Tribute of their Honey: But when
your Priest puts his rough hand to the Hive, the Bees are ready to fly about
his ears, as not acknowledging any such Usurper. And have you never read nor
heard, that if one that is chaste, come among the Bees, not offering violence
unto them, they will never offer to sting him: but if an adulterous person come
amongst them, they will quickly smell him out, and be all about his ears? And
be sure, Christ's Bees cannot brook such Priests, as smell of the whore of
Babels Smock, and commit spiritual whoredom with her, or have any hankering
affection after her. And therefore mervaile not, if (as you say) when it comes
to the Priest, the Bees come about like Waspes, or Hornets, all sting, and no
honey for your Priest there. And you seem to speak it feelingly. Surely if you
deal roughly with the Bees, and begin to lay about you, they will be about your
Ears. Therefore be not cursed unto them, least you make them as angry as a Be.
Thus by your patience I have truly and genuinely applied your Similitude. As
for the occasion, what ever it be, or may be, whereupon you bring it in, and so
apply it, so much complaining of the Bees, for their stinging, as if you felt
the present smart of it: though perhaps an ordinary Be may smell it out, yet I
will not take upon me to divine it. But if you will contend and offer violence
to a whole Hive, forcing the Bees beyond their nature, though you be never so
well armed Cap a pied, from top to toe, as with 1 Samuel 17.38.
Saul's armor, so as the Bees cannot reach you: yet how shall you escape the
sting of the great Master-Bee, JESUS CHRIST, who is able with one whoope to
raise an army of flies to plague the Egyptian Tyrants and Taskmasters, for
their extreme violence offered to his poor Bees. And never look that such
Bees should ever brook your Priest, as having learned by too much experience,
that Ioh. 1^.10.
he comes not but to kill, and take the honey. As Christ says of the Thief,
or Usurper, that climbeth up into the Sheepfold another way, He comes not,
but to steal, kill, and to destroy.

Again, I must crave a little more of your patience, while I somewhat more
thoroughly Scan your Conjunction of the King and Priest so closse, and
inseparably together. The King and the Priest: or, The King and the Prelate:
or, The King, and the Bishop: according to a new Late Start up Proverb, or (as
you make it) a new Maxim in the Politics, No Bishop, no King. Now for a
ground whereon to pitch the Mathematical Staff of my ensuing Demonstration, I
must beg two Ait^mata, or Demands: First, That ever a King is, good; this is
such a principle, as transcends the Demonstration of Art. For, Romans 13.
He (...) Minister of GOD to thee for Good: Ergo Good. The Second is, That a
Priest or Prelate (as being out of the rank of Gods Creation, and Ordination)
is ever Bad. These two things granted, (as they may not be denied) I say: It is
not good, that Good and Bad be joined together. Although as Scal. Exercit.
contra Cardanum.
Scaliger says, Malum non est, nisi in bono: Evil is not, but in good. But
the King and Priest thus linked together, are like to two Planets in
Conjunction, the one (as Astronomers tell us) Benign, the other Malignant* and
during the Conjunction, the Benign Planet is not so forcible in its kindly
influence, as the Malignant is potent in hindering it, and in sending forth his
own more predominant Malignity, not so easily qualified by the Benignity of the
other. And they say again, that some Planets are of such a temper, as they are
neither good, nor bad, but as they are in Conjunction with others; if with a
good Planet, they are good; if with a bad, evil. As we read of King 2 Chro. 24.
Ioash, who so long as good Iehoiada the High Priest lived* reigned well: but
he being dead, he by the bad Counsel of his Princes fell to Idolatry. So an
evil Planet being in Conjunction with an indifferent, may cause it to do
hurt, which in its own nature is not much malignant. Again, it is observed of
the Oak (which for strength among all the Trees, may be an Emblem of a King)
being all overgrown with the Ivy (which for its many insinuations and windings
every way, may well resemble your Priest) it thrives not; the fewer leaves and
branches it puts forth, for shade and protection from a shower or storm, or
heat of Summer: and little fruit, to feed the hungry: for it is hide-bound, so
guirt in by the Ivy, that it cannot prosper. Yea such a Conjunction cannot be
more fitly parallelled, in my judgment, then to the feet of that Image in Dan.
2.
Daniel: the Head whereof was of gold: the breast and arms of silver: the
belly and thighs of brass: his legs of iron: his feet part of iron, and part
of clay. The Image represented the Successive Reigns in the Babilonian
Monarchy, each worse then other, till at last it came to ruin. And it may be
an Emblem of all Kingdoms and States, which if they want the ancient Roman
Lustration, or Purgation every five years (like some old Statutes of England
for a Trienniall Visitation, a certain thing, which was wont to be called a
Parliament) or so, will (according to an old observation in the Politics)
easily grow worse and worse. As the Roman Poet observed in his time: Aetas
parentum pejor avis; Tulit nos equiores,
mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem.


In English thus: Our Fathers Age, which they did pass,
Grew worse then our Grandfathers was:
Our selves worse then our Parents be,
And our next race proves worse then we.


But we pitch (to be silent in the rest of the Image) upon the feet, mixed of
iron and clay; the last legs (as the Proverb) which that Empire went upon.
Iron (as Daniel interprets it) signifies strength; but Clay, brittlenesse;
which intermeddled with the Iron, adds no strength to it, but only makes it
swell the bigger, which swelling portends and causes ruin. For the Iron
relying on its mixture with the Clay, and the Clay presuming to do great
things, by being joined and backed with the Iron: here is the Portent. Rev. 17.
In the Revelation we read of Kings, giving their power to the Beast, that is,
giving way to the Beast, or to his limbs, the Priests, to exercise a power over
them, and their Kingdoms: For which cause England was wont to be called the
Popes Ass. v. 16, 17.
The ten horns, which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the whore,
and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree,
and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled. On this GOD, and on his word, will we wait. Sure we are, that the
whore of Babylon, with her Priests, shall Rev. 18, 19.
come down into the dust. And verse. 4.
all Gods people are admonished to come out of her, least they partake of her
sins, and receive of her plagues; So in due time, when Gods word shall be
fulfilled, the Iron shall unmixe it self from the Clay, that the one may be
preserved, and the other go to his Act. 1.25.
own place, to the earth, whence it came, and whe^eof it is.

But in the next place, for what good end and purpose do you link your Priest
with the King? Because (say you) They, more then any other are bound to look
to the Integrity of the Church, in Doctrine, and Manners. Surely, for the
first, the King, we do in all humility embrace and acknowledge him, as Gods
vicegerent, bound to do that office for the true Church of Christ, which Gods
word has enjoined and requires of him. And that consists generally in ^his, as
he is Custos utriusque Tabulae, the Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
Keeper in trust of both the Tables of the Law: he is to see, ut currat Lex,
that Gods Law and Word hina treke, that it may run, have a free passage,
without impeachment; that the Commandments of the Law be kept Sarta tecta,
safe and sound, without diminishing, much less demolishing any one of them;
that nothing be done, either in Doctrine or Manners, or in the worship of GOD,
besides the prescript and precise Rule of Gods written word: that able and
godly Ministers, duly chosen by Gods people, and Congregation, be set over
every Congregation, to preach Gods word diligently to the people, and that the
well deserving be cherished, encouraged, countenanced, and protected from
oppression, but the Droanes cast out of the Hive. This is all the King need to
be careful of about the Hive of Christ. For then, as for Doctrine and Manners
Gods word in the due administration thereof, will sufficiently direct, inform,
instruct, and teach both what to believe, and how to live, and 1 Pet. 2.17.
worship God, and honor the King.

But for the Priest you speak of, to intermeddle: Procul o! hands off, Here Is
no room for him, he may get him to Rome to his Sacrifice. This Priest (as is
already touched) has no calling of GOD at all, and therefore not bound to any
such thing: much less ought he to yoke himself with Kings, that he may
prescribe what Doctrines and Manners do best please his own corrupt and blind
fancy. And as for you my Lord, if you be that Priest (as it is most likely)
what kind of doctrine we might look for at your hand, your Book here will
sufficiently inform us, as we shall see throughout, and as partly we have seen
by your acts, edicts, declarations, and practices. And for Manners: I pray you
what Manners will your Priest teach us? Namely, how to make a leg, or a
courtesy at our coming within the Church, with the posture of our face toward
your Altar: devoutly and lowly to bow, passing by, or approaching your Altar:
devoutly to pray with the face east-wards, toward your Altar: to make a low
leg, or crindge, when the name Jesus is named: to doffe the bonnet, with some
other courtesy, before an Appeal to Caesar.
Image, Cross, or Crucifix: to receive the Communion kneeling before your
Altar: and many such like, as will fit time and place. Yet whether these be
your Manners or Doctrines, you can best resolve us. And if you mean Moral
Manners in life and conversation, can your Priest teach them? Can he that
ruffles up and down the Court in his Silks and Sattens, teach men humility?
Can he that ambitiously aspires to honors and riches in the world, teach men
contempt of the world, and contentedness with a mean estate? Can he that
flatters and dissembles, and plays the Hypocrite, teach men Sincerity and
Truth? Can he that is an R^v. 12.10.
Accuser of the Brethren, teach men Charity? Can he that is a cruel persecuter
of Gods servants and children, teach men to be merciful? Can he that
oppresses the innocent in their cause, and takes away the righteousness of
the righteous from him, teach men to do justice? Can he that hates the very
name of holiness, and the practice and profession thereof in a strict life, as
GOD commands, teach men to be holy? Can he that labors all he can to put out
the light, and to put down Rev. 1.20.
Candlesticks that hold it forth, to set up his blind Priesthood, teach men to
walk as Children of the light? Can he that stops Ministers mouths for
preaching the truth, teach how Ministers ought to preach? Can he that hates
holy Wedlock, and violently As in the Case of Dr. Bastwick, and Mr. Burton.
Separates Man and Wife without Cause, teach Man and Wife their mutual duties
to each other? Can he teach Chastity, who thus exposes married Couples to
Satan's temptations to 1 Cor. 7.5.
incontinencie? Or (in a word) is he fit to look to the Integrity of the Church
in Doctrine and Manners, whose both judgment and affections in both, are
altogether corrupted? Away therefore with your Priest from the King, least that
come to pass indeed, which here you say (as it were to prepare the way) that
the Priest undertaking to qualify the Church, with a new kind of integrity (as
he has already done in a good measure in Doctrine and Manners, he bring to
utter ruin both Church and Kingdom.

Lastly, before I leave your Comparison of the Bee-hive, I cannot but note two
pl^ces of Scripture, which you make (as you use to do, when you apply any
Scripture, which is not a Shoe will fit your foot) very bold with. For the
first: you say, The Kings case (as King David's) is to be stung with the Bees.
For this you quote in the Margent, Psalm. 118.12. And you apply it to the King,
saying, God grant it be never yours. Why, was David stung by the true Church
and Children of GOD, which you compare to a Hive of Bees? You are much
mistaken. David there speaks not only in his own Person, but as a Type,
ingenerall of Gods Church, and in particular of Christ. First, as in his own
Person: who were those Bees that stung him, or buzzed about his ears? Were
they any of Gods Children? Was it not especially Saul, who continually
persecuted him, and sought his life, to have stung him to death? Wherein was he
not rather the Master-Wasp, or the Master-Hornet, that with his 1 Samuel 20.
Swarms of Wasps and Hornets, armed troops pursued after David's life, and
sometime enclosed him like a Swarm of Bees? And for this very Cause, did not
David complain to the Lord of Saul's cruelty, setting forth his wickedness
under the name Psalm. 59.58.
of Heathen? For when Psalm. 59. Title of the Psalm.
Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill him, coming about him like Bees:
David thereupon flies to GOD in prayer, to deliver him from the workers of
iniquity, and to save him from bloody men. ver. 1.2. 5.
Thou therefore, O Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the
Heathen: be not merciful to any wicked Transgressors. And verse. 8. But thou, O
Lord, verse. 8.
shall laugh at them, thou shall have all the Heathen in derision. Now by
Heathen here is plainly meant, Saul and his wicked Servants and Officers, and
that for their heathenish cruelty, seeking to murder innocent David. With such
Bees therefore was he compassed about. That Is for his Person. Secondly, David
in that Psalm, 118. represents the Church of God, that Be hive you Spoke of,
whose Bees are often smoaked out of their Hive, or smothered in the Hive, and
their honey devoured by the wild Boares of the Forest, the Common Bee-hunters,
a right Emblem of the cruel persecuters of Gods Children and Church, who are
here in the world, as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. One fresh bleeding-new
example I could give you of one Member of this Church, one Be of this Hive,
whom you sent your Officers with Swords and Weapons beseting his house to take
him, as you did, and though not to kill him presently, yet with intent, that in
case He did live, His life should be worse then any death. So as, has not such
a one reason to hold himself one of that Church, which David in his Psalm. 58.
Psalm 59.
Psalms, prefigured, as touching the afflicted estate thereof in this world?
But enough of this Instance before. Thirdly, in that Psalm, and that passage
by you quoted, and so foulely misapplyed, David speaks Typically and
Prophetically of Christ, and that principally. They came about him like Bees.
Who? The High Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, who also hooked in the
secular power, Caesar, and the Priest; these came Swarming about Christ, like
Bees; which they did, first in the Garden, where they apprehended him; then in
the High Priests hall, where they accused him; then in the Praetorium, before
Pilate, where they condemned him; as before Herod, where they mocked him: and
last of all, they Stung him to the heart with a Roman Spear, his hands and
feet fast nailed to the Cross. Thus the Great Master Be of the Hive was stung
to death by the Hierarchies instigation. And thus indeed, GOD grant it never be
our Kings case, as it was Christ's. Thus I hope you see by this time, what a
Divine you are in your application of Scripture. If you hear but the buzzing
of a Be, presently that is the Be that stings you. Whereas in truth, you and
all such as you, who are persecuters of Christ, and murderers of him in his
Saints, and Servants, are those Bees that David, and in him Christ complains
of, They came about me like Bees. But take with you what follows: They (these
Bees) are quenched as the fire of thorns: For in the Name of the Lord I will
destroy them.

The Second place (which I wonder at more; and yet I will now Nil admirari,
prope res est una, Solaque quae (...) facere and s^rvare b^atum.
cease to wonder at any thing you either do, or dare to speak) which you
quote, is Rev. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
to every man according as his works shall be. Now this you apply to your self,
as a medicine to cure that sting, which (you say) the Bees have given you. Why,
what Bees do sting you? If any, are they not (and that by your own confession)
the Bees of Gods own Hive, his true Church? And why do they sting you? Is it
not for your slapping of them, and smoking them out of their Hive? But how, or
wherewithal do they sting you? Alas, poor souls, they have no other stings,
but Prayers and Tears, and the sting of Truth, which they preach and profess.
These are their proper stings. Perhaps (as they have cause enough) they pray
against you, as a most cruel persecuter of the poor painful Bees of Christ,
his Ministers, and an overthrower of their Hives, and a destroyer of the Bees.
But such stings you little care for, as which you are not afraid to provoke
more and more against you every day. But believe it, their Prayers like winged
darts, or arrows, fly swiftly, and pierce deep, and will deadly wound where
they light, though as yet ye be not sensible of it. But all this while I hear
not a word of the Hornets-Selfe- stinging. Why do ye not yet cry out of the
deadly sting of your own Conscience, For all the innocent blood of Gods
Servants, which you have shed, and for all the havoc you have made in his
Hive? Nay rather, your heart is so hardened with sin, and blinded with Romish
zeal, that instead of remorse, you look for a reward. And a reward you shall
have of him, whose words you fear not to cite, who Says, Behold I come
quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give to every man, according as his works
shall be. But you tell us immediately before this, that you are stung of the
Bees, many times for no offense, nay sometime for Service done them, would they
see it. Many times for no offense. Therefore it seems sometimes it is for
offense done them by you. But can you name any one time, when they sting you
without being extremely provoked by your offense given them? Show it if you
can. Nay, sometimes (you say) for Service done them. Sometimes? When? And what
Service? Your oppressing and burthening their Consciences with more and more
Romish rites and Ceremonies? Your fetching them up to your High Commission, and
there undoing of them, clipping their wings, that they can now no more do
their office, and bring any more honey to the Hive; and so muzling their
mouths, that they cannot, dare not, so much as humme? What other Service can
they see you do them? Or do you your self know any, that you do in private
for these Bees? Do you now and then whisper a good word for them in the Kings
ear? That were a good heareing, if you did it on the right side. But this
service we confess you do them: You drive them closser to their GOD, make them
pray the more earnestly and fervently, and to be the more provident in the well
husbanding of that poor stock of honey they have got, both because you have
stocked up all those flowers, on which they should gather more; and least that
which they have, you should take from them.

For a Conclusion of this your similitude of the Bee-hive: the Church of Christ
upon earth you compare to a Hive of Bees. And when the Priest puts his hand
to the Hive, he shall be sure to be Stung, and there is no Honey for him. This
Priest is the Prelate, an Hierarchicall man. And as I noted before, the true
Bees of Christ, his true Church, cannot brook such Priests, such Hierarchicall
men, to meddle with them. Ergo hence I conclude, that the Hierarchy, consisting
of Priests, and such like men, as Prelates, or an Hierarchicall Church, is no
true Church of Christ, is not this Hive of Bees, to which you compare the
Church of Christ upon earth. How so? For your Prelaticall Church is such a Hive
of Bees, as the Priest may put his hand to the Hive without any fear or danger
of stinging, at his pleasure. For in that Hive all the Bees are so conformable
to the Priest their Master-Bee, as they yield all subjection to his dictates,
neither do they, or dare they, at any time offer to sting him. But if this
Priest offer to meddle with Christ's Bee-hive, and to impose his Cannon Law, and
Ceremonies upon Christ's Bees, to enforce them to conformity to his Rules, the
Bees do no more acknowledge such a Priest, or Prelate for a Master, then
Christ's Sheep, which will not hear the voice of a strange Shepherd. John 10.5.
And if he will needs force them, he must not blame them, if they sting him.
For as Christ said to the Jews, Ye are not of my Sheep: So such Priests, with
their Hierarchy, are none of Christ's Hive. Prelaticall Churches, therefore are
none of Christ's true Churches. And thus much of the Bee-Hive.

L. p. 15. The Church of England is in a hard Condition. She professes the
Ancient Catholic Faith, and yet the Romanist condemns her of Novelty in her
Doctrine. She practices Church Government, as it has been in all Ages, and
places, where the Church of Christ has taken any rooting, both in, and ever
since the Apostles times, and yet the Seperatist condemns her for
Antichristianisme in her Discipline.

P. It matters not so much, who they be, that thus condemn your Church of
England, as how true it is, whereof you are condemned. Does the Romanist
condemn you of Novelty in Doctrine? And what defense have you against this
charge? You say, She professes the Ancient Catholic Faith. Is this your best
Apology for your Church of England? Profession of Faith no Sound and Sufficient
proof of a true believer.
Is profession sufficient, when you are departed from the Ancient Catholic
Faith? And is not the Ancient Catholic Faith, that, which Christ and his
Apostles taught, and have left recorded in the Scriptures? Dare you deny this?
Now in what particular the Romanist condemns you for Novelty in Doctrine, I
know not. Surely not in those, wherein themselves are equally condemned, I will
instance in two Doctrines, wherein both you and they are Apostatized and
departed from the Ancient Catholic Faith in your Novelty of Doctrine. The
first is your Forbidding of Marriage, wherein thus far you go with the
Romanist, in forbidding Marriage to all sorts of persons for certain times in
the year, in all, amounting to upon 20. weeks, wanting not half a quarter of
half of the year. The Second is, Forbidding Certain Meats, on certain
days, and weeks, in the year. And your Zeal in the observation hereof
shows plainly, that you make it a matter of Religion, as the Romanist does,
and not a mere civil thing, as the Statute makes it. Now let us see what the
Adostle says of both these: for he couples them together: 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils,
speaking lies in hypocrisy, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which GOD
has created to be received with thanksgiving of them, which believe and know
the Truth. For every Creature of GOD is good, and nothing to be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving. For it is sanctified by the Word of GOD, and
Prayer. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be
a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of Faith and good
Doctrine, whereunto thou have attained. So the Apostle. Where we may observe
these particulars. First, That these two Doctrines, Forbidding of Marriage and
certain Meats, are, Doctrines of Devils: Secondly they proceed from lying
Spirits: Thirdly they are lies spoken in hypocrisy; as if some times were more
holy then Marriage it self, Heb. 13.4.
which is honorable amongst all, and at all times: or, as if some meats were
holyer then other, or some more unclean then other, at some times. Fourthly
such as teach, hold, and practice these Doctrines, have cauterized or seared
Consciences, which instead of remorse, glory in these Doctrines, and stiffely
maintain them, and out of which your Prerogative Courts, and other Episcopal
Courts suck no small advantage, making a rich merchandise of them. Fifthly,
That the holding of these Doctrines is a departing from the faith: Apost^sonta,
tines, some shall apostatise, or be Apostates from the faith; such as hold
these Doctrines. And this faith is the true, ancient, Catholic Faith, which
they depart from. Sixthly, These Doctrines, are the marks and fruits of the
last times, perilous times, times of Antichrist, and Antichristian Apostacy;
and therefore they are Doctrines of Novelty. Seaventhly, For the truth and
confirmation of all this, The Spirit speaks it expressly, So as it admits of
no doubting, or gainsaying. Eighthly, and lastly, That it is the duty of every
good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and good
Doctrine, to put the Brethren in remembrance of these things. So as it were to
be wished, that the Church of England had some good Ministers of Jesus Christ,
that durst and would cry out against these Doctrines of Devils, practiced by
the Prelates and their Disciples, and learned from Antichrist himself, and
upheld by his Canon Law against the express word of God. Thus then does not
the Church of England justly lie under the Apostles sentence of condemnation
for Novelty in Doctrine, yea holding Doctrines of Devils, and that by the
express testimony (not of Romanists,) but of Gods Spirit, that cannot lie? I
could give many more instances of novelty in your Doctrine, though not as yet
generally professed, yet practiced, preached and printed by Authority (though
if ye be charged home with it, either that Book shall be burned, and the Printer
blamed, or they will prove but private men's opinions, as you say in your Book)
As Invocation of Saints, Justification by Charity, Erection of Altars, with
many other Popish Doctrines, as also New Arminian Heresies, old Pelagianisme,
newly raked out of hell again, whither they had been long ago remaunded,
which to entertain, and maintain in your Church of England, you have made
your Articles of Religion (and that by an Edict, or Declaration prefixed before
them) to be of a dubious sense, and to equivocate, having a mental Reservation
of sense for the adverse party, while the Orthodox imagines the letter to be
on his side, and as it has ever so been taken, till you altered the case: But
the two former Instances shall be sufficient witnesses against you for the
present, that you are departed from the Ancient Catholic Faith, being justly
condemned of Novelty in Doctrine, yea Doctrines of Devils. So as here ye may
have a sounder Answer to stop the Romanists mouth, charging the Church of
England with Novelty in Doctrine, then to say, She professes the Ancient
Catholic Faith: Tell the Romanist by way of Retortion, That in some things the
Church of England is no more to be condemned of Novelty in Doctrine, then the
Church of Rome is, nor altogether so much.

We come now to your discipline, wherein the Separatist (you say) condemns her
(the present Church of England) of Antichristianisme. A sore Charge, and
sufficient, if true, to separate from you. But what defense have you for this?
Surely you say, She practices Church Government, as it has been in use in All
Ages, and all Places, where the Church of Christ has taken any rooting, both
in, and ever since the Apostles times, and yet the Seperatist condemns her for
Antichristianisme in her Discipline. Here you say something indeed, and to some
purpose, could you make it good. For to say, you profess, is nothing: but to
profess and practice, that is matter of clear evidence. And yet I say, could
you prove it so, it were but to some purpose, and not sufficient to acquit you
from Antichristianisme, which is the maine Point. For Some things were in use
even in the Apostles times, and have continued ever since in all Ages, and all
Places too, where the Church you mean of, has taken now in tract of time a
deep rooting in the Earth, yea even there also, where Christ's true Church has
taken rooting: and yet all this is no sufficient Argument or warrant for the
true Church of Christ presently to embrace them. For instance, The Mystery of
Iniquity began to work in the Apostles time, as he affirms, 2 Thesse. 2.7.
And an example hereof St. John notes in his third Epistle, of Diotrephes, 3
John 9.
who was ambitious of Prelacie, he loved to have, The Preeminence, the Bishops
Chair, he prateth against John, he receives not the brethren, and forbids
them that would, and and throws them out of the Church by Excommunication,
just as you and the Pope do. This ambition and erection of Prelacie or
Hierarchy, was that Mystery of Iniquity, which Satan began to brood and hatch
even in the Apostles days, and wherein we have Diotrephes, quickly grown up as
the first Cock of the Game, of special and particular note, and name, that
durst affront even the Apostle himself. And this Mystery of Iniquity, has
continued ever since, though at first, and in the first Ages it grew up but
slowly, by reason of a to katekon, a Remora, or maine impediment, the Roman
Empire, whose Imperial Seat being once removed from Rome to Constantinople by
Constantine, who consopited, appeased, and put an end to those ten
Persecutions, which had been a great hinderance to Antichrists growth: then
began this Mystery to perke up, and the Bishop of Rome Silvester the first
could be content to wear a Crown, put upon his head by Constantine, which upon
Boniface the eight his head, was multiplied to a triple Crown, one for heaven,
another for earth, and third for purgatory; and thus by degrees successively it
grew up to that height, which we see it now arrived at, even its Akme, or full
Stature, beyond which it cannot go, though it would: So as its main care,
strength, Nec ultra quo jam progrediatur habet.
and policy, is all little enough Parta tueri, to maintain what it has got.
Now (I say) in this Mystery of Iniquity (I mean the Prelacie, or Hierarchy) was
Antichrist begotten, born, bred up, and at length brought to his full maturity
and perfection. Now is this Mystery of Iniquity therefore good, because it is
able to vie and plead Antiquity even as high up, as the Apostles own times,
and so along down to ours? Though I do more then suspect, that you take it in
foul Scorn, that I should Anti-christen your Prelacie or Hierarchy with the
name of the Mystery of Iniquity. But if ye will be patient a while, I shall,
ere I have done, give you (I hope) good Satisfaction. And in the mean time the
Apostle shall pass his word for it, who in the very same place, where he
speaks of the Mystery of Iniquity, does speak also of the Man of Sin, the Son
of Perdition, who is an Adversary, and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped, who sits as God in the Temple of God,
showing himself, that he is God. The very recital of which words may suffice
to stay any reasonable man's stomach from breaking out into outrageous
impatience, against him, that says, The Prelacie is the Mystery of Iniquity.
But you shall have it ( God willing) at full anon.

Again, some of your Divines go about to drive the Antiquity of your holy
Lent-Fast from the Apostles very times, and so to have continued ever since in
all Ages, and Places, where the Church has taken any rooting. And indeed some
Christians even then began to observe Col. 2.21.
Touch not, Taste not, handle not; and to Gal. 4.10.
observe Times, days and Months: but the Apostle condemns all such
observation; and (as before) brands them for Doctrines of Devils, and departing
from the Faith, and denying of Christ. So as though you could prove your
Church Government to have been in use both in, and ever since the Apostles
times, yet it will not follow, that it is such a Government, as either was
practiced, or yet approved by the Apostles themselves. For your
Church Government is altogether Hierarchicall, by Prelates; which the Apostles
never practiced themselves, nor yet approved, but condemned in others, that
either began to practice it, or were inclined and affected thereto. 1 Pet. 5.
Not as Lords over Gods Heritage, says Peter. 2 Cor. 1.24.
Not as having dominion over your Faith, says Paul. Math. 20.
It shall not be so among you, says Christ. 3 Ioh. 9.
Diotrephes loves to have the Preeminence, says John. But of this we shall
have occasion to speak more at after. In the mean time, take this with you,
Did the Apostles, nay (for some hundred years after them) did Prelates keep
Courts, and Consistories, with their Chauncellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries,
Officialls, Tipstaves, Pursuivants, Apparators, like the Roman Lictors, with
their I. lictor, liga.
rodds, for terror, and state? Or had they their private Courts to
excommunicate whom they pleased, and that by a dumb Priest, and for every
trivial matter, and for no just cause? Prove these things my Lord, to have
been in use in the Primitive Ages, at the least for the first 500. years, or
in any place, but where Diotr^phes was, until Antichrist, the Pope, set up
that frame of Hierarchy, with all its Equipage, Train, and Rabble, the just
Image whereof you have set up in the Church of England? You speak big indeed,
but you cannot be as big as your word. If you had leisure to read the
Histories of the Church, and among the rest the Though your Altar-man Dr.
Pockl. in his Christian Altar has censured those Centuriators.
Centuries, they will show you what a vast difference there is between your
Church Government (as both now and of long time it has been practiced in the
Church, both of Rome, and England) and that ancient Government practiced by the
ancient Prelates in the Primitive Ages. And in the Popes Canon Law, and other
Records, a Polidor Virgil De Inventorebus rerum, etc. you may come to know the
Antiquity of your Prelaticall Courts and Consistories, Chancellors,
Archdeacons, Officialls, Commissaries, Registers, and all the fry. For beyond
that seven hild City, the head-spring of this Seaven-Streamed Egyptian Nilus
is not found.

Has not then the Seperatist (as you call him) just cause and ground to charge
your Church of England with Antichristianisme, whose Church Government, and
Discipline is such as the Apostles never approved, but expressly reproved and
condemned, and practiced the contrary? For if your Church Government be that,
which the Apostle brands with the Mystery of Iniquity, and of Antichrist, then
surely you cannot excuse it from Antichristianisme. If you say, This is rather
meant of the Church of Rome, and of the Pope the Head thereof, who you must
needs confess is very like to Antichrist, if he be not the very Antichrist, as
indeed he is: then of the Church of England. Why, wherein differs the Church
of England, from that of Rome in Church Government? Do you not say you are both
one and the same Church? And wherein one and the same, but in Church Government
especially? Of which we shall speak more anon.

Now for Antichristianisme, you know it comes of Antichrist: Of
Antichristianesme and Antichrist.
and Antichrist is a compound word, Anti, in the Greek signifying both for and
against: So as Antichrist is one, that under pretense of being for Christ, is
against Christ. Such is the Pope, who pretends to be Christ's Vicar, which is as
much to say, as Antixristos, Antichristus, as Anthupatos, Pro consul, so
Antichristus, Prochristus, or Vice-Christ. And yet he is Anti, Against, Act.
13.12.
Antikeimenos, an Adversary to Christ, as the Apostle sets him forth. So as the
Pope is Antichrist, both as he pretends to be Christ's Vicar, for Christ, or
Vice- Christ, as he practices against Christ. And for this reason he is noted
to be ho Antikristos, That Antichrist, by a note of singularity, 1 John 2.22.
as 1 John 2.22. to distinguish him from other Antichrists, of whom there are
many, as 1 John 2.18. 1 John 2.18.
Of which many your Lordship and all Prelates are, and especially
Arch-Prelates, or Patriarchs, as the Pope called you. For you tell us at after,
that you Prelates are Viceroys, whereby Christ governes his Church. So as you
being Christ's viceroy, over the Church of England, you are as vice Christus,
vice-Christ, or in the Greek Antikristos, as Anthupatos, Viceroy, under the
King Christ. This you confess and profess. And under this Title you practice
Antichrist, you are an 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Antikeimenos, an Adversary, as all your practices proclaim you; and as we have
in part noted, and shall yet more set you forth. And this is that Mystery of
Iniquity. For it were not else a Mystery, if it were not veiled with a pretense
and profession to be for Christ, and under that to be against Christ. So as the
difinition of Antichrist pertains no less properly to you, then it does to
the Pope, only he is Antichrist with an Ho, That Antichrist, And you are An
Antichrist, and no little one neither, as being Papa alterius Orbis, The Pope,
or Patriarch of the other world, to wit, of England, as the Pope said of you.
Now this being so clear, as is without all contradiction, and you being
Metropolitan of all England, and the Church of England under you, and the
Government thereof being Prelaticall or Hierarchicall, and this Hierarchy being
that Mystery of Iniquity of such Antiquity, for it pretends and professes to be
for Christ, as the Government of a viceroy, but in practice is against Christ,
and so is altogether Antichristian: can you blame your Seperatist, for
condemning your Church of England of Antichristianisme, and that for that very
Church-Governments sake, which you Say has been used both in, and ever since
the Apostles in all Ages and Places, where the Church has taken any rooting.

But you will, with the Jesuit, allege that place of John, to defend you from
being an Antichrist, as they do, to defend the Pope from being that
Antichrist. John says, 1 Ioh. 2.22.
Who is a liar, but he that denies, that Jesus is the Christ? He is
Antichrist. But you Say, you do not deny Jesus to be Christ, therefore you are
neither a liar, nor Antichrist. It Is true indeed, none is a more devout adorer
of the Name JESUS, then your self: but yet I must tell you, that for all this,
you deny the Person Jesus to be the Christ. But you confess him to be the
Christ. In words you do. But what says the Apostle? They Tit. 1.16.
profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate? So that in words a man may
confess and profess Christ, and yet in works deny him. And so do you for all
your fair pretenses, and professed love to Jesus. And who was fitter to betray
Christ, then he that with a Hale Master Saluted him with a Kiss? But let us
now see, what it is to deny Jesus to be the Christ. Jesus in that place is
spoken of his Person: and Christ is spoken of his Offices. So as there is
meant, not a denial of Jesus to be the Son of God, or God-man, not a denial
of his Person, and two Natures; these you do not deny: but a denial of Jesus
to be the Christ, the Anointed of the Father. And this you deny. How? For
Christ is that Anointed King, Priest and Prophet: which three Offices of his
are comprehended and signified in the Title ho Kristos, The Christ, as John
there sets it down, and our English does well express it. The Christ, That
Anointed, Anointed above his fellows, namely King, Priest, and Prophet, so as
none of his fellows, those foregoing Types, or Figures of him, were anointed.
Melchisedech was King and Priest: Samuel was Priest and Prophet: David was King
and Prophet: but never any was this ho Kristos, The Christ, The Anointed, King,
Priest, and Prophet. And Christ was anointed solemnly, and in a conspicuous and
visible manner King, Priest, and Prophet, by the Holy Ghost lighting upon him
at his Baptism, whereupon that voice of the Father from heaven proclaimed him
King, Priest, and Prophet, Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. Luke 9.35.
This is my Beloved Son (there he is King) in whom I am well pleased (there he
is Priest) hear him; there he is Prophet. Now he that denies, or destroys
any one of these three Offices of Christ, which are inseperably inherent in
him, and incommunicable to any Creature, denies Jesus to be the Christ, as
either denying him to be the only King, or the only Priest, or the only
Prophet of his Church. Now it is no hard matter to prove, that you Prelates as
Prelates, deny and destroy all these three Offices of Christ. And first, you
deny Jesus to be the Only Priest, and that not only in taking upon you the
Title of Priests, but also the Office. The Title of Priest you profess, and
take a pride in. And the Office of Priest, you Priests of the Church of England
do in part at least usurp. For the Office of Christ, as Priest, is in two
things: First, to Sacrifice: Secondly, to forgive Sins. Now though you do not
yet openly profess your selves to be sacrificing Priests, as the Romish
Priests do: yet you take upon you to do that, which never any Priests under
the Law did, or might by their Office do, namely to forgive Sins. This, I
say, never any of the Leviticall Priests did. This was and is Christ's only
Prerogative, as he is God and Priest. For who can forgive Sins, but only God?
This the proud Pharisees confessed. But this power you Say, you have
derivatively from Christ, by his Authority committed unto you, as Priests. But
first, we have before proved that you are no Priests of Christ. Secondly, where
has Christ given any such power, even to his Apostles and true Ministers of
the Gospel, to forgive Sins? Indeed he says unto them, Ioh. 20.22* 23.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted: and whose
Sins ye retain, they are retained. Was this by a Priestly Absolution? But the
Apostles were no such Priests as you profess to be. Therefore it was not by
any such Priestly Absolution, as you practice. How then? How then, Say you? You
are here at a Nonplus, if it was not by a Priestly Absolution. It must needs
remain then, that it was by the Ministry of the Gospel, and by the preaching
of Faith and Repentance, and pardon of Sins to the Penitent Believers. As
Mar. 16.15, 16.
He, that believes, and is baptized into Christ, professing his true Faith and
Repentance, has his Sins remitted: but he that believes not, has his Sins
still retained. And this is that remitting of Sins Declarative, the power
whereof Christ committed to his Apostles, and their Successors, the true
Ministers of the Gospel, who by their preaching declare who have their sins
pardoned, and who not. So as your coloring over your usual evasion of the
Papists about their merits, which, they say are not absolutely meritorious of
themselves, but as being dipped and dyed in Christ's blood, whence they receive
the tincture of merit. But as the merit of Christ is altogether immanent in
himself, and not transient to us, but only by Imputation through faith, and
not by any infusion or inherencie, as Papists teach: So the power of Priestly
Absolution is so proper and peculiar to the Person of Christ, that it is not
communicative, or derivative to any Creature. No not (I say) to the Leviticall
Priests, who otherwise were Types of Christ. They only offered sacrifices for
sins, but as Types, and which Heb. 10.4.11.
could never take away Sins, as the Apostle speaks. And their Office was to
Levit. 13.
discern and judge of the Leprosy, and to pronounce a man clean or unclean,
according to those signs and marks, which God himself gave. Now Leprosy was
an Emblem of Sin. And as those Ministers of the Old Testament, did with the
Leprosy, namely pronounce or declare it only, to be, or not to be: So the
Ministers of the Gospel are to declare unto believers the pardon of sins, by
those signs and marks, which God has set in his Word, and to impenitent
persons condemnation, except they believe and repent. But for power of
Absolving men from Sins, as to Say, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, that is
Christ's voice alone. Never any of the Apostles used this voice to any, Thy Sins
are forgiven thee: but as Peter said to those that were pricked in their
hearts, and asked, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Act. 2.37, 38.
Repent (says he) and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of Sins. But to Say, I absolve thee from thy Sins, or
Thy Sins are forgiven thee, is only his, who can give Repentance and Faith.
These two Prerogatives are inseparable in Christ, as Peter shows. Act. 5.31.
Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to
give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins: and we are witnesses of
these things, Says he. Now if you can prove that Christ has made you Such
Princes and Saviors, as to give you a power (which Act. 8.19*
Simon Magus would have bought with his money) to give Repentance to any man:
then I will without any more ado confess, that you have also a power to
forgive Sins. Otherwise not till then, by your assumed and usurped Priesthood,
and presumptuous, yea blasphemous forgiving of Sins, I Absolve thee: you deny
Jesus to be the Christ, the only Christ, to wit, the only Priest, who only
has merit and power, as to give Repentance, so remission of Sins to whom he
will. And thus, as you take upon you to be a Priest, both by your profession
and practice, you are an Antichrist. For who is a liar, but he that denies
Jesus to be the Christ? He is Antichrist, Says the Apostle John.

Secondly, neither were it any great difficulty to prove, that you Prelates,
(and that according to your own Doctrine in many places of your Book) do deny
Jesus to be the Christ; to wit, the only Prophet of his Church. For you allow
no belief, that the Scripture is the voice of Christ the Prophet, except the
voice and Tradition of the present Church do first usher it in. And this
Church must always be meant of a Prelaticall Church. No question of that. And
for Exposition and Sense of Scripture, you deny that the Scripture it self,
and of it self, has sufficient light, (as at after we shall see at large) and
therefore you refer us either to the Exposition of the Primitive Church, or
the Decisions of General Councels, for the right Sense of the Scripture. Thus
you do akuro^sa, (as Christ says) or make void and of no authority the voice
of Christ, by your Tradition. Nay you Say also, That if a General Council
should Conclude and Decree an Error, yet all men ought to yield obedience (at
least external) thereunto, till another General Council, equal to that,
shall reverse and correct it. And (by the way) what if it shall make it worse,
or add more Errors to it? But thus do you not deny Christ to be the only
Prophet of his Church (of whom God Says, Hear Him, Him only, His Word only,
His Voice only) when you do not take his Word to be light enough, and to be
sufficient to interpret it self, but that you must have recourse to General
Councels, consisting of Prelates; as your Oracles, to decide all doubts and
controversies of Faith? Do you not thus attribute a greater light to men, then
to the voice of Christ? GOD Says of Christ, that Prophet, Act. 3.22.
Hear him in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: but you say, In all
doubts and controversies of faith, hear what a General Council Says, yea
though it determine Errors, yet all men are bound to yield obedience
thereunto. Thus the express voice and clear word of Christ that Prophet, must
depend upon Men, and those an Assembly of Prelates or Priests, which Christ
never ordained in his Church; and not men, upon It. And so in this respect
also, denying Christ to be the only All sufficient Prophet to instruct and
establish his Church in all Truth, while you deny his word to be Autopistos,
and Autarkes, of selfe-Credit, of it self to be believed, and selfe-sufficient
to show and interpret it self: you prove your self an Antichrist: For who is
a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist. Your
Grace therefore is an Antichrist.

But I come to the third Instance, to which (I confess) I thought to have
confined my self, and not to have touched the other two in this place, though
they be no less proper, then this: which is, That you Prelates, both by
Profession and Practice, as you are Prelates, do deny Jesus to be the Christ,
in that you deny him to be the only Lord, and King of his Church. For what is
for Christ to be the King of, and over, and in his Church, but (as to exercise
his Almighty power, and Fatherly care, and Spouse-like love, in protecting and
preserving his Church, from all evils, in comforting her in the midst of
afflictions, in supplying her with all necessary Graces and Blessings, and in
vindicating the cause of his People against all their Persecuters and
Oppressors: So also) in bearing a Special Kingly Rule in and over their Souls
and Consciences, in all things concerning Faith, in the Worship and Service of
God. So as the people of God do, and ought to acknowledge Christ herein their
only King, and not to suffer their consciences to be captivated, and ensnared
by any ordinance of Man, whatsoever in point of faith and ceremonies in Gods
service, injoyning a necessary conformity thereunto. It Is Christ's Prerogative
alone in this case, to sit as King in the throne which he has set up for
himself in every man's conscience. And Christ has redeemed us from all bondage
and subjection to humane devises in Spiritual things: as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men So as this Kingly
office* this Kingdom over his Church, Christ has purchased with a dear
price, even his precious blood. But Prelates ^ra^ple this blood of Christ under
their feet, and make this his purchase void, by setting themselves in his
throne, by sitting in and over men's consciences, making Laws, and imposing
Rites (as absolute Kings over the Church) binding the Conscience to a necessary
conformity to them in the worship of God. And to this purpose, this their
Kinglike Authority (indeed intolerable usurpation and Tyranny) comes usually
armed with a strong guard of Canons, and attended with meta polle^s phantasias,
with a pompous train of Ceremonies, ever waiting at their heels. For their
Maxim is, No Ceremonies, no Bishop. A Bishop and his Ceremonies are Relatives,
and can no more be separated one from the other, then an Altar and a Priest.
But of Ceremonies I shall have occasion to speak more anon: and therefore I am
the briefer here. The Sum is, That a Prelate, as a Prelate attended with his
Ceremonies, which he imposes upon the Consciences of Gods people in the
worship of God, does thereby deny Christ to be the only King of his people,
and so to be their Redeemer, as who has freed them, as from all Leviticall and
Legal Rites, so from all humane Ordinances and Devices in the worship of God.
I conclude therefore, That a Prelate, by his very place, profession and
practice, as a Prelate, usurping domination over men's Consciences in Gods
worship, by imposing his Ceremonies, denies Christ to be the King of his
people, denies Jesus to be the Christ, and so is a Liar, and Antichrist; For
who is a liar, but he that denies Jesus to be the Christ? He is Antichrist.

Thus the Case being so, that the Church of England, being a Prelaticall and
Hierarchicall Church, and so for Church Government and Discipline, ruled and
Lorded over by the Prelates: does thereby (as a Prelaticall Body united to
Prelaticall Heads) and by subjection and conformity unto their Lordly
impositions and injunctions in point of Ceremonies, and of the worship of God,
conspire with the Prelates in denying Christ to be her only King; and so with
them denying that Jesus is the Christ, is justly condemned of Antichristianisme.

I should now proceed to some other passage, but that one rub here comes in the
way, and that is concerning the Church of Christ, which here ye name. For you
say, The Church of England practices Church Government, as it has been in use
in all Ages* and all Places where THE CHRCH OF CHRIST HAS TAKEN ANY ROOTING.
Why, my Lord, what say you to all the reform^d Churches beyond the Seas? Has
your Church Government in England been in use in all places where th^se
Churches have been rooted now for the space of at least 100. years? What? In
Geneva? In France? In Belgia, and other places? Now therefore you must either
plainly confess this one Clause to be most notoriously false; or else, that
the best Reformed Churches beyond the Seaes, are no true Churches of Christ.
But for that you pass not much to confess, that those Reformed Churches are
no true Churches, because they have no Prelates. This you Spoke openly not long
ago at your High Commission, in Cathedra, when your charity called that famous
and glorious shining Lamp, Mr. CALVIN, Rascal, when you gave those Churches
that doom. Had you been a Prelate in Queen Elizabeth's time, durst you have done
so? Nay in King James his time, who with the Church of England gave all those
Reformed Churches the right hand of fellowship, as true Churches of Christ (as
in the Council of Dort) durst you have done it? And why now tam audax omnia
perpeti, as that Heathen Horace.
Poet said? And have not these Churches taken rooting? How then have they
continued so long, and flourished so much, and put forth so many beautiful and
goodly branches, godly and learned Divines, and brought forth such abundant
good fruit? Could all this be without taking root? yea and a sound rooting too,
well planted by Gods own hand, and watered abundantly with his blessed showers
of Grace from heaven, and fenced about with the wall of his mighty protection,
against Storms and Tempests? And I trust they shall stand and flourish, when
all Ier. 2.21. Math. 15.13.
degenerate plants, which our heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
plucked*up by the roots, as bearing no other fruit, but the Apples of Sodom;
without beautiful, but all black and rotten within. Although it might justly
be feared (could you effect your so labored through Reconciliation with Rome,
to become all one, as you say, you already be) you would do your best, to root
out all those Reformed Churches, as that of the Palatinate now is. And it is
true inded, that no particular visible Churches can promise to themselves
perpetuity of continuance in one place, longer then God is pleased. But for
thee, O Psalm. 137.8. Rev. 17. and 18.
daughter of Babylon, thou Mother of whoredoms, God has particularly
designed, and marked thee out for destruction, so as thou, with all thy
confederate Lovers, shall not escape; and the day of thy visitation sleeps
not. But for the Kingdom and Church of Jesus Christ, it shall abide, to
triumph over Antichrist, and all his accursed Crew. And for thee o Church of
England, beware of being an Ivy about that old rotten Romish Oak, least you
both be cut down together, and be cast into the same burning Lake for ever,
beware of grappling thy self with that old leaking and sinking Peter-boate, as
thy Pilate would persuade thee, least you both be swallowed up together.

L. ibid It Is very remarkable, that while both these (the Romanist, and
Seperatist, press hard upon the Church, both of them cry out of Persecution,
like froward Children, etc.

P. What cause the Romanist has so to cry, I know not; especially if the just
Laws against them be suffered to sleep. But for your Seperatists, (among whom
you reckon and rank godly and zealous Ministers, and all good men, whom you
hunt after, and prosecute continually in all your Courts) what cause these have
to cry out of persecution, and that even in the throwing of them out of their
Churches and Houses, and native Country, that they can rest no where for you,
and so what cause they have to cry, and complain to their GOD of such
persecution, (as having none on Earth to complain to) both the world may see,
and you shall one day feel, withot speedy repentance, which we have as little
hope of, as you can have of heaven. But they being thus persecuted, you impute
the cause to their hard pressing upon the Church, comparing them to froward
Children. Indeed Children will cry, when they are swadled, or beaten, and
misused. And the poor Innocent, or Infant, being pinched too hard with the
swathing bands, or pricked with a pin mis-put, will cry out, and roar, till
they find ease. So as there is cause enough of their crying. And is it not
(trow you) your too hard pressing upon your Seperatists, with your Canons and
Ceremonies, and which as with swaddling bands you bind them too strait withal,
and your hard and rough handling of them, that gives them just cause to cry?
But however, for all this, your hard usage must by no means be called
persecution. Far be that from your piety, and clemency, that you should
either persuade to Persecution in any kind, or practice it in the least.

L. p. 16. To the Papists common Objection, Where was your Church before
Luther? Your Answer is: It was just there, where theirs is now. One and the
same Church still, no doubt of that. One in Substance, but not one in Condition
of State and Purity; their part of the same Church remaining in Corruption: and
our part of the same Church under Reformation. The Same Naaman, and he a Syrian
still, but leaprous with them, and cleansed with us; the Same man Still.

P. Here you teach us a Point, which had the Divines of the Church of England
in former Ages known, it might have saved them a great deal of puzzle, which
the subtle Jesuits, for diversion and gaining of time put them unto, in
tracing the footsteps of the Protestant Church, and the professors thereof,
through all ages, years, weeks and days, ever since the Apostles times. Where
was your Church? Why, it was just there, where Romes is now. This had been a
short Cut to find the Protestant Church; Like the North-East passage to China,
or the North-West to the Westeran- America, could they be found out. But you
have at length found out a South-East passage to Rome, where the present Church
of England, loosing her self, may find her self. Which passage or path had
now for a long time through disuse, and want of Travailers and Pilgrims
thither, been grown up with grass, till now again beaten out, by your hard and
continual travail in it. Would an English Protestant then know, where his
Church was before Luther? Why, go but to Rome, and if you have lost both
Church, and Religion in England, there you may be sure to find it again; no
doubt of that. Surely I hope Jesuits will be no longer such fools, as to take
such a tedious pilgrimage, compassing Sea and Land, to the Shrine of
Canterbury, to ask of the Oracle there, where your Church of England was in
diebus illis. They might have stayed at home, and there have found it, even in
Rome, within the Sacred Thresholds of S. Peter, or S. John Lateran, and that
(with some favorable Interpretation) where and when the Priest is at his
Mass. So as well might your Lordship call it (as you do) an Idle and
Impertinent Question, Where was your Church before Luther? What a jest is
that? Just there, where Romes is Now. One* and the Same, no doubt of that. And
who shall doubt that, what your Lordship e Cathedra defines, out of Canterbury
Chair defines? But now henceforth I hope, you will not so much complain of
Seperatists from your Church of England. For you teach them to Separate from
the Church of England, as from Rome it self, as being one and the same Church.
And you know that all Protestants of that Spirit, cannot away with the Church
of Rome. So as you may expect every day new Companies, and that by threaves, to
get them packing from your Church of England; and that according to Christ's
warning piece, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, least ye be partakers of
her Sins, and least ye receive of her Plagues.

But you distinguish: Yours in Purity, and under Reformation: Romes Church
under Corruption; yours Naaman cleansed; theirs Naaman Leprous; yet both one
Naaman, and be a Syrian, the Same man still. A paradox indeed. A Riddle.
A Riddle to pose Oedipus himself For riddle me this: One and the Same Man
both Leprous, and* Cleansed, at the same time. Cannot the Priest in the Mass
as easily riddle, how one and the same numericall body of Christ may be both in
heaven, and in his Masse-pix, or on his Altar, at one and the same instant?
Even as soon. But not to stretch your paradox too far, least we tear it, and
so make the rent wider betwixt you and Rome (which in your Book you say, you
are loath to do) Is your Church of England Cleansed, and Romes Leprous?
Remember your self well; and Consider. Why then do you not cast out that
Leprous woman, and Levit. 13.46.
Shut the door upon her? Nay, why would you so feign be reunited with that
filthy and polluted Leper? And yet, why not? For is the Church of England in
the Condition of Purity, and under Reformation? Indeed Solomon says, Pro.
30.12*
There is a Generation, that are pure in their own eyes: and yet is not washed
from their filthiness. And is your Church of England Cleansed from all her
Leprosy and pollutions? What from the bitter root of the Hierarchy, which has
defiled the Land with Idolatrous Altars and Images, and Sundry Superstitious
Ceremonies; and open Profanation of the Lords day, by tolerating of Heathenish
Sports, and Whorish and Drunken meetings? Is it cleansed from those Doctrines
of Devils forementioned, accounting holy Wedlock unclean at Some times, and at
Some times the Creatures unclean? Or is England cleansed from the guilt of
Innocent blood of the Saints and Servants of Jesus Christ, whom she has
cruelly persecuted and oppressed, and with whose blood the whole Land is
defiled, and yet she is not washed from it, She repents not, but goes still
on, to fill up the measure of her Cruelty? How art thou then purified, o Land!
How reformed! How cleansed! Nay do thou not hate and persecute true
holiness, and purity, and especially in godly and painful Ministers, who
preach against thy profanations? So as may it not be said of thee, as the Lord
said of Jerusalem, Eze. 22.24*
Thou art the Land, that is not cleansed?

Seeing then thou art not cleansed from thy Leprosy, but art a Syrian still, a
Leprous Naaman still: well may thou be Said to be One and the Same Church
with Rome, even one and the same body, even one and the same in Substance. For
what is that substance wherein you say, the Church of England and Rome, are one
and the same? Is it not that, which you account the very Essence, Form, and
Being of your Church? And what is that? Or what be those things, wherein the
Substance of your Church consists, as wherein the Church of England and of
Rome, are both one and the same, so as we need make no doubt of that? Surely
wherein we find you both one and the same, we need not doubt, but in those
things consists the one and only substance of your one and the same Church.
For as for other things, wherein the Church of England either in profession
dissenteth, or in practice differs from the Church of Rome, you reckon those
among Romes corruptions. Therefore on the contrary, in whatsoever you are one
and the same Church with Rome, those must be no corruptions, but the very pure
Essence and Substance of that one Church, which is just there where Romes is
now. And what are those? Namely: One and the same in the Hierarchy, or
Prelaticall Government, which is so essential to your Church, as where it is
not, there is no Church: Only with this difference: The Pope Christ's Vicar over
the whole world, and your Lordship his Viceroy over all England, that other
world. One and the same, in all the members of this great body of the
Hierarchy, and in all the Officers of this Church Government: as Chancellors,
Archdeacons, Officialls, Commissaries, and so down to the very Skirts of that
goodly guarded Babilonish Government. One and the Same in all your
Ecclesiastical Courts: as the Prerogative Court, the Court of Arches, the
Bishops Ordinary Court, the Spiritual Court, the Court of Inquisition, and
High Commission; with a little difference in the name. One and the Same in
their Canons, and chiefly the Popes Canon Law. One and the Same in your
Episcopal Robes and vestments, both rare and rich, as purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, as it were the livery whereby you are known to be of one and the
same house, or family, with that Woman ( Rev. 17.) alias, the Great Whore of
Babylon, with whom you claim Sister-hood; So also in your Miters, your Rochets,
Palls, Semiters, Square Caps, Tippets, and so cap a pied. One and the Same in
your Liturgy, Service, or Matins, or Service-Booke, which even your Jesuit
confessed to be Catholic; and so One and the Same in all your Service dressing
and garb: as rich Copes, Palls, and other Altar-ornaments, goodly guilt plate,
fair Crucifixes over them, and devout adoration unto them, and praying toward
the East, where your Altar and Crucifix stands; goodly gay Images, and
Loud-sounding Organs, and sweet chanting Choristers and Chanters, Deanes, and
Subdeanes, and Prebends, Epistlers, and Gospellers, Singing-men and Viergers,
and a huge Sately pome, and Equipage, more then I can tell: where you have Long
Service, and Short Sermons, or rather (to avoid tediousness) none at all: yea
and your Service in your Cathedralls in an unknown tongue, the Popish Service
mumbled in a strange tongue, and yours in a strange tone chanted and roared out
so loud by a sort of profane and drunken Singing Men, and Apish Boys, with
such a black Sanctus, as the people is no way edified, as not knowing whether
they sing a Song of Robin Hood, or play a Scottish Jigge. One and the Same in
your Altars, Priests, Sacrifices: Only with some small difference in some
terms, and manner of expression, both holding a real presence, Rome
explicitly by Transubstantiation, and England implicitly, not daring to speak
plainly how; only willing to come as near Rome, as the time will give leave;
in stead of an Host, you will have at least your Crucifix, a representation of
Christ's body* Sacrificed on the Cross, either upon the Altar, for a pawn till
the Host it self come, or as near over the Altar, as may be. One and the Same
in exercising an Antichristian Tyranny over men's Souls, Consciences, Bodies,
Purses, Estates, by holding them in hard bondage under your roaring Canons, and
intolerable burdens of Ceremonies; but this is rather to be referred to the
Title or Caput of Hierarchy, the Essence, and Substance of your One and the
Same Church. One, in punishing the Transgressors of Ecclesiastical Canons,
more severely, then of Gods Commandments. One, in execution of Discipline by
Excommunication in your blind Courts, for every trifle, which must cost more
then a trifle to get off, So as there must be a Commutation, and Solution, for
Absolution. One, in Dispensations and Prohibitions, dispensing with such as
will dispend, that by License they may Marry, or eat flesh in Lent. One and
the Same in persecuting the true Church of Christ, his Word, his Ministers, his
People, only Rome does it under the name of Heretics, of which you are none,
and you under the name of Puritans, the worst of Heretics. One and the Same in
bowing at the Name Jesus. One and the Same in observation of Holidays, only
with some difference, Rome has more: yet not an English Almanac, but sets
them forth at least in black attire, (as the Papists veil their Images all the
Lent from the peoples view, to make them hunger the more after such food after
their long Fast, at Easter) in hope that in time, they may come to be cladde in
In red Letters.
Scarlet, their Holy Day suit; So as, a Mr. Gellybrand, quem honoris causa
nomino.
Religious Gentleman, late the Astronomy-Reader in Gressham-house, but now
translated above the Stars for Setting out an Almanacke with a Martyr to
every day, in stead of the Popes Saints, was brought into the High Commission
Court, where he hardly escaped findging for an Heretic. One and the Same in
profaning and disesteeming the Lords day; both accounting it to be of humane
Authority; both, preferring their Church-holy-dayes before it, both, profaning
it, only with this difference, Rome profanes it only practically, but England
both practically, and professedly, and Authentically, by Special Dispensation
and Edict. One in condemning Innocents in your Ecclesiastical Courts, mixed
with temporal Judges, as in your High Commission; and in temporal Courts,
mixed with Ecclesiastical Judges, such a sower leaven, as As in the Case of Mr.
B. first Suspended in the High Commission, and then brought into a temporal
Court, where your selves are also Judges, and Parties.
after Ecclsieasticall Censure, you deliver them over to the Secular power,
where through your instigation no mercy can be expected, your selves being both
Parties, and Judges. One and the Same in holding the rule of Faith, only with
this difference; Rome, equalling her Tradition with the Scripture* and you,
putting a necessity of the present Churches Tradition and voice, as without
which the Scripture cannot be believed to be the word of God, as was touched
before, and as will appear more fully at after: So as Rome yoaketh her
traditions in equal rank with the Scripture, and you put your Churches
Authority and Tradition for the Forehorse, to draw and lead the Scripture into
men's belief (as the 2 Samuel 6.6.
Oxen drew the Arc toward Jerusalem) that it is the word of God. One and the
Same in exempting your Clergy from the Civil power and Judicature; only with
this difference: Rome has got it in possession, and you have often attempted
it, and openly professed your hope of Seeing the Clergy of England, as high, as
ever they were; or as the Lawyers now are. In a word, One and the Same in your
Babilonish Faith and Religion: For Rome has so contrived some of her doctrines
(as those about Grace) laid down in the Decrees of Trent, as that those two
mighty dissenting Sides about merit of Congruity, See the History of the
Council of Trent.
to wit, Andreas Vega with his Franciscans, and Dominicus Soto with his
Dominicans, both Sides bearing a great sway and swindge in the Council: as that
each side persuaded it self, that the Decrees (brought from Rome in a
Cloake-bag, as most of the rest were) was for them, and favored their side:
And the present Oracle of the Church of England, (Papa alterius Orbis) has so
handled and hammered the matter in his forge, that by a Declaration before the
Articles of Religion, he has with no great difficulty, made those Articles
concerning Grace, so to speak, as to please both the dissenting parties. Like
to a Picture, which each man in the room imagins looks upon him in particular.
Or, as easily (I say) as if a man should take away the prick of a Hebrew Letter
from the right side, and place it on the left, according to which variation a
man pronounces respectively the word Judge. 12.6.
Schiboleth, or Sibboleth: The false pronounciation of which word cost the
Ephraimites their lives. Lastly (to end as I began) The Church of England and
of Rome are One and the same, in turning Christ's Kingdom, which is altogether
Spiritual, and not of this world, into an earthly and seculer Kingdom,
although Styled a Spiritualty, and Hierarchy, or holy Government, and Kingdom,
whose Governors are temporal Lords* calling themselves Christ's viceroys,
whose kingdom, glory, pomp, dignity, riches, is all earthly, not heavenly;
carnal, not spiritual, verefying that of the Apostle, Phil. 3.18.
They are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose
God is their belly, whose glory is in their Shame, which mind earthly things.
Here are particulars enough (to be silent in the rest) to prove your Speech
true, That the Church of England and the Church of Rome, are in Substance one
and the Same; no doubt of that. As for Romes corruptions (as you account and
call them) they are neither so many, nor so great (So long as they overthrow
not the foundation, as you not say, they do) but that the large Mantle of your
Charity is broad enough to cover them; So as that need not to break square, or
greatly hinder your so much desired and attempted Reconciliation; wherein I
know you will be ready to meet Rome the half way, or three quarters and more
rather then fail, to give his Holiness the kiss of peace, so he will be
content to leave your Patriarchate or Popedom in England, while himself
enjoys the Vicarship of the wider world, and at his death leave you his Heir
apparent of the triple Crown. Yet perhaps for your Reputation sake you would
require, that some grossenes at least might be payred off the outsides of her
fouler corruptions, and they a little smoothed over: and for your part (I dare
say) you will not be behind hand to bring on the Church of England in such a
fair forwardness, and neernesse (as possibly the time will permit) to a just
conformity in all things fecible.

But is the Church of England, now come to this, to be in Statu quo, So as a
man may find her just there, where Rome is now? Alas, poor England! Shall not
now all thy brave Worthies, that are for the most part dead and gone, and Some
yet surviving, as brands out of the flame, rise up, and bring their Learned
Treatises. Rev. 17. and 18.
Evidences, as witnesses aganst Rome, that She is a False, Heretical,
Idolatrous, Apostatized, Antichristian Church, the very Whore of Babylon,
plainly described in the Revelation? And one of the last Books written
against her to purpose indeed, Entitled BABEL no BETHEL, (which came forth in
a good season, somewhat before you came to sit in the Chair of Canterbury: and
for which you may remember you convented the Author before your High Commission
Board at London house out of Term, and committed him to prison, (Mr. BURTON I
mean) now a closse prisoner and Exile) has by many impregnable Arguments so
strongly proved the Church of Rome, to be no true Church of Christ, but a mere
Antichristian Apostacy from the Faith: So as neither his two hot Mr. Chalmley,
and Mr. Butterfield, who is since gone to Doway and turned Jesuit.
Antagonists, your Bishop of Exon.
Brothers Champions; nor any Jesuits since has undertaken to Answer it, as
being indeed unanswerable; And so it Stands, his Adversaries giving him the
Bucklers in the plain Field. And yet now is the Case so altered, that so
suddenly the Church of England is become One and the Same with the Church of
Rome, So as She may find her self just there where Romes is now, and that, no
doubt of that. But how does this appear? Surely you may take it for truth, for
the Primate and Metropolitan of all England has so bestirred himself, and
played his part, in Chopping and Changing, putting down truth, and seting up
error and superstition in the Church of England, that she is Suddenly so
metamorphosed into another form, and in a manner transubstantiated, into a new
Substance of a Church, as now you may find her just there, where Romes is now,
both one and the Same Church, no doubt of that.

If then we may take your word for your Church of England in this Case, and
considering that the Church of Rome is that notorious Harlot: how any true
Christian (as I said before) that will not become the member of a Harlot, can
hold longer communion with you, I cannot see. And for my part, I do here
ingenuously profess, and protest against you, again and again, that I
abhor you, and all such Churches as hold communion with Rome, as one and the
Same Church, and do utterly separate from you, till you separate from all
communion and conformity with that Babylon in all those particulars
forementioned. And so I have done with you thus far in this point. You
proceed.

Notorious blasphemy in putting aly upon Christ.
L. p. 17. According to Christ's Institution, the Scripture, where it is plain,
should guide the Church: and the Church, where there is doubt and difficulty,
should expound the Scripture.

P. How? Where, I pray, has Christ so instituted? And who has bewitched you
to dare to utter such a notorious, Prelates Blasphemy against Christ.
and pernicious untruth, as this, and to Father it upon Christ, and that upon
your bare word? For What Scripture do you, or can you bring For this? Nay if
the Scripture, Christ's own voice, and wherein the Spirit of Christ breaths,
be not sufficient to interpret it self, and that in all more doubtful and
difficult places of it: what Man, or Men, or Church, shall be able to do it? For
how can any interpret difficult places of Scripture, especially such as
concern Faith and Salvation, but by the Scripture it self? But we shall
speak more fully of this afterward. And you have told us what the Church is,
namely a Hierarchy, or Kingdom of Prelates, who generally Romans 8.5.
Savor the things of the flesh, and not of the Spirit: And if you^ Lordship
should but stand for a proof and Say in this Case, and that all other Prelates
would hazard their credit upon your Ability in interpreting the Scripture: it
would quickly appear what hope the world might have of Prelates help at a
dead lift, for the establishing of our Faith and Consciences in some perplexed
Cases. O then what brave Prelaticall Glosses should we have? As for the
purpose: Some doubts of late are risen in England about Altars, Prelates
Calling, Ceremonies* Now if they should consult your Lordship Siting in the
Chair of Canterbury to resolve them in these difficulties, what would be your
final determination of them? For the first, would you not allege Heb. 13.10.
We have an Altar? For the second, Psalm. 45.16. Princes in all Lands, that is
Prelates. For the Third, to wit Ceremonies 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be
done, decently, and in Order: Ergo, what Ceremonies the Bishop shall injoyne,
you must observe. These are your Glosses, and such interpretations as these we
must look for of your Church. Such as the Church of Rome is very dextrous and
expert in. As Mat. 26.26.
This is my body: Ergo, The Bread is transubstantiated into Christ's very body.
Luke 22.32
I have prayed for thee Peter: Ergo, the Pope cannot err. Luke 5.4.
Launch out into the deep: Ergo, the Pope may fish all the world. Act. 10.13.
Arise Peter, Kill and eat: Ergo, the Pope may kill the Venetians. 1 Cor. 3.15.
As it were by fire: Ergo, there is a Purgatory. Thus the Scripture, where it is
plain, should guide the Church; otherwise not: but in doubt and difficulty the
Church should expound the Scripture, that is, guide the Scripture. Ergo, the
Church is above the Scripture, because only where it is plain, it guides the
Church: but where difficult, the Church must guide it, interpret it. In
difficulties then the Scripture, it must not guide the Church. Ergo, in
difficulties and doubts the Church may interpret, as She pleases.

No, not so: for you add ibid. Saying, Yet so, as neither the the Scripture
should be forced, nor the Church so bound up, as that upon just and further
evidence, She may not revise that, which in any Case ^ath slipped by her.

P. Here be two things enterfeerinch each other. First, a Caution. Prelates
Subtle, but vain evasion.
Secondly, a Condition. The Caution, That the Scripture be not forced. Take
heed of that. But who shall Judge of that? Even the Same that forces it, the
Church. And who shall defend that Scripture from forcing; if it be left to men's
interpritation, and those men in matters of doubt and difficulty are not guided
by the Scripture, but the Scripture by the Churches interpretation? But in no
Case let the Scripture be forced. You will have a care of that. Prelate a most
notorious forcer of Scripture.
But why then do you show your self so expert in forcing and misapplying the
Scripture, and that most pitifully, as both has been showed, and will all
along appear? But however the Condition will help all. Forcing, or not
forcing, the Church must not be bound, but that upon just and further Evidence
She may revise that, which in any Case has slipped by her: Now what is this just
and further Evidence? Or what, this Revising? And what this Sliping by her? I
take the Sense and Sum of all to be this: That here you lay your ground to
make way for an Index expurgatorious to revise. But is that all? Nay it is
employed, that some thing else be done: as to correct and expunge, or at least
more clearly interpret; but indeed, to expunge, with a Deleatur, let it be
blotted out, whatsoever in any Books formerly Printed by Authority in England,
has in any Case slipped by her; or if the maine Subject of the Book be not
Catholic, and consonant to the Doctrines of the present Church, that they may
be censured as Prohibited Books, and so una Litura cancelled. And withal,
whatsoever you find in any Books, which you do not very well resent, to declare
which be the Doctrines of the Church of England, and which private men's
opinions. And 'twill be requisite, in my judgment, that you hasten this work,
to dispatch it in your time, least if you die, such another Phoenix will hardly
arise out of your Ashes, that will have the courage to adventure upon these
things. But among all other things, leave us not in that perplexed estate;
whereinto you have brought us by your Declaration before the Articles of
Religion; but make us a New Declaration, to certify us what to believe, and
rather resolve us plainly, that the Articles are to be taken in that sense,
which agrees with your own opinion, then that they should give an uncertain
sound: for then who shall prepare himself to the battle? And there may be
great reason, why we should prefer your Lordships opinion, before the
judgment of all other those learned men that have formerly lived in the Church
of England, because the Church may now see more, and further into a Millstone,
then of old; as a Dwarf upon a Giants shoulders. And so what slippes have
formerly passed by the Church of England, your Lordship with your Chapleins and
Divines will so revise, and repurg, as there shall be nothing left upon record,
whereby it might appear to Posterity, that there is any such difference
between the Church of England and of Rome, as to hinder their most wished and
desirable reconciliation. And I think I am not in this far wide of your
Project. The Wardens of the Company of STATIONERS can tell, what you lately
gave them in Charge about such a matter for the revising of Puritan Books; that
so when you have purged out the Puritanism, there may be neither Purity nor
Verity left. As I remember the Orator said of a certain Chaerea.
Roman, that he always had his head and eyebrows Shaven, that men might take
him not to have one hair of a good man. Thus when you have given such Books a
dry shaving, you will make them to appear as ridiculous, as 2 Samuel 10.4.
David's Messengers, whom the young Ammonitish King took, and caused half their
beards to be Shaven off, and their garments to be curtalled to their bare
buttocks. But herein you prudently follow both the example of Rome, and the
Counsel of Franciscus a S. Clara, who commends you for seting afoot this
Project. But I hope, the Stationers will look a little better to their to
meros, and ^rgasia, the gain of their Trade, and that which is their Freehold,
and Livelihood; as well knowing, that if the good Books be guelt of their
masculine virtue, and verity, none will buy them, except perhaps Chandlers, to
stop their Mustard pots, and put about their Candles. And then should the
Company of Book sellers, and their Posterity be deprived of the benefit of
their Coppies, which are as a Coppy-hold of Inheritance to them, and theirs.
But time will try all things.

L. p. 18. And though I cannot prophecy, yet I fear, that Atheism and
Irreligion gather strength, while the truth is thus weakened by an unworthy way
of contending.

P. Cannot you prophecy, being the High Priest of England, as that High Priest
did, John 11.50*
that it was necessary Christ should dye, that the whole Nation perish not? So,
cannot you prophecy, That it is necessary that all Puritans, Christ's members
should perish, that the whole Generation and Hierarchy of Priests perish not?
But though you cannot, no more then Number. 23.23. and 24.1.
Balaam, prophecy, or bring an Enchantment against the Children of Israel,
that God should curse them: yet can you not do, as that wicked Prophet did, in
Rev. 2.14.
Counselling King Balack to put a stumbling block before the Children of
Israel, by enticing them to his Idols, with his fair Damsels? You can tell
us, that the Church of England, and of Rome, are one and the Same Church, and
that her worship of Images, is but a trenching, or coming near Idolatry (as at
after) so as none need fear communion with her, so he be but ignorant of her
Corruptions. Of which more hereafter. But though you cannot prophecy, what is
all your practice, but a clear Prognostication, and that, not only
foretelling, but causing and haling in a Deluge of Atheism and Irreligion
flowing in upon you. Prelates Practice.
Yea witness this your Book, which could not spring, but from the root of
Atheism, and Sourse of all Irreligion; and which does not only prognosticate,
nor only teach the way, how Atheism and Irreligion may gather strength: but
does certainly presage, and that by necessary consequence, most terrible
Judgments and Calamities, to fall upon the Church of England; I would say
rather, upon the Hierarchy of England: and which you do with both hands, in
writing and publishing this Book, and by all other your practices, pull upon
your own heads.

But this your fear of Atheism and Irreligion to gather strength, is (say
you) while the Truth is weakened by an unworthy way of contending. What Truth?
Or what is that unworthy way of contending for the Truth? Or what is your
Atheism and Irreligion? For all these terms need your interpretation. But
your prudent modestly therein we will make bold, as well as we can, to Supply.
First for Truth, it is much in your mouth, I mean, the name and word Truth.
But when you name Truth, you always mean Falsehood; as when you Speak of the
Church, you mean such a Church, as is a false Church; and when you Speak of
Peace, you mean such, as is a false Peace, when your Reconciliation with Rome,
is a Conspiracy against Christ, and his true Church; and when you name Priest,
you mean, such, as is a false Priest; and when you name Devotion, you mean
such, as is a false Devotion, of humane devising: and when you name Faith as
the gift of God, you mean not the true Saving Faith, whereof the Apostle
speaks, where he Says, Ephe. 2.8.
Faith is the gift of God. As we shall see at after. So as ever under the green
leaves of such fair words, as Truth, Peace, Church, Devotion, Faith, etc. we
may ever Suspect, and shall be ever sure to find a false Serpentine Sense to
lurk.

Secondly, your unworthy way of contending for the Truth, what is it, but that,
which the Jude 3.
Apostle exhorts unto, that Christians should earnestly contend for the Faith,
given to the Saints; and Phil. 1.27.
Paul, that we should sunathlein, wrestle together (as for Mastery, or for a
Crown) for the Faith of the Gospel. Now is not this that, which you call an
unworthy way of contending for the Truth? No doubt of th^^. As to write Books,
or preach Sermons, proving the Pope to be Antichrist; and the Church of Rome to
be a false Church, or no Church of Christ; and no Salvation to be hoped for in
that Church: and that all true Christians ought to have no Communion with that
Church, but to abhor, and abandon her, as the Rev. 18.4.
Lord commands; and that Prelates are not Jure divino, but are Antichristian,
and their Hierarchy Tyrannical; and that Altars in Churches are a denying of
Christ the Only Altar; and that all Ceremonies invented and imposed by men in
the Service of God, is a will worship, condemned by Mat. 15.9.
Christ, and his Col. 2.8.16.18. Gal. 4.10.
Apostles* and many such like. This is that unworthy way of contending, whereby
(you say) the Truth is weakened. No marvel.

Thirdly, what is that Atheism and Irreligion, which you fear will gather
Strength, while the Truth is weakened by such an unworthy way of contending?
This, I take it, may be taken two ways. Either that by Atheism you mean the
true Faith of Christ, which is opposite to the Romish faith, wherewith you hold
such correspondence; for whatsoever is contrary to Romes faith, or (which is
all one) your faith, is with you branded for Atheism. Or Secondly, Atheism,
truly and properly taken gathers strength, by such an unworthy way of
laboring a Reconciliation between the Church of England, and the Church of
Rome, which to make way for, you are glad to say, that these two Churches are
for substance one and the Same Church. Now before your time, the Church of
England, though in many things it symbolized with Rome, (as has been showed)
yet still it renounced all communion with her, as being a Strumpet, and that
great Whore, whose Husband is the great Antichrist. But now you have so turned
the Cat in the pan, by making way to bring the Church of England back again to
an union, and communion with Rome, that you put the people to a stand, to a
nonplus, so as they know not what to believe, or what to think, but are ready
to cast off all further thought of God, as if there were no God, because they
see those to flourish, and to go on unpunished, who overthrow the faith
formerly professed in England, seting up the Romish faith again, where it had
been cast out: and on the other side, Preaching and Preachers to be put down,
and the true Professors to be persecuted, and thrown out of all, and forced to
quit their native Country, and the like. Now where all this is, do you but
fear, that Atheism gathers Strength? Nay is not the root of all your cruely
in persecuting Christ's Ministers and People, mere Atheism? It is noted of the
Sadduces, that of all other Sects they were the most cruel in their judicial
Censures: As Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 14. out of Josephus. And no marvel.
They denied the Resurrection, and the Last Judgment. So as they were Atheists.
This made them dare to practice all cruelty, and injustice. For Maxima peccandi
illaecebra, impunitatis Spes. So, how durst you be so unjust and cruel in your
oppressions and persecutions, did you certainly believe, that there is a
Resurrection and Last Judgment, wherein you shall be Judged. But this by the
way, it is an Item.

And Irreligion also: what is that? That Is soon resolved, to wit, Obstinacy in
not admitting of Altars in some Churches: Irreveverence, in not bowing to
Altars, and worshipping toward the East: and adoring the name Jesus, and the
like. This is with you Irreligion: because your whole Religion is placed in
these things. For so you tell us in the words following.

L. p. 19. The external worship of God, in his Church, is the GREAT WITNESS
to the world, that our hearts stand right in the Service of God. Take this
away, or bring it into contempt, and what light is there left to shine before
men, that they may see our Devotion, and glorify our Father, which is in
heaven.

P. Surely were it not for this GREAT WITNESS (which here you bring in arrayed
in Capital Letters) to wit, your external will worship in many devised
Ceremonies, of seeming Humility, Devotion, and Piety: the world could not come
to know, what Religion is in your heart toward God, in that internal part of
his worship, which you Speak of. But now through the clear perspective of your
bright shining Devotion without, we can discern what Devotion is within. Herby
we come to know all that spirit of Infidelity, and Apostacy, and consequenty
of Atheism, and Irreligion, which is in your heart. Do you set up Altars, and
adore them, and set up Priests to serve at them, to which you must needs add a
Sacrifice suitable, some material and corporal thing? Hereby we come to know,
how in your heart you deny Jesus Christ to be the only Altar, Priest, and
Sacrifice, as is showed before. And were it not for your lowly bowing at the
bare nameing of the Name Jesus, you should want witness to testify to the
world that deep hypocrisy in your heart, while in bowing to Jesus, you
persecute the Lord Jesus Christ in his Word, in his Ministers, in his Members.
So as your external ceremonial worship is the GREAT WITNESS to the world,
that there is in you an Antichristian heart, a Popish heart, a Superstitious
heart, an Idolatrous heart, an Heb. 3.12*
Evil heart of unbelife, in departing away from the living God. How then, with
what inward testimony of your Conscience, with what evidence of truth can you
say, that your heart stands right in the Internal worship of God, when the
external is so crooked, and bowed together with so many lowly duckings and
crindgins, so as your Head and Feet do even meet together? And is not the
Devotion of your heart every way as crooked? Does not your heart bow, as, and
when your body does? And is not the Same object which your body boweth unto,
the object, to which your heart boweth, and wherein your internal worship is
ultimately terminated and bounded? For as Aug. Says, Quis intuetur Semulacrum,
etc. Who beholds an Image, that is not so affected as to imagine the Divinity
to be in that Image, which he adoreth? And do not you Say, that your
God-Almighty is upon your Altar, which you bow unto, when you Say of your
Altar, you will have none to fit above God Al-mighty? So as either you Locally
place God there; or you make your Altar your God, and go no further. But
suppose you do in and by that Altar, which you bow unto, worship God: Who has
required such worship at your hands? Nay has not GOD in the Second
Commandment expressly forbidden any such worship, in or by an Image, or any
such thing as Man devises, in and by it to represent and worship GOD? And such
will worship is it not the fruit of the Will of your Evil, Corrupt, and
Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Proud Heart, whence it springs, and
proceeds? O Proud and Blind Hearts indeed, that dare make choice of their
own selfe-pleasing devises in Gods worship, thinking thereby to please GOD?
But GOD abhorres all such will worship. But it is (Say you) a testimony of your
Humility. But the Apostle expressly condemns such Col. 2.18.
voluntary Humility. And tell me, what is there in all the World (seting your
Honors, and Dignities, and Favor in Court aside) wherein you take more Pride
and Glory, then in such counterfeit Humility* Prelaticall pride in Will Worship
wherein your Heart is more lifted up, in persuading your self, that thereby
the World comes to take you for the most Devout and Pious Prelate, or Person in
all England, and as whereby you so bewitch the Court with an opinion of your
incomparable Sanctity, then simply in these your external Ceremonial
Complements; Will Worship is no true Service of God.
Saving only that they Serve for your GREAT WITNESSES to all the world, that
your heart stands right in the Service of God; which indeed is a Service done
to your self? And this appears in part through those Swelling words set down
at large Characters, EXTERNAL WORSHIP, GREAT WITNESS. Is not this a clear
expression of a heart full of pride, self-conceit, and vain glory, when you
do thus (as the Poet said) Proijcere ampullas, and Sesquipedalia verba, strout
it in such a swelling Style, and big words?

And that the world may yet further see how little I misjudge in this, let your
own immediate words further witness. For Say you, Take this away (this
EXTERNAL WORSHIP this GREAT WITNESS) and what light is there left to shine
before men, that they may See our Devotion, and glorify our Father which is in
heaven. I remember indeed what Christ said, to his Disciples, Math. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. These be the words you play withal as
a Descant of your Devotion. But Rev. 22.18, 19.
cursed is he (Says Christ) that adds to, or takes from Gods word. Here you
do both, for you leave out good works, and in stead of that put in your
Devotion* and you put out the true Light there, which is faith, and put in the
place of it your false Light, which is your blind Devotion. I say, blind
Devotion, because of your own devising. For as the Prophet says, Isa. 8.20.
If they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them: So I say of that Fear, or Devotion, which is taught by the precepts of
men: Such have no light in them. But your Dovotion is your Light, when both you
and it be blind. As I have read of some Creatures, that are muopes, Mope-eyed
(as we Say) that see better in the dark, then in the day. To such, darkness
is light. Such a light is your Devotion. And such Devotion was in the Priests
of Baal, which was mixed, or rather inflamed with great zeal. 1 King. 18.26.29.
Zeal, in Launcing themselves, that the blood sprang out: Devotion, in their
long Prayers from Morning till Noon. And this ( secundum usum Sacrum) after
their manner. Now might not they have said, as you do, This our external
worship is a GREAT WITNESS to the world, of our Zeal to our God, and without
which, what light have we left, whereby men may see our Devotion? And such also
was the Devotion of Hypocrites, of whom Christ says, Math. 6.5.
They pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that
they may be seen of men. Now might not these Hypocrites say for themselves,
This our external Devotion is the GREAT WITNESS unto the world, that our
hear^s stand right, being testified by standing in Prayer, so as without this
light men could not see our Devotion? So the Pharisees who were curious Masters
of Ceremonies in will worship, Math. 23.5. and 14.
they wore goodly broad Phylacteries, and for pretense made long prayers. Might
not they also have said, as you: This our external worship in long Prayers, in
our Solemn Robes, with goodly Boarders, is the GREAT WITNESS to the world,
that our hearts stand right, and without this Light men could not see our
inward Devotion toward God? And say not you, Our external worship is that
light, without which men could not see our Devotion? Just, as the Pharisees,
Math. 23.5*
All they did, was to be seen of men.

But you would persuade us you do it to a higher end, which is Gods glory. For
you Say, Prelates abusing of Scripture
Take this away, and what Light is there left to shine before men, that they
may see our Devotion, and glorify our Father which is in heaven? So here be
two ends of all your external worship, and solemn service, and great pomp,
and humble expressions of Devotion: First, that men may see your Devotion; for
else it were not worth a rush: Secondly, that they may glorify God. As I noted
before, these words of Christ you falsely apply to your blind Devotion, which
he Spoke concerning the Light of faith shining forth in good works to the
glory of God. Whereas your external worship, as it is a fruit of your blind
Devotion, so it is that, whereby God is greatly dishonored; and that both
actually in it self, and effectu^lly in the beholders: First, Actually in it
self, all false worship, or will worship (for both is one) is a dishonor to
God. Math. 15.9.
In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Precepts of Men. Now God
is not glorified, or honored with any vain worship. Nay, on the contrary, he
is greatly dishonored by it. For such will worship is a high presumption,
derogating from the Majesty of God, who will be worshipped no otherwise, then as
himself has expressly commanded in his word. As the Prophet says, And shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure: And
such is all will worship. Secondly, God is greatly dishonored, by such
external will worship effectively in the Beholders. First, because when they
see such a great Prelate as your self use such gestures in Gods Service, they
are apt to imitate you, and so to partake of your sin, as too many do.
Secondly, because in such false worship, the nearer they think to Isa. 29.13.
approach to God in imitating of you, the further off their hearts are from
God, as the Prophet Speaks. And they whose hearts are far removed from God,
cannot glorify God. Now your will worship, which is taught by the Precepts of
men, though it seem to be very humble, and so to draw near unto God: yet it
draws away men's hearts far from God; as there the Prophet shows. And such
as behold, and affect, and imitate your devises in external worship, they are
as much puffed up with vaineglory, that they imitate and so please such a great
Man, as your self, as they never think of glorifying God. And lastly, God is
not glorified by blind and Superstitious worshippers: but by good works
springing from the inward light of Faith. Now your blind Devotion is not to be
reckoned and ranked among good works. For good works are such, and so done, as
God has commanded: but your external worship (as you call it) being a
will worship, and so a false worship, which God no where has commanded, but
every where expressly forbidden, are no good works, but as Aug. Says,
Splendida peccata, a glaring false worship. But it seems this your external
worship, the fruit of your Devotion, is all the good works you have to show,
that men thereby may See what Kind of light is in you; which is not any true,
but a false light.

I proceed. But how has this ignis fatuus of yours carried me so out of my
way, that I have over Skipt one Passage in the same Page, a little before? But
yet coming in here, it will the more fitly usher in the next, which we shall
note in the Same Page.

L. ibid. This I have observed further, that no one thing has made
Conscientious men more wavering in their own minds, or more apt and easy to be
drawn aside from the Sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of England,
then the want of uniform and decent Order, in too many Churches of the Kingdom.

P. A little Page 34.
before you commended unto us the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and
Manners; and but now, how right your hearts stand in the Service of God: here,
you use a third word, Sincerity of Religion, and that professed in the Church
of England. By this time we are sufficiently acquainted with your Sincerity of
Religion, professed in the Church of England. For we have your external
worship as the GREAT WITNESS thereof, of which your Sincerity so much is
spoken, as we have left a great hole in it. And the nature of that your
Sincerity of Religion, professed in the Church of England, duly considered,
can we marvel, if most men's minds in the Kingdom fall a wavering; yea, and
if they be truly Conscientious men indeed (not such as you mean, to wit,
mere Formalists, or Newters) no marvel if you find multitudes of them (if
multitudes of such be left) to fall quite off from the Sincerity of your
Religion professed in the Church of England. But if any of your Conscientious
men be drawn aside: what is the Cause? Want of uniforme and decent Order in too
many Churches in the Kingdom. But do you not see on the other side a whole
Nation driven aside, and that (as they Say) by your too much pressing upon them
your uniforme and decent Order in all Churchs for the erecting of the Sincerity
of Religion professed in the Church of England? And yet you complain, that you
cannot set up your uniformity in too many Churches in England. Surely, ye might
have done well, first to have made all uniforme at home, before you pressed too
hard upon your Neighbour-Countrey. And if too many Churches in England be not
uniforme, whose fault is that? Not yours, I dare say. Have not you and your
brother Prelates done pretty well to it, in Suspending, Silencing,
Excommunicating, Casting out of their Ministry and Living, so many Ministers?
Witness Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent, Surrey, and other Diocese and
Shires. Will not these Examples, terrify all other Churches in England? But
yet if nothing else will do it, the publishing of this your Book anew, will
certainly effect it, or nothing. And therefore you add.

L. Ibid. To deal Clearly with your Majesty these thoughts are they, and no
other, which have made me labor so much, as I have done, for Decency and an
Orderly Settlement of the external worship of God in the Church. Now no
external action in the world can be uniform, without some Ceremonies: And
these in Religion the ancienter they be, the better, so they may fit Time and
Place. Too many overburthen the Service of God, and too few leave it naked,
etc. Ceremonies are the hedge, that fence the Substance of Religion from all
the indignities, which Profanesse and Sacrilege too commonly put upon it.
Weakness it is, not to see the Strength, which Ceremonies (things weak enough
in themselves, God knows) add even to Religion it self; but a far greater,
to see it, and yet to cry them down, All, and without choice, by which their
most hated Adversaries Climb up, and could not cry up themselves, and their
Cause, as they do, but by them.

P. I shall have here occasion, and that in sundry respects, to be more large
upon your words. First, for the Substance of the matter, being of such moment.
Secondly, for the Circumstance of the Person, to whom you speak, his Sacred
Majesty, which makes your matter of the greater Consequence: and Lasty, in
respect of the Excellency of the Person Jesus Christ, whose honor and regal
Sovereignty is here undermined by you. For when Kings are misinformed, and
miscounselled in matters of Religion especially, and that by those, whom they
repose greatest confidence in* and whose judgment they most rely upon, and
have that high opinion of, both for Learning and Sanctity; which they conceive
to be in them; it is a matter full of weight. And when we see the glory of
Christ, and of his Kingdom trodden under foot, it will, and ought to stir up,
and kindle the Zeal of every true Servant of Christ, to vindicate his Masters
honor, to the utmost of his power. Now to your words.

And to deal truly with your Majesty. What else? Surely one of your honorable
place, and in whom such trust is reposed, should deal clearly with Kings at
all times, and in all things. But wherein do you deal clearly with his
Majesty? In this (as you say) in telling him, These thoughts are they and no
other, which have made me labor so much, as I have done, for Decency and an
Orderly Settlement of the external worship of God in the Church. Is it so?
Why, a little before (if you remember) you told his Majesty that you put forth
this work, wherein you have bestowed so much pains, for the vindicating of
your Reputation: And now you tell him, that your thoughts for Decency, etc.
and no other^, made you thus to labor. And no other then? Then what is become
now of your Reputation? Yea, and (page 9. before cited) do you not tell his
Majesty expressly, saying, I have thus acquainted your Majesty with all
occasions, Prelates Contradiction.
which both formerly, and now again have led this Tract into the Light? All?
But how all, where here is one more comes in the Rear, not mentioned before,
which excludes all other, Saying, These thoughts are they, and no other, which
have made me labor so much, as I have done, for Decency, and an Orderly
Settlement, etc. And herein, you say, you deal Clearly with his Majesty. Did
you not then deal Clearly in the rest? You have occasion now to clear your
self. But to let this pass; we can easily believe, (that setting your
Reputation aside) these thoughts of yours were of greatest force with you to
set upon such a work. For I believe you have been no small time in hammering
this Project, how to beat and fashion it to such a Decency and Orderly
Settlement of the external worship of God in the Church of England, as you
speak of* But what do you call Decency? Certainly that only is Decent in the
worship of God, which God himself approves, and that is only That, which
himself commands in his word. But you account and call that only Decent in
the worship of God, which either your self, or that Whore of Babylon has
devised for Decent, as the seting up of her pompous Devotion, and voluntary
humility in Rites and Ceremonies in Gods worship, as ye pretend. And can you
Say, that your decencies are not just the Same, with those of Rome? Perhaps you
cannot yet attain to all hers. And if not hers, how could they with you be
Decent? But She being That Whore, and marked out for such, even by her very
attire (Rev. 17.) Will Christ (trow you) aporove that for decent in his Spouse*
which is the Whores Fashion? Is not this enough to provoke his jealousy, and
(if he knew it not) to suspect your Church of England for Scarce an honest
Woman? Yea an honest Woman for her Credit sake, will not go in gaudey and
garish garb, proper and peculi^r to such as are notorious Strumpets, and such
too, as whereby famous Whores are known from honest and virtuous Matrons? But
let it be the Decency of your Church of England, to be suited like her Sister
Rome; that so they may be the better known for Sisters, and both of one House,
and (to prove your words true) both one, and the Same Church.

But decency is not all. Your thoughts are also for an Orderly Settlement of
the external worship of God in the Church. Why, what Settlement? Were not all
things sufficiently settled (yea and Ier. 48.11.
upon the Lees too) in the Church you speak of, before you were settled in the
Throne of Canterbury? Was there not settled an universal conformity to those
Ceremonies prescribed and limited by Act of Parliament? Are not all
Non-conformists Silenced, and casheered? Was not all quiet then? Yea so quiet,
that the Church of England was fallen quietly asleep, and so securely settled (I
say again) upon Zeph. 1.12.
her Lees. What has now then made the disturbance, and unsettled the State of
things? Did not that begin with your Primacie? How so? For just then, when you
were Scarce warm in the Chair, began there Edict to dispense with the due
Sanctification of the Lords day, by giving liberty for profane Sports; wherein
also Gods people, whom you call Puritans, were marked out, as not worthy to be
suffered in any Country. Then also, began there not to be published a
Declaration with and before the Book of your 39. Articles, prohibing all
Disputes about all the Controverted Points in those Articles, and commanding to
keep to the letter of the Text, which yet (as it says) might be taken either
way? So as was not this a most gross unsettling of the Doctrines of your
Church, and a strowing of the way to Fr. a S. Clara his Book, wherein he goes
about to prove, that the Doctrines of England and Trent, are one and the Same,
or with but small difference, which Book coming forth was much Graced by you in
Court. And so that Declaration because also a Shelter to Shroud your Arminian
Faction against a Storm, if ever it should come, yea and to defend their
Heresies, and defeat the truth (had it no surer footing, then your
prevaricating Articles) when once you could Order to be a new set forth, with
an Enlargement of restraint, reaching even to Deanes and Prelates, and the
greatest Rabbis of your Church not to meddle in their Sermons with those
controverted points, as of Predestination, Election, etc. but strictly to
observe the said Declaration? Under your Primacie began there not a more
remarkable restraint of writing, or at least of Printing against the Pope, and
a larger licensing of most notorious Popish Books? As Shelfords five Sermons or
Treatises, wherein (among many other like things) he endeavors to prove
Justification by Charity, and the Pope not to be Antichrist, and no necessity
of frequent Preaching, and none to preach but Bishops and Deanes, and that
only and especially at the three Solemn times in the year. Also another Book
entitled the Femall Glory, as full fraught thoughout with the most gross,
blasphemous, Idolatrous Popish Stuff, as it can hold; and this in plain
English, allowed by one of your Chapleins, or of London house; and for ought I
hear, not yet suppressed, or called in. Besides many other of the same branne,
some whereof are printed, but kept up under deck, not daring yet to peep forth,
till the Storm (as in Star Chamber you called it) raised by BURTON and
others, be over; and least they should be made Popish Martyrs in Smithfield, as
Salis his Devotions were, which for fear were burned, as before. Under your
Primacy has there not been a Altars, etc. yea of Images too, and Crucifixes,
and that in Collegiate Churches, or Chapels, both in Oxford, you being
Chancellor, and in Cambridge, where you want not a Vice-Chauncellour, and
which you Churches of England? Under your Primacie, have not your pregnantest
wits, and profoundest Divines been set aworke to write Books to unmorallize the
4th Commandment for the perpetual keeping of the Lords Sabbath day, and so
unbind Christians from the sanctification of the Lords day; and their Books
allowed by your Authority, and Dedicated to great ones, and much applauded by
your Faction? Under your Primacie have not your Doctors also written stoutly
for Altars, and that, even unto blasphemy, Saying, that the use of the Altar is
to sanctify the Sacrifice, and without an Altar the Sacrifice is not
Sanctified, or dedicated by the Bishop? Under your Primacie began not Ministers
to be Suspended, Lords day, and to set up Altars in their Churches at their
Ordinaries Command. These these my Lord being thus, do you complain of
unsettlednesse? Who has troubled the Fountain? The Wolf, above at the Spring
head, or the Lamb below? To recollect then, and recapitulate these things: When
Profanation of the Lords day is by public Edict allowed: when the Articles of
Religion are made as the Delphick Oracles, to be taken two contrary ways: when
the Doctrines of Gods Grace are universally restrained and forbid to be
preached: when Popish Books publicly allowed in Print, and Orthodox Books
against Popery restrained: when Altars set up in all Churches, where there was
none before: when Books published by Authority to disanull Gods Moral Law:
when Books allowed publicly to maintain the seting up of Altars in Churchs:
when Godly Ministers by multitudes put down, for not yielding to those things,
which are contrary to the Laws of God and man: and all this in the State of
England, where from the first Reformation (such as it was) have been
universally and constantly maintained both by writing and preaching, the
morality of the 4th Commandment for the sanctification of the Lords Day: the
Articles of Religion concerning Grace, to have but one Orthodox sense: the free
and unrestrained preaching of Gods word, and confuting of all opposite Errors:
that the Pope is that Antichrist: that the Lords Supper was to be celebrated
only at the Lords Table: that Ministers Conformity was extended no further,
then was limited by the Law: all these things considered, in the tumult of so
many bold Innovations, (Innovation? I cry you mercy: Renovations I should say,
of old Popish rags and outcast relics, for you disclaim Innovation) against
Gods law and Man's law: what settlement, what peace, what tranquillity can be
expected? and then again al these new Attempts for Uniformity and Conformity
coming in under and with your Primacie, can they vindicate your Reputation from
a general opinion of your being the most perilous and pernicious Instrument
of unsettling and troubling the State o^ the Land, What a Settler the Prelate
is,
and of Religion (and you may, if you will, take Scotland in to boot) with
general discontents and heart burnings, to see the State of Religion, thus
turned topsie turvie* And do you complain notwithstanding, that you cannot
attain to an Orderly Settlement? Stay, my Lord, be not so eagre: See Scotland
first settled, before you proceed further in the settlement of England, least
you unsettle all. Be not deceived in the confidence of your own active brain,
and borrowed power. And see also how your Book will take. For Certainly
therein you have run your self upon the Pikes, get off as you can. Your
Reputation (if you mean it for the Repute to be a good Protestant: unless you
mean it, that you would be accounted what you are, a member of one and the
Same Church with Rome) is now bound to the Stake, ready to be Sacrificed for a
whole-burnt Offering. For what your Ordinary practices proclaimed to the world
of you, now in your Book you stick not openly to profess, that you desire for
the Church and State of England to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome. So as your
Book, besides the turbulent matter in it* (like the Trojan horse, full of armed
enemies) could not possibly have been borne into the world in a more unhappy
time, then now, when you see two Kingdoms all in a combustion, which the
Sprinkling of your Romes Holy water will be so far from quenching, or allaying,
that it will prove rather as Oil to increase and feed the flame. But GOD give
the King the Spirit of Wisdom and Judgment to see into these things betimes,
both for the preventing of further mischiefs, and for the reuniting of the
great rent between his two Kingdoms. But as Iehu said to Iehoram, when he
asked, Is it peace, Iehu? What peace (said he) so long as the Whoredoms of thy
Mother Iezabel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? So what peace can be expected
in the Land, where such an Uniformity and Settlement is required, as is so
repugnant to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, and conformable to Antichrists
Tyranny, and conducible to a reconciliation with that old Iezabel of Rome?
Certainly, the case being so, as Deborah said in her Song, They chose new gods,
then was war in the gates: So when a Nation falls to advance higher and
higher a new and false Religion, where it had been formerly in some good
measure cast out, to set up Idolatrous and Romish Altars, whereby Christ the
true and only Altar of true Christians (as has been showed) is denied and
renounced: and to cry down Gods holy Commandments: and to oppress Gods holy
Word in the Ministry of it: and to persecute Gods faithful Ministers and
People: and like the Egyptians to oppress Gods People more and more with
intolerable burdens of humane inventions, to the great reproach of Christ, and
the throwing down of his incommunicable Royal Sovereignty over his Church and
People, in matters of Faith, and the worship of God: Can peace, or settlement
be expected there? Can, or will the Lord Jesus Christ long suffer such things?
And what does England now attempt? The recovery of Scotland? First, o England,
be thou thy self reconciled to God: humble thy self for thy fearful
Apostacy: revoke and call in all thy ungodly Edicts against Christ, and his
Word: reform all thy oppressions of Gods People, and thine own: maintain not
still open war against the Spiritual Kingdom of Jesus Christ, least he
destroy thy temporal: look up to God, as highly offended with thee, and who
has for the present rent a whole Kingdom from thee, who have rent thy self
from his Kingly Dominion over thee. Be no longer rebellious against God: stand
not upon the confidence of thine own conceited Prudence and Power, which
unless thou have God on thy side, shall be but a snare unto thee, and shall
stand thee in no stead at thy need, except thou do repent and turn to God
unfainedly, and refrain thy violent courses, and reform all. My zeal has
carried me thus far for my God, and for my King, and for my Country, and for
all the People of God, and the King, in all his Kingdoms, my daily prayer
being for Truth and Peace; as the Prophet Says, Zach. 8
Love the Truth and Peace. Truth is both the Mother, and Nurse of Peace.

But to proceed: you say, No external action in the world can be uniforme,
without some Ceremony. If you speak of Natural Actictions, 1 Cor. 11.14.
nature it self does teach a fit manner in doing of them. If of Moral, or
Civil actions, we commonly use such Ceremonies, as either humane Laws,
Customs, or a man's own reason has brought in use. But if you Speak of
Religious actions, such as are conversant about the worship of God: That Is
quite of another nature, for point of Ceremony. Only thus far it holds
proportion with the other: that as every natural action has for its manner of
performance and carriage certain Principles of Nature to guide a Man in the
decent and orderly doing of it: and as every Civil and Moral action has for
its manner of the decent carriage of it some Rule, either intrinsecall, within
a man, and in his own choice and power, or extrinsecall and without him,
according either to Custom, or humane Law: even so the external manner of
performing Gods worship, has for its Sole Principle and Rule the will of God
himself, whose service it is, and over which he is the Sole Lord, whose will
for his whole service both internal and external he has clearly expressed
in his word, the holy Scripture. And this is a principle, which every man, that
sees not but by the Spectacles of Natures Light, assenteth unto, as a firm
and universal truth, namely That every Master is so to be served, as himself
commands. And if a Servant presume to serve his Master as himself lists,
and not as his Master commands, shall have small thanks for his labor. How
much more, and beyond all comparison is God to be served of us, not as we
fancy, but as himself has expressly commanded in his word? And this is a safe
obedience, wherein a man, observing his Rule, cannot err. Whereas obedience to
Man's command is only so far good, as the commandment it self is good and
lawful. But Gods Word and Commandment being every way perfect, and given us
with a strict charge, and under a most severe penalty, even a Curse to those,
that shall either add to it, or detract from it: who, but Kataras tekna.
Children of the curse, will presume to invent what manner of external service
of God his own proud fancy likes best? Such service cannot be called the
service of God, as wherewith he is served and pleased, but the service of Man,
wherein he pleases himself. Yea when a man has pleased his own fancy in the
invention of this or that Ceremony in religious worship, and not content
herewith, does withal impose and injoyne it to be of necessity observed of
all, so as their Conscience is now by humane Law captivated thereunto: Heresy
what it is.

Prelates Ceremonial worship Heretical.


this service of God becomes Heretical. For what is Heresy in the common use
among Divines, but an obstinate holding, and maintaining of an error in faith,
which man's pride has made choice of But, not only presumtuously to elect, and
obstinately and pertinaciously to maintain, but to make a Law to enforce others
to conform to any such error in faith: this is the highest degree of Heresy
that can be. And that the inventing, holding and imposing of such Ceremonies in
Gods worship is an error in faith, and so heretical, is clear. For it is a
point and Artcile of faith, Christ the only Lord in and over his own house and
Service.
Article of Christian faith to bebeleeve, that Christ is the only Lord and
King of his Church; and therefore in the Creed we say, And in Jesus Christ, his
only Son, our Lord. To whom then does the power of ordaining Ceremonies in
Gods holy service appertain, but to the King or Master of this service? This
power is Christ's Prerogative in his Church. This is Christ's Throne, wherein he
sits, reigns, and rules in and over the Souls and Consciences of his
people, as before is touched. He is the only Teletarkes, or Master of
ordaining Ceremonies in Gods house, or family (as the learned Budaeus
interprets that word out of Dionisius Areopageta) so as Teletarkia, which
signifies a Prerogative and Power in GOD, incommunicable, to ordain Ceremonies
in his worship, is used for the Sovereign Deity or Godhead, and so for the
Holy Trinity. And Christ has ever from the beginning reserved this power
entire and peculiar to himself, even as his glory, not imparting it to any
earthly power, not to his Church, not to his Prophets and Apostles, not to the
Kings of Israel under the Law, nor to the Fathers before the Law. For before
the giveing of the Law in Mount Sina, Genesis 4. and 7. and 8. and 35.^.
GOD taught his Church the use of Sacrifices and Altars, and other Rites, with
the difference of Meats clean, and unclean. At the giving of the Law, GOD
showed Moses a pattern for the Tabernacle, and all things thereunto belonging,
Exodus 25.9.40.
with a Charge to do all things according to the Pattern which he had seen.
Not the least Ceremony, no not a pin about the Tabernacle was left in Moses
power or choice to make of his own head. So afterward, when the Temple was to
be built, David received the 1 Chro. 28^12.19.
pattern thereof, and of all things appertaining to the whole service thereof
from God in writing, which David delivering to his Son Solomon appointed of God
to build the Temple Said, All this the Lord made me understand in writing by
his hand upon me, even all the work of this Pattern: even the v. 12.
Pattern of all that he had by the Spirit. So as, though David was a King, and
a Prophet, and that of singular eminency, 1 Samuel 13.14.
a man according to Gods own heart, and abundantly endued with the holy Spirit
of God, and 2 Samuel 2^.14.
the Sweet Psalmist of Israel: and though King Solomon was endued with
admirable and incomparable wisdom: yet the Lord would not commit to either of
them any part of this his Prerogative in appointing what manner of service they
thought good, or in the fashion of building the Temple. Nor yet did the Lord
deliver the pattern of these things by tradition, but in writing, that in
nothing they should come short, or over shoot their bounds. Neither had any of
the Kings of Judah the power afterward, either to add, or alter the least
thing, but at their peril. No not the King, and the Priest together, as you
would now have it. So as when in a cafe of necessity (no Law or Rule for us to
take liberty to do what we please, without warrant from Gods word) 2 Chronicles.
30.2, 3, 4.
King Ezechias was to keep the Passover in the Second Month: he did it not
alone, nor with the Priest alone, but with the unanimous assent and approbation
of all the Princes and People in Jerusalem: So as the thing pleased the King,
and all the Congregation. Likewise when 2 Samuel 6. and 1 Chronicles. 15.1, 2, 3, 4.
King David was to bring the Arc to Jerusalem, he did it not alone, or with
the Priest alone, but gathered all the chosen men of Israel together about it.
And what to do? Not what himself, and they thought fit, but according to the
Law and Commandment of the Lord. And is it come to this pass now, that the
King and the Priest must do all, and that according to their own Fancy in
the worship and service of God? 2 King. 16.
When the Priest Vriah had according to the Kings Commandment built an Altar,
according to the pattern sent him by the King from Damascus, on which the King
offered Sacrifice, did God approve it? Is he not branded with this note, which
sticks upon his name to this day, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
This is that King Ahaz? And did not the Lord 2 Chro. 26.
smite King Vzziah with Leprosy, for offering Incense, which pertained to the
Priest only? And was not 1 Chro. 13.
Vzzah smitten, for but putting his Hand to stay the Arc, when the Oxen shook
it, it not pertaining to him, being but a Levite, and not a Priest, who only
was to meddle with the Arc? So dangerous is it for men, to take upon them, be
they Prince, or Priest, or both, to intermeddle in any thing about the service
of God, which God has not given them warrant for. Now where has Christ, or
his Apostles from him left any such power to man, Prince, or Priest, or both
(as you claim and usurp) or to the Church, to ordain any Ceremonies in
Religion, to bind the Conscience of his People to the observation of them? And
if ye have either a pattern, or pattent for it from Christ, and under black and
white, in writing, not by any unwritten Tradition, produce and show it. But
none can you show, we are sure. I know your usual places, which you use to
wrest for this purpose. As 1 Cor. 14.4^. Let all things be done Decently and in
in Order. Hereupon (it seems) your words of decency, and orderly settlement
are grounded. But what conclude you hence? Ergo the King and the Priest
(although in things of this nature you use the King but as a Cipher, to back
and countenance the Priest in what he does) may appoint what Ceremonies they
please in the service of God. But frame your Argument in a Syllogism.

All things in the Church are to be done Decently and in Order. But for the
King and the Priest to prescribe and impose what Ceremonies they please in Gods
Service is Decent and Orderly. Ergo, it is left to the Power of the King and
the Priest to prescribe and impose what Ceremonies they please in Gods Service.
Or thus:

What is Decent, and according to Order, is lawful to be done in the worship
of God. But for the King and Priest to prescribe and impose Ceremomonies in
Gods Service, is Decent, and according to order: Therefore it is lawful for
the King and the Priest to prescribe and impose Ceremonies in the Service of
God.
Now if I have not framed your Argument according to your mind, I desire you to
mend it. But I conceive it is all that can be framed upon that test, which you
allege, so as if you argue not thus, you can make nothing at all of it,
according to the Rules of Logic. Nor for answer. First, I deny, that the
Apostle speaks there of the Service of God in Prayer, but only of an Order,
and Dencie in Prophesying, such as was then in use in the Church: as, first,
that it should be done 1 Cor. 14* 31.
one by one, and not confusedly. Secondly, v. 34.
that women should not be permitted to speak in the Church. Thirdly, v. 27.
that it be not in a strange tongue, without an Interpreter. And such like. And
to this has that of the Apostle particular and immdediate reference, Let all
things be done decently and in order. As for Praying in the Church, the Apostle
gives no other Rule but this, that it be not done in a strange tongue. Again,
we have before excluded the Priest you speak of, from having any thing at all
to do, or meddle in Gods service, for the Reasons fore-shewed. So as if for
the King and the Priest you put the Church, I answer. First your Prelaticall
Church is a false Church, as has beed proved, and so with your Priest is
altogether excluded here from having any such power, as to ordain Ceremonies in
Gods service to bind the Consciences of Gods people. For in so doing you show
your selves to be Antichrists, and Tyrants over men's souls, as before is
showed. Secondly, not even the true Churches and Congregations of Christ, the
King, Minister, and People put together, have power to ordain and impose any
Ceremony in Gods service to bind the Conscience: For the Apostles themselves
neither had, nor exercised any such power. We find not any one footstep of it
in all the New Testament. But in this case Christians were left altogether
free. And the Apostle admonishes the Collossians, and in them all Christians,
Saying, Col. 2.8.
Beware, least any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after
the Tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
And v. 16. Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of an holy
day, etc. which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ. Let
no man Judge you: that is, subject not your Conscience to Man's command and
ordinance in these things, as matter of Religion. And v. 20. If ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as living in the world, are
subject to Ordinances, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; which all are to perish
with the using; being after the Commandments and Doctrine of men; which have
indeed a Show of wisdom in will worship, and humility in neglecting of the
body: not in any honor to the Satisfying of the flesh. The sum of all which
is to show, that Christians being freed by Christ's death from all humane
Ordinances and Traditions in matters of Religion, they ought to be so
mortified, as to be dead to these things, and not any more to suffer themselves
in such things to be vassalized by men: which to do, is to deny Christ's death,
and so to fall away from Christ, not holding the Head, that is, not holding
Christ, as the Apostle Says, v. 19. And therefore he charge, Saying, v. 18.
Let no man beguile your reward (or the Crown of your victory, as the Kata.
word imports) in a voluntary humility, etc. That is, Subject not your selves
to men's devises in matters of Religion, though they have never so fair
pretenses of voluntary humility, and devotion: for so you suffer your selves to
be spoiled of your Crown, that you fight for; as Christ Says, Rev. 3.11.
Hold fast that thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Thus we see, that it is
a matter of no small moment and consequence, to be subject to Man's devises in
matters of Religion, and Gods worship, when it is a denial of Christ's death,
yea a falling from Christ, and so a loosing of our eternal Crown. And here
again on the other side, such as will be Masters of Ceremonies in the service of
God, may take notice of their damnable pride and presumption, in daring to
bring into bondage the people of God, whom Christ with his own precious blood
has redeemed from all such Slavery. And for matter of decency: Is it decent,
for a Judge set over a Province by the King, or Supreme Magistrate, with
express written Laws how to govern, and no otherwise, to take upon him to rule
them as he list, and to yield what service to the King he pleases? Or is it
decent, that one King, subordinate to a higher, as Emperor, or so, as King
Herod was to Caesar Augustus, should presume to make Laws to bind Caesar's
Subjects, without any express warrant so to do? Now all earthly Princes are
subordinate to Christ, as his vicegerents, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.

Nay more then this: Christ's Kingdom here on earth, is Spiritual, and the
Laws thereof altogether spiritual, enacted by his Spirit, and recorded in the
Scripture: Is it decent then, that earthly Powers, or Princes, or Priests, how
ever styled, should make Laws according to their carnal fancies, for the
government of this Spiritual Kingdom, and the service of God, who will be Ioh.
4.23 24.
served in Spirit and Truth? Yea, in this Spiritual Kingdom, Christ our King
keeps his perpetual residence by his Spirit immediately, and that in the heart,
soul, spirit, and conscience, of every one of his Subjects and Saints, the
true believers. So the Apostle: Heb. 3.6.
But Christ, as the Son ^ver his own house, whose house we are, etc. And, 2
Cor. 6.26
you are the Temple of the living God, as God has Said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye Separate, Says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you: And I will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my Sons and Daughters, Says the Lord Allmighty. And 1 Cor. 3.17
Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple of God, him will God defile, or
destroy: For the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are. And, 1 Pet. 2.5
Ye are built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Now, is every true believer the
Temple of God, a Spiritual house, over which the Son of God rules as King,
and in which he dwells and walks, in which also spiritual Sacrifices and
Services are offered up in Christ's Name, as himself has commanded in his
word? And is all strange service, devised by men a profaning of the Temple of
God, as the Exodus 30.9 Levit. 10.1.3 Mal. 1.7. 2 Chro. 36.1.
Scripture every where teaches? And must Gods people Separate themselves from
all such profanesse, and touch no unclean thing, by subjecting themselves to
profane ordinances of men, whereby they should cast off God for their Father,
and Christ for their King, and the Holy Ghost from his residence and dwelling
in them? Then how not only undecent, but unholy, profane and impious is it,
for any sort of men whatsoever, to impose the devices of their own brains upon
the Consciences of Gods people in the worship of their God? What is this, but
to thrust Christ out of his Throne (as before) and to set up an Antichristian
Throne of Tyranny (like Caesar's Image in the Temple, the abomination of
desolation) in the living and spiritual Temples of Jesus Christ? Thus Christ
being that O^kodespotes, the Father of the Family of God, is it decent for any
Steward (Such whose Office you do usurp) of his own head, without warrant, to
give carnal Laws to the Family for their spiritual Service to their Lord,
and Math. 24.49.
to beat them, if they refuse to conform unto them.

Secondly, neither is it according to Order, for men to Set up Ceremonies in
Gods service. First, because they have no order from God so to do: So as God
may Say unto them, Isa. 1.12.
Who required these things at your hands? And, Math. 15.9.
In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men.
Again, It Is the greatest violation of Order in the World, for any Man to
usurp and exercise a Tyranny over his Fellow Servants, Math. 24.48.49.
which the Lord has expressly forbidden, and which he will most severely
punish. And of all Tyrannies in the world, is not this the greatest, and most
intolerable, to hold under the yoke of bondage the Consciences of Gods people,
in the observation of humane rites in the worship of God, from all which Christ
has freed them by the shedding of his blood? And will a King think it to be
according to Order, and not the highest degree of rebellion, for a Subject to
usurp his Throne? Can it then be either decent, or orderly, for any power on
earth, Prince or Priest, or altogether, to invade Christ's Throne, and therein
exercise their Tyranny over his people? Certainly such as do so, it is just
with God to thrust them out of their Thrones, and to break the Staff of their
Tyranny, wherewith they beat his Children, over their heads. Thus this
Scripture, the Same weapon, which you violently wrest and take out of Gods
Armory, to beat us withal: we vindicate out of your hands, and turn both edge
and point against your usurped Tyranny. And so being beaten out of the maine
Fort, which you had violently seized, you can have small confidence in the rest.

But you go on, and Say, Ceremonies in Religion, the ancienter they be, the
better; So they may fit Time, and Place. We all know your Lordship to be no
small adorer of venerable and hoary Antiquity in point of Ceremonies. Indeed
Solomon Says, Pro. 16.31. Antiquitas sin^ Veritate vetustas erroris est*
The hoary head is a Crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness. Else not. And Tertullian an ancient writer of the Church, Says,
Antiquity without Verity, is oldnesse of Error. And again; Illud
antiquissimum, quod ^erissimum: That is most ancient, which is most true. You
commend unto us ancient Ceremonies; and the ancienter the better, so they may
fit time and place. But here is never a word, how fit, and agreeable they be to
the word of God. As Tertullian else where Says to Hermogenes the Heretic,
Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis Officina; Si non est Scriptum, timeat vae illud
adijcientibus* etc. Let Hermogenes his Shop show this to be written; if it be
not written; let him fear that woe to all them, that add to, or take from the
word of God, etc. But if antiquity be with you in such request, you may take in
also the Mystery of Iniquity, if antiquity will commend it for good. For even
in the Apostles time (as is noted before) it began to work, though (as a
Mystery) more covertly, as not yet then fiting time and place. Not time: For
the Apostles then living, thundered it into holes and thickets. Not place: For
not Jerusalem, but Rome must be the place for it, but was not yet fitted for
it. And the Devil, with his Lies can plead great antiquity. And with his Lies
came in all Errors, which may stand in competition for antiquity even with
verity it self For Satan's Religion had the Start for antiquity of time, even
of the Gospel it self; as we may see, Genesis 3.1.15. And therefore no marvail if
your Lady Mother Rome do stand so much upon the Tiptoes of her antiquity, both
in her Hierarchy, and its whole frame of Errors, and Superstitious Ceremonies,
as all claiming from the antiquity of the mystery of Iniquity, the common
Grandmother and root, whence has sprung in successive ages the Stock and
branches of all Popery.

But for answer to all your Plea* and Pretense of Antiquity, we allege
against you the antiquity of Truth. And if you plead for antiquity of humane
devices, because Satan's Lies were born into the world, and embraced, before
Christ was revealed; So as the very foundation of all will worship, and
inventions in the service of God, was laid in Adams fall from God, by the
Serpents seducement: yet we prefer the Religion of Christ before it, because
this brings with it the blessing. As in the Old Testament, when through Adams
fall nature had lost her birthright, the blessing still descended upon the
younger, and that through grace. And does not the antiquity of your ancient
Ceremonies take its very rise and Original from that poison of pride, which
the Serpent infused into our First Parents, telling them they should be as
Gods, selfe-wise, selfe-sufficient? Now there is nothing, wherein men would
seem more wise, and please themselves more in that opinion, then their own
devises in the worship of God. As the Apostle notes of the Gentiles, Romans 1.22.
Who professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. Wherein wise? The
Apostle shows, in their devised worship of God, in framing and worshipping
false similitudes of God, yea even Images of beasts, and creeping things.
Herein they thought themselves very wise men. And do not you so in all your
Train of humane inventions in the service of God? If you do not think it the
highest point of your wisdom, why do you make it your main Study, and spend
all your wits, and strength, to fill the Church with such inventions? But you
will Say, They are not your own invention, they are ancient, and the ancienter
the better. But your seting them up, makes them your own, and makes them new
again, where they had been antiquated and cast out to the dunghill. Nay one
thing more for antiquity of your Ceremonies you have from the Old Serpent, to
be persuaded that you are as Gods, that you have all power in your hands over
men's Consciences, in imposing upon them what Ceremonies you please in the
service of God. Do you not here take upon you to be as Gods? Sit you not in
Christ's Throne, while you thrust him out? Thus we see what antiquity not only
your Ceremonies, but your absolute Tyranny in imposing of them may justly
challenge. Well, take, your antiquity, but withal there is another antiquity
goes with it, which falls unto you by right of inheritance from that Old Sire
of your Ceremonies, and that you may find in those words, to the Serpent and
his Seed Genesis 3.14, 15.
Cursed art thou. And this is confirmed unto you ( Deuteronomy. 27.26.) Cursed is he
that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. And do you not make
the word of God of no effect by your Traditions, Ceremonies in the worship of
God put for the very Substance of Religion.
while you set up your Ceremonies for and Essential part of Gods service? For
so you call them in plain terms, The external worship of God, which you
express to be those external actions which you use in your Church Service, as
your devout bowing to your Altars, and the like. Thus you make Gods word of no
authority, which alowes of no other worship of God, internal and external,
but such as he has expressly commanded in his word. To which purpose Christ
alleges against those hypocritical Pharisees the Prophet Isaiah, in these
words, This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. Which is expressed in Isaiah
thus: Isa 29.13.
Their fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of men. Where, by fear is
meant the worship of God; as is noted before* but you give me new occasion here
to mention it again. And I have no other Weapon, but Gods word, to encounter
your vanities withal.

So they may fit Time and Place. Can you find any time or place in these days
in England, so uncivil, or so irreligious in your religion, as not to
intertaine your ancient venerable Ceremonies? Or is not time yet ripe for it,
but that some places at least shut out such guests? Why then, what is wanting?
Have you not a remedy in a readiness? Either the Popes Dispensation, to
suspend all those without Law, that stand out, or some Edict or other will
serve the turn. And no marvel, if your English Christians, so long brought
up in Christ's School, think Scorn to be brought back to Romes A.B.C. again.
And they have read how Joshua and the Elders of Israel, not consulting God, were
deceived by the Gibeonites fair pretense of longinquity, by the appearance of
Antiquity, Showing it self in their moldy bread, and old Shoes. Which was
all they had to pretend for themselves, to be received into a League with
Israel. The Same pretense is yours, who to strike a League between England and
Rome, you pretend your Ceremonies come from far, from antiquity it self, and
the Ancienter the better. But all this Chafe will not entice the old Birds
into your Snare. Your Ceremonies for all their antiquity, will not yet fit Time
and Place, at least not all Places in these Times. Why my Lord cannot your
zeal be patient a while, till Time fit the Places? Though you do parturire,
are in travail to bring forth whether a Man, or Monster, or perhaps (as the
Parturient Montes, Nascitur ridiculu^ Mu^. Hor.
Mountains once did) a mouse: yet you must wait for Time and Midwife to help
to deliver a birth of such Difficulty. Soft and fair. Rome was not built in
one day. It Is too rude, at first dash to hoyse up your Altar, and flappe down
upon it presently your God-Allmighty. And though the heat of your zeal has
hastened the times to such a ripeness, as they are even white again (as your
Rochet) with a pure outside of sanctity: yet some places being of a more solid
and well watered soil (not like Summer fruits, soon ripe, soon rotten, but as
Winter corn, that abides many a storm, and many a nipping frost) all your
zeal cannot so easily work upon; insomuch, as you shall sooner burn those
fields, then ever come to reap your harvest of them. Ah, my Lord, you have
undertaken a hard task upon you, so as before you shall come to fell down that
good old Oak of the Gospel, that has grown so long, and taken such rooting in
England, you will meet with many a hard knot, that will go near to turn the
edge of your hatchet. Oh these Puritans (my Lord) are tough Laddes, you cannot
with all your Rhetoric woo them to be in love with old Mother Babel, or so
much as once shake hands with her. And they are a strong Faction: for the head
of it is Christ, and the guard of it is the holy Angels, and their weapons are
such, as you cannot take from them (though you labor to strip them of all the
rest, as their faithful Pastors, and solemn Fasts and days of humiliation)
and that is, their Prayers and Tears, which are of a prevayling power. So as
you may suspect some thing is the Cause, that since you have so hampered them,
and more remarkably since you cooped up those three Men, you have thriven so
ill, as your Cause is rather gone backward, then got any ground; and on the
contrary the Puritans are mightily multiplied, and their zeal and courage
sharpened against you. And how comes this to pass? Do you not know? Why,
partly by the Antiperistasis of a hard frosty winter, and partly by their
strong cries to God; which are also redoubled in their fervencie, by reason of
the outward cold, and of your h^t and furious pursuing of them. And this is no
new thing. The Exodus 1.10. Psalm. 105.25.
Israelites of old in Egypt, the more subtly and cruelly they were handled
by the Egyptians, under hard taskes, the more they multiplied And the High
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, thought they had made their Kingdom Cock-sure,
and utterly overthrown Christ's, when once they had nailed him fast to the
Cross, and Sealed him up in the Tomb: but it proved quite contrary, even the
ruin of their State, and the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom over the world.
And Ecclesiastical Stories tell us, that the Primitive Christians in the
greatest heat of those 10. Persecutions, did so multiply, that at length they
wearied out their persecuters. And it is noted of that Apostata Julian, that
when he saw his cruel persecuting of the Christians, and banishing of their
Bishops nothing avayld, but that they did the more increase, he altered his
course, and began to use them gently, and to recall their banished, and to
promote them: So as by this means he drew a number of them to his bow, and
they grew cold and feeble in their Christian profession, whereas by his former
downright cruelty, they grew upon it. And my Lord, be not so eagre in your
zeal for a Reconciliation with Rome, as therefore to fall out with all good
men. You have done much for your Time, as any one possibly could do, yea and
more a great deal, then I am persuaded any Man of wisdom and judgment (all
things considered) either would or durst have done, although he had all your
encouragements; which though great* yet because humane, a wise Man would not
put so much confidence in. And besides, though you have calmed those THREE: yet
is the Storm you Spoke of in the Star Chamber at their Censure, over,
otherwise then over your heads, So long as you storm so upon others? You have
exasperated the world against you by your desperate fury and cruelty: but much
more the wrath of Heaven. And have you not had some terrible Signs of Gods
wrath upon the Land, since their Censure? Are all things quiet, now that they
are in safe-Custody? And though they be quiet, poor men, yet do you not hear
the voice of their blood crying out against you? Can you wash your hands of it,
while the guilt of it sticks so closse to your Conscience, as the fire rather
must purge it, then the water wash it.

But you go on: Too many overburthen the Service of God, and too few leave it
naked. You seem here somewhat reasonable: neither too many, for burden; nor
too few, for nakedness. You could be content then with some reas^nable
mediocrity, could you hit upon the mean. But my Lord, in this Case of
Ceremonies, Even Mediocrity is Extreme: and even your too few (in your
reckonig) are too many, and do overburthen the true service of God. For indeed
the Imposition of your Ceremonies, though you think them too few, does so
burden Men's Consciences, that their backs are ready to break; and it does so
alter the property and nature of Gods service, that it is to be termed rather a
servitude of men, then the service of God. For Gods Service is perfect
Fre^d^me, as your own Service Book Says: but your Ceremonial service is a
yoke of bondage, and therefore no service of God, but such as God says of it,
In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, and
for my Service the Ceremonies of Men. But admit, that Ceremonies were lawful:
who shall limit the Mediocrity inter nimium and parum, between too many and too
few? How few or too few? And how many are too many. Mediocrities, you know, are
as hard to be kept, as to be found. And especially in Religion you must have a
care, that not only the Service it self, but least your servants the Priests,
be not overburthened. Therefore as one of your Canons provides, that your
Priest that is not able to have a Long Gown, may wear a Short Cloak: So you
may do well to provide, that your Ceremonies and habits in your Service be
fitted both to the Persons, and to the Seasons. For some Ceremonies may be
tolerable in Winter, which are not so fit for Summer: as for your Priest to
administer, and preach in his Surplice and Hood in Winter time, is more
tolerable, yea and perhaps more useful too, as keeping both his Corpse, and
cold Sermon that has never a Soul, nor any heat of zeal in it, warm from
freezing. But in Summer time to administer and preach with Surplice and Hood,
it is enough to stifle any man, especially if he be a fat Parson. But you will
say, he may Preach the seldomer, and when he does Preach, it may be the
shorter. For better, Preaching be omitted, then the least of your Ceremonies
should be neglected. But yet for shame of the world, at least in the Church of
England (which is not yet grown so Romish, as that Ceremonies should altogether
thrust out Preaching) me thinks you might do well, as men do for their
wearing apparel, to have some habits for Summer, and some for Winter. But now
I remember my self, that will put many a poor Priest to the more charge. And
therefore to prevent both trouble and charge, I remember a pretty device of
Plutarch.
Dionisius, who coming into an Idols Temple, and finding rich cloth of gold,
very Massy, upon the Idols, he took away their Robes of gold, Saying, they
were both too heavy for Summer, and too cold for Winter, and he put upon them
good course Freeze, saying, this would be both light wearing for Summer, and
warm for Winter. But I suppose you would be loath to have your rich cloth of
gold Copes, and the like, to be turned into course Freeze, as preferring Aurei
Calices, and Lignei Sacerdotes, before Lignei Calices, and Aurei Sacerdotes;
which were of old in fashion: Golden Chalices, and Wooden Priests, before
Wooden Chalices and Golden Priests; I mean, such Golden Priests (so called)
as then were, when the Chalices were of Wood, that is, Learned, Godly, and
Preaching Presbyters. For otherwise, as Rome, so you, want not your Golden
Priests suitable to your Golden Chalices, as Bernard in his Book De
Consideratione to Pope Eugenius the Fourth has liberally taxed in the Pope and
his Clergy of Priests: But these things I leave to your Lordshippes
Cosideration.

But to return to the point: in plain terms my Lord till you do resolve us
justy how many Ceremonies you will have, and no more, for burthening the
Service, or how few Ceremonies, and no fewer, for leaving all naked (though I
think you incline rather to the extremity of Excess, in the too many, then to
the extremity of Defect, in the too few, as loath to leave your Service naked)
you do to a hairs breadth resolve us, you must give us leave with one voice
or The Shout of Mariners when they hale together.
Keleusma, to cry down all your Ceremonies of what sort soever, whereof the
very least is a burden intolerable to Gods People in the service of God. For
(as we said before) Gods service admits not of any Will Worship at all, no not
in the least Ceremony, wherewith the Conscience as it is bound, so it is
overburthened. One Fetter, or Link, or Chain, or Bolt makes a Prisoner as
sure, as many. As the Israelites were enslaved by the Egyptian Taske-masters,
as well when they were allowed Straw, as when it was denied them. Though the
bondage was the greater. But when a man is once made a Slave, who shall hinder
his Master to lay as much burden upon him, as he pleases? And if you have a
power to impose one Ceremony, who shall stint you for more, for ten, twenty, an
hundred, if you do but say the word that too few leave the Service naked? But
you will not have too many, for burden. But how will you know when it is a
burden, for you touch it not with one of your fingers, and so feel it not, as
the Egyptian Taske-masters did, while the poor people of God cry out for
intolerable burdens? All your burden is to get it but up upon the peoples,
and your Priests shoulders, and then you are so far from feeling any more
burden, as you turn it into no small benefit, in Case any for very weariness
and irksomeness of the burden, do either lay it down, or cast it quite off,
yea or do but rest himself a little with some intermission. Then your High
Commission shall ring of him. Nor can we in any reason imagine that a few
Ceremonies will serve the turn. For your maine Scope is to bring your Church
of England to a full Reconciliation with Rome, the way to which must be strowed
with many Ceremonies, as at a Marriage they strew the way to the Church with
Herbs, that so when you have brought the matter to a pretty Conformity with as
many Ceremonies as Time and Place will permit, the Match being already agreed
upon and concluded between the parties, and friends, there may nothing be
wanting to hasten the full and final consummation. But herein the maine
burden will lie upon you. For it can little be hoped, that Rome for her part
will abate any of her Ceremonies, so as the greater addition and accumulation
will be required on your part; to make up to ison, an equality in some reasonable
proportion at least. For Amici^ia est inter pares. Friedship is between
Equals. But howere, in any Case not too few; for then your Service would be
naked; and it might either hinder your Project, or hurt your reputation with
Rome, when upon your coming home to Rome, She should find you naked (such
guests as Rome uses not to entertain) unless you will trust to her Kindness
in furnishing you out of her rich Wardrobe and Magazin of Ceremonies, wherein
She has a large Overplus of Treasure, which your Church of England might
afterward recompense, either with reviving the Peter Pence, or returning his
Holiness his Old Tribute of Annates.

But in the mean time, how would too few leave your Service naked? Surely many
ways, now when I better consider it. Without the Surplice and Hood, the
Minister naked: without rich Ornaments and a Crucifix, the Altar naked: without
a Sign of the Cross, Baptism is naked: without Kneeling before the Altar at
the Communion, the Sacrament naked: without a devout Crindge when Jesus is
named, Jesus is naked: without looking toward the East when you Pray, Prayer
naked: without goodly Images, the Walls naked: without the rich Copes, the
Epistle and Gospel naked: without a fair pair of Organs, and Chanting to it,
the whole Service naked. But what if the whole Service were thus naked? God
neither requires, nor respects any such pomp in his Service. You will say,
It Is, sightly and stately. But one of the Heathen Persius Satyr. 2. Heathen
more holy then Prelates.
Poets could tell you, that God regards more a simple and honest heart, then
all such gifts, or pompous Service. As he says: Dicite Pontifices, in Sancto,
quid facit aurum? etc.
Compositum jus, fasque animi sanctosque recessas
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
Tell us, ye Or Bishops.
Pontifies, what such glittering gold
Makes on your Temples? etc.
A mind composed of justice, and of right,
And holy contemplation ( Gods delight)
A breast well dipped in the purple grain
Of noble honesty, That will not stain.


Horace Carm. lib. 3. Ode. 23.
Another of them says: Immanis Aram si tetigit manus,
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia
Mollibit aversos Penates,
Far pio, and saliente mica.
The innocent hand, if it the Altar touch,
The sumptuous offering pleases not so much,
TO appease the anger of your Household Gods,
With Sacred Corn, and savory Salt by odds.


Yea and every Schoole-boy knows that Distich of old Cato: Si Deus est animus,
nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus.
If God as Poems say, a Spirit be:
Then with pure mind let him be served of thee.


And as the Roman Orator also said. Non in Ambrosia Deus, etc. I do not think
(says he) that God is delighted with Ambrosia, or Nectar, or such like
sensual delights in his Service. [ Tuscul. Quaest. lib. 1.]

Thus you see how those Heathen, even by the glimmering light of nature, had a
better opinion of God, then our modern Prelates have, or at least, then our
present Oracle of Canterbury has showed himself to have, for how near came
they to that truth uttered by Christ John 4.23.24.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth, etc. And if you propound the Jews for example of State in the service
of God; first, God commanded it: and the magnificence of it was a Type of
Christ, and of his Spiritual Temples, Psalm. 45.13
all glorious within. Those Types are all vanished, the truth being come. And
to revive that Service, and those Types, or to set up an Image of them, you do
with the Jews deny Christ to be come. And for this Jerome shall answer you,
Si placeat aurum, placeat et Iudaei: If gold please you so well in the service
of God, let the Jews also, and Judaisme please you. And the Poet: Dicite
Pontifices in Templo quid facit aurum? Tell us you Pontificiall Priests, what
makes gold in the Temple? And tell me, whether was Adam and Eve more beautiful
in Gods eyes, and their own too, having no other clothing, or ornaments upon
them, but their naked Innocence* then in their new devised fashion of
Fig-leave-Aprons? Although they now seemed gay with their borrowed leaves, as
the Crow with his borrowed feathers. And surely this may be a very fit pattern
to Sample your Church by. For yours and Romes Church, having lost their
Primitive and Original beauty of Innocence, Simplicity, and Purity of Christ's
Spouse, as the Love of God, Saving Faith, Soundness of Doctrine, Sanctity of
Conversation, and Purity of his Worship, which you have by so many of your
Superstitions so miserably corrupted: think you now to please GOD with a
curious painted Service, which serves to no other purpose, then to please your
own fancy, and other men's carnal senses? Is not this a GREAT WITNESS to the
World of your notorious blindness, and most gross and palpable ignorance of
the very nature of the Godhead, who Is a Spirit, and therefore will be
worshipped in Spirit and truth? And they who thus worship him in Spirit and
Truth, are the true Worshipers, as the same Scripture Speaks; and GOD seeks
such to worship him; as is noted before. So as that Inscription, which the
Apostle found upon that Altar in Athens, Act. 17.23.
Agnosto Theo, To the unknown God: may it not be written as well upon your
whole service, which you dedicate to the unknown God* which being patched up,
like a Fools gay Coat, of so many diverse colored shreddes, wherein your
service being dressed up, you think it is wondrous pleasing to God: does not
all this bewray, that you do all this service to a God, whom you know not, as
whom your fancy frames to be some carnal Man, whose senses are delighted
with such service: as his Ears with Organs, his Eyes with goodly Images,
curious wrought Copes, rich Palls, fair gilded Plate: his Smell with sweet
Incense, his Majesty with siting upon your Stately High Altar, as upon his
Throne, and to keep his Residence in your goodly Cathedral as in his Royal
Court? May not then that which the Apostle thereupon Preached to the Athenian
Philosophers, be hereupon applied to the Romish Rabbis, and blind Prelates of
Rome, and of the Church of England? Act. 17.22* 23. etc.
Ye men of the Church of England, I perceive, that in all things ye are too
Superstitious. For as I passed by, and beheld your Devotions (mark your
Devotions) I found an Altar (for blind Devotion cannot be without an Altar)
with this Inscription, To the unknown God: whom therefore ye ignorantly
worship, him declare I unto you. God that made the world, and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples
made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any
thing, etc. ve^s. 29.
Forasmuch then, as we are the Offspring of GOD, we ought not to think that
the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone, graven by art, and man's
devise. And the times of this Ignorance GOD winked at, but now commands all
men every where to Repent. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he
will judge the world in Righteousness, etc. Now what say you to this, all you
blind Ceremony-Mongers? Are you grown so stupid, as not to be sensible how
this touches you, as much, yea and much more, then those Athenians? What? Are
you so blind and senseless, as for all this to dream, that GOD accepts your
ga^ Puppet-play as a Service of Piety done to him? Nay, GOD took so little
delight in those Sacrifices and Rites, which himself ordained in the Law, and
much less when the people rested in the outward performance and observance of
them, that he Says, Is^. 1.12. Psalm 50.8. etc.
Who required these things at your hands to tread in my Courts, etc. So also
Psalm. 50.8. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, to have been
continually before me: I will take no bullock out of thy house, etc. No: v. 23.
Who so offers me thanks and praise honors me: and to him that orders
his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God. v. 22.
Now consider this, ye that forget God* least I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver. Yea the consideration hereof, brought Psalm. 4.6.7. Heb
10.^* 6, 7* 8, 9, 10
Christ down from the bosom of his Father, to offer up his body as the only
acceptable, and All sufficient Sacrifice, to put an end to all carnal rites
and services. If then Gods own Ordinances in the Law did not please him, but
that he must send his Son in the flesh to fulfill all things* then what hope
can you have, that your vain Superstitious devises should please GOD, or that
he should otherwise be affected with them, but thereby to be provoked to send
his Son the Second time 2 Thessalonians. 1.^* 8* 9.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God (even all blind
worshipers, but much more wilfully blind) such as obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Then shall all your Sumptuous Ceremonies, and Solemn
Service be discovered, and the rotten inside of your hypocritical formalities
be turned out to the view of all the world. Like to Cardinal Campeius his
Sumpter, which with a justle in Cheape-side, the girts bursting, down it
falls, and out fly the old Boots and Shoes, and such like baggage which it was
stuffed withal, becoming a ridiculous spectacle to all the beholders. So when
your fair glorious guilden earthen pot, striving with your Maker (as the
Prophet speaks) comes to justle with the godlen pot of Manna Jesus Christ,
and to be struck with a blow of his Iron-rod, all that filthy inside of
hypocrisy, and infidelity, shall fly out, to become a laughing stock, to all
the world, which shall then see that GREAT WITNESS of what sincerity was in
your heart, when you bleared ignorant men's eyes with the glaring luster of
your* external worship. Yea your external pompous service, as wherewith you
think to please Christ, argues you to have no other conceit of Christ, then
such as the Jews had, dreaming of a temporal Messiah, and an earthly Prince.

But let us hear your tale out: And scarce any thing has hurt Religion more
in these broken times, then an opinion of too many men, that because Rome had
thrust some unnecessary, and many Superstitious Ceremonies upon the Church,
therefore the Reformation must have none at all. For Answer in short, All your
Ceremonies are Superstitious, and therefore unnecessary; or (if you will) all
unnecessary, and therefore both Superstitious and Superfluous. What necessity
(I pray you) of your Cross in Baptism? What necessity of a Surplice, except
to hide your poor Priests dublet, when it is either greasy, or out at the
elbowes? What necessity of Kneeling at the Sacrament, and so before your Altar?
And how can you sever these from Superstition? What Is a sign made in the Air,
to signify and set forth the life of a Christan, and that also after Baptism,
the seal of his vow to renounce the Devil and all his works, and to be a
soldier and servant of Jesus Christ? And how is your Surplice a sign of
sanctity, when commonly he that wears it has least holiness, and has cause
to blush, when he has no better sign to hang out, then that which tells the
world, there is no true Sanctity within? And when you so devoutly kneel before
your Altar, at the receiving of the Sacrament, (to which your Altar-men,
usually apply that in the Psalm, O come Let us worship, and bow down and
kneel before the Lord our Maker.) What is it a sign of? Of your adoring
Christ's body imagined to be in the bread? Or of your adoring the Altar, as
which you call Gods-Mercy-Seat, and where Christ keeps his personal residence?
Or of your adoring the Crucifix, upon or over your Altar? Or is it a sign in
general of your humility, See page 3. Will Worship Idolatry.
or of your Idolatry rather, or both together, Idolatrous humility, or humble
Idolatry? And so is it not a plain sign of your pride and presumption, in
perverting the ordinance of Christ, while you injoyne such gestures before an
Altar in receiving the Lords Supper, which Christ ordained not at an Altar, but
at a Table, where a Supper ought to be eaten as a Supper sitting, and not
kneeling.

But (say you) ought the Reformation to have none at all? Yea, none at all, of
men's devising to bind the Conscience of any Christian. For else how is it
Reformation, if it retain any thing, that is either unnecessary or
Superstitious? Your Reformation is deformed with your Hierarchy, and Ceremonies
the very badges and Ensigns of Antichristian Tyranny, and Romish Apostacy;
for thereby (as is noted before) you thrust Christ, the King of his Church out
of his Throne, and put a yoke of bondage upon his peoples necks.

But (say you) Ceremonies are the hedge, that fence the Substance of Religion
from all the indignities, which profanesse and Sacrilege too commonly put upon
it. You mean such Substance of Religion, wherein Rome and you are both one
Church* that is Hierarchy and Ceremonies; as is showed before. And you use your
Ceremonies as the Train and Guard of your Hierarchy and Principality, which
were contemptible, without such Attendance. And it is not without need, that you
make such use of these beggarly Rudiments, when you have no fence for your
selves in Gods word. And in one respect your Ceremonies may fitly be termed a
hedge, yea Mi^h. 7.4.
Sharper then any thorn hedge (as the Prophet speaks) which who so offers
to thrust away, must be (as David says) 2 Samuel 23.7^
fenced with iron, and the Staff of a Spear, to be utterly burnt with fire in
the same place, otherwise they will pierce through his hand. And this hedge of
your pious seeming Ceremonies is a fence to your Hierarchy against Profanesse,
while profane ignorant persons, led by their carnal sense, are thereby more
then half persuaded, that Prelates, when they are at their Church-devotion,
are pious and holy Men, although they do not so much as seem so out of the
Church. And again, Ceremonies you use as a hedge to f^nce you against
Sacrilege: for were it not for your pompous daily Service, and at Solemn
Feasts, in your Cathedralls, you might be in some danger of having all those
fat Corpses alienated to some other use, then to the maintenance of a sort of
Idle-bellies. As once a Dr. Andrews
Brother of yours answered, being asked of King James to what use their
Cathedrals did serve: your Majesty (quoth he) is there daily and Solemnly prayed
for. Although those Solemn prayers, in regard of their fat feeding, and
customary Chanting and Roaring out of a Sort of ignorant Chanters, may be
thought to have but little virtue in them, except it be for the poor Singing
men's poverty, whose allowance will scarce maintain their Credit upon the
Alehouse Score.

You add: And a great weakness it is not to see the strength, which
Ceremonies (things weak enough in themselves, God knows) add to Religion it
self: but a far greater to see it, and yet to cry them down, All, and
without Choice, by which their most hated Adversaries Climb up, and could not
cry up themselves, and their Cause, as they do, but by them. Now, as we said
before, Considering what your Religion it self is, in Substance one with that
Religion of Rome: it is weakness indeed, not to consider* what a Strength your
Ceremonies do add unto it. Yet what strength in Ceremonies, so weak in
themselves, as you seem to acknowledge, when you Say, God knows? And indeed
the Apostle calls them Gal. 4.4.
Weak and beggarly Rudiments. But as weak as they be in themselves, yet being
backed with your Canons and Courts, they prove strong enough to make the
strongest to stoop, and veil bonnet unto them. Yea are they not strong bonds
and chains to bind and captivate the Conscience of Gods people worse then
either the Egyptian or Babilonian captivity. B^nds of Egypt
So as were it not for your Canons mounted, and full charged, these hedges or
mud-walls would prove but weak enough to fence the Substance of your Religion.
And indeed this is the reason, that so many cry them down, All, without Choice,
because of that strength which they add to your Romish Superstition, your
Religion it self: and because on the other side, they eat out the very heart
of true piety, and the power of true Religion in all those, or the most part,
who are ensnared by them. Although you call this Weakness in those, that cry
them all down. But I hope this weakness is So crying, especially reaching up
to heaven, will in time so prevail with God, as to batter them down, and to
dismount your Canon that holds them up.

But such consider not (Say you) that by this means, their most hated enemies
(the Jesuits, I suppose you mean) cry up their cause, and not else, but by
them. Surely, [ By them] here, if rightly taken, 'twill prove very true, you
Say. By them, that is by your Ceremonies. For what is there, whereby the
Jesuits do more climb, and cry up themselves, and their Cause, then your
crying up of your Ceromonies? This they profess in their Books and English
Pamphlets, which they scatter among the People, that the Church of England is
coming amain toward Rome, as being weary of her Religion, or ashamed of it.
And all this especially, since you have climbed up to the top-pinnacle of
Canterbury Church. And well you Say, Their most hated Adversaries* You say not,
Your most hated Addversaries, the Jesuits: for then you should account
Jesuits no better then Puritans. Though I think your Lordship can give no
great good reason why the Jesuits should be the Most hated enemies of those,
that most cry down your Ceremonies, except you will give the Jesuits
precedencie of you in persecuting those men. But (I say) your Zeal for
Ceremonies is a fiery Chariot, to carry the Jesuits to that heaven of their
happiness, to wit, Englands Reconciliation with Rome, which is hastened and
advanced by nothing so much, as by hoysing up of Altars, and other Idolatrous
Superstitions, and putting down of good Ministers, and all true Religion. This,
this is the Ladder, by which Jesuits Climb up, not now to the top of Tyburne,
but to the top of their Mount Tabor; beholding the Church of England
transformed into the Church of Rome; being also so exceedingly helped up and
advanced by this your handy work now published for that end.

L. p. 21. In this ensuing Discourse, I have endeavored to lay open those
wider Gates of the Catholic Church, etc.

P. So you have indeed, having set open Englands broad Gates, that That Great
Whore of Babylon, with all her Train and Trinkets, her Superstitions and
Idolatries, may have the more easy reentry, without so much as the ruffling of
her Ruff. Nay rather then fail, as the Trojans, at the Subtle Counsel of
their perjured Sinon, brake down a great part of their City-wall to let in the
Trojan horse, (which unknown to them, was full of armed Greeks, their Enemies)
by which means their City was surprised, sacked and burnt: So you having been
a great Instrument, of not only Seting open the broad Gates, and making them
wider then they were before, but of pulling down the Walls and Bulwarks of the
Church of England, to wit, in Suppressing Gods Word, and Supplanting the most
Painful and Godly Ministers, as the Watchmen of the City, yea the Chariots
and Hose-men of Israel: and having prepared it by the Setting up of your
Altars, and Superstitious Service and Devotion attending thereupon, all
conformable to Rome; do in this your Book now published, as with open voice
proclaim, how happy a thing it were, that the Church of England and of Rome,
were perfectly reconciled and reunited.

The Prelates wider Gates whither they lead.
Again, you have in this also laid open those wider gates of your Catholic
Church, in that therein you have in some respects made those broad Gates that
lead to destruction, wider then they were before. For at after in your Book
you can find a broad way for the silly ignorant Papists to find Salvation in
the Church of Rome, and so to be Saved living and dying in the Roman Faith. But
of this in its due place. Only you have altogether shut the Gates of the
Catholic Church against all Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as having no
Prelates, and therefore no Churches. As has been noted.

You add: (The Catholic Church) confined to no Age, Time, or Place, nor
knowing any bounds, but that Faith, which was once (and but once for all)
delivered to the Saints. Jude 3.

P. My Lord, what have you to do with the Saints faith, except that you
endeavor to destroy it? Or with those Saints, except to persecute and root
them out? Or would you make us believe, that you are one of those Saints?
Certainly then you must become another-gates Man, then as yet you have showed
yourselfe to be. Your Tyranny, your Hypocrisy, your Superstitions, your
Persecutions, your Reconciliation with Rome must be utterly abandoned. Except
by continuing in them, you hope to be the next Canonized Saint to* Ignatius,
the Father and Founder of the Jesuits Society, Lately Canonized by his
Holiness at Rome, for his good Service for the Catholic Cause: and so may you
happily after 100. years, come to be Canonized for the notable Service you have
done in the Church of England for the Church of Rome, if ever you shall bring
them to a perfect Reconciliation. And as for that Faith you Speak of, as the
bound of the Catholic Church, which you say you and Rome do both profess:
we shall have occasion hereafter to speak more largely of it.

L. p. 22. I have delivered with a single heart, that truth which I profess.

P. What truth it is, which you profess, we have in part already discovered,
in this your Dedicatory, and shall further and more fully in your ensuing
Discourse. But with what singleness of heart you have done it, that we leave
to the Judge of all hearts. Only where we find your hypocrisy so palpable, as
that we cannot choose, but use it as a Perspective to see into the constitution
of your heart, as where we find your words so directly contradicting your deeds
and practices, the clearest Indexes of your mind, expressed and written in
Capital Letters: we do not spare to inform you of it; both because Ier. 17.9*
the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know
it? So as your own heart, when you think it single, may double with you: and
that others also taking warning by such a dangerous example, as the greatest
Prelate of England, may not also be deceived and seduced by your deep
dissimulations.

L. ibid. In the publishing whereof I have obeyed your Majesty, discharged my
duty, to my power, to the Church of England given account of the hope that is
in me, and so testified to the world that Faith, in which I have lived, and by
Gods blessing and favor purpose to dye.

P. For your obedience to his Majesty, we say no more, having touched before,
how strong that back had need to be, that bears all your burdens, so
intolerable to be borne. But is this the discharge of the duty of the
Metropolitan of all England to the Church of England, to compile and publish
such a Book to reconcile England with Rome? What thanks the Church of England
may return you, I know not. But thus did not any of your Predecessors, ever.
And have you more Charity, or more Devotion, then they had? And for the hope in
you, whereof you give account to the world, and your faith testified, wherein
you have lived, and resolve to dye: I will say as Jerome said to the Pelagians,
Sententias vestras prodidisse, Superasse est: The discovery of your opinions,
is our victory. So, thus to give account of your hope, and testify your faith
to all the world, as that wherein you have lived, and resolve to dye: Let Us see
by your own testimony, now irrevocably upon Record, what to judge of you
formerly, namely as of one, Qui cum Lacte nutricis errorem Suxisse videatur:
who seems to have sucked in Error with his Nurses Milk; Tuscul. Quest. lib.
3.
As the Orator Speaks of all natural men: and what to expect of you
hereafter: that as you have lived a most notorious Persecuter of the truth of
Christ, and of his Saints; So we must look for it Still, so long as you live.
And this is our victory, that we have to deal with one, who is not now any
longer a disguised, but unmasked Enemy of the true Faith and Religion of JESUS
CHRIST. And however you may flatter your self in regard of the World, and
favor in Court: yet if you repent not of your former life, but dye as you have
lived, you can have neither hope nor faith in expecting Gods blessing or
favor. And so I pass from your Dedicatory to your Discourse, as follows.

THE REPLY TO THE RELATION OF THE CONFERENCE.
L. p. 2. IT is very fit, the People should look to the Judgment of the
Church, before they be too busy with particulars But yet neither the
Scripture, nor any good Authority denies them some moderate use of their own
understanding and judgment, especially in things familiar and evident, which
even ordinary Capacities may as easily understand, as read. And therefore some
particulars a Christian may judge, without depending.

P. What you mean by Church, you have told us before, namely that, wherein
your Church of England, and that of Rome, are one and the same, one Prelaticall
and Hierarchicall Church, out of which are excluded all those Reformed
Churches, which neither have, nor acknowledge Prelates to be of divine
Institution. We have also made a Say of the difficulties: So as it is no
difficulty to divine, what Christians we are like to prove in understanding and
judgment in the mystery of Faith and Salvation, when we must be limited to
that narrow Scantling of some moderate use of our own understanding and
Judgment, and that but in things familiar and evident to every ordinary
Capacity. O poor Christians, that for Understanding in the Scripture must be
at the allowance of Antichristian Lords, who would bring into bondage Gods
people, by Chaining them up in Darkness and Ignorance, and do with them, as 1 Samuel 11.2.
Nahash the Ammonite answered the men of Iabeth Gilead; On this condition will
I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay
it for a reproach upon all Israel. But the Apostle exhorts Christians, Saying,
1 Co^. 14.20
Be not children in understanding; howbeit, in malice be children, but in
understanding Teleio ginesthe, be perfect. And, Heb. 6.1.
Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Let us go on unto
perfection. And, Heb. 5*14.
Strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, even those, who by reason
of use have their Senses exercised to discern both good and evil. But you
allow Christians only some moderate use of their own understanding, and that
in things familiar and evident, which men of ordinary Capacities may as easily
understand, as read. So as what they read, except with the very reading they
do as easily understand it, as they read it, they must not meditate further of
it, but in what they presently upon the reading understand not, they must
depend upon your Churches judgment. So as you would exclude your Christians
from being of those Psalm. 1.1, 2^
blessed men, of whom David Speaks, which delight in the Law of the Lord, and
in his Law to meditate day and night. You would not have them with He^. 5.14.
use to exercise their wits and Senses to discern (...) good and evil. Yea
the Apostle uses a word very emphaticall, di^ to exin, by an habitual use, or
long custom have their Senses gegumnasm^na, exercised* the word properly
signifies such an exercise, as Wrastlers, or such, as contend for victory, do
use, which is with all their might and strength, being trained up unto it by
long exercise. So as the Scripture does not only not forbid, but Commands and
exhorts Christians to all diligence in the Study of the Scriptures, C^l.. 2.2.
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto
all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the aknowledgement of the
Mystery of God; as the Apostle speaks. And, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of God dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another, etc. And the Bereans are Said to be dugenesteroi, more
noble, then those of Thesselonica, in that they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things
were so, which Paul taught. Lo ^ere, they examined Paul's Doctrine by the
Scriptures: they depended not upon his bare word; and therefore the Holy Ghost
marks them forth for men of a more noble spirit. But you would have your
Christians to be poor and beggarly in the knowledge of the mystery of Christ,
and to be so base-minded, as in all things, which are not obvious to every
Capacity, to depend merely upon your Church Authority and Judgment. So as
what you mean hereby, except to bring into your Church of England the
Jesuitical blind obedience, captivating the peoples senses to your Dictates,
that they might pin their Salvation and Faith upon your Priests Sleeve: I
cannot imagine. Which will appear yet more clearly at after.

Again, these words of yours are in Answer to the Jesuit's words, namely,
That it was not for the Lady, or any other unlearned Persons, to take upon them
to judge of Particulars, without depending upon the Judgment of the true
Church. The Prelate yields the Jesuit this, that the Church of R^me is a true
Church* on whose Judgment people must depend.
To which all your Answer in full is, as before. Wherein you easily let the
Jesuit slip, and run away with this, that the Church of Rome is that true
Church, on whose Judgment for Particulars all unlearned Persons must depend.
But you understand the true Church to be that, wherein you told us before, your
Church of England and of Rome, are one and the Same. And so for Rome to be a
true Church, you plainly confess at after. But your words here may stand you
in very good Stead, to be a fair Item to all the Readers of your Book, not to
be too busy with the Particulars of it, but first to look to the Judgment of
the Church of England, whose mouth you seem to be in this your whole Discourse.
So as I may see my Doom already set down in black and white, that I must be
Censured as one too busy, or Allotroepioskopos, playing the Bishop in another
Diocese, in our English Translation, a busy body. But I must bear it off with
Head and Shoulders. And, as the Proverb is, Over Shoes, over Boots. I have
already waded through the Fords of your Dedicatory, and now I must launch into
the Deep of your Discourse. And there is now no returning. Nor have I put my
hand to the Plough to turn up your weeds by the roots, to look back, or
desist, for fear to be censured as one too busy. Yea all my business is
about particulars; and namely such, as summed up together in the total,
conclude you to be, though not a professed Invader, yet a most subtle and
pragmaticall Enginer, and underminer of that Truth of Christ in the Scripture,
which yet the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against.

L. p. 4. Bellarmine of very great ability, to make good any truth, which he
undertakes for the Church of Rome.

P. What one thing (I pray) which Bellarmine undertakes to make good for the
Church of Rome (as the Church of Rome) is a truth? I say, as the Church of
Rome. For what he undertakes to make good for the Church of Rome properly, must
needs, be some point of Popery, or Popish Doctrine. Otherwise he undertakes not
to make it good, as for the Church of Rome. Now the Church of Rome, as it is
the Church of Rome, namely the Papal Church, holds not any one Saving Truth. I
say again, it holds not any one Saving Truth. I shall prove this more
particularly at after. Yet you seem to intimate here, that either all, or most
things so undertaken by him, are truth. But the contrary will appear; So as
what things are in themselves false and erroneous, can by no humane ability
either of that Champion of Rome Bellarmine, or of the great Champion of the
present Church of England, be so made good, as to deserve the name of Truth.

L. ibid. After Bellarmine has distinguished, ^o express his Meaning, in what
sense the particular Church of Rome cannot Err in things which are de Fide, of
the Faith: he tells us, this Firmitude, is, because the Sea Apostolic is
fixed there. And this he says is most true.

P. Your last words here are somewhat dark, whether we should take them for
Bellarmines words, he says; or for your own assent therein, And this he says
is most true. This Later is the Likelier. And then again, here is another
doubt, whether [And this he says is very true] it be referred to the whole
Sentence going before, and alleged by you; or only to the Last Clause. If to
the whole Sentence, then in Saying, And this he says is most true; you assent,
that Romes infallibility consists in the Firmitude of the Sea Apostolic fixed
there. Which you seem afterward more expressly to contradict. But if only to
the Last Clause your Speech has reference, And this he says is most true:
then first, you should have expressed it more Clearly and punctually, as in
some things you do. But taking it in the best sense, you confess it is most
true, that the Sea Apostolic is fixed there: thus you give occasion of
Dispute, about Peter's being at Rome, and of his being Bishop of Rome; and if
so, whether consequently Rome be yet the Sea Apostolic. But because your
words, here are not Clear enough, and at after you declare your self herein
more plainly, what we have to say of this, we will reserve to a fitter place.

L. p. 23. I shall ever be glad, that the Church of England may have far more
able Defendants, then my self.

P. Certainly the Church of England her self may be glad hereof, to vindicate
her Reputation, which you, by this your Defense, have laid flat in the dust.
But, May have, seems to import, that now she has not, at least, now, that Dr.
White is dead. Nor has the Church of England any great cause to glory in
either of you both, as Defendants, unless by the Church of England you
understand that new Start-up Faction of Arminianized, and Iesuited Atheists,
whose Standard-beares you have been and are to bring the whole Land back
again to Rome, and so to make a full League and Confederacy against the true
Church of Jesus Christ.

L. p. 29. Things not Fundamental, yet to some men's Salvation are ne^essary.

P. How prove you this? Seeing what is necessary to some men's Salvation, is
necessary to all, and every man's Salvation. And Fundamentalls only, to wit,
Such things as are de Fide, of Faith, are the only things necessary to every
man's Salvation. According to the Athanasius his Creed. Whosoever will be Saved,
it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith: which Faith unless a man
keep whole, and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. For the
Catholic Faith comprehends all Fundamentalls, which to violate in any one
particular, overthrowes the Faith, and cuts a man off from Salvation. But your
adding of other things, besides and unto the Fundamentalls, as necessary to
Some men's Salvation: does necessarily infer this Consequence, that there be
other things besides Christ, which are necessary to Some men's Salvation: And so
you make Christ an insufficient Savior to some men at least, as to whose
Salvation things not Fundamental are necessary. For things not Fundamental
are extra Christum, out of, or without Christ. Whereas the Scripture Says of
CHRIST, Act. 4.12.
That there is no Salvation in any other: for there is none other name under
heaven given, whereby Dei sothenai emas, we Must be Saved, which words do
plainly evince, that besides Christ, nothing under heaven is necessary to any
man's Salvation. But give us some one particular instance of such things, as
being not fundamental, yet are necessary to some men's Salvation. You tell us
of certain (I wot not what) Deductions from the Articles of Faith, which you
make to be your Not-Fundamentall, and yet necessary to some men's Salvation: but
for our better Information you particularize in nothing, neither in the things,
nor in the persons, for whose Salvation they are necessary, but leave all in
the Clouds, the fittest man^le to fold^up such foul and blind errors in.

L. p. 31. The Churches Declaration can bind us to peace, and external
obedience, where there is no express Letter of Scripture, and Sense agreed
upon.

P. By the Latitude of this Sentence, you, or your Church of England may (as
you have done) by your Declaration prefixed to your Articles of Religion (as
before) bind Ministers not to preach of those Doctrines of Grace, as Election,
Predestination, etc. because, though there be express Letter of Scripture for
them, yet the Sense is so far from being agreed upon by your present Church,
as that you Say plainly, they may be taken in two opposite Senses. So as upon
this your Churches Declaration of the ambiguities of your Articles, you have
stopped all the Ministers mouths, binding them to peace, and external
obedience. Although I cannot yet conceive, how that Declaration should be the
Church of Englands, though published in the Kings Name, and perhaps compiled in
the Conclave of Canterbury. And thus also that Order for the Altar of S.
GREGORY'S, which yet is but Dormant in Cryptis, not published in Print, in
which respect it cannot be called the Declartion of the Church, yet must be of
force to bind all Ministers to Peace and Obedience; first to Peace, not to
speak a word against Altars, for his Ears: and next to Obedience, that if he
refuse to have an Altar set up in his Church, himself shall be made a Sacrifice.
But why should such an Order thus bind? I must crave pardon for making
Question. And the rather, because your Lordship here gives us a Rule or Canon
saying, The Churches Declaration can bind us to Peace, and external,
Obedience, where there is no express Letter of Scripture, and Sense agreed on.
Now though we have express Letter of Scripture, proving Christ to be the only
Altar of Christians (as before is showed) yet because this sense is not agreed
on by your Lordship, and so by your present Church of England, therefore men
must be peaceable, and obedient in that point, and quietly submit to Authority,
in the admitting, and the Adoring too (if you will) of Altars in every Church.
And so in all other your superstitious Ceremonies, of what force is the
express Letter of the Scripture, where the Sense of it is not by you and your
Church agreed upon? To give an Instance or two more, This is my Body: the Sense
of these words is not agreed on between your Church of England, and that of
Rome (though you are in Substance both one Church) what then? Ergo Ministers
are bound to Peace and Obedience, in not meddling to or fro with the manner, How
Christ is present in the Sacrament (though your Article of the Lords Supper
does declare it, both affirmatively, and negatively, how it is, and is not) but
to content themselves with Really; which is a very peaceable word, about which
Rome and you have no great reason to fall at odds. Again, for bowing at the
nameing of the Name Jesus, although you have no express Letter of Scripture
for it, (no not Phil. 2.10. where it is Said, En to onomati, In, or (as your
Translation has it) at the name of Jesus every knee should bow; but it is not
Said, En to onomazethai to onoma Iesoun, or Iesous, In the naming of the name
Jesus, every knee should bow: So as that place is plainly expounded, and agreed
on by other places of Scripture, as Isa. 45.23. and Romans 14.10. as some of your
old English Bibles note those places in the Margent over against the place; as
in that of Isaiah, there is set in in the Margent, Romans 14.10. and Phil. 2.10.
all which three places unanimously show the universal Subjection of all
Creatures in heaven, and earth, and under the earth to Christ in the day of
Judgment) yet because this Sense is not agreed on by the present Church of
England, therefore her Declaration in her Canon binds all to Peace and
Obedience: to Peace, in not speaking or writing against bowing at the nameing
of the name Jesus, nor in preaching to expound the Letter of Scripture (Phil.
2.10.) by the plain sense of other Scriptures, as before cited: and to
Obedience, by bowing themselves, when they hear that Name to be named. So as
your Lordships Rule here is very useful for many things, although you have
neither Letter, nor Sense of Scripture for them.

L. p. 32. The power of adding any thing contrary, and detracting any thing
necessary, are alike forbidden. No power of the Church can do this.

P. This Sentence you allege out of Vincentius, and allow it; So as it is to
be accounted your own Confession, which I suppose you will not deny. Whereupon
you with your Church fall under just condemnation, both for adding things
contrary, and detracting things necessary. For you add to the service of God
(as you call it) your Altars, and sundry other superstition^, which the
Scripture excludes and condemns, and so are contrary: and you detract things
necessary, as Preaching of the saving Doctrines of Grace, Preaching on the
Lords days in the after noon, Preaching Weekday Lectures, and Cathechising by
expounding the Grounds of Religion. Which things are necessary, profitable, and
useful to the people of God, and which God commands; as 2 Timothy 3.15.16. and
4.1.2. Gal. 6.6. Let him that is Katekoumenos, Cathechised in the word,
communicate To katekounti, to him that Catechiseth, or instructs him, in all
good things. Thus you and your Church take upon you to do those things which
are alike forbidden, and which no power of the Church can do, though you can.

L. p. 35. Wrangle while you will, you shall never be able to prove that any
thing, which is but de modo, a consideration of the manner, of being only, can
possibly be fundamental in the Faith.

P. Wrangle I will not, but prove, that some things which are, de modo,
considered in the manner of being only, not only may possibly, but are
really, in that very respect, fundamental in the Faith. So as to deny them, or
not to believe them, is in it self damnable. And hereof I shall give some
Instances. 1. Christ's body in receiving of the Sacrament, is to be considered
in the m^nn^r of its being present to the believing Communicant. In so much as
to exclude such manners of being present, as do destroy either the Article of
his perpetual Residence in heaven till his c^ming again, or the truth of his
Natural Body, does deny and destroy two Articles of the Faith, 1. touching
Christ's sitting (...) the rig^^ hand of God, from whence he shall come to
Judgem^^^* and 2 ly. that he was borne of the Virgin Mary, with a true humane
body. As the Papists apprehending and believing Christ's natural body to be
locally present in the Eucharist, do thereby overthrow his perpetual
residence in heaven, ^
till his coming again: and withal, the truth of his natural body: which
being a true natural body, with all its natural properties, cannot be locally
or corporally in many places at one and the same time; which yet the corporal
presence in the Eucharist does necessarily import. And if the truth of Christ's
natural body be destroyed (as by the Manichees, and other Heretics) Christ is
wholly evacuated, and shall profit nothing. Besides, this Popish belief of
Christ's corporal Presence in their Eucharist, makes Christ's natural body,
which has its dimensions of length, breadth, thickness, to be a mere
fantastical and imagina^y body, as being contained within the narrow circle
and compass of a thin Wafer-cake: and so they destroy Christ's body. And so
also, in that they believe they eat this body of Christ, which is to destroy
it: as 1 Cor. 6.13. And this belief of Christ's corporal presence as
aforesaid, destroys spiritual communion with Christ, and with the Holy Ghost,
and consequently the Article of faith concerning the Communion of Saints. For
Christ says to his Disciples, John 16.7*
I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send
him unto you. So as to believe Christ to be corporally present on earth, and
that men have by that means a corporal communion with him, does debar such
men from all communion of the Spirit of Christ. And Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. He has not
Christ, that has not his Spirit: and he has not Christ's Spirit, that rests in
the belief of Christ's corporal presence on earth, as before. For except I
depart (says Christ) that is, except I be absent from you, as concerning my
corporal presence, the Comforter will not come unto you. And thus by a false
belief of the very manner only of Christ's presence in the Popish Eucharist,
Christ the Foundation is overthrown. And this error de modo, of the manner of
being only, overthrowing the Foundation, must needs be a Fundamental error,
if any error may be said to be Fundamental.

My Second Instance is about Christ's humane Nature, Synodi Chalcedonensis
^lepistis: Asmukutos: Akoristoes, Adiairetoes, Atr^ptoes*
de modo Subsistendi, of its manner of subsisting in the Person of the Son of
God. For to believe, that it is either after the manner or way of Commixtion,
or by adherence, as one thing cleaving to another, or Inherence, as an Accident
in the Subject, or by Conversion into the divine nature, or by Concomitancie,
as Bellarmine says, Christ's divinity and soul is present with his body in the
Eucharist by Concomitancie: all these manners do destroy the personal union
of Christ's two natures in one person. As those two Heretics, Nestorius and
Eutiches, the one condemned in the Council of Ephesus, the other in the Council
of Chalcedon, the later for holding, that Christ had but one Nature, the humane
converted into the Divine Nature: the other, that Christ had two Persons: both
these destroyed Christ the Mediator, who is not a Mediator, unless he be both
God and Man in one Person Christ. So Bellarmines devise in holding Christ's
divine nature, and humane soul to be present in and with that body, which they
frame unto him in the Mass, by way of Concomitancie, as being inseparable
companions: destroys the Sacrifice of Christ's Passion, wherein the soul of
Christ was in death separated from his body, until his Resurrection. Now the
Papists say, they offer up Christ's body in the Mass, as representing the
Sacrifice of his death and Passion. Which how can it be, when they say his
soul is by concomitancie with his body offered up; So as all this while there
is no representative, or Commemorative, much less a propitiatory Sacrifice of
Christ's death, Seeing in that body (as they say) Christ's soul is inseperably
present? And again, to say Christ's divine nature is present with that body of
Concomitancie, this destroys the Personal union. For Concomitancie is no
personal union of the two natures, concomitancie being but an accompanying of
each other. Whereas the divine nature of Christ does not accompany the humane
nature, but assumes it: and the humane nature does not accompany the divine,
but subsists in it. Thus it is clear, that the Consideration of the manner of
being only may possibly prove to be Fundamental in the Faith.

L. p. 37. All, which pertaines to Supernatural, Divine, and infallible
Christian faith, is not by and by fundamental in the Faith to all men.

P. You told us See page 94. ^^fore.
before, That things not fundamental, yet to some men's Salvation are
necessary: and here, that all that pertaines to Christian faith is not
fundamental in the faith to all men. It seems you have some peculiar way to
heaven, which is not common to all. But take heed, least leaving the common
road-way of true Saving Faith, attended with a holy life, you fail of heaven.
John 14.6.
I am the way, the Truh, and the Life, says Christ. And is not Christ this
way, Truth, and Life to all that are Saved? Is not he to all such as are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of
God? But what do I speak to you of Christ, or what do you speak of
Christian faith, that know not what Christian faith is, otherwise, then as you
discern in it some thing, for which, in whomsoever you find it, you persecute
it to the death?

L. p. 39. If new Doctrines be added to the old, the Church may be changed in
Lupanar errorum, which I am loath to English.

P. Nay, are you not ashamed to English it? For this you Speak of the Church
of Rome: and you have told us, that the Church of England and of Rome are one
and the Same Church. And now you Say, If new Doctrines be added to the old, the
Church may be changed in Lupanar errorum. And this the Church of Rome has
done, as you elsewhere affirm: She has added new Doctrines to the old, and
such new, as She does with the old, a^ men do when they put on a new suit,
make the old a Cast suit. But because you are loath to English in Lupanar
errorum, for the reverend respect you bear to that Venerable Apostolic Sea, I
will do as much for you, as to English it: If new Doctrines be added to the
Old (as the Church of Rome has done) the Church may be changed into a Stews
of Errors. This Phrase you take out of Vincentius Lyrenensis his Sentence,
quoted in the Margent: which is this in English, The Church by adding new
Doctrines to the old, becomes a Stews of impious and beastly Errors, which
was before a Sacrary of chaste and undefiled verity. Whence I note, how you, not
only smother some of his words, but smooth others, Saying, for, [The Church
becomes a Stewes] The Church may be changed. So as herein you falsify the
worthy Saying of Vincentius, when you make but a May be, of his, Is made. But
let the Conclusion be, If a Church be turned Whore, it is good that all should
know her to be so in plain English, that they may avoid her, and (as Solomon
says) Pro. 5.8.
remove their way far from her, and not come near the door of her house. And
for this Cause have I taken the Pains to be your Translator.

L. p. 39. Some Decisions, yea and of the Church to^, are made, or may be, (if
Stapleton inform us right) without an evident, nay without so much as a
probable testimony of holy writ. But Bellarmine falls quite off, and confesses
in express terms, that nothing can be certain by certainty of Faith, unless
it be contained immediately in the word of God, or be deduced out of the word
of God by evident consequence. And if nothing can be certain, then certainly no
Determination of the Church it self, if that Determination be not grounded
upon one of these, either express word of God, or evident consequence ^ut of
it. (And a little before) Every wrangling Disputer may neither deny, nor
doubtfully dispute, much less obstinately oppose the Determinations of the
Church, no not when they are (Dogmata deposita, Deposed Principles.

P. Now all these Passages weighed together, do clearly and distinctly resolve
themselves into these Conclusions: 1. That the Church may decide and determine
some things, without any evidence, or so much as a probable Testimony of holy
Writ; and herein you consent and jumpe fully with that notorious Papist, and
adversary of the once Church of England, Stapleton, whom the learned Dr.
Whitakers publicly confuted in the Divinity Schools in Cambridge, as his
Works can yet testify. And yet behold now the Church of England has got a
Champion in the Chair of Canterbury* who pleads for, and applauds that in
Stapleton, which Dr. Whitakers, and many other learned Divines in England
formerly have refuted. And for further Confirmation hereof, you tax Bellarmine
as of untruth, where he confesses, that nothing may be certain by cert^inty of
Faith, unless it be contained immediately in the word of God, or be deduced
thence by evident consequence. Whereupon you infer, that if nothing can be
certain, then certainly no Determination of the Church it self, wanting
express word, or evident Consequence out of it. Thus you condemn Bellarmines
true Saying (if by the Word of God he understand the Scriptum alone, and not
his word unwritten) and approve and prefer Stapletons false and heretical
sentence before it. Secondly, That things so decided and determined by the
Church, without either evident, or so much as probable Testimony of holy writ,
yet are so de fide, so firmly to be believed, as every wrangling Disputer may
neither deny, nor doubtfully dispute, much less obstinately oppose. Consonant
hereunto you ^ay at after (page 224.) The Determination of a General Council
^^ring, is to stand in force, and to have external obedience at least yielded
to it, till evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration to the Contrary make the
error appear, and until thereupon another Council of equal Authority do
reverse it: And so also, page 226. etc. Where here I mention for clearer proof
of what you say here, but not to anticipate or prevent our fuller Answer, when
we come to those places, where we shall supply our brevity here.

L. p. 40. I hope A. C. will not tells us, there is any Tradition extant
unwritten, by which particular men may have assurance of their Several
Salvations.

P. But what think you of it? Will you tell us there is no such thing written
in the Scripture, That true Believers may have assurance of their own
Salvation? But if there be, why do you forbid Preachers to meddle with it,
considering the true and solid comfort which it brings to him that has it?
As the 17 th Article confesses, might it be suffered to speak out, and had
you not put a gagge in the mouth of it.

L. p. 43. Mine is, That the belief of Scripture to be the word of God, and
infallible, is an equal, or rather a preceding prime Principle of Faith, with,
or rather to the whole body of the Creed.

P. How? The Belief of Scripture to be Gods word, and infallible, no more but
an equal, or rather a preceding prime Principle of Faith, with, or rather to
the whole body of the Creed? This is yours (you say) your Saying. And I believe
it to be yours. For it is as like to one of your Sayings, as may be. For here
you attribute no more credit to the Scriptures, then to the Creed, both equal,
only differing perhaps in point of some precedencie of time, or So, with an,
or rather equal, or rather preceding, the difference not great, if any. Thus
do you not equal a Church Tradition with the Divine Scripture? For we have it
by Tradition that the Apostles compiled the Creed, and each his Several
Article. And is this or any other Tradition of equal Credit with Scripture?
And is not the Scripture the Rule, whereby the Articles of the Creed are to be
interpreted, which are no otherwise to be believed, but as they are agreeable
to the Scripture? So as (for the Purpose) if you go no further for the Sense
of the Article of Christ's Descent into hell, then the very Letter of the
Article, you can make no Sense of it, nor give any reason for it. And how then
can you give a reason of your Faith in this particular? Except you do believe
it, because you do believe it, and because the words are, He Descended into
Hell. But of this more by and by.

L. p. 44. Some Traditions I deny not, etc. to be Apostolical, but yet not
fundamental in the Faith.

P. You might do well to point out unto us, which be those your Apostolical
Traditions, that we may distinguish them from those Traditions, which Rome
calls Apostolical. Or rather perhaps you admit of all those as Apostolical
indeed, but yet not Fundamental. Surely if you can prove them to be truly
Apostolical, namely, that the Apostles delivered them immediately to the
Church by word of mouth, why are they not fundamental in the faith? Why are
not all bound to believe them, or give as much Credit to them, as to the
Articles of your Creed, which you Say are fundamental in the faith.

L. p. 45. The Church of England takes the words, He descended into hell, as
they are in the Creed, and believes them without further Dispute, and in that
Sense, which the ancient Primitive Fathers of the Church agreed in.

P. Here a Question may be moved, 1. In general, Whether a man taking up a
matter upon such trust, as he gives equal belief unto it, as to the
Scriptures themselves, do not therein Sin damnably. As making that a
fundamental ground of his Faith, which is not found to be in the Scripture.
Secondly, in particular, Whether a man resting in the very Letter of the
Article, He descended into Hell, believing th^reupon, as surely as he believes
that God is in Heaven, that Christ's Soul did locally descend into Hell among
the damned there, having no regard at all to what the Scripture Says of it,
whether the Scripture Say any such thing, or no: do not hereby make way for
his own Descent into Hell? Or thirdly, Whteher you do as verily and firmly
believe Christ's Descent into Hell, as you do his Ascent into Heaven, Seeing
the Scriptures Speaks clearly and expressly of this, but not so of that; and
whether you are a^ much bound to believe his Descent into Hell, because you
find such words in the Creed, as his Ascent into Heaven, because you find it in
the Scripture? Now for Answer to all these together, I conceive, that to make
any thing of the necessity of Faith to Salvation, besides what is found in the
Scripture, is Sin, and in particular to believe, that because it is Said in
the Creed, He Descended into Hell, therefore Christ did locally in Soul
descend into Hell, the place of the damned, without any proof from Scripture,
is Sin. My reasons are these: 1. Because this opens a gappe to men to believe
humane Traditions to be of Faith to Salvation, as of equal credit and
authority to the Scriptures. Now it cannot be proved, that the Creed it self,
with its form and words, and Articles, and Title, called The Apostles Creed,
is other, then a humane Tradition, or that the Apostles composed the Creed.
Secondly, This argues, as a too high estimation of a thing humane, as if it
were autopistos, of selfe-Credit: so a too base estimation, and undervaluing of
the holy Scripture, as if they alone were not the Rule of Faith, or not to be
relie^ and rested on alone for all matters concerning Christian Faith. So as to
give Credit to any thing else besides the Scripture, as of equal Authority
with the Scripture, (as you make your Creed to be) and not examining it by the
Scripture, is a detracting from the Authority of Scripture, and consequently a
denying of the Scripture to be the Sole Rule of Faith. For the Creed, it is
either a part of the Scripture, or not a part: if it be not a part of Scripture
(as indeed it is not) then all the Articles of Faith in it (being but a small
abridgement of Christian Faith, and so, of necessity, and in comparison of
Scripture it self, very obscure, and Scanty) are to be proved and illustrated
from Scripture, the Sole Rule of Faith, and Trial of all Truths. Thirdly, in
Particular, to believe Christ's descent in Soul into hell locally, must stand
with some reason, and analogy or proportion of Faith laid down in the
Scripture. For Christ did or suffered nothing, but the Scripture shows the
Reason, Cause, and End of it. For instance: Isaiah Says, Isa. 9.6.
To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given. So the Angel to the Shepherds,
Luke 2.11*
To you is borne this day a Savior which is Christ the Lord. This then shows
the End of Christ's Incarnation, namely for our Salvation. Then for his Death,
Romans 4.25*
He was delivered up for our Sins. And, Heb. 2.14, 15.
Forasmuch as the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the Same: that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil. And deliver them, who through fear
of death were all their life time subject to bondage. So for his Resurrection,
Romans 4.
He rose again for our Justification. So for his Ascension, It was that he
might Ioh. 16.7.
send the Holy Ghost, and go to prepare a place in heaven for all his. So for
his Sitting at Gods right hand, Ephesians. 4.8. Ioh. 14.2. Romans 8.34. Psalm. 2.6.
Act. 7.56. Heb. 1.13.
There he makes Intercession for his people, rules as King his Church, in
preserving, protecting, governing his people, and making his and their foes
his Footstool. But for any such thing, as Descent into hell, neither is it
found in the Scripture, nor much less any reasons given there of it. Indeed
Peter Speaking of Christ's Resurrection, alleges Psalm. 16. Thou will not leave
my Soul in Hell: So in the English. In the Hebrew it is commonly taken for the
Grave, not for the place of the damned. But will you take Peter's exposition of
it Speaking by Christ's own Spirit? Act. 2.29, 30, 31, 32.
This (says he) David Seeing before, Spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that
his Soul was not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see Corruption. So then,
this place (Psalm. 16.) was by the Holy Ghosts own Interpretation, a Prophecy
of Christ's Resurrection from the Grave, and not of any Descent into Hell, the
place of the damned. For he is not said to rise out of hell, as you say he went
down into Hell, nor to ascend out of Hell, as you believe he descended into
Hell. Will you have a particular Article of Christ's descent into Hell, and
shall you not need another Article for his Ascent out of Hell again? And the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 4 9*
Christ descended Eis ta katotera mere tes ges, to the lowest parts of the
Earth, which is spoken of his humiliation to the Death, and the Grave: but here
is no word of his Descent into any such place as Hell, the place of the damned.
But admit your Faith to be true, that Christ's Soul descended locally into
Hell: I ask, to what end or purpose? Can you show any Reason from Scripture
for this? Will you say, his Soul went thither to suffer? Surely that had its
Ioh. 19.30. Psalm. 18.5.
Consummatum est upon the Cross, there it was finished. Will you say, he went
to triumph over the Devil in his own D^nne? That was also done on his Col.
2.15.
Cross, as on his Triumphall Chariot. And can you give any reason why Christ
should descend into hell in regard of us? What* that so he might deliver our
Souls out of Hell? Surely this also was done in his Heb. 2.14, 15.
Death. And again, if it were necessary that Christ's soul should go locally
into hell, to deliver our souls: then also it was necessary for his body to
descend into hell, to deliver our bodies from thence. For he came to redeem our
bodies, as well as our souls. Or what else can you Say? Certainly what ever you
can invent, the Scripture will presently discover the vanity of it. But for my
part, I dare believe nothing concerning Christ, and my Salvation, but what the
Scripture has revealed. But the Scripture has revealed no such thing, as the
Descent of Christ's Soul into Hell locally. But you will then object unto me,
Do I not believe my Creed, and every Article in it? I answer, I do. Why then
(say you) Do I not believe the Article of Christ's Descent into Hell? I say, I
do, being understood, or expounded according to the Scripture, and the Analogy
of Faith therein. How is that? Christ dyed, and in his Passion he suffered the
Torments of Hell in his Psalm. 18.5. Math. 26.38, 3^. and 27.46.
Soul on the Cross, and in the Garden. But his Descent into Hell is set after
his burial. And do you not know, that the ancient Heathen used to put Hades
for the state of the dead. So as katelthein eis hadou, is to go, or to abide
in the state of the dead, which Christ did for 3. days, and then arose again
and revived. So as the Article shows the continuance of Christ's being dead and
buried, till his Resurrection. Again, you know the Nicene Creed mentions only
Christ's burial, and no Descent into Hell: and Athanasius his Creed, katelthen
eis hadou, He Descended into Hell, without speaking a word of his burial. All
which do confirm what I say, that christ in being buried, remained so long in
the State of the d^ad, his soul separated from his body: and being said to
D^scend into Hell, hades signifying also the Grave, thereby is meant his being
buried for so long a time, till his rising again. As it is said in the next
Article, The third day ^e rose again from the dead, that is, from the Grave,
where he abode in the state of the dead.

Now I have given you a reason of my Faith: Can you give one reason of yours,
concerning this Article, as you take and believe it with your Church of
England? Show but one reason, or shadow of a reason out of Scripture. Nay,
except you bring every Article of the Creed to the examen or trial of
Scripture, for the staying and establishing of your Faith, you may run into
many monstrous errors. What do you believe concerning Christ's death? You
believe that he dyed. But for whom? Whether for the Elect only, in Gods
Purpose, Account, Appointment, Acceptance: or universally for all men, Elect
and Reprobate? I tell you, my Lord, if you believe that Christ dyed for all men
universally, as well for the Reprobate, as the Elect, you destroy both Gods
Grace in giving Christ for his people only, the Elect, and also the merit and
eff^icacy of Christ's death. The Scripture shows these things abundantly. But
I mention this only by the way. Again, What do you believe concerning the
holy Catholic Church? You believe (I dare say) and you do say it, that L. p.
62. compared with other places. See p. 109.
the Catholic Church on earth, consists visibly of all Prelates, and those
that are subject unto them, as one entire Body. This is your Faith. But if you
examine this by the Scripture, you will find it to be an Error no less soul
then false, as has been showed. So, do you not believe the Article of the
Communion of Saints? You do. But who are your Saints on earth? You will hardly
allow any Saints on earth, till after their death, they be Canonized by his
Holiness at Rome. Nay in plain terms you persecute both the Saints
themselves, and their Communion. Can you endure such as but profess holiness?
And for their Communion, do you not hunt out and persecute Private Fasting and
Prayer among the poor souls of Christ, when public they can have none, and
no other remedy or weapons are left them to defend themselves withal against
your bloody Cruelty? So as the truth is, you neither rightly believe the Holy
Catholic Church, nor the Communion of Saints; but are a notorious both denye^
and persecuter of both. And therefore we see what a necessity there is, that we
should bring the Articles of the Creed to the Standard Rule, the Scripture,
both as the surest and safest way, yea and the only way to preserve our Faith
from Error.

But you object the Fathers for the Sense of this Article of Christ's Descent
into hell, as you believe it. What if they believed so? Is their example a
sufficient Rule for us? We must examine their sense they held of it, by the
Scripture. If it be not according to the Scripture, we reject it. The Fathers
might for a time hold an erroneous generally received opinion, before it came
to be controverted, and well sifted and examined by Scripture. But they were
ever ready to have their faith, and opinions tried by the Scriptures. All the
ancient Fathers were of this mind and spirit. As before Nondum ^ato Pelagio,
securius loque^^ntur P^t^^s. Aug. Epist. 103
Pelagius his time, the Fathers spoke too liberally of Man's Free Will: which
after, upon his Heresy, they reformed, and by Scripture abundantly confuted
the Pelagians, and especially Augustine* Jerome, Prosper, Fulgentius, Hilarious,
and others. And Augustine enticing a Donatist to dispute about that Heresy,
Says unto him, Ratione agamus, divinarum Scripturarum authoritate agamus: Let
us dispute the matter by Argument, let us be guided by the Authority of the
Divine Scriptures. Not what I, and thou Say, but what Christ Says. And this
was the Spirit (I say) and practice of all the Fathers in such cases. So as if
this Article of of Christ's descent into hell had been by occasion of
controversy about it well searched into, and examined by the Scripture: no
doubt but the Fathers would therein have regulated their Faith according to the
truth of Scripture.

But the Church of England (say you) holds and believes that Article, as you
do. No marvel, when you do. And should you hold otherwise, must it not do
so too. And yet we have but your bare word for it. But you will allege your
Article, That Christ went down into hell. But we must examine your Article by
the Scripture. And it is not the sound of your Article, but the sense, and that
it agrees with Scripture. But we have showed, that no such thing is in
Scripture. And you tell us withal, what Mr. Rogers upon the Articles says of
this; That then (Then I say) in diebus illis, the Church of England was not
resolved of this Article: and he was then the Archbishop of Canterbury his
Chaplein, your Predecessor Richard Bancroft. But now your Lordships bare word
is enough to Sway the Balance, which before stood but in aequilibrio in an
even peize, not resolved; but now resolved. But this I can tell you, what ever
your Church of England now believes, there is (and I hope a good sound Church
of Christ) yet in England, that believes the Creed, and all the Articles
thereof, and this in particular, no otherwise, then they find them agreeable to
the Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith. And this is agreeable to that, which
once a Dr. Bilson.
Prel^te of England said, By the general conf^ssion of all Antiquity,
Traditions must he warranted by the Scriptures, or else we must reject them. And
Isidore says: A Prelate, if he teach or command any thing, besides that which
is evidently cammanded in the holy Scriptures, let him be taken for a false
witn^ssie to God, and a committer of Sacrilege.

But looking a little further, I find you confessing, That the Church of
England has not determined as yet either way by open Declaration upon this
Article. No, has she not? How then do you affirm, and would persuade us,
that you believe, with the Church of England that Christ descended into hell,
without any further Dispute? We hope therefore it will not be long, before your
Declaration come forth with a Definitive Sentence, determining the sense of
this Article one way or other. And the rather, because in the late Declaration
before the Articles, wherein this Article of Christ's going down into hell is
particularly set down for one, they are declared to be of ambiguous sense, and
yet men must hold to the letter of the Article. So as by that Declaration we
are less resolved of the Articles, then before. A new Declaration therefore we
would feign see, which is clear, Declarative, and Determinative; and therein
tell us, whether Christ's Soul descended into Hell, the place of the damned, or
into Purgatory* the Suburbs of hell, and whether Locally, and for what end and
purpose (because the Scripture is altogether silent in this whole mystery) and
whether you find hell to be in the Center of the Earth, or no, because your
Article says, He went down into hell, etc. But in the mean time, I have for my
part ingenuously given you a reason of my Faith touching this Article, which I
am so resolved on by the Scripture, that whatsoever Declaration you or your
Church of England shall set forth to the contrary, I must crave pardon if it be
not of the same faith with you. And thus far you allow any in the Church of
England this liberty, for your words are, p. 45.46.
Is it not lawful for any in the Church of England to say, I conceive thus or
thus of it, etc? Although you add

L. p. 51. It is one thing to hold an opinion privately, within himself, and
another thing boldly and publicly to affirm it.

P. I do, I confess, boldly and publicly affirm this my faith concerning
this Article, which my faith I do assure my self is true, being grounded upon
good and clear evidence of the Scripture, on which my faith is built, and not
upon any thing of humane Authority. And in making open confession of this my
faith, I do therein follow the Rule of Scripture, which says Iam. 5.1^.20.
Brethren, if any of you do err from the Truth, and one convert him: Let him
know, that he which converteth a Sinner from the error of his way, shall save
a Soul from death, and shall hide ^ multitude of Sins. Now what know I, that
this Declaration of my Faith with Reasons from the Scripture, may by Gods grace
be a means to convert, if not your Lordship from your error, yet others, or
may preserve them from falling into it, being dangerously entered into it by
such an example, as your self And however, if it be lawful for you boldly and
publicly to affirm such things of belief, which are not found to be in
Scripture: why may it not be as lawful for me boldly and publicly to affirm
the Contr^ry? But the Scope of your Speech (as I conceive) is, to maintain
your practice in punishing in High Commission, such as expound this Article by
and according to the Scripture*

L p. 53. For that all the Positive Articles of the present Church of England,
are grounded upon Scripture, we are content to be judged by the joint and
constant belief of the Fathers, which lived within the first four or five
hundred years after CHRIST, when the Church was at the best, and by the
Councels held within those times, and to submit to them in all those points of
Doctrine.

P. But first (as is before noted, as you give accasion) why have you made your
Articles to be Dipsucoi, of a double sense. So as in that respect, how can you
call them Positive, being so perplexed in themselves? And again, Whom do you
mean here, by, We? I suppose you and your church of England. You are
contented to be Judged by Fathers and Councels within the first 500. years,
whether your Church-Articles be grounded on Scripture or not. Are you contented
so indeed? Then you must be contented to undergo the Censure of departing both
from the judgment of the Scriptures, as disavowing them for the only rule of
Faith and Doctrines to be tried by: and also from the joint and constant
belief both of Fathers and Councels within the first 500. years. For their
joint, constant, and unanimous belief was, that nothing besides the Scripture,
is to be Judge in matters of Faith. And if you want leisure to read the
Fathers, do but peruse the learned Discourses and Disputes of the Divines of
the Church of England before your being a Prelate, as Dr. Carleton of the
Church, De Ecclesia, Dr. Whitakers forementioned, Dr. White his way to the true
Church, Dr. Bilson, yea and all those that have written of these Controversies,
and they will abundantly show this, that it was ever held as a Principle, and
therefore not to be denied, nor needful to be proved; and which Dr. Carleton
in his said Book proves never to have been altered, till in and by the Council
of Trent, That the Scripture is the sole rule of Faith. But thus you and your
Church of England are contented to be one and the Same Church with Rome, in
refusing the Scripture as the Sole Judge of your Doctrines. But will you be
judged by the joint and constant belief of Fathers and Councels within the
first 500. years, whether your Articles about Grace, Election, Predestination,
etc. bearing (as you Declare) a double and opposite sense, in their Pelagian
and Arminian sense be according to the Scriptures, or no: If I name only
Augustine, who was Pelagionorum Malleus, that Hammer to knock down the
Pelagians, both the Fathers and Councels within those first 500. years did
jointly and constantly profess that which he writ to be the Belief of the
whole Church, it was so clearly and fully proved out of Scripture. In so much
as you may read in the Histories of the Councels, as in Binius, how that some
Councels and Bishops of Rome set down Large Passages in Augustins Tracts
against the Pelagians, as the Jugement of the Catholic Church, and the
particular Decrees and Acts of such and such councels. If then you will stand
to the Judgment of those ancient Fath^rs and Councels, then you must at their
Bar hold up that hand, which was a chief instrument in drawing up the said
Declaration, which has so enigmatized and darkened the Articles, as they have
no other Light left, but a kind of twilight, which inclines rather to the
night, then to the day, rather to favor the Pelagian Heresy, then the
Orthodox verity. But this being your language all along, that you put not only
your Articles and the Articles of the Creed, but the Mysteries also of the
Scriptures to the Judgment of the Primitive Church, Fathers, General
Councels, we will Supersede from speaking more of it in this place.

Again, where you say, that the Church was then at the best: if you understand
it, during the age and time of the Apostles, it is most true: but if of the
Succeding ages within 500. years, we may doubt of it, or rather resolve the
contrary: unless you mean it comparatively to the ages after that, wherein
Antichrist and the Mystery of Iniquity began more brightly to shine forth and
display themselves in the Roman Sea, both in corruption of doctrine, and of
Gods worship, beyond all excess. For you may know, that within the space of
the first 500. years, the Church was so overgrown and pestered with the
heresy of Arius, as the world groaned under it, wondering it was become an
Arian; as Hierome speaks. Totus ingemuit mundus, miratus se factum esse
Arianum. And among many corruptions, and much unsoundnesse in Doctrine, what
multitudes of Superstitious devises, and heathenish Customs, not only crept
but crowded into the service of God? Which Heathenish Rites (as we find in B.
Rhenanus his Annotations upon Turtullian) were by the Christians in a kind of
carnal policy admitted, both because many ancient men being converted to
Christianity (such as it was) could not easily part with their old Customs: as
also that thereby they might draw other of the Gentiles to become Christians.
Just such a policy, as our new Doctors, (I mean of your Church of England)
have used, in a pretense at least, making us believe, that coming as near as
you can to the Papists in their Ceremonies, you shall thereby bring them to the
Church. And surely this is the ready way either to bring Papists to your
Church, or you to their Church. But (I say) the Church was so pestered with
Rites and Ceremonies even in Augustins days, that he complained, that
Christians were now in a worse case and condition, under the Gospel, then the
Jews were under the Law: for though their yoke was grievous, yet those
Leviticall rites were of Gods own ordaining, and commandment, but Christians
(says he) are brought under an intolerable yoke of Ceremonies of men's
devising and imposing.

But now on the other side, if I should enter into a Comparison between the
Reformed Churches since Luther, and those Primitive and ancient Churches as
aforesaid, I know it would be very tedious to your Lordship and extremely move
your Patience; especially if I should by many degrees prefer Calvin, Bez^,
Zanchius, Iunius, and many hundred more Worthies both for learning and piety,
and chiefly for Soundness in Doctrine, in the Reformed Churches, beyond the
Seaes, yea and not a few, on this side, as Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper,
all Martyrs, Jewel, Whitakers, Reynolds, Perkins, with infinite more, and all
within one Century, before such as those Centuries aforesaid produced, whose
Names for Envy-sake I forbear to mention.

Lastly, you say, you are content to submit to them in all those points of
Doctrine. If you be, then for Shame clear away those Clouds, which the said
Declaration has over-cast your Articles withal, and cast away your Arminian
Pelagian sense, and take off your Suspension of them, and let them speak one
single truth, as they formerly did, and as all understood them, according to
the Scriptures.

L. p. 62. The Catholic Church we believe in our Creed to be the Society of
all Christians.

P. What you believe is one thing. But we believe the Catholic Church of
Christ in the Creed to be the number and Society of all the Elect, as the next
Article expounds it, The Communion of Saints: but not that Company of all
Christians which you name and mean, Christians in name and profession, tag and
ragge, pell mell, good and bad, Papists and Protestants, of which the greatest
number are no true living members of the true Catholic Church, the mystical
body whereof Christ is the Head, and which by Faith only we apprehend (for we
believe the Holy Catholic Church) but cannot discern with our bodily eyes,
as we do a visible Object. This is that Ehes. 5.25, 26.
Church which Christ loved, for which he gave himself, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, to present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish. This we believe to be the Holy Catholic
Church, and no other. But thus indeed (as you tell us before) you make wider
the Gates of the Catholic Church, then ever Christ made them; or rather
indeed you exclude the Catholic Church of Gods Elect, and set up a new
Catholic Church, which may be seen, but ought not to be believed.

L. p. 66. Agreed on for me also it shall be, that Gods word may be written, and
unwritten.

P. Agreed on? with whom? Even with no less, then Bellarmine. For in the very
next words you give us the reason, why it is agreed upon for you, that Gods
word may be written and unwritten. For (Say you) Cardinal Bellarmine tells us
truly, that it is not the writing or Printing, that makes Scripture the word
of God, but it is the Prime unerring Essential Truth, God himself uttering
and revealing it to his Church, that makes it Verbum Dei, the word of God. Does
Bellarmine say so? And that truly? And to what end, I pray you, does the
Cardinal say so? Is it not to overthrow the Scripture for being the Sole word
of God, and to bring in another word of God, which he calls verbum non
Scriptum, an unwritten word, that is, a word besides the Scriptures, and equal
to the Scriptures, which is Romes unwritten Traditions. And to this end and
purpose Bellarmine using these words, does he tell you truly, and is this the
reason, for which it is agreed on for you, that Gods word may be written, and
unwritten? Now though it be true, that that which is spoken by God, is his word
though it be not written: yet to us there is now no other word of God, but that
which is written, that which is contained in the Scriptures. And this word
written is that alone, which our Faith is grounded and settled upon. According
to that of John: Ioh. 20.30, 31.
Many other Signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are
not written in this Book: But these things are written, that ye might believe,
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life
through his Name. So as we are not to inquire further, what Christ spoke, or
did, besides what we find written. But your Lordship tells us before, of
certain Traditions Apostolical, which it seems are that word of God* which
may be unwritten. For you say: page 52.53.
If the Scripture be a Foundation, to which we are to go for witness, if
there ^e doubt about the Faith; and in which we are to find the thing that is
to be believed, as necessary in the Faith: we never did, nor never will refuse
any Tradition that is Universal and Apostolic, for the better exposition of
the Scripture. And to this place you refer that which you say, page 58. As
for Tradition, I have said enough for that, and as much as A. C. where it is
truly Apostolical. From which words, first we observe, that you make but an
If, of the Scripture as a Foundation, If the Scripture be a Foundation: and, If
in it we are to find the thing that is to be believed; as If it were to be
found in any thing else. And Secondly, how home you come to A C. the Jesuit,
in admitting Tradition Apostolic to expound any doubt about the Faith: and so
with Bellarmine you are agreed for a word of God unwritten, as well as written.
And you further add here (page 66.) Speaking of the Scriptures: their being
written gave them no Authority at all, in regard of themselves. Written or
unwritten the Word was the same. But it was written, that it might be the
better preserved, and continued with the more integrity to the use of the
Church, and the more faithfully in our memories. So you. Now it is true, that by
the writing of the Scriptur^s Gods word contained therein is preserved,
continued in integrity, and the more faithfully kept in our m^mories. But is
thi^ all? Nay the very writing of them, though it added no Authority to Gods
word in regard of it self, yet as the Scriptures are to us, Gods word, is of
the greater Authority, because written. For we acknowledge no other word of God
as the Rule and Foundation of our Faith, but what we find written in the holy
Scriptures. This is that word of God which is authentical, of Authority to his
Church; and therefore Authority to us, because written. So as your unwritten
word, wherei^ you agree with Bellarmine, and your Apostolic Traditions,
wherein you come home to your A. C. the Jesuit, we receive none of them all as
authentic, or to have any thing to do to expound the Scripture in any doubt
about the Faith. But if you can show us any Traditions Apostolic, we will by
your leave examine them by the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures by them. You
name baptizing of Infants for a Tradition Apostolic. We doubt not but the
Apostles baptized the Infants of believing Parents. For the Infants or Children
of such are 1 Cor. 7.14.
holy, as the Apostle shows; And so they belonged to the Covenant. And as the
Children of the Jews in the old Testament were circumcised, as pertaining to
the Covenant and promise made to Abraham and to his Seed: So Baptism,
succeding in place of Circumcision, as a Seal of the Same Covenant, belongs to
all Children of believing Christian Parents. As the Apostle says, Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might come by Grace, and the Promise might
be sure to all the Seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that
also which is of the Faith of Abrah^m, who is the Father of us all. So as
believing Christians have the same interest in the Covenant with Abraham, and
their Children or Infants have the like privilege of Baptism, as the Infants
of the ancient Israelites had for Circumcision. Therefore the Baptizing of
Infants was certainly practiced by the Apostles, as well as the baptising of
believing Parents. So as we do not baptize Infants, because you tell us it is
a Tradition Apostolic, but because it is as clearly and firmly grounded in
the Scripture, as the baptizing of believing Parents. We exclude therefore
whatsoever Word unwritten, or Traditions Apostolic (as you call them) as
being either partial or equal Rules of Faith with the Scriptures, as
Bellarmine calls them, or as Interpreters and Judges of the Scripture in doubts
about Faith, as you are bold to affirm. We have no word of God, but the
Scripture: we acknowledge no Traditions Apostolic, but what we find they
delivered in Scripture. The Prophets in the old Testament sent Gods people to
the Scripture, for information, instruction, resolution in all matters of
Faith, and Cases of Conscience. Isa. 8.20.
To the Law and to the Testimony (Says Isaiah) if they Speak not according to
this word: it is because there is no light in them. He Says not, To the
Traditions of our Fathers, but, To the Law, and to the Testimony, Gods word
written. Else, there is no light in men; they are blind guides, that in matters
of Faith lead us any where, but to, and by the Scriptures. And the Prophet
Jeremiah: (...). 8.9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? All
wisdom, without this word of God, is foolishness: all knowledge, without
this, is ignorance and blindness. So our Savior Christ: (...). 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to find eternal life, and they
are they, which testify of me. So as Christ allows us no other Testimony of
him, and of Faith in him, but the Scriptures. We must erunan, Search them, not
the Archives, or Sacraries of blind Traditions though gilded over never so
fair with the name of Apostolic, nor of any pretended word of God unwritten.
And Christ answers the Lawyer, when he asked Luke 10.25.26.
what he should do, to inherit Eternal life: What is written in the Law? How
read thou? And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.6.
That none presume above that which is written. And, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And Peter: 2
Pet. 1.19.
We have a more sure word of Prophecy, (to wit the Scriptures of the old
Testament) whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed. In all which places, and
many more, the Scripture is still commended to us, as the only absolute,
sufficient, perfect and complete Rule of our Faith in all matters, or doubts of
Faith touching our Salvation, So as it has no other interpreter, but it self,
not any Tradition, not any word unwritten. But of this you will give us
occasion to speak more at after.

L. p. 72, 73. Faith is the gift of God, of God alone, and an Infused habit, in
respect whereof the soul is merely recipient. The Sole Infuser is the Holy
Ghost. Till the Spirit of God move the heart of man, he cannot believe.

P. I confess, when first I read these words, I began to muse with my self,
and to argue thus: What, is my Lord of Canterbury turned Orthodox, no Arminian,
in the Doctrine of Grace? But looking a little further, and observing both the
Authors you allege (as Stapleton, a great man with you, and other Popish
Authors (as is usual with you throughout your Book) and also considering of
what Faith you here Speak, I changed my conceit, and found that you were no
Changeling For whereas I thought that all this fair ^^ourish of Faith is the
gift of God, of God alone, A habit infused, The Holy Ghost the Sole Infuser,
The soul merely recipient, Till Gods Spirit move man's heart, he cannot
believe: had been meant of that Grace, of Saving and Justifying Faith, which
the Scripture teaches, and particularly the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye
are saved through Faith, and not of your selves: it is the Gift of God, etc. I
imagined (I say) that as you used the Apostles very words, and the Language of
Scripture, so you had done it in the sense and mind of the Apostle, and of the
Scripture, which Speaks so of the Saving and Justifying Faith. But when I found
the contrary, I confess I blushed at my folly, in having such a conceit of
you, having had so much experience both of your usual perverting of
Scriptures, and your corrupt sense throughout your Book, and considering that
light and darkness cannot stand together, and how you h^ve altogether
suppressed the Preaching of the Doctrines of Grace, and finding that all this
Faith you Speak of, is nothing else, but that historical Faith in believing
the Scriptures to be the word of God, which belief is common to the very
Reprobates, and Devils themselves, who Iam. 2.1^.
believe and tremble Phristou^i, they quiver and Shake, as when men's teeth
Chatter in their head in extreme cold. And yet how do you abuse the Scripture,
and your Reader, in giving to this Faith those peculiar Attributes, which are
proper and peculiar to the only Saving Grace of Saving Faith, the Sole
Infuser, Giver, and worker whereof is the Holy Ghost? Tell me, how come the
Devils to that historical faith, whereby they believe the Scripture to be the
very word of God, and all things therein to be most certainly true, and so all
those plagues written therein, and threatened against Reprobates and Devils,
shall be most certainly inflicted, in belief whereof they tremble? What, have
they this Faith given them of God, and is the Holy Ghost the Sole Infuser of
it, or any Infuser of it at all? And yet I say, This historical faith is that
which you Speak of here. For you do in that 16 th Section, consisting of about
30 leaves in folio, Speak of that Faith alone, which believes the Scripture to
be the word of God, the only subject of that long and tedious Discourse,
wherein you have spent so much sweat to so small purpose. And the words
immediately preceding do show this. And your words immediately following are
to confirm it, which you allege out of Stapleton, Saying, The Holy Ghost did
not leave the Church in General, nor the true members of it in particular
without Grace to believe, what himself had revealed, and made credible.
Whereupon you infer a little after: Till the Spirit of God move the heart of
man, he cannot believe, be the object never so credible. Thus we see your mind
at full, what Faith, what Gift of God, what Grace, this is, which you Say none
but the Holy Ghost gives to his Church* namely, not that faith, not that gift
of God, not that Grace, not that work of the Holy Ghost, whereby a man comes
to believe in Christ, and to be endued with the Grace of Regeneration, and
Sanctification, the proper work and gift of the Holy Ghost, whereof the
Apostle speaks in the forecited place: but such a faith, such a grace, as
the Co^^il. Trid. Sess. 6.
Council of Trent professes and aloweth, and so, that which Stapleton, and all
other Pontificials write of, which is common to all wicked men and Reprobates,
as we have elsewhere fully proved.

L. p. 75. The world cannot keep a man from going to weigh the Scripture at the
Balance of Reason, whether it be the word of God, or not. Abasing of the
Scripture, in subjecting it to natural Reason.
For the word of God, and the Book containing it, refuse not to be weighed by
Reason. And, (page 76.) For Reason by her own light can discover, how firmly
the Principles of Religion are true: but all the light She has, will never be
able to find them false.

P. It Is ^rue, that man's natural Reason, being not bridled by grace, is so
headstrong, that the world it self cannot restrain it within its own bounds,
but will be meddling. But yet, though Reason be not excluded from giving her
voice and assent to the Scripture, yet She must know her place, She must come
in the Reere of all, and as a handmaid, not as a Mistress. Nor is it Reasons
office to bring her balance to weigh the Scriptures, whether it be the word of
God, or not; for herein She has no negative voice, but only of assent: So as
in this respect; as a Judge, Gods word refuses to be weighed by Reason: much
less can it be true, that Reason by her own light can discover, how firmly the
Principles of Religion are true. For man's Reason being but Natural, and Gods
word Supernatural, there is no proportion between them, and Reason can no more
judge of Scripture in this respect, then a blind man can judge of colors. So
as Reason must not come in with her balance and weights, till a man be
illuminated by the Scriptures themselves, and by the Spirit of God; and then
being convinced of the truth thereof, She gives her full assent, that the
Scripture is the word of God. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God: neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned. How say you then, That
Reason by her own Light can discover how firmly the Principles of Religion are
true? Point blanke against the Apostle. Act. 16.14.
The Lord opens the heart of Lydia, to attend to the things spoken of Paul.
Now if the natural man by the light of his natural reason, receives not, nor
is thereby capable of the things of the Spirit of God contained in the
Scripture, but that they are foolishness unto him, until God open the heart,
and 1 Cor. 2.
reveal those things by his Spirit (as the Apostle says) then Reason cannot
judge of Scripture by her own light. For what is Reasons light in a natural
man? Surely darkness it self, unto Spirit^all things. Ye were once darkness,
says the Apostle. Darkness in the very abstract. Man's natural understanding
and Reason darkness. And therefore as Christ says, Math. 6.23.
If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? And
Romans 8.5. They that are after the flesh, ta tes sarkos phronousin, do savor
the things of the flesh: but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the
Spirit. Spiritual things are as unsavory to a natural man's Reason, as
wholesome meat is to an aguish palate. They are unto him 1 Cor 2.14.
moria, foolishness, says the Apostle. And Romans 8.6. Romans 8.6.
The wisdom of the flesh is death, v. 7.
and ekthra, emnity against God; and it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. Ye says Jeremy, Ier. 10.
Every man is brutish in his own knowledge. Can you then hale the Scripture to
the bar of man's natural Reason, which is brutish, to be judged by it,
whether it be Gods word, or no? And David says, Psalm. 62.9.
Surely men of low degree, are vanity. Yea, say you, Men of low degree: but not
so, men of high degree, of learning and parts. But take all with you: Surely
men of low degr^e are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in
the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. What, men of low degree,
vanity? and men of high degree a lie? Yea Surely, yea altogether lighter then
vanity it self, being ^ayd in the balance. But in what balance? In the
uneven balance, with the false Scales of your natural Reason? No: but in the
Exodus 30.^3
Balance, and with the weights of the Sanctuary your Reason must be weighed.
And this balance of the Sanctuary is the Scripture. If then your Reason must
be weighed at the balance of the Scripture, and there be found too light, yea
lighter then vanity, yea altogether lighter then vanity, yea, Surely altogether
lighter then vanity, yea a very lie: then what weights can your Reason bring,
being altogether lighter then vanity it self, whereby to weigh the Scriptures?
Or how shall Reason, which is a lie, with her unequal Balance, and false
weights weigh verity it self?

But if all this will not put you out of conceit of your natural Reason, as an
incomptent Judge of Scripture to be the word of God (which must needs argue the
truth of Scripture, that man's Reason is blindness, darkness, emnity against the
truth, brutish, vanity, a ly, altogether lighter then vanity it self) give me
leave a little to put you to it. You persuade your self that you can by the
strength and light of your natural Reason judge, Pr^lates Reason put to its
trial.
or weigh the Scripture, whether it be Gods word, and discover how firmly the
Principles of Religion are true (for had you been persuaded hereof by Gods
Spirit, you would never have attributed so much to man's Reason; but herein you
have consulted altogether with flesh and blood, having no acquaintance
certainly with the Spirit of truth, that leads his into all truth.) Now then by
the Same Reason, you may discover whether Christ be of God or no; for he is the
Sum, Substance, and Scope of the whole Scripture, and so is called Rev. 19 13.
The word of God. And Christ Says, Search the Scriptures, for these testify
of me. Do you believe then that the Scripture is Gods word, and therefore
true? Do you believe all things in it to be true? And to be a word of wisdom,
surpassing all the wisdom in the world? Do you believe this? And that to obey
and follow this word of God, is man's chief wisdom, and happiness? Does your
Reason apprehend this? What say you then to that word of Christ, Luke 9.22.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his daily
Cross and follow me? Does your Reason comprehend this? Is it not durus sermo,
a hard Saying, as that to the rich man, Vade, vende omnia, Luk 18.21.
Go, Sell a^l, and give them to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, and come and follow me? But all Gods Saints do thus. M^ses accounted
the R^buk^s of Christ greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt, and chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, th^n to enjoy the pleasures
of Sin for a Season. Psalm. 8.8.
Paul accounted all his Prerogatives loss, and dung to win Christ. The
Apostles forsook all to follow Christ. You will Say, A few poor (...) nets.
Nay, Says Aug. they forsook not only what they had, but whatsoever they might
have in the world. Abraham, when God called him, forsook his native Country*
and all his friends. Do you believe these men did wisely in doing this? Does
your Reason apprehend so? Do you thereupon Conclude, that this Scripture is
Gods word, because it teaches such things, as the doing whereof brings a man
to true happiness? Can you then be content to follow Christ upon his
Conditions, to forsake all, and take up your Cross daily, and follow him? Can
your Reason down with his, or your Stomach digest this? Or will you Say, To
forsake all, is but matter of Council, not of Precept? Yes certainly of
Precept, in those things especially, the retaining whereof detaines us from
Christ, and are a bar to come to him, and so to heaven. Si in Limine Pater
jaceat, per calcatum perge patrem: Says Jerome: Hieronimus Epist.
If they old Father lie cross the threshold to hinder thee from Christ, tread
on thy Father to come to Christ. If any thing stand in our affections in
competition with Christ, we must forsake it. Math. ^^.3^.
He that loves Father, or Mother, or lands, or honors, more then me (Says
Christ) is not worthy of me. For Iam. 4.4.
the amity of the world, is emnity against Christ. Now if things in themselves
good and lawful, being loved above Christ, keep us from Christ, and therefore
must be forsaken: then how much more, such things, as are in themselves evil,
unlawful, unwarrantable, for a man to keep, as being against Gods word, and
against Christ, and against a man's salvation? How then can your most refined
Reason persuade his Grace of Canterbury to deny himself, to abandon all that
Grace, to forsake his Hierarchy, as being emnity against Christ, and a Tyranny
over his Church, and therewith to account all his Dignities as dung, to cease
persecuting of Gods word, Ministers, People, to abandon his counterfeit and
hypocritical Devotion in in will worship, which is a vain worship of God, and
in stead of all these, to take up his Cross daily, and to follow Christ in
obedience, in patience, in humility, in meekness, in holiness? Does your
Reason apprehend this to be good, to be the wisest and only way to come to
heaven and happiness? For this Gods word commands. Then either follow this
word, as Gods word, or else never look to persuade the world that your own
Reason can with her own light discover how firmly the Principles of Religion
are true. No, no, my Lord, away with these vain Speculations, and presumptuous
Speeches, which have not one crumb of Salt in them. Tit. 1.16.
Will you profess you know God, and in works deny him? Do you believe the
Scripture to be Gods word, and yet by accounting the preaching of the Cross
foolishness, make God a liar.

But I will conclude with your last Clause: Reason (say you) for all the light
she has, will never be able to find the Principles of Religion false. Nay
certainly, although you deny Reason any ability by her own light to discover
how firmly the Principles of Religion are true: yet we will not deny unto her
blind impotencie a Special faculty in finding them to be false: not false in
themselves, but yet false, in her own apprehension. For is not this one of the
main Principles of Religion, to wit, to know Jesus Christ, and him Crucified?
This was the Apostles Chief Learning, 1 Cor. 2.2.
I determined (says he) to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified. But (says he) 1 Cor. 1.18.
The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness: but unto us
which are Saved, it is the power of God. And who are they that perish? Such as
are wise in their own conceit, and prudent in their own understanding and
Reason; as the Apostle says in the next words: for it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to naught the understanding of
the prudent; Such as exalt their own understanding and Reason to such a height,
as they presume therewith, as with a Balance, to weigh, whether the Scripture
be Gods word, or no; and with the light thereof to discover how firmly the
Principles of Religion are true. And when they have said and done all, their
actions and practices do plainly show, that they reject and despise the
Scripture, as being none of Gods word* yea they Persecute, oppress, and seek
all the ways they can to destroy it, and utterly to quench the light of it. As
will yet more clearly appear by those things that follow.

L. p. 77. Though this Truth, that the Scripture is the word of God, is not so
demonstratively evident, a priori, as to enforce assent: yet it is strengthened
so abundantly with probable Arguments, both from the light of nature it self,
and humane Testimony, that he must be very wilful, and self conceited, that
shall dare to suspect it. [And more plainly] page 80. Prelates blasp^^my against
(...) Scripture.
The light which is in Scripture it self, is not bright enough, it cannot
bear sufficient witness to it self. The Testimony of the Holy Ghost, that is
most infallible, but ordinarily it is not so much as considerable in this
Question; which is not, how, or by what means we believe, but how the
Scripture may be proposed as a Credible object, fit for belief.

P. We are still in your 16 th Sextion, mentioned before, which continues from
p. 59. to 116. wherein are sundry passages ^o this purpose, whereof the last
was one, and the rest we shall touch, as we meet with them. And here I cannot,
(though I said I would no more wonder) but admire, that such Speeches should
flow down so fast from the Sea of Canterbury, which is a mighty Catarrhact or
distillation of the eye, drowning the sight, and flowing from such an abundant
humor in the head, as it is like to turn into a Dropsy, possessing and
putrefying the whole body, which if not prevented by some remedy from h^aven,
must needs prove Epedemically mortal. You are the first Antagonist of
Jesuits, that ever uttered such things, and you might well have given them
leave to utter such base Speeches of the holy Scriptures, as more proper for a
Jesuit, then one pretending the Faith of a Protestant. But the difference is
not great, nor matters is much, which of you be the mouth, having all one
Spirit, and being all one and the Same Church. So as being the Metropolitan of
that Church, which with Rome is one and the Same: you have the greater
privilege to speak in the language of that pregnant Mother* who is so Rev.
17.3
full of the names of Blasphemy against the word of God.

Now is not the Scripture so demonstratively evident in it self, as to enforce
assent? What then shall do it? Probable Arguments from the light of Nature.
But Nature is blind, as we showed before of natural Reason. And again, how
can that which is but probable, confirm that which is truth? For the Scripture
is Truth it self. As Christ says, Thy word is Truth. Now there being
strictly, no proportion between Probability and Truth: how can the Light of
Nature, which you say is but probable, confirm that which is truth. And we
showed also how the Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
which things are contained in the Scripture. But you add, Arguments from
humane Testimony, confirm the Scriptures to be Gods word. That which is but
humane, cannot strengthen that which is Divine. I receive not the Testimony of
man, says Christ. Ioh.
So the Scripture is so far above humane testimony, that it can receive no
strength from it, no more then God can receive strength from the creature, Gods
word from man's word. And the Scripture, being Gods written word, is above Man's
bare word. As Christ tells the Jews, who took Christ for a mere Man: If ye
believe not Moses his writings, how shall you believe my words? Thereby
implying, That Writings, the Scripture, are above man's words. Again, humane
testimony in Comparison to Gods word, is but a lie. For Romans 3.4*
every man is a liar. Moreover, in saying, The Scripture is not evident enough
to demonstrate it self to be the word of God, and to enforce assent: but being
strenthened by Probable Arguments from the light of Nature, and of humane
Testimony, it is then wilfulness and pride to suspect it: Here you set the
light of Nature above the word of Grace, probability above Truth, humane
Testimony above Divine, Man above GOD. For Christ tells us, that the Scriptures
bear witness of him: And you Say, the Scriptures are not sufficient witnesses
of themselves, and so consequently of Christ, without man's testimony, So as
hereby you disable the Scripture, as being an incompetent witness of Christ,
because not evident enough in themselves without humane Testimony, So as how
you can clear your self from blasphemy, I see not. But this is but one
degree. For you add, The light which is in Scripture is not light enough, it
cannot bear sufficient witness to it self. Now you open your mouth a little
wider to blaspemy. But we shall have yet more of ths Suffe out of your
Wardrobe. Of which I may say this by the way, That you bewray how grossly and
palpably blind you are in discerning the Scriptures glorious brightness, being
like that Woman in Lipsius, who being blind her self, blamed the house she was
in for being very dark: So you, because you are blind your self, the 2 Cor.
4.4.
god of this world having blinded your eyes: therefore you blame the holy
Scriptures of GOD for being dark, not bright enough to to bear witness to it
self. Why, Surely all light is Sui index, and sui Communicativum, it is a
witness to it self, that it shines, So as all in the house do see it; yea
though it be but the Math. 5.15.
light of a Candle, as Christ says. If therefore the Scriptures have not so
much light in them, as all may see it to shine forth, then they have no light
at all. For if there be any light at all, it will show it self. But this you
will not stick to tell us anon, that the Scripture has no light in it self,
and therefore no mervaile if here you say, the Light that is in it is not
bright enough. And you tell us here also, That the Testimony of the Holy Ghost
ordinarily is not so much as considerable in this Question. Why? What is the
Question? Is it not how, or by what means we believe the Scriptures to be the
word of GOD? Is not this the Subject Question of this whole 16 th Section, and
which you handle throughout? And this being so, have you forgotten what you
told us before of this belief, that the Scripture is the word of GOD? Namely
that faith is the gift of God, of God alone; and an infused habit, in respect
whereof the Soul is merely recipient, and that the sole infuser is the Holy
Ghost? and Till the Spirit of God move the heart of man, he cannot believe? And
now do you come and tell us, The Holy Ghost ordinarily is not so much as
considerable in the Question? Yea, but here you tell us, this is not the
Question. What then? Namely, how the Scripture may be proposed as a Credible
Object, fit for belief. And for this you set us down a rule of Proposal,
which must of necessity take its rise from the Tradition, or Authority of the
Present Church. Whereof we shall hear more anon. But by your leave, this is
not the Question, but the other. For this your manner of Proposal, you put it
not as a Question, but as an a'itema, a Question begged, not to be argued, and
disputed upon, as the nature of a Question is to be, but you do dogmatizein,
obtrude and force upon us a novell opinion of your own devising, without
proof of Reason, Argument, or Authority from the Scripture. And therefore we
deny your Question, or Position as Heterodox, or a Paradox, contrary to the
truth of God word, which is the only rule of determining all Questions in
Divinity about faith, whereof this is not the least, How, or by what means a
man comes to believe the Scripture to be the word of God? Now for the
determining hereof you would tie us to the one only manner of Proposing the
Scripture, as a Credible object fit for belief: and that is, necessarily to
begin at the Tradition or Authority of the present Church, or else there is no
dealing with you. But what if we shall propose a better manner and way of
propounding the Scripture as a Credible object fit for belief? And this we
shall do, God assisting, overthrowing your false way, and vindicating the
only right and true, safe and sure way, that will certainly lead us to this
belief, That the Scripture is the word of God.

And for a ground hereof, I lay down the Contradictory of your words for my
true Position, which is this, That the light which is in Scripture it self, is
bright enough, it can and does of it self beware sufficient witness to it
self. For proof hereof: The Scripture is the witness of Christ, as is said
before: and a witness must be a sufficient and competent witness, without all
exception; else it is rejected. Now the Scripture is without all exception, it is
a holy, true, and faithful witness, free from all vice, or defect. It is pure
and perfect, so as it needs nothing to be added to it. So Solomon, Pro. 30.5, 6*
Every word of God is pure: Add thou not unto his word, least he reprove thee,
and thou be found a liar. Add thou not; Ergo it is a most perfect and
competent witness. Again, as the Scripture is every way a Competent and
sufficient, a perfect and Complete witness, without all exception: So it
brings full and clear Evidence with it for that whereof it is a witness. For
this, Solomon says, Pro. 8.8, 9.
All the words of my mouth (says Wisdom) are in righteousness, there is
nothing froward or perverse in them: they are all plain to him that
understands, and right to them that find knowledge. The Scripture is plain,
clear, and evident. So Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.19.
Ye have a beba^oteron ton prophetikon logon, a most sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto you do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place. The Scripture then is a most sure witness, and it is a light that
shines. The light is not in it, as the fire in the flint: but it a light
shining forth, as the light of the Sun. Psalm. 119.105.
Thy word (says David) is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my path. And,
Psalm. 19.8.
The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding unto the
Simple. The very first entrance or gate (as the word signifies) of Gods word,
does illuminate, and give light, it gives understanding to the Simple, the
rude and ignorant; it Ps. 119.130
enlightneth the eyes. Now all this could not be, without a light that shines,
and that clearly too, such as upon the first entrance of it gives light and
understanding to the simple.

But how comes this light of the Scripture to shine forth? I Answer, First of
its own proper nature. Let but an unregenerate Man read the Scriptures,
Scripture convincing a natural man.
and he shall feel such a Convincing light in them, as he will perceive there
is a Divine power in them. But this light of Scripture, by Gods own
appointment, shines forth more bright, and is more effectual, when it is
preached. Of this the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
If all prophecy, (that is, preach the word of God, as in that place) and there
come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all: And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so
falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report, that God is in you
of a truth. Now whence is all this Conviction, and Confession, but from the
power of Gods word preached. So Heb. 4.12. The word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two edged Sword, Heb. 4.12.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. This,
this is that, that dazleth man's clearest reason, convinces and confounds his
Conscience, and as a mighty Engine 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
batters down, and lays level Strong holds, and all high things that exalt
themselves against the knowledge of God, bringing into Captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ: as the Apostle speaks. And is Gods word (the
Scripture preached in the power and purity of it) a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of man's heart? Then let that man tell me, whether, without any more
testimony, this be not the very word of God? And that there is in it* Theionti
a divine Spirit, and power, that thus can search into the inmost bowels, and
secrets of man's heart? So as, as the Samaritan woman said to her neighbor,
Come, and see the man, that has told me all that ever I did; is not he the
Christ? So a natural man thus convinced and confounded by the power of Gods
word, and Secrets of his heart discovered, may he not now truly report, and
say Come, and hear that word, which has discovered unto me all the Secrets of
my heart: must not that needs be Gods own, word* So as this Discovery, is it
not by that native, operative, effectual, and resplendent penetrating lihgt,
shining in the Scripture, the beams whereof are displayed in the Ministry of
this word of God? what is it then, that enforces and even extorteth this
assent and confession from a natural man, but the clear evidence of Gods word
preached, that the Scripture is the word of God, which is so preached?

And to bring this a little nearer home, and set it closse against your own
Gate: What Say you my Lord (for I must deal plainly with you, seeing you are
so bold with the Scripture) will you be tried by this word of God, whether it
have not sufficient Light in it self, and of it self, even to convince your
own heart and Conscience, that the Scripture is the word of God? I say, in,
and of it self, without all those circumstances which you put as necessary
previous inducements to this belief, whereof your Church Authority is ever the
Prime. Will you be content but to make trial of your self in this Case? How
is that? Why, do but once come into some obscure, poor Parish Church, A
motion.
where there is a good Zealous, and Orthodox Preacher; and come disguised (as 1
King. 22*
Ahab at the Battle of Ramoth Gilead) in a private manner, not in your
Pontificalibus, with your long Sattentraine carried after you, et magna
comitante Caterva, a troop of gallants at your heels; So as none takes notice
of you, much less the Preacher: and come your self in person, not sending
your ta o'ta, your Long Ears, I mean your Scouts and Spies, Informers,
Promoters, Priests, or Pursuivants, Delators, and Sycophants; for these will
seldom tell you the truth of things: But I say, come your self in a private
disguise, and so stand muffled up in the Crowd, and hearken diligently to the
Preacher, first how he does o'rthotomein ton logon, divide his text aright, as
it were anatomising and ripping up the bowels of it and then how fitly he
grounds his docttrines, or points of Instruction upon his text, and so
prosecutes them with proofs of Scripture, and Reasons; and lastly applies this
word in sundry uses to the hearts and Consciences of the hearers, reproving
this or that sin, and pressing it home; And all this while, knowing nothing,
that any such Creature, as the Archbishhop of Canterbury is in his
Congregation, in the ardor of his holy Zeal, he lets fly his Darts of sharp
Reproof, Steeled with Divine Authority of GODS Word, the Scripture, as against
Pride, Hypocrisy, hatred of GODS Word, Persecution of Gods Ministers and
People under a color of piety, and pea^e-making in the Church, and the like,
and so drives the nail to the head, as that the dart* pierces through all
your armor of proof (as the 1 King. 22.
Arrow, shot at adventure, hit Ahab between the joints of his Armor) to the
the very quick of your Conscience, not only to the awakening of it, but
driving it to a trembling fit, (as Paul's preaching did to Act. 24.25.
Felix) and to be in a cold Sweat, and to wax wanne and pale, (as Belshazzar at
the sight of the handwriting, which is a part of Scripture) what would you
imagine of this? Perhaps, that the Minister knew of your being there. But the
contrary appears to your self, you did it so secretly, as you knew none could
discover it; as you want neither wit nor art to do such a feate, if you will.
Well, you can draw no other Conclusion from that your Conviction upon this
occasion, but that sure those were the Darts of the Scripture, that wounded
you, yea and sounded you, and found you out in the Crowd, pulling off the veil
of hypocrisy from off the the face of your Conscience, and therewithal so
terrifying it, as you are persuaded all the men in the world could not have
struck such terrors into your Soul: and thereupon you are forced to Conclude,
and Confess, that surely the Scripture must needs be the word of God, having
such a mighty power in it, being applied but by a weak man. As the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellence of the power
might be of God, and not of us. For you could discern nothing of the Minister
himself, but that he was a simple plain man, and did but speak, as his text
led him, and for which he brought good proof from the Scripture. Thus if your
Lordship should make but such an experiment as this, would you not do with
this your Book (wherein you have, besides many other strange passages all
along, as will appear yet more at large, pronounced so many disgraceful
Sentences against the Sufficiency of the Divine Scripture, to prove it self
to be the word of God) as those Converts in the Acts did with their Books of
Curious Arts, or as you did (though against your will) with that Popish Book of
the Bishop of Geneva in Smithfield. But I proceed.

As the Scripture, not only in and of it self, but by the Ministry of it
discovers such a clear selfe-light, as whereby even natural men are
convinced, and enforced to believe and confess, that Surely the Scripture is
the very word of God: so this word, this Scripture is not (as the Papists say,
and you say little better) a dead letter: but as it is the word of God, uttered
by his Spirit, by which 2 Pet. 1.21.
holy men spoke and wrote it: so it carries meat in the mouth (as we say) it
never goes alone, but is accompanied with the Spirit of God, which Spoke it,
giving testimony unto it, that it is the undoubted word of God. For even as the
veins in a natural body do carry and convey in them the lifeblood, and as
the Arteries do contain in them those animal Spirits conveyed from the head
to all the members, whereby they are vegetated, and moved: So the Scriptures
and every part of them have in them the Spirit, whereby they are quickened, and
which is in them, as the light in the body of the Sun, their proper light,
wherein they shine forth in such a brightness, as is sufficient to convince
all men, that they are the word of God, and effectual in persuading and
assuring all the Elect of God of the truth thereof, even to their Salvation.
And as the Soul with its faculties, as understanding and Reason, in man's body,
do show him to be a reasonable creature, Man: So the Spirit of God, breathing
and moving in the Scriptures, do show them to be the very word of God. For in
the Scripture do shine forth Gods Majesty, Wisdom, Holiness, Power,
Providence, Justice, Mercy, Truth, Goodness, Omniscience, and all his
excellent Attributes, so as they all bear testimony unto it, that it is the
word of God. So as to separate these from the Scripture, as they do, who
affirm, that the Scripture is not bright enough to be a sufficient witness to
it self, to the begetting of Belief, that it is the word of God: Comparison.
is as if they should abstract and separate the light from the Sun, and say, it
is not sufficient to prove it self to be the Sun. For indeed take away the
light from the Sun, and then you may say truly, it is not bright enough to
show it self to be the Sun. Nay it cease to be the Sun any more, when the
light and heat of it is taken away. For the Sun is pheronumos, according to its
names in the Hebrew, Shemesh, so called, because by its light it is a Minister
or Servant to the world: or some derive it, quasi Sham-esh, ibi ignis, There is
fire: or according to another name, from its property of calefaction, or
heating. But take away its light, and it loses both its nature, and its name,
and serves for no use. So if you take from the Scripture those things in it,
which are its life and soul, its native light and ^uster, which can no more be
separated from it, then the light from the Sun (nay the Sun Mat. 24.29*
shall come to loose his light, as it once did at the Ecclipsing of the Mal.
4.2.
Sun of Righteousness in Mat. 27.45.
his Passion on the Cross, but Gods word Ps. 119.89.
endures for ever in heaven) you quite destroy the nature of the Scripture,
and so make it to be no longer the word of God.

I might here enlarge my Discourse upon this excellent Subject, but I shall
have further occasion ministered by you to speak something more of it, as I
pass along. For you proceed.

L. p. 83. A man is probably led by the Authority of the present Church, as by
the First informing, inducing, persuading means, to believe the Scripture to
be the word of God: but when he has studied, considered, and compared this
word with it self, and with other writings, with the help of ordinary Grace,
and a mind morally induced, and reasonably persuaded by the voice of the
Church: the Scripture then gives greater and higher Reasons of Credibily to it
self, then Tradition alone could give.

P. Here you begin to tell us your manner of proposing the Scripture as a
credible object, fit for belief. And you place the Authority of the Present
Church in the forefront, as a prime leader and inducer to this belief. And
this you inculcate very often, and Say, page 120, I confess every where, that
Tradition introduces the knowledge of them. And page 126. you tell the Jesuit,
A. C. saying, Herein we go the same way with you, because we allow the
Tradition of the present Church to be the First inducing Motive, etc. So as
herein you jumpe with the Jesuit. So then, Authority of the present Church is
the Prime. Or as sometimes you call it Tradition, or otherwhiles, The voice of
the Present Church. All comes to one reckoning. Then, to this Leader you muster
up a troop of followers; as here, Ordinary Grace, a mind morally induced, and
reasonably persuaded; and before: a man's own Reason, and humane Testimony,
moral persuasion, Reason, and Force of the present Church, the Holy Ghost,
Conferring of the Scripture with it self, and other writings. And what then?
Then, and not before, the Scripture gives greater and higher Reasons of
Credibility to it self, then Tradition alone could give. What? No more effect
for all this, but a Credibility? I expected you should with such a Troop,
under the command of such a General, as the Authority, Tradi^ion, and voice of
the present Church have effected that Rockie For^ of man's heart to have yealded
to open the Gates of his Infidelity to let in this Belief, that Scripture is
the word of God. And can you obtain no more then a Credibility? Alas poor
Scripture! Can all Man's witty inventions advance thy credit (which they have
taken away) no higher, then to a Credibility? But thus we may see the vanity of
Man's wit, when it has cast away the truth. This is right, as the Preacher
Says, Eccles. 7.29*
L^e, this only have I found, That God made man upright: but they have sought
out many inventions. So when men reject the word of the Lord, what wisdom is
in them? Then they fall to their inventions, like 1 Samuel 19.13.
Michals stuffing her Image with Goats hair, and laying it in the bed,
instead of David. Or a right Emblem hereof we have in our First Parents: when
they had disrobed themselves of that plain, simple seamelesse, but glorious
robe of their Innocence, having thus lost their uprightness, wherein God made
them: presently they fall to their inventions; they will supply the want of
that robe with a many fair fresh Fig Leaves sowed together without either
needle or thread, vainly imagining, that this would cover their shame, when
indeed it was a plain sign, they had lost their Glory, and yet could not hide
their nakedness. So when a man has lost the Truth, he shall loose his wits in
his manifold Inventions, before he shall be able thereby to make up his loss.
Thus did the Church of Rome of old, no sooner had they thrust out Gods word,
and the preaching of it out of their Temples, but up go their Images for
Laymens Books, and in comes crowding a multitude of Ceremonies, the Inventions
of man, as if these would make amends, with advantage, instead of the holy
Scriptures. Just your practice in the Church of England at this day. And just
your like practice here. When you have cast a black veil over the Scriptures
native beauty and light, disabling them as sufficient witnesses, to prove
themselves the word of God: Magno (...) magnas nuga^*
you invent here a number of things to stop our mouths, to make us believe,
that by these you will bring Man's natural blindness to see, and his
infidelity to believe just nothing at all, that the Scriptures are the word of
God. So as you deal with us here, as some Parents do with their Children,
take the piece of gold from them, and please them with a handful of deaf
nuts. Only, they do it providently, to preserve the Gold from being lost: but
you Popishly, to destroy the Gold, and to set up the painted dress of your
New-nothing. Or you put out the Eyes of the Scripture, and then light your
Candle before it: as after you tell us.

But let us a little examine your words. First I note here, what a blind guide
you commend to blind men, to lead them to the belief of the Scriptures to be
the word of God. For what is it? Certainty? No, Probabilty. A man is probably
led. But of Probability we have spoken before. And take this with you for a
certain truth: Probability may beget an opinion: but never, a belief. But by
whom probably led? By the Authority of the present Church. What present Church?
Of the Prelates, or Hierarchy ever. But who gave you Authority, to be a Church?
Or Suppose you were the true Church of Christ: who gave you this Authority to
take away from the Scriptures their sufficiency of guiding men to the faith of
them, and to tie men to depend upon the Authority of the present Church,
thereby to be induced to believe the Scriptures? And what is your present
Church? Is it not the Same with that of Rome? And is not this Authority which
you arrogate, Romish? And what if your present Church with Rome, shall induce
us to believe the Apocryphal Books to be part of Scripture? Or some word
unwritten, which you call Apostolic Traditions, to be equal with the word
written, as you agree with Bellarmine in this Distinction of the word written,
and unwritten; as before is touched? And what if (as you have given us too much
proof) you should limit us in believing the Scripture, what part to believe
for Canonical, and what otherwise? For as Adversus Luciferian^s.
Hierome says, The Scripture consists more in the marrow of Sentences, then in
the bark of words, more in the Sense then in the Syllables. What say you then
to the 4 th Commandment, which your present Church denies to be Moral for a
Seventh day Sabbath, and thereby overthrow the Sanctification of the Lords day?
What say you of the Doctrines of Grace, which you have overthrown by your
Declaration before your Articles? What of Altars, and the like? If herein you
overthrow the Sense of Scripture, do you not proclaim to the world, that such
and such Scriptures are not Canonical? Or if the words be still holden for
Canonical, yet it must be according to the Sense of your present Church. As
Paulus 4. the Pope, in the End of the Council of Trent, ties all Priests by
oath to interpret the Scriptures no otherwise, but according to the Sense of
the Catholic Church; the Sum whereof is the Decrees and Canons of Trent. Is
not thus the whole Scripture made void?

But, come on, let men be primely induced by the Authority of the present
Church, The only way how men may know the Scripture to be Gods word as the
Prelate teaches.
to wit, of the Prelates or Hierarchy (for no other Church you allow, nor we
you to be any other, but of Antichrist) by what Argument (trow you) is it
likelyest they will be persuaded, that the Scriptures are the word of God? Will
you give me leave to tell you my Opinion? It is this in brief: When men upon
your Authority and Commendation should be brought to read the Scriptures, and
therein should find many Prophecies, and among the rest, how there should come
Math. 24.
False Proph^ts, being Wolves in Sheeps Clothing: Revel. 13.
pretending holiness, but Persecuting Gods Saints; pretending Religion, but
oppessing Gods word, pretending to be Math. 24.
Christ vic^royes, but Col. 2.^8.
tyrannizing over his people; and such as should Apostatise from the Faith, and
set up Doctrines of Devils, as in abstinence from certain Meats, and Marriage
at certain times, and how Christ and his Apostles were humble, and despised
the world, being crucified unto it, and how they which were proud, pompous
Lords, claiming to be their Successors follow none of their steps, neither in
diligent preaching, nor practice of a holy life, are such Antichrists as the
Scripture has foretold: and how 2 Timothy 3.13 2, 3, 4, 5.
in the last days perilous times should come: when men should be
Selfe-lovers, covetous, boastors, proud, blasphemers, unholy, without natural
affection, implacable, covenant-breakers, false, accusers, incontinent, fierce,
despisers of them that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures, more then lovers of God, Having a form of Godliness, but denying
the power thereof; with many other like things; which when they come to compare
with the State of the present times, and especially of the present Church, and
chiefly of the Prelates themselves, and shall find most of these Prophecies
fulfilled in these present times, they will certainly hereupon conclude, that
these be those last days, and perilous times wherein these things, so long
ago foretold, do clearly show, that certainly the Scriptures are the word of
God.

The next thing I note here is, that you Say, a man so probably led, must
compare the Scripture with it self, and other writings. What other writings, I
pray you, shall he compare the Scriptures with? Shall humane writings light him
a Candle to show him the Sun shining at noon day? But thus humane testimony
comes in for a Second Inducer. And for all your previous inducement, you must
still at last join some thing of man with Scripture.

Well, what is the third? Ordinary Grace. And this with the Authority of the
present Church may beget in a man an ordinary belief, that Scripture is the
word of God. As it seems such ordinary Grace brought King Act 26.28*
Agrippa to believe the Prophets to be the word of God: yet for all that he was
but almost persuaded to become a Christian. And this Ordinary Grace is (it
seems) that Holy Ghost, which you told us of before.

The Fourth is moral inducement. Well, admit this bring him to a moral
belief or opinion. The Fifth is a reasonable persuasion by the voice of the
Church. Well, what the^? After all this, the Scripture gives greater and higher
reasons of Credibility to it self, then Tradition alone could give. Here Is
then the upshot of all (as we noted before) you by these steps advance the
Scripture to a Credibility. So as all this while, you have walked the round, and
gone in a Circle, and end just where you began; for you began at Probability,
and end in Credibility; whereas the Scriptures were credible at least, that is
such as might be believed; before you taught this new way to come to the
belief of them. So as this your Conclusion comes to just nothing. Only you
seem to attribute some thing to the Scripture, being assisted with those other
inducements, wherein it surpasses your Tradition alone. Which is such a
comparison and commendation, as you could not devise the like, to abase the
Credit of the Scripture. But to conclude: What a Tedious Dispute you make here
with the Jesuit about that, which (when you have done all you can) will never
bring a man upon any sure grounds so much as to believe, that the Scripture is
the word of God: much less to bring him to Saving faith in Christ. But what
do I speak of Saving faith? Alas, that is no work for your pen. You are for a
Scholasticall Dispute here, which is so jejune, and barren, that many
Scholasticks would hiss it out of their Schools, much more Divines out of the
Divinity Schools, as indeed nothing pertaining to true Divinity, but to a Col.
2.8.
Spoiling through Philosophy and vain deceit, as the Apostle Speaks. But the
sum of all your inducements (the Prime whereof must necessarily be your
present Churches Authority) amounts to this: That men being by a bond of
necessity tied to this your Church as without which he cannot come to believe
Scripture to be Gods word: and without this belief, no faith of Salvation: and
your Tradition with all other helps cannot bring a man to that belief, when
all is done: the Conclusion is, that according to your Tradition no man can
come to be Saved. So as thus by this your new Doctrines you overturne the
Foundation of Faith by the very roots, leaving no footing for faith to stand
upon, whereby a man may have any hope of Salvation.

But I showed you before, a short and sure way for a man to come to this
belief, and not only so far, as to believe the Scripture to be the word of
God, but to believe, that he has his part of Salvation in that word. And this
way is, by hearing the word of God preached. For Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And this faith being
the Saving faith in Christ, as it apprehends all the Promises of God in the
Scripture to be true, and to belong to him, so it comprehends the belief of
Scripture to be the word of God. And this, this word of God preached and heard,
is that voice of the Church of Christ, or rather Christ's own voice in the
Church, calling men, yea and instrumentally causing, Gods Spirit effectually
working in and by the word, to believe unto righteousness, and to confess to
Salvation, whatsoever is written in the Scripture to be most true, as being the
word of God himself. And besides this true Christians in all ages, never
believed and Authority, Tradition, voice of men simply to be any necessary
prime inducement to believe so much, as the Scriptures to be the word of God.

L. p. 84. That divine light, which the Scripture, no question, has in it
self, is not kindled, till these helps come. Thy word is a Light. So David. A
Light? Therefore it is as much a manifestation to it self, as to other things,
which it shows, but still, not till the Candle be lighted: not till there has
been a preparing instruction, Prelates Blaspheming of Scripture all along, and
exalting his Present Churches Authority above it.
what light it is, till Tradition of the Church, and Gods grace put to it, have
cleared his understanding: So Tradition of the present Church, is the first
moral motive to believe.

P. These words confirm your former, with a little illustration. A divine
Light here you confess to be in the Scripture. But you mean some dim Light.
At the best, not bright enough, not sufficient to show it self to be the word
of God. And here, That Light, whatever it is, is not kindled, till these helps
come. It Is but a kind of Light potentially in the Scripture, as fire in the
flint, which must be struck out with the steel. Nay you compare it but to the
light of a Candle; and yet not all that neither: for the Candle must first be
lighted. The Scripture then of it self is but as a Candle in the box, of 12 in
the pound, as you Say ibid. which has no Light, till it be lighted. And
Tradition of your present Church must light the Candle. And surely, then may
not the Tradition of your present Church put out the light of this Candle
again, after you have lighted it? As the Pope crowned the Emperor with his
feet, and then struck the Crown off again with his foot, to teach the Emperor,
that his Crown was at his Holiness Devotion to dispose of as he pleased. So
may you do with the Scripture, light the Candle, and put it out again. Prelate
lighting the Scripture* and putting out the Candle.
As you have don with the Doctrines of Grace, with the Sabbath, or Lords day,
with preaching, and the like. And Thy word is a light: So David. But not, So
you. For David Said, Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths. So say not you. You like not (it seems) such a lamp and light to your
ways. For ways you leave out, as the Devil did, when he recited that
Scripture, Psalm. 91.11. He shall keep thee: but he left out, In all thy ways:
as Luke 4.10. And you could never have the hap hitherto to cite Scripture
right. And no marvel if you be out of your way, when you come to the
Scripture, seeing you can find no light in it to give you sufficient direction.
But you Add: A Light? Therefore it is as much a manifestation to it self, as
to other things. Even just as much as if you had Said, A blind man sees as
much in the dark, as in the day. So it is here with the Scripture, for the
light you allow it. And what is that? But none still, no light, till the Candle
be lighted. It Is just so then, as I say. I guest your meaning right. But you
add: Not till there has been a preparing Instruction, what light it is, till
the Tradition of the Church and Gods grace put to it, has cleared his
understanding. How? I am here at a loss, except you help me out, and clear
the understanding of your words. For before, you must have the Candle first
lighted: and here, you seem to grant some light, when it is once discovered to
be a preparing instruction what light it is. I pray you my Lord deal plainly
with us. Speak out. Has the Scripture a light in it, or no, before the
preparing instruction has showed what light it is? For to show, what light it
is, does necessarily presuppose that there is a Light. And if there be a Light,
how is it true, that you Say, Not till it be lighted by Tradition of the
Church? Must Tradition do all, both light the Candle, and also show what light
it is? Or does Tradition with the same act of lighting the Candle, show also
what light it is? If so, then I begin through this dark lantern of yours to
discern what light the Scripture has: namely a borrowed light, lent it by
Tradition. For you say, The Candle is not lighted, till Tradition light it. Or
if I be out, it is for want of Clear Light from your dark Lantern. But here
follows a worse perplexity. For from the lighting the Candle of Scripture by
Tradition, you come to the lighting of another Candle, namely the Clearing of
the natural man's understanding by the Tradition of the Church, and Gods grace
put to it. 'Twas well you put Gods grace to it. For if the Tradition of your
present Church have but Gods grace put to it, it may work wonders. But stay.
Cannot your Churches Tradition or Authority, do the deed without Gods grace;
at least do its office of the fore-horse, as the necessary prime leader? Or is
your Churches Tradition some jade, that puts all the brunt upon the next horse
that follows? Then you should rather give Gods Grace the Precedencie. But now I
remember, this Grace of God is but an ordinary Grace, as you told us before,
which at the most works but an ordinary moral and probable belief, that
Scripture is the word of God, but not certain and evident: So as the natural
man's undestanding being but thus far cleared to have a probable opinion of
Scripture to be Gods word, except you can bring him to believe in Christ, and
forsake his sins, his opinion will but aggravate his condemnation so much the
more. But what evidence can you show us, that your Church Tradition is
certainly seconded with so much ordinary Grace? For if your Tradition be
derogatory from the Credit of the Scripture, you cannot hope for the least
degree of ordinary Grace to give it either assistance, or attendance. It
behooves you therefore to prove, that this your Authority in this point is from
God, is Gods ordinance: and if so, you may then easily persuade us, that Gods
grace will accompany his own Ordinance. But this you will hardly prove. But
will Say, Traditions are Traditions, and therefore not to be proved from
Scripture: and this Church-Tradition is that, which the Scripture must be
proved and tried by. And so here upon belike it is, that you conclude: So
Tradition of the present Church is the first moral motive to believe. The
Conclusion might serve the turn well enough, if you had but good logical or
rational Premises to bring it in, better then yet you bring, for the inducing
of belief, That Scripture is the word of God.

L. ibid. So after Tradition of the present Church has taught and informed the
Soul, More and more Blasphemy of the Prelate, ascribing that to his Tradition,
which is only proper to the word and Spirit of Christ.
the voice of God is plainly heard in the Scripture it self. And then here is
double Authority, and both Divine, that confirms Scripture to be the word of
God, Tradition of the Apostles delivering it, and the internal worth and
argument in the Scripture, obvious to a Soul prepared by the present Churches
Tradition, and Gods Grace.

P. The more you speak, the more we come to Sound the depth of your meaning.
You told us before of the present Churches Tradition, and Gods Grace put to it,
by which the natural man's understanding is first cleared. And here Tradition
of the present Church alone does the deed: for you say, After Tradition of the
present Church has taught and informed the Soul, then, the voice of God is
plainly heard in the Scripture it self. Surely my mind gave me all this while,
that although for fashion sake, and for a color you named the grace of God in
the second place after your Tradition, yet your principal aim was to advance
the Credit of your Church Authority, as that alone, which does the deed. This,
this is it, that cleares the natural man's understanding; this it, that
teaches and informs the Soul (Tradition I say of the present Church) before
the voice of God is plainly heard in the Scripture it self. As if you had
Said, The Tradition of the present Church does all, it opens the blind eyes
of the natural man's understanding to see, and the deaf ears of his Soul to
hear: for after it has cleared his understanding, and taught and informed the
Soul, then the voice of GOD is plainly heard in the Scripture it self.

And besides you tell us here, that after Tradition of your present Church has
taught and informed the Soul, the voice of GOD is plainly heard in the
Scripture. Ergo not till then. Ergo your Tradition opens the ears of the
deaf. And then there is double testimony, and both Divine. What? Tradition of
the Apostles delivering it. You mean surely, the divine Tradition of your
present Church, one of your obstruse Apostolic Traditions. Otherwise, what
does the mention of the Apostles Tradition in this place? And thus you acquaint
us with the whole Mystery of your new Divinity. New, I call it, because it is
contrary to the old. For the old is (which is not yet antiquated) Psalm. 19^8.
The Commandment of the Lord, (that is the word of God) is pure, inlightening
the eyes. And verse. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul:
the testimony of the Lord (...) sure, making wise the simple. And Psalm. 119.30.
(mentioned before) The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives
understanding unto the simple. Now who is the blind and simple, but the
natural man, before his Conversion and Regeneration? And what is that, which
inlightens his eyes, and cleares his understanding? Gods word. For, The
entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding unto the Simple.
The light of Gods word going forth in the Ministry of it, is the first that
makes entrance into the Soul. Now does not your Lordship grant all this? Yes,
you cannot but confess it: but always provided, that it is ever understood,
the Tradition of the present Church must prepare the way first: that must first
clear the natural man's blind eyes of his understanding; that must first teach
and inform his Soul, before Gods word can inlighten his eyes, and give
understanding to the Simple. But do you consider what you Say? The Scripture
(you must needs confess, you cannot deny) inlightneth the eyes. Well, but you
Say again, your Tradition must first clear the understanding, and light the
Candle of Scripture. Now to clear the understanding, is to open the eyes. How
then can Gods word be said to open and enlighten the eyes, when they are
cleared before? Or how can it give understanding to the simple, when the Soul
is taught and informed before? The Tradition of the present Church prevents
all, and saves the word that labor. Unless you will say, The Tradition of the
present Church is a preparing instruction to the opening of the eyes by the
Scripture, as the John 9*
anointing of the blind man's eyes with clay went before his washing in the
poole of Siloam, whereupon he received his sight. Indeed your Church-Tradition
in this Case might well be compared to the daubing of a natural man's blind
eyes with Clay, to confirm him in his blindness, that he shall never see, so
long as he depends upon the necessity of your present Church-Tradition as a
preparing instruction to clear his understanding, and to teach and inform his
soul, as without which he shall never come to have his eyes enlightened by the
word of God. So as in very truth this Tradition, Authority, voice of the
present Church, which you every where so plead for, and press, as a necessary
previous inducer, A Doctrine of damnable Blasphemy.
yea clearer of the natural man's understanding, and teacher and informer of
his Soul, before he can plainly hear the voice of God in the Scripture it
self, is a Doctrine of Damnable Blasphemy against Christ, and his holy word.
For this clearing of the natural man's understanding, this inlightning of the
blind eyes of his mind, this teaching and informing his Soul, is both the
proper and prime act of Christ, of his Spirit, and of his word, working
together. Of the words inlightning David has sufficiently informed us before.
And Christ sends us to the Ioh. 5.39.
Scriptures for search (and not to any Church Tradition) as bearing witness of
Christ, and so directing us to him for eternal life. And Says Christ, Ioh.
6.44* 45
No man can come to me, except the Father, which sent me, draw him: and I will
raise him up at the last day. As it is written in the Prophets. And they shall
be all taught of God* Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of
the Father, comes to me. Heard? What? The Tradition of the present Church? No,
the preaching of Gods word, which is Gods own voice (as we said before) this
voice in the ear, being accompanied with Gods learning and teaching within (as
August. in Johan* and alibi. Act. 16.14.
Augustine hereupon well notes) is that, which brings us unto Christ, Thus the
Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things which were
spoken of Paul. It was not the Tradition of the present Church, but as she was
hearing the word, the Lord opened her heart, both to attend, and to believe
Paul's Doctrine. And Luke 24.45. Then opened he their understandings, that they
might understand the Scriptures. Away then with your Blasphemous Romish
Doctrine of Tradition of your present Church, from having any thing to do in
this divine business, wherein only God, and Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and
the voice of God in the Ministry of his Word, have the whole and sole work in
opening both the eyes and ears of man's Soul to see and hear the wondrous
things of Gods Law contained in the Scriptures. As David Says, Ps. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law.

But you add: And then here is double Authority, and both Divine, that
confirms Scripture to be the word of God, Tradition of the Apostles delivering
it, and the internal worth, and argument in the Scripture, obvious to a Soul
prepared by the present Churches Tradition, and Gods Grace. And. Then. Sill:
Then, and not before, all goes current: Worth in Scripture comes in with their
double Divine Authority. Then, when the Soul is prepared (as before) with the
present Churches Tradition. Else, all the fat is in the fire: Nor Apostles
Tradition, Nor worth in Scripture, are worth a rush in this matter. And thus
all must depend upon your present Churches Tradition Still. But here you bring
in again, Gods Grace, as a Second to your Tradition. But I told you before,
and tell you again, that your present Churches Tradition has nothing to do
with Gods Grace, nor with any Grace of God, not with common and ordinary Grace,
Gods Grace is a concomitant and Assistant unto his own Ordinance. But for the
Authority and Tradition of the present Church to be a necessary inducer to the
belief of Scripture, by clearing a natural man's understanding, and teaching
and informing his Soul is none of Gods ordinance, but an Antichristian Romish
presumption, and therefore has no promise of, and so no title to Gods Grace,
either to accompany or assist it. When Christ took his Farewell of the
Apostles, he left his Commission with them for the Ministry of his Word, and
Sacraments, and thereupon gave a Promise of his continual assisting grace to
them, and to all his faithful true Ministers of his Word successively to the
end of the world: Mat. 28.19, 20.
Go, Says he, and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: And Lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Now it is plain (as is both showed
before, and will yet more) that your present Church being Prelaticall, and
Hierarchicall, is a false and Antichristian Church, a Church of Priests of a
strange Order, not of Christ's institution, nor your Government of Christ's
ordinance, and so your Church is of no Auhority: nor do you faithfully and
truly preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments, but with the mixture of
your own Superstitious devises, nor do you teach men to observe all things,
whatsoever Christ commanded in his word, and has left written in the
Scripture: but on the contrary, you suppress the preaching of his word, and
oppress his faithful Ministers, and by public Authority assumed, make void
Christ's eternal Law (as before.) So as Gods people have cause to take up that
complaint and prayer of David, It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they
have made void thy Law: And therefore, that promise of Christ to his Apostles
and true Ministers of the Gospel, pertaines not to you, and so not to any of
your usurped Authority, and pretended Tradition of your present Church.

But you proceed: L. p. 85. After the moral persuasion, reason, and force of
the present Church, there is ground enough to move any reasonable man, that it
is fit he should read the Scripture, and esteem very reverently and highly of
it. And this once done, the Scripture has then In, and home Arguments enough,
to put a soul that has but ordinary Grace out of doubt, that the Scripture is
the word of God, infallible and Divine.

P. The same man Still. But what if, as with the Church of Rome and the
Jesuits your present Church of England does hold this Paradox, so She should
take up Romes practice, and by your Authority forbid all men the reading of the
Scriptures, but such only, as shall be thought fit to be dispensed withal to
read it? We know not what you may do, if once you can obtain voices in
Convocation (as what may not you do) to make this your bare assertion, and
Antichristian opinion an Irrefragable Canon of the present Church of England,
That men ought not to presume to read the Scriptures, till the Authority of the
present Church has made way, and her Tradition cleared their understanding,
and taught and informed their Souls, and thereupon very reverently and highly
esteem of it. For this is the Clear Sum of your words here: No reading of
the Scriptures, no esteeming highly and reverently of it, no In, and home
Arguments enough to pu^ a soul out of doubt, that Scripture is the word of
God, Infallible and Divine: So as till he be persuaded hereof, it is but vain
and frivolous for a man to read the Scriptures: and this persuasion he cannot
have, till after the moral persuasion, reason, and force of the present
Church. And here I note again, how you put the Tradition of your present Church
single and alone, forgetting to Second it with Gods Grace: which does but
confirm what I said before, that Gods Grace, Ordinary Grace, when you do
mention it, it is but when you stumble upon it, and it stands but for a Stale;
it is your Tradition, and Authority of the present Church that is all in all.
But you proceed.

L. p. 85, 86. Thirdly, you (to wit, A. C.) pretend that we make the Scripture
absolutely and fully known Lumine suo, A subtle and sly evasion of the
Prelate from the Jesuit, who objecteth truly.
by the light and testimony which it has in, and gives to it self, etc. We
do not Say, that there is such a full light in Scripture, as that every man
upon the first sight, must yield to it, The Question is only of such a light
in Scripture as is of force to breed Faith, not to make a perfect knowledge.

P. The pretense of A. C. herein, was not without just cause; only he
considered not what the present Church of England now, under your Primacy, does
hold. So as you should or might have shaped your Answer thus: A. C. Distingue
tempora: Distinguish the times. Know you not who sits now in the Chair of
Canterbury? True it is, that formerly the Church of England, or rather some
private men, all or most of the Divines thereof that have written of this
Subject, allthough very learned (I confess) and of great note, place and rank
in the Church in their time, held and writ so against you: but that was only
their private opinion, though all their Books were published by Authority. But
what is all this to the Church of England now? Now you may hear, and understand
by me, who am the voice of the present Church of England, that it is otherwise.
And what you do pretend, I do thus interpret: We do not Say, etc. But what
do you not Say? We do not Say that there is such a full light in Scripture,
as that every man upon the first sight must yield to it. How? So perhaps not
any has Said. Yet this all our Orthodox Divines before you have said, That
there is such a full light in Scripture, as that every man by the through and
serious reading over of the Scripture, has sufficient evidence therein to
convince him, as to yield it to be the very word of God. And if he do not
thereupon yield, the defect is not in the Scripture, but in himself. A miserable
Shift.
But at first sight? This is a miserable shift, and poor put off, to answer
fully to the Jesuits pretense, or rather true assertion. For in this he says
true, that we (to wit, all the Orthodox Divines of the Church of England as
aforesaid) do hold the Scripture absolutely and fully to be known lumine suo,
by the light and testimony which it has in, and gives to it self. Only we do
not make it so (as you express the Jesuit) but we find, know, and believe it
to be so. But they never said, At first sight, This is your own Flam. But what
our ^ormer Divines have written hereof, they have with such Arguments
confirmed, as not you with all your Divines of note and worth, of which you
patch up your present Church of England, are able to Answer, oude gru, not one
word or Syllable.

But come we to the Question as you State it. The Question is (say you) only
of such a light in Scripture, as is of force to breed faith, not to make a
perfect knowledge. And what is your resolution of this Question of your own
Stating? Do you yield thus much, that there is in the Scripture such a light,
as is of force to breed faith? Nay, you have already again and again, and I
know not how often expressly and flatly denied, that there is in Scripture so
much light, as of it self has force to breed so much faith, as to believe it
to be the word of God. And this was all the Question with you but even now. But
how comes in this Negative, Not to make a perfect knowledge? The Question was
not all this while, whether the Scripture had so full a light in it, as to make
a perfect knowledge. But seeing you took this in, to cast a mist before men's
eyes, that they may not so easily discern your A pretty juggling trick of
Legerdemain.
juggling trick in answering A.C. and yet keeping your credit, as if you herein
maintained no other thing, then what they Divines of the Church of England have
held, that which you say the Jesuit pretends: I will answer this too: That
all Orthodox Divines do hold (and that according to the Scripture) that there
is in it such a full and clear light, as to make a perfect knowledge. For
First, there is a knowledge perfect: and 2 ly we have no other Schoolmaster to
teach it, but the Scripture: and 3 ly this perfect knowledge is required of
Christians: 1 Cor. 14 20.
Be not children in understanding (says the Apostle) but in understanding be
men. So the English has it. But the Original is tais de phresi teleio
ginesthe. In understanding, or wisdom be ye perfect. So, Heb. 6.1. Wherefore
leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us be carried on to
perfection. That is, to perfection of Knowledge in the mystery of Christ. Now
this knowledge is no where, but in the Scripture, and so this perfection no way
to be attained unto, but by the Scripture, as the only rule and means
thereof. So the Apostle to Timothy says, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
From a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto Salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. So as Tertullian might well
say, Adoro plenitudinem Scripturarum, I adore, or admire the fulness of the
Scriptures. It is a Fountain, yea an Ocean of Knowledge. And if we cannot
attain to that full perfection of Knowledge in this life, which is to be found
in the Scripture, it is defectus vasis, non fontis: the defect is in the
vessel, man's soul, (For 1 Cor. 13.
we know but in part, and we prophecy in part, says the Apostle) and not in
the fountain, the Holy Scripture, which is like Jacobs Well, full of Water,
but deep* so as every one has not such a lage vessel, and long line, as can
draw forth a full measure of knowldge out of it; yet he may draw for a
plenitude or fulness of the vessel, according to its quantity, and the Romans
12.6.
proportion of Faith given to every man; yet not so exactly full, by reason of
our infirmity, and in-capacity of our vessel, which is partly of a leaking
condition, plenus rimarum, as he said, full of cracks, and a great deal we
lose in the very drawing of it up, as a bucket does of water, before it come to
the top. So as the defect is not in the Well, wherein it was, but now over
head and ears (as we Say) under water, and fuller then it could hold: but in
the bucket in bringing it up, or containing and retaining of it.

L. p. 87. Faiths evidence is not so clear, for it is of things not seen (Heb.
11.1.) in regard of the object; and in regard of the subject that sees, it is
in Prelate perverts the sense of Scripture, conf^^^ding the Regenerate with the
Unregenerate, and Saints Faith with Historical.
enigmate in a glass, or dark speaking. Now God does not require a full
demonstrative knowledge in us, that the Scripture is his word: and therefore in
his Providence has kindled in it no light for that, but he requires our faith
of it, and such a certain demonstration, as may fit that. And for that he has
left sufficient light in Scripture to Reason, and Grace meeting, when the Soul
is morally prepared by the Tradition of the Church.

P. Speaking Still of that Faith, whereby a man believes the Scripture to be
the word of God, which Faith is Historical: here you confound it with the
Saving justifying Faith, just as the Papists do. For as Andreas Vega.
Bellarmine, and others.
they, so you here allege for your faiths unclean evidence, Heb. 11.1. where
the Apostle describes Faith thus: Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
the evidence of things not seen. By which very description, it is clear and
evident, that he speaks not of that Historical Faith of Scripture, common to
all men: but of the Saving Faith peculiar to Gods Elect; Tit. 1.1. and given to
the Saints. Jude 3. which notwithstanding comprehends in it, the Historical
Faith of Scripture to be the word of God, and that in a higher degree and
measure, then any Reprobate can have; even as the Rational Soul of man being
it comprehends in it the Sensitive faculty in a more excellent manner, then it
is in the bruit beasts, and the Vegetative faculty in a more excellent manner,
then it is in the plants; because as the sensitive and vegetative qualities of
the soul of man being comprehended under the Rationalls, are subjected to the
rule and command of Reason, and so do participate in some kind of the very
nature of the Rational faculty; man being both moving, and seeing, and
hearing, and smelling, and tasting, and touching, not as a bruit beast, but as
a Reasonable creature. So Historical Faith, being comprehended under the
Saving and Justifying Faith in a true believer, it is in him more excellent,
and advanced to a higher pitch of perfection, then it is, or can be, in a
natural man; so as it participates so far of that plerophoria tes pisteoes,
that full assurance of Saving Faith, as that it not only apprehends and
believes the Scripture to be the word of God, but does believe it so certainly
and firmly, and with such an affiance and affection, as that the Believer will
rather dye then for the terrors of death it self be brought to deny this
truth. And what is this (trow you) but a full and certain demonstrative
knowledge, that persuades him to this? But for This Historical Faith, in a
mere natural man, or one unregenerate, though he be sufficiently convinced in
his Conscience, that the Scripture is the word of God, yet he has neither so
much affiance in it, nor affection to it, as that he will be content to loose
life and all (if need be) for the maintenance of this truth. This full
Demonstration he wants.

But for that Faith which the Apostle speaks of and describes ( Heb. 11.1.)
which you make to be your Historical Faith, and the evidence of it in regard
of the objest, not so clear, as being of things not seen: it is requisite
here a little to consider the Apostles words. First, Faith (says he) is
e'lpizomenon vpostasis, the substance, or subsistence, or confidence (at the
Apostle uses the word 2 Cor. 11.17.
elsewhere) of things hoped for. And as some well expound it, such a Faith, as
causes the things hoped for so to subsist in our hearts, not only in a sure
expectation, but also in a degree of possession and fruition, as if they were
present with us. And this object, of things hoped for, argues plainly, that
this Faith is not your Historical Faith, to believe simply that the Scripture
is the word of God: but the true, lively, and Saving Faith, which has not
only for its common object, the Scripture, but for its more proper and
peculiar object, Christ, and the Promises of God in him contained in the
Scriptures, which are those things hoped for,, here. Whereas your Historical
Faith, as that of the Papists (as both Vega and others affirm) looks only to
the common object, the Scriptures, but not specially on the Promises therein
contained. This (I say) is the proper work, and object that Saving Faith does
chiefly exercise it self upon. Faith is the substance of things hoped for.
Secondly, it is pragmaton elegkos, ou blepomenon, the evidence, or
Demonstration of things not seen: Which things not seen are also the proper
object of Saving Faith, whereof it is the evidence. And those are 2 Cor. 4.18.
See also 1 Cor. 2.9. and 1 Pet. 1.8.
eternal things in heaven, as the Apostle shows: The things which are not
seen, are eternal. So Romans 8.25. If we hope for that which we see not, then
do we with patience abide for it. But now your mere Historical Faith, which
believes in general, that the Scripture is the word of God, looks no farther,
then things that are seen. But for the Faith which is the evidence of things
not seen: is the evedence of it, therefore not so clear, because it is of
things not seen? Surely had you such an evidence of thos^ things not seen, as
Faith is, you would not go on thus blindly in speaking of divine things, which
(it appears) are Psalm. 10.5.
far above out of your sight. Is Faith the evidence of things not seen: and
therefore not of so clear evidence in regard of the Octject? Nay certainly,
being an evidence of things not seen, it argues the quick and piercing clear
eye of faith, whereby it so clearly sees things not seen, as it is a clear
evidence of them. As Chrysostom upon these words commenteth: poia lexis, says
he? What a speech or expression is this? elegkos, an evidence? Whereupon he
Says, That faith is a far clearer and surer evidence of things not seen,
then the eye is of a visible object before it. And you have here forgotten what
you writ but in the next page before, page 86.
That belief is firmer, then any knowledge can be. Which it seems you mean,
as the Papists do, who to elude certainty of faith, do say, That Faith is
certain, ratione objecti, in respect of the Object, the Scripture, but not
ratione Subjecti, of the Believer himself. Otherwise how do you say, here,
that Faiths evidence is not so clear as being of things not seen? But I
conceive the reason to be because you believe no further, then you see. So as
what things you do not see with your bodily eye, you have not any such clear
evidence of by your faith, as if they were present before your Eyes. Thus you
may see, (could you see) what all your Faith comes to. But that faith whereof
the Apostle there speaks, and elsewhere, has an eye, more piercing, then the
eye of an Eagle. For by this faith, as by a most clear Perspective, we so see
things afar off, eve^ in the highest heavens, as if they were present before
us. Thus the believing Saints in the Old Testament, by the eye of this same
Faith (illustrated by so many examples in the same Chapter) did Heb. 11.1^.
See the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them. v.
27.
By this ^aith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, for he
endured, as seeing him that is invisible. And by this Faith, Ioh. 8.56.
Abraham, though afar off, saw Christ's day, and rejoiced. As Act. 7.56.
Stephen at his stoning, saw Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God.
This you will Say, was with the eyes of his body miraculously. It Is true. But I
will Say again, Stephen with his bodily eyes at that time saw not Christ more
certainly, nor more clearly then a true believer by the eye of his faith sees
him standing at the right hand of God, as a mighty Savior, Advocate, Judge,
Protector, Avenger of his People, when so used as Stephen was, So as the faith
of all true believers being one and the Same, it fully agrees with that
Difinition of the Apostle, Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the
Evidence of things not seen: therefore it has an eye that sees those things
not seen more clearly, then I dare say your Lordships eye sees, when you look
upon the Kings Countenance Smiling upon you. For you think you see now clearly
the object before you: when indeed you see it not clearly, but through a false
glass of your imagination, as apprehending your chief happiness to consist
in that Object, the Kings favor, which may easily be overclowded. Whereas God
says Ier. 17.^.
Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord. For though he may flourish for a time, yet he
shall be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see when good comes.

Again, this Faith of yours (Say you) is not of such clear evidence in regard
of the Subject that sees, it is in enigmate, or dark speaking. We showed but
now, how this Historical Faith is different, according to the Subject, in
which it is, in the Reprobate, or in the Elect believer. For in the true
believer being comprehended under the Saving Faith, it is so much both the more
clear and infallible, in believing the Scripture to be the word of God, as
wherein all along he finds Christ 2 Cor. 1.20*
in whom all the Promises (wherewith as so many Sweet Roses, that Garden is set,
and strowed, or as so many Stars shining in that Firmament) are yea and Amen
to the glory of God the Father. And thus to every true believer the Scripture
is the sure word of God, and more especially sure to him in all the Promises of
it. Thus David's Faith tells him: Psalm. 19.7. and 93.5.
The Testimony of the Lord is sure. Thy Testimonies are very sure. Psalm.
All his Commandments are sure. So Esaias Esaias. 55.3.
The sure mercies of David. Thus the Apostles were sure: John 6.69. Act. 13.34.
We believe and are sure, etc. Now are we sure, etc. And Paul, Romans 4.16.
It is of Faith, by Grace, that the Promise might be sure to all the seed. And
Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19.
We have a most sure word of Prophecy. Thus the whole word of God, with the
Promises therein, are sure to a true believer, both as being of God, and
belonging to all the faithful. As the Apostle Says, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. But on the
other side, this belief, that the Scripture is the word of God, being in a
Reprobate, or wicked man, the stronger it is in a persuasion and conviction,
that it is Gods word, and so a word of truth, the greater terror it strikes
into him, when he considers of those fearful judgments, punishments, and
torments of hell therein denounced against all impenitent persons. As Act.
24.25.
Felix trembled, when he heard Paul reasoning of judgment to come. And Act.
26.28.
Agrippa said to Paul, en oligo, somewhat, or almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian: when Paul had said unto him, verse. 27.
Beleevest thou the Prophets? I know that thou beleevest. So that a wicked man
may be throwly convinced in his Conscience, that the Scripture is the word of
God, he may certainly be persuaded of it, and that hoes en horamati, as a thing
visibly before him, and he apprehends it as too true. But that place of the
Apostle, Scripture perverted by the Prelate* as page 134.
We see here di ainigmatos, as through a dark Saying, it is not to be applied
to this Faith that is in a wicked man. For the Apostle there speaks of true
believers. 1 Cor. 13.12
We (Says he) now do see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now
I know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known. So as there he
speaks of the estate of the godly here, comparatively to their estate of glory
hereafter: and that, concerning their knowledge and spiritual vision of God
here, and hereafter. Here we do with Moses see but Exodus 33.
Gods back parts, in comparison to that we shall see, when we shall see him
face to face: here we know him at the best but imperfectly: but then we shall
know even as we are known, in full perfection. And yet so great and glorious
is our knowledge of God in the State of Grace, that the Apostle says, 2 Cor.
3.18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord. So glorious is the Image of Christ, in every New Creature, or regenerate
man, had men but eyes to see it. But this by the way. On the other side again,
as some natural and moral men may have a certain evidence of an Historical
Faith thus far, that the Scripture is the word of God, and so he trembles at
it: So others again, and such as think themselves great Clerks and glorious
Priests may perhaps see but en skotomati, blindly in a brainsick miorim, or
giddiness, so as their head swimming with w^imses, the eyes of their
understanding being darkened, or rather blinded with the god of this world,
they imagine the world goes round with them, and while they so much dispute of
the Authority of the present Church, in clearing a man's understanding to
believe the Scripture to be the word of God, the conclusion is, that they can
bring never a good Evidence to prove, that themselves have any faith at all.

You go on, and Say, Blasphemy against God in his Providence.
Now God does not require a full demonstrative knowledge in us, that the
Scripture is his word: and therefore in his Providence has kindled in it no
light for that, but he requires our faith of it, and such a certain
demonstration, as may fit that. Job. 16.3.
When shall vain words have an end, as Job Speaks? Job. 19.3.
You have reproched the Scripture these 10 times, and therein blasphemed God,
and are not ashamed, as he Speaks in another Case. God does not require (Say
you) a full demonstrative knowledge in us, that the Scripture is his word. No?
Does he not? But he requires such a faith in us, which has in it a full
demonstration of knowledge. For such is Saving Faith, whereof we formerly
Spoke, it is a demonstration of things not seen, it is a plerophoria, a full
assurance. Now whereon is this faith grounded? Is it not grounded upon the
Scripture? And if this full demonstration of faith be grounded on the
Scripture: is there not such a full demonstrative knowledge in the Scripture?
For always the Foundation must have a full latitude, and depth, proportionable
to bear up the building, which is laid upon it. Faith then being a full
demonstration, and the Scripture being the foundation of it, the Scripture then
must have in it a full demonstrative knowledge: and if such a full
demonstrative knowledge be in the Scripture, God requires in us also such a
full demonstrative knowledge, as is suitable to that full demonstration of
Faith. As the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed. And our Savior joins knowledge and faith
together, saying, I^h. 10.38^
That ye may know and believe. And so the Apostle, speaking of believers,
says, 1 Timothy 4 3^
Which believe and know the truth. And that which in other places is attributed
to faith, is ( Ioh. 13.3) attributed to knowledge: This is life eternal, that
they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom ^hou have sent.
And the act of believing is typed out by an act of the eye in seeing, to show,
that believing is a seeing and knowing. As Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses lifted up
the Serpent in the wilderness: even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.
Where believing in Christ lifted up upon his Cross, has relation to those in
the wilderness, who being stung with the fiery Serpents, looked up upon the
brazen Serpent upon the Pole, which Moses by Gods appointment lifted up, and
looking upon it, they lived. There being then such an affinity, or rather
unity, or union between Faith and knowledge, Faith being a certain knowledge of
the thing believed, which is the Scripture, and faith being 1 Pet. 1.23.
begotten by the word of God, which is therefore called Iam. 1.18.
the word of Faith, both because it is the seed of Faith, and the ground wherein
it is rooted, and every seed having in it the nature of that which springs of
it: it necessarily follows, that there is in the Scripture a full
demonstrative knowledge, and consequently God requires in us such a full
demonstrative knowledge, as whereby we are fully assured, and know certainly,
that the Scripture is the very word of God. And this full demonstrative
knowledge is in true Faith, which apprehending and embracing Christ; the
believer by the same Faith does know assuredly, that that Scripture, by the
heareing whereof preached he came to believe, is the very word of God. And there
is such a necessity of this full demonstrative knowledge to be in every
believer, it is both de esse, of the be^ing of a believer, and also de been
esse, of his well-beeing. That it is of the being of a believer, we have
proved out of Scripture, because it is of the very being of Faith. And
secondly it is necessary for the well-beeing of a Christian. A true Christians
life is full of affliction, more then other men. For this he has the greatest
need of comfort. Now wherein has a Christian most solid comfort? Surely in the
Scriptures. David, a man of afflictions, can tell us this by his own
experience. Psalm. 119.49, 50.
Remember Lord (Says he) the word unto thy Servant, wherein thou have caused
me to hope. This is my Comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.
And v. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, o Lord, and have comforted my
self. And v. 54. Thy Statutes have been my Songs in the house of my
pilgrimage. Gods word is that which supports Faith in prayer to God in
affliction. As v. 76. Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my
comfort, according to thy word unto thy Servant. And v. 80. Let my heart be
sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed. And v. 92. Except thy Law had
been my delights, I should then have perished in my Affliction: And that
excellent Psalm, which Aug. so much admires (and not without cause) calling it
Magnificum Psalmum (it is his own word) is full of such meditations, and
consolations, grounded upon Gods word. And the Apostle also shows this, where
he says, Romans 15.4.
Wha^soever things are written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Now how
could a Christian in affliction comfort himself in the Scriptures, had he not
a full demonstrative knowledge by Faith, that the Scripture is Gods word, and
therefore all his promises therein are most true, and in Christ yea and Amen? I
say, a full demonstrative knowledge by Faith, which is 'elenkos* the
demonstration of things not seen, as before. Not that this full demonstrative
knowl^dge in ^aith has in it the full perfection of Degrees, which is not
attained in this life: but it is such a full demonstrative knowledge, such a
sure trust and confidence in God according to his word; such a hope in his
Promises in Christ, that although his ^aith be sometimes assaulted with
temptations of fears, and doubtings arising either from infirmities and
corruptions within, or from Satan's suggestions without, yet the believer sticks
closse, and will not let go his hold, but as Job says, Job. 13.15.
though God kill him, yet will he trust in him.

Then then being so, your assertion is very bold and blasphemous, Blasphemy.
in saying, God in his Providence has kindled in the Scripture no light for
that, namely full demonstrative knowledge: whereof we have made sufficient
demonstration to the contrary. And your own next words will confute you; for
you say, The Prel^te contradicts himself, not understanding whereof he
^ffirmeth.
He requires our faith of it, and such a certain demonstration, as may fit
that. Does he so? And what is that faith: but wherein there is such a certain
and demonstrative knowledge, as gives a man full assurance, that the Scripture
is the word of God? And this is that faith, which God especially r^quireth in
hi^ people, as without which they cannot Romans 10.10.
believe unto righteousness, and confess unto Salvation. But this is not that
faith, with its certain demonstration, which you mean. For (as you add) yours
is such a faith, as is begotten of Reason and ordinary Grace (which is ever the
burden of your Song) where the soul is morally prepared by the Tradition of
the Church. Of which enough before. Neither can your moral faith probably
persuaded by your Tradition, ever become to be elegkos, a demonstrative
assurance, that Scripture is Gods word: So as hereby you overthrow both the
being and well-beeing of a Christian, and leave him stripped of all means and
hope of Salvation and consolation by the Scripture.

L. p. 88. Hooker gives a very sensible Demonstration: It is not the word of
God, which does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is his
word. For if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony to it, yet still the
Scripture would require another to give credit unto it. So that unless beside
the Scripture there were some thing that might assure, etc. And this he
acknowledges (says Buerly) is the Authority of Gods Church. Certainly Hooker
gives a true and sensible Demonstration.

P. First, for your Author here alleged, he was (we all know) not only a
Creature, but a Champion for your Hierarchy and Ceremonies. And besides that,
his Book was guelt in some things, before it could have its passeport to
travail abroad. However (as you say of Others, so I of him) he was but a
private man. And if you take his words to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, you may, seeing the Jesuit does so approve of it, as also your self
does. Well, let Hookers words be so, as you allege them: yet give me leave to
detect in them a mixture of some absurdity, and some impiety together. As in
these words, It is not the word, which does, or possibly can assure us, that we
do well to think it is his word. And so in that sense (which is the only
sense a sensible man, and sound Christian can make) it is true, that the
Scripture neither does, nor possibly can assure us, that we do well to think
only it is his word. For as the Scripture cannot lie, so it cannot assure us,
that we do well, when we come short of our duty, as in thinking, (which is but
opinion) when we should believe, which is Faith. For the Scripture requires a
firm Faith in us, and approves not of thinking, as sufficient.

But now for his sensible Demonstration, which is this: That if any one book of
Scripture did give testimony to all: yet still the Scripture would require
another to give testimony to it; and so we can never come to assurance this
way: I answer, The Scripture is a complete body in it self, and every part of
it an uniforme, and homogeneall member, to the making up of this body. So as
the Scripture is to be taken first in the whole lump, or body, as bearing full
witness to it self: and every part or Book of Scripture has a witness in it
self, and for it self, and for the rest too, there being such a sweet and
full harmony in the whole, and all the parts, Gods Spirit speaking and
breathing in it (as the Animal Spirits in man's body, moving the whole and
every part) and showing, that it is Gods word. And we must never in this notion
fever the Spirit of God from the Scripture, his own word, which it fills in
every part, as the lifeblood does the veins. So as there is not a Book of
Scripture, wherein the Majesty of GOD, and his Wisdom, and Goodness, and
Righteousness, and Holiness, do not in some degree more or less shine
forth. And Mr Hooker might as well have reasoned thus: It is not the whole
frame of man's body, that can persuade us, that we do well to think, that it
is a man's body; for though one member by its motion does bear witness to the
rest, that they are parts of man's body, yet still that member wants other
members to bear witness unto it, that it is a part of man's body. As if every
particular member of man's body by its inherent proper motion, were not a
sufficient witness, not only to all the rest of the body, that it is a living
and true organicall body of man: but also to it self, that it is a true living
member of this body. Or as thus: It is not the whole frame of heaven and earth,
that can assure us, that we do well to think, that God made all the world:
for if any one Creature should give testimony to all the rest, yet still that
Creature would require another Creature to give testimony to it, that it is one
of Gods Creatures: and so we should never come to any pawse, to rest our
assurance this way, that God created the whole world heaven and earth, and all
the Creatures therein. Now what is there besides the Creature, that can assure
us of this? What? The Authority of men, or the Tradition of the whole world?
No: for Heb. 11.3.
By Faith we come to understand, that the worlds were framed by the word of
God, so that things which are seen, were made of things which did not appear.
Now whereupon is this Faith grounded? Surely on the word of God, and confirmed
abundantly by the whole frame of heaven and earth, and all the Creatures
therein, not one of them, but having a stamp of the Creator upon it, to assure
us, that it is his Creature. And how do we come to be assured that this word
of God is contained in the Scripture? By the Authority of the present Church?
Does Hooker Say so? Had you Said, The Ancient Church: as the Jews, in
witnessing for the Old Testament: and the Ancient Apostolic Church, in
witnessing for the New: you had said Something. As also, if you had put the
Ministry of the Word, for the Authority of your present Church. For (as we said
before) the Ministry of the Word is Gods own voice, which commends unto us the
Scripture, as the word of God. This is Gods own ordinary means to bring men
to Faith, and not the Authority and Tradition of I wot not what present Church.

And now against Mr Hookers sensible Demonstration, as you call it: I will
oppose another Demonstration, which is not only sensible, but most true, as
proving, that the testimony of Scripture to be the word of God, is in the
Scripture it self. First, Paul in the Epistle to the Romans 3.2.
Romans, witnesses, that unto the Jews, or Israeliets under the Old
Testament, were committed the Oracles of God: those Oracles were contained in
all the several Books of the Old Testament, which the Jews kept entire, and
inviolate, without the mixture of Profane Books. And of this Scripture Paul
speaks, and testifies saying, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration from God. And Christ himself gives
testimony of the Old Testament, saying to the Jews, Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. And what those Scriptures were, the Jews knew well
enough, for they were deposited with them, and they kept them as their chiefest
treasure. And 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
Peter also gives testimony to the Old Testament, saying of it, that Holy men
of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; speaking of the Scripture
expressly in that place, in the former verse. And, Act. 10.43.
To Him give all the Prophets witness. Thus the New Testament gives testimony
to the Old, that it is the word of God. And I hope you will not except against
this testimony as insufficient. Again, the New Testament gives witness to it
self, that it is the word of God. Peter witnesses of Paul's Epistles, that
Paul wrote them according to the wisdom given unto him; that is, the Holy
Ghost. And Christ said to Peter, Luk 22.32
I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. Yea He Ioh. 16.13.
sent the Holy Ghost to all his Apostles, that should lead them into all truth*
Ergo what they preached and wrote, was the Truth and word of God. And Christ
made all his Apostles his witnesses, who in all their writings beare-witnesse
of him, both of 1 Ioh. 1.3.
what they saw and heard; and so their record left in writing is true. See Luke
1.2. 1 John 1.3. 3 John 12. And none writ the New Testament, but either
Evangelists, or Apostles, all endued with the Holy Ghost. And the Wisdom of
Christ reserved his beloved Disciple John as the last surviver of all the rest,
to write the Book of the Revelation, and to conclude, as the New Testament, so
the whole Bible with that Charge. Rev. 22.18
If any man add to this Book, or take away from it, etc. as showing, that the
whole and entire Scripture was now compiled, and consummate. I might be copious
in this point* But I will sum, up all this: The New Testament gives testimony
to the Old that it is the word of God* also to it self, one Book to another,
one Apostle to another (who were all witnesses of Christ) Christ and the Holy
Ghost to all the Apostles, all their writings being guided by the Spirit of
Truth, and giving joint witness unto Christ, and to the truth of the Gospel.
Yea and the several parts bear witness to themselves. As 1 Cor. 14.37. If any
man think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge, that
the things that I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord. And 1 Pet.
5.12. I have written brieflly, exhorting and testifying, that this is the true
Grace of God, wherein ye stand. And Joh. 20.31. These things are written, that
ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing
ye might have life through his Name. So 1 John 1.3, 4. 2 John 5. 3 John 12. And
we also ^eare record, and ye know that our record is true.

And as the New Testament does every where bear witness both to the Old, and
to it self, both in the whole, and every part, even by the Spirit of God, that
speaks and breathes in the whole and every part: So the Old Testament, in like
manner bears witness both to it self, and to the New Testament, and that by
many Types and Prophecies, all which are fulfilled in the New. So as these two
Testaments are as Ezechiels Wheels one within another, the New Testament being
the Old revealed, and the Old the New veiled. Or they are like the two
Cherubims, both looking toward the Mercy-Seat, which is Christ, the Sum of
them both* the Old looking upon him as he was promised and to come; the New, as
he is now exhibited, and come. Thus we have here* a full, true, and evident
Demonstration, that the whole Scripture gives testimony to it self, that it is
the word of God. And yet you Say* page 88*
That Truth it self cannot say, that Scripture it self can do it. But you
add.

L. ibid. That Scripture cannot bear witness to it self, nor any one part of
it, to another, it is grounded upon Nature: which admits of no created thing to
bear witness to it self: and is acknowledged by our Savior, Io^. 5.31*
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true, that is, is not of
force to be reasonably accepted for truth.

P. Though the Scripture, The Prel^t^s Ground (...) false, if appl^^^ to
S^ripture.
as it is considered in the written Letter, be a Creature, yet the matter of
it, the Light, the Truth, the Authority and Evidence of it is merely Divine, as
wherein God has imprinted and expressed his Divine Nature, Counsel, and Will.
So as (as is said before) we must never abstract the Scripture from that Spirit
of God, which is always in it, and with it, as a clear and sufficient
witness of it, and as the very life and Soul of it. Whereas you, with the
Papists, take the Scripture for no other, but as a bare Letter, or bark of a
Tree, or dead Corpse, without any Divine Spirit in it. But you aledge Christ,
Saying of himself, If I bear witness of my self, etc. You must know, that
Christ here speaks, as the Jews took him for no other* as a mere Man. But
take him as Christ, God-man in one Person, and is he not a'ut^pistos, worthy of
himself to be believed? And what Says he, when the Pharisees objected unto
him, Ioh. 8.13, 14.
Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true? Though I bear
record of my self, yet my record is true, Says he. For is not Gods record
true? And again, v. 17. It is written in your Law, that the testim^ny of two
men is true. I am one that bear witness of my self: and the Father that sent
me, bears witness of me. So may the Scripture say, Though I bear record of
my self, yet my record is true: for the Father speaks in me, and Christ
speaks in me, and the Holy Ghost speaks in me, and all these jointly bear
witness in me, with me, and to me, that I am the word of God. And in the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall every word be established. And hereunto might I
add the many Divine and Admirable works and effects, which the word of God
produces, all which bear witness abundantly, that the Scripture is the word
of God. Why, what works, what effects does it produce? Yea what not? Psalm. 19.
It enlightneth the eyes: Ps. 119.93.
it quickens dead Souls: 2 Cor. 10.
it is that great Engine of battery, that subdueth the world unto Christ. Heb.
4.12.
It is the sharp two-edged sword, lively and mighty in operation, etc. Romans 1.
it is the mighty power of God to Salvation: 2 Cor. 2.15.
it is to all men the sweet savor of God, the savor either of life, unto
life, or of death unto death. Lo my Lord, what think you now of this Word? Is
it trow ^ou only a dead letter, being of such a Divine and Spirit-full
efficacy, as no word of man is, or can be? And here might I bring many
negative proofs, to show it cannot be the Word of Man. But let this suffice. I
will pass on.

L. p. 89. No man can set a better State of the Question, then Hooker does, his
words are these: The Scripture is the ground of our belief: the Authority of
man (that is the name he gives to Tradition) is the Key, which opens the door
of entrance into the Knowledge of the Scripture.

P. We have already answered sufficiently, that the Scripture is both the
Garden wherein all the pleasant Flowers, and wholesome Fruits of Paradise are
planted, and grow; which are of that beauty, fragancie, sweetness, and relish,
as he that beholds them, smells to them, and tastes of them, may easily discern
they are not of a terrene or earthly nature ( Non vox hominem son^t) and it
self is the Key that lets in those that will, to taste of her Fruits: which I
say, when they once taste, they will Say, This is none other, but the Garden and
Paradise of God, even the Word of God. This is that Luke 11.52.
Key of knowledge, for the taking away whereof, Christ denounces a Woe to the
Pharisees. And that by this Key is not meant Tradition, is plain, seeing the
Pharisees did not take away Tradition, but they exalted it so far, as thereby
they made the Word of God of none effect. Is this the Tradition, that you call
the Authority of Man, and so highly commend, which the Pharisees used for no
other Key, but as a false Key, or picklocke to rob the Scripture of their
Divine Authority. But if you understand by Tradition here the Delivery of the
Scripture from hand to hand to be kept as a Depositum by the Church of God:
thus the Scripture is a rich Cabinet full of precious Jewels, together with the
Key, or Spring-lock so united unto it, as it is a part of the Cabinet, and so
deposited with the Church of God, as by the Ministry and preaching of the Word
the Key is turned, and the Cabinet unlocked, the Key being no other, but of
Gods own making and appointing; and so the Cabinet thus opened, and man
looking into it, his eyes being also opened by the same Key, there he finds
that goodly Mat. 12.44.46.
Pearl of the Kingdom, and that rich Treasure, which to purchase, he goes and
sells all that he has.

But suppose now for all this we should either grant your Lordship such a Key,
as Prelaticall Authority, whereby you assume a power of opening an entrance to
men to read the Scriptures: when the Key is once in your hand, what if you
should prove so closse fisted, and so churlish a Keeper, as not to suffer them
to come to read the Scriptures, as you have done in not suffering them to hear
them preached on the Lods days at least in the After-noones? As also, in so
keeping fast under Lock and Key those precious Jewels of the Doctrines of Gods
Grace (as aforesaid) as the Ministers themselves may not come at them, once to
touch them? So as it might prove a dangerous thing, and too suspicious, if you
had such a Key of Authority, or the Authority of such a Key put into your hand,
men should rather be shut out from the Scriptures, then have the entrance open
to go freely to them, when they will. But if you will needs perforce wrest
this Key, as the Preaching of Gods word, out of the hands, or from between the
teeth of Godly Ministers* as you have done: we have no remedy, but to complain
to the Lord of the Vineyard, and pray him to vindicate his Key out of such
Hucksters hands, and to force you to give up your usurped false Keys.

L. p. 91. Could the Pope and his Clergy put this home upon the w^^ld (as they
are gone far in it) that the Tradition of the Present Church is Divine and
Infallible: how might they and would they then Lord it over the Faith of
Christendom, contrary to S. Peter's Rule; whose Successors certainly in this
they are not.

P. Thus you confess, there is, or may be a Lording of the Clergy over the
Faith of Christendom, or Christians, contrary to S. Peter's Rule. But you
restrain this to Romes usurped Infallibility, as if without this she could not
Lord it over Christendom. How comes your Lordship then with your Hierarchy to
Lord it over the Souls and Consciences of Gods people, even over all England,
that other world? You disclaim your Church Authority, and Tradition here to be
Divine and Infallible. By what Authority then do you Lord it over all England?
Certainly Divine Authority you have none for it. And as you Say of Rome, so I
do to you: Certainly you are no successors of the Apostles in this; as both
has been, and shall be more showed. And because you cite here that place of
Peter: what think you of it? Does it not condemn all kind of Lordship over Gods
heritage? As Lordship over men's Consciences in captivating them to humane
Ordinances, as Ceremonies in Gods worship? As Lordship over Ministers,
forbidding them to Preach Gods word, both how far, and when you please? As
Lordship over the very Commandments of God, in dispensing with them, as in the
4 th and 5 th Commandment? Or Lordship over men's Souls, as touching their
belief, and reading of Scriptures, as the word of God; all which must depend
upon a necessity of your present Church Authority, as without which you tell
them it is not fit, that they should either read the Scriptures, or believe
them to be the word of God? Now is Rome so far g^n in putting home her
Infallibility* as thereby to Lord it over the greatest part of Christendom?
Then how far are you gone in Lording it over the Souls and Consciences of
all the People in England, and Ministers too, in all these particulars
formentioned? But to proceed.

L. p 93. The Lawfully sent Pastors, and Doctors of the Church in all Ages,
have had, and shall have continual assistance, but not infalli^le, at least
not Divine and Infallible.

P. Such therefore as are not Lawful Pastors and Teachers, have not continual
Assistance, as all Prelates and Priests, as you call yourselves. But for
Lawful Pastors, if they have continual assistance, whence have they it, but
from Christ? And how then is it not ^ivine? And if Divine, how, not Infallible?
The assistance certainly, for so much as it is, and in those things wherein it
is, is no less Infallible, then Divine. For that which is Divine, is
Infallible, as was touched before. But because this Assistance Divine is given
to every man but in part (for 1 Cor. 13.
we know in part, and we prophecy in part) and to some in one kind, to some in
another, both to whom, and when, and how much, and to what special purpose, as
it seems good to the Divine wisdom, but to all 1 Cor. 12.7*
to profit withal, and 2 Cor. 10.8* and 13.10.
for edification, as the Apostle speaks: therefore it comes to pass, that
even good men, and good Pastors lawfully called, may sometimes run into some
errors, both by reason of humane frailties and infirmities, and when they
pass the bounds of their peculiar karismata, or Ministerial Graces bestowed
upon in this or that kind, or measure, and do not keep closse to the Rule,
Gods word: Having therefore gifts (says the Apostle) differing according to
the Grace that is given unto us, whether Prophecy, Let us Prophecy according
to the proportion of Faith: or he that teaches, on teaching: or he that
exhorts, on Exhortation. And yet when we have done all that we can, we come
far short of what we should do. Yet all Gods Elect, both Pastors and People,
have Christ's promise so far fullfilled in them, and made good unto them, by
continual Divine, and Infallible Assistance, of his Grace, and Spirit dwelling
in them, that they are preserved from all those Errors, which might seduce
them from Christ, as himsefe Says, Math. 24.24.

L. p. 95. When Command is for Preaching, the Restraint is added, Go, Says
Christ, and teach all Nations. But you may not Preach all things, what you
please, but all things, which I have commanded you. The publication is yours,
the Doctrine is mine.

P. How then dare your Lordship be an Instrument of Restraining and Prohibiting
any Doctrine of CHRIST, The Prelate self-condemned.
which he has in his Word commanded to be Preached, and Published to his
People? How will you answer this bebefore that Judge? And why do you suborne
your Arminian Faction to preach their Heresies out of your d^psucoi, double
minded Articles, while you restrain Gods Ministers from preaching the Truth,
and Suspend them for so doing?

L. p. 98. Though Tradition and Scripture do mutually, yet they do not
equally confirm the Authority either of other. For The Prelate bel^s the
Scripture to credit his false Tradition.
Scripture does infa^libly confirm the Authority of Church Traditions truly so
called: but Tradition does but morally and probably confirm the Authority of
the Scripture.

P. Then Surely your Church-Traditions make the Scripture but a poor
requital, when for an infallible confirmation of them, Scripture little
beholden to the Prelate for his Tradition.
they return a Confirmation only moral and probable. Can they not return
such as they receive, at least in some degree? But what be those Traditions of
the Church truly so called? That inducing Tradition, which of necessity must
lead men to believe the Scriptures to be the word of God? But show us where
has the Scripture given you any such Authority, much less infallibly
confirmed it? Or how is this a Tradition truly so called? Because you call it
so? But The Prelate caught in his own Delemna, or net.
if Scripture have not sufficient Light to prove themselves to be Gods word:
what Light find you there infallibly to confirm the Authority of your
Tradition? And if your Church Tradition do not confirm the Authority of
Scripture infallibly: how then? Ergo fallibly, and deceitfully. But probably,
you Say. But probability cannot confirm truth. This is a mere Solecisme of
yours, A Solecisme of the Prelates.
and any common Aristotelian would hiss it out of the Philosophy Schools. And
in a Law-Case, a Probable Testimony is not Legal, it is no Testimony. And will
you Say then, that the Scripture has confirmed to your present Church such an
Authority infallibly, to be a confirming Testimony of the Authority of
Scripture, which is insufficient and illegal? How much the nearer is Scripture
Authority for such a Testimony? Or your probable testimony does confirm
Scripture-Authority to be probable. That Is all; and that is nothing, saving that
hereby you make the Scripture to be of no Authority at all. For first you Say,
The Scripture has no testimony of its Authority, sufficient in it self:
Secondly, that it must first have testimony from the Authority of the present
Church: and thirdly, that this testimony is but probable, not infallible.
Therefore necessarily it follows, that it is but at the most probable, if the
Scripture have any Authority at all. And this is that Goates-haire, wherewith
you have full stuffed almost 30 of your Folio-leaves, as before we have noted.
And yet the thread of that 16 th Section is not yet cut off, or spun out.

L. p. 100. The Jesuit in the Church of Rome, and the precise party in the
Reformed Churches agree in this: That the Sermons and Preachings by word of
mouth, of the Lawfully sent Pastors, and Doctors of the Church, are able to
breed in us Divine and Infallible Faith. Nay, are the very word of God. So A.
C. expressly. And no less then so have some accounted of their own Factious
words (to Say no more) then as the word of God. (in the margent at this mark)
For the freeing of Factious and Silenced Ministers is termed The restoring of
Gods word to its Liberty. In the Godly Author of the Late News from Ipswitch.
p. 5.

P. That the Sermons and Preachings by word of mouth of the Lawfully sent
Pastors and Doctors of the Church, are able to breed in men Divine and
Infallible Faith; being according to the Rule and Evidence of Scripture, as
true Preaching is: what good Christian makes a doubt, though you deride it? I
pray you, (you that are the great Rabbi: and Champion of the present Church of
England) What Say you of the Apostles words? How shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they
Preach except they be Sent? So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. But we shall hear your judgment by and by. As for A. C. (with
whom you yoke the precise party in the same sentence) surely were he no
Jesuit, nor illegitimate Priest, but either a Sound Christian, or a Lawfully
sent Pastor and Doctor of the Church of Christ, the words rightly meant, and
understood, are most true. I remember I have read a Story of a Grecian State, I
take it of Athens, where when a vicious Senator in Court on a time gave very
good Counsel for the Commonweal they approved of the Counsel, but would not
have it Registered in his name, A. Gelius. Noct. At^icarum.
but caused an honest man to utter the same form of words in Court, and so
under his name it was recorded. So I may here, Let a good Christian, or (if you
will) one of the precise party you mention, utter these words (and not A. C.)
and then the sense will be good and true. And by your own words we shall convince
you of folly by and by. Now for the precise party in the Reformed Churches, do
you not mean those, who are most reformed in their life and conversation, and
most refined from the dross and dregs of all Deformed Churches Superstitions
and Idolatries in the pretended worship of God, and from all gross errors in
Faith and Doctrine? Surely those you must and do mean, as whom you most deadly
hate, and therefore in your wretched malice do couple them with A. C. Of which
precise party Jesus Christ is the head, that pure and precise Nazarite, and
Seperatist from all sin and error, with all the Apostles, Prophets, and
Martyrs. And what do they say? No less (say you) then A.C And what faith A.C.?
Expressly, that Sermons, etc. (as before) are the express word of God. And how
prove you that this precise party says no less? Nay you say more, that they
account their own Factious words no less (to say no more) then as the word of
God. To Say no more? Nay surely, you have said enough, if it be true. But if
not true, a great deal too much. Well, true, or not true, it is enough you Say
it; and so you make this precise party to be ten times worse, then the Jesuit.
And so you would have it. For say you, the Jesutie says, Sermons are the very
word of God: but the Precise, That their own factious words are. What? The word
of God. No, but, As the word of God. Why, do you call them factious words,
because they are As the word of God? Do you not know that true Preachers words
should be 1 Pet. 4.11.
hoes log^^ ^eou; as the Oracles, or word of God, as Peter speaks? such words
as become T^t. 2* 1.
Sound Doctrine? v. 8.
Sound Speech, that cannot be condemned (but unjustly, by such as do
heterodidaskalein, teach strange Doctrines, and agree not to wholesome words)
keeping the H^pot^posin Tit 1.13.
Form of Sound words. But you charge here the precise party with factious
words. How prove you that? For Si sat est accusasse, quis innocens erit? If
your single Accusation be sufficient, who shall be Innocent? But you bring your
proof e Scriptis, good evidence sure. What Is that? For the freeing of factious
and Silenced Ministers, is termed, The restoring of Gods word to its Liberty
But where do you find these factious words? In the Godly Author of the late
News from Ipswich. Well then, here be 2 things obserbable: 1. The Matter: 2.
the Author. 1. The Matter charged, The freeing of factious and Silenced
Ministers, is termed, The restoring of Gods word to its Liberty. And who are
these factious and Silenced Ministers? Namely a matter of about an hundred
godly and Conscientious Ministers in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent, Surrey,
and other Sh^res, who were in one Summer, and the most in the Circuit of one
Visitation, some silenced, some suspended, some also excommunicated, from
Church and Chimney (ab Aris ac Focis, aqua and igni) and with their Wives and
Children exposed to beggary, and all calamity? Wherefore? They were factious.
Wherein? They would not ob^y and conform to the Orders of their Ordinary. What
Orders? For the reading in their several Congregations the Book for Sports on
the Lords days: For the setting up of Altars in their Chancels: For the
causing of their People (never accustomed to it before) to come up to the
Altar, and there receive the Communion, or the Lords Supper on their knees. For
these, and the like, which they refused to do, they are doomed Factious. But
the Ministers aledged, these were new Impositions praeter praescriptum Legis,
besides the prescript Law or Statute, so as their obedience should have
incurred a Praemunire. No matter for that. They are a sort of factious fellows,
and ringleaders of Puritan-people (as you apologized in the Star Chamber) and
so being once silenced, it is too late to talk. Yet these men were all
Conformists to the Discipline by Law established, and lived peaceably. How then
were they Factious? Why, surely they would not observe Orders. They would
(notwithstanding an Order to the Contrary) preach twice every Lords day: They
would open the Catechisme-points, and not content themselves with the bare
words of Question and Answer, as it is in the Book: they would hold the
people so long with their preaching in the Afternoons, that they had no time
left to go to their Laudable Sports* nor could the people enjoy their
pleasures with a quiet Conscience, the Ministers would so trouble them with
pressing the Sanctification of the Sabbath according to the 4th Commandment,
and the like. Well then, diligent Preachers they were: and they preached the
word of God by expounding and applying it, which we shall hear you by and by
to commend, if we may believe your words, when we see your deeds contrary. So
as then, in Norfolk, and Suffolk, and Essex, while these godly and painful
Ministers preached the word of God, it did as the Apostle says, 2 These. 3.1.
trekein, run, or diarrusai, flow forth like the Ezekiel. 47.12.
waters in the Sanctuary. When Paul was prisoner at Rome, and yet had liberty
to preach the word, (for in those days, A French Proverb.
Les Diables estroyent encores en Leur Donat: the Devil was but a Grammar
Scholar, and had not learned in Machiavels School to be one of Antichrists
Statesmen, to shut Ministers up in the Inquisition-house, that they shall never
tell Tales more in the Pulpit) he Said, 2 Timothy 2.9*
For the which I am a Prisoner in bonds, but the word of God is not bound. So
as while Gods Ministers, are not restrained from preaching the word of God, but
that they freely preach it without impeachment, it may be truly said, The word
of God is not bound. But on the contrary, when Godly and painful Ministers are
silenced, then it may alike truly be said, The word of God is bound. I will
recollect all, and conclude with a Syllogism:

If the free Preaching of Gods word be the liberty of it, and the silencing of
Gods faithful Ministers be a binding of Gods word: then the freeing of such
silenced Ministers, is the restoring of Gods word to its libetty: But the free
Preaching of Gods word is the liberty of it; and the silencing of Gods
faithful Ministers. Therefore the freeing of silenced Ministers is the
restoring of Gods word to its liberty.
The consequence of the Antecedent cannot be denied: and the Minor is the
Apostles in that place forealedged, 2 Timothy 2.9.
so as here is nothing left for you to deny, but the Conclusion. And that is
enough for you. Yet might those Ministers have but eq^all Law, and liberty to
plead their Cause against you, they would easily purge themselves from such an
aspersion of being Factious, when some of your party would prove to be deep
enough plunged at least in a Praemunire (to say no more) were not the Laws
asleep, and (in this case) in as much bondage, as the Gospel. I pass from the
matter of your Ipswich News, to the Author. And it would be News, to tell us
truly, who that might be. But all the tidings you can tell us of him, is by
certain marks to describe him unto us. And those are three* 1. Is H.B. which
(in your Book set out concerning those three foresaid bitter men, The Prelates
3 marks of his imagined Author of Ipswich News.
and which you read in the Star Chamber, before all the Court at their
Censure) you set in the margent over against those passages which you cite out
of Ipswich News. This is one of your marks; although (as I said before, and as
I have it by very credible intelligence) he was not the Author of it, and
therefore you take, and have set your first mark amiss, for H. B. it was not.
And yet this mark falsely set, became the occasion of the seting on of the
second mark; and that was an Eare-marke, and that upon both the Ears for
failing; and that closse to the head, which escaped scarce a hayres breadth,
and this upon the Pillory, that some thousands of beholders might be witnesses
of it. The third mark I find here in your margent, in this form, a Crucifix I
cannot call it: but it is next unto it, a Cross it is, and very like to
Christ's Cross, and as like to that Pillory, wherein H. B. stood, as can be; A
fit mark therefore for him, whom you had so marked before. So as, if any inquire
of this Author, who it should be, your Book can shape him a ready answer, Ecce
signum* Lo here a sign of that Pillory on which he suffered. In the last
place, you call him here in scorn, and through the nose (as Tertullian speaks
in another case of an Heretic) the Godly Author of the late News from
Ipswich, and all this he may do by Authority, that sits in Cathedr^ derisorum,
in the scorners chair, making a mock of all true Religion, Godliness, and
honesty. And thus you cease not still to persecute the poor Man every kind of
way here, Heb. 11.36*
by ^ruell mocking, as the Apostle speaks. But he but drinks of the same Mar.
10.34* Mat. 27.31.
Cup which his Lord and Master drunk of before him. And all these things you
load Christ's Servant withal, shall but make his crown the more glorious. For I
hear, he indures that his perpetual closse Imprisonment, and Banishment, from
Wife, Children, Friends, Country, all; with as great a continued magnanimity,
as he did his standing and suffering on the Pillory.

L. ibid. Prelates words and deeds agre^ not.
I ever took Sermons (and so do still) to be most necessary expositions and
applications of holy Scripture, and a great ordinary means of Saving
knowledge. But I cannot think them, or the preachers of them divinely
infallible. The Ancient Fathers of the Church preached far beyond any of
these of either Faction: and yet no one of them durst think himself
infallible, much less, that whatsoever he preached, was the word of God. And
it may be observed too, that no men are more apt to say, that all the Fathers
were but men, and might err, then they that think their own preachings are
infallible.

P. Here you acknowledge Sermons to be necessary expositions, and applications
of holy Scripture, and a great ordinary means of saving knowledge. Do you so?
Have you indeed ever taken them to be so? And so still indeed? What still?
What, all this while, that you have been, and are a most notorious persecuter
of, and rooter out of godly Preachers, whom your late Brother White in Scorn
(in his Book of the Sabbath, or rather against the Sabbath) calls Sermonders?
And is there a generation, or profession of men above ground, whom you hate,
more then these? If you ever took Sermons to be such; why do you continually
take the Preachers themselves in your nets, and so devour them? Are Sermons
necessary expositions, and applications of Scripture, and that by your own
confession? Then the greater your condemnation, that take away this Key of
Knowledge. And that they be a great means of Saving knowledge: Then why do you
not only suffer the people to Hos. 4.6*
perish for want of them, but chase away good Pastors from them? Thus are you
not guilty of the blood of so many thousand Souls, and have pronounced the
sentence of condemnation against your self with your own mouth? And thus does
not the nakedness of your notorious and shameless hypocrisy discover it
self to all the world, while you profess in words one thing, and in your
deeds practice the contrary? But you give the reason your self* because you
take Sermons to be such, as you say, therefore you persecute the Preachers of
them. Neither yet come you full home to the truth, Prelate a notorious
persecut^r of the true preaching of Gods word.
in giving Sermons their due, for all your sugared words; Sermons, I mean, the
plain, powerful, and sound preaching of Gods word, by explication, and
application. You say, they are great means of sound knowledge. You do not say
so of Sermons, as of your external worship, The GREAT WITNESS: but, a great
means, not The great means, nor the GREAT MEANS put in Capital Letters:
Romans 1.16.
much less do you say, as the Apostle, That preaching is the power of God
unto Salvation, to every one that believes. Or as, 1 Cor* 1.18. The preaching
of the cross is to them that perish foolishness: but to us that are saved, it
is the power of God. Or, 1 Cor. 1.24.
To them that are called, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom
of God. And yet with you it is but a great means. And well too, that you will
vouchsafe to give it so good a word. But it is such a great means, as there is
none other ordinary means of saving knowledge whatsoever to be compared with
it.

But you cannot think Sermons divinely infallible. I think not such Sermons
as you make. But are not those Sermons, which being a true explication and
application of the the word of God, the Scripture, do convert souls to God,
do beget faith in the hearers, and make of them new Creatures divinely
infallible; can such Sermons be otherwise, then divinely infallible? I do not
mean your Court Sermons. And can that preaching which is a great means (as
you confess) of saving knowledge, but be divinely infallible? Can that, which
brings men to salvation, deceive men? I speak still of true preaching.

But you put Sermons (which you say are expositions, and application of
Scripture, and a great means of saving knowledge) and preachers together, whom
you do not think to be infallible, There is some difference, by your leave.
For the Sermon may ^e divinely infallible, saving the hearers souls, and yet
the preacher himself be deceived, and put by his purpose in preaching of it.
For instance: I remember Augustine tells how on a time preaching upon a text,
he did, besides his purpose and intention extravagate from his text, and fell
upon the Manichean Heresy, which was nothing to his text, in which extravagant
discourse, he notwithstanding, according to his dexterity, ^oundly confuted
that Heresy: Well, after the Sermon a Manichean that there had heard him, came
to Augustine, and told him, that his Sermon had much wrought upon him, and
convinced him of his error, desiring him further to instruct him in the true
Faith: Hereat Augustine fell into an admiration, saying to the man, give glory
to God, and never thank me for it: for I never intended, when I came into the
Pulpit at that time, so much as to touch upon that point. But now I see* Gods
merciful hand led me out of my intended course, that I should, going out of
mine own way, bring thee into the right way. Thus we see the Sermon may be
divinely infallible, when yet the Preacher himself was deceived. Again, the
Preacher being a man is subject to error, when yet his Sermon is infallible,
being divine, that is, according to Gods word, the Scripture, and his life
through infirmity may have many errors, when yet his doctrine is upright and
sound, being regulated by Gods word, and Spirit, which is not wanting to his
faithful Servants, in his own Ordinace.

But (say you) the ancient Fathers of the Church preached beyond any of these,
of either Faction: and yet no one of them durst think himself infallible,
much less, that whatsoever he preached was the word of God. Here first you
show still your teeth, and utter your extreme malice against Christ, in calling
his faithful servants, the Ministers of his word, a Faction; and such a
Faction, as you yoke with that of the Jesuits. Certainly if godly Ministers
(such as you place, in the precise party of the reformed Church) be a Faction,
it is under and with their King and Captain Christ, fighting, and
confederating, against all Antichristian adversaries, the disguised enemies of
Christ, and of his word, and true Church, and of all his faithful Ministers,
and people, that do sincerely profess his Name. Which your malice being so
Diabolical, The Prelates Diabolical malice against the true Ministers of
Christ.
the Lord reprove you for it, and reward you according both to your Jude. Ier.
15.19. Esaias. 5.20.
words and deeds, who do thus confound, the precious with the vile, the good
with the evil, light with darkness, Christ with Belial, true Christians with
Antichristians. Certainly there is a woe belongs to you for this. We do utterly
reject all Jesuits and Antichristians, as who neither do, nor dare, nor can
preach Gods word truly, to the begeting of Saving Faith, and Saving Knowledge.
For then they must preach against the Popes Kingdom, and his cursed doctrines,
which in the Council of Trent, do both forbid, and accurse all saving
doctrines of grace, and burn with fire and faggot the Preachers of them; whom
you also most cruelly persecute with all the Engines of cruelty, that malice it
self can invent, and a desperate man against all Laws of God and man dare
execute.

For the ancient Fathers of the Church, whose preaching you far prefer,
before any of that precise party (as you call it) for as for A. C. and his
Faction, we altogether exclude them out of the number of preachers in the
reformed Churches: whether ignorance, or malice has more blinded your
judgment in this, I cannot directly say. Ignorance, not only of the Fathers
preaching, but much more of the preciser party of preachers, in the Reformed
Churches, whose Sermons, and writings I suppose you have but a little
acquainted your self withal: but for your malice against these, I dare
confidently say, you have no want of that. And seeing you draw me (though
against my will) to enter within the lists of such a comparison between those
ancients, and our modern reformists, I hold it fit to speak something of it,
(though I declined it before, when you gave the like occasion) both to discover
the weakness of your judgment herein, and to vindicate the truth it self, in
maintaining the just reputation of the truly Reformed Churches. Now no reason
can be given* why those Ancients (though otherwise of honorable mention)
should preach far beyond the best preachers of the Reformed Churches. For
they could not have that knowledge, and learning, which so many ages since have
produced, together with much experience; all which the truly reformed preachers
make use of. Again, do but compare most of the writings and Sermons of those
Ancients, with our modern Reformed Divines, and a right judgment will find
the odds of your far beyond, to be on the side of the reformed party. In
comparison of whom, how poor were those Ancients, both in their expositions
and applications of Scripture. Augustine, that excellent light in those times,
though in his Polemicall Tracts, and especially against the Pelagians, and
Semipellagians, in the vindicating of Gods grace, and so in opening all those
places of Scripture, concerning those points, he showed an accute dexterity,
and sound judgment: yet in his other exercises, or Sermons, and expositions of
Scripture, he was not so pregnant. As in his 8 th Tome, containing his
expositions, and Sermons, upon the Psalms, although the Reader shall not
repent him of his labor, because he shall meet with many passages of good
note, yet he may observe how far wide he is of the scope and meaning of the
Psalms, which he handles all along. He preached indeed every day: as Calvin
did at Geneva (besides all his other weighty employments) but what a disparity
there is between their expositions, I refer to the judgment of K. James, who
commended Calvin's Commentaries, above all those of the Ancients. So for the
Greek Church (as Aug. for the Latin) that golden mouthed Chrysostom
(according to his Name) the best preacher in his time, though many of his
expositions were good, yet when he came to his to u'thikon, his moral, or
application, though in it self it was very good, yet for the most part no way
pertinent to his text he handled: but he would sometimes make his use against
covetousness, sometimes against pride, or some other sin, or, to exhort to
some moral virtue, or other, but (I say) without any coherence to his text,
for the most part. And for the most of those Ancients, what was the common
Theme of their preaching, but morality, delighting rather to contemplate in a
solitary life, then to practice such preaching, as might win souls. How few of
them did preach the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ. In so much as
Bernard, who lived many hundred years after those ancients, and in those
times, wherein he noted Antichrist to be come (which he plainly poynted out to
be the Pope) did preach more soundly of this doctrine, of Justification by
Faith only, then all those Fathers had done: if we may judge of their
preaching by their writings. They spent themselves more in preaching for good
works. Then to set forth the faith in Christ; though some flashes they had here
and there. And whether this be not one reason, why you so commend the Fathers
preaching, because they were so much for good works, and so little for faith, I
know not. Whereas the modern Divines of the Reformed Churches are most
singular, and excellent in seting forth the Mystery of faith, and that doctrine
of Justification thereby, therein exalting Gods grace, and excluding man's
merits (though not negligent in exhorting to good works, as the fruits of
faith) Those Doctrines of Grace and faith, being the main substance of the
Gospel, and the true practicing of Jesus Christ, besides which there is no
true preaching. Admirable they are also in seting forth the nature of sin, to
bring man out of himself, and to plant him into Christ. And in a word, have so
set forth the whole body of Divinity, as the Fathers writings to theirs, are in
comparison, in respect of sound Divinity, but as a barren Field to a fruitful,
well planted, and well watered Garden. And great reason there is for this. The
Fathers had to deal with some Heretics, as with Arius, whose Mal was
Athanasius, and with Pelagius, knocked down by Augustine, and others: but they
knew not as yet the Mystery of iniquity: which in these latter times seeking to
overtop the Gospel; and, to overthrow the Doctrine, and Kingdom of Christ,
has given occasion, not only of a reformation, in a separation from that
Whore of Babylon, but to many Worthies, whom God has raised up in these last
times, to bestirre themselves, and to study Christ his Military Discipline, and
spiritual warfare, against the Beast, and his Crew, and to be expert in
maintaining Christ's Cause, with weapons both offensive, and defensive. So as by
this occasion, Gods Grace working with it, this last Century has produced,
more excellent, sound, and learned Divines, and famous preachers, then (I may
say truly, though not without envy) have been ever since the Apostles times;
The Name of our God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by this means, has
Tryumphed over Antichrist, be praised, and glorified for evermore. These have
been and are Christ's The manner of the old Triarian Soldiers fighting.
Triarian band fighting against Antichrists power, with the sword of the Spirit
in their lips, their pike, their pen in their hand, and fighting on their
knees by Prayre, and have so confounded Antichrist by the dint of their Sword,
and Pike, the word of God, that he has no means left him, but by his legates
a latere, to negotiate his cause with Kings and Princes of the earth, to Rev.
16.14.
incite them against the precise party, by taking their weapon (Gods word, and
the preaching thereof) from them, leaving them nothing, but their bare knees to
plead their Cause upon, even Prayers* and Tears, these which the powers on
earth may cause, but never deprive them of And how far you have been a
stickler, and instigator in this kind, I appeal to your practices, and to this
your Book, sufficient, and competent witnesses against you.

But to return to your Fathers: (you say, that they, for all their preaching so
far beyond others, yet no one of them durst think himself infallible, much
less, that whatsoever he preached, was the word of God. It Is true, they had
been no wise Fathers, but Children rather, yea proud and foolish Men, if they
had thought themselves to be infallible, which is proper to God alone* But
whatsoever they preached out of Gods word, that they had good evidence it was
according to the Scripture, why should they not, not only think, but be
assured, that being the truth, it was infallible, as being the substance of
Gods word, which they preached? And so all other preachers.

Lastly, where you say, It may be observed, that no men are more apt to say,
that all the Fathers were but men, and might err, then they that think their
own preachings were infallible. And what say you, I pray you, of your ancient
Fathers? Were they any others but m^n? And might they not err? But you are not
perhaps so apt to say, They were but men, and might err. You are willing to
entertain, and retain a higher opinion of them, then so. Or at least you are
not so apt to say so of them, as they, then whom none are more apt to say, The
Fathers were but men, and might err. Sure if there were cause enough, and
urgent too so to say, (as when it concerns the glory of God, and the truth it
self) he that is aptest to say so, is the most to be commended. And now let us
here a little inquire, who these men be, that are so apt to say thus of the
ancient Fathers, and for what cause, That they were but men, and might err.
Why, who should they be, but the precise party of the reformed Churches, as all
the worthy, reverend, pious, religious, learned, and judicious Divines, both
beyond the Seas, and on this side, who undertaking to defend the truth of
Christ, against Antichrist: and their Adversaries objecting, and pressing so
much the authority of the ancient Fathers in such things, wherein they could
not be otherwise excused, but that they did a'n^ropopathein, speak as men, who
are not in all things infallible: what could they in such a case, answer
otherwise, But that those Fathers were but men, and might err? Nor did they
speak this out of any disesteem of those Fathers, but when they were (I say)
so urged to defend the truth against the Adversaries of it, by the evidence
whereof, they were able to make good what they said, that those Fathers were
but men, and might err. Now for this, who is more apt, then your Lordship to
cast in the dish of this precise party (as you call them) that they should upon
just cause speak thus of your ancient Fathers? What would you say then, if all
this party should as one Man rise up, and openly profess against you, as a
notorious enemy of the truth, and of the Church of God in England, and
elsewhere, and of all pious, sincere, and zealous Preachers of the Gospel, and
that under the Name of the precise party, which you so yoke with the Jesuits,
you do maliciously, not only seek to undermine, but even professedly to
invade and oppugn, the whole Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as also your practices,
and this your Book can witness. And how do you come to know the thoughts of
this precise party, so well, that you say, they think their own preachings were
infallible? Surely you do but think so. You might therefore judge more
charitably. But as I said of those Fathers, so do I of these, what they have a
good and sure ground in Scripture for, to preach and teach, they may be sure,
and they know it to be the truth, and so infallible. As for those that Psalm.
59.12*
preach of cursing and lies (as David speaks) and suggest slanders, and false
reports into the ears of Princes, and Courts against Gods Ministers and
Preachers: let them think, and be assured too, that what they preach, or
print, is not only not infallible, but most malicious, and detestable, both
before God and Man; as tending also the blinding, and so to the downfall of
such as believe such falsehoods to be infallible.

L. p 104. When the Fathers say, we are to rely upon Scriptures only, they are
never to be understood with exclusion of Tradition, in what causes soever it
may be had. Not but that the Scripture is abundantly sufficient, in, and of it
self for all things: but because it is deep* and may be drawn into different
senses, and so mistaken, If any man will presume upon his own str^ngth, and go
single without the Church. And citing an excellent sentence out of Vincentius
Lynnen^is* quum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad ommia satis
superque sufficiat, etc. Forasmuch as that Canon of Scripture is perfect, and
superabundantly selfe-sufficient to all things, and if you add this your note
upon it in the margent. And if it be sibi ad omnia, then to this, to prove it
self, at least, after Tradition has prepared as to receive it.

P. A little page 101*
before, you cite also Augustine seting down 4 special notes and marks
internal to the Scripture to prove it to be the word of God. As 1. The
Miracles. 2. That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine. 3. That there has
been such performance of it. 4. That by such a Doctrine of humility, the whole
world almost has been converted. And there also to the same purpose Lynnen^is:
who places the Scripture before Tradition. And here again, That the Scripture
is selfe-sufficient to all. What room then for Tradition? Or if Tradition have
any place at all, it were good manners for it to come behind, as a Handmayd
waiting on her Mistress. But you can salve all with a wet finger, or with one
drop out of your pen: If it be sibi ad omnia, that is, selfe-sufficient to all
things, then to this, to prove it self, at least after Tradition ^ath prepared
us to receive it. This is your own Addition, or Comentary and Gloss of your
own Mother wit, which is, as Tertullian says of the old Roman Senate, which
had made a decree, that none should be taken into the number of their Gods, but
such as the Senate it self should first think worthy, and approve of: So as
Tiberius Caesar under whose Empire Christ suffered, when he had heard much fame
of Christ, he moved the Senate, that Christ migh be entertained for one of
their Gods. But the Senate for the foresaid Reason rejected it, because they
first had approved of it. Whereupon Tertullian says, Ergo nisi homini
pla^uerit, Deus non erit Deus. Therefore except it please man, God shall not be
God. A fit parralell for this very purpose. The Scripture, by the consent of
all the ancient Fathers, is abundantly selfe-sufficient to prove it self to be
the word of God: but the present Church has a Senatus consultum, a Decree,
Tradition, which must first give her voice and approbatiton, that the Scripture
is the word of God; otherwise in vain are all those Encomiums and
Commendations of the Fathers, though never so ancient, affirming, and
confirming, the Scriptures selfe-sufficiencie, even beyond all measure. The
Tradition of the present Church must first give her voice. Ergo, nisi homini
placuerit* Scriptura non erit verbum Dei: Therefore except it please man, the
Scripture shall not be the word of God. Only herein you go beyond the Roman
Senate: for their Decree for the admiting of a God was by the general voice of
all the Senators: But yours is here from the sole and single Oracle of the
Church of England. The Chair of Canterbury. It Is enough that you tell us, with
an if, if the Scripture be, Sibi ad omnia, then to this, to prove it self, at
least after Tradition has prepared us to receive it. Otherwise, never talk of
Fathers Authority, all is in vain, The Scripture cannot be believed to be the
word of God, unless The Tradition of the Present Church prepare the way to
receive it. And, at least, you say; which is no small deminution of the
S^riptures selfe-sufficiencie, which you put with an if, at least. But of this
sufficiently.

But let us hear your Reasons further for your Tradition. The Scripture (Say
you) is deep, and may be drawn into different senses* and so mistaken, that any
man will presume upon his own strength, and go single without the Church. So
it seems your Articles of Religion are deep, as which not only may be, but
are drawn into different senses, and so mistaken, and that by the presumption
of one man's strength, going single without the Church. But for the Scripture,
though it be deep, yet it affords us both line, and Bucket sufficient to draw
water out of those Esaias 12.3*
well^ of Salvation, and so to give us a full taste, whereby to relish and
resent whose word it is; except the Tradition and Authority of your present
Church do cut off our line, and break our Bucket. The Scripture has both
Milk for Babes, and strong Meat for Men. 2 Pet. 3.
In the Sea both the Elephant may swim (as AUG. and GREG. says) and the Lamb
wade, and when it is by unstable men wrested and drawn into different senses,
and so mistaken, yet it remains the same unchangable truth still, and has in
it sufficient evidence, both to reconcile those differences, and to convince
the gainsayer. It Is true, Let no man presume upon his own strength; Psalm.
25.14.
for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Wha^ was the cause
then, that you have all along your Book, (as in part has been showed) so
perverted the Scriptures? was it not because you took not with you for your
guide, the Tradition of the present Church? And was not this then a prusuming
upon your own strength, when you go so solely, and singly to work? But what
mean you by going single without the Church? The not consulting the Prelates?
Or because the Papists object, as you, The Scriptures are deep and dark:
therefore we must in all things take the present Church Tradition in our way,
where it may be bad, and be guided by that, as by Ariadnees Thread, through
those manyfold Meanders of that intricate Labyrinth, the Scripture, as you make
it. Or that you mean by Church Tradition, the Authority of the present Church
of England, as one with that Church whereof none is; and that this Authority
must needs proceed and like a Candle before the Sun at noonday (as before)
show us the way to know the Scripture to be the word of God: if we be willing
to shut our eyes, and blindfold to be led by the Traditionall Authority of this
your Church: what know we, but by such Authority you may tell us (putting the
^ible clasped into our hands) All that is cantained within those claspes, is
the word of God. This you may be sure of, you have Authority for it, you need
go no further. And all your Bibles of your present Church of England, being by
express Charge bound with the Apocrypha, so as they are punished that do it
not, all the Books forfeited, which may breed an opinion in the people, that
those Books also are a part of the word of God: If now one hereupon opening
the Bible, and lighting upon either that ridiculous tale of Tobies Dog, or that
of the Angel, who tells Tobia^, that he is his kinsman; and of the Smoke of the
Fishes Liver that drives away the Devil; or of Razis killing of himself, and
commended for it by the writer of the Books of the Maccabees; or that of the
same Authors, doubting whether he has done well, or no, in writing that Story,
and the like: he may possibly by this means be brought to think meanly of the
Scriptures, and that they are not the word of God, because he finds such things
in the Bible (so as it is bound) as are ridiculous, false, vain, impious, and
uncertain whether the rest be done, as it should be, etc. And thus by your
Apocrypha, delivered into his hand by the Authority and Tradition of your
present Church, he is brought to believe, that either the Scriptures of tha^
Old and New Testament, are not the word of God, as wherewith those Apocryphal
Books are equally bound in all Bibles: or else, that such Tradition of the
present Church it little to be regarded, while pretending to lead men to the
belief of the Scriptures, to be the word of God, there is no more difference
made between them, and the Apocrypha, so full of vain lies and ridiculous
tales. And perhaps you may come in also as Epistle Dedic^tory.
Time, and Pla^e, will permit) with your Verbum Dei non scriptum to boot, the
word of God not written, of which you tell us before, agreeing therein with
Bellarmine. And at last, when your Tradition, and Authority has sufficiently
prepared the way, you will perhaps bring in your Traditions Apostolic
accompanied with the Decretalls of Gratian, which your Sister Church of Rome
equal with the 4 Evangelists. But however, were it for nothing else, but to
maintain the credit of your present Church Tradition and Authority in
commending to men the Scripture to be the word of God, you might do well to
take away your Apocrypha, which your Zeal will have placed in the midst
between the two Testaments, not suffering any Bibles to be bound without it,
which is, as Mr. H. B^.
one says, as a Blakamore placed between two pure unspotted Virgins. Nor do I
think, that your Lordship so places your Blackamore, as Ladies put a black
patch upon their Cheek, or Chin, as a foil, to make them seem more fair: so
you, to make the Scriptures the more lovely, and desirable, or the better to
be known, as things by their contraries, as white by black, or the straight by
the crooked, or truth, by error* Hierom. Epist* ad Laetom.
standing near it. And though Hierome (who excludes the Apocrypha out of the
Canon of Scripture) says, they may be read ad morum institutionem non ad
confirmationem Fidei, for instruction of manners, and not for confirmation of
faith: yet considering both the fooleries, and falsities, and vanities, and
commended impieties, and confessed uncertainties in them (as aforesaid) all
these things put together, might be (me thinks) of sufficient strength to
thrust out that Blackamore by the head and shoulders from between those two
fair and unspotted Virgins.

L. ibid. It is most reasonable that Theology should be allowed to have some
Principles (as well as other Sciences) which she proves not, but presupposes.
And the chiefest of these is, That the Scriptures are of Divine Authority.

P. How? Is the chiefest of these Principles allowed to Theology, This, A true
Principle overthrown by a false.
That the Scriptures are of Divine Authority? Do you not forget Tradition now?
Do you not reckon that for the first, and so the chiefest, as without which,
the other cannot be granted? Or perhaps you do not reckon your Tradition, or
Authority of the present Church to be a Principle of Theology. What then?
Perhaps, of Muthology, the science of setting forth Fables, Or, of Buttologie,
the science, of much babble to no purpose. Or, Argologie, the science of vain,
and frivolous talk. Or, Carphologie, a gathering of Chafe, as if you would by
the heap of Chafe show us, where the Wheat is. Only, your Tradition is no
Principle of Theology, and therefore a heap of chafe wherein there is not one
grain of the pure corn.

But let us come to see what is most reasonable. It is most reasonable (say
you) that Theology should be allowed to have some Prin^iples (as well as other
Sciences) which she proves not, but presupposes. And what is Theology, but the
Scripture it self, and the Doctrines therein contained? And however it be with
other Sciences, which in comparison of Theology are but imperfect and
beggarly, so as they have need to beg their a'itemata, some Principles to be
granted them, as grounds to work upon, as the Mathematics, etc. yet you might
have given that honor to Queen Theology, to which all other Sciences are but
handmaids, as to exempt her from being a beggar, yea and of that too, which is
her own, and in her own possession, namely, That the Scripture is the word of
God. This is one of Theologies prime Principles, which the Scripture does suo
jure vindicare, challenge as her own right, and which no man can take from her.
And if Theology must borrow or beg this principle: Of whom? Of the Tradition
of the Church? Beware of that: For then Pro. 22.7.
the Borrower, should be servant to be Lender, as Solomon says. And to Beg
it, were worse. But if Theology have this principle of her own, and it in the
Scriptures possession; what need she go either to beg or borrow it, and that
of those, who can neither give, or lend it? And if this be a Principle, that
Scripture (...) the word of God. What use of your Church Tradition? For
Principles are not to be denied. But you denying, that this can be believed,
without the Tradition of the present Church do first induce unto it: then you
are one of those, that deny Principles. And Contra negantem Principia non est
disputandum, we are not to dispute against him that denies Principles; but in
this case to hold him as an Heretic, Tit. 3.10.11.
and to deal with him as the Apostle admonishes: A man that is an Heretic,
after the first and second Admonition reject: knowing, that he that is such, is
subverted, and sins, being a'utokatakritos, selfe-condemned.

L. p. 105. The evidence of supernatural Truths, which Divinity teaches,
appears not so manifest, as that of the Natural, though in themselves more
sure, and infallible.

P. Appears not: true indeed to a natural man. Here you speak by experience.
But to the spiritual man this evidence appears very clearly; for (as the
Apostle says) The Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are foolishness unto him: Neither can ^e know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual, judges all things; as
Solomon also says Evil men understand not judgment: But they that seek the
Lord, understand all things.

L. p. 106. Faith is a mixed Act of the Will, and the understanding, and the
Will inclines the understanding to yield full approbation to that, whereof it
sees not full proof. Not but that there is full proof of them: But because the
maine grounds, which prove them, are concealed from our view, and folded up in
the unrevealed Council of God, God in Christ, resolving to bring mankind to
their last happiness by Faith, and not by Knowledge, That so the weakest among
men may have their way to blessedness open.

P. It Is true, that Faith, being the life of the soul, anima animae (as Aug.
speaks) does inform and quicken all the faculties thereof, as the Will,
Understanding, Reason, Affections: so as the Will does no more incline the
Understanding to assent (this being the opinion of those Schoolmen, that hold
the Will to be the seat of Faith, as others do hold the Understanding) Then the
Understanding does the Will, or Reason the Affections: But Faith being that
Grace, which quickneth the whole soul, and in it all the faculties as
aforesaid, it is this Faith Principally that inclines all the whole soul with
all its faculties to yield their unanimous assent unto it. And yet I deny not a
mutual reciprocation, and interchangeable cooperation, which is between these
faculties, as in the natural man, so in the spiritual man, regenerate by
faith. For as in the natural man sometimes the Understanding inclines the Will,
sometimes the Will the Understanding, sometimes Reason inclines the Affections,
and sometimes the Affections incline Reason, and that oftentimes with great
violence to a wrong object: the like working there is among the sanctified
faculties of the soul Regenerate, sometimes the Understanding inclining the
Will, sometimes the Will the Understanding, and sometimes the Affections incline
both; as the Apostle says (speaking of zeal for God) Whether we be besides
our selves, ^ Cor. 5.13, 14.
it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your Cause. For the love of
Christ constrains us. And the affections of the Apostle toward Christ were
so strong in him, that they carried his Understanding, Will and Reason along
with them with strong hand, when notwithstanding he was told of dangers, yea
bonds abiding him at Jerusalem, and earnestly desired of his Friends not to go
thither: he answered* What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? For I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the
Lord Jesus. Act. 21.13.
And Christ himself was so full of holy Zeal, and strong Affections, as he
was carried with a wonderful violence of them, insomuch as they said of him,
that he was mad. And his friends one time went to lay hold on him, Io^.
10.20. Mar. 3.21.
saying he was besides himself. And many of Christ his Servants, his
Ministers, being carried with a strong love of Christ, and zeal for his glory,
expressed in their courragious witnessing of the truth against wicked men, the
enemies thereof, although their Understanding apprehend the danger, and their
Will could be content to live in peace, yet the Affection here carries all
along with it, and they willingly follow, because the same Faith guides and
carries all along with it, whence it comes to pass, that the affection here to
Christ, and to truth being as it were the Leader of the rest, the
Understanding, Reason and Judgment least appearing in the sense of the world,
men are thereupon so apt and prone to Censure such Ministers of indiscretion.
But this may show the inward opperation of the faculties of a regenerate soul,
how one works upon another reciprocally, and one inclines another, sometimes the
superior faculties, the inferior; and sometimes the inferior, the superior,
but Faith is the principal agent working in, and inclining all.

It is not then the Will that always inclines the Understanding, but the Grace
of Faith, which infused, does at once both illuminate, incline, and draw both
the Will and Understanding to rest in the saving truth of God apprehended by
Faith. This Faith I say does so illuminate, the whole soul, with all its
faculties, as that it self brings meat in the mouth (as ye say) even a full
proof in it self of the things believed: so as now not only the affiance of
the Will, but the affiance, and certain knowledge of the Understanding do rest
themselves in the clear evidence, which Faith it self brings with it, which
evidence has the ample and sure Testimony, both of the word of God, and of the
Spirit of God, whose work it is. For this saving Faith never goes alone, but
is both ushered in, and wrought, and accompanied with the word and Spirit of
Christ. For so soon as Faith is conceived in the soul, it unites to Christ,
and so it has communion with Christ, together with his Spirit mimediately; so
as both the Will, and the Understanding, and the whole soul, heart and
affections, so soon as Faith possesses them (which Faith is a plerophoria,
full assurance of the things believed, and a clear evidence of them, though
not seen, as before is showed) there is withal exhibited both in, and with
Faith a full sufficient proof of the things believed. Belying of God, and of
the Scripture, and bewraying profound ignorance.
How say you then, that the maine grounds, which prove them, are concealed from
our view, and folded up in the unrevealed Council of God? And what main
grounds, I pray you be those? Can you tell? Or do you speak in the Clouds,
that you may seem to say something; which you understand not. For certainly
this Mystery of Faith is concealed from your understanding, as appears by
your dark and clowdy words. And is that unrevealed council of God the object
of our Faith? Comes not Faith by hearing of the word of God, wherein God has
revealed his will to us? Or does the Tradition of your present Church, lead you
to believe such senseless speculations? Indeed the Apostle says, Col. 2.3*
That in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Hid, that
is, laid up, and contained as a Treasure. But not hid from his true Church, and
faithfu^l people, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.3.^*
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this
world, has blinded the minds of them that believe not, least the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. And again, 1 Cor. 2.9*
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things, which God has prepared for them that love him: But God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit. But where? Search the Scriptures (says
Christ) for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me; so to this purpose the Apostle speaks excellently, Ephesians*
3.4, 5, 6. and 1.9.17, 18, 19 and in many other places. But to you it seems
these things are hid, and folded up; and therefore no mervaile you know not what
you say, nor whereof you affirm: As the Apostle says of some 1 Timothy 1.5* 6.7.
Who were turned aside from Charity out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience,
and of Faith unfeigned, unto vain ^angling. Desiring to be teachers of the Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Let therefore the
Prophet Esaias read you a Lecture, Esaias. 29.9*
Stay your selves, and wonder: Cry ye out, and cry: They are drunken, but not
with wine, They stagger but not with strong drink. For the Lord has powered on
them the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes: The Prophets, and
your Rulers, the Seers has he covered. And the vision of all is become unto
you, as the words of a Book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is
learned, saying, Read this I pray thee: And he says I cannot, for it is
sealed: And the Book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this
I pray thee: And he says, I am not learned. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor
me, but have removed their heart far from me: and their fear toward me is
taught by the Precepts of men: Therefore behold I will proceed to do a
mervailous work amongst this people, even a marvailous work and a wonder: for
the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their council from
the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say who sees us: And who
knows us? surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
Potters Clay. Lo, my Lord, I hope this word is not folded up: if to you it be,
you shall one day both see and feel it more clearly and sensibly fulfilled.

But you go on. Bold belying and blaspheming Gods Secret Counsels.
God in Christ (say you) resolving to bring Mankind, to their last happiness
by Faith, and not by Knowledge. What, by a blind Faith? For by Faith, and not
by Knowledge, is all one, as to say, by such a Faith, as is without Knowledge,
and so without light in it, and so blind. Whereas the true saving Faith, is a
knowing Faith, it is the evidence of things not ^een, it sees him that is
invisible; as before is showed. But my Lord, if the maine grounds be folded up
in the unrevealed counsel of God: I wonder by what revelation you come to know
his secret, That God in Christ has resolved to bring Mankind to their last
happiness by Faith, and not by Knowledge; surely God has no where in
Scripture revealed any such resolution of his. And if it be not written, Timeas
(...) ill^d (as Tertullian forementioned said to Hermogenes the Heretic) Fear
that Woe to them* that shall add to the Book of Scripture. But if you had
leisure to Read the Scripture, it reveals unto us plainly what God in this
business has resolved to do, and how he will bring Mankind to his last
happiness; and that is by a seeing, not a blind Faith: by a Faith explicit and
clear, not implicit, and folded up: by light, and not by darkness. This is
Gods way, that he has chalked out unto us in the Scripture (as before is fully
proved of Faith) and therefore we are sure, that God in Christ in his eternal
council resolved to bring us this way to heaven, and no other way. And this
Ioh. 14.6.
way is Christ: and Christ is Ioh 1.4.
light: and in this way we must walk as Ephesians. 5.8.
children of the light, and not as children of darkness. And every true
believer, as he becomes a new man, so of a blind man, he becomes a seeing man.
For this cause Christ came the Ioh. 1.9.
true light, that he might lighten every man that comes to him. For this cause
was Paul sent to preach to the Gentiles, Act. 26.18.
To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in me, says
Christ; so that every true Christian in his conversion, of blind, becomes
seeing, of darkness becomes light in the Lord, of Satan's bo^dm^n, Gods
ser^ant; and by this way only through Faith in Christ, they receive
forgiveness of sins here, with sanctification, and hereafter the eternal
inheritance. But as for you, my Lord, as you have found out another way,
namely, a blind way, Prelates blind Popish way.
not by the way of knowledge, by which yet you pretend to your last happiness:
so be assured of this, that the place you are going unto, is just like the way
that leads unto it, blind and dark, yea, utter darkness, where the Pit is,
into which, both the blind leader, and the blind led shall fall.

And for your further conviction, or else confusion, and confutation of your
folly, and information of your blind Disciples, and confirmation of the truth
to all the children of truth: note what Christ himself says expressly, point
blanke against you. You say, God in Christ resolved to bring Mankind to their
last happiness by Faith, and not by Knowledge. But Christ says, This is the
will of him that sent me (this God has resolved on) that every one that sees
the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life, John 6.40.
and I will raise him up at the last day: Mark here; This is the Fathers will,
his resolution, his revealed council, and purpose. What? That every one that
sees Christ (not with bodily eyes here, but with the eyes of his soul, being
illuminated by holy knowledge) and so believes in him, should have eternal
life, and Christ will raise him up in the last day. Here is Man's last
happiness, to which God has revealed t^ us in his word, that he has resolved
in his council to bring Mankind by Faith and Knowledge, together, and without
separation, as both seeing, and believing. Ephesians. 4.11.
And this does the Scripture every where show unto us. Wherefore did God give
some Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and
Teachers: but for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edefication of the body of Christ: And (Col. 2.2) That their hearts
might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the
full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the Mystery of God.
What a high and admirable expression is here? And 6.7. this is to be rooted and
built up in Christ. Again, on the other side, what is the Cause and sourse of
all wickedness, and infidelity superstition and Idolatry, but ignorance of
God, and of his word? As Ephesians. 4.17. This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk^, in the va^ity of
their minds, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life
of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart, etc. So, 1 Pet. 4.3. Hos. 4.1.
1 Pet. 4.3. and Hos. 4.1. The Lord has a controversy with the Inhabittnts of
the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
Land. And verse. 7. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: Because thou
have rejected knowledge (mark it well my Lord) I will also reject thee, THAT
THOU SHALL BE NO PRIEST TO ME. And on the other side again, Ier. 3.15.
The Lord says, I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall
feed you with knowledge, and understanding; namely, the people whom the Lord is
in Covenant with: But it seems your Priesthood stands not with the nature
and office of those Prophets, which feed the people of God with knowledge and
understanding. You can teach the people a shorter cut to heaven, and more easy
for the Priest: for you tell us, God has resolved to bring Mankind to
blessedness another way, then by knowledge. Wherein, how far, you not only
dishonor, but blaspheme the truth of God, in Fathering such a foul and
abominable lie upon him; for this, I leave you to that judgment, which he has
revealed in his Word.

But you seem to do all this in charity, That the weakest among men may have
their way to blessedness open. A way open? You mean surely the broad way, and
you know whither that leads, and how the many such weak ones, as you speak of
go in that way. And broad and open your way had need to be, both for the
multitude of the travailers therein, and for their blindness, and for the
darkness of the way, that so, though both they and their guides be blind, yet
the way is so broad, as they cannot possibly go out of it, so long as they do
but follow their Nose, which must be their guide, for want of eyes. But it may
be you will allege that saying of Augustine, Indocti rapiunt regnum Caelo^um,
etc. The unlearned and ignorant take by violence the Kingdom of heaven, where
we that be great learned Clerks are shut out. Ergo, the way is open for the
weakest* and shut against those, that abuse their Learning to Gods dishonor,
and souls destruction. But whom does Augustine there mean, by unlearned*
Ignorants that had no Faith, nor true Religion in them? Certainly, there is no
heaven for such. The 2 Samuel 5.6*
blind, and lame come not within the fort of Sion. But a true believer may be
unlettered, or (as they say) not book learned: yet, not without knowledge. For
if he has faith, he has a knowledge of God in Christ. And being Christ's, he
has the Spirit of Christ, and this quickens him up ^o diligence in the use of
all good means of saving knowledge; as to hear Gods word faithfully preached,
(for he knows Christ's voice) and frequently read, and conferred upon; and he
meditates on it, his mind is much upon it, as yours is of your honors, and
favor in Court, how to keep them: and he is still praying for increase of
grace, and faith, and knowledge. And my Lord, many a such man I could bring,
that cannot a letter on the Book, that for all your seeming Learning, would
put you to your Trumps, if your greatness would but descend so far, as to
reason with him of the Scriptures, and of Christ, and so of faith, and the
like. For there is all his Learning. And such unlearned ones they be, who go to
heaven, yea Mat. 11.12.
take it by violence (as Christ says) when great Lord Prelates are shut out.
As Christ says to the Pharisees: Mat. 21.31.32.
The Publicans and ^arlots go into the Kingdom of God before you, for they
believed John's preaching: but ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward,
that ye might believe him.

But you go on in your blind way, and say, page 109. Page 109. Blasphe^^^g
again of Gods Counsels.
The way of knowledge was not that, which God thought fittest for man's
Salvation. It Is true, not such a speculative knowledge, as you speak of: but
God thought it fittest to bring men to salvation by a knowing Faith; as before
is showed. I will conclude this with the Apostles thunder: Gal. 1.8.9.
As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach otherwise, then that
is delivered in Gods word, let him be accursed. And if the Scripture accurse
him, that Deuteronomy. 27.18
leads the blind out of his way, to which curse all the people say Amen: then
what curse is due to him, that teaches the blind such a way, as leads to
certain destruction of Soul and Body? Shall not all the people say Amen to
this curse?

L. p. 106. Credit of Scripture hanged upon man's opinion of God. See 165.
The Credit of the Scripture depends not upon the subservient inducing Cause,
that leads us to the first knowledge of the Author, which leader here is the
Church: but upon the Author himself, and the opinion we have of his
Sufficiency.

P. Do you not make the credit of the Scripture to depend upon the Authority
of the present Church, when without this subservient inducing Cause you deny
the possibility of belief, that the Scripture is the word of God? For you say
expressly, page 120. When I said, Scriptures were Principles to be supposed, I
did not, I could not intend, they were prius cognitae, known before Tradition;
Since I confess every where, that Tradition introduces the knowledge of them.
But if the credit of the Scripture depends not upon the Church, whereon then? On
the Author (Say you) and the opinion we have of his Sufficiency. Here be two
things which you couple together: 1. The Author: 2. The opinion we have of his
Sufficiency. 1. For the Author, which is God: it is true, that God himself is
the Author of the Scripture, and so it is the word of God; and God the Author
bears witness of the Scripture, that it is his own word* And where does God
bear this witness? Is not this his witness in the Scripture it self? Does
not his Spirit speak in it, and tell us, that it is his word? Says not his
Spirit expressly, that 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is given by Inspiration from God? And does not the Scripture it
self tell us this? Says it not then of it self, that it is Gods word? And so
saying, does it not bear witness to it self, that it is the word of God? And
is not the witness thereof true? And if true, does not the credit of the
Scripture depend upon it self, as it is the word of God that speaks in it,
that it is the word of God? Or how can you so separate the Author from the
Scripture, he speaking in it, but that you must confess the credit of the
Scripture to depend upon it self, when you acknowledge it depends upon the
Author? For as 1 King. 19.12* 13.
God was in the Soft and Still voice: so he is in the Scripture, which is the
Soft and Still voice of God. And as Elias knew by the soft and still voice, that
the Lord was in it: So we know by the Soft and Still voice of God, the
Scripture, that God is in it, and therein speaks unto us. And what God therein
speaks unto us, the Scripture, which is his voice speaks unto us. So as the
Scripture being Gods own voice speaking unto us, what it says, is of the Same
credit, that God himself, the Author and Speaker, is of. And therefore, if the
Credit of Scripture depend upon the Author, it depends withal upon it self,
because it is Gods own voice.

But Secondly, you couple here with the Author, the opinion we have of his
Sufficience. Man's opinion of Gods Suffi^iency (...) ^ain and blind.
So as first, it seems you do not allow the Credit of Scripture to depend
simply and Solely upon the Author, but withal upon the opinion we have of his
Sufficiency: And what if we fail in our good opinion of the Authors
Sufficiency? Whereon will you then hang the Credit of the Scripture? Surely it
must depend upon our opinion. That Is the dint of your speech. But of our selves
we are altogether ignorant of Gods Sufficiency. How then, or whence shall we
come to have such an opinion of his Sufficiency, as whereon the Credit of the
Scripture may infalliby depend? From the Authority or Tradition of the present
Church? Alas your present Church will tell us, that the holy Trinity may be
expressed in a Picture, and that God the Father may be pictured like an Old
Man, because Christ in Daniel is called the Ancient of days. For thus you
pleaded against Mr. Sheruile in the Star Chamber, when you fined him 500.
pound to the King, for defacing the Images of the Trinity in his own
Church-window, he being a Justice of Peace. If therefore the Almighty and
Incomprehensible God may be expressed in an Image, what opinion can we have of
his Sufficiency, to be the God of truth, and the Author of the Scripture, as
whereon the credit thereof may depend, when we express and represent him by
that which is a lie, a mere vanity? For the Scripture calls an Image, a lie,
as Esa. 44.20. And, a teacher of lies: Hab. 2.18. And vanity, wind, and
confusion: Esa. 41.29. And falsehood, Jer. 10.14. And v. 16. God the portion of
Jacob is not like them. And an Image made to represent God, is a lie, and
falsehood, because it is a false representation of God. For God is a Spirit,
Invisible. And, Esa. 40.18. To whom will ye liken God? Or what likeness will
ye compare unto him? And the Second Commandment expressly forbids any Image to
be made, to represent God by. So as the practice of your present Church in
adoring and seting up, and maintaining Images in Churches, and Copes, and the
like, whereby you represent God, The Prelates blind opinion of Gods
Sufficiency.
does teach men a base and false opinion of God, and so of his
All-Sufficiencie. And therefore, Secondly, in Saying We, upon the opinion We
have of his Sufficiency, you that are the Setters up, and maintainers of lying
Images of God in your Churches, must needs be those We, upon whose opinion of
Gods Sufficiency must depend the Credit of the Scripture. And what opinion can
you have of Gods truth, that represent him by a lie, and falsehood? And what
opinion can you have of his Sufficiency in being the Author of the Scripture,
that hold and affirm his Scripture and word to be an insufficient witness to
prove it self the word of God? And what opinion can you have of Gods
Sufficiency, who do every where by your open practices, and your Shameless
blasphemies in fathering your lies upon God in this your Book (as has been
noted but now) proclaim to the world what little fear or dread you have of
his Majesty, as if he were not a just God, in punishing wickedness, or in his
power insufficient to tame proud Rebels? Thus if by the Tradition of the
present Church we cannot come to such a knowledge of God, as to have a right
opinion of his Sufficiency: whence shall we have it? Surely all true knowledge
of God is to be learned from the Scripture. But that you make to be of no
credit, but as it depends upon the Author, and your opinion of his Sufficiency;
which what it is, we have taken a Scantling of. And so the conclusion is from
these your Premises, that, No credit of Scripture to teach, no true knowledge
of God: no right opinion of his Sufficiency, nothing for the Credit of the
Scripture to depend upon: and having no credit in and of it self: Ergo, the
Scripture is of no Credit at all. This is the very Sum and Sequel of your
Speech, and indeed the upshot of those sharp arrows, which you have with all
your might and malice let fly at the Credit of Scripture, to give it the deaths
wound. Yet you add:

L. p. 111. Scripture, though it give light enough for Faith to believe, yet
light enough it gives not, to be a convincing Reason, and proof for Knowledge.

P. These words are to be expounded by what you have formerly Said. Though it
give light enough: that is, though it should or could give ^ight enough. For
that it does not give light enough for Faith to believe, you have plainly told
us. As page 80. The light which is in Scripture, is not bright enough: it
cannot bear sufficient witness to it self. If it cannot, then neither can it
give light enough for faith to believe. For sufficient light for Faith to
believe, springs from a sufficient light in Scripture, to bear witness to it
self. But this (Say you) it has not: Ergo not the other. Again you Say (page
81.) Church Authority must first light the Candle. Ergo the Scripture has no
light of it self, much less light enough for faith to believe But though it
should, though it be granted, that Scripture had light enough for Faith to
believe: yet light enough it gives not, to be a convincing Reason and proof
for knowledge. As if you said, Neither for Faith: for we have proved before,
that faith and knowledge go inseperably together, true faith being a seeing
and knowing faith, and not a blind faith. The Scripture teaches no blind
faith. And why should not Scripture give light enough, to be a convincing
Reason and proof for knowledge? When it is a sufficient light to H^b. 4.12.
discover unto a man the secret thoughts and intents of his heart, whereof man
himself is thoroughly convinced, and thereby in himself condemned of his own
Conscience? But this knowledge you cannot away withal. But you can never put
out the eyes of your Conscience, though you may for a time fold it, or lull it
fast asleep. Much less shall you be able to put out the light of Scripture,
which is greater then the light of your Conscience. As Says the Apostle, 1
Ioh. 3.20.
If our heart, or Conscience condemns us, God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things. If therefore the heart or Conscence, that is in man, be a
sufficient witness of all his thoughts Romans 2.15.
good and bad, and lays them before him, as the Apostle says: much more is
Gods word a sufficient witness, and gives light enough to be a convincing
reason and proof for knowledge. And Solomon Says, Pro. 20.27.
The spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of
the belly. If such then be man's spirit, the Candle of the Lord, searching all
the inward parts of the belly, that is all the secrets of man's heart: how much
more is the Spirit of God in the Scripture, his Word, such a searcher, yea
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.2^
The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. And these deep
things of God he has revealed unto us by his Spirit. And where but in his
word, the Scripture, is the voice of this Spirit of God? And it was the
constant sentence of all the Ancient Fathers, whom you would seem so much to
adore, which Augustine expresses in these words; In Scripturu sacris aperte
continentur ea omnia, quae necessaria sunt ad S^lutem: In the holy Scriptures
are clearly contained all those things, which are necessary to Salvation. Now
how should this be true, if the Scripture does not give light enough, to be a
convincing reason and proof for knowledge.

L. p. 113. To prove the Scripture to be the word of God, first comes in the
Tradition of the Church, the present Church: So it is no Heretical or
Schismatic belief. Then the testimony of former Ages, etc.

P. Here at length, you come near the winding up of the long thread of your
endless Discourse in this your 16 th Section, the sum whereof is to prove,
that the Scripture is of no selfe-credit and Authority, And first and last,
your present Church Tradition must be the Prime hand to lead the bl^nd to this
belief, that Scripture is the word of God. For otherwise the belief thereof
should be Heretical, or Schismatic, For thus you say; To prove the
Scripture to be the word of God, First comes in the Tradition of the Church,
the present Church: So it is no Heretical or Schismatic belief. Ergo
Belief of Scripture to be Gods word, comes by any other way, (as by the word
of God it self, read and heard, in the preaching of it, and by Gods Spirit
speaking in it) then wherein the Tradition of the Church, the present Church
has been the Prime leader. This belief is Heretical and Scismaticall. Ergo
this belief in all the Apostles, Martyrs, Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Primitive Ages, who never knew any such Tradition of the present Church, as
whereon this belief should depend, for its necessary prime inducement, was
Heretical and Schismatic. They constantly held (till Rome and you brought
in this your blind guide, to tread down under feet the light of the Scripture
and to exalt the Authority of your Antichristian Hierarchy) that the Scripture
was of self-Authority and Sufficiency to prove it self to be the word of God
and by the hearing of it preached and read, to beget and confirm faith in all
believers without any such inducement of Church Tradition as you speak of. And
therefore here you pass your sentence of condemnation of this belief in all
those forementioned, for Heretical and Schismatic. But how justly may this
sentence be retorted upon your self, and your present Church, as both
Heretical and Schismatic. Heretical as in the maintenance of Doctrines of
Devils (as before) of the Pelagian and Semi-Pelagian Heresies, under color of
your doubtful Articles of Religion as you have made them by publik Edict and
Declaration, and flatly forbidding to preach of the Saving Doctrines of Grace,
as they are clearly laid down and taught in the Scripture; and in seting up and
maintaining of your Altars, whereby the only Altar Jesus Christ is denied* and
in d^spensing with the 4 th Commandment; yea destroying and unmoralizing of
it, and so overthrowing the Lords-day-Sabbath, wherein you subvert the whole
work of Redemption, with the Resurrection; and the like: thus your present
Church is Heretical: as also in this, in holding and stiffly maintaining by
you a necessity of your present Church-Tradition, for the inducing of belief
of the Scripture to be Gods word, as not sufficient, and wanting light of it
self to do it, and which otherwise is of no credit at all: Thus I say you are
damnably and desperately Heretical. Secondly your present Church is also
Schismatic, being a Separation from the true Church of Christ, in your
Hierarchy, or Prelacy; which being altogether ^ntichristian has no communion
in that respect with Christ's Church, and therefore is notoriously Schismatic:
yea in this also Schismatic, that you account and brand that belief of
Scripture to be Gods word, for Heretical and Schismatic, which is not first
induced by your present Church-Tradition, wherein you are Schismatics from the
Faith; and so from the Church of the Apostles, and Ancient Fathers, and
succeding Churches which never held any such Hereticalll opinion, concerning
any such insufficiency of the Scriptures, and Authority of the present Church,
as you most pertenaciously and pernitiously hold: Therefore I Conclude that if
the present Church of England, approve of your Book, and hold as you do, it is
both Heretical and Schismatic. But you conclude:

L. p. 115. So then the way lies thus as far as it appears to me) The
Credit of Scripture to be Divine, reduces finally into that which we have
touching God himself and in the same order. For as that: So this has three
main Grounds, to which all other are reducible. The First is, the Tradition of
the Church: and this leads us to a Reverend persuasion of it. The Second is,
light of Nature: and this shows us how necessary such a revealed Learning is,
and that no other way it can be had: Nay more, that all proofs brought against
any point of faith, neither are nor can be Demonstrations, but Soluble
Arguments. Most notorious bl^spheming against the Holy Ghost, making him the
Author of falsehood.
The Third is, The light of the Text it self: in Conversing wherewith we meet
with the Spirit of God inwardly inclining our hearts, and sealing the full
Assurance of the suffi^iencie of all three unto us, And then and not before we
are certain that the Scripture is the word of God both by Divine and by
Infallible proof. But our Certainty is by Faith and so voluntary, not by
Knowledge of such Principles, as in the light of nature can enforce Assent
whether we will or no.

P First here, you make the manner of the way and order of belief of God, and
of the Scripture to be one and the same So as belief of Scripture to be Gods
word must first be induced by the Tradition of the present Church, else it wants
credit: so belief of God to be God must be in like manner and order induced;
else that is without credit too. This is just, as we applied Tertullians Speech
before concerning the Roman Senate, which would not allow Christ to be admitted
and inrowled in the Catalogue of their Gods a^ Caesar's motion, because,
according to a Decree of the Senate, it had not first moved it, as the Prime
inducing cause, whereupon Tertullian says, Ergo nisi homini placuerit, ^eus
non erit Deus, Therefore unless it shall please man, GOD shall not be GOD. So
by your Doctrine here: God shall not be believed to be God, unless it come in
by the door of the present Churches Tradition, as the sole necessary prime
inducer of it. How did men believed God to be God, before this new Doctrine of
yours came in to lead them the way? was all the world then drowned in a Deluge
of Atheism and Infidelity? so it seems, Till this light of your present Church
Tradition shined in the world, it was all as tha^ Exodus 10.
Egyptian palpable darkness, all men sitting all that time, and not stirring
one foot to any degree of belief, that GOD was GOD.

But come we to your 3 Grounds, wherein you sum up all the Total of all this
tedious Discourse in this Section. The First is, The Tradition of the Church
that is ever presupposed, as a Prime principle, having the Precedencie before
that other Principle, that Scripture is that word of God; as before. Well, what
does this Tradition? It leads us (say you) to a Reverend persuasion of the
Scripture. This is a fair inducement. And without this, no Reverend persuasion
of the Scripture can be had. Thus the Scripture must be beholden to your
Tradition for a Reverend persuasion of it. And who will not have a Reverend
persuasion of that, which the most Reverend Father in God commends as LAUD-
able? Well, let this suffice for that.

The Second is the light of Nature. Well; and what office has that? It shows
us how necessary such a revealed learning is, and that no other way it can be
had. But your Revealed Learning here is somewhat obscure; we cannot well tell,
whether you mean this your Revealed learning of this your present
Church-Tradition concerning belief of Scripture; or the Scripture it self.
But be it either, or both, all is one, we do not much stand upon it. Let it be
the Scripture believed to be Gods word, by the first necessary Inducing cause,
Tradition; as then which no other way can be had. This is then your Revealed
learning, which the light of Nature shows us how necessary it is; How necessary
it is, that the belief of Scripture to be the word of God; should be induced
by Tradition, because no other way it can be had. Of Natures light we have
spoken before sufficiently. And one no^e more resulteth from your words here.
And that is, That forasmuch as natures light is altogether blind in spiritual
things, and can no more judge of the Scriptures, then a blind man of Colors,
nor discerns any more light in the Scriptures, then a blind man does light in
the Sun, when it shines at noon day* and Natures light judging all things
according to her carnal sense; and having those things in greatest admiration
Jude 16.
and highest esteem, which have the greatest and most glorious outward luster,
dazeling the eyes of her carnal mindedness: and there being nothing in the
world, that carries with it a more glorious and glittering show in the eyes of
carnal and natural men, then a Hierarch or Prelate Sitting in his Chair in
his Pontificalibus, with all heads bare round about him in the Great Hall of
his Princely Palace, and especially when he sits the supreme Judge in all those
Causes brought into his Court: and all this glory is accumulated, and highly
elevated in the light of Natural men's eyes, not only in respect of all the
outward splendour of the Present Church: but because of an Instinct of nature in
all men, concerning Religion and Piety, and the Service of God, which is ^ed
and nourished with a great pretense and profession of holiness in th^se Right
Reverent Fathers whose very bare Titles of most Reverend Fathers, stike a
reverence into all such Naturalists hearts, as in children toward their
Fathers, and much more to their Gh^stly Father; and which also is highly
contented, and pleased with the variety of Ceremonies and Pompous Service, as
most suitable and agreeable to natures fancy, which knows no other Religion, but
that which stands in these external things: And seeing this Tradition of the
present Church, has no testimony, ground, nor warrant for it in the Scripture,
but is a thing merely usurped by the pride of Man: And seeing none are fitter
Judges to pass their sentence, on Traditions side, then such as are blind, as
Nature is in all spiritual things, only having a bare name of light, as a
Candle going before her, whereby others may take notice of her; Therefore not
without great reason do you take the light of Nature for a Second to your
Church Tradition, as a fit consort, which will easily speak for you,
whatsoever you desire, giving her blind testimony to confirm your blind Cause.

And you add: Nay more, that all proofs brought against any point of Faith,
neither are, nor can be Demonstrations, but Soluble Arguments. To wit, without
your Church Tradition, as the Inference shows. This is a pretty point in
Divinity indeed, That the light of Nature is become a Judge in points of Faith,
whether the Arguments brought against it, be Demonstrative or no* But this
s^ppery is so fully refelled before, that we need to say no more.

We come now in the last place to your Third ground Which is the light of the
Text it self: in conversing wherewith (you say) we meet with the Spirit of
God, inwardly inclining our hearts, and sealing the full assurance of the
sufficiency of all three unto us* We meet? Who? Surely you never met with this
Spirit of God in your conversing with the Text it self: Which if you had, you
would not have uttered such things Yet if this Third ground you had put single
by it self, as the sole, excluding the former, it were true Divinity: but
putting the two former before it, as necessary inducing causes to persuade the
Scriptures sufficiency* you do thereby utterly overthrow it, as also that Spirit
of God breathing in it, and inwardly inclining and persuading the heart to
believe. For how come we to meet with the Spirit of God in our conversing with
the Text, but because, conversing a ^ight by prayer and humility, we find it
breathing and speaking unto us, in his own word and voice? For the Spirit is
never separated from his word, as is showed before. Now if Gods Spirit breath
in the Scripture, and in our reading thereof, with a mind rightly disposed, we
find the same speaking effectually unto us to the settling of our faith: is this
spirit and word tied to any necessary dependence of any outward things, as
without which it can have no operation? Does not this spirit (as the Ioh. 3.
wind, to which Christ Compares it) blow where it lists? Can you by any art
or invention cause the wind to blow? Does not Psalm. Job 35.
God bring it out of his Treasures?

But your Conclusion is the foulest of all. For you say, this Spirit of God
seals the full assurance of the sufficiency of all Three unto us. Belying and
blaspheming the Holy spirit of God.
That is, First of your Church Tradition, as aforesaid. 2dly Of the light of
Nature. And ^dly, and in the last place, of the Scripture. But you make the
sufficiency of these 3 equal, and alike, Saving that you give your Church
Tradition, and the light of Nature, the Precedence of the Scripture And in
saying, that Gods Spirit seals the sufficiency of those two, to wit, Church
Tradition, and light of Nature, for the reason aforesaid, which are altogether
insufficient, and are a mere lie, and falsehood, and have no ground nor warrant
from Scripture: but are contrary thereto, and destroy the credit, authority,
and sufficiency thereof. I must tell you that herein you do most impiously
blaspheme the spirit of Truth, as if it were the Author, Approver, and ratifier
of a lie.

And you add: And then an not before, we are certain, that the* Scripture is
the word of God, both by Divine and Infallible proof Here still you shut out
from the Scripture all Self Authority, sufficiency* and Testimony to prove it
self the word of God, not allowing it so much, as you do to Tradition, and
the light of Nature; for these say you perform their offices sufficiently: but
you have nothing to say for the Scripture, as if that had any thing at all to
do, but to wait upon the good pleasure of Lady Tradition, and light of Nature,
for their Commendation and approbation, and then, having their good words, this
is sufficient, to bring in the Spirits testimony, to seal the sufficiency of
all three; the Scriptures sufficiency being this, to be recommended by the
other two* And then, and not before, we are certain that the Scripture is the
word of God, both by Divine, and infallible proof; but not of the Scripture it
self in any case.

But (say you) our certainty is by Faith, and so voluntary, not by knowledge of
such Principles, as in the light of Nature can enforce assurance, whether we
will or no Why, what certainty can we have, but by Faith in Christ? But what
mean you by voluntary? By your Free Will? That which Luther calls Servum
Arbitrium, servile Will, such as man's natural will is to Spiritual things.
And surely this you mean by voluntary. For before you do so highly magnify the
light of Nature, as being of such sufficiency, as we need not doubt of your
good opinion of the Natural Will of man, having as much liberty in heavenly
things, as light. Well; by Faith, and so voluntary, not by knowledge of such
Principles, as in the light of Nature can enforce assent, whether we will or
no. You spoke of such Principles before, which we answered; as also the
forceing of assent. We come now to the close of the 16 th Section.

L p. 116. I have said thus much upon this great occasion, because this
Argument is so much pressed Notorious and gross hypocrisy, pretending respect
to Scripture, when never any Jesuit, did more vilify and nullify the
Authority and credit of it. Detection of the Hipocrisy.
without due respect to Scripture. And I have proceeded in a Syntheticall way,
to build up the Truth, for the benefit of the Church, and the Satisfaction of
all men Christianly disposed. (And a little after) I labor for Edification,
and not for Destruction.

P. When I look back to the premises of this Argument, and now upon the
conclusion: I cannot but stand amazed at two things: 1. Your notorious
vilifying or rather nullifying the Authority, sufficiency, and Testimonys of
the Scripture, to prove it self to be the word of God: and 2 dly your
egregious hypocrisy, here in the close of all, as if you had done all with due
resp^ct to Scripture. And how finely you would seem to put it off from your
self, but laying the blame upon others, as the Jesuits. As if you had taken
all this pains to vindicate the Scripture from that Disrespect, which Jesuits
have of it, in their pleading for Church-Tradition. And yet do not you tell us
before, that you go the same way with the Jesuits in advancing
Church-Tradition; only you say, you go not so faare as they. And wherein, I
pray you do you come short of them? They say, Scripture Authority, that it is
the word of God, depends upon the Authority and Tradition (...) of the Church:
and you say, Scripture without Church-Tradition of no Credit, Authority, or
sufficiency, to prove it self the word of God. Nay you go further: ^or, for
all your Tradition, and the light of Nature, going before, yet not one word
has dropped from your pen, that Scripture (I say after all your preceding
inducements) is sufficient of it self, to prove it self the word of God, but
that still its Authority is precaria, at the good will of Tradition, and
Authority of the present Church, whose sufficiency you prefer before the
Scripture, in many respects, as has been showed.

And you have proceeded in this way (you say) Synthetically. What Is that? That
is (in the true E^imon of the word) by way of composition, or confederation
with the Jesuit, to bring both the Churches to a reconciliation, by your
mutual discrediting of the Scripture, as Herod and Pilate could not be made
Friends, but in consenting to put Christ to death. And as Pilate gratified
Herod, in sending Christ bound unto him whereupon they became Friends: so you
here ingratiate your self with Rome, in sending her this Book (as I suppose it
is there before this time) wherein you present her with the Scripture bound in
the fetters of Tadition, which puts on your Synthesis or League, in a fair
forwardness, the Foundation being already laid. For you say, It is to build up
the Truth for the benefit of the Church. We have discovered before what the
truth is you speak of through your Book; which is as much to say, as all that,
wherein you agree with the Church of Rome as one and the same Church, for the
benifit where of you have writ this Discourse to discredit the word of Truth.
So as by your building up of Truth, is meant your pulling of it down with that
hand, that wrote this Book. And for satisfaction of all men Christianly
disposed: that is of a peaceable Disposition, and not perverse, peevish, and
refractory, but willing to meet Rome at least in the half way. And (in a word)
All your Labor is for Edification, not for Destruction. For Edification?
Wherein? By rasing the Foundation of Faith, the Scripture, to build up the Tower
of Babel again in England? And not for Destruction, but only of the Puritan
Profession, and Religion and the power of Godliness, and the Purity of Gods
worship, and the sincere Preaching, and Preachers of the word of God, and in a
word, in rooting out the precise party, where ever your Arm of flesh can reach
them. This being your practice too well known, this must needs be your meaning
and sense of these words of the Apostle, 2* Cor. 10.8.
For Edification, and not for Destruction Which as you most wickedly pervert
and abuse ( as you 2 Pet. 3.16.
do all other Scriptures)* to your false purposes; so in this respect it is a
Conclusion not unsuitable to your whole Section, while thus you make the word of
God of no Authority by your Traditions. Mat. 15.9.
And so here an end of this Section. But not an end of the prosecution of the
same subject still: For it follows:

L. p. 118. You see, neither Hooker, nor I, Sect. 18.
nor the Church of England (for ought I know) leave the Scripture alone, to
manifest it self by the light, which it has in it self. No: but when the
present Church has prepared and led the way, like a preparing morning light to
Sunshine, then indeed we settle for our Direction, but not upon the first
opening of the morning light, but upon the Sun it self.

P. In the former Section (17.) consisting of one page, the Jesuit objecting
your words, The Bishop said, That the Books of Scripture are Principles to be
supposed, and needed not to be proved: your Answer is, A (...) or put off.
Did I say it needed no proof at all to a natural man? or to a man newly
entering upon the Faith? yea or perhaps to a doubter, or weakling in the Faith?
Can you think me so weak? I do but mention this by the way, as taking notice
with what a pretty slight you put off your recantation of that speech. But the
next passage will clear this more fully. Now this your Comparison of the
morning light, let us clearly see how weak and improper it is for your
purpose. For what is the morning light, but a beam, or beams of that Sun,
which as children of the Psalm. 19.5.
Bridegroom, do usher him out of his Chamber, signifying his near approach?
These beams (I say) are of the very same nature of that light, which is in the
body of the Sun, and do immediately issue and spring from it, inlightning the
Sky, or that part of heaven above the Horizon, which beams or morning light,
as the Sun advances nearer to his Rising Prove. 4.18.
waxes clearer and clearer unto the perfect day. But now the Authority of the
present Church, which you compare to the morning light, is no such beam Mal.
4.2.
of the Sun of Righteousness shining in the Scripture (as in his Sphere) as
that it is of the same nature of the light of the Scripture. For the Scripture
light is Divine and Infallible: but of Tradition you say, Page 90.
I cannot find that the Tradition of the present Church is of Divine and
Infallible Authority. Which if you could by all the light in the Sky at noon
day, find, you would be no Churl in hiding it from the world or putting it
under a bushel. But to hold you to the propriety of your Comparison, which at
first blush shows as fair, as the first morning light: you may know, That the
Sun makes the beams to shine, and not the whereas you say, The Authority of
the present Church, lights the Candle of Scriptures (which otherwise gives no
light) and so makes it to shine. Again 2 dly, The morning light is an but you
dare not say, yea you deny, that the present Churches Testimony or Authority,
is infallible for the inducing of belief, that Scripture is the word of God.
morning light, so soon as ever it first peepeth, or dawneth, we say, and that
truly, It is day: but an Infiel, or doubting or weak Christian, upon the first
hearing of the testimony of the present Church, That the Scriptures are the
word of God, is not so infallibly Convinced and persuaded, as therefore to
believe it to be The morning light is alone a sufficient and infallible sign
(as being an immediate effect, an essential quality issuing from the Sun) of
its near rising: but you confess, that though your present Church Authority,
be the Prime, yet it is not the Sole Gnomon.
Index or finger, to point us out the Scripture to be the word of God; but you
join with it sundry other helps, as before you tell us. Thus no way can we
find your Comparison proper, or pertinent to your purpose, being as a blind
Horse, that halts downright of a^l four. But this by way of application to the
right purpose, I conclude out of it: That as the morning light which certainly
and infallibly tells us of the approaching of the Sun rising, and which
persuades every man, whose eyes are awake, of the truth thereof, is an immediate
beam of that Sun, and of the same nature and quality of its native and
essential light: So, that which is both Prime and Sole in leading us,
Certainly and Infallibly to believe, that the Scripture is the word, yea and
working also, and begetting this Faith in us, is the light or beam of the
Scripture it self, displayed by the Ministry or Preaching of the Word, which
is as the dawning of the day, or the 2 Pet. 1.19.
Day Stars first arising in our hearts (as Peter speaks) by means whereof we
come actually not only to believe (without any other external Cause) that
Scripture is the word of God, but also to know and feel that the Sun of
Righteousness has now begun to shine in our hearts by the beam of his
Spirit; the immediate forerunner of his rising unto the perfect Day.

L. p. 120. A* C. Cannot but perceive by that which I have clearly laid down
before, that when I said Scriptures were Principles, to be supposed I did not,
I could not intend, they were prius cognita, known before Tradition, since I
confess every where, that Tradition introduces the knowledge of them.

P. I do but name these your words (as before) being but an Inculcation and
Confirmation of such things, as I have abundantly Confuted before. Only this I
add. That if the Scripture be not before the Tradition or Authority of the
present Church: whence has the present Church this her Authority? and so
whence her Testimony the Credit, to be of that absolute necessity to bring men
to believe the Scripture to be the word of God? Must you not be forced to come
into the same Circle, The Prelate in a Circle.
where a little before you found A.C. as to say (which yet you never went about
to prove, to prevent the loss of your labor) the Scripture authoriseth
Church-Tradition, and Church-Tradition necessarily introduces belief of
Scripture to be the word of God? But if you be in this Circle, there I leave you

L. p. 121. This Principle then, The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, we
cannot say is clear, and fully manifest to all men simply, and in selfe-light,
for the reasons before given.

P. The Reasons we have weighed and found them too light. But to all true
believers, in Christ; This Principle, The Scriptures are the Oracles of God, is
clear, and fully manifest, and that simply, and in selfe-light; For the
reasons and proofs before given, and which all true Christians, and Saints of
God Confess.

L. ibid. Yet we say, After Tradition has been our Introduction, the Soul
that has but ordinary Grace added to Reason, may discern light sufficient to
resolve our Faith, that the Sun is there.

P. As this so often repeated by you usque ad nauseam, as crambe bis cocta,
Coleworts twice boyld, and to no other purpose it seems, but to fill the
empty belly of this your volume, and to make your present Church Authority
swell the bigger with its ventosity, is but a repetion of the former: So I
shall not need to repeat the Refutation. Only this: Do, or can you discern
the Sun in the Scripture, by the light of your divine Candle, your Church
Tradition; And has it not so much shining light, or is it so over-clouded or
ecclipsed with the black letters, as nothing but the Authority of the present
Church, must in the first place put to her hand to withdraw the Curtain?
Surely the Sun is so glorious in it self, as be it never so much clouded, yet
that will show day above our heads if we do but look up.

L. ibid. Now men may be apt to think out of Reverence that Divinity can have
no Science above it. But your own School teaches me, that it has: namely,
The knowledge of God, and of the blessed in heaven.

P And truly, my Lord, how ever you account and Reverence Divinity: yet for my
part, I do not only most highly reverence it, but conceive and believe the
excellency of it to be so transcendent, as I hold there can be no Science
above it. For what is Divinity in its native and proper Notion? Divinity in its
proper Prime, and most sublime Notion, is the Deity, or Godhead it self:
Theiotes, signifying the Divinity or Deity, the derivation from ^eos, GOD. This
is the Prime Notion of this word Divinity. The second Notion of Divinity, is
pan to gnoston tou Theou, all which may be known of God, which being in God as
the light in the Sun, comes to be made known unto us, as by so many beams
shining partly (though in Comparison more obscurely) in his works, and partly
(and that most clearly) in his word, and most gloriously in Christ the Mal.
4.2.
Sun of Righteousness himself, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, the very
light of the Scripture, and so of his Church. And of this Divinity as Christ is
the full pattern and perfect platform: so the Essence of the eternal Deity,
and the subsistances of the 3 Persons in that one Godhead, together with all
the glorious Attributes of God: but also the whole Mystery of Christ the
Redeemer, comprehending and expressing whatsoever is necessary for us to know
and believe for our Salvation. In which respect the Scripture may be called
(and that most proproperly, as by a Title proper to it quarto modo) Gods
Divinity-Booke and his Churches Divinity-Schoole. So that in the Scripture we
have a most perfect and Complete body of Divinity, of all Divinity, of
whatsoever holy knowledge of God, and of Christ, and of our selves, requisite
to our Salvation, and the setting forth of the Glory of God. In which respect
(unless a man will presume above that which is written) we may truly say, That
Divinity being but one and the same, and Science thereof one, and the Rule of
this Science but one all comprehended in the Scripture, That Divinity has no
Science above it. Yet your Lordship has learned in the Jesuits, or Romes
School, (wherein it seems you have been more trained up then in Christ's
School) That Divinity has a Science above it. And what is that super-science,
I pray you? The knowledge of God say you) and of the blessed in heaven. If you
mean such a knowledge of God, and of the blessed in heaven, as is not revealed
in the Scripture, I say, Quae supra nos, quid ad nos? And it is presumption to
conceive of any other knowledge of God (fit for us to know) then what is
revealed in the Scripture, wherein is declared the whole counsel of God,
concerning his Glory, and our everlasting good. And for the knowledge of the
blessed in heaven, If you mean of the blessed Angels, we may know as much of
them as the Scripture has made known unto us. But this knowledge is not a
Science above Divinity. And if you mean the knowledge of the blessed Saints in
heaven; it is the same with that of the Saints on earth, only Differing in
Degrees of perfection. Or if you had meant the knowledge that is in God, and in
the blessed in heaven, you should so have expressed it, In, and not, Of. But I
think you speak of such a speculation, as is above the Sphere of our
expression. Only something though it be de non ente, you must say, that we may
take notice what a profound Proficient you are in Romes School in teaching us
such a sublime and hyperbolicall Science, as is inexpressible in Babylons
language, and therefore the fitter to darken the luster of that Divinity, which
so gloriously shines, and is so exactly set forth in the Scripture. But you
have plentifully showed us, what Reverence you bear to this Divinity.

L. p 122. (In the margent) I would fain know, why leaning too much upon
Tradition, may not mislead Christians, as well as it did the Jews.

P. The Prelate self condemned.
And I would fain know why leaning so much upon Tradition of the present
Church, as you do, might not be the Cause, that has lead you so much to
undervalue the Scriptures, and may not mislead Christians, by teaching them as
base an opinion of the whole Scripture, as the Jews have of the New Testament.

L. p. 123. Even that Scripture of the old Testament was a light, and a shining
light too: therefore could not but be sufficient, when Tradition had gone before.

P. What, told you us but now of misleading the Jews, by leaning too much upon
Tradition: and do you go about the same way to mislead them (blind as they be)
and to make them yet more blind, if possible, That you have gone to mislead
Christians? Do you tell the Jews now, that the old Testament is sufficient,
when Tradition had gone before? So as without Tradition preceding, no
sufficiency in the Book. I perceive you will not yet have done with your
Tradition as without which nothing is done.

L. p. 125. Certain it is that by humane Autthority, Consent, and proof, a
man may be assured Infallibly, that the Scripture is the word of God, by an
acquired habit of Faith: Cui non subest falsum, under which no error nor
falsehood is: but he cannot be assured Infallib^y by Divine Faith cui subesse
non potest falsum, into which no falsehood can come, but a Divine Testimony.
(And a little after, If you speak of Assurance only in General, I must then
tell you a man may be assured, nay Infallibly assured, by Ecclesiastical and
humane proof. Men that never saw Rome, may be sure, and infallibly believe,
that such a City there is by Historical and acquired Faith.

P. Although you use here a School Distinction, Cui non subest falsum, and cui
non potest subesse falsum: Of Faith Historical, and Faith Divine: Assurance
general, and Assurance particular: yet in truth in the upshot it will appear
you speak very Confusedly, as in the Babylonish Dialect or Phrase. For first
you attribute Infallibility to your acquired habit of Faith, wherein is no
falsehood, which habit of Faith you oppose to Divine Faith, wherein no falsehood
can be: whereas Infallibility, in its genuine, or Gramaticall sense imports
impossibility of Error or falsehood. For infallible is that which is not subject
unto error, which cannot be deceived. So as you do (under correction) very
much mistake in applying your School distinctions, Non subest, and non potest,
to Infalliblity. I remember indeed that the Schoolmen apply this Distinction
to Faith. Cui non subest, and cui non potest subesse falsum: but never to
Infalliblity, for that is always such, Cui non potest subesse falsum, which
cannot be deceived. Look a little better in your Schoolmen, and I believe you
will find it so, as I say. Secondly, while you would seem to put a Difference
between your acquired habit of Faith, which you express and instruct to be
Historical and Divine Faith, which you say is only, to believe the Scripture
to be the word of God: you do bring both ends together, making your Acquired
Faith, and Divine Faith one and the same kind, both Historical. Only
Historical Faith may differ respectively to the object, Humane or Divine: For
it is an Historical Faith that believes there is such a City as Rome, in which
respect it may be called Historical Faith humane: and it is an Historical
Faith that believes the Scriptures to be the word of God, in which respect it
may be called Historical Faith Divine. Divine I say, respectively to the
object; but being in kind the same Historical Faith with the other, whose
object is humane. And you tell us before, that ordinary Grace and a moral
persuasion, upon the necessary previous Authority and Tradition of the present
Church, works this your Divine Faith. All which reaches no further, but to an
Historical Faith* call it what you will, acquired, or divine. And your
building this your Faith upon the Rise of humane Authority, and moral
persuasion (how ever you use the ingredience of ordinary Grace by naming of it)
yet you are not able to say whether this Historical Faith, be an habit infused
or acquired, though you never so much daube it over with Divine. Only thus you
give us occasion to take notice, what an accute School-Divine you are, at least
so far as a distinction or two will go, which rather confound then
distinguish. But admit you could demonstrate, and make it plain unto us, that
your ordinary Grace, what ever it is, and a moral persuasion puts a special
difference between your Divine Faith, and Historical: yet to what purpose,
will all this prove? May not both these Faiths be found in wicked men, and
Reprobates, however distinguished by divine ordinary Grace, and the like? The
Schools have a known Distinction much more proper and sensible, and agreeable
to the truth of Scripture, then those you bring, and so apply For speaking of
the Difference between ordinary common Graces, and those peculiar to the Elect,
they call the first, Gratia gratis data, Grace freely given, meaning
Ministerial Graces, which God freely gives, as well to the wicked as to the
godly; he gave as Royal Karismata, or Graces to Saul, as to David; and
Apostolical Graces as well to Judas, as to Peter. And this Grace, Thus freely
given is grounded on those words of Christ, freely you have received freely
give. But that peculiar Grace, which God freely gives too, but only to his
Elect, is distinguished from the other, being called Gratia gratum faciens,
Grace making us acceptable unto God; according to that of the Apostle Ephesians.
1.2.5.6.
According as he has chosen us in him, etc. having predestined us, etc. To
the praise of the Glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved. Or that, Romans 3.24.
Being justified freely by his grace, etc. Now ordinary and Common Grace, being
freely given of God, to whom he will good or bad, depends not upon humane
Authority, as a necessary inducing Cause. Yet you make your present Church
Authority, which is but humane, a necessary previous Cause to ordinary Grace,
whereby your Historical or Divine Faith (as you call it) is wrought in
believing the Scripture to be word of God; and so what ever fair terms you
guild this Faith withal, it will be found no better then either merely humane,
or at least common unto the wicked and Reprobate, which for all this your
Divine Faith go to hell: and then the difference is not so great between your
Historical and Divine Faith (which you keep such a puzzell about) but that a
man may without any great hazard winck and choose.

Ob. But you tell us before, That ordinarily the Scriptures must have Tradition
to go before. Therefore, that you place not an absolute necessity in it.
Ordinarily? So you once say indeed. But so, as withal it must be absolutely
necessary. For you make all other means of this belief to be deficient,
without your Church-Tradition leading the way. As for the Scriptures, those
have not light sufficient for themselves, and are as a candle that must first
be lighted, before it can give light, and that is, by Church Authority. As for
the holy Holy Ghost that works not this Faith but by an ordinary Grace, and
this Ordinary Grace has no force at all, unless the present Churches
Authority prepare the way. So as this, Ordinarily, of yours, admits of no
exception at all, in any case, though never so extraordinary. And thus you
exclude that your Divine Faith, as it is a work of ordinary Grace (as you call
it) from being any Grace of God at all, except Grace of Canterbury can dubbe it
for a Grace. For all Grace is one of those two kinds, I named even now: either
that Grace of God, which makes a man freely accepted in Christ, which your
Ordinary Grace by your own Confession does not: or that common Grace, which is
said to be freely given of God to whom he will* without the intervention or
prevention of any outward means or respect; which your ordinary Graces cannot
be: for your self every where profess, that no ordinary Grace, nor any thing
else can work belief, that the Scripture is the word of God, unless your
present Church Authority, tanquam Gratia preparans ac praeveniens, as a
preparing and preventing Grace, prepare the way. And thus you see to what a
Confusion all your School Distinctions are brought. And in truth your School
Distinctions for the most part, being weighed in the just balance of the
Sanctuary, prove too light, and do corrupt the truth For even that Distinction
which I named, of Gratia gratis data, and Gratia gratum faciens, though the
terms are good and true: yet as some apply the latter, to wit, Grace making
acceptable, it is corrupt. As when by that Grace they understand Faith, Hope,
and Charity, which being infused into the soul, a^e the matter (say they) of
Justification, and of our acceptance with God Now in this sense this member of
the Distinction holds not good* but is Popish. For Faith only is that Grace,
which makes us accepted of God, but this, not as it is a work, or Grace
inherent, but as an Instrument apprehending and applying Christ, in whom alone
we are through Faith accepted of GOD, who Ephesians. 1.6.
make^ us accepted in the beloved* So as he that will find any good and sound
Distinction out of the Schoolmen, he must do as Virgil said of his reading
of Ennius, Margaritas e caeno legere, gather pearls out of the mudde: and he
must look to have them well washed, and polished, and tried by the Scriptures,
before he use them to illustrate or confirm any Doctrine of sound Divinity.
This by the way.

L. p. 226. The time was, before this A. miserable rent in the Church of Christ
(which I B think no Christian can look upon, but with a bleeding heart) that C
you and we were all of one belief. D That belief was tainted in Tract and
Corruption of time, very deeply. A division was made: yet so, as E both parties
held the Creed, and other Common Principles of belief. Of these, this was one
of the greatest, That the Scripture is the word of God. For our belief of all
things contained in it, depends upon it. Since F this Division, there has been
nothing done by us* to discredit this Principle. Nay we have given it G all
honor, and ascribed unto it more sufficiency, even to the containing of all
things necessary to Salvation, with satis superque, Blasphemous lie
enough and more then enough, which your selves have not done, do not. H And
for begetting and settling a belief of this Principle, we go the same way with
you, and a better besides. The same way with you, because we allow the Tradition
of the present Church to be the first inducing motive to embrace this
Principle: only we cannot go so far in this way, as you, A subtle
insinuation.
to make the present Tradition, I always an infallible word, of God unwritten.

P. Here I Have Alphabetically, as by A, B, C. etc. noted sundry particulars. A
That you call the Protestants seperating from the Church of Rome, a miserable
rent. Why miserable, when Christ Commands it? As Rev. 18.4. as is noted before,
and shall yet more in a fit place. So as the Protestants had been in a
miserable condition, if this separation, this rent had not been made. B 2 dly,
And must every Christian heart bleed to see it, because (it seems) yours does?
Surely this has cost the heart-blood of many thousands of Gods Saints and
Martyrs, shed and spilt by that blood drunken whore. Yet better so to perish,
by her temporally here, then to perish with her eternally hereafter; which must
have been, had not this miserable rent been made. C 3 dly, But before this rent
(say you) they and we were all of one belief. You may speak, for your self,
if you had lived before the rent was made. We doubt not, but both you would
have been of the same Faith with Rome, and would have continued in it, so as
for your part there should never have been made such a miserable rent. We know
well, both your Faith, and your Charitable and Peaceable disposition for that
matter. Yea though that one belief was tainted. That should have broken no
square. For you say, D 4 ly, That belief, that (very one belief, whereof you
and they then were, before the rent) was tainted, yea very deeply too. But I
say still, speak for your self, and your Confederates only; usurp not the
name of all Protestants quorum tu pars minima* whereof you were the least part
if any at all) that separated from Rome, whereof many, (before they came to be
called Protestants, which was upon their protesting against the Whore of
Babylon, and for their just and necessary seperating from her) dissented from,
and disliked, and (so far as the iniquity of the times, and humane frailty,
and unavoidable necessity permitted) separated themselves privately at least
from many of her most notorious and intolerable en ormites, and not a few in
their several ages, wherein they lived, openly protested against her, both by
writing and preaching, though it cost them their heart-blood for it. You have
at hand a Catalogue of them in Catalogus, Testium veritatis, and in the Book of
Acts and Monuments, and other Authors, both foreign and domesticke, and that
of f^esh bleeding memory E 5 ly, You prove your Faith was then one for hol^ing
the Creed, and other Common Principles of belief, of which one of the Greatest
etc. Indeed before that rent, Rome professed and held the letter and external
form of the Creed, but not the sense, faith, life, and substance, as elsewhere
you confess of the present Church of Rome. Did you so then, so now? I doubt
'twill prove so, in a great measure. For though you tell us, that your belief
of all things contained in the Creed, depends upon this principle, That
Scripture is the word of God. (For that is the best sense can be made of your
words) yet there be many, even fundamental Doctrines in Scripture which your
belief depends not upon, A shameful lie.
nor your practices agree unto, as both before is touched, and occasion will be
given yet more to speak of. F 6 ly, But since this Division (say you) nothing
has been done by you, to discredit this Principle, That the Scripture is the
word of God. No? Nothing? Not, Page 80.
when you say, The light which is in Scripture it self, is not bright enough,
it cannot bear sufficient witness to it self? Not, when you say, page 83, 84.
The Scripture is a light, but as a Candle that yields no light, till first it
be lighted by Tradition of the present Church? Not, when you say, page 77.
That Scripture to be the word of God, is not so demonstratively evident a
priore, that is, of and by it self primarily, as to enforce assent? Not, when
you say, page 86.
Such a full light we do neither say is, nor require to be in Scripture as is
in Prime Principles, which carry a natural light with them? Is not this point
blank against this Principle, That Scripture is the word of God? Not, when you
say, page 87.
God does not require a full Demonstrative Knowledge in us, that the Scripture
is his word, and therefore in his Providence has kindled in it no light for
that? Not, when you say, That the Scripture cannot bear witness to it self,
nor one part of it to another? And yet in all this, and much more, has nothing
been done by you to discredit this Principle, That Scripture is the word of
God? Now let the Lord of the Scripture, whose Word it is, and all the Children
of Truth be Judge in this matter against you.

G. 7 ly, Yet you dare say more, that you have given it all honor, and
ascribed unto it more sufficiency, Blasphemous lie*
(as more then all) even to the containing of all things necessary unto
Salvation, with satis superque, enough and more then enough. How? enough, and
more then enough? What? A work of Superarogation? or superarrogancie, rather.
Now fie for shame. Will no bounds of Sober Speech contain your lawless spirit,
but that you must cast it in Gods dish, That you had ascribed to his Word all
honor, and more sufficiency, and more then enough? Had you yet turned
Lyrinensis his word in the margent* superque, Abundantly, it had been both more
agreeable to reason, and not less disagreeing with Grammar. Certainly it had
become you of all other, to have qualified the construction of Satis superque,
better considering what palpable hand and harsh language you have dashed the
Credit of Gods most holy Bible withal. Extremes are not good. And your
Hypocrisy here is too grossly counterfeited. Just as some Gentlewomans bad
face, for want of Art, is daubed so much with laying on of Colors, that it is
ridiculous to every beholder. And how say you in the truth of your heart (were
there any there) that the Scripture contains all things, necessary to
Salvation, when it does not containt tha assertion of yours, That the Scripture
is not known to be the word of God, but by the Authority and Tradition of the
present Church? When yet this, That the Scripture is the word of God, is by
your own express Confession, one of the greatest Principles of belief? H 8
ly, For your going the same way with the Jesuits, partly your whole Book, and
partly all your practices do Satis superque, superabundantly witness. Only
you say, (...). Subtle Insinuation detected (...) vanity.
you cannot go so far in that way with them, to make the present Tradition,
Always an Infallible word of God unwritten. No, not Always Infallible, I
hope. Only sometimes perhaps Infallible, when you say the word of God. And if
your present Tradition be not always an Infallible word of God unwritten: I
pray you is it at any time an unwritten word of God? If it be then at such a
time especially (when its Infallibility is in Season) is it not Infallible? For
Gods word is always Infallible, be it written, or when he speaks it from
heaven. But when shall we se the time, when you will prove your present
Tradition to be a word of God unwritten, or to have any Ground at all in
written word of God, the Scripture? But if your present Church Tradition be not
always infallible, but that sometimes at least it may deceive us, certainly I
conceive our safest course will be always to go immediately and directly the
shortest Cut, to the Scripture it self, which I am sure, is always
Infallible, and will never deceive us, and not at any time to depend upon your
present Tradition, which is not always an Infallible word of God unwritten.
But me thinks I hear you say, That you make not the present Tradition, An
Infallible word of God unwritten. No not absolutely, not Always. We understand
English. But if you could prove, This your present Tradition to be but sometimes
an infallible word of God unwritten (in the use at least you put it to) it were
no great Mastery to conclude it to be (in that case) Always an Infallible word
of God unwritten; and so you should by this way of the Jesuits come full home
to Rome. But I hope you will more clearly and fully express your self in
this grand point, when (to use your own words before) It shall fit Time and
Place. Epistle Dedicatory.
In the mean time, if this be not the genuine sense, which I have picked, but
not stolen (for the interpretation is Grammatical, and sensible) out of your
words; then I confess, your meaning is more abstruse and mystical, then can
be gathered from your manner of expression, your words having a tang of that
Genesis 11. Difference between Rome and the Prelate about Tradition.
confusion of tongues at the building of that old Tower. But the sum of it
is, Here is the grand difference, between you and Rome: She makes her Tradition
always a word of God unwritten unfallible, you, yours not Always: sometimes
therefore; and so it is blasphemy.

But at length (page 127.) the Lady calls you from the point of Church
Tradition, to hear what you will say of the Church of Rome, whether you will
Confess it to be the Right Church. And (says the Jesuit) the Bishop granted
that it was. Now if the Lady were not dead (as elsewhere you tell us) I should
give her hearty thanks for being an occasion of delivering us out of this
Purgatory-lake of your tedious, irksome, and endless Discourse of your present
Tradition; wherein, otherwise, it is to be feared you lie so long, till you had
been drowned in your own puddle, or burnt up with your own hot zeal. But let
us hear your Answer to the Jesuits relation of what you granted.

L. p. 128. There is a great deal of difference between The Church, and A
Church: and some, between a True Church, and a Right Church. For the Church may
import in our language The only True Church, and perhaps the root and ground
of the Catholic. And this I never did grant of the Roman Church, nor never
mean to do. But A Church can imply no more, then that it is a member of the
whole. And this I never did, nor never will deny, if it fall not absolutely
away from Christ. That it is a True Church I granted also; but not a Right as
you imposed upon me, So as, No Right, that is No Orthodox Church at Rome. And
yet no news it is, that I granted the Roman Church to be a true Church. For so
much very learned Protestants have acknowledged before me; and the Truth cannot
deny it. For that Church which receives the Scripture, as the Rule of Faith,
though but as a partial and imperfect Rule; and both the Sacraments as
isntrumental Causes, and seals of Grace, though they add more, and infuse
these; yet cannot but be a True Church in Essence. How it is in manners and
Doctrine, I would you would lo^ke to it with a single eye.

P. Not Right then, not Orthodox, you hold the Church of Rome to be, That Is
something yet. Yet True, you ever have and will hold her to be, unless she
absolutely fall away from the Faith. Well. And yet I wot well, you give
absolutely falling away from the Faith. So large bounds, as it is to be feared,
you will never come to give her for absolutely gone, and fallen away from the
Faith, so long as she can have, but one bare thread or ragge of the profession
of the Faith of the Creed; nay if she can but say over her Creed, though (as
you Confess elsewhere) she has quite overthrown the sense of it. And if the
sense of it be destroyed, surely the Faith of it also. This will more fully
appear as we go along. We come to your Reasons why you hold Rome a True
Church.

1. For very learned Protestants, which hold with you in this: First, we can
set both as learned, and double the number of of Protestants, who will weigh
down the Scale against those, that seem to be of your opinion. Secondly, we
could out of those very Protestant Authors, whom you mean (though I suppose you
seldom read such Authors, and in other things scarce name them Honoris causa)
collect more against this opinion, That the Church of Rome is a true Church,
then you can for it. As out of Iunius himself, for Instance. I mentioned
before a la^e Book, entitled, Babel no Bethel, never yet answered by any
Jesuit, or other Priest Romish, or English, where the Author has cleared all,
or most of those Protestants, which his Adversaries alleged, and I suppose you
mean, from this opinion of yours. And then also the Author proves by many
concluding Arguments (and in my opinion unanswerable) that the Church of Rome
is no true visible Church of Christ, as having lost the very Essence of a true
Church. To which Book I refer your Lordship, could your patience but brook
the Authors name, or your Conscience not tremble at the mention of him.

To your Second Reason: First, I deny that the Church of Rome receives the
Scriptures as A Rule of Faith For first, The Rule of Faith must be in it self
simply Divine and Infallible. But such to the Church of Rome the Scripture is
not. For she makes the Infallibility and Divine Authority of the Scripture to
depend upon the Church, as you do upon Church Tradition, which you confess to
be not simply Divine and Infallible. Ergo Rome receives not the Scripture as A
Rule of Faith. Secondly, Rome receives not, holds not The Rule of Faith: Ergo
she is not a true Church; As the late Dr Carleton of Chichester in his Book of
the Church has well and learnedly proved: For not to hold the Rule of Faith,
is to deny and destroy the Faith, and to fall absolutely away from the
Foundation of Faith, and to set up a new and false Faith, upon a new and false
Foundation. Nor dare, or do you say, that Rome receives the Scripture as The
Rule of Faith, but only as A Rule of Faith, to wit, a partial Rule, as
Bellarmine calls it. But if the Scripture be (as it is) The only Rule of
Faith, and ever has been in all ages so held, till Rome in the Council of
Trent changed this Rule: then not to hold it so, for The Rule, that is, the
only Rule, but only as a partial Rule, joined with other Rules equal to it,
as her Traditions, which Bellarmine in his Book de verbo Dei non scripto, calls
the word of God unwritten: is to reject the only Rule, and so to fall
absolutely away from the Faith. And you confess, that the Church of Rome holds
the Scripture but as a partial and imperfect Rule. And is this nothing with
you? What is this, but to evacuate and utterly make void the Rule, when for a
perfect entire and absolute only Rule, it is made but a partial, imperfect,
and joint Rule? And when humane Authority is equalled with Divine: Humane
Traditions with Divine Scriptures, as an equal Rule of Faith? Nay, and those
her Traditions, which she calls her word of God unwritten, are such as teach
things directly contrary to the Doctrines of Scripture, as of Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, and the like. Is not this, a'kurosai as Christ says, to
make void and of no Authority the Commandments of God by men's Tradition? Yet
this Camel you can easily swallow, you slight this over, as a matter of
nothing: as if it were all one thing in a manner to hold the Scripture The Rule
of Faith, and A Rule of Faith, namely a part or piece of the Rule: The whole
Rule, and a partial Rule: The only perfect Rule, and An imperfect Rule. All
this breaks no squares with you, but that Rome for all this, holds the Rule of
Faith, and therefore you hold her for a true Church of Christ. But yet in so
saying, you plainly imply, That if Rome held not the Rule of Faith, she is no
true Church of Christ, but is absolutely fallen away from Christ the
Foundation. For you give this for a Reason, that Rome is a true Church because
she holds the Rule of Faith. Ergo If she hold not the Rule of Faith, she is no
true Church of Christ, but is absolutely fallen away from the Faith. Whereupon
I argue thus:

That Church, which denies the Scripture to be the only Entire, Absolute,
perfect Rule of Faith, Major*
is fallen absolutely away from Christ, and so cease to be a true Church,
that is, to have the very Essence and being of a true Church of Christ: But
the Church of Rome denies the Scripture to be the only, Entire, Absolute,
Perfect Rule of Faith: Minor.
Ergo the Church of Rome is absoluely fallen away from Christ, and so cease
to be a true Church, that is, Conclus^^^*
to have the very Essence and being of a true Church of Christ.
The Minor Proposition is confessed by your Lordship, For you say, The Church
of Rome holds the Scripture, but as A Rule, a Partial Rule, an Imperfect Rule.
Thus she denies the Scripture to be the only, Entire, Absolute, Perfect Rule
of Faith. And for the Major Proposition, you do by necessary Consequence
confess it also to be true. For you set it down as a Reason, why you hold the
Church of Rome to be a true Church, because she holds the Rule of Faith, the
Scripture: Implying, that to hold the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, is
one special note of A true Church. But now you confess again that Rome holds
not this Rule, but as a partial and imperfect Rule. And therefore denying this
Rule of Faith, she cease to be a pure Church of Christ, And (which is the
more) this the Church of Rome does ex professo and solemni Decreto, professedly
and by solemn Decrees, ratified as irrefragable, and that under Anathema to be
received of all. And this is far more then to do it by Practice only. And
yet in Practice to destroy, and overthrow, but only some special Doctrines of
Scripture, though otherwise the Scripture be professed, and confessed, in this
or that particular Church, to be the entire and only Rule of Faith: is de
facto to disclaim the whole Scripture, and to unmake it the perfect Rule of
Faith: and so thereby, such a Church, possessing such and such Errors, as are
Fundamental, that is, against the Foundation, is fallen from Christ: as has
been formerly proved. Now if but any one part of Scripture, in this or that
Doctrine of Christ, be overthrown, so as therein it is not made the Rule of
Faith; and this overthrowing such Doctrines being once professed and maintained
generally, in any one particular Church, makes that Church to cease to be a
true Church of Christ, as not holding the Scripture entirely, but professedly
overthrowing it in such and such particulars: then how much more the Church of
Rome, professing and maintaining gumne kephale, with a whores forehead, that
the holy Scripture is not the only Rule of Faith, entire and perfect, but
partial and imperfect (as your Lordship confesses) does thereby proclaim her
self to all the world, to be fallen away absolutely from Christ, and so
cease to be a true Church of God. And denying the Scriptures to be the Rule
of Faith, she denies the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone: and so is fallen quite from the
Foundation.

Nor only thus by Addition of another Rule, does the Church of Rome overthrow
the only Rule of Faith, the Scriptures: but also by denying the self
Authority of them; as also you do; and withal, by tying the sense of
Scripture to the interpretation of the Church, as also you do; at least in
difficult places; and by holding and maintaining false Doctrines, against the
Scriptures, which overthrow Christ, and wherein they will not be regulated by
the Scriptures; as you also do, in your Altars, and forbidding the Doctrines
of Grace to be Preached, and other things: which if the Church of England hold
with the Church of Rome, and with you, you and both your Churches are fallen
absolutely from Christ, and so cease to be true Churches of God. As also your
very Hierarchy makes you to be no true Church of Christ, were there nothing
else; as before is sufficiently proved. And if you desire any further proof,
that the Church of Rome is no true Church of Christ; I still refer you to the
forementioned Book, Babel no Bethel. And though you suppressed the Book, yet ten
to one, but one of your Hounds will hunt it out for you.

Next, for the Sacraments: which is your second Reason: you say, The Church of
Rome holds both the Sacraments as isntrumental Causes and Seals of Grace,
though they add more, and misuse these: Ergo she cannot but be a true Church
in Essence. For Answer: First, she holds them not absolutely to be Sacraments,
but dependently upon the Priests intention; which you mention elsewhere. And so
has the Council of Trent defined, of the Sacraments: so Vega: so Bellarmine.
Secondly, if she be sure the Priests intention be not wanting, or going a
wool-gathering in his Consesecration, then she makes the Sacraments to be, not
Isntrumental Causes of Graces, but aitia kuria, Principal and efficient
working causes of Grace, ex opere operato, as they barbarously speak, by the
immediate virtue of the work wrought. So the Council of Trent also. So as they
shut out the Holy Ghost from this work, as the Principal Efficient worker and
sealer of Grace. Thirdly, For Baptism, which you make to be an Infallible
Mark of that Church to be Christian, besides their infinite corruptions of the
Element of water, (which the Apostle calls pure water) with their spittle,
salt, cream, exorcismes, or conjurations of the Devils insultations, and the
like, they hang the very being, not only the virtue, of this Sacrament, upon
the Priests intention, which intention of the Priest is so uncertain, as Vega
(one of the prime Sticklers in the Council of Trent, as aforesaid, in his Book
upon the Council of Trent, especially the sixth Session, where he treats of
certainty of Faith, in Justification, Confesses, that there can be no
certainty of Salvation to a man, because he cannot be certain, whether he has
true Baptism or no; and that in regard of the Priests intention, whereof he
cannot be certain: So as by this their own Doctrine, no one Papist can be
sure, that he is a Christian: and so consequently, neither can all the members
of that Church severally, nor conjunctly the whole Body it self, be sure
whether they, or it be Christian or no* and so the Church of Rome, upon this
very ground, cannot resolve certainly, whether she be a Church of Christ or no;
unless your Testimony will help her out at a dead lift. And that not only in
regard of the Priests intention in the Sacrament of Baptism, but also in their
Additionall Sacrament of Orders, one of these more, which they have added to
the two. So as for default of the Popes intention in ordering of Prelates, or
of the Prelates invention in ordering one another, and in ordering of Priests,
and of Priests intention, in Consecrating their Sacrament of Baptism (as
themselves, Vega and others, do argue the case) they are all put to the
stagger, whether they have in that Church either Priesthood, or Sacraments. For
all hangs upon that weak pin, or hair, of the Priests intention. So as
another of their Primipili, a Standard Bearer* of the Dominicans, in the same
Council, Dominicus Soto forementioned) in his Book de natura and gratia,
says, that, Deus in potestate Sacerdotis posuit Populi salutem, GOD has put
the peoples Salvation in the Priests power. Now all this considered, and
withal, the time, when this was made a Decree, in the Council of Trent, a
matter of 100 years ago, and when it was but new, and the Pope and Prelates,
and Priests could not perhaps, of a good while learn their lesson perfectly,
and so get a habit of it, but that in all their Consecration of Prelates, and
Priests, still intention was to seek, and where it breaks off, as in the Pope
and Prelates, in their Consecration of Orders, there follows a mere nullity
in succession of the whole Generation of Priests downwards, and so through that
whole body no Priesthood now, no Sacraments: what evidence can the Church of
Rome now give us, or what assurance can she have (besides the bare name) That
she is still a Christian Church? Only Vega helps it, as well as he can, That in
reason and Charity men are not to think, that the Priest should be so
careless at the Consecration* as not to look to his Intention, upon which the
Salvation of all men^ souls depends.

Fourthly for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or of the Altar, as they call it:
First this is in the same Predicament with Baptism, for the Priests intention,
which if not present, at the Consecration of the Host (as they call it) there
is no Transubstantiation, no body of Christ, and so they worship, a wafer
instead of Christ, and so by their own Confession, in that case they commit
material Idolatry, as a Sweet.
Jesuit confessed in Dispute with Dr Featly. But Secondly, by the very name of
Sacrament of the Altar, they destroy the Sacrament that Christ ordained in his
last Supper, called therefore 1 Cor. 11.20.
the Supper of the Lord. For they have turned it from a Supper, to a sacrifice,
yea and that from an Eucharisticall sacrifice (as the Fathers called it) to a
Propitiatory sacrifice, for the sins of quick and dead; as is noted before. And
so this Sacrament they have Non sacramented, and made of it a whole burnt
sacrifice. Secondly, they have utterly destroyed the materials, or Element in
this their Sacrament, the bread and wine, that no man should so much as dream,
or once take it for the Lords Supper. For a Supper cannot be without bread and
drink: and he^e is neither. And so it is neither Supper nor Sacrament. And
thus they have taken away, no^ only the cup from the people, but the bread
also, altogether. So as there is nothing in their Sacrament but a mere lie,
mere imaginations, Phantasmes of Accidents without subject; as we said before.
And so enough of this.

And lastly, the Church of Rome having disanulled the Sacraments of Grace, it
has withal disabled them from being seals of Grace. For it is the property
of a seal to give a sure and certain Impression, and thereby a Confirmation of
the Covenant. But in Popish Sacraments all certainty is taken away, as is
showed; and so having lost the seals, consequently the Covenant of Grace it
self is of no force unto them. And thus, in denying the two Testaments to be
the only rule of Faith, and overthrowing the two Sacraments the seals of
Faith; yea having lost and disclaimed the true Saving Faith it self: what
evidence has Rome left her to show and prove, that she is now a true Church of
Christ, or has the Essence of a true Church? Let her show her evidence. As he
said, Iugd. 6.32*
Let Baal, if he be a god, plead for himself. Yet all this is of no Force to
your Lordship, but that, like Ixion embracing a cloud for Juno (as it is in
that Fable) so you embrace but a cloud, or rather the shadow of a cloud,
instead of the once fair Virgin Rome; you must needs have her a true Church
still. She only (say you) misuses the two Sacraments. A small trivial trifle,
to speak of. Misusing then, is nothing with you. What say you then to those
wicked Princes and Priests of Israel 2 Chronicles. 3^* 16.
that misused the Lords Prophets? Was this nothing? They so misused them, that
they stoned them to death. And so the Church of Rome has so misused the two
Sacraments that they have stoned them them to death, and left not one alive:
But they have made amends for it. For (say you) they have added more, even no
less then five, which are as the five wounds, wherewith the Lord was crucified
to death. For those five have eaten out the other two of Christ's own ordaining,
both expressing his death, the one for Romans ^*
ingrafting us into it, the other for growth and strength by it, as our
spiritual food. And these five Sacraments fo humane invention, they must have
their virtue of conferring Grace ex opere operato, being all, as they use them,
a mere evacuating of Christ's me its. But time permits not a longer discourse
of them. Enough is said for Answer. And for Conclusion, the Church of Rome
having taken away the Authority of Scripture, and added her own Traditions: and
having taken away and misused the Lords Sacraments, and added their own
Sacraments: what remains to that Church but that which the Divine John
Concludes the whole Bible withal? I testify unto every man that hears the
words of the Prophecy of this Book: If any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this Book: And if any
man shall take away from the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his
part out of the Book of life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things
which are written in this Book. Out of the Holy City, which is the Church of
Christ. Here then, in this holy City, is no place for the Church of Rome.

L. p. 131.132* The Church of Rome both was, and was not, a right, or Orthodox
Church, before Luther made a breach from it. For in the Primitive times of it,
it was a most right and Orthodox Church: but upon the immediate times before
Luther, or some Ages before that, Rome was a corrupt and tainted Church, far
from being right. And A Privy Nippe.
yet both these times before Luther made his breach.

P. The Conclusion then of your speech here is this, That Luther made his
breach from the Church of Rome, not only as it was Corrupt and tainted
immediately, or in some Ages before, but also as it was right and Orthodox in
her Primitive Times. For you say, And yet both these times before Luther (as
well those wherein the Church of Rome, was most right and Orthodox, as those
wherein after, before Luther it was corrupt and tainted) made his breach. And
thus you make the rent on the Protestant party, to be not only from the
corrupt and tainted Church of Rome, but from the most Right and Orthodox Church
of Christ. A pestilent speech, bewraying the speaker to be in the very Act.
8.23.
gall of bitterness* and in the bond of iniquity, and worhty to be abhorred
and abandoned of all that bear the name of Protestants. But this agrees with
that which we noted before, how you exclude all the Protestant Reformed
Churches, beyond the Seas (where your Prelacie and Hierarchy is not erected,
nor my Lord Bishops Chair allowed) from being any Churches of Christ, or
members of the true Catholic Church. For here also in Luthers rent from the
Church of Rome) not only as corrupt and tainted, but as once Right and
Orthodox) you include all those Reformed present Churches, and to exclude them
out of the true Church of Christ. But as before we have showed and proved, and
shall yet more upon fit occasion ministered, upon the same cause, for which you
exclude all Reformed Protestant Churches beyond the Seas from being Churches of
Christ, because they are separated from the Church of Rome, and from all
Prelacy and Hierarchy: we do exclude you, and Rome, with your Prelaticall and
Hierarchicall Churches, and Government Ecclesiastical, from being any true
Churches of Jesus Christ. And whereas you say, Rome was once Right and
Orthodox; it is true that in Paul's time the faith of those Christian Romans was
famous throughout the world; and so it might continue pure for a time after:
but when once the Prelacie and Hierarchy of Rome, and that but within Romes
Diocese, was erected, it became, Ipso facto, Antichristian: and after when the
Bishop of Rome became supreme over all Christendom, then it was the Church of
Antichrist, from which it is necessary for all true Christians to make a
perpetual Separation.

L. p. 133. The Roman Church which was once Right, is now become wrong, by
embracing superstition and error.

P. Such is your style, to touch that delicate Woman tenderly, as saying, She
is now wrong by embracing superstition and error. But not by defiling her self
with abominable Idolatries. This you never once charge her with in all your
Book: as we shall see more at after. And only error, as, humanum est errare:
but you never tell her of her Heresies, and Apostacy from Christ, and her
Doctrines of Devils. Beware of that. You have therefore put me to the greater
pains in dealing plainly both with her and you.

L. ibid. It Is too true indeed, that there is a miserable rent in the Church,
and I make no question, but the best men do most bem^ane it, nor is he a
Christian, that would not have unity, might he have it with Truth.

P. You are often putting your finger into this scarre, or rent. An Argument it
pains you, because ubi dolor, ibi digitus. And I am persuaded, the more you
put your finger in it, the wider you will make it. And certainly those that are
indeed the best men are so far from bemoaning such a rent, as they rejoice in
it (the cause considered) as in their glory and safety. And such Christians as
have the greatest wisdom tempered with their goodness, do see such an
Impossibility of Reconciliation with Rome, that they account it the greatest
folly in the world, once to dream of such an unity, as is coupled with a
condition of Truth, I mean Truth indeed, not such a Truth as you mean there,
where nothing but superstition and error, Idolatry and Infidelity, Hypocrisy
and Iniquity, Ambition and Avarice, Pomp and Pleasure, are the only
supporters of Peter's Infallible (but counterfeit) Chair. Unless you mean (as
you must do) those good men, which are your Confederates in your Idolatrous
Altars, and other Superstitions and Idolatries, halting between two opinions.
God and Baal, and have already one foot over Romes threshold^ accounting
themselves with your Church of England, one and the same Church with Rome, as
two branches of the same tree; as two Sisters of the same venture, ready to
salute each other with the kiss of amity and unity, as 1 King. 20.
A^ab did his Brother B^nh^da^: then much may be; what should hinder your
unity? And for your Truth (as we said before) we know very well what it is:
Rome will not want for that, which you call Truth.

L. ibid. But I never said, nor thought, that the Protestants made this rent.

P. I pray you do you think, as you speak? But admit it* Why should you think
so? Or why are you so zealous, in making such an Apology, which true
Protestants indeed will never thank you for. But you are such a Protestant, as
I dare say would not have been the first, that should have made the rent; no
nor the hindmost neither, so firm you are for peace. But I noted before a
necessity of Separation to be made by the Protestants from Rome, as Christ
admonishes, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, etc.

L. p. 135. He must leave my words to my self, and their sense either to me,
or to the genuine construction, which an Ingenious Reader, can make of them.

P. 'Twere well, If you would observe the same Law your self to others, Then
you would not so frequently as you do Isa. 29.21.
make a poor Minister an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that
reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught* as the
Prophet speaks.

L. ibid. The Protestants did not get that name, by protesting against the
Church of Rome, but by protesting (and that when nothing else would serve)
against her errors and superstitions. Do you but remove them from the Church of
Rome, and our Protestation is ended, and the Separation too.

P. Yes, by protesting against the very Church of Rome, got they, and that
deservedly the name of Protestants. For were not those errors and superstions
you speak of, yea and Antichristianisme, and abominable Idolatries, and
universal Apostacy; become the very body and soul of the Religion faith, and
practice of that Church? Was not your Dalilah, the Church of Rome, become that
Harlot, and Mother of whoredoms, and all abominations, before the Separation
and rent was made? Could they then protest against her corruptions, and not
withal against her self? Were not all her corruption: so incorporated unto
her, as they were altogether inseparable from her, like the Ier. 13.23*
Blackamores skin, or the Leopards spots, which cannot be changed? And do not
you confess, that they protested against her Corruptions, when nothing else
would serve, when there was no remedy left, when she was grown incorrigible, So
as they might have said, as in the Prophet, Ier. 51.9*
we would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed* Forsake her and let us
go every one into his own Country: for her judgment reaches unto heaven,
and is lifted up even to the Skies. It applies it self. And my Lord, you
speak too late, and in vain to A.C. to remove Romes errors and superstition: A
C. is not of the Faith, to remove such mountains. He cannot w^sh the Blackmore
white. You must procure such a General Council, as is at least equal to that
of Trent, to reverse all those Decrees, whereby all Romes superstitions and
errors are so ratified, as England will sooner hear of a Parliament for
Reformation, then Rome will endure the thoughts of any more General Councels,
to question or meddle with her Trent Decrees. Rome is now settled upon her lees,
and you shall sooner remove the City of Rome it self from her muddy Tiber,
then the Church of Rome from her superstitions. Nor is the black skin more
conaturall to the Ethiopian, nor spots to the Leopard, then Idolatry,
Superstition, Infidelity, Apostacy, and all error is conaturall to the Beast
with seven heads, and ten horns, as making up both the Complexion and
Constitution of that painted Whore. And therefore you might have saved all this
labor in vain, in writing such a Volume, out of a hope to work an unity with
Rome, when her superstitions and errors shall be removed; and that is ad Graecas
Calendas, when men sheere their Goats: so in this respect you may safely say,
That when Romes errors and Superstitions are removed, our Protestations and
Separation is ended. And so may I.

L p. 136. Protestants do but protest the sincerity of their Faith against the
Doctrinall corruption, which has invaded the great Sacrament of the Eucharist,
and other parts of Religion

P. Well were it for you, and your present Church of England (as you have
lately made it, or would at least make it) if you had such sincerity of Faith
to protest against Romes doctrinall corruptions, as true Protestants have* But
why do you call the Lords supper, The Great Sacrament of the Eucharist? Is it
Great, because you give it a Name, not known in Scripture. Or because it is so
grandized in the Church of Rome, as it is made like the Great Act. 19.34.
Diana of the Ephesians, whom all the Pontifician world worshipeth? Or it is
Great comparatively to Baptism, because this is celebrated in the Font at the
Church door, near the Belfrey, and That upon your high Altar, which you have
advanced at the chief (as you esteem it) and East end af your Chancels, and of
your stately Cathedrals? Or Great, because in your Devotion you bow toward
that place, whence (it seems) you look for your help, yea so lowly fall down
and worship before it, as before the Lord your maker? Or what is it that your
Eucharist is become with you so Great a Sacrament, Because it, or, your self
is Great with Child of a young new God-Almighty? But however, For my part, I
reverence every Ordinance of God, but I dare not make nor esteem them greater,
then God has made them, nor give them other Names and Titles, then God has
given them, least I either seem to be wiser then my Maker, and their Author; or
should give more honor to them then is due: this being (as woeful experience
has taught) the ready way to rob God of his honor, to transfer it to the
creature, and set it up instead of God. But loath you are, I know, to call the
Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.20
the Lords Supper, as the Scripture calls it, least it might call for the 1
Cor. 10.21
Lords Table (as the Scripture also terms it) and so your high Altar should
have no more Room in the Church. But do the true Protestants protest the
sincerity of their Faith, only against the Doctrinall Faith, which has
invaded your Great Sacrament of the Eucharist? Yes, you add, and other parts
of Religion. What be those? That we may know those special Doctrinall
Corruptions, against which you say Protestants do protest the sincerity of
their Faith. For Rome has many Doctrinall Corruptions against which true
Protestants protest, which you do not so much as mention in all your Book, and
such too, as do ^^atly overthrow the Foundation Christ. As Justification by
works for one, which we have touched before. Yea and Rome has many, and those
most damnable corruptions, which you are so far from accounting corruptions,
as you make them Essential parts of Gods worship. I name Altars for one. Of
which also before. And these things we Protestants protest the sincerity of our
Faith against. But you are none of those Protestants, as not professing, much
less protesting the sincerity of any such Faith.

L* p. 138. A right sober man may without the least touch of insolence or
madness, dispute a business of Religion with the Roman either Church or
Prelate (as all men know Irenaeus did with Victor) so it be with modesty, and
for the finding out or confirming of truth free from vanity and purposed
opposition against even a particular Church.

P. This passage I cited before in my Preface to your Lordship, yet I here
recite it again, because perhaps all will be little enough to put you in mind
thereof: For as I told you before, the Greatness of the Cause has caused my
style and Spirit to mount upon the wings of zeal for my Christ, and for his
Church in a higher degree and strain then ordinary. And that for this you
Censure me of insolence or madness (as I fear it will be the best defense you
can make for your Cause always excepted the Bill in Star Chamber) I have no
remedy, but patience, committing the Cause to him that judges rightly. And as
I have done it for the finding out of the truth, so this has caused me a great
deal of moyle in digging and removing away a mass of earth and rubbedge,
which you had cast, to hide this Treasure from us. So as a purposed opposition
was not it, that set me upon this Great task, but yet I oppose you, and
purpose to detect your falsities so fairly gilded over with hypocrisy, that
you might not impose too much upon your Credulous Reader. You aledge for this
purpose the Example of Irenaeus, arguing a Case with Victor Bishop of Rome,
which you say all men know. But my Lord, I suppose all men do not know it. And
because it is a matter both worthy, and not unnecessary for all men to know it:
I will take occasion here to speak something of it, as not impertinent also to
our present purpose.

Toward the end of the second Century, there was a difference between the
Asian Church, and the Roman, about the Day of Celebrating the memory of the
Lords Resurrection. The contention grew hot (as commonly men are most eagre in
propounding their own devises in matter of Religion) so as, because the Asian
Churches would not conform to Victor Bishop of Rome, he began to fume and to
thunder, and threaten them all with Excommunication. Irenaeus, who lived in
France, for this reproves Victor, telling him, that he ought not to proceed and
deal so with Asian Churches for such differences, as were of things at that
time accounted Indifferent. Some, says he, fast one day before Easter; some,
two; some, more; some, Tesparakonta horas.
40. hours together (whereupon by the way it seems, that those 40. hours were
afterward turned into forty days, for your Lent Fast) kai cuden elatton
pantes o^uioi eirteneusan te, kai eireneuomen pros alluious: yet nevertheless
(says he) all these lived peaceably together, and we also are at peace one
with another. Kai he diaphonin tes nesteias ten homonoian tes pist^os
sunistesi: And this difference about Fasting commends (says he) the unity of
Faith. And he relates unto him also the examples of sundry of his Predecessors
in the Sea of Rome, who neither kept it themselves, nor command of it to
others; and yet nevertheless they that observed it not, were at peace with
those that came to them from the neighbor Churches or Congregations, wherein
it was observed. Nor were any at any time cast out of the Church about the
Manner or Custom. But those Presbyters (says he) who before you observed it
not, Hoi prosou Presbuteros. Fpempon Eukaristian.
sent Commendations or kind salutations and greetings, as tokens of Charity, to
those of other neighboring Churches, who did observe it. And blessed
Polycarpus sojourning at Rome in the time of Anicetus, and they being at some
small odds between them, yet preserved peace, and did not fall out about this
matter. For neither could Anicetus persuade Polycarpus not to observe it, nor
did Polycarpus persuade Anicetus to observe it; but each left other to their
own Customs. And thus they communicated together; and in the Church or
Congregation Anicetus gave the Eucharist to Polycarpus out of a reverent
respect, and so they dismissed each other in peace, and in all Churches, but
those that observed it, and those that observed it not, had peace one with
another. And thus Irenaeus pheronumos it is, according to his Name, became a
Peacemaker to all the Churches. So Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 26. Et Socr. lib. 5.
Eccl. Hist. c. 22.
Eusebius.

Now as these things I here relate by Occasion: so the Consideration that
sundry particulars therein may be not unusefull. As 1. That things Indifferent,
and of humane Ordinance in matters of Religion, ought not to be imposed upon
men's Consciences as necessary to be observed, but in such things Christian
Congregations or Churches ought to be left free. Secondly, in variety or
difference in opinions, or manners and customs in things Indifferent,
Christians may and should keep fast the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, and testify the unanamity of Faith in the diversity of Factions,
nothing being done against Gods word. Romans 14.5.
One man (says the Apostle) esteems one day above another: another esteems
every day alike. Let every man be persuaded in his own mind. And v. 13. Let us
not judge one another in these things, but judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way. And v. 19. Let
us follow after the things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may
edify another. So, All meats are in their own nature clean: but of any think
this or that unclean, to him it is unclean. And that whole Chapter is of
things indifferent (such at least, as those Primitive times in the more tender
infancy of the Church admitted and esteemed indifferent) as of Days and
Meats, wherein men's Consciences were not to be forced. And as concerning our
Christian liberty, we must take heed (says the Apostle) least by any means it
become a stumbling block to them that are weak* Thus we see what the Christians
in the primitive Ages did. Thus did the Bishops of Rome themselves before
Victor, whom Irenaeus calls Presbuterous, Presbiters. Thirdly, Victor is
reprooved by Irenaeus for breaking this peace among the Christian Churches, and
s^eking to bring their Christian liberty unto bondage, by forcing them is
conform to his assumed n^w Altar, wherein his Antichristian pride and Tyranny
began to show it self in attempting what his Predecessors (...) not do^ in
this kind. Fourthly, Victor being thus reproved, defi^^ed from his violent
course, and yielded to Irenaeus his Allegations, and so gave way for Churches
to enjoy their liberty with peace.

Now, my Lord, to apply these things: Hereby you may see, how things in their
own nature indifferent, ought to be left free, and not to be made burdens and
bonds to men's Consciences; that so Christian Liberty and Peace, may be
preserved inviolate. You see, how those ancient Bishops or Presbyters of Rome,
bound not this liberty, brake not this peace. You see, how Victor presuming to
violate both, yet upon the reproof of Irenaeus (though inferior to him in
place) he yielded to reason, suffered not pride or passion to predominate, but
left to the Churches both their Liberty and Peace. But now for you my Lord, you
are not contented only to impose with rigor upon men's Consciences those
Ceremonies which you otherwise call Indifferent, yet enforce them as necessary
as being also by man's Laws Commanded, and such, as in point of Indifferency
might justly be questioned, were they not superstitious: but also in erecting
and imposing, both besides Man's Law, and against Gods Law, other both
idolatrous and superstitious devises (as your stone or wooden Altars, with
their Equipage, and service in adorations, and the like) and those borrowed
from the Church of Rome her self, none (since Victor) infinitely corrupted,
and deeply deceived, yea drowned in all Idolatries and Superstitions; which
have been of late so violently and universally pressed upon all Churches within
your Reach, that what confusions or combustions it may further cause, the Lord
knows: But this we are sure of, that as the liberty of Men's Consciences is
hereby generally brought into bondage, and both the outward and inward peace of
the Churches violated, and broken to pieces, while you cry for peace, and cease
not to press your Universal Conformity, as if it were the way of quenching
the flame, to pour out the Oil of a mere nominall Peace: so the Faith of
Christ, and the salvation of Christian men's souls is hereby utterly subverted,
as formerly is showed. And of these things you have been sufficiently
admonished, and convinced by some Ministers of Christ. But you say, It was too
roughly done, not as Irenaeus reproved Victor. Is that all? But consider how
truly; And how diseases the more desperate, require the sharper medicines. Yea
as the Poet said, Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera
trahatur. I leave you to English it. But that the reproof were true, though
sharp, did you as Victor did, who suffered himself to be victus, overcome by
Irenaeus his reproof and Allegation? Nay you, though both victus and
convictus, vanquished and convinced in your Conscience and knowledge of the
truth of all those enormities which you were charged withal, yet you must be
Victor, not resting till you had sent away your Reprover with a Censure more
bitter, and sharper then the sharp reproof could be; and yet not desisting
from your violent course to enforce an Universal Conformity, whereby the whole
Land is infected with terrible combustions, and those no less further
dangerous, then already full of damage. Such a Peacemaker is your Conformity.
Is this the way think you to make you Victor? Soft and fair. For though
perhaps you glory in your tyrannical conquest over the poor Body of your
Reprover, yet while your spirit does (to use the Apostles word to the same
purpose) hupernikan, become more then Victor (as before is noted) and so his
Cause, not foiled but confirmed and crowned in his suffering for it: never
think your self a Victor. No no, my Lord, never think to be victor, by
fighting against Christ; Lay down your violence in pressing your Conformity:
fight not against the common peace, by disturbing the peace of men's
Consciences: Lay not siege to Christian liberty in enforcing even things
indifferent, and how much less such as are both in their nature and use
Idolatrous, Superstitious, and directly against the express word of God. But
that you will, that you must needs set up your Romish Altars, with your other
devices suitable, yet enforce them upon Gods Ministers and People by your
terrible commands and threats armed with High Commission Power, or Princes
Edicts. Convince men as much as you can by the strength of your powerfullest
persuasive reasons, and draw them by your gentlest motives, but do not hale
and dragge them with the violence of your Archiepiscopall power, and Romish
zeal Throw not Godly Ministers out of their Ministry and Means. and that by
Hundreds, with their Wives and Children exposed to all miseries of poverty, and
all because they will not, dare not yield to your lawless Prelaticall
Impositions, Innovations, Usurpations. But if you will needs proceed on in that
your violent course against Christ and Christian liberty, and peace of men's
Consciences, assure your self you shall not pr^sper, you shall not be victor,
Christ will confound you with all your Power and Policy. And He shall be both
Irenaenus and Victor for his Church, both to Conquer his Enemies, and to
restore Peace to his People. And thus much of your example of Irenaeus and
Victor.

L. p. 141. Well, thus the whole Militant Church is holy, and so we believe.
And if she err in the Foundation, that is, in some one, or more Fundamental
points of Faith, A most (...) conclusi^n of an erroneous faith.
then she may be a Church of Christ still, but not Holy, but becomes
Heretical; And most certain it is, that no Assembly (be it never so General)
of such Heretics, is or can be holy.

P. Do you believe the whole Militant Church to be holy? And so do I. But
your whole Militant Church is not the same with that, which I believe is holy.
For your whole Militant Church whereof you profess to be a member, is, in
plain terms, the Antichristian Church, and the Church Malignant, which is a
persecuter of the true Militant Church of Christ; as both has been, and yet
will be made more manifest. So as your Militant Church is properly so called,
for no other reason, but because it makes War against Christ and his Saints,
Rev. 12.7. and 13.7. and 16.14. and 17.14. but the true Militant Church of
Christ, is so called, because she fights spiritually under Christ's banner
against Sin, the World, the Flesh, the Devil, and cruel Persecuters, whom
Rev. 13.12.
she overcomes by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of her Testimony, not
loving her life unto the death. So as your Militant Church is a name which you
have usurped, abused, and perverted; whereas it is to be named according to its
nature, The Church Malignant. For further proof hereof, you say, if she err
in some one, or more Fundamental points, etc. Which implies your Militant
Church may err in points Fundamental. Which cannot possibly be understood of
the only true, holy, Catholic Militant Church of Jesus Christ. For this
whole Militant Church of the Elect cannot, either in whole, or in part, or in
the least member of it, err in any Fundamental point, so as thereby to bec^me
unholy. For this were else to fall from Christ, and from ^he Com^munion of
Saints, by being seduced by Antichrists and Mat. 24.24.
false Prophets, who shall deceive, if it were possible (but it is not
possible) the ver^ Elect. This erring in the Foundation belongs, and extends to
all the Reprobates of the world, who are by Antichrist seduced unto their
perdition; who 2 These 2.1^.11.
because they receive not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved, God
shall send them strong Delusions, to b^leeve a lie, yea to believe that for
truth, which their own ^eared Conscience tells them is a lie. For not to
receive the love of the truth, implies, that they had received the truth unto
acknowledgement and conviction, but the love of this truth they embraced not.
But the whole Militant Church of Christ (I say) cannot be so seduced unto
perdition, or to fall from Christ. What is it to fall from Christ? To fall from
Christ is to fall from that Faith and love of Christ, which once they
professed; that is, from the Faith of the Doctrine of Christ, and from that
love, which they professed toward it. And this fa^ling from the Faith of
Christ, is when any one Fundamental point of faith is denied, and persisted
in, as we have formerly proved; as in the 1 Cor. 15.14
Resurrection, and Gal. 5.2.4.
Circumcision, and sundry others. I might add here many other Instances; as
the Denial of all the Doctrines of Grace in Gods Free Election, Redemption,
etc. which Grace and Merit of Christ is peculiar to the Elect only. I will
only add one more here which I but touched before. O^ the Lords (...)-Day.
He that denies the Lords day, to be the Sabbath day of Christians, commanded
no less to Christians in the 4th Commandment, then the seventh, or last day
of the week was to the Jews: he erres in the Foundation, becomes unholy, and
falls away from the Faith of Christ. This I demonstrate thus. First, The 4 th
Commandment is Moral, and so eternal, and unchangeable. And as the eternal
sabbatisme is in heaven, belonging to the Church Tryumphant, so there is a
sabbatisme temporal, pertaining to the Church Militant in this world. This
sabbatisme (as the other) is the rest of God. Psalm. 95.
His Rest, says David. This Sabbatisme in the Church Militant is by God
himself appointed to be solemnly observed of the whole Congregation on that
seventh day of the week, whereon himself rested. This Sabbath or rest of God
was on the seventh or last day of the week, upon the finishing of the work of
creation. And therefore, for that very cause, God commanded his People in the
Old Testament to sanctify that Sabbath day weekly. This is given as the Reason
of its sanctification by the People: The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: For in six d^yes he made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh:
Therefore, etc. Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day, the Lords Sabbath day.
And note, he says not, Remember to sanctify the seventh or last day of the
week: but Remember to sanctify the Sabbath day. These words are the Moral
substance of the Commandment. The rest is an exposition and application of it,
the exposition to keep holy that Day for Sabbath, which is the Lords own
Sabbath day, wherein himself has rested. Note this well* for I will speak
much here in few words. Weigh them therefore, number them not. The particular
application of the seventh or last day of the week, as wherein God rested from
his works of Creation, is commended and commanded to Gods people under the Old
Testament. So as if there had not come in afterward, a more glorious Sabbath,
or rest of Gods, as from a more glorious work of a more glorious Creation: we
Christians also should have kept that seventh day that the Jews kept. But that
this more glorious day of a more glorious rest of God from a more glorious
work, being come: then the same 4 th Commandment commands us Christians to
keep this new Day of Rest, of the Lord our God. So as though the Day be
changed, yet the Commandment is the same. It binds us still to sanctify the
Sabbath of the Lord our God.

Secondly, for the application of the 4 th Commandment to us Christians.
Remember to keep the Sabbath day holy. What Sabbath day? Or what day for
Sabbath? The Sabbath day of the Lord thy God, wherein himself rested. What day
is that? The first day of the week. This is another seventh day, reckoning the
week backward. Now on this first day of the week the Lord our God Jesus
Christ, after that he had finished the work of Redemption (being a new
Creation, and much more glorious then the former, in many respects) rose again
from the dead, and so entered into his Rest that morning and moment of his
Rising again. He entered then I say into the state of Rest, though not into the
place of Rest, till his Ascension. This is sufficient. But the work of
Redemption was finished on the Cross. Not altogether* on the Cross, Christ
endured and finished his suffering of the pangs and pains of death, when he
said Consummatum est, It is finished: but there remained the bonds of death to
be endured, and that was in the grave 3 days, to redeem us, as well our bodies
from the grave, as our souls from hell on the Cross. Now all this being
finished, to wit, the whole work of Redemtion: Christ rising the 3 d day,
therein rested from his work. And this being the Sabbath or Rest of the Lord
our God, surpassing the former Rest in glory, and into which rest or sabbatisme
all believing Christians do enter, and have an Interest (as Heb. 4.3.) it
follows necessarily, that as by Christ's example of Resting on that day, as by
his Commandment to keep the Sabbath day of the Lord our God, wherein himself
has rested, that we Christians do sanctify the Lords day, the first day of
the week, for our Christian Sabbath day, according to the 4 th Commandment.
Which if we do not, as not holding our selves bound by the 4 th Commandment:
Then all these errors in the fundamentalls of faith follow upon it:

As first, by not sanctifying the Lords day for our Christian Sabbath day, we
utterly deny, overthrow and destroy the Morality of the 4 th Commandment,
which to the Militant Church on earth stands in this, To sanctify the Sabbath
day of the Lord our God. It commands us this, or nothing; and if nothing, it
loses both the Nature and Name of a Commandment. And if you do acknowledge
and believe it to be (as it is) one of Gods ten Moral Commandments: then of
necessity you must either sanctify the first day of the week for Sabbath,
whereon Christ arose and rested: or else, you must sanctify that seventh day
of the Old Testament, which God rested on from his work of Creation, which the
Jews observed. And if you keep the Jews Sabbath, you must turn Jew, and deny
Christ to be come in the flesh. For in Deuteronomy. 5.12.13.14.15*
Deuteronomy God commands them to keep the Sabbath day, in memory of their
Redemption from Aegipt; and so their Sabbath day was turned into a type of
another Sabbath or Rest, that was to be brought in upon the accomplishment of
our spiritual Redemption. Which being now finished, that typical Sabbath is
vanished, being the last Type which was fulfilled by Christ, resting in his
Grave on that day, and so utterly abolished in that more glorious Rest of his
Resurrection. If then you keep the Jews Sabbath* you do with them deny Christ
to be come. And if you sanctify not the first day of the week, instead of,
and succeding in place of the old Sabbath day: then as you utterly deny and
destroy the 4 th Commandment, so you deny the work of Redemption finished on
the Cross and in the Grave: you deny his Resurrection, wherein he rested from
that work: and you deny the very rest of heaven: and you deny the Communion of
Saints, both in the Church Militant and Triumphant. First you deny the
Accomplishment of the work of Redemption on the Cross, and in the Redemption
it self, in denying the Rest of Christ in the day of his Resurrection. For if
he then rested not, the work of Redemption was not finished. And you deny he
rested, in denying his rest to be the rest of the Lord our God, which the 4 th
Commandment commands us Christians to keep weekly on that day; which if we
keep not, Christ has not rested, and so he has not redeemed us. Secondly, in
denying Christ's rest, you deny his Resurrection. For if he rested not, he arose
not. For the very first moment of his Resurrection began his rest. If then you
sanctify not the Day of his rest for the Christian Sabbath day, you deny as
Christ's rest, so his Resurrection, and the whole virtue of it, by which we
arise from Sin spiritually, and from the Grave corporally. And cursed is he,
that has not his part in the first Resurrection: for on him the second death,
that is, eternal death shall have power: because Reve. 20.5.
Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the first Resurrection: for on
him the second death shall have no power. Thirdly, in thus denying Christ's rest
in his Resurrection* while you deny that day to be the holy rest, or Sabbath
day of Christians, you deny, as Christ's eternal rest in heaven, so that rest,
or sabbatisme, which remains for the people of God. As the Heb. 4.9.
Apostle says, There remains therefore Sabbatismos, a sabbatisme, or
Sabbaticall holy rest for the people of God. Therefore? Whereupon is this
inferred? Upon the verse. 8.
former verse, where he speaks of this very Sabbath, or Rest day of Christians,
which is as the first fruits of the eternal sabbatisme. For says he, If Jesus
(Joshua) had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of
another day. Another day? What other day, but that rest day, which our Jesus
rested on, and which is our rest day? For when Christ in his Resurrection
entered into his rest, he made that day the day of our rest, which gives us an
Interest in, and brings us to his eternal rest. For Certainly if we do not
rest with Christ in the Day of his Rest weekly here, according to the
Commandment, we shall never rest with him eternally in heaven. He that keeps
not this Heb. 4.8.9*
Other Day, which succeeded that under the Law, has no sabbatisme remaining
for him in heaven. Lastly, in denying this Rest-day of Christ to be our
Christian Sabbath, to be sanctified according to the Commandment, you deny the
Communion of Saints in the Church Militant, and consequently in the Church
Triumphant. For except there be a Communion of Saints in the Church Militant,
which is the seed of the Church Triumphant, what Communion of Saints can be in
heaven. For none are Saints there, which were not first Saints here. And what
Communion of Saints can be here, but especially in the holy and solemn
Assemblies, where they are to Communicate together in Prayer and Thanksgiving,
and hearing of the Word, and receiving of the Sacrament. And how can this be,
if there be not a set day for it? And who shall appoint this day* but God
himself? And what Day so fit, as his own Day of Rest, which he has Commanded
to be sanctified weekly of us* if we be his people, and he the Lord our God,
who has redeemed us in his holy and eternal Law, and in which day we resting,
do partake and communicate of his holy and eternal rest, begun here by Christ,
and consummate in heaven in that pangurei, solemn General Assembly and
Congregation of the first borne written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. And to conclude)
if the ten Commandments belong to us Christians under the Covenant of Grace,
then certainly the 4 th Commandment, which commands to keep the Sabbath of the
Lord our God, which is the Lords day.

Now by this which has been spoken, you may examine how far you and your
Church of England have erred in the foundation, that is, in this, and other
fundamental points of Faith: at least if those Acts, ^dicts, and Books, that
have been published against the aforesaid Doctrines, shall be avowed for the
Doctrines of the Church of England, as they are pressed. And if with Rome you
be thus fallen, holy you are not by your own confession; nor only so, but
Heretical: yea more then that, Infidel. For in the same page you say, If the
Church can err quite from the Foundation, Page 141.
then she is nor Holy, nor Church, but becomes an Infidel. Now we have proved,
that to err in one, or more, though not in all fundamental points of Faith,
is to fall quite off from the foundation. But if you thus cease to be holy, how
are you the Church of Christ still, as you say? For holiness is essential
unto, and so is of the Difinition of the true Church of Christ: I believe the
Holy Catholic Church. And so of every particular Church, if it be a true
member of the true Catholic, it is holy For Eadem est ratio totius and
partium: If the whole be holy, so every member and part. But the whole true
Church is holy; For it is Christ's body mystical, whereof he the Head: he the
root, and we the Branches: and Romans 11.16.
if the root be holy, so are the branches, as the Apostle says. And he says
again, 1 Cor. 3.17.
The Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. And (I say) Christ being the
Head* and the Church h^s body, the spirit of holiness and sanctification flows
down from the Head to all the m^mbers, as the Oil powered on Aarons head went
down to the skirts of his clothing: which was a type of the holy anointing oil
of Christ's spirit powered on him, which he communicates to all the members of
his mystical body; even as a man's head communicates of Animal spirits of
motion to all the parts of his body, as we touched before. Except with
Bellarmine you will have a dead member to be a true member. Indeed a dead
member of a dead body, is a true member of that body. And certainly, if a
Church cease to be holy, it cease to be a Church of Christ any more^ But I
pray you, what should move you to say thus: Though the Church cease to be
Holy, yet cease not to be a Church of Christ. You have it not from the
School of Divinity; not scarce can you rake it out of the puddle of the
Jesuits themselves. But happily you might suspect, that the Church of Rome might
be proved to be fallen quite from the Foundation (as has been already proved
before) and therefore your Charity would provide one refuge for it, that though
thus she cease to be holy, yet not to be a true Church still. But you may do
well to study this point a little better, how to make it good, How a Church may
cease to be Holy, becoming Heretical, and yet be a Church of Christ still.

L. p. 141.142. Those Errors that are dyed in Grain, cannot consist with
holiness, of which Faith in Christ is the very Foundation. And therefore if we
will keep up our Creed, the whole Militant Church must still be holy.

P. This confirms, what before I concluded of the Church of Rome, as no Church
of Chhist, because by your own verdict, not holy. For her Errors, and that in
the fundamental points of Faith, are all dyed in grain, so as they will never
change color, nor look of another hue. For both they are of no small
antiquity, and since their first hatching, they have been by sundry Councels
confirmed, and at last most irrefragably in the Council of Trent, as has been
showed. For as those things which you elsewhere instance: Worship of Images
first erected in the 2 d Council of Nice, the seventh General:
Transubstantiation, first Decreed in the Council of Laterian under Innocent the
third and the taking away of the Cup in the Sacrament, first decreed in the
Council of Constance: so the Title of Antichrist, of Universal Bishop and Head
of the Church, obtained first by Boniface 3. above a thousand years ago: with
many or most, or all the Rest of Popery, have been ever since their several
erections upon all occasions more and more ratified (never any corrected) and
by general practice upheld, and against all opposition and conviction stiffly
maintained. Are they not dyed in grain then? And if so, you confess they
consist not of holiness. But (say you) if we will keep up our Creed, the whole
Melitant Church must still be Holy. Here you enterfere again. For
notwithstanding all that is said, or (I suppose) can be said, you will have the
Church of Rome to be holy still, as being a member of the Church Militant, in
despite of the Pope. But let her be a member of your Church Militant, is she
therefore holy? Say not you, your Church Militant may fall into errors, so as to
cease to be holy? And if the Church of Rome has thus fallen, has she not for
her part, ceased to be holy? But not, if she keep up the Creed. What call you
that? To hold the letter of the Creed, and to deny the Faith of it? so we have
proved before. She has lost the Faith of Christ, the foundation of Holiness:
Ergo she has lost Holiness. Ergo lost the Essence of a Church: Ergo she is
not in the compass of your Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church.

L. p. 142. I say it, and most true it is, That it was ill done if those, who
ere they were, A peremptory speech.
that made the separation.

P. It should be most true, if you do but say it. Yet we find not all to be
most true, you say. How true this is I know not yet* Let us here. I remember a
little before, you performed a thanklesse office for the Protestants, in making
an Apology for them, as not the first in the fault of this separation. Which I
answered. And here you put the fault on those, that made the separation who ere
they were, which might be as well the Protestants, as the Papists But speak out.

L. p. 145. For my part, I am of the same opinion for the continuing of the
Schism, that I was for the making of it* That is, That it is ill, Plain
dealing.
very ill done of those* who ever they be, Papists or Protestants, that give
just cause to continue a separation.

P. Here you speak plain: Papists or Protestants: and why not then Protestants
as well as Papists, that did very ill in making the separation, as they do ill
in continuing of it? But yet your meaning here may possibly be, that as it was
ill done of the Roman party to give the first cause of the separation: so it
were no less ill done to continue the same cause to the continuing of the
Schism. You may do well to persuade Rome to lay down all her Corruptions,
which the Protestants have and do protest against her, that so, if the Schism
be any long^r continued, it may then appear to be long of the Protestants. ^ut
if Rome be obstinate and incorrigible in her errors, you have no reason to say,
it is ill done on the Protestant party to continue the Schism. But it may be
perhaps ill done of the Protestant Church of England notwithstanding, to
continue the Schism, for as it may be well done of you to sowder it again.
And therefore while the case is thus in agitation and Rome maks no more have to
meet you, the multitude of her impedimenta, bag, and baggage, and all kind of
Trumpery retaining her peace, and which in no sort she will part withal, and
so will not stir a foot over Tiber: what is wanting on her part, you will
supply, with all expedition dressing up her sister the Church of England in
Romes fashion, unto such a conformity and symphony, as promises a making up of
the ma^ch with all faults on both sides, sooner perhaps then Rome could hope
for.

L. ibid. The Kings and the Church of England had no reason to admit of a
public Dispute with the English Romish Clergy, till they should be able to
show it under the Seal, or Powers of Rome, That that Church will submit to a
third, who may be an Indifferent Judge between us and them; or to such a
General Council, as is after mentioned.

P. First, the English Romish Clergy are by the Laws of England Traitors, and
therefore to be disputed withal at Tiburne. So as if you put them to show their
warrant to dispute with you under Romes seal: they will require of you perhaps
to show them under Englands seal an abrogation of the Laws against them. And
you tell us before, that the Church of England knows well, that a Parliament
cannot be called at all times. Nor will the Powers of Rome permit their
Religion to be disputed on. And whom will you choose to dispute with them? some
peaceable men, that will not be apt to fall out with the Jesuits, your
Lordship being Moderator. But you know Rome denies the Rule of Faith, the
Scripture. And Contra negantem Principia non est disputandum. Who shall else be
the Umpier? Who the Third? Who the Indifferent Judge? Could both the Churches
jointly choose a more Indifferent Judge, then your self? Sure Rome her self
would nominate you before Bellarmine himself if he were living. A General
Council indeed of Romish, English, and other Prelates, might do much: so you
should be sure to exclude all the Protestant Reformed Churches for wranglers*
as Franciscus a S. Clara well advises. And then if a General Council should
reconcile and compose all differences, though never so erroniously, yet the
Error must stand, till another General Council shall reverse it, as you tell
us at after. But you add.

L. p. ibid. and 146. And this is an honest, and I think a full Answer. And
without this, all Disputation must end in a clamor; and therefore the more
public the worse, because as the Clamor is the greater, so perhaps will be the
Schism too.

P Nay, my Lord, if you stand upon terms of honesty indeed, you should have
nominated the Scripture for the only sufficient and upright Judge between you.
This had been honest in one that professes but the name only of a Protestant.
But for that you told us enough before, whereby we understand, that this point
of honesty is no part of your meaning. But if your Answer were not in this
respect honest, I must tell you, neither was it full, but an empty and
frivolous Answer. To dispute of Divinity or Religion, where Scripture is not
the only Judge, is as to judge of gold by the color, without the touchstone.
And so he that could show the best color for his matter by a false light,
should carry it away. And I may say truly, without the Scripture be Judge,
your disputation must needs end in a clamor, where the voice of God is of no
authority. But then also if Scripture should be the Judge, you might well say,
The more public the worse. For it is such a light, as would discover all your
fallacies; and so raising a clamor of the public Audience, when they should
observe such collusion between the English Clergy, and the English Romists, it
might breed such a detestation against all Reconciliation with Rome, as would
make the rent the wider, and so all your labor should be in vain. And then
you might use the Proverb, As good never a whit, as never the better.

L. p. 148. That there are errorr in Doctrine, and some of them such, as most
manifestly endanger salvation in the Church of Rome, i^ evident to them that
will not shut their eyes.

P. To endanger Salvation, is much; and for you to say so much, is much too*
and you saying so much, we need not make much doubt of the truth of that you
say in this Case. And yet in saying so much, you speak not all truth. The
truth is (as we have proved, and shall yet further) That Romes Errors in
Doctrine are damnable, and cannot consist with salvation; as is evident to
those, whose eyes are truly opened.

L. ibid. A. C. himself confesses, that error in Doctrine of the Faith, is a
just cause of separation, so just, as that no cause is just but that. Now had I
leisure to descend into particulars, or will to make the rent in the Church
wider: The tenderhearted Prelate (...) to make the rent wider.
it is no hard matter to prove, that the Church of Rome has erred in the
Doctrine of Faith, and dangerously too: And I doubt I shall afterward descend
to particulars, A. C. his importunity forcing me to it.

P. By A. C. his canfession then, the Protestants are able to justify their
separation abundantly. As for your Lordship, you are so charitably and
peaceably affected, that you are loath upon any terms (though it concern the
salvation of men's souls in such a case to speak the truth home) to make the
rent wider, till by your Adversaries importunity (I would say A. C.) you be
forced to it. You have too tender a heart to be a Surgion, when for fear,
least the opening of the wound make it wider, you suffer it to fester inwardly
It were well if you were half so tender hearted to the poor Sheep and Lambs
of Gods fold; there you fear not most stoutly to make wide wounds, and make no
b^n^s of it. Put true Protestants do hold, that the wider the rent is made
between them and Rome, the better it is. I know this is to you as the widening
of a ghastly wound. But it is the truth Yet you put us in some hope to hear
what you will say, when you are forced to it. As Cowards will fight most
terribly, when they are forced to it Though I hope you will not endanger Rome
more, then her errors endanger her own salvation.

L. p. 149. Nor can you say that Israel, from the time of the separation, was
not a Church; for there were true Prophets in it, Elias, Elizeus, and others,
and thousands, that had not bowed knees to Baal.

P. But I can say (and that upon good evidence) that Israel, the ten Tribes,
from the time of their setting up and following the Calves, were no true
visible Church of God. For they had no visible signs or marks of a visible
Church. Their whole Religion consisted in the worship of the two Calves:
neither had they any Leviticall Priesthood, or Priests of Aarons order: nor
went they up three times in the year to worship at Jerusalem, according the
Law (1 King. 12.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, ^3.) Here was not one footstep of a visible
true Church of God, but of the Devil indeed, whom they worshipped in the Calves
But (say you there were true Prophets in it. True. 2 Chro. 11* 15.
But that was upon some extraordinary occasion, when they were sent, and
prophesied. But for all their Prophecyings, did the King and People abandon
their Calves? Yea when Elias had caused Baals Prophets to be slain: or when 2
King. 1^.
Iehu slew all the remainder of them, and their worshipers: both he and the
People followed the Calves still And besides, they had not true Priests, but
those of Ieroboams Order. And if they had no true Priests, will you allow them
(for all their Prophets) to be a true Church of God? Do you not exclude all
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas from being true Churches of God, because
(notwithstanding all their Prophets, to wit Preachers and Ministers of God)
they have no Priests, no Prelates, no Priesthood? Would you account or call
Rome a true Church, if she had not her Priesthood? Although her Priesthood is
of no other Order, then that of Jeroboam, of humane Ordinance, not of Divine
Institution: sacrificing Priests, as those were. Now as Jerome says (as you
cite at after) Vbi non est Sacerd^s, non est Ecclesia: Where there is no
Priest, there is no Church. Israel had no true Priest, and so no true worship
of God. Nor does Jerome (and so the ancient Fathers, when they used the word
Sacerdos) thereby mean any such sacrificing Priests; as are at this day in the
Church of Rome. For the Fathers held no Transubstantiation, ergo no sacrificing
Priests. Whereas your Romish Priests, have no other Order, but of sacrificing
Priests expressly in their Ordination, in these words, Take thou a power to
sacrifice the body of Jesus Christ upon the Altar; or to the like effect. And
this by the way proves Rome to be no better a Church of God, then that of the
ten Tribes was, when they had their Calves and Priests suitable. And as for
those Prophets you speak of, Elias, and Elizeus, were their Prophecies
regarded? Nay were they not persecuted, by Ahab and Iez^bel, and their Son
Iehoram? Yea and 100 Prophets of the Lord more, whom good Obadiah hid in a
Cave, and fed with bread and water, and so preserved them from Iezebels fury?
Yea and all the Prophets, whom the Lord sent, were they not persecuted by the
State, and Court of Israel? Was not Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13.
Amos forbid by Amasiah King Ieroboams Court-Priest, to preach at Bethel,
saying, Prophecy no more at Bethel: for it is the Kings Chapel* and it is the
Kings Court? And did not this Court-Priest complain of the Prophet to King
Jeroboam, saying, Amos has conspired against* thee in the midst of the house
of Israel: the Land is not able to bear all his words? And it were well if
there were no such Priests in Christian Kings Courts, that do such offices
against the Lords Prophets and Preachers, complaining of them to the King, that
they are a sort of factious Conspirators against him (such as those whom you
have called shallower waters, as before) and the Land cannot bear all their
words, although they speak nothing but truth, which Gods word teaches, and
gives them good warrant for. But this by the way. To return to Israel. Is a
people presently a Church, upon the coming of a Prophet, or Minister of God to
preach unto them: until they do embrace Gods word, and set up his pure
worship amongst them? But those ten Tribes, still minced and contemned Gods
word, and persecuted Gods Prophets that were sent unto them, and with a high
hand maintained their Calfe-worship* the Devils service (though they pretend it
was Gods service, as Exodus 32. These are thy Gods o Israel, that brought thee
out of Egypt) until there was no remedy, that the Lord gave them up to
perpetual Captivity.

Again, I cannot but a little wonder, that your Lordship should so grossly
forget your self, as because of a Prophet, or two to give such a state the
style of a true Church of God. For do you any where allow a true Church, which
has no Priests? And it is clear, that Israel then had no true Priests, but
counterfeit, such as Rome now has. So in this respect rather I suppose you
mean that was then a true Church, because of their Priests, such as they were,
Baalish, such as your Babylonish Priests, as good an Argument to prove Rome a
true Church.

But you allege, there were thousands among them, that had not bowed knees to
Baal. It Is true, God told Elias, when he complained he was left alone, that he
had reserved to himself 7000. that had not bowed the knee to Baal, nor kissed
his mouth. But they were all so hid, that (you see) the Prophet himself knew
no such thing, till the Lord told him. They made no open profession of the true
Religion. And if they had any private meetings to pray together, and to read
and expound the Law, will your Lordship call that a Church, Though those
Assemblies were indeed the true Churches of God. But would not you, if you had
been in Amaziah the Priests stead, have called those private meetings
Conventicles, and would have hunted them out with your Pursuivants? And
therefore those seven thousand not being of the Kings Religion, nor Communion
Ecclesiastical with the other many thousands of Israel, and lying hid in
Corners here and there, they would not denominate the whole state of the ten
Tribes a true visible Church of God, themselves living as it were invisible, at
least so invisible, as though others took notice of their Persons, where they
conversed, yet they saw not their Religion, for themselves durst not openly
profess it. So as those seven thousand I cannot more fitly compare, then to
those, whom you call a sort of Puritanicall Separatists, whom you by your Altar
services and other superstitions drive from your Communion, who will not bow
the knee to your Baal, to your God-Altar, nor at your Name Jesus, and therefore
you Ferret them out of their holes, because they will not do as their
Neighbors do, go with them like loving Neighbors, and good Fellows to Bethel
and Dan, and there make merry, eat, drink before their God, and rise up to
play, as you give your people leave to do on their Holy days, and on the
Lords days too. Only here is the difference, it seems that in those days
of old of the ten Tribes, there were no Pursuivants to hunt out those poor
Snakes, that lurked in holes, and would not bow the knee. For then sure Elias
should have heard of them, and they should have been served with the same
sauce, that the Lords Prophets tasted of. And again, there was in Israel* one
good Obadiah, that hid an hundred of the Lords Prophets in a Cave from wicked
Iezebel, as there was in Judah a good Ier. 38.
Ebedmelech, that spoke to the King for the Prophet Jeremiah whom the Princes
had put into the muddy Dungion: but where there is an Arch-Prelate, or
Archpriest, that takes upon him to rule the roast, there is not found one
Obadiah, or one Ebedmeleck that dare so much as speak one good word to the
King for the Prophets of the Lord, who are most unjustly and most cruelly
confi^ed, and that to perpetual imprisonment and banishment, for no other
cause, but faithfully executing their Prophetical office; as before.

But a little after you add, That Israel is called the People of the Lord: 2
King. 9.6. therefore a Church still. I answer: They might be so called, because
they were Abraham's seed according to the flesh, Romans 9.6.17.
which the Apostle distinguishes from Abraham's ^eed according to the promise:
For all they are not Israel, which are of Israel, neither because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all Children. Yet they were called the Children of
Abraham, and so the people of God. Or secondly, they might still be called Gods
people, in regard of the Covenant made with them in Abraham's ^oynes, the
external badge whereof they wore in Circumcision, and a type of the Promise
whereof they enjoyed in the Promised Land of Canaan, which now they possessed;
so as they might retain the name of Gods people in that respect, till they were
quite cast out of that profession. Or Thirdly, as Antichrist is said to sit in
the Temple of God; that is, in that place, and over those, where was once the
Church of God, or over men's Consciences, which of right are the Temple of God;
so as Antichrist usurping Gods right, and putting him as it were out of
possession, is truly said to sit in the Temple of God, though now turned into
the Temple of Antichrist: so the ten Tribes, have been once, with the rest of
their brethren, the true Church of God, and now fallen from it, yet they might
retain that name still, to be called the Lords people, until there was no
remedy, that they were utterly cast out, and cast off by a Bill of perpetual
Divorce. Even as the Church of Rome, until the Council of Trent,
notwithstanding her manyfold corruptions, and abominable Idolatries, yet was
generally taken for, and called a true visible Church of Christ, though in
truth in the General it was not, but a false Antichristian Hierarchy, and
Tyranny over men's Souls and Consciences: yet when (after all admonitions and
convictions of her Errors by many of Gods Prophets, who Ier. 51.^*
wou^d ^av^ cur^ a Babylon, but she was not cured; nay she was so far off
from cure, and (...) all remedy, or hope of remedy, as in her council of Trent
she has for ever in perpetuam memoriam ratified and consumed all her damnable
errors, and detestable Apostacy, so as all within her Verge must under
Anathema be of the same Apostasy with her) she remains wilfully obdurate and
obstinate: notwithstanding we must give you leave to call Rome still, A true
Church of God.

L. p. 153.154. The Council of M^l^nis, in which S. Augustine was present,
condemned the whole Course of Heresy of Pelag^^^, that great and bewitching
Heresy, in the year ^16. The second Council at Aur^na, a Provincial too,
handled the great Controversies of Grace, and Free Will, and set the Church
right in them in the year 444.

P. Call you the Heresy of Pelag^us, That great and bewitching Heresy? So I
have heard many say of Tobacco, complaining how they are bewitched with it,
when they would same leave it, but have not the power. Is it in this respect,
that your Lordship calls that Heresy of Pelagius, That great and bewitching
Heresy? Then it is in this respect, that I never heard of any willingness and
desire you have to leave it; yea the contrary whereof you have manifes^ed, and
do daily, by suppressing the Doctrines of Grace, which are directly contrary
to that great bewitching Heresy. And surely as all Heresy is of a bewitching
nature ( Gal. 3.1.
Who has bewitched you, says the Apostle? etc.) so this of Pelagius more
especially, as advancing Man's Nature above Gods Grace. But had you indeed read
the many As, De (...).
excellent Polem^call Tracts of the Malleus Pelagianorum, Augustine, it might
have been of force (were there but one spark of true Grace) to have conjured
and unwitched this Pelagian spirit. There you might read in Terminis, all those
Controversies about Grace discussed, and the Pelagian and Semipelagian Heresy
in all o^ them by clear evidence, and abundant pregnant Testimony from
Scripture, confuted: as, That Election and Pred^stinat^on of some to Salvation
and Glory, and Reprobation of others is by an (...) Decree: That, The Grace of
Effectual Redemption by Christ pertaines to the Elect only, which he calls
the world of the Elect, distinguishing it from the world of the Reprobate. As
also Ambrose, who says, that in mundo Electorum censetur specialis
universitas: In the world of the Elect is reckoned a spiritual universality,
as where it is said, Christ redeemed the whole world: that is, says Augustine
the whole world of the Elect. As also, that the Romans 8.28.
Calling of Gods Elect is according to Gods Purpose, and so differing from the
common Calling, of which, many are called, but few chosen* And that the Elect
are Called by an Omnipotent power of Grace working in them: and that they
certainly persevere in Grace unto Glory, and never fall away; and, that those
who do fall away, had never any true sanctifying Grace, nor ever were the true
Children of God, though we called them such, while they professed the Truth.
And all these points (I say) he proves by such pregnant Testimonies of
Scripture, that both Councels and Popes afterward, that had to do against the
Pelagians, did set down whole large passages verbatim out of Augustins works,
as you may read in Binius his Councels. And therefore (I say) had you indeed
perused well those Tracts, and yet had persisted such a tanter of that Heresy,
which Arminius of late has raked out of hell, which Augustine and the Orthodox
Fathers and Councels had remaunded to hell: you for your part (and so others
too) might truly call it That Great Bewitching Heresy.

And that the Council of Aurang, as you say, did set the Church right in those
Doctrines of Grace and Free Will, wherein they followed Augustins judgment
before them: how have you set the Now Church of England right, of being one
Instrument at least (if not the greatest, if not sole) of seting forth such an
Edict (no Decree of a Council, so much as Provincial) wherein those Articles
of Religion concerning the foresaid Points, and Doctrines of Grace (which were
set so Right, before you unset them, as the whole Church of England maintained
the Orthodox truth of them according to the Scriptures, and so Augustine and
the Fathers, and that unanimously, and universally) are made like Ianus with
two faces, the one, looking (but frowningly) upon the Orthodox party (who are
forbid to preach the Orthodox Doctrines) the other, looking upon your Arminian
Favorites, and that with an Amiable aspect, as who may find their opinions in
your Articles, and so not only impunity for preaching them, but Dignities in
your Church for but affecting and holding those Opinions, so Great a bewitching
Heresy is it. O blind Guides of the Church of England! and thou qui Primas
tenes, the Pilot that steers the stern, if you be capable of any shame, and
have not drunk of that Circaean Cup: blush at these things. And do thou
(after all thy notorious practices in suppressing the Preaching of the
Doctrines of Grace, and the Printing of Books written in defense of Gods saving
Truth, in the Church of England too intolerable to be borne, and which the
earth groaneth under, and for which the wrath of heaven is already kindled) now
come, thinking to blanch all by telling us a tale of this and that Council, and
of St. Augustine, and of that Great bewitching Pelagian Heresy? Do thou think
the world is such a Baby grown, or the Old Mother Church of England come to
that Dotage, as to believe, because her Arch-Prelate tells her, such a
Provincial council wherein S. Augustine was condemned the whole course of the
Great bewitching Heresy of Pelagius, and another Provincial set the Church
right in those great Controversies of Grace and Free Will; therefore her
Arminian Pilot is no Pelagian? Think thou (I say) to bewitch the world with
these thy enchantments, which thou workest by the golden cup of thine
hypocrisy? Surely heavens patience cannot long brook these darings, and deep
dissemblings, which yet are so gross, as they are not of a thread fine enough
for Hypocrisy to make a veyle of.

L. p. 155. To these two (to wit, Our Princes, and the Clergy) Principally the
power and direction for Reformation belongs.

P. You told us Epistle Dedicatory.
before, how the King and the Priest, more then any other, are bound to look
to the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners, and that in the first
place: Here you tell us of Princes and Clergy. This is some enlargement. For
Clergy is not one Priest: except one Priest be so great, as that of Rome, or
Canterbury, that he is equivalent to the whole Clergy, or is in himself the
Clergy Collective. And yet suppose your whole Clergy of Priests were assembled
in Convocation, what relation have you to the Princes? you do not mean (I
dare say) the Princes assembled in Parliament. Beware of that. No you are
content but to obtain a Conge or License from the King to have your
Convocation, and then let you alone for Reformation. The Princes shall not need
to trouble themselves further. That Is your sole work. But yet this agrees not
with your two Patterns, which you set in the Margent (touched before) to wit of
King Ezechiah, 2 Chro 29. and King Iosia, 4. Reg. 23. (though you might as well
have cited 2 King. 23. according to our English: but you love the old latin
vulgar better) Now as we noted before, the Kings of Israel in their
Reformations of Religion did not mate themselves with the Clergy, but together
with all the Princes, and chief Fathers in Israel (like a Parliament for all
the world) commanded the Priests to execute their office according to the
express Law of God, and they also looked strictly to have it done. And this
you confess elsewhere, Page 205.
That those Kings reformed no otherwise, but according to the prescript Rule of
Gods Law. Ergo* The Priest reformed not, but was himself to be reformed by the
King, and all according to Gods prescript Law. But now if the Prince and
Clergy, or rather (as I said) the Clergy by the Princes leave (which you can no
where show Gods prescript Law for) should be the Principal, or rather sole for
Reformation: I pray you what Reformation should we have, or could we expect?
The Church of England once thought her self to be under Reformation (as you
Epistle Dedicatory.
tell us before) although at the best it was but as one calls it (in his Sermon
preached in Queen Elizabeth's days at Paul's Cross, and published in Print by
Authority) a half Reformation, because (as the Author of the Hunting of the
Fox says) the great Fox, the Pope had but his ears cropped, but his whole body
remained still in England in the Prelacy; yet this was called a Reformateon,
(...) which the Church of England thought her self well separated from Rome,
yet this is not that Reformation, that gives you content. And much less that
Reformation beyond the Seas. Well, what Reformation is it then which you mean
here? Surely the same, which you meant before by sincerity and integrity in
Doctrine and Manners in the Church, to which I refer the Reader, where he
shall find this Reformation clearly expounded. And in sum your Reformation
here will differ from the former Reformation of the Church of England in this:
that as that was but a half Reformation, because it retained the Prelacy, with
some of Romes Ceremonies: Englands half Reformation now made a whole
Deformation.
so this your Reformation shall make that up; in reducing the Church of England
to the Integrity and sincerity of the Church of Rome in Doctrine and Manners
full and whole. A thing indeed, which can no otherwise but be expected, so long
as the Hierarchy stands in its full ruff, as it does now in England. For like
will to like, as you know who used the Proverb to the Colyer. Or as the
Philosopher says, Every thing aspires after its perfection. And the Perfection
of the Hierarchy is at Rome, and thence All Hierarchy and Prelacy now adays
has and had its first Rise and Original. And therefore no mervaile if Prelates
naturally affect their native Country Rome. As the Roman Ovid.
Poet said in his banishment, Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse sui.
Some secret sweetness in man's native home
Draws him to mind it still, where ere become.


L. Ibid. In a corrupt Time, or Place, it is as necessary in Religion to deny
falsehood, as to assert and vindicate truth. Indeed this latter can hardly be
well and sufficiently done, but by the former: an affirmative verity being ever
included in the negative to a falsehood.

P. Then I hope in a corrupt Time and Place, is it not necessary in Religion to
deny your falsehoods, and to assert and vindicate the Truth, by you so
undermined and oppugned? And your own Words here are sufficient to leave your
Deeds without excuse.

L. p. 157. If it be a Cause common to both parties, a third must judge, and
that is the Scripture, Thus still no^ the Scripture must be Judge.
or if there be jealousy or doubt of the sense of the Scripture, they must
either both repair to the exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit to
that, or both call and submit to a General Council.

P. The Scripture? That Is honest as I noted before. Yea, and submit to, and
rest in that, which you say not. But of the Scripture the only Judge of all
Controversies, we have spoken sufficiently before, and so for matters of
jealousy or doubt; and not either to your Primitive Church, or to a General
Council. For further Answer we shall have further occasion.

L. p. 171. Pope Urban 2 at the Council held at Bari in Ap^lia, accounted my
Worthy Predecessor S. Augustine, as his own comp^^^e, and said, He was as the
Apostolic, and Patriarch of the other world: so he then turned this Island.

P. As worthy as your predecessor Anselme was, and though now one of Romes
Saints, yet he was against your Priests Marriage. But perhaps therefore the more
worthy. And he was so holy, it seems, that he said he never repented him of any
thing in all his life, but about the eating of some Fish one time. But if the
Pope gave your Worthy Predecessor the Title of Apostolic, and Patriarch of
the other world, of England: why should not the same Title descend to his
successors. And it seems you are not a little affected with it. For you say, A
Primate is greater then a Metropolitan; and a Patriarch then a Primate. And
none were above Patriarch but Pope. If then you succeed Anselme in his
Patriarchate of the other world: you are in the next degree to succeed him,
that is Papa totius Orbis. But how ever you glory in these titles: I assure
you, for my part, I shall ever prefer a good honest Cobbler, that fears God
above them all. For he has an honest calling: you none. And you all are
persecuters of them that truly fear God, and so enemies of Christ. And though
you would be called Apostolic: yet to be Metropolitan, Primate, Patriarch,
Pope, are all swelling Titles of pride, which the Apostles never knew, and
which Christ expressly forbids; as has been noted, and will be more. As
follows.

L. p. 175. The calling and Authority of Bishops over the Inferior Clergy,
that was a thing of known use, and benefit, for preservation of unity and peace
in the Church.

P. For this you cite Hierome. But you omit his other words, where he says,
That your Diocesan Bishops (for of such only the Question is) were brought in,
but, humana praesumptione, non Institutione Divina, by humane Presumption, not
by Divine Institution, or Gods Ordinance: and this (as men presumed) in
Schismata remedia, for a remedy of Schism. But it proved to be Schisma magnum,
the Great Schism, that made up the body of Antichrist, the Great Rent from
Christ, filling up the Mystery of Iniquity, as has been showed. And out of
Ieromes Sacerdos, Priest, where he says, No Priest, no Church, you conclude in
the Page 176.
Margent, so even with him, No Bishop, no Church. As if to be a Priest, must
needs be a Bishop.

And idid. you say, This was to settle in the minds of men from the very
Infancy of the Christian Church, as that it had not been to that time
contradicted by any. In the very Infancy of the Church? But your Prelacy was
but an Infant then, and Innocent in comparison to the Giants now. We showed
Epistle Dedicatory.
before how this Mystery wrought even in the Apostles times, which they knocked
down: yet still Satan kept it afoot. The use of it has great Antiquity, but
the Apostles condemned it as a mere abuse, and Christ, as Heathenish. And you
talk here of use, but you are not able to show us any Authority from
Scripture, either from Apostolik Ordinance and Example. The Apostles indeed
before Christ's Resurrection were blindly ambitious of being chief in Christ's
Kingdom: and Christ told his two kinsmen James and John, They asked they knew
not what: and yet Mark tells us, that Christ asking them, what they reasoned of
by the way, they were ashamed to tell him, as being selfe-guilty of pride and
ambition: and still when he had but newly told them of his Passion to be at
Jerusalem, they not understanding what it meant, were still at it afresh, who
should be the chief: but after that Christ was risen again, and his holy
Spirit was breathed into them, then they were of another mind, they never after
contended who should be chiefest, but rather who should be ^umblest, and
ho^yest, and most painful and faithful in the spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
in the execution of their Apostolical Charge. Which argues plainly, that the
Prelacy is a mere carnal thing, a temporal Kingdom (contrary to Christ's
Kingdom) which carnal men, void of Christ's Spirit and Grace are blindly
ambitious of, calling their Prelacy an Hierarchy, or ho^y Government, or
Kingdom, but know not what holiness, or Christ's Kingdom means. And do we
see any men in the world of any rank whatsoever more Lordly, more proud, more
ambitious, more covetous, more profane, more corrupt, then those of the
Hierarchy? Take the best of them now in England, the most learned of them: have
they any zeal or courage for the truth, now, when they see Religion and the
Faith of Christ turned topsieturvie? Do they not all seek their own, not that
which is Jesus Christ's? And when your Chapleins gueld their Works, have they
any virility left in them, to maintain the truth of that which they have
written? If their Metropolitan do but speak the word, is it not with them, as
in the Comedy of the Parasite, Ait quis? Aio. Negat? Nego. But what say I of
those Prelates, that are fallen upon the very Lees and Dregs of the worst,
and last times? Alas, in the first General Council of Nece under Constantine,
in the Infancy of the Church, as you call it: what hot contentions among the
Prelates one against another? What bundels and fardels of complaints brought
they into the Council before Constantine? Enough to set all in a combustion,
had not the Emperor the more wisely put all their Bills and mutual complaints
in a combustion, by burning them in a fair fire before him in the view of all
the Council. And the maine point of their Contentions was about Precedence,
which Bishopric should be before another. Oh devout and humble Prelates! O
holy successors of the Apostles! Are these men like to remedy Schism in the
Church, that are the Authors of them themselves? How came the great Schism of
Arius, but by the Prelates, when but Athanasius.
one chiefly stood up against him? How got Antichrist to be Caput Universal,
Universal Head, or Bishop, but by the dessent of the Bishops, which causing
their Appeals to Rome, brought the Roman Bishop to that height? so as the
Prelates being worse divided among themselves, then the Presbyters had been
before them, for remedy of whose Schism they were by man's prescription
erected: gave occasion to the two Bishops of the two Imperial Cities, Rome and
Constantinople to stickle for one Headship over all, to reconcile all. And so
the Popedom it self, the Throne of the Beast was erected in Schismatis
remedium: for the only Remedy of all Schism. And it is to be noted how these
two Prelates strove for this supremacy, and both under the veil of humility.
John of Constantinople becomes a great Faster; whereupon he was styled Johannes
Iejunator, John the Faster. Gregory, then of Rome, though he thundered against
John's Ambition calling him that had, or affected that Title, the forerunner of
Antichrist, yet seeing John like to prevail with pretense of holiness and
humility: Gregory styles himself servus servorum Dei. He thought he would not
come behind for humility, but indeed therein bewraying his pride, when his
humility was but in emulation. And we see in Gregory's Registrum, in sundry of
his Epistles, how low he descends in most base flattery to that Parricide
Phocas, and his Empres, to visit the thresholds of Peter and Paul, etc. But
what will not Episcopal zeal do for the Hierarchy? But thus he kept John
off: and so made way for his own Prophecy which was, Filius superbiae prope
est. The son of pride (that is Antichrist) is near at hand. And nearer surely,
then he was aware. For Gregory deceasing; and Sabianus succeeding, and siting
but one year: Boniface 3. the next successor obtaind this Title of Phocas: and
so each confirmed other, the Emperor the Pope in the Throne of Antichrist,
which is a Tyranny over men's Souls: and the Pope the Emperors Cruelty in a
Tyranny over men's Bodies. And thus came that Prophecy of the Angel (Revel.
17.18) to be fulfilled, The Woman which thou saw is that great City, which
reigned over the Kings of the Earth. As Rome then did in S. John's time. So as
according to Gods word, not Constantinople (which was not the Imperial C^ty,
till Constantine so made it) but Rome must be the feat of the Beast, and of the
Whore thus described. Thus from Bishops emulation, ambition, contention, one
against another, for honor, precedence, and greatness in the world, came
Antichrist to mount upon that Beast which had 7 heads and ten horns. And your
self Page 176.
confesses, The difficulty was, to accommodate the Places and Precedencies of
Bishops among themselves. And for this you say, The most equal and impartial
way was, that the H^w comes then Canterbury to have the (...) Y^^ke ra^^^r then
(...) there Constantine was (...). And the the old Prop^e^^ is, York^ shall be.
Honors of the Church, should follow the Honors of the State. So that the
greater City, the greater Bishop. And thus Romes Primacy in Order, brought him
to his supremacy in Authority.

Again, you say, The Calling of Bishops, Whence this Calling? Not from God.
And of Aarons Priesthood it was said, No man takes this honor upon him, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron: Heb. 5.4. So all the Apostles had a
special Calling and Commission from Christ to preach, etc. Paul Called to be
an Romans 1.1. 1 Cor. 1.1. 2. Cor. 1.1. etc.
Apos^le of Jesus Christ. He stood upon his Calling, he had a lawful Calling,
whereon his Apostolic Authority was founded Now you would be accounted
Apostolic, and the Apostles successors: but where is your Calling? We find no
such Calling, as of Lord-bishops in the Scripture. Therefore you have no
Authority over the inferior Clergy, not over Gods Ministers, I mean. Either
therefore prove your Calling from God, or give us leave to deny your Authority,
as being an usurped Tyranny. If you aledge those Bishops so called, Act. 20.28.
Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1. Tit. 1.7. etc. Prove they were Diocesan Bishops. We
prove them by the plain Text to be but Presbyters over the several
Congregations, over which the Holy Ghost made them Episkopous, Bishops, or
Overseers, as more fully at after. If you aledge Timothy and Titus for Bishops,
that is soon answered, they were only Evangelists, no Bishops. Those
Epigraphees in the end of that to 2 Timothy and Tit. they are no part of the Text,
but were added long after, at the leas^ 400. years. It behooves you therefore to
prove your Calling better, before you so press and oppress us with your
Authority. But you add:

L. p. 177. Among these (to wit, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Bishops) there was
effectual subjection respectively grounded upon Canon, and positive Law in
their several quarters.

P. Here you confess, that all subjection of Metropolitans to the Patriarchs,
and of Bishops to the Metropolitans, was but grounded upon Canon, and Positive
Law: Ergo, not upon the Canon of Scripture nor the Law of God. As you confessed
openly in High Commission, that no one Apostle had Authority or Jurisdiction
over the Rest, or any of their fellows. so as though you call your calling
Apostolic, yet your Archbishopric is not Apostolic, in exercising
Authority and Jurisdiction over all the Bishops in your Province. This you have
not from the Scripture: I know not from what Papal Canon. For as for Positive,
if you mean the Politic Laws of Princes, you will not take your Authority
from them. And the Judges have declared their judgment in the Kings Edict,
that your exercising your Authority, and keeping Courts in your own Names, is
now no more a trenching upon the Kings Prerogative, then formerly it has been.
Where the Judges are to be commended for their Discretion. But it is very well.
Thus you are loose off from the Positive Law of the Prince: and we deny you any
title either of Authority or Calling over the Ministry: and so you may prove to
sit between two stools; or as he that has not one string to his bow. But
whereas you confess before, that Bishops have no Jurisdiction one over
another, because the Apostles had not: hence it is evident, that those who are
true Bishops, to wit, Presbyters, have no jurisdiction over one another; and so
there is no such Order, or Calling of Lord Bishops, whereby they have Authority
over the true Bishops and Pastors of the flocks of Christ. These things are
noted sufficiently before: but as Augustine writing against the Pelagians,
says, By these things so often repeated, though the importunity of the
Adversary will not be repressed, yet the Truth shall be the more confirmed, and
the Faith of Believers the more firmly established.

L. p. 183. The Patriarch of Rome had potentiorem Principalitatem, a more
powerful Principality, then other Churches had. And that the Protestants grant
too: and that not only because the Roman Prelate was Ordine primus, First in
Order and Degree, which some one must be, to avoid confusion: but, etc.

P. What the Protestants grant to have been de facto, is one thing, that such a
thing is, or was so and so: but what they grant to have been de Iure, but what
Right is another. And this the Reformed Protestants never granted to the Pope,
or any Prelate. But there must be some one (say you) to avoid Confusion: and
this according to the honor of the state and Place. And that must needs be the
Pope of Rome. But for the purpose, or end, you are far wide. For instead of
avoiding Confusion, this strowed the way to build up Babylon, Confusion it
self. And your self says as much: Page 176.
This was the very fountain of Papal Greatness, the Pope having his
Residence in the Great Imperial City. So as Primacy joynd with Power, and
Authority too, as that of the Pope in Rome, and yours in England, the Pope
residing in the Imperial City, and you in the Royal Court, What confusion the
one has brought to the Empire it self, the world knows, and what the other
may bring to the State Royal, the Lord knows, and he in mercy prevent: and if
such confusion to States, then what to the true Religion, and the Churches of
Christ.

But has the Pope then (that pretended successor of the poor Fisherman) such
a Principality? This is more then Primacy. Unless Primacy be, by your
interpretation, Principality. Nay it must needs be so: because, if the Popes
Principality be more potent, then other Churches: then surely your Primacy is
at least a Principality too, though less potent. And who doubts of that. For
at your High Commission Board at Dr BASTVVICKS Censure, you did prove most
bravely from Scripture it self, that you were Princes. What Scripture? You
aledged Psalm. 45.16. Instead of thy Fathers shall be thy Children, Psalm. 45.16.
whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth. What conclude you hence? Ergo,
Prelates are Princes. We deny your inference, and consequence. How prove you
it? I know you will straight appeal to a General Council, if we doubt of it.
Stay awhile. A General Council is an Assembly of Prelates. And then, They
shall be their own Judges. That Is not fair play. And Bellarmine would have a
great stroke there, for he also aledges this place for you, and himself too,
to prove that the Pope is a Prince, and so all Prelates under him. But by your
leave we appeal to the Scriptures themselves for Interpretation, as best
knowing their own meaning, and ablest to express themselves. Now comparing
this with other Scriptures, we find, that those Princes there spoken of in all
Lands, are understood of all Gods Children, true Believers, throughout the
whole earth now under the Gospel. For of these the Spirit says, He (Christ)
has made us Kings, Rev. 1.6.
and Priests to God his Father. Now if all true Believers be Kings, then also
Princes. And in 1 Pet. 2.9* Rev. 5.9, 10. Iam. 2.5.
Peter, we are called a royal Priesthood. So Rev. 5.9, 10. Thou have redeemed
us to God by thy blood, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc.
And Jam. 2.5. Hearken, my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of
this world, to be rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which God has
promised to them that love him? How if heirs of the Kingdom, then Princes And
Romans 8.16, 17. Romans 8.16, 17*
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children
of God. And if Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ, if s^ be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.
And many other places to this purpose. We are the Romans 8.29. Heb. 2.11.
brethren of Christ, the congregation of the first borne. Therefore Princes. And
yet poor in this world. But if Prelates be Princes, they are such as Solomon
describes, by another Title, being compared to the true Princes, Gods Children.
There is (says he) an evil, which I have seen under the Sun (and he saw it by
the eye of Prophecy) as an error, which proceeds from the Ruler. What is the
evil? What that error of Rulers? Namely, Folly is set in great Dignity, and the
Rich set in low place: I have seen Servants on Horses, and Princes walking as
Servants upon the earth. Now who are these rich, that sit in a low place? The
rich in Faith says James. And who are these Princes, that walk as Servants
upon the earth? Namely Gods Children, who are true Princes, heirs of the
Kingdom, that are afflicted and oppressed in the world. And what folly is
that, which is set in great dignity? Who more properly then Prelates, which are
as those of whom James speaks, in rich and gorgeous apparel, who are set in a
goodly place, while Gods poor Children sit below on the footstool. And who
those Servants on Horses? Prelates on their footcloth, riding in pomp, while
Gods people trudge a foot on the earth. If you say, you are not here meant:
because you are no fools, nor servants. Indeed you are no small fools. For
there are no greater fools in the world, then such as seem wisest in their own
conceit, as Prelates do. As Solomon says, Pro. 26.12.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then
of him* Now do not you make your selves the wisest men in the world, as the
only Guides and Oracles of the Church, and that even as you are Prelates? And
again, are there any such fools, as those, who prefer the riches and
honors in the world, before heaven? Or that war and fight against Christ,
and his Kingdom? And do not you Prelates so? Your own vain profession, and
practices proclaim you to be folly it self, set in great dignity? And are you
not servants, servants of sin, servants of your own lusts, and other men's,
Jude. 16.
having them in admiration, for advantage? And under color of humility, as if
you were servi servorum, servant of servantes as the proud Pope styles himself,
which was Genesis 9.
Chams curse) do you not exalt your selves as Domini dominantium, mounted on
your rich and prancing Palphrys, while you Psa^. 66.12.
ride over the heads of the true heaven bred Princes, that go afoot on the
ground? And how came you to be so mounted, but through the (...) of Rulers of
the earth. How mounted the Pope, but by the Emperors holding of his stirrup.
And when the Pope was terrible angry with the Frederick.
Emperor, for holding the wrong stirrup, did not the Emperor trow you then
begin to see his error? But it was now too late. Having given Revel. 17.
their Kingdom to the Beast, it is just with God, they should become his
Vasalls, till the time appointed.

But to conclude this your Ordine primus, which you apply to (...) Pope, I
cannot more properly and truly parallel or compare it, then to Judas, the
Standard Bearer of that troop, that came to apprehend Christ; for Judas came
to Christ with Hale Master, and kissed him, and with this kiss, as by the
signal given, betrayed him. And is not your Ordine primus by this very
Character known to be Antichrist, while pretending to be Apostolic, and a
Successor of the Apostles, he does the more easily betray Christ in his Word
and Members into the hands and bands of men?

Object. But Peter was Ordine primus. What, such as to avoid confusion? As a
head uniting all the members, and governing all the body, as your Ordine primus
to avoid confusion, necessarily imports? Did Peter at any time convent the
Apostles? Was he that Ordine primus, that struck the stroke, and gave the
Difinitive sentences in that first General and Apostolical Council, Act. 15.
Did not James determine, and the whole Church assented? And Gal. 2.9. Is not
James set before Peter: Act. 15. Gal. 2.^.
And was Act. 8.1.^*
not Peter and John sent by the rest of the Apostles to Samaria? When was this
necessity then of an Ordine primus, to avoid confusion? And what confusion is
avoided this day in the Church of England by your being Ordine primus, nay
prim-as, both in honor and Authority and Jurisdiction? Have you not by that
your Ordine primus brought a confusion upon Religion? Upon the Doctrinall
Articles? Upon the Consciences and Faith of men, not knowing what to believe,
or what to do, or how to live in any peace, inward or outward? But you think
to shift well enough for one, so long as you put an other Ordine primus before
(as before is noted) upon whose back you may lay all your burdens. So as if
any thing be amiss, or succeed not well, you are not then the Ordine primus.

Lastly, one thing I observe more from your Ordine primus, and that is, the
necessity of it, which say you, some one must be. What one soever this is,
whether the Patriarch of the greater world, or he of the lesser, or other
World, but Rome rather must be she, there is a necessity for this, that one be
Ordine primus. What Is this? By the necessity of this Ordine primus, is brought
in a necessity of your new Catholic Militant Church, consisting of the
Prelacy, or Hierarchy, which is so one, as one must be Ordine primus, as
general of the whole Army, as the Dragon and his Angels to war against
Michael and his Angels. So as here is an indissoluble and inseparable
combination and confederacy of Prelates throughout the world, making up that
one Militant or Malignant Church, whereof one must (...) the chief, to order
the battle, that there be no disorder, but that every one keep his rank, and
fight in his station against the true Militant Church of Christ, as was before
noted.

L. p. 182. Let Rome reduce it self to the observation of Tradition
Apostolic, to which it held in Irenaeus his time, and I will say as he did,
That it will be then necessary for every Church, and for the faithful every
where to agree with it.

P. Let Rome reduce it self to the rule of the Scripture in all things, which
the faithful there held in Paul's time, when he was prisoner, yet Preacher in
Rome, and then I will say (and will be the first that will do it) I will be one of
the faithful, that will agree with it. But for Tradition Apostolic, I know
not what you mean, and therefore I dare not say as you do. But still you hold
with Ordine primus, I am sure of it. You hold fast together for your Hierarchy,
wherein you place the Pope your Ordine primus. Which while you do, Whatsoever
Tradition Apostolic Rome shall reduce it self to, it will be most perilous
and pernicious too for any of the faithful to agree with it. And I am sure the
Hierarchy, and our Ordine primus in that, was no Tradition Apostolic. So for
that, there is no talk of reducing, either for Romes or Canterbury. And could
you persuade the world to agree with with the Ordine primus at Rome, then that
speech of yours ( page 182.) would easily take place in these our times, as
well as Irenaeus his time. page 182.
Very great reason was there in Irenaeus his time, that upon any difference
arising in the Faith, Omnes undique fideles, all the faithful, or, if you
will, all the Churches round about, should have recourse, that is, resort to
Rome, being the Imperial City, and so a Church of more powerful Principality,
then any other at that time, in those parts of the world. But the meaning of
A.C. is, we must so have recourse to Rome, as to submit our faith to hers. And
should I grant them their own sense, that all the faithful every where must
agree with Rome (which I may give, but can never grant) yet were not this
saying any whit prejudicial to us now. For first, here is a powerful
Principality ascribed to the Church of Rome* so you. Here are many words
conningly woven, and packt up together, that to discover your full meaning, you
had need to un^old your whole pack. Now all round about Rome, is a large
compass; for the whole world lies round about Rome, it being also (at least
there) the Imperial City, and so a Church of more powerful Principality, then
any other, which might therefore challenge resort of all unto it, as to the
only Oracle for resolving all your faithful every where in doubts of Faith.
Yea and if you should grant too, that all must submit their faith to Rome, you
say, it were no whit prejudicial to us now. And should you not grant it, how
should it agree with your necessity of having one Ordine primus. For to what
purpose should there be one Ordine primus to avoid confusion, i^ to his Call,
Summons and Judgment all your faithful resorting, they should not rest this
their faith in his Determination. Otherwise, how should Confusion be avoided.
For then to what one Ordine primus should they go? But do you yield it, or no?
You say, you may give it, but can never grant it. I pray you, whether shall
your affirmative giving, or your negative granting be of more force? Or if you
give it, how do you not grant it too? Yea giving is more then granting. If
therefore you give it, you do more then grant it. But suppose you restrain it
only to Irenaeus his time. Had Rome then an Infallible Oracle in the Popes
breast? Or was his Judgment the more infallible, because his Chair was in the
Imperial City? Or his sentence of the more credit, because his Church had the
more powerful Principality? Then why in all doubtful cases of Faith should
not all the faithful in England resort to the Chair of Canterbury, as which
has the most powerful Principality, of all the Prelates in England? Why
should not the thresholds of your Palace be as much worn with the footsteps of
those that come to your Oracle for resolution in matters of faith: as the
Shrine of your Predecessor S. Thomas of Canterbury, with the keys of his blind
votaries? And so much the more in these days; as wherein you have put all
England to a stand and stagger what to believe in point of Faith, considering
that the Articles of Religion, like Meteors hang in suspense in the air, no
man knowing what to make of them, whether they be white or black, or what such
Comets portend, until to that Edict of the Court (that binds up the sense of
the Articles fast asleep, or in a slumber between Hawke and Buzzard, or as a
speaking in a dream) you shall superadde the Definitive Decree of the Chair
of Canterbury, to interpret unto us what they have dreamed all this while. But
I suppose, the Board calling you so much away from your Chair, you are the
more willing, and that in such a case of necessity to send all the faithful to
your Ordine primus at Rome, and to Peter's Chair there (if any such thing be
there) which may like Iunoes three footed stool, resolve all their doubts. And
so (as you idid.
say to A C.) Rome may thank you for it. But always provided, tha^ Rome first
reduce her self (as you say) to the Observation of Tradition Apostolic, and
then you will say Latin, plainly, That it will be then necessary for every
Church, and for the faithful every where to agree with it, to have recourse to
Rome, and to rest their Faith there, where is the most Powerful Principality.
And thus (as well as I could) I have picked up your meaning, wherein if I have
come short, you must pardon me, and blame your self, for your being no more
perspicuous in matters of such moment, as about consulting of Oracles,
considering, that that of Apollo and Delphos was long ago put to silence. But
to proceed.

L. p. 199. The Bishop of Rome has no power from Christ, over the whole Church
to be Judge in Controversies: nay out of all doubt, it is not the least reason,
why de facto he has so little success, because de Jure he has no power given.

P. Not over the whole Church. This seems to imply, that the Bishop of Rome
has a power from Christ to be Judge in Controversies over all the Churches at
least within his own more powerful Principality. And consequently, that the
Primate of Canterbury has the like power from Christ to be Judge in
Controversies over the whole Church of England. If you have, yet it will be some
ease to the English, that they have an Oracle so near home to resolve them in
all doubts, so as they need not (as formerly) go trudge to Rome for the matter.
But neither to the Pope in his Powerful Principality, nor to you in your
Primacy has Christ given any power at all to be Judge in Controversies of
Faith. And because you have no Calling, nor Commission from Christ, therefore
it is true you say in this, that the Pope has no better success. And I pray
you Selfe-condemned.
what success have you had, since you took upon you to sway the Crosier staff
of Canterbury, and to be Judge in Controversies of Faith, making and raising
controversies there, where there was none before, as namely in the Articles of
Religion? It Is true, you have put many a good Minister to Silence, thrust many
a one out of his Cure, and Country, levied your way for an universal
Conformity to Rome, prevailed much in your Designs that way: but yet have you
any great cause to boast of your success, all things Considered? I say no
more. Verbum sapienti: you understand me well enough. And certainly when you
cast up your reckoning, you will find your self to be as much behind hand for
success, as you do the Pope. And your Reason is true: because you have no
power, no Authority, no Calling, no Commission from Christ, either to possess
such a place, or to execute such an Office. For as the Lord says in Ier. 23.32.
Jeremy (speaking of false Prophets) I sent them not, neither commanded them:
therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord. So, neither
have you reason to think, that because you may do what you list in turning
things upside down, in seting up your Altars, in suppressing Gods word, in
oppressing Gods Ministers, in advancing your Arminian and Popish faction, and
you hitherto prosper therein, while there is never a man left, that dare so
much as mutter a word against these your practices, so great is your Power, and
so terrible your Cruelty, and Ministers so Cowardly, so as by this means your
Cause and Course seems to prosper, while you can crush any that shall interpose
himself, or lawfully in his place oppose your violent courses: therefore Christ
has given you this power thus to tyrannise, wherein you do so prosper. True
it is, that Christ has given way to Satan to rage in these times, because he
knows he has but a short time: and hereby Christ will try and humble his
people, that he may do them good, and be glorified in their deliverance, and
in the destruction of all such Papal and Antichristian Tyranny.

L. p. 200. The Church being as large as the world, Blasphemy against Christ as
being Author of the Antichristian Hierarchy.
Christ thought it fitter to govern it Aristocratically, by Diverse, rather
then by One Viceroy. And I believe that this is true. For all the time of the
first 300. years, and somewhat bettter, it was governed Aristocratically, to
wit, by the Bishops, etc.

P. Here you give us occasion further to launch into the Deep of this Mystery,
that we may sound the bottom of it, and so discern what ground it floats upon
( mudde, or sand, or both) although we have in part discovered it before. Here
you say, and you say you believe it too (it is an Article of your Creed) that
Christ thought it fitter to govern the Church Aristocratically by diverse,
rather then by one Viceroy. And you give the Reason, The Church being as large
as the world. We will first take an Assay of your words, and then of your
Reason. For to a vulgar Reader some of your words are somewhat obscure, and some
also very finely couched, that every eye cannot at the first discern the
Mystery of them.

And first, for Aristocratically: Aristotle, the famous Philosopher, and no
mean statesman, in his Politics lays down 3 kinds of Civil Government, taken
in the better part: The first is Monarchia, which is a government by One: the
second is, Aristocratia, which is a Government of the Best Men: the third is
Democratia, which is a Government Popular, or of the People. Opposite to these
three, he sets three sorts of bad Government: the first is Tyranny, which is
opposed to Monarchy; Tyranny ruling either without, or contrary to the good
Laws established: but a Monarchy governing according to the established good
Laws of the State, Kingdom, or Commonweal. The second is, Oligarchia, which
signifies the Government of a few; and this standing in opposition to
Aristocratia (the Government of the best men) it signifies the Government of a
few of the worst men. The third is, Anarchia, that is, no Government at all,
when without Law, or Ruler, every one does that, which seems good in his own
eyes (as Jude 17 6. and 21.25.) and this is opposed to Democratia, a Government
of the people by good Laws. These things thus plainly laid down, we shall the
more clearly proceed in our Point.

Secondly, I note here your word Viceroy; which every man knows does signify
a Vice-King, or one Deputed by the King to govern a Kingdom in his personal
absence, whereof there is usually but one in a Kingdom; as the Viceroy of the
Kingdom of Naples under the King of Spain; or the Lord Duputy of Ireland
under the King thereof. But yet every one does not perhaps understand, that
among diverse Prelates, you make your self a Viceroy. But looking more
narrowly into your words, we shall find that sense easily resulting from them.
For you say, That Christ thought it fitter to govern his Church by Diverse,
then by One Viceroy: that is, by Diverse Viceroys, rather then by One. All
comes to one reckoning. And besides you express the word Diverse, and the word
One* with a Capital, to note, that both have reference to Viceroy. So as it
runs Current both ways, whether you say, By Diverse, rather then by One
Viceroy: or, By Diverse Viceroys, rather then by One. Thus it is plain enough.

Lastly, a third word here is of some difficulty: that you say, Christ thought
it fitter. Now I never took you to be one of Christ's Privy Council, so as to be
made Privy to Christ's thoughts, and that in these things, which he has no
where expressed in his word. But this is familiar with you (as before) to tell
us Gods thoughts. But show us where Christ has expressed any such thought of
his in his express word, the Scripture. If you cannot (as you cannot) how
presume you to say, Christ thought so. Certainly my Lord Jesus Christ, that 1 Timothy 6.15.
only Potentate, and Romans 16.27.
only wise King, uses not to entertain such as you are to be of his Privy
Council, or Cabinet, that dare discover his secrets, nay dare report that of
him, which never came into his thought. And if ye be so bold with Christ,
others may be warned hereby how far to trust you with their secrets, and
others again, how far to believe your reports of Princes Pleasures, or
Purposes, when perhaps it is neither so nor so. But my Lord, your Places, and
Grace, attended with all the Princely Pomp, suits not with Christ's
Privy-Councel-Board. He admitted none thither, but a company of poor simple
Fishermen. Those were his Ioh. 15.14, 15.
Friends, to whom he did communicate and impart his councels and secrets. As
Genesis 18.17.
Abraham being the Iam. 2.23.
Friend of God, God said he would hide nothing from him. No, nor from any of
his true-bred seed. Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will show them his
Covenant. They are either strangers in the world, as Dan.
Daniel in Babylon: or exiles from the world, as Rev. 1.
John in the I Will of Pathmos; or such as live sub Dio, in the wilderness, as
John Baptist: or dwell in a poor thatcht Cottage, or so, to whom the Lord
Jesus Christ reveals his thoughts; and not lightly to those that live
deliciously, and are in Kings Course, and go in soft clothing, their Rev. 12.4.
Train borne up after them, wherewith they draw the third part of the stars
of heaven. As a Cardinal at the Election of a Pope, when there was a solemn
Mass sung to call down the Holy Ghost, to set the dissenting Factions of the
Cardinals at one, and it would not be, said, Let us uncover the Roof, for the
Holy Ghost cannot find a way to pass through so many tyles. And my Lord, if
you tell us this as a revelation, what Christ thought: we have no more, but
your bare word (as in many other things of like nature) so as unless (in a
matter of such moment as this is) you can show us the truth hereof by some
Miracle for confirmation, as the 2 Th^ss 2.
Romish Priests do for their Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, and such like
secrets: you must pardon us, if we do not give credit to what you so boldly
say of Christ's thought here.

But from your words come we to the matter, which they import, and which I say
we still require proof of, which will trouble you worse to find, then all the
writing of your Book has done. And seeing you compare your Episcopal
Government with the Aristocraticall, which is the Government Optimatum, of the
Best men: prove unto us (to make your comparison good, and that in the prime
notion of it) that Prelates are the Best men in the Church. You are Megistoi
indeed, the greatest: but are you Aristoi, Cicer. Offic.
the Best. Riches and Honors (says Cicero) make a man to be Majorem, greater:
Meliorem vero quomodo? but how, better? I could never believe, that the Papal
Miter, could infuse holiness, or an Archiepiscopall Pall, Grace. Nor could I
see any Reason why Prelates should take place in precedence one of another,
according to the greatness of their Principality respectively, as if the Pope
were ever the more learned, virtuous, religious, holy, because he is Bishop of
Rome, or your Lordship because you are Titled His Grace of Canterbury. Whereas
precedence of persons should go by their personal worth, and age, and inward
indowments, and not by any Prelaticall outward Prerogatives. But this by the
way.

But for your Aristocratie: That Prelates are the best men to govern the
Church of Christ; will ye be tried by the thoughts of Christ expressed by the
Apostle, which he had heard in the 2 Cor.
Third heaven, in Christ's Privy Chamber? There you shall see plainly, what both
your, and our faith may infallibly build upon; namely who, or what manner of
persons they be, whom Christ thought fit to Govern his Church. You say,
Bishops. So say we too. But whether our Bishops be the same with your Bishops
(and that not only for their Function, yours being Diocesan, and ours (such as
the Apostle speaks of) Pastors respectively over their particular
Congregations: but for their qualities and conditions, such as are required in
true Bishops indeed) let us hear the Apostles words. 1 Timothy 3.1, etc.
Pistos ho logos. Eitis Episkopes o'regetai, kalou e'rgou e'pithumei: This is a
faithful saying: If any man desire the Office of a Bishop he desires a worthy
work, Oregetay, signifies an earnest desire, quasi porrectis manibus
prehendere and arripere; the Office of a Bishop perhaps you would translate
e'piskope, a Bishopric: but our English has turned it right, The office of a
Bishop; for it is called here, a worthy work. And therefore it is not one of
your Prelaticall Bishoprics, which indeed you do with both hands both
o'rexasthai, and epithumesai, reach after with all earnest desire: for you
reach after the Lordship, after the Honor, after the Revenues, after the
Pleasures, after the Ease, and after the goodly Palaces and Demeanes of your
Bishoprick^: in all which you cannot show k^lon 'ergon, a worthy work. And so
indeed these words of the Apostle (and elsewhere) concerning a Bishop do nothing
concern you: but only to convince you, that you are none of those Bishops,
whom the Scripture so styleth. Well, what be those special qualities, which
the Apostle requires in a true Bishop, set over the Congregation of the Lord?
It shall suffice to mention for the present purpose but some of them. As first:
He must be Anegkletos, unreprovable, such as cannot be justly accused of any
crime. Now none of you come thus clean to your Bishoprics: for you are, or
may be justly accused of having been Pluralists (which is against your Old
Canons) Non-Residents, Idle Dreanes, seldom Preaching in their own Cures, but
by a poor Stipendary Curate, flattering Court-Preachers, and the like. Nay who
is capable, or heir apparent of a Bishopric, or Prelacie, that has not two
or three ^at livings, with a Prebend or two, and a Deanery, that being thus
qualified, having his Purse well lyned (I say not, that he may purchase his
Bishopric) he may be able at least at his In-coming to defray five or six
hundred Pounds, or a thousand Marks for Fees, and Feasts, and Gloves at his
Consecration? Well, secondly, He must not be Authadas, selfe-willed (so our
last Translation renders the word.) And believe me this may come near the
proudest of your Coats, when you come with your Volumus and Iubemus, We will
and command, and that without either Law, or Canon? And you must have your
will, there is no remedy for that, else ye will take the pet, or pepper in the
nose, and cry out of contempt of Authority. And the word signifies also one
that is arrogant, and proud, a selfe-pleaser. You may take all these senses, if
you will. Thirdly, He must not be, Plekges, a strik^r, whether with his own, or
others hands, as delivering over to the secular Power, or Sword, whereby he so
strikes, as he sheds the blood of the Innocents. He must be none of that
society. Fourthly, he must not be Orgilos, soon Angry, testy, or touchy, such
as Na^al, that one might not speak to him, he was so snappish, and cursed,
Fifthly, he must not be Aiskrokerdes, given to filthy lucre, as in exacting Fees
(he or his Officers) of poor Ministers, either extraordinary at their
Admissions, or ordinary at Visitations, and a thousand ways besides Viis and
modis sine modo in your Bishops Courts. Sixthly, He must be Philagados, a lover
of good men, not a hater and persecuter of them. Seventhly, he must be Dikaies,
just, not oppressing Innocents by a faction and confederacy of voices
forepacked in your Courts, before the Cause come to be heard. Eighthly, He must
be Osios, holy, not one that is an enemy to all true holiness, and persecutes
the very name of it, and suppress the practice and means of it, as by crying
down the sanctification of the Lords day, and the sincere Preaching of the word
of God, and commending and dispensing with profane sports on that day* Ninthly*
He must be Didaktikos, apt to teach: not only sufficient and able, for his
Scholarship, or one that can make a Sermon, if he will, but he must be diligent
in preaching in season and out of season. He must hold fast the faithful Word,
that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the
Gainsayers. So far must he be from abbetting and countenancing false
Teachers, and unsound Doctrine, and old damned Heresies, and forbidding to
preach sound Doctrine, and punishing those that do. I might reckon up sundry
more qualities, which Christ requires in those, whom only he allows and
appoints as fittest to govern and feed his People, as becom^th good Pastors to
do their flocks; as 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. and elsewhere. But because Lord
Prelates, or Diocesan Bishops (as I said before) are none of those Bishops here
which the Apostle requires to be thus qualified; therefore I have said enough to
convince you, that you are none of Christ's Bishops, if you do but look your
selves in this Glass. And if you mark it well, these are those, that
immediately succeeded the Apostles and Evangelists, in the Ministerial
function. As we read, Ephesians. 4.11. where the Pastors and Teachers are those, who
are elsewhere called Presbyters and Bishops, such as Paul and Barnabas did Act.
14.23.
Keirotonesi, elect, ordain, or appoint by imposition of hands Kat'
e'kklesian, in every Church, or particular Congregation. A place very
remarkable. And these Presbyters, Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Preachers,
Ministers (for all is one and the same Office) as they succeeded the Apostles,
but with a particular limitation every one to their peculiar charges and
Congregations respectively: so while the Apostles lived, they were still next
unto them, as we see Act. 15.2.4.6.22, 23. And these are those Elders that rule
well, which especially do Kopian, labor hard in the Ministry of the Word and
Doctrine. These are those Aristoi, those Optimates, the best men, by whose
Aristocraticall Government, according both to the thought (we may boldly and
truly say) and to the express word of Christ, the several Churches, and
particular Congregations and flocks of Christ, are governed; and that, not by
any their own devised Canons, but by the only Canon of Scripture, wherein are
expressed all those Laws, and Rules, by which all true Ministers of Christ do
regulate themselves, and govern their several Congregations. For although
Christ's faithful and true Ministers are the best men, and therefore are but few
in comparison (and 2 Cor. 2.16.
who is fit, or sufficient for these things? says the Apostle) yet Christ left
them not to govern his Churches or flocks, as they should think best, but
according to his own Laws: as Deputies are to govern the people according to
the Kings Laws, and no otherwise. For such is the Government of Aristocratie,
it is established upon good Laws of the Commonweal; otherwise it should
degenerate into the corrupt and bad Government of Oligarchia. So as here is no
room for your Diocesan Lord Bishops; for you are none of those Aristoi,
Optimates: the best m^n, whom Christ thought fit for the Aristocraticall
Government of his Church, since ye are neither qualified for it, as he requires
in his true Bishops, nor will you confine your Prelaticall Government to the
Laws of Christ expressed in his word, but will govern by your own Canons and
lusts, as usurpers use to do. And therefore (by the way) no mervaile if you
speak so contemptibly and basely of the holy Scripture, seeing in them you can
find no ground, either of Precept, or Apostolic Precedent for your
Antichristian Hierarchy.

All which considered, does in the second place give us just cause to doubt at
least, or rather to be well assured indeed, that Diocesan Prelates, or Bishops
(as you usurp the Title) are no Viceroys under the Great King Jesus Christ:
because your Government is nothing according to our Great Kings Laws, but
according to your own devised Canons, and in nothing, in Nothing (I say)
agreeable to the Laws of Christ in the Scripture, for the right Government of
his Church. Nay that Government which Christ has prescribed in his word, and
which is practiced in the best Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, you do
utterly and openly condemn, and the Churches themselves, that do practice the
Discipline of Christ and his Apostles, while you deny them to be any Churches
of Christ at all.

Again, Every Kingdom, as it has but one King over it, so it is capapable of
no more, then only one Viceroy* so as by that Title, he that is your Ordine
Primus, and has a more Potent Principality, the Pope, had he but a good Title,
would carry that honor from you all, if you value the worth and Dignity of
that Vice-Royship after the value of your Bishoprics, and not after virtue.
Either then you must acknowledge the Pope to be the sole Viceroy, which you
are loath to do. (For why should not the Patriarch of the other world be as
capable of that honor, as he) or you must give us leave to find out the only
true Viceroy of Christ in his Church, and that is, The Holy Ghost. For when
our Great King went into his Celestial Kingdom, to his Church Tryumphant,
leaving his Militant here on Earth under the Kingdom of Grace, as touching his
bodily presence: he sent the Holy Ghost to be his Viceroy, or Vicegerent, to
be perpetually resident in his Kingdom of Grace here, for the Governing of his
Church Militant, and that according to the Law of Christ in his written word,
leading the People of Christ into all truth, by revealing unto them all the
Mysteryes of Christ's will contained in the Scripture. As Christ says, Ioh.
16.14.
He shall g^orifie Me; for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. And
v. 13. When the spirit of Truth is come, whom (v. 7.) I will send unto you, he
will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. Lo here then a faithful
Viceroy indeed. And will, or dare you deny this Spirit of God to be an All
sufficient Viceroy, who does execute Christ's Kingly Office in his Church, in
all things just so, as Christ himself will^th. And therefore except you can
prove, that Christ has many Kingdoms of Grace here on earth, or any more
Churches Militant, then one only, here is no Rome for any such Viceroys, as
you pretend to be. For here we see it plain, that of Christ's one, and only
Kingdom of Grace here on earth, the Holy Ghost is the only Viceroy. And who
is fit to be Christ's Viceroy in his spiritual Kingdom, but the Spirit of
God, and of Christ^? Ye are therefore no Viceroys, because you are altogether
carnal, and your Kingdom is of this world.

And therefore Thirdly, how can you Prelates pretend to be Viceroys over
Christ's Church, whenas (as is noted before) ye are not so much as any members
at all of Christ's Kingdom. For you are the Members of Antichrists Kingdom,
and so you are, or may be Antichrists Viceroys over his several Provinces.
It Is true you style your selves spiritual, Lords spiritual, and your Courts
spiritual, and you are an Hierarchy, as much to say, as a Holy Kingdom, or
Government: but it is not spiritual of Christ's spirit, but of that spirit that
rules in the air, that gave you all that Authority. Ephesians. 2.2.
So as you do with Bellarmine turn those words of Christ to Peter, Pasce oves
meas, Feed my Sheep, to Regio more Impera, Rule as a King. And what similitude
is there between Christ and you, that you should be his Viceroys in his
Church-Militant? When he was here in person, he was among his own as a servant,
and Minister. He had no sta^ely and Princely Palaces, he kept no such
Pontificiall house, nor Court: he governed not his Church by Chancellors, Arch
Deacons, Deanes Chapters, Commiss^^^^s, Offi^ialls, Pursuivants, Apparitors,
and all that Rabble. Christ had no such face of a Kingly Government. So as you
have altogether perverted the Kingdom of Christ, which is altogether
spiritual, and holy, into a mere temporal and carnal Kingdom, wherein
therefore you are none of Christ Viceroys, but Vi^ious Roys* and Tyrannical
Lords. O Antich^istian Generation! O notorious Hypocrites! O proud and blind
Guides! How shall you escape the vengeance to come, that dare thus impiously
ab^se the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so impose upon the world by your
bold usurpations? Usurpations indeed. You call your selves Viceroys,
Apostolic, Bishops, Spiritual Church, Grace, Holiness: mere Nominalls,
which you have usurped, and patched together, to become a veil to cover your
deep hypocrisy, and to seem glorious in the eyes of the world, and all to hold
up your earthly Kingdom, which consists altogether of earthly things, honors
riches, pleasures But blind world, that su^ferest thy self to be thus guld and
befoold with such glittering stuff, and to be made a slave to such Lords, and
to be cheated of thy salvavation by these Antichristian Mountebanks. And yet
they pretend and profess, that this their carnal* pompous, and Pontificiall
Kingdom is Christ's spiritual Kingdom here, in the state of Grace. Let them
then clear themselves herein from that damned Heresy of that old Heretic
^erinthus, who lived in S. John's time. His Heresy was, That Christ's Kingdom,
after his Resurrection was earthly, and that now the flesh conversing in
Jerusalem was to serve lusts and pleasures. [See Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib 3. cap.
22. Meta (...).
] Now is not the Prelates Kingdom just that in practice, with Cerinthus his
Heresy? If so: As S. John forsook the Bath wherein Cerinthus was, what cause
have Christians to fly from that roof, where such an Antichristian Hierarchy
domineereth?

But in the next place, let us consider of your Reason How stands it good, that
because Christ's Church is as large as the world, therefore he thought it fitter
to govern it by Diverse, then by One Viceroy? Now we have proved your
Hierarchy not to be an Aristocrasie, a Government of the Best men, and that by
good Laws: seeing therefore you must needs be some Government, then it must be
an Olegarchie, that is, the Government of a few of the worse men, such as rule
by their lusts, and not by any good Laws, either of God, or Man. But now tell
me, my Lord, if you argue upon this ground, that because the Militant Church is
as large as the world, therefore it is fitter it be governed by many Vice Roys,
then by one: why may not as well one Prelate, as the Pope, be sole Viceroy over
the whole world, as my Lord of Canterbury be a Viceroy over all England. For
does not the Pope and you Govern your Churches by substitutes? Why then may
not the Pope Govern the whole by his Curates, as you do all England by your
Curates? For all the Ministers in England are but your Curates. And suppose you
were one of the Popes Bishops, and so his Creature: what difference would there
be between your Governing of your Province under the Pope, as it were his
Deputy, and Governing according to Romes Canons and Customs, and as you do now
in your own Name? And the Pope challenging the whole world for his Diocese,
and you the Province of Canterbury for yours: all the difference is, that he
needs the more Curates, which he may have with a wet finger, and you the
fewer. Only perhaps his Holiness would now and then fleece your Graces
Clergy, as he was wont of old to do. But in the mean time both the Pope and
your Lordship do much mistake the matter, in judgeing, or estimating, and
measuring the latitude and extent of Christ's Church. For you both measure it
according to the extent of your large and Potent Principalities, Patriarchall
Countries, Archiepiscopall Provinces, Episcopal Diocese. But you are far
wide in casting your line. For though Christ's Church is said to be dispersed
over the whole earth, being confined to no place: yet of all this wide world he
has the least number, and fewest of all, where commonly your Hierar^hy is most
predominant. For those that belong to Christ, are a sort of poor Snakes
despised in the world, and always persecuted and oppressed by your Hierarchy,
so as they can hardly find so much as a little corner any where in the world,
much less in all the Circuit of your Diocese, or Provinces, where they may
hide their heads, or live in any peace. So as of all your full Vintages, and
fruitful Fields, Christ is glad of the refuse of a few gleanings. And so
Christ's flock (alas!) is so small, and so poor, and his Kingdom on earth so
despised, as to set up such Lordly Viceroys, as the Prelates over it, the very
Fees of your Courts would eat them out. And therefore because Christ's sheep are
here and there scattered in the world, and many times as sheep without a
shepherd, being driven by your Dogs from their own pasture: Christ thought
it fitter to place over his small and scattered flocks, poor sheheards, that
should feed their several flocks respectively with the wholesome food of the
word of God: and therefore appointed to every particular Congregation a peculiar
Pastor of their own, that should always be personally resident with his
flocks, keeping his watch over them night and day; and so much the more, in
regard of so many Wolves and Foxes, and wild Beasts, which without continual
watching, would make a prey of them. Neither would Christ permit his shepherds
to commit their Flocks to Hirelings, or Stipenda^y Curates, while themselves
should take their pleasure and ease: for Ioh. 10.10* 12.
the Hireling when he sees the thief, or wolf coming, flees, because he is
an Hireling, neither cares he for the Sheep. Therefore Christ wisely and
providently has appointed to every particular Congregation or flock of his, a
shepherd of their own, and that Ier. 3.15.
after his own heart, to feed them with knowledge and understanding. And as the
shepherd governes and guides his own flock: so every faithful Minister or
Pastor is appointed by Christ to be the 1 Pet. 5.2.
Governor of his own Congregation, according to the Rule of Christ. So as in
this respect, Christ thought it fitter to appoint many Governors in his
Church, namely to each Congregation their own Shepherd: rather then a few,
such as you speak of, as one over a whole Country or Province. Neirther let
your Lordship think, that every such Congregation, having a faithful Pastor
over it, has yet need of any your Episcopal Inspection, or Trienniall
Visitations, or your Archdeacons, Annual Visitation, wherein you inquire only
whether your own Canons be observed, and if so Omnia been, All is well, only
the poor Ministers paying their Procuration; the Visitor never inquiring, if
the Minister be diligent in preaching to his flock: but whether he has kept
the Order for not preaching in the After-noons on the Lords day, and the Order
for not Preaching such and such Doctrines, and such like: so as commonly your
visitation is like that of the Plague, saving that this is from God
immediately, and yours, from another sourse. And Ministers and People too could
think themselves happy, to be freed from your awful and terrible vi^its,
wherein your maine aim is to root out all good Ministers, for which the
omission of one of your Ceremonies is sufficient. So as Christ's Congregation (I
say) needs not any such Inspection of the Bishops eye over them, which is as l'
aeil de beuf, or the weather gall, called the Ox eye, L' aeil de beuf.
which portends a storm to follow. For Christ has promised his perpetual
Presence and residence with his people, and his eye Esa. 27.3.
watches over them night and day, least any hurt them. As he says, Mat. 18.20*
When two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them. Lo here an entire, and complete body of a Church, having Christ as head
over them, and his Spirit in them, and his Word before them, and their own
shepherd appointed by Christ to feed them. so as here is no place left for
your Prelaticall Viceroys.

Object. Put you say, No Bishop, no Church: so say I too, but the Apostles
Bishop he must be, not your Diocesan Lord Bishop. What order then (say you)
will be in the Church? A good and decent order in every Congregation, where
Christ's order, and ordinance takes place, and where man's presumption breaks not
this order. And consider here the excellent wisdom, and order of Economy,
that Christ has appointed every Congregation to be governed by. For as that is
the most perfect, and complete form of Civil Government, which is mixed of all
the 3 states, as the Monarchiall, Aristocraticall, and Democraticall, when the
King governs by his good Laws, using the best men, as the noble, and most
virtuous in the higher places of the Kingdom, and the b^st and dis^reet^st of
the common people in the bearing of inferior offices, such as every one is
most fit for; a representation whereof we have in the 3 states in Parliament,
the King, the Nobles, and the Commons: so the Lord Jesus Christ has
established this most complete form of Government in his Church: First,
himself rules as King over all, Governing by his Spirit: Secondly, he has set
over every particular Congregation such as are Arist^i, the optimates, the best
and ablest to be Pastors and Teachers, each of his own flock: And thirdly, he
has added also the Denocraty, or government of the people, appointed to be
chosen out of every Congregation the gravest, wisest, sobriest and discreetest,
some as 1 Timothy 5.17.
Elders, some, as, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
Deacons, to be helpers to the Minister in matter of Discipline, of
Sacramental Provision, of relief of the poor, of visiting the sick, and of
other Church affairs for that Congregation. And these are called by the
Apostle Antil^pseis, kubern^seis, which our English ^enders, helps in
Governments. And all this according to the express Law of Christ our King,
recorded in the Scripture, as being the most perfect pattern of the Government
of his Church for every particular Congregation to be regulated and ordered by.
So as in truth those Congregations, that are thus governed, are the only true
Churches of Christ, as wherein himself, his spirit, his word do govern both
Minister and people: whereas on the other side, all Prelaticall Churches are
false, and Antichristian, as wherein not Christ, and his spirit* and his word
do bear rule, but Antichristian men by the pride of their spirit, and by their
Canons do altogether bear sway, thrusting Christ out of his Throne, despising
his word, and putting a yoke of bondage over the necks both of Ministers and
people.

To conclude this point: because you are of such a belief, and so confidently
tell us, and peremptorily avouch, that Christ thought it fitter to govern his
Church by Diverse, then by One Viceroy: besides what is already said, I will a
little more press, and present before you Christ's own words at full; which I
do, to put you out of all such belief, or so much as any such conceit, that
Christ had ever any such thought. Math. 20. upon occasion of those two (at that
time) ambitious brethren, Math. 20.
sent to Christ by their Mother, to be chief about him in his Kingdom: Christ
first tells them, Ye know not what ye ask. Then calling his Disciples to him,
he says thus unto them: Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise
Dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise authority upon them. But
it shall not be so among you: but wh^so ever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, etc. Which the Evangelist Luke expresses thus: Luke 22.25*
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise
Authority upon them, are called Euergetai, Benefactors. But ye shall not be so.
Ye? Who? Not the Apostles of Christ, not the Ministers of Christ in succeding
ages. Not so? How? Ye shall not exercise Dominion, Lordship, Authority one over
another; you shall not be called Benefactors, Patrons, Lords, Gracious Lords,
Honorable, your Grace, your Honor, etc. Why so? For such are the Kings of the
Gentiles, who exercise Dominion over them, and are called Benefactors. You
shall not be as they, in exercising any Authority or Jurisdiction one over
another. Nor shall ye be called Euerg^t^i, My Good lord, My Benefactor, My
Patron, My lords Grace, or My Gracious lord, and the like. Thus under those
words Christ cha^geth his Apostles not to affect, not to be ambitious of, not
to exercise Superiority or Prelacy, Jurisdiction and Authority one over
another, or over Christ's Kingdom, his Church and (...); as Peter says, 1 P^t.
5*
Not as Lords over Gods heritage: where the Apostle uses the same word that
Christ his Master used, M^ (...) katakurieuontes ton k^uron, not exercising
Dominion or (...) Gods Inheritance: or if you will, over his Clergy, though
they be not his only Inheritance, but his people are no (...) unto him, and
are kleros, Gods lot. But now for Christ's (...): do you not think that Christ
spoke, as he thought, and (...) as he spoke? Or can you believe any other? And
do not his (...) to his Apostles, in them reach to all his Ministers (...)
succeed them in future ages? If you say* you are the (...) only successors:
why are you then l^rds ov^r Go^s (...) why do you exercise ^u^hority and
Dominion over his (...) and people, as Heathen Kings do over then people,
(...) expressly forbid, to his Apostles, and to all their Successors? But you
show your selves to be none of Christ's Disciples, and so none of his Apostles
successors: for you obey not Christ's word, as the Apostles did.

What do you answer then to Christ's words? Or what interpretation can you
devise to avoid them? You will answer perhaps with Bellarmine, that Christ
forbad his Apostles to be like the Heathen Princes, in exercising a temporal
Government, or Authority one over another. This is indeed all the evasion
Bellarmine has. But how vain! Let Us bring it to the Touch. How shall it be
tried? What says Christ? Humeis de ouk outos: you shall not be so. Now if you
be not so, all is well: you may prove Apostolical men. But if you prove to be
like the Heathen Princes in exercising Lordship over the people, under your
Government, and in exercising Authority over them: what can you say for your
selves why you should not be proclaimed for proud Contemners of Christ's word,
and for usurping Tyrants over his peopl; and so for a rebellious Faction and
Confederacy against Christ's Kingdom? Let Us therefore draw our Parallel. Those
Heathen Powers were called Princes: so you call your selves: they were Kings,
and so were Gods Vicegerents: you call your selves Viceroys of Christ: they
were called Benefactors, though they never did good: so you are styled, My
lords Grace, and when in your Court, you condemn poor innocents, yet they must
confess the justice and favor of your Court: They were called Fathers of
their Country, so you, Right Reverend Fatheres, Most Reverend Father, your
Grace, etc. They were lords: so you, yea you are temporal lords, and so sit in
Parliament, though styled spiritual: they exercised lordship, dominion,
Authority over the people, and that with tyranny, and without Law: so do you:
And in a word, Is not your Pomp and state, your Power and Greatness, your
Palaces and Courts, your Train and Attendants, your Fasces and Lictors, to
wit, your Pursuivants and Apparitors, your Kinglike Attire in Purple and
Scarlet and fine lynen, soft raiment of silks and sattens, your Tables
overflowing with delicacies of viands and wines in all abundance and variety,
and what not, like that of Kings! Thus do you not bear the Image of the
Beast, the Dragon, the Heathen Emperor, who gave power to that other Beast,
the Pope, who in himself erected the Image of the first Beast from top to toe,
namely the Imperial state and magnificence being fully expressed and limmed
out in the Papal, though but in somewhat a lower degree in your Episcopal
Pontificiall state. As Pope Boniface 8. in the first day of his Jubilee came
forth pompously arrayed in all his Pontificalibus, and the next day in the
Imperial Ropes, with two Swords carried before him. And a lively Image of this
is my Lord Bishop, a mixed Creature, partly temporal, and partly spiritual
spiritual in name only, and temporal in his whole outward state, as the
Kings and Princes of the Gentiles were, as the Crea^ure called Amphibius, that
lives now in the water, and now on the Land, and yet is neither good Fish, nor
Flesh.

Now tell us, my Lord, whose Image you bear: Christ's, or Caesar's? yea in all
things you resemble Caesar, but not many one thing the Lord Jesus Christ. I
say, not in one thing. Show any one thing, wherein you instate either Christ,
o^ his Apostles after his Resurrection. Indeed you inatate ^he Apostles in
their Phil^^^iki^, emulation and contention, which should be the greatest,
which Christ condemns, and utterly forbids in them. But this was in them
only before they knew the Mystery of Christ's Kingdom aright They dreamed of a
Temporal Kingdom: but after Christ's Resurrection, when they had received the
Holy Ghost, they were of another mind, no such emulation then who should be the
chiefest there, but who should show greatest love and fidelity to Christ in
preaching the Gospel, and building up spiritual Temples to God. But you (I
say) imitate them in their carnal estate, wherein that which they blindly
imagined, you have erected an Image of, namely a Temporal Kingdom, like that
of Heathen Kings and Princes, and other Temporal Lords. Which shows, that you
are none of Christ's Disciples (I say) or the Apostles successors, and that you
have not Christ's Spirit, but are altogether carnal and sensual, as the Jude
1^.
Apostle says. For had you Christ's Spirit, you would be truly spiritual, as
the Apostles were. But you are Jude 19.
s^nsuall, having not the Spirit. And if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
the some is none of his. And in that you veil your hypocrisy and all your
sensuality, and carnal state which you call your Hierarchy, under the specious
terms and Titles of spiritual Holy, Grace, Church, Bishops, Christ's Vicars,
or Viceroys, Apostoli^ke, successors o^ the Apostles wherewith you gull the
blind world: this is that very Mystery of Iniquity the Apostle speaks of, which
began to work even in his days (as we noted before) you being those false
Prophets that come in Christ's Name, in sheeps clothing, Mat. 24. and 7.1^.
but are inwardly ravening Wolves. You may think my language sharp, but it
cannot be too sharp against such a cursed proud Generation, as you Prelates
are, usurping Tyrants, Rebels against Christ, Perverters of all truth and
faith, corrupters of all true honesty, holiness, Religion, and the worship of
God, who are made to be destroyed with that Rev. 19.19, 20.
Beast of Rome, whose Image you bear, and with whom the false Prophets, such
as you are, and all those that in you do worship the Image of the Beast, and
receive his marks, shall go into the bottomless pit* and burning lake.

L. p. 204. Now it (the Church of Rome) must be a Tryumphant Church here,
Militant no longer.

P. I hope then, if Rome be here (as she is) a Church Triumphant, and no more
Militant, but in warring against Christ and his Saints (for Rev. 18.7.
she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no
sorrow: And in her Decretalls, she has made a firm Vt sedeat, sedendo
quiescat in Tabernaculis pacis, etc. As Rev. 18.7. Sedeo Regina.
Decree for her perpetual tranquillity and felicity here, in all pleasures, and
prosperity, free from all incursions and invasions; which is an estate
Tryumphant) there also you, and your Hierarchicall Lady Church of England will
not be far behind your Sister Queen at Rome. For you are both one and the
same Church, and one in that especially, which makes you a Church Tryumphant,
and that is your Kingly Hierarchy, and Lordly Prelacy: and therefore if that
Queen be tryumphant at Rome, your Lordship and your Churches Ladyship must be
tryumphant in England, as indeed you are, in all your Ruff, and Gallantry. And
as Rome has now a long time tryumphed over the poor Rev. 17.
Saints of God, and Martyrs of Jesus, martyring and massacring them, and
garrowsing full cups of their blood even unto drunkenness, and surfeit: so your
Tryumphant Chariot marches after her apace, trampling the Saints under your
feet, and tryumphing over them in shedding their innocent blood, and so
glorying in your Bestiall and Diabolical cruelty in oppressing and tyrannizing
over Gods people, and that so fiercely, as if you would outstrippe your Elder
Sister in all her bloody barbarism, and therein exalt your triumph above hers.
For wherein else should the Glory and magnificence of your Prelaticall Princes,
and Heroical Viceroys shine forth, but in being mounted on Horseback, while
the true Princes lacky it by them on the earth? And thus you ride in triumph,
as the Heathen Kings were wont to do. Oh how you tryumphed, when you looked
through one of your Court-windowes, when you passed your tryumphall Censure, to
behold those THREE looking through your Pillory-windowes, whose blood you had
before (how justly your own Conscience can tell you condemned there to be shed?
But the wonder was, that they even the^e, as in their tryumphall Chariot,
tryumphed over your Barbarous cruelty. But thus you are a Tryumphant Church
too, and in nothing Militant, but (as is noted before) in your warring against,
and persecuting the poor Saints of God. But your triumph shall end in Phil.
3.19.
your shame and confusion, verifying that which shall be fulfilled in your
Sister, or Mother Rome, Rev. 18.6, 7, 8, etc.
Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to
her works: in the Cup which she has filled, fill to her double How much she
has g^^rified her self, and lived delicioutsly, so much torment and sorrow
g^ve her: for she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall
see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, etc.

L. p. 205. The Kings under the Law, but s^ill according to it, did proceed to
necessary R^formations in Church-busin^sses, and therein commanded the very
Priests themselves, as appears in the Acts of ^lesechiah, and Josiah, 2 Chro.
29.4. and 4 King ^^.2.

P. All this is true you here affirm* so as i^ confirms what we said before
of Christian Kings in matters o^ Religion, that they ought to do nothing, but
still according to the Law of God, All, Allways, in All things, not varying in
the least Circumstance or Ceremony. All this is well. But what makes this for
your Priest? What says your practice? This: Ergo the King giving way to the
Priest, or Prelate of Canterbury, he may of his own head appoint and impose
what Ceremonies his Romish Devotion thinks fit in the worship of God. This is
your usual Logic. This your usual perverting and abusing of Scripture.
Well: What more? A little before Page 205.
( ibid.) you tell us, Omnis anima, Every soul, All spiritual men even to the
high^st Bishop and in spiritual Causes, so the foundations of Faith and good
Manners be not shaken, must be subject to the Higher Powers. And where they are
shaken, there ought to be Prayer and Patience, there ought not to be opposition
by force. Now for your highest Bishop and all spiritual men, we have done
withal, That all Obedience is due from all men to Kings and Princes in all
things where the foundations of Faith and Good Manners be not shaken, we all
acknowledge with you: and where they are shaken, there ought to be Prayer and
Patience of every particular and private Christian, without his opposition by
force, when he is pressed to do that which is against Gods word, and his own
Conscience. Now here by the way, I pray you resolve me, as in a Case of
Conscience, 2 Chro. 26.16, 17, 18.
Whether the High Priest Azariah did transgress or no, when King Vzziah in the
Temple burnt Incense on the Altar, he with fourscore Priests of the Lord, that
were valient men, went in after the King, and withstood him* saying, It
perteameth not unto thee, Vzziah, to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests, etc. Lo, here was a withstanding the King. But I will not press you
for your Judgment: for I find in the next verse Gods own Judgment of the
Case: for Vzziah with the Censer in his hand being incensed, even while he was
wroth with the Priests the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the
Priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the Incense-Altar; And Azariah
the Chief Priest, and all the Priests looked upon him, and behold he was
leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea he himself
hasted also to go out because the Lord had smitten him. And Vzziah the King
was a Leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a
Leper, for he was cut off from the house of the Lord, and Iotham the Kings son
was over the Kings house judging the people of the Land. Now to apply this to
the present purpose: You make your self as the High Priest of the Church of
England. Now suppose the King of England should do that, whereby the
foundations of Faith and good Manners were shaken: what would your Lordship
do? I ask not what you would do, in case you should be the Chief Agent and
Instrument, a Counceller, a Promoter, and a Contriver of such a thing. For then
it were a vain Question. But suppose you had no hand nor head in it at all,
and were a man zealous of Gods glory, and truly pious, and found in the faith,
and one that knew well what the foundations of Faith and good Manners are, and
when they are shaken, and one that respected more the Kings good and Honor,
then your own private ends, and more Christ's Kingdom, then any Hierarchy, or
spirituall-Temporall Principality on Earth, and one that loved more to speak
the Truth to Kings, though you were sure of displeasure, then to flatter and
speak pleasing things to the ruin of the State and Kingdom, though for the
present it pleased: suppose (I say) all this (for even impossibilities may be
supposed) then tell me what your self (a man of such high Place and Grace in
Court, and of so great Power to persuade and dissuade) would do, when you
should see the Foundations of Faith and good Manners to be shaken by the King,
or supreme Magistrate. For the very Name of shaking the Foundations of Faith
and good Manners, is enough to shake a Man's heart, and cause him to abhor the
very thought of it, if he were not either altogether senseless, and ignorant
what the Foundations of Faith and Good Manners do mean: or knowing them, were
not either an open* or secret enemy unto them For what is such a shaking, but a
m^king way for the sudden precipitation of the state of all things into
inevitable Destruction, a dissepating of all humane society, a mingling of
heaven and earth together in one Chaos of all Confusion? And therefore, now that
we are upon a point of such Moment, as it were the Center, whereon the worlds
Globe is pitched, or as the two 1 King. 7.21^
Pillars in Solomon's Temple, I^chin and Boas, stability and strength, Faith and
good Manners being the stability and strength of all true Religion, of humane
society, and Civil Polity: it will be worth our Inquiry a little, what it is to
shake these Foundations, or when these Foundations are shaken. And it is
possible, that these Foundations may at this very time be shaken in the Church
and state of England, and so threaten, if not hasten Ruin; in so much as a
speedy remedy for prevention, upon the discovery, may be required. You will
say, God forbid. What? God forbid, that in such a Case a speedy remedy should
be used? No, not so, by your leave. Well, what say you then to your Articles of
Religion, wherein the Doctrines of Faith of the Church of England, and those of
them that are according to the express Scriptures, as Gods Grace in Election,
Predestination, Salvation, etc. are shaken? Are they not shaken, and that
terribly too by an Edict, or Declaration, so as they do at the least nutare,
et huc illuc f^luctuare, so reele too and ^ro, like a drunken man, as no sober
man knows to which side they will fall? And are not those Doctrines of Gods
free and saving Grace in Christ, the foundations of Faith, which are contained
in those Articles? Can you deny this? Again, what say you to the Two Tables,
wherein are contained the Ten Commandments of Gods Moral Law? Are they not
also Foundations? Yea and Foundations both of Faith, and Good Manners? For the
Four Commandments of the First Table concern Faith and Religion: the Six of
the Second, Good Manners. So much all confess, and your self too. And you
say, page 205.^^*
Emperors and Kings are Cussodes utriusque Tabulae: They to whom the Custody
and preservation of both Tables of the Law, for worship to God, and duty to
man, are committed. And That a Book of the Law was by Gods own command in Moses
his time, to be given to the King, Deuteronomy. 17.18. So you. Is it so then? What say
you then to those two Great Commandments, the Last of the First Table, and the
First of the Second? Do they not stand closse together, as those two
formentioned Pillars in Solomon's Temple, Iachin, and Boaz? Is not holy
Obedience to God in his worship on his own day, as Iachin, the stability of the
the Church and Temple of God? And is not Civil subjection to superiors, as
Boaz, the strength of the Commonwealth? So as when these two Commandments are
shaken, are not two maine Pillars and Foundations of Faith and good Manners
shaken, and so the Foundations both of Church and Common-weal^h shaken? What
say you to this, o Great High Priest? Is it true, or no? For I must now put you
to it You give just occasion. But you answer nothing, si^ence in this Case is
consent, and such as proceeds from guilt of Conscience. And how ever, Res ipsa
clamat, The thing it self proclaims it, and clear evidence proves it. For
does not the Edict for Sports (so often upon fresh occasions mentioned) declare
as much. And does it not shake the Fourth Commandment, for the sanctification
of the Lords Day, the Lords Sabbath Day? Which Dispensation of such profane and
mad sports, can it consist with sanctification, or any holiness, or common
sobriety of a Christian, or with Christian Profession, or with our Baptismall
vow to the Contrary? much less with the direct and express immediate solemn
sanctification of that day, commanded in that Fourth Commandment? Is not here
then a Foundation of Religion, and so also of Good Manners too, shaken? For
what Good Manners does our May-pole-dances, and Morisdances teach us? Nemo
saltat sobrius, could the very Cicero.
Heathen say, No man Danceth that is sober. And as an English Wits
Commonwealth.
Author says, licenced too, but in diebus illis: A Dancer and a mad man
different, but in the duration. And to help to shake this Foundation yet more,
you have licenced Dr. White of the Sabbath. Dr. Primrose. Dr. Heylin. Dr.
Pocklinglon.
Books, that do unmoralize the Fourth Commandment (as before) as antiquated
now, and of no force to bind us Christians to the observation of a seventh day,
or the Lords day, which we have proved before to be the Rest-day, or the
Sabbath day of the Lord our God, Jesus Christ. And did not your Tyranny
suppress all Truth, all your Doctors had been ere now answered to the shame of
their Divinity-Profession, and the confusion of their accursed Opinions, and
Blasphemies against the holy Truth, and eternal Law of God. Well, here you are
charged with shaking this Great Foundation of Faith and Religion. And though my
Name be not here to the Bill (which therefore you will be ready by another Bill to
make a Libell) yet (as I said before, I say again) let the King be but pleased
to send forth a Proclamation, commanding the Author of this Charge to come
forth, and avouch it before the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, where
he shall have a fair, just, unpartiall and honorable hearing, and where your
Lordship shall as well stand at the Bar, as your Accuser: and you shall see
your Antagonist dare show his face. But to prevent the trouble of Calling a
Parliament, you will answer, this is none of Your doing* it is the Kings Edict,
and of King James before him, and now by the Kings special command
republished? Is it so? And therein are the Foundations of Faith and Good
Manners shaken? And that not only in overthrowing the Morality of the 4 th
Comm^ndement by Dispensaton of profane sports, but by dispensing with youth to
use their lib^rty on that day without control of their Superiors (as Parents
or Masters) who if they shall hinder them the Magistrate shall punish them, and
so the 5 th Commandment, which is a Foundation of Good Manners in all
obedience due to Superiors, is shaken, if not pulled down to the ground, as
the Aprentices of London were wont on Shrove-Tuesday to pull down Infamous
houses? Is all this so? Why then did you not step in, as good Azariah, and
withstand the coming forth of such an Edict, and tell the King, It pertains
not to Thee, o King, to set forth such an Edict, to dispense with Gods Holy,
Moral, Eternal Commandments, whereby the Foundations of Faith and Good
Manners are shaken, least thereby shaking the Foundations both of Church and
Commonwealth, you do, through Gods just wrath, bring your own Kingdom to
sudden ruin. But did you at all interpose your self? Or did you use Prayer
and Patience, rather undergoing the Kings displeasure, then being either Agent
or Instrument in the publishing of such an Edict? No such thing. For it was the
handsel of your Primacy to publish the Edict, as being the best Office, whereby
you could testify your thankfulness for so high a Preferment? For why should
you here leave the King alone in so weighty a Cause, when you tell us Epist.
Dedicatory.
before, that the King and the Priest, more then any other are bound to look
to the Integrity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners, and that in the first
place? And would you now leave the King in the lurch, to do that, whereby the
Foundations of Faith, and Good Manners are shaken, and the Church in Doctrine
and Manners corrupted? But you were an Instrument at least, and that at both
end^ of the business. As for Prayer and Patience, you were willing to leave
them to others, that had more need, and could make better use of them: to wit,
those poor honest Ministers, who seeing the danger of their public reading
of the said Book in their several Congregations, so straightly imposed by the
Prelates, and th^in^ the Kings Name, wherein they well understood, that the
very Foundations of Faith and Good Manners are shaken, so as their reading of
it to their people, would make themselves acces^ary to all the mischief that
might come thereby, as whereby the wrath of God must needs be greatly incensed
against the whole Land: did thereupon refuse to read it, committing the Cause
to God in Prayer, and arming themselves with resolved Patience to endure all
the Censure, and punishment threatened in the Book, and left to be inflicted by
the Bishops. As not long after the Bishops thunderclap of threatening, they
feel the thunderbolt it self, by Suspension, Silencing, Excommunication,
Dispossession out of their Benefices, Cures, Houses, Freeholds, Dispersion of
Family Wife and Children, now exposed to the wide world, and made a Prey to
Wolves and Lions Rev. 13.10*
Here is indeed the Patience and Faith of the Saints. Here is use of their
spiritual Armor, Prayer, Patience, Tears, the only weapons of their
warfaire against such enemies* so as if Solomon the Preacher were now alive, he
might see his words as truly and fully verified in these times, as ever they
were in his, Eccl. 4.1.
I returned (says he) and considered all the Oppressions that are done under
the Sun, and behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
Comforter; and on the side of their Oppressors there was power; but those had
no Comforter. But it is well, that you left the poor souls those weapons,
which you could not take from them, but with their lives, Prayer, and Patience.
Although how do you labor to deprive them even of Prayer, when you will not
suffer them to pray together, that suffer together in and for the same Cause,
but your Beagles hunt them out. And would you not reduce all Prayer, and
conjure down the very Spirit of Prayer, by confining it to the prescript letter
and form in your Service Book where there is never a Prayer for poor
afflicted, and distressed, souls in such a Case, complaining of the Bishops
Cruelty, and Tyranny over them.

So as you see, they patiently suffer, they use no opposition by force. And yet
what say you to one of your S. Edmund. Elect of Cant.
Predecessors, who, when the King would not agree to his Nobles in the
casheering of his Favorites, who were his Privy Counselors to the ruin of his
Realm; he being then but Lord Elect of Canterbury, took with him his Clergy,
and went to the King, and threatened him, if he would not yield in the matter,
he would Excommunicate him. Neither (I suppose) are you of opinion with once a
Brother of Winchester, who in a Book of his, published by Authority, and
Printed at Oxford, has these words: Dr Bilson of Christian subjections, and
Antichristian Rebellion. Part 3. page 52^. Printed 1585.
If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a foreign Realm, or
change the form of the Commonwealth, from Empery to Tyranny: or neglect the
Laws establlished by common consent of Prince and People, to execute his own
Pleasure: In these and other Cases, which might be named, If the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed Liberty,
Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be countod Rebels. So he. But this by
the way.

But I have something more to say about the shaking of the Foundations of Faith
and Good Manners; though I mentioned it before, but now upon this occasion. And
that is concerning Ceremonies of humane ordinance in Gods worship, which being
imposed upon men's Consciences, is not only a shaking of the Foun^ation of
Faith, but an overthrowing of it; for thereby Christ is denied to be the only
King of his Church. And therefore, as the Kings of Israel did nothing in
reforming of Religion and the worship of God, but what was expressly commanded
and prescribed in Gods Law: so Christian Kings and Magistrates ought not to do
any thing, no not to impose any one humane Ceremony or Ordinance in Gods
service, besides that which is written in Gods word* otherwise the Foundations
of Faith is overthrown. Of such moment is the least Ceremony in Gods service,
that it is of the substance and Foundation of Faith.

L. p. 210. But it is time to return, For A.C. in this Passage has been very
careful to tell us of a Parliament, and of living Magistrates, and Judges,
besides the Law books. Thirdly therefore, The Church of England ( The Prelate
here blasphemeth Gods Name, as if a favourer of his Prelaticall practices.
God be thanked) shines happily under a Gracious Prince, and well understands,
that a Parliament cannot be called at All times; and that there are visible
Judges besides the Law Books, and one supreme (long may he be, and be hap^y) to
settle all Temporal Differences (which certainly he might much better perform*
if his Kingdom were well rid of A. C. and his Fellows.) And A blasphemous
(...) ^f Faith.

Prelates C^nons equaled with Scripture for governing the Church*


she believes too, that our Savior Christ has left in his Church besides his
Law Books, the Scripture, Visible Magistrates and Judges, that is, Archbishops
and Bishops under a Gracious King, to govern both for Truth and Peace,
according to the Scripture, and her own Canons and Constitutions, as also those
of the Catholic Church, which Cross not the Scripture, and the Just Laws of
the Realm. But she does not believe there is any Necessity to have one Pope or
Bishop over the whole Christian world, more then to have one Emperor over the
whole world.

P. It were time indeed for you to return from your Course, when once there is
mention of a Parliament For thriving, If you mean, that your Church of England
has of late days well thriven, in her prevailing for the seting up of Images
and Altars, for bringing in more Superstitions into your Service; for putting
down sincerity, Purity, and power of the true Religion, and of the Preaching of
Gods word; for suppressing the Doctrines of Grace forementioned; for hampering
the Puritans (as you call them) by putting down, suspending, and silencing of
Godly and painful Preachers, and by crying down both the Doctrine and Practice
of the sanctification of the Sabbath, or Lords day, and by smothering in the
birth all sound and Orthodox Books against Popery, and other Heresies, not
suffering them to be Printed, and by licencing of Popish Books to be Printed
and Publ^shed, and the like: and if this be the way of the well thriving of
your Church, whomsover you have cause to thank, yet surely you have small
cause to thank God (whose Name herein you do abuse and blaspheme; as perhaps
your own Conscience may tell you) as if he favored such practices of yours,
because for a time he patiently suffers and winks at them; and that in
judgment to a sinful Land, and for trial of his own servants and people, and
for a preparative to your certain ruin, if speedy repentance prevent it not.
For God is not mocked with such thanks (though he be mocked) but Gal. 6.7.
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. How then does it concern all
Christian Magistrates to look to it, least if they suffer Christ's Kingdom to
be betrayed into the hands of Antichristian Usurpers, by giving way unto them
to do what they list, while themselves seem to sleep, they provoke God too
much. For as Samuel said to the People, 1 Samuel 12.25
If ye do wickedly, you shall perish, both you and your King. For my part,
though I will not join in Prayer with such a Profane Hypocrite, as you are,
and an enemy of Jesus Christ, and his Truth (no more then the Apostle John
would be in the same Bath with that Heretic Cerinthus) yet my daily Prayer is,
and shall be, that God would more and more let the King see, how miserably he
is abused, and the Peace and safety of his Kingdom distracted, and endangered,
both by the late violent practices which have been held in Church-affaires, and
now by the publishing of such a Book as this, so notoriously perilous, or
rather most pernicious, and so much the more in these times of troubles about
Religion lately sprung up in the Island of Great Britain. Which Book, though it
make many fair pretenses for Peace, yea Peace and Truth: yet in truth it will
prove the greatest troubler of Israel, and the falsest friend to true Truth,
that the light has seen these many years. This I speak not by conjecture,
much less out of malice to the Authors Person, but from the clear evidence of
the word of Prophecy in Scripture, in such cases.

But how comes your Church of England to be so well seen in State-Mysteries (I
pray you) as so well to understand, that a Parliament cannot be called at all
times? Or by the Church of England do you not mean the the Chair of
Catnterbury, as the Church Collective, or representative of England? For you
should better understand such State-matters, especially, for the not calling of
Parliaments at all times (or suppose it were at Notime, or Nevermas, least
perhaps it might prove as a Frost to nippe your thriving, and overforward
spring) then your Lordship? For my part, I am no Statesman, and so I leave
State matters to Statesmen, who should best understand them. But if your A.C.
and his Fellows be such troublesome fellows, why do you trouble your selves
with them, when a good honest Parliament might ease the King and Kingdom ^oo
of that trouble, provided, that good Laws, already enacted, and by the next
Parliament (if ever there shall be any) quickened by a new Law, to put them in
better execution, there may be also a good season to bring forth such Visible
Judges, as without straining the strings either of their Purses, or
Consciences, coming clearly to their Benches, and not making them as Banks, but
siting Recte in Curia, they may without fear of any Prepotent Prelate, or
Partiality in respect of Persons do Justice.

I pass now from the understanding of your Church of England, to her Belief,
which you also tell us of. She believes too. A blaspemous Article of faith.
What does she believe? That our Savior Christ has left in his Church,
besides his Law Books, the Scriptures, visible Magistrates and Judges, that is,
Archbishops and Bishops. How? Is this come already to be an Article of the
Faith of the Church of England, because her Great Metropolitan a little before
believes it? Or because Ipse dixit, he said, Christ thought it fitter to
govern his Church by Diverse Viceroys, then by One? Is there such an
Infallibility in your bare word, as for the Church of England to establish her
belief upon? Certainly this is an Addition to the Articles of the Faith of the
Church of England, which in her former days she was not acquainted with. Well,
for your Archbishops, and Bishops we have said (I hope) enough (and perhaps
you will say too much) and desire no more to be troubled with them. Yet I see
we must, whether we will or no. For first, here again you do most impiously,
ne dicam, impudenter, ye blasphemously belly the Lord Jesus Christ, as before
you have done more then once or twice, and are not yet ashamed, but rather
hardened in your Habit, as being reserved to be confounded. Secondly, as before
you would make Christ to be the Author of such Governors and Viceroys, as
Arch bishops and Bishops, so here, Prelates ^^sphemy.
Besides his Law Books, the Scripture, he has (you say) made you visible
Magistrates and Judges. Surely, That is besides the Scripture indeed; yea not
only praeter, but contra, not only besides, but against the express
Scripture (as is but a little before proved, that Archbishops and Bishops
(though they have gotten a degenerate Being, as Mules, in Rerum natura,) yet
should have any Being at all in the Church of Christ: much less that they
should be Judges at all in spiritual matters, being themselves altogether
carnal. And For Archbishops it has not so much as a Name in Scripture, as
your Bishops have usurped that Title from Scripture: and you confess the
Apostles were all equal: in what night then grew up this Mushrum? And we have
before given a touch and trial, what kind of Judges you would prove, would men
but pin their faith on your White sleeve. But except you can bring some better
Authority, then your own blasphemous speech, that Christ has left such visible
judges to his Church: your Church of England will have but a cold pull of it,
when she shall be put to give a reason of this her belief, that Christ did so.
Or what? Or why? For truth and peace. These words are with you as Mel in ore,
verba lactis, honey in the mouth, words of milk: but we can discern by them
Fell in Cord, fraus in factis: Gall in the heart, and fraud in actions. But by
what means will you procure us truth and peace? By governing. How, or by what
Law, or Rule? According to the Scripture, say you. Stay there, and govern
according to that, for that is the only way (were your Pr^laticall Government
according to the Scripture) both to procure and preserve truth and peace But
unless you can prove (which you never can) by the Scripture, and not by your
own single-soled bold affirmation, that Christ has made you Governors of his
Church, you shall never persuade us to believe, or hope, that you will ever
Govern according to the Scriptures. But yet is this all? Will you be such
honest Governors, as you will not go beyond Christ's Law Books, the Scriptures?
Nothing less. For there follows immediately a dangerous Conjunction
Copulative, And. According to the Scriptures, And. And what? I hope you have no
other Law Books to add to Christ's Law Books. Have you? Produce them. And her
own Canons and Constitutions. Nay then Farewell Christ's Law Books. Christ may
put up his Mat. 11.17.
Pipes (as it is said) When your Canons and Constitutions come in Place. And
then farewell Truth and Peace; your own Canons and Constitutions can make no
Room for them. For he that shall hold the truth never so right and firm, and
shall transgress but one of your Canons, what peace? He shall be put to read the
Canon, that is, he shall be shattered to pieces with your shooting off of your
Canon. And he that comes under the command of your Canon, is ipso facto brought
under the Babylonian and Antichristian yoke, so as not only his peace is
destroyed, but the truth, power, and verture of Christ's death, which has freed
his people from the bondage of all humane ordinance (as has been showed) in
Gods worship and service, is overthrown. As also your self elsewhere says,
Page 274.
That Peace and Truth are rent by superstitious de^i^es; from which (I hope)
all your Canons and Constitutions are not altogether free. How much less can
that Church be free from most miserable slavery, that puts her neck under the
yoke, and her shoulders under the intolerable burden of your Canons and
Constitutions? Nay, I will say more: If you be the visible Magistrates and
Judges of the Church, as the High Priests, and Pharisees were (although the
Highpriests office was groun^ed upon Divine Ordinance and Authority)* and had
Christ himself to stand at your Bar to be judged: though you had not (as the
Jews said they I^h 19^7.
had) a Law to put him to death, yet you would find Church-Canons and
Constitutions enough, or some new devise, though not to condemn him to be
Crucified, yet to Censure him to be Pillorified, and to have his Ears closse
cropped, and his blood shed in a great measure, and stripped naked, and perpetually
Imprisoned and exiled, as being the Arch-enemy of your Hierarchy, Tyranny,
Hypocrisy, and all Impiety. And all this you would do by virtue of your Canons
and Constitutions, which yet were never ratified by any Law of the Land, or Act
of Parliament.

But yet seeing you must have your Church-Canons and Constitutions besides
Christ's Law Books to govern by: yet the Church of England may think her self
well appayd, and in some tolerable (though intolerable) case, if she have but
her own Canons, such as her self has constituted and assented to. For volenti
non fit injuria: If the Church of England be willing to be an Ass to her
Prelates, as once she was to the Pope, she may. And so she has her amends in
her own hands. If the yoke of Canons pinch her, she may thank her self for
putting her neck under. I but this is not all. There be other Canons besides,
that are not hers, that she must be governed by. What, more Bonds and Fetters
yet for thee, poor Church of England? Yes. As well her own Canons, and
Constitutions, as Those also of the Catholic Church. What are those? Alas,
your Church of England is an Ignoramus in all such Canons, as you call
Catholic. And your Church Catholic you know, and tell us, does Comprehend
that of Rome, and Rome has innumerable Canons, Cons^itutions, and Decretalls:
so as under the Canons of the Catholic Church, you may bring upon the Church
of England all the Canons and Decrees of Trent, all the Popes Decretalls, and
the whole body of the Popes Canon Law, so large a field is your Canons and
Constitutions of the Catholic Church. But you qualify the matter in adding,
Which cross not the Scripture, and the just Laws of the Realm. That Is
something. But who shall be Judge of that? Alas, we are never the nearer, if you
Prelates be the visible Judges. For then what Canons or Constitutions shall
cross either Scripture* or Positive Law of the Land, A (...), if Prelates be
Judges*
which you shall define and determine to be fit for you to govern the Church
by? What Laws of the Realm shall be just, which cross one of your Canons? Did
not in a Cause pleaded in your High Commission, the Popes Canon aledged by the
Advocate on the one party, preponderate a Statute of Edw. 6. alleged by the
Advocate of the adverse party* so as the Popes Canon carried the Cause? So as,
while you will be the visible Judges, you will lead us all in a Circle, and
make us so turn round* as we should not know where we are, imagining that all
the world went upon wheels.

Yea but there is yet one qualification may help at a pinch. For you say,
Archbishops and Bishops under a Gracious Keng to govern, etc. It Is true
indeed, that under the shadow of a Gracious King to you, you are imboldened to
do all you do.

Lastly you say, the Church of England does not believe there is any necessity
to have one Pope, or one Bishop over the whole Christian world. And are there
not trow you many thousands in the Church of England, which do not believe
there is any necess^y of having One Pope, or Arch-Prelate over the whole Church
of England, the other world; as before? And I believe there is no more
necessity of the one, then of the other, but that they might be well spared, as
Christ will one day not spare them. And (as I said before) the Pope by as good
a Title may argue a necessity of his being uneversall Bishop over the whole
Christian world, as you can (setting the Law of England aside) for your being
Pope over the whole Church of England. And that upon your own Ground: for you
say, The Church of England and the Church of Rome is one and the same Church,
no doubt of that; and The Church of England may find her self, where Romes is
now, just there: then if so, that both are one, and the Popes Principality more
powerful, then that of Canterbury: and if there be a nccessity, that
Canterbury be over the whole Church of England (which is but a part of the
Catholic) and that for order and unity: why not the like necessity for the
Pope to be supreme over all, for preserving order and unity, seeing your
Militant Church is but one* and to make many heads, many Viceroys, is to
divide the body, and Kingdom, and so make rents in it, which you like not of.
But to conclude, I believe, and with me all true Believers, who have their
judgments rightly informed, wherever they be in any part of the world, that
there is a necessity of duty lying upon all Christian Magistrates, to
exterminate and exterpate the whole Hierarchy and Prelacy, A spiritual duty
necessary to all Christian Magistrates.
as Antichristian enemies of Jesus Christ, and of his Kingdom, yea and the
band of Civil States and people, out of the world For so we read, Rev. 17.16,
17. A place worthy to be written in the hearts of all Kings Christian. And it
is the duty of all true Christians to rowse up the Spirit of prayer in them,
and to stir up the coals of zeal to flame forth in offering up of pure
Incense of fervent Prayer, and especially in these times, wherein Satan so
rages, and his Instruments grow so malapert and mischievous, that God would
hasten the accomplishment of Antichrists Kingdom, that so the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ may be exalted and enlarged, and he alone rule and reign in his
Church.

L. p. 212. Somewhat may be done by the Bishop and Governors of the Church to
preserve the unity and certainty of Faith, and to keep the Church from renting,
or for uniting it, when it is rent. And this (page 198) one Pope cannot do.

P. Somewhat? Why, you tell us immediately before, that the Pope, or a Bishop
may perhaps despense in some cases, with the Decrees of a General. And this (I
hope) is somewhat more, then somewhat. Or perhaps at least. And we have showed
before, how you Prelates, do either preserve the Church from renting, or when
it is rent, make up the breaches of it, namely by an uniting and confederating
against Christ and his true Church, and by laboring tooth and nail to support
and keep safe and sound your Antichristian Hierarchy, which is not truly and
properly an unity, but a conspiracy against Christ, from whose true Mystical
body you have made the Great and unreconciliable Rent. And therefore you to
preserve the unity and certainty of Faith entire, which, even as you are
Prelates, you are altogether Apostates from, and enemies unto? Or is the spirit
of Infallibility, intayld to the Prelates Chair? For does not this necessarily
imply either an Infallibility, or at least a greater dexterity, and a more
excellent and Divine spirit to be in Prelates, qua Praelati, and Infulati, as
they are Mitred Bishops, then in all those, that are no Prelates, when only by
Prelates, though but somewhat, to this purpose, may be done? But we have showed
before what ability or soundness of judgment in divine and spiritual matters
we may expect to be in Prelates, in comparison of others, who are both learned,
pious, and judicious Divines.

L. p. 194. To draw all together, to settle Controversies in the Church, there
is a visible Judge and Infallible, but not living, and that is the Scripture,
pronouncing by the Church: and there is a visible and living Judge, and that is
a General Council.

P. Here I go back a little to fetch in this passage, as fi^ here to usher in
a many other Passages scattered here and there in your Book, which is hard to
reduce to any order or form. But we must do as we may. And I shall not
wittingly offer violence to any part in the least, though sometimes here and
there I am feign to pull them in by the head and shoulders. And here, you do
with the As Hes^us, Pignius e^ alis.
Papists make the Scripture to be but a dead letter; for say you it is not a
living Judge: no nor yet a speaking Judge; but as it is pronounced by the
Church. Whereas the Apostle says of it Zon^o logos tou Theou. The word of God
is living or lively* nor only so, but e'nerges, effectual; as it is before
noted And if you will apply this to the Word preached, that is true too.
Although you will not confess preaching of Gods word to be the Scripture, or
yet the word of God. But it must be pronounced by the Church, as the only
mouth of Scripture, and that must be also in the Churches sense. Of which
sufficiently before. Yet this you add to all your other indignities you put
upon the Scripture, that you make it a dead Judge, and so indeed no Judge at
all, as before you plainly tell For if it be blind, as wanting light; and if it
be mute or dumb, and needs the Churches mouth; and if it be dead, as being not
living: Certainly it can be no fit Judge at all; except ye will admit of a
Judge, that is both blind, and dumb, and dead. As three Romans being sent in
Embassage, one a Fool, an other a Coward, the third having the Gout, Cato told
the Senate, they had sent an Embassage, that had neither Head, Heart, nor Feet.
And such a Judge would you make the Scripture. But it is visible you say. So are
your dumb, dead, and blind Images in your Churches they are visible, and very
conspicuous, when the Scripture oftentimes can neither be seen nor heard. Now
to your General Councels.

L. p. 192. And surely what greater or surer Judgment can we have, where sense
of Scripture is doubted, then a General Council, I do not see. And page 211.
The making of Canons, which must bind all particular Christians, and Churches,
cannot be concluded, and established, but there (to wit, in a General
Council.) P. 224. I said, The Determination of a General Council erring, was
to stand in force, and to have external obedience yielded to it, till evidence
of Scripture* or a Demonstration to the Contrary, made the error appear; and
until thereupon another Council of equal Authority did reverse it. And page
226. Now suppose a General Council actually erring in some point of Divine
Truth, I hope it will not follow, that this Error must be so gross as that
forthwith it must be known to private men. And doubtless, till they know it,
obedience must be yielded* Nay when they know (if the Error be not manifestly
against fundamental verity, in which case a General Council cannot easily
err) I would have A. C. and all wise men consider, whether external obedience
be not even then to be yielded. And p 227* Therefore it may seem very fit and
necessary, for the peace of Christendom, that a General Council thus erring,
should stand in force, till evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration make the
error to appear, as that another Council of equal Authority reverse it. And
ibid. No way must lie open to private men to refuse obedience, till the Council
he heard and weighed. And p. 261. A Council has power to order, settle, and
define Differences arisen concerning Faith. This power the Council has not by
an immediate Institution from Christ, but it was prudently taken up in the
Church, from the Apostles example, Act 15. And ibid. If the Council be lawfully
Called, and proceed orderly, and conclude according to the Rule, the Scripture,
then the D^finitions thereof are binding: but not from calling another Council
to reverse or abrogate the former Asts upon just cause. P. 346. It Is true, that
a General Council de pace facto, after it is ended, and admitted by the whole
Church* is then Infallible, for it cannot err in that, which it has already
clearly and truly determined without Error. After it is confirmed, it is
admitted by the whole Church, then being found true it is also Infallible, that
is, it dece^ves no man. And p. 347. For a man upon the pride of his own
Judgment to refuse external obedience to the Council, was never lawful, nor
can error stand with any Government. P. 357.358. Christ did just intend to
leave an Infallible certainty in his Church, to satisfy either Contentious, or
Curious, or presumptuous spirits. And therefore in things not fundamental, nor
necessary, it is no matter if Councels err in one, and another, and a third,
the whole Church having power and means enough to see* that no Council err in
necessary things, etc. If it err in things necessary, we can be Infallibly
assured by the Scripture, the Creed, the 4. first Councels, and the whole
Church, where it erres in one, and not in another. And page 360 For one Faith
necessary to Salvation, a most infallible certainty we have already in the
Scripture, the Creeds, and the 4. first General Councels, to which for things
necessary and fundamental in the Faith, we need no assistance from other
General Councels. P. 378. I submit my Judgment with all humility to the
Scripture, interpreted by the Primitive Church, and upon new and necessary
doubts, to the judgment of a lawful and free General^ Council. And, I
absolutely make a lawful and free General Council Judge of Controversies, by
and according to the Scripture. And p. 386. I have expressly declared, that the
Scripture* interpreted by the Primitive Church, and a lawful and free General
Council, determining according to these, is judge of Controversies.

P. Thus in your Commending of General Councels, you are very large, that I
may not say lavish too. And surely in one respect especially you have great
Reason: for your General Councels must consist of Prelates only: so as in
exalting General Councels, you magnify your Prelacie. But I remember a saying
of Basil, that in his Observation* he never knew any good to come of General
Councels of Bishops, who when they met in Council, were more zealous and eagre
for their own particular Honors and Dignities, then of the Church of God. And
as Bernard says Totus fervet Ecclesiasti^us zelus sola pro Dignitate tuend^:
All the zeal of Churchmen is inf^amed altogether for the advancing and
upholding of their Dignity. But let us now take a brief view of your words,
which we will collect and reduce to certain summary Heads. First, That General
Councels are the supreme Judge of the sense of Scripture, when and where it is
doubted, p. 192. Secondly, that the Canons and Decrees of General Councels
bind all Christians of necessity, p. 211. Thirdly, yea though General Councels
determine Errors, yet that requires at least external obedience. Fourthly,
That General Councels erring in some points of Divine Truth, yet you hope it
will not be so gross, as to come to the common view: or if it do, yet
obedience must be yielded, p. 226. only except the Error be not manifestly
against the fundamental Verities. Fifthly, That a General Council has no
power from Christ to be Judge in Controversies, but the Church prudently took
it up from the Apostles example, Act. 15. Sixthly, That the Difinitions of
General Councels bind, being according to the Rule the Scripture: yet that
those may be reversed by an after-Councel. Seventhy, A General Council in
things clearly and truly determined, cannot err, but in that is infallible.
Eighthly, That it is pride not to obey the Councels, Difinitions, yea unlawful,
and not standing with any Government. Ninthly, That Christ intended to leave an
Infallible certainty in his Church, but not to satisfy contentions, or
curious, or presumptuous spirits. Tenthly, That it is no matter if General
Councels err in one, two, three etc. things not fundamental, nor necessary.
Eleventhly, That for necessary Faith to Salvation, we have an Infallible
certainty in the Scriptures, Creeds, and 4. first General Councels, to which
for things necessary we need not the Assistance of any other General Council.
Twelfthly, That the Scripture interpreted by the Primitive Church and General
Councels, is the Judge of Controversies, whereunto you profess to submit in
all humility. Thus these 12 Conclusions be as the 12 Articles of your Faith.

But now let us a little examine what Truth or Force there is in all these. I
confess some of them are somewhat coincident, and like Brooks fall one into
another, but all have their Confluence into your General Council, as one maine
Ocean. But we will take a say of each, as they run along.

For the first, and so the rest, which have any general concurrence with it, I
deny, that a General Council is a sufficient, and competent Judge of
Controversies in matters of Faith. My Reasons are these. First, Because
General Councels consisting of Prelates, and more especially in these latter
times, are so much the unabler to judge of the sense of Scripture, where it is
deep, or doubtful. As Nicolaus de Clemangus in his Tract De Concilus
Generalibus, discourses very largely and pregnantly of this very Circumstance,
showing, that Prelates are none of those, to whom God does reveal the
mysteries of his will in his Word, which are altogether spiritual, but
Prelates are carnal, proud, ambitious, covetous, minding the things of the
world. His whole Discourse is worth the Reading. And See Aeneas Sylvi^s of the
Council of Bas^^, who was after Pope Pius 2. See also Book of Martyrs.
Arelatensis Archbishop of Arles in France, in the Council of Basil, said that
they had no zeal, nor love, nor knowledge of the Truth, but every one would be
of his Kings Religion, and was ready to say as his King would have him; and
that the poor Priests were those, by whom the Truth was upholden. And (not to
go far from home) If a General Council were assembl^d of such Prelates as
you are, who have no savor of, and less favor to the Truth, having bewrayd
in this your Book (besides your usual practices) how contrary your spirit is
to Christ's spirit and wisdom: Certainly (as much as in you were) you would
bring utter confusion upon the world, in seting up and establishing your
Babilonish Faith and Religion. And I have noted before, how the poor in
spirit, such as fear the Lord, are those Mat. 24.28.
Eagles Christ speaks of, whose eyes are sharpest to pierce into the Mysteries
of the Scriptures, as having Gods holy Spirit to guide them into all Truth.
Hear what the wiseman says, Pro. 28.11.
The rich man is wise in his own conceit: but the poor that has understanding
searches him out. I leave it to your Application. And Christ Luke 10.21.
rejoicing in Spirit, says, I thank thee o Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto babes: even so Father; for it seemed good in thy sight. Again,
Prelates, especially such as your self, are taken up with State-matters, and
all of them generally with their worldly affairs, and great Revenues, so as
they have little leisure so much as to think of Divine matters, or to care for
the state of men's souls, or to seek to advance Christ's Kingdom, as being
Ephesians. 2.12*
a'pellotriomenoi tes politeias tou Israel (as the Apostle speaks) Aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel. Yea even those, that have good learning and
judgment in Divinity, which they had before they were Prelates, after they
come once to be Prelates, they are so choked with the world, and so overawed
with the servile fear of man, that they dare do nothing for the Truth,
especially in a time wherein it is openly opposed and oppressed, but are
willing to sleep in a whole skin, and to let Religion and Faith sink, or
swim, so they may enjoy their Lordships, and fill their Coffers. Again,
suppose a General Council of Prelates were called (for the purpose) to judge
and determine of the Controvesie about the Calling of Prelates, whether it be
Iure divino, by Divine Authority, or no (as it was in Question and agitation in
the Council of Trent) would not such a Council trow you be Partial in their
own Cause, and Define with one voice, That Prelates are an Order, and of a
Calling Jure divino, and that Christ thought it fittest to govern his Church
by such visible Judges and Viceroys. Or, if the Controversy were, whether the
Church always collective in the Prelates, have power to ordain Ceremonies in
Gods service, to the Obedience and conformity whereof all men's Consciences are
bound; by which Imposition Gods people come to loose that liberty, which Christ
has purchased for them, and Christ should lose his Royal sovereignty as King
in his Church (as before is showed) it is not easy to Divine, what the
Difinition of such a Council would be? Or is there any Question to be made, but
that without any more ado, they would Order, Determine, Define, and Conclude,
that Prelates the Church Collective, have power to ordain what Ceremonies they
please in the worship and service of God, which shall bind all men's
Consciences, to the necessary obedience, and observation thereof? Would they
herein have any respect to Christian liberty, or Christ's Prerogative? Would
they not with the Scribes, and Pharisees and High Priests in their Council,
condemn Christ, for his Title of King of the Jews.

And because you are so much for a General Council, as Judge in Controversies,
What say you to the first General Council of Nice, wherein there were above
300 Prelates (as I remember) Had they not all consented to the making of a
Decree for the establishing of a 1 Timothy 4.1.
Doctrine of Devils, to wit, forbidding Marriage to all Ecclesiastical
Persons, had not one man Paphnutius, and he an unmarried man too, stood up, and
withstood such a Decree, showing by many Reasons and Arguments from Scripture
and otherwise, how wicked and cruel such a Decree were. So early began the
Mystery of Iniquity to bud forth, and that in the most Ancients, and in the
very Prime or first General Council, wherein these Fathers, the Prelates were
so piously zealous (though ignorantly) to lay the foundation of a general
Aposticie from the Faith, in establishing such a Doctrine of Devils, as the
Apostle calls it; of which suffciently before. Yet by your Doctrine, If that
General Council of so many Prelates had determined it, and ratified it by
Decree, all Priests then were bound to obedience, until another General
Council, equal to that, should reverse it; which should have been long
enough, when every Age grew successively worse then other. And thus in the very
first, and best General Council (after the Apostles) a Doctrine of Devils
should have been ratified, and therein an Apostacy from the Faith, and all men
must have yielded obedience, at least external (enough to keep all your
Priests from Marriage) and so all Prelates and Priests should so quickly have
proved a Generation of Apostates from the Faith.

Again, if you have a General Council, you must not (according to the Council
of Friar Franciscus a S. Clara) admit of any Puritans, or the precise Party of
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, no not such as you call Puritan Bishops.
For you see what one wise and honest man did in preventing so wicked a Decree
of a whole General Council of many Prelates. And assure your self, were
there but a few sound Puritans admitted to your General Council, and might
have free liberty to speak, you would not be able to resist the evidence of
Truth, which they should bring in, as Arelatensis told the Prelates in the
Council of Basil, concerning the poor inferior Priests. But if you shall
exclude the Puritans* and so all Reformed Non Prelaticall Churches, out of your
Prelaticall Council General, how should it be a General Council? But I cry
you mercy, Puritan Reformed Churches are already by you doomed for no members
of your Catholic Church, whereof and wherein yours and Romes Church are one
and the same, and therefore as Heathen, they ought to be shut out for Wranglers,
as they were from the Council of Trent.

Another Reason against a General Council, being Judge in Controversies is,
because all sound and Orthodox Divines, both Ancient and Modern, both
Foreign and Domesticke in the Church of England formerly, with all the
Orthodox Fathers in this point, have held, professed, and believed, That the
holy Scripture is the sole sufficient Judge in all Controversies of Faith. And
for proof hereof, What say you to Dr Whitakers Lectures against Bellarmine and
Stapleton in this Point? Or how do or can you answer any of his Arguments
drawn from clear Scriptures, and Testimonies from the Ancient Fathers. But it
seems you have not been acquainted with him, as not once mentioning him in all
this. For that were besides your Purpose. But you will except against him, as a
Puritan, which is a sufficient confutation with one puff of your mouth. And so
you do all honest, sound, learned, Religious, Orthodox Divines whatsoever,
whom particularly to allege here, would but make your stomach rise, and so I
pass on to the rest.

Secondly and Thirdly, and again, and again, I deny, that the Decrees of
General Councels, 2.3.
bind any true Christians Faith and Conscience, so much as to outward obedience
to any one Ceremony; as before. Yea though your Council Decree according to the
Scripture, yet jure proprio, and absolutely of its own Authority it binds not
the Conscience. That Is proper and peculiar to the Scripture alone immediately,
the only binding Rule of Faith and Conscience. How much less does a Council
bind in a matter of error in a point of Faith? This is such an abominable point
of Divinity, as never any Arch-Prelate of Canterbury since the Reformation and
(I presume) before, ever uttered. Divinity, say I, yea Divinity Diabolical,
and monstrous Impiety, and Antichristian Tyranny, to be hissed out by all that
bear but the bare name of Christians. And this Answers also to the Fourth, 4.
which is as full of ridiculous absurdity, as of impious folly. You hope
(forsooth) that a Councels errors will not be so great as all men shall
discern them. That may well be, when many thousands take no notice at all of
any such Council Decrees. And how many men have not the eyes to discern even
the grossest errors? How many in the Church of England do discern the
grossenes and danger of your seting up of your Altars in all the Churches of
England, as namely, that it is a denying of Christ the only Altar, And the
bringing in of the Popish Priesthood, and sacrifice? But what if you could in a
Provincial Council of Canterbury make a Decree for seting up, and worshipping
of Altars, as you do, and that all men did see the grossnes of it? Would the
sight of it exempt them from at least external obedience, being once defined
in that your Synod? And so of a General Council, for universal obedience. No,
the knowledge of the grossnes of the error will not serve their turns, to
excuse them from obedience. For you tell us, We must notwithstanding yield
obedience. If so, surely it were the safest way then for men to close their
eyes, that they may not see at all, and so yield blind obedience to your
Decrees, pinning their souls (as I said) to the Prelates Innocent white
sleeve, to be led blindfold to hell, then seeing and knowing, to sin against
their Conscience, in yielding obedience. But how ever, seeing, or not seeing,
hang, or be damned, the Decree of a General Council, even in point of error in
the Truth, yea though men know it to be against Gods word, must be universally
obeyed, till evidence of Scripture or a Demonstration to the contrary made the
error appear, and until thereupon another General Council equal to that,
did reverse it. Which may be long enough, before all these things concur.
What? Must the Decree of the seventh General Council, the second of Nice, for
the worship of Images bind all men to Obedience, till another General Council
equal to that, upon Demonstration to the contrary, shall reverse it? Or must
the Decree of the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent 3. for
Transubstantiation, be believed and obeyed by all men, at least in external
obedience, to worship the Altar and Host till another Council equal unto
that shall reverse it? Or must the Decree of the General Council of Constance*
for the taking away of the Cup in the Sacrament from the People, bind all to
obedience, till another Council equal unto that shall reverse it? Or lastly,
shall the Decrees of the Council of Trent (which calls it self a General
Council) ratifying the worship of Images, Transubstantiation, and the taking
away of the Cup, wi^ing the Peoples nose of it, besides all those other
damnable and damning errors against the clear Truth and Faith of Christ, bind
all to obedience till another Council equal to that shall reverse it? Then
certainly all Papists, by your sentence, are bound to be damned. Nay, are not
you and your Church of England bound to obey all those Decrees of Former
General Councels, as that of the second of Nice, for worship of Images, not
yet reversed by a General Council equal to that, though by a Council at
Frankford called by Carolus Magnus, Emperor of the West, that wicked Decree
was condemned. But the Decrees of this Council are smothered, and kept in
hugger mugger, as being outfaced by such a prevailing generallity of unblishing
Images, and so have lost their place among the Records of the Councels. And
besides, that Council at Frankford was not for generallty equal to that of
Nice under that wicked Empress Irene. Which being so, and so, that Decree of
Nice not yet reversed, why (say I) do not you observe your own Rule in obeying
that Decree, in worshipping of Images? Or why at least (though you here write
something against them to some small purpose, as coming near to Idolatry) do
you not yield external obedience, in doing corporal Reverence to those Images
you have set up, only reserving your internal worship, and keeping your Faith
to your self? But to satisfy us for that, you have over or upon your Altar in
your own Chapel at Lambeth sufficient Images and Crucifixes, which, when you
do honor and homage to your Altar, cannot but participate of it. And again
the Council of Constance being a General Council, and the Decree thereof for
the Cup being not yet reversed by another Council equal to that: And seeing
your Church of England is one and the same with the Catholic Church when it
was represented in that Council: why do you not press your Doctrine unto
Practice in your Church of England, telling them that they are all bound to the
obedience of that Decree of the Council of Constance, for the taking away of
the Cup in the Sacrament, at least they are bound to external obedience, not
to drink of that Cup till another Council equal to that, shall reverse that
Decree, which has not yet been; but on the contrary the General Council of
Basil since that has ratified that Decree of Constance, notwithstanding all
the Bohemians supplications and demonstrations to the contrary? But you will
say, you have here in your Book made a demonstration both against worship of
Images, and the taking away of the Cup. But this will not free you from
external obedience to the Decrees of the said Councels, till another Council
thereupon equal to those shall reverse them. Therefore by your own Doctrine
you have put upon your self and Church a necessity of external obedience to
the said Decrees, from which because you cannot otherwise be exempted, how does
it concern you, and your Church of England too (if indeed you desire to be
freed from the obedience of those Decrees) to use all means for the
expediting, and speedy calling of a General Council, to reverse the said
Decrees? And so much the rather now, when you have made such Demonstrations
against those said Decrees, as being against Truth, which therefore you cannot
obey, without offering manifest violence to your Conscience. And if your
Protestants of the Church of England shall aledge, that these Errors,
Heresies, Idolatries, Sacriledges, have been cried down by one unanimous voice
of all Protestants, and in particular, by the established Doctrines of the
Church of England, yet your Doctrine tells them still, that being never yet
reversed by a General Council equal to those wherein they were Decreed; and
seeing that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas are no true Churches, for
fault of Prelates; And the Doctrines of the Church of England are declared to
be doubtful: therefore your Doctrine stands in force still, that external
obedience at least must be yielded of all. Otherwise, it cannot stand with any
Government, as you tell us here. But how stands it with Faith, with Conscience,
with Scripture, with the Apostle, that a man is bound knowingly to obey an
Error in the Faith? For the Apostle says, Romans 14.23.
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, that is, whatsoever a man does against
his Conscience, is sin. So as you hereby teach men directly to sin against
their Consciences, and all to uphold the Credit of your Prelaticall Government
and Decrees. Thus the Church of England may see what an Oracle she has got in
the Chair of Canterbury.

To the Fifth, A General Council has not power from Christ immediately to be
Judge in Controversies. Imediately? No nor mediately neither, nor any way at
all. For it is denied, that your General Council of Prelates are lawful,
seeing all the members of the Council are neither visible Judges, nor
Viceroys, appointed and allowed by Christ to Govern his Church, as has been
proved* Now if all the members of your General^ Council be of no Authority
Divine, then neither your General Council it self, with all the Decrees of
it. For there is ^he same reason of the whole, and of all the Parts. Christ
then will not have his truth to receive Testimony, much less subject his word
to the Judgment of those, who are usurping Tyrants, and enemies of his word,
and especially since Antichrist has prevailed, Mat. 3.12.
Christ would not receive testimony from the Devils that they knew him. No more
does he allow 2 Cor. 11.13
any of Satan's Ministers, false Apostles, to be Judges in Controversies of
Faith. And you confess, A General Council has no power from Christ
Immediately (at least) to be Judge in Controversies.

Whence then has your General Councels this power? The Church (say you)
prudently took it up from the example of the Apostles, Acts 15. Prudently
took it up? Nay surely rather, you craftily stole it. You took it up where it
was not laid down, for you to take up, and so to abuse. But you have Prudently,
that is Politickly and presumptuously taken up, that is, usurped that power
which was never given you, nor yet by any Apostolic Legacy left unto you,
seeing you are neither their h^ires, nor successors, nor Executors, nor
Administrators, nor Assigns of the Apostles, but (in one word for all) mere
Usurpers. Yea though by the Name of Church we should understand (which you do
not) the true Church of Christ successively after the Apostles in all Ages; yet
she has learned another gates Prudence, then to take up such an example from
the Apostles, as is neither warrantable for her to do, nor imitable* For the
Apostles, a^ they had their Immediate Calling from Christ, so by him they were
immediately inspired with the Holy Ghost, so as then judgment in all matters
of Faith was infallible. But the succeeding believers had not the like
fulness and abundant measure of the Spirit, as to make them competent and
sufficient Judges in matters of Faith, on whose judgment men might infallibly
rest their faith, and settle their Conscience. Yea it pleased the wisdom of
Christ to give that fullnes of his Spirit to his Apostles, that being thereby
led into all Truth, they might, not only preach that truth to that present
age, wherein they lived, but also leave the same truth written to all
succeeding Ages of the Church of Christ, to be guided and directed by that
Truth in the Scripture, as the sole competent, and every way sufficient and
complete Judge in all controversies and matters of faith whatsoever. Again,
that particular Example of the Apostles (Acts 15.) was an A per se. It was a
particular Act proper only to that present occasion, and not to be stretched
to aftertimes, when the Church should be settled. For that very determination
of the Apostles, was but proskairos, for that very season, to compose some
Differences arising between the Jews and Gentiles, newly converted to
Christianity. And the Apostle James lays this for the ground of the
Determination or Decree; Acts. 15.20.21.
Moses (says he) of old time has in every City those that preach him, being
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. Here is the occasion of this
Assembly, the mixture of the Jews living amongst the Gentiles. And though the
Gentiles converted were free from Jewish ordinances, yet the Jews being
offended at it, and not yet strong enough in the faith, and pressing the
Gentile Christians with Circumcision; hereupon the Assembly met, and by the
special and immediate assistance and guidance of the Spirit of God, determined
what was fittest to be done for the present necessity. And the determination
was, that those Christian Gentiles should abstain from Blood, and strangled,
and Idoll-offerings, and Fornications. And this Decree lasted no longer, then
the present occasion required. Though to abstain from Idoll-offering and from
Fornication (so frequent among the Gentiles) is perpetual, according to Gods
Moral Law: but abstinence from Blood, and strangled was a Ceremonial Law* and
so was not to outlast that time, of the Jews tenderness. For otherwise all the
Leviticall Ceremonies were abrogated in Christ's death. And yet for that time
and occasion, these abstinences were called Necessary things, that is, only in
regard of the occasion; though to abstanain from Idol offerings, and from
Fornication we are for ever and to all necessary. But now this example ought
not to be drawn into a Rule, no not to the true Church of God, and to the
Ministers of his word, or to any humane power, to impose what Ceremonies they
please upon the Consciences of Gods people. This did not the Apostles. What
they did here, was by the Holy Ghosts direction, and for the occasion
aforesaid. And such an evidence can no General Council of Prelates show us.

And in a word, you that have so prudently taken up that Power for General
Councels to be Judges in Controversies of Faith from the example of that
Council of the Apostles, Acts 15. do you truly conform to the pattern of that
Assembly? You must understand that that Assembly, or Council consisted not of
the Apostles alone, but also of the Act. 15.6.
Elders, the Presbyters; nor only so, but also of the ve. 22, 23* 25.
Brethren, the believers, who were also members of that Assembly, and who with
the Apostles and Elders are mentioned in the Epistle, as whose joint Assent was
to the Decree. Here was then a Complete Pattern of a General Council, when the
Ministers and Brethren, the people are the joint body of the Council. For
otherwise, how is it a General Council, if it consist of the Ministers alone?
So as that is a true difinition of a General Conucel, which consists Generally
of the Ministers and People together. But you have prudently left out of your
General Councels, not only the People of God, but also his true Ministers,
the Presbyters; these you shut out, not only from your Council, but also from
your Catholic Church, as not members of it; as they are not indeed. So as
your General Synod or Council, may truly be called (how prudently soever you
have taken it up) as that second Council of Ephesus was, lustrike* a stolen
Council. Thus though you Prelates would be thought to be the Apostles
successors, and propose their example here, yet in nothing do you follow them,
no not in that, which you say you have here prudently taken up from their
example: But your prudence is no other* but to make the Apostles states for
your tyranny while you Challenge the office of being the sole Judges in
Controversies of Faith* and of the Scriptures too, which not even the Apostles
themselves did ever take upon them, though they had the Spirit of Christ, which
you have not.

To the Sixth, it is answered in the former. For Difinitions of your General
Councels, though they be for the matter according to Scripture, yet do they
not bind, as the Councels Difinitions* Gods word in and of it self only
binds, as is said before. Nor do your General Councels bind, for the manner
and form, which is ever false, seeing they are not such Councels, as the
Scripture allows And again, neither do they bind, because they are always
fallible, because never Infallible (by your own confession) and they are often
erroneous, as you also confess. And therefore as when false, they bind not, so
neither when true, are men bound to believe them, as he that is accustomed to
lie, is ever suspected, although he sometimes tell truth.

For the Seventh, it is as ridiculous, as some of its fellows* For you say,
That in things truly determined by the Council, being done, In that, it cannot
err. Which being understood in the most perfect sense of the words, is as if a
man should say, He that tells the truth, being told, therein he cannot lie. But
yet things may be said to be truly determined, which yet being so determined,
may be said to be erroneous. For a thing may be said to be truly Determined,
quoad externam formam and modum determinandi; when the external form and
manner of the Determination is observed: And yet quoad materiam ipsam
determinata* in regard of the matte^ and thing it self determined, it may be
false and erroneous. As those 1 King. 22.
400. Prophets in the case of Ahab, did truly consent with one unanimous voice;
but yet it was a lie, which they truly consented in. So a thief may be said to
be a true man, in respect of the substance of a man, or truly to live, because
he lives, yet he is a thief, and lives a lewd life. So your General Council
may observe all its accustomed forms and manners of Determining matters by
voices, and the like, yea and also may do it according to the letter of
Scripture, as they take, and interpret it, and yet the thing so determined may
be erroneous; because they mistook and misinterpreted the Scripture. So as
neither in this speech of yours is there a truth. Or do you mean, being
rightly after your manner done, has it some virtue ex opere operato, not to
err? Or do you mean, That so being once done, for the manner, it must not for
the matter be questioned, but then, right or wrong, must be obeyed as truth?
And again, your expression is very improper, to say, of a thing already done,
and past, It cannot err. Non posse, or possibility is properly of a thing not
yet done, So as you should have said, A General Council in the things so and
so done, has not erred, nor cannot err. But who shall reduce your words to
reason, or free them from being ridiculous? For, Perlectum admissi, risum
^eneatis amici? Can any refrain laughter that reads your words? Or from saying,
They are as a fools coat made up of sundry pieces and sundry colors For thus
they are framed; 1. It Is true, that a General Council de post facto, after
it is edded, and admitted by the whole Church, is then Infallible. 2. The
reason, For, it cannot err in that* which it has clearly and truly determined
without error. 3. After it is confirmed, it is admitted by the whole Church. 4.
Then being found true, it is also Infallible* that is, it deceives no man. Is
not here Mira verborum complexio, as the Orator says, A ridiculous babbling? Or
as the Poet says, is not this Humano Capiti Cervicem sungere equinam? to paint
a man's head standing upon a Horses neck? Would ever any man have spoken thus,
that had not first bid adieu ^o common Sense, Reason, Judgment? And if the
Reader require a larger Commentary, let him but read the words over again.

To the Eighth I answer, It is not in it self pride, not to obey Councels,
Difinitions; and much less, when a man knows them to be erroneous. Nor is it
against any Just and Godly Government* but only against that which is Papal,
Antichristian, Tyrannical. And is it not high and Antichristian pride, to
impose Difinitions of General Councels of Prelates, yea even when they are
erroneous, and known apparently to be so, yet to be as Gods own holy
Commandments necessarily obeyed of all? This is the highest and most
Diabolical Tyranny in the world, thus to bring into bondage the faith, soul
and conscience of men to a necessary subjection to error and falsehood. Yea,
thus not to obey, you call it also unlawful. Unlawful? By what Law? Or what
Law either of God, or of any lawful Authority of Man, or of Civil state, is
here broken? Are men's lufts a Law? Or are your Prelaticall Councels any true
General Councels? General they may be, in respect of Prelates, but General
they are not in respect of the true Catholic Church of Christ, the Body
whereof is not represented in your General Councels: as is showed before. No
nor is your General Council General, in respect of the Catholic Church,
whereof you call your self the representative body. For the lay people are not
admitted into your Council, nor any to represent them: therefore it is not
General: therefore not to obey the difinitions of it, is it unlawful? And
suppose the Council were lawful, are the Decrees thereof to be obeyed, when
erroneous.

To the Ninth: That Christ intended not to leave an Infallible certainty in his
Church, to satisfy either contentious, or curious, or presumptuous spirits.
Here is one thing expressed, and another employed: the thing expressed is
negative, Christ intended not, etc. the thing employed is affirmative: That
Christ intended to leave an Infallible certainty in his Church. And suitable
hereunto are your precedent words; There is, there can be no necessity of an
infallible certainty in the whole Catholic Church, and much less in a
General Council, of things not absolutely necessary in themselves, Which words
imply this Affirmative, That there is a necessity of an infallible certainty in
the whole Catholic Church of things absolutely necessary in themselves So as
here also, it is all one, as if you had said thus: Christ intended to leave an
infallible certainty in hi^ Church, but not to satisfy either contentious, or
curious, or presumptuous spirits. Oney you do still in such things of this
nature, prudently avoid the plainer and least deceitful way of expressing your
self* Now what Christ intended, he certainly performs and makes good. But to
that your Imaginary Catholic Church Prelaticall, I deny, that Christ ever
intended to leave an infallible certainty. For to such he never made any such
promise. And therefore you cannot say, and say truly, That Christ intended that.
For you are no part of his true Church, as having no calling from Christ, as
before is proved. And you your self confess in many places of your Book,
that the Authority of your Church is not Divinely infallible: And for instance,
you make your present Church Authority, in inducing belief of Scripture to be
Gods word, to have a prim^ place in things absolutely necessary in themselves;
and yet you confess, that this Authority is not Divine and infallible. So here
is a Contradiction, which I leave with you to reconcile. Again, you tell us
before, that our Savior Christ has left in his Church besides his Law Books,
the Scripture, visible Judges, to wit, Archbishops and Bishops. And of such
are made your General Councels, Ergo, of necessity Christ must intend to leave
unto you an Infallible Certainty in judging Controversies of Faith. For the
Scripture you deny to be a complete and sufficient Judge in doubtful cases;
and that in such cases the visible Judges, the Prelates in a General Council
are to determine. Now if you have not certain infallibility of Judgment, in
what case is the Church? Then it may be said, as Bellarmine.
Bellarmine and other Jesui^es say, Christ has provided very ill for his
Church, if he had not left a visible Judge, and withal a certain
infallibility unto him, to determine controversies of Faith. This he speaks of
the Pope; and upon the very same ground, that you do for all Prelates in a
General Council. And the ground is, that you and they both deny the Scripture
to be sole Judge in Controversies of Faith. Well then, what say you? Do you
confess this, that you have this Infallible certainty? If you say you have it
not (as you do) and yet you will be the true Church of Christ, then you belly
Christ, both here, saying He intended to leave it: and before, in saying, He
has left you to be visible Judges: For had he intended to leave such an
Infallibility certain to such a Church, as you speak of, and to leave such to
be visible Judges, as are Archbishops and Bishops: then certainly he would have
given you such an Infallible certainty, as whereby you should have been
qualified and furnished, to be sufficient and competent Judges, whose Judgment
should be such in matters of Faith, as men might secretly and safely rely, and
rest their Faith upon. For otherwise if you have not this Infallibility, but
that sometimes at least, and that in weighty Controversies you might err in
Judgment, then men should have no more ground whereon to settle their Faith,
then the Dove in the Deluge had to set her foot upon, you have so covered the
Scripture as with a Deluge of Criminations, as to be no sufficient Judge in
Controversies of Faith. And you confess (ibid) That a General Council (which
is an Universal Assembly of Prelates, and Grand Bench of visible Judges) is
not of infallible credit, but that they may err, yea and possibly manifestly
too against fundamental verity, as page 226. So as if the Scripture be, though
Infal^ible, yet not living, but a dead Judge, that cannot speak, or pronounce
the sentence: And if the Prelates, the visible living Judges, have not
infallible certainty, nor a General Council infallible credit in their
Decrees; you leave the Church in a most perplexed case. Whither shall she go
in all her doubts? To what Judge or Oracle for resolution? To the Scriptures?
That Is dead, and cannot say, Mum^ To a General Council of Prelates? That Is of
no certain credit; their Judgment is not infallible; yea not in fundamental
Truths. Alas, poor Church, what will thou do? What will thou do? Why,
surely, believe none of all these false Prophets, no not all of them together,
when assembled in a General Council, for they may and will miserably deceive
and seduce you, if you trust to their Judgment. Whither then? To the
Scripture. But it is dead, say they. They are false Prophets, and blind guides:
believe them not: follow them not. Io^ 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, as Christ bids you. Esa. 8.20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word;
it is because there is no light in them. Art thou not Christ's Spouse? Then
hear Christ's voice, the Scripture. Say with the Spouse in the Canticles: Cant.
1.7.
Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou causest
thy flocks to rest at noone: For why should I be as one that turns aside by
the flocks of thy companions? To whom Christ, her beloved Spouse, answers,
verse. 8.
If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way to the footsteps of
the Flock, and feed thy Kiddes besides the shepherds Tents. Here the true
Church, Christ's Spouse, in her perplexities, and doubts, wherein she is like to
loose her self, goes to Christ, to her shepherd, and asks of him, where he
feeds, where he causes his Flocks to rest at Psalm. 91.1. Mat. 6.21.
Noon, where his Congregations may find a shady layre, rest, and refreshing
from the meridian heat of Persecutions; or her Faith find rest in doubtful
cases of Faith, or Conscience. For why (says she) should I be as one, that
turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? Why should I be uncertain and
unsettled in depending upon the guidan^^ and conduct of false shepherds, such
as pretend to be as thy fellow-shepheards, that sit as God in the Temple of
God, showing themselves to be God, equal to thee in power and Regal Authority
over thy Kingdom and Church, making what Laws they please, in binding our
Consciences and that even to their erroneous Decrees? To whom Christ Answers,
If thou know not (O thou fairest among women, although despised by men) go thy
way forth by the footsteps of the Flock, to the green Psalm 23.1, 2.
Pastures, and the waters of comfort; the Scriptures where my flock does
ordinarily find pasture. ( Mat. 4.4.
For man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God) there thou shall find the true Pasture, by the footsteps of
the flock, by the continual treading of my sheep, which know no other pasture
but this; For here my sheep hear my voice, even here by the shepherds Tents
my Ministers whom I have set over the flocks, Ier. 3.15.
to feed them with understanding and knowledge; Isay. 55.1, 2, 3.
Here, be those waters for every one that thirsts, here is the milk and wine
that is to be had without money: Hearken diligently unto me; incline thine Ear,
and come unto me, and thy soul shall live: search the Scriptures for in them
is eternal life, and they are they that testify of me. These are the only
Psalm. 119.-
light which I have left to be a lamp for thy feet, and a light for thy steps.
These are the only Logiatheo^. 1 Pet. 4.11.
Oracles of God, which shall clearly resolve thee in all thy perplexed doubts:
These are my only faithful witnesses, which I have left to witness the
truth, and to establish thy heart in the faith, in me, 2 Timothy 6.3.
if any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of
Scripture, which are mine Heb. 4.12.
own l^vely voice, and which contain all things pertaining to faith and
godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, he is a false Prophet, a false
shepherd, a blind Guide, a seducer, an Antichrist. Thus Christ speaks to his
Spouse in the Scripture, his own voice, the only true, living and infallible
Judge* And to this Judge, Christ's voice in the Scripture, the true Spouse of
Christ in all Ages has still resorted, and therein been resolved in her
doubts, and comforted in her distress. For Mat* 11.19.
here is that wisdom which is justified of all her Children. And Romans 15.4.
whatsoever is therein written is written for our learning, that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Nothing can comfort us
in our calamities, nothing can confirm and establish our faith and hope in all
our perplexed doubtings, but this. Before we showed, how all the Fathers with
one voice took this sanctuary, came to this Judge, made this the only Rule, to
determine all doubts and disputes by: so Augustine, so Tertullian: so the
uncertain Author upon Mat. 24. in Chrysostom says, that in the times of
Antichrist (even in these our Times) one cannot know the true Church but by the
Scripture, because Antichrist with his wicked Clergy, make such a fair show
and pretense, that they are the Catholic Church, just as your Lordship does.
Therefore let all true Christians in these perilous times of Antichrist, and
Antichristian Prelates (which cry down the Scriptures as an insufficient Judge
in Controversies of faith, and cry up their own usurped Authority as the
supreme Judge of the Scripture, at least in all doubtful cases, though they
confess their Judgment not to be of Infallible Credit) fly to the Mat. 24.
Mountains, and to the Ad Fontes the common voice of the Primitive Fathers.
Fountains, the Scriptures, the lively voice of Christ, they, they only will
resolve us, and settle our faith in all doubts and difficulties, and will
discover unto us the true Church of Christ, from all false, pretended,
counterfeit, Antichristian, Prelaticall, Hierarchicall Churches and Synagogues.

Now seeing, though you arrogate, but are not able to prove, that Christ has
left your Catholic Church an Infallible certainty, which yet you confess to
be uncertain: give us leave (though we touched this before) now again upon a
fresh occasion to vindicate the Truth of Christ, that he not only intended,
but indeed has left unto his true Church an infallible certainty of his
Spirit, which by the rule of his word does guide his Elect into all truth in
all ages successively unto the end of the world. When he took his long Farewell
of his Apostles and Disciples as concerning his bodily presence with them upon
earth: he left them this Promise yet to comfort them concerning his perpetual
spiritual presence with them, saying, Mat. 28.20.
Lo I am with you always unto the end of the world, To the end of the world,
Ergo with all those that are his true Disciples unto the end of the world. So
as wheresoever Christ's Churches and Congregations be, there his Spirt is. This
Ioh. 16.13.
Spirit leads his into all Truth, into all necessary and saving Truth
infallibly, and most certainly. This is that 1 Ioh. 2.2^.
Anointing of which before. He that has not this Spirit of Romans 8.9.
Christ, this Spirit of truth, is none of his. And he that has it, is
preserved from the seducements of false Prophets, which come in Christ's Name,
and shall deceive many, but not the Elect; for that is not possible. Every true
believer cannot, will not willingly err in any point of faith, and truth
necessary to Salvation. I say, not wittingly. For many of Gods dear Children
do that ignorantly, whereby Christ is denied, as in yielding obedience to man's
devices in Gods worship, and that through custom, whereas if they were rowsed,
and put to it, and asked if they believed not that Christ is the only King of
his Church, and Lord over the Conscience; oh, they believe and acknowledge none
other King. Ask them again, whether they believe that any man may exercise
this Authority over them; oh, they renounce all such lords. Ask them again,
why they subject their Consciences, souls and bodies to the will and lust of
man in will worship, forbidden by the Apostle: o, they answer, they never knew
that before: and now that they know it, they repent of it, and from henceforth
they renounce it, and resolve to loose rather life and all, then they will do
so any longer. Thus even a good Christian, through ignorance may for a time in
a dangerous error; but so soon as he is convinced of it, he will not for all
the world continue in it. So he that has true saving faith in Christ, resting
on Christ's merits alone for his justification, he neither will nor can be
brought to believe, that he must be justified by his works. For this is against
the very nature of saving faith, which rests only on Christ, renouncing all
other respects. So that it is impossible, that any true member of Christ, should
by any error be so seduced, as to be separated from Christ, for he is 1 Pet.
1.5.
preserved by the spirit of Grace, by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. So that, as the whole body of the Church of Christ, so every
particular member of this body, has the certain and infallible seal of the
Spirit of Truth given him of Christ, according to his promise, purpose, and
intention, for all truth absolutely necessary to salvation, having both his
Spirit and word to guide them into all truth.

Finally, it is very true (being taken in a true sense) that Christ never
intended to leave an infallible certainty in his Church, to satisfy either
contentious, or curious, or presumptuous spirits. And if not presumptuous
spirits, certainly not such spirits, as usurp a Prelaticall and Lordly
Authority, and to sit as visible Judges of Scripture in General Councels*
imposing upon all men a servile yoke of obedience to their Decrees, whether
right or wrong, true or false. Nay to such presumptuous spirits God has given
eyes not to see, and has made their hearts fat, not to understand the truth,
not to see the light, that shines in his word, and therefore they say it is
dark, and speak disgracefully of it. So as the presumptuous is properly
yours. As for the contentious, and curious, these are they that contend for the
truth against your undermining and oppugning of it, and are curious ^o search
and sound the bottom of that Mystery of Iniquity, which is cunningly, yet
grossly enough folded up in the voluminous leaves of this your Book. So as for
these so contentious and curious, Christ did intend to leave an Infallible
certainty in his Church to satisfy them, and to assure them of the Truth, so
as not all the opposition and contradiction in the world can beat them from it.

To the Tenth, you make no matter of it, if General C^uncels err, in one, or
a second, or a third; so it be not in things necessary. In other cases it makes
no matter, if they err. And what matter is it then, if there be none of your
General Council at all. For you confess that they may possibly (though not
easily) err in things necessary, and in fundamental points of Faith; Page 226.
and yet obedience must be given. If then it be no matter if in other things
they err, on^e, twice, thrice, yea or if you will in a hundred things: take
all these together, and the world should be free from many dangers, if it were
rid of General Councels altogether. But in the mean time, you make no matter
of it, if in so erring, they load the world with an intolerable burden of
errors, which all men must bow their necks under, till another General
Council do free them: and perhaps in stead of freeing them, may lay as much
more load upon them. Truly, my Lord, if you had not a liberty to talk with your
pen what you please, and a strong opinion also, that whatsoever you write or
speak, must needs be of every body highly applauded, as if all you write were
Oracles: you would never have suffered such foul blots to have dropped from
your pen. But it is no matter. If you err in this, and that, and another, etc.
as well as your General Councels; so as we knowing them may not in obeying, or
assenting err with you.

To the Eleventh you say, for necessary faith to salvation, we have the
Scriptures, Creeds, 4 first General Councels. So then, being furnished of
necessaries, what need we any more? I think the Apostles rule for temporal
things, may hold well in spiritual, he says, 1 Timothy 6.8.
having food and raiment, let us therewith be content: So Having all things
necessary for faith to salvation, let us use these well and b^ content, not
affecting to be laden with a multitudo of humane devises, which Prelaticall
Councels, Courts, and Canons put upon us. And are General Councels so Cheap,
as that you should keep such a do, having no Necessaries to trouble them
withal But it seems you have some other necessaries, besides those of faith,
that will require a General Council. For you tell us (page 211.) The settling of
the Divisions of Christendom (as the reconciling of England with Rome) the
making of Canons, which must bind a^l particular Christians and Churches,
cannot be concluded (...), but there, to wit, in a General Council. Why but
there? For the Church of England you may do what you please; only you desire
perhaps a General Council, to conclude for Altars, and other utensils, and so
ease your shoulders of the envy, and crime of Innovation, but for that also you
have a sufficient put off, as is showed before. But the reconciliation and
settling of the Divisions of Christendom will conclude all. But still the
Scripture with you, is not alone sufficient for necessary faith to salvation,
without the Creed, and (at least) the 4 first General Councels: Why, was the
Scripture, before there were any either Creeds, or Councels? And was not the
Scripture then alone sufficient for all things necessary to salvation? The
Creeds and Councels are not to be added to the Scripture, as if without them it
were not an absolute and complete Rule. As for the Creeds, they were for the
sum and substance of them extracted from Scripture, and must still be reduced
to Scripture for their true sense and interpretation, as before. And for the
Decrees of the 4 General Councels, we approve of them, no further, then the
Scripture warrants them. And therefore though

Twelfthly, you humbly submit to the Scripture, as it is interpreted by the
Primitive Church and General Councels, and not else: yet we submit our faith
only to the Scripture, as it is interpreted by it self, and by the spirit of
Christ speaking and breathing in it, which by the Scripture interprets the
Scripture unto us; as Augustine does well observe in his Second Book de
Doctrina Christiana. And herein you show your faith not to be Divine, but
humane, as which you submit not merely to the Scripture, but unto the Judgment
of men, as they shall interpret the same unto you. And so I leave you to your
faith, wherein you declare your self to be quite from the true Catholic
Church of Christ, whose Faith is built upon the only foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the Chief corner stone, without any
depending upon humane testimony and Authority. And so here an end of your
General Councels.

But yet one thing remains unresolved on your part, for you have told us that
General Councels may err even in fundamental truths: but whether at any time
they do actually so err, you resolve us not. Nay in some places you make it
so ambiguous, whether they can err, or no, that we know not what to make of
it, fish or flesh. For ( page 223.) you propound the Question, saying, whether
a General Council may err, or not, is a Question of great consequence in the
Church of Christ. To say it cannot err, leaves the Church not only without
remedy against an error once determined, but also without sense that it may
need a remedy, and so without care to seek it, which is the mystery of the
Church of Rome at this day. To say it See a little before fol. ^^ Bellarmine.
can err, seems to expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty, and
wavering in the Faith, to make unquiet spirits not only to disrespect former
Councels of the Church, but also to slight and contemn whatsoever it may now
determine, into which error some opposes of the Church of Rome have fallen.
Thus you. Now this Question of so great consequence, and that in utramque
partem, on both sides, pro and con: you seem in your last words here to resolve
and determine, as if to say it can err, were an error, into which some
opposers of the Church of Rome have fallen. Now the Church of Rome has had
many opposes, many Protestant, Learned and Judicicious Divines of former times
in the Church of England, who have clearly proved, that General Councels can
err: as we have showed before. Now then do you prove they erred in so saying?
Or (which is all one) how do you prove, that a General Council cannot err?
For if it be an error, to hold they can err; it is no error in you, to hold
they cannot err. Thus I find you fast upon the hooks, get off, and quit your
self as well as you can. But page 239 you distinguish; which in sum is, That
all those Popish Authors alleged by Bellarmine for General Councels not
erring, either speak of the Church (including the Apostles) as all of them
do: and then all grant the voice of the Church is Gods voice, and infallible;
Or also they are General, unlimited, and appliable to private Assemblies, as
well as General Councels, which none grant to be infallible, but some mad
Enthusiasts. Or else they are limited, not simply into all truth, but all
necessary to salvation. In which I shall easily grant a General Council cannot
err, suffering it self to be led by this spirit of Truth in the Scripture,
and not taking upon it to load both the Scripture and the spirit, Thus there.
Now here I would ask the most perspications and Judicious Reader, that reads
these lines, and ponders them well'-what certain conclusions or resolutions he
can pick, or deduce out of your words, either for Infallibility, or not.
First: That all grant, The voice of the Church is Gods voice, divine and
infallible, if you speak of the Church including the Apostels. Whence your
conclusion should be this: That General Councels, being the Church
representative, are infallible, their voice is Gods voice, divine and
infallible, understanding the Church, whereof they are the Representative* to
include the Apostels. Ergo by virtue of the Apostles understood to be included
in the Church, whereof Genesis Councels are the Representative, their voice is Gods
voice, divine and infallible, and so can not err in any age unto the end of
the world, still understanding that in the name of the Church the Apostles are
included; can any rationable man, or reasonable creature make hereof any other
conclusion? Secondly, In all truth necessary to salvation, you easily grant a
General Council cannot err, suffering it self to be led by the spirit of
Truth in the Scripture. This is just as Arminius said in answer to that place
in 1 Io^. 3.9. Arminius Examen.
John, for the certain Perseverance of Gods Saints: Whosoever is borne of God,
does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him; and he cannot sin,
because he is borne of God. Now how does that Heretic avoid so clear a
Testimony and evidence? That is, says he, so long as the seed of God remains
in him; but it may depart. But the Apostle gives this as a reason, why the
Saints cannot fall away, Because seed of God abides in them, being Regenerate.
Ergo it ever abides in them: and therefore they cannot fall away. And as he, so
you here; A General Council is infallible, while it suffers it self to be led
by the spirit of Truth in the Scripture. As if you said, A General Council,
while it does not err, it does not err, but in that i^ infalliblepunc; as you
told us before: But what if a General Council do not suffer it self to be
led by the spirit of Truth in the Scripture? That is, what if a General
Council have not this spirit of Truth in it, to keep it, that it suffer it
self to be led by the spirit of Truth in the Scripture? What is your
Resolution here? you leave us still upon uncertainties concerning General
Councels infallibility. And you seem to grant, that a General Council may take
upon it to lead both the Scripture and the spirit. O miserable perplexities of
a man, whose spirit itcheth to speak something which he dare not. But tell us
ingeniously and plainly (if there be any ingenuity in you) Has a General
Council this spirit of Truth in the Scripture always, to make it Infallible in
all necessary Truths, or not? That Is the point. But this you do not, dare not
grant. Yet thus much you are bold to say, Page 230.
That the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is without Error. That Is no Question;
and A comparison fa^se and bl^sphemous.
as little there is, that a Council has it. How? Is there as little Question
to be made, that a Council of Prelates has the Assistance of the Holy Ghost,
as, That the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is without error? No more Question?
I Question, whether a General Council have the Assistance of the Holy Ghost;
will you therefore as well question, whether the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is
without error? Nay I am so far from making question, that I am confident,
and that upon clear evidence, that your General Councels of later times
especially under Antichrist, neither have had, ^or have been capable of the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost to preserve them from error. For they have been
still assembled against Christ, and his Truth, and the true Church and Children
of God, and either for the decreeing of wicked errors in in Faith, or
confirming of them, and establishing of the throne of the Beast, and power of
Antichrists Kingdom against Jesus Christ. Nor were it a hard matter to
demonstrate this by many instanecs, which for the present I omit. In the mean
time, How prove you here your, As little Question? Or how come you to name This
spirit of Truth in the Scripture? What, after all that you have said before of
the Scripture, that it is not bright enough, that it has no light, till it be
lighted by the Authority of the present Church, and the like; come you now to
confess, that The spirit of Truth is in the Scripture? Told you us not a while
ago, That the Scripture is no living Judge? What, not living, when the spirit
of Truth breaths in it? Is not the spirit in the Scripture, living? And is not
a Judge a living Judge, when, and while his spirit is in him? What, nothing but
absurd and senseless contradictions with you? Nothing but Babilonish language?
But thus we may see into what gulfes of perplexities they plunge themselves,
that presume and undertake to exalt their high imaginations against the Truth
of God. And you say again, Ibid.
A General Council has not this Assistance (to Infallibility) but as it keeps
to the whole Church and Spouse of Christ, whose it is to hear his word, and
determine by it. As it keeps closse? Why? is it not your Catholic Churches
Representative? How can it then, but keep closse, being of the same Body, and
spirit, with your Church? Secondly, speaking here of the whole Church, the
Spouse of Christ, you do equivocate, applying that to a false Church, which is
univoce, univocally proper and peculiar to the mystical body of Christ. For
your whole is Prela^icall, that of the Hierarchy, and none other, which we have
before proved, to be the Synagogue of Antichrist, which hears not Christ's
voice, but as your Church is pleased to interpret it, and to give it Authority.
And that which you say of your General Counc^ls, may be truly said of any
particular Assembly, two, or three, met in Christ's name, which does not err,
being led by the spirit of Truth, in the Scripture, Christ himself (according
to his Promise) being in the midst of them. No nor yet any particular single
Believer erreth, being so led, So as you speak to no purpose, when you say, A
General Council cannot err, in that wherein it has already determined
according to the Scripture; the vanity whereof we showed before. But the
conclusion is, you still leave the the Infallibility of your General Council
unresolved, upon yea and nay, sometimes affirming, sometimes denying; except
your negative be according to that Rule in Logic, That one Negative is of
more Force, then a thousand Affirmatives.

L. p. 213. Sect. 27. My Answer was, That the Council of Trent was not only
not legal in the necessary conditions to be observed in a General Council,
but also that it was no General Council.

P. Though this be true, you say, yet the Council of Trent was so legal,
according to Romes own Law, that it wanted no conditions observable, to make it
in that behalf, not only a legal, but a General Council too. And secondly,
so General for the Roman Catholic Church of Rome, that all the Decrees
thereof do bind all Papists to a necessary obedience, and conformity unto
them, and that under Anathema. And your Rule is, That a General Counsels
Decrees and Canons bind all Christians: and a Provincial Councels Decrees bind
all of that Province. And therefore I hope you will grant, that the Papal
Council of Trent is of force to bind all Papists, who acknowledge and accept
the Pope for their Head, or Primate. So as though it were not a General
Council in the largest sense, yet it was a General Council for the Roman
Catholic Church, which (say they) is the only Catholic Church. And with
which (say you) the Church of England is one and the same. Now this I do here
touch by the way, as whereof I shall have occasion to make some use anon,
though perhaps your thus Arguing against the generallity of Trents Councels, is
one of those Passages, which you think may be an ingredience of the salve of
your Reputation. But this (I say) by the way.

L. p. 227. It may seem very fit and necessary for the Peace of Christendom,
that a General Council thus Erring should stand in force, till evidence of
Scripture, or, etc.

P. This passage I cited before upon occasion, among sundry other of like
nature; and now I repeat it only for this, to show how your zeal for Peace
made you forget Truth. For still you are telling us of Peace and Truth, or,
Truth and Peace. But here your Peace stands single, without Truth. What Peace,
without Truth? For you say, It may seem very fit and necessary for the Peace of
Christendom that a General Council erring should stand in force. What, will
you force a Peace against Truth, by an Authorized error? O blush for shame.

L. p. 254. Suppose they Key of Doctine be to let in Truth, and shut out
error, and suppose the Key, rightly used, infallible in this: yet this
infallibility is prime^y in the Church, in whose person (not strictly in his
own) S. Peter received the Keys.

P. Suppose? Do you make it but a supposit on that the key of Doctrine, is to
let in Truth, and shut out Error? So it seems with you, when you use that Key
of your Doctrine to shut out Truth, and let in error; as both, your Practices,
and writings do show. But what is this Key of Doctrine? Is it not the sincere
Preaching of Gods word? And then this Key is rightly used, and here is the use
thereof Infallible But (say you) this Infallibility is primely in the Church.
How? Can we get no other language from you? Still, all Primely in the Church?
Certainly not at all in your Antichristian Church, where the spirit of error
reigns, and where the whole bunch of Keys hangs at the Prelates g^r^le. As
Pope Paschall 2. when he rode in Pomp, had his seven Keys hanging at his
girdle, the Chief whereof was to open and shut Paradise to whom he pleased. But
we say still* that this infallibility is primely in the Scripture, and not in
the Church, not in Christ's own Church. For the Scripture contains that
infallible Truth, which the Ministerial key, Christ's own ordinance and voice
opens to the Church, or Congregation of Gods people. And this Ministerial
key Christ committed to Peter, not simply as sustaining the person of the whole
Church, but chiefly and properly as he was an Apostle and Minister of Christ to
preach the Gospel; in which respect also he might represent the person of all
faithful Ministers of the G^spel rightly and truly called to the Function, to
whom Christ did in Peter, as afterward he did John 2^.
in all the Apostles, commit and entrust the key of knowledge of the Doctrine
of Christ, to be used and employed to that end* to the end of the world.
Whereas by saying, Peter represented the Person of the Church, you must mean,
that the Church is wholly contained in the Ministers; For you usually call your
Clergy the Church, as if you had no Church but that; whereas the Congregation
or society of all the Faithful is the Church of God, as is showed before. So
as in no respect did Peter receive the Keys in the person of your Priest and
Prelaticall Church.

L. p 258. Where it is said, That Christ makes to himself a Church without spot
or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5. That is not underst^^d of the Church Militant, but of the
Church Tryumphant. And to maintain the contrary is a brand of the spreading
Heresy of Pelagianisme.

P. That speech of the Apostle includes as well the tru^ Church Militant, as
the Tryumphant* both which contain, and consist of all the El^ct only. And
these Elect, that in the Church Militant live by Faith, though they have Romans
7.20.
enoikou^an ki Heb. 12.1.
euperistton a^mratian, as the Apostle says, sin dwelling in them, and
easily besetting them, yet they are in Gods sight, through Faith in Christ's
blood, that Zach. 13.1.
fountain set open for Israel, washed from all the spot^ of sin, being in
Christ's 1 Cor. 1.30.
imputed Righteousness and holiness presented, and accepted in Gods sight, as
most pure, without spot or wrinkle. As the the Apostle John says, 1 Ioh. 1 7.
The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. And Christ says to his
Spouse his Church Militant, Cant. 4.7.
Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee. Concerning that place,
which you cite out of Augustine, where he says, The whole Church prays,
forgive us our debts. It Is true, speaking there of the visible Church, quae in
toto terrarum orb clamat ad deum, which over all the earth cries to God. And if
he mean it of the Elect only, which are the only true Spouse of Christ in
all the world, their praying, forgive us our debts, hinders not, nor
interrupteth their perpetual purity in Gods sight notwithstanding. For we may
be, and are, through faith in Christ, accepted for pure in Gods eyes, when in
our own eyes, through sin, and manifold corruptions still dwelling, but not
reigning in us, we are impure. And therefore we pray, forgive us our debts,
because we have daily failings and infirmities, whereof our Consciences accuse
us, and the confession of them with deprecation is a means to have that stain,
and guilt, cleaving to our Conscience and corrupt nature wiped off, Faith still
renewing the application of Christ's merits as a Balm to heal our wounds, and
to assure us that our sins are blotted out in his blood. For as John says, 1
Io^. 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousnes. Now as for the Pelagians, One of
their errors was, in Arrogating purity to their own sect, and that they had no
Original sin, but that they were Justi by a selfe-Righteousnesse, calling
those of their own sect Justi, Righteous, as Augustine tells us. But where you
name the spreading Heresy of the Pelagians: I know none to whom that is more
beholden then to him, (your self I mean) who has given it a footing and
rooting too in the Articles of the Doctrines of the Church of England, and
under whom it has shot forth its branches both in height and breadth, that it
dare both overtop, and overdrop the Truth without control.

But I had almost forgot one thing, and that is this: you allow not Purity in
your Church Militant in this life. If therefore there be not a full purgation of
the Church and her Children here in this world, where will you have her purged?
Purged she must be, and that thoroughly, that she be without spot or wrinkle,
before she come into heaven. For in thither no unclean thing ent^eth. Me thinks
then I smell here the smoke of some Purgatory fire, after this life, which must
purge away all the relics of sins spots. And upon this very ground, that you
go on, it is, that the Papists have very prudently, as in a case of necessity,
devised their Purgatory to cleanse all after this life, seeing here (they say)
there is no Perfection of Purity. But perhaps you thought not of this
consequence, when you writ those words, That the Church Militant is not without
spot or wrinkle. But so, how will you avoid the consequence of Purgatory. So as
while you pretend to avoid the Pelagian Rock, you fall into the Roman fiery*
Phlegetom, or Purgatory-Gulfe. According to the old Proverb, Incidit in
Scyllam dum vu^t vitare Char^^^in. But you seem afterward, not to allow of
Purgatory, telling some stories of it, but bringing not one Argument from
Scripture against it, as, That the blood of Christ does cleanse a true believer
from all sin in this life, and the like. But hereof in its place. Again, In
saying, That Christ does not make the Church Militant in this life, to be
without spot or wrinkle; ^
you do (...) overthrow that Article of Faith, I believe the holy Catholic
Church. Now does not the holy Catholic Church (...) Church Militant? Is not
the Church Militant (...) if holy, is it not then without spot or wrinkle?
(...) But this is no Article of your Faith: because your Catholic Church is
not thus holy, without spot or wrinkle.

L. p. 275. In and by the Council of Trent, the Pope (...) of Saints, and
Adoration of Images, to the (...) of Christianity, and as great hazard of the
weak.

P. What, no more but so? First, In the Council ^f (...) the Pope teach no
more, but these two? And these two he could teach long before the Council of
Trent. There they had the P^p^ confirmation, but not their Christendom. But
you tell us not ^ word in all your Book of the Popes teaching of (...) man's
works and merits: and of his Anathematizing of (...) by Faith only, which the
Scripture teaches. Nor a (...) teaching the Mass to be a Propitiatory
sacrifice for (...) quick and dead: Nor, how he teaches a New order of
sacri^^^cing Priests. Nor, That Original sin, is no sin, saying, Council.
Trid. Sess. 4.
Although the Apostle define it to be sin yet the holy Council (of Trent)
decrees it not to have the nature of sin. And all these, and many more such,
the Pope teaches in the Council of Trent. Secondly, Are Invocation of Saints,
and Adoration of Images, no more but a great hazard to the weak? Are they not
so also to the strong, while they make the strongest to stoop to them* and
therefore so much the more hazardous? Except you mean, that to the strong they
are damnable, not only dangerous. But is plain Idolatry in both these, both
adoration of Images, and Invoca^i^n of Saints, only hazardous to the weak? Is
not Idolatry damnable? Nay is it not damnation to Idolaters? Does it not shut
them out of heaven? For 1 Cor. 6.9.
no Idolaters shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Know ye it not, says the
Apostle.

But Thirdly, you say, These are a great scandal of Christianity. No more?
Why, sure they are the very badges and proper marks of the whore of Babylon,
and the Doctrines of Antichristianity. For they are spiritual whoredom. And
as for true Christianity, it so abhorres them, and that whore that uses them,
that it is not easily scandalized with them, as you are, that would so feign be
^econci^ed to Rome, For what communion has the Temple of God with Idols? Or
Christ with Beliall? Or true Christianity with Antichristianity?

L. p ibid. Transubstantiation taken properly, cannot stand with the ground of
Christan Religion.

P. Why, is there some other taking of Transustantiation, then properly? Is
there a Transubstantiation improperly taken? show it us* I pray you. Is not
Transubstantiation* Transubstantiation? To (...), a C^anging of one substance
into another? As the changing of the substance of ^
water into the substance of wine: which Christ truly did miraculously? As the
changing of ^
waters into blood, which Moses did miraculous^y? As the changing of the brea^
into Christ's body, and of the wine into Christ's blood, which the Papists falsely
teach, and believe, as if done miraculously, when no Miracle at all does
appear? Or they say it is done, by verture of pronouncing the words of
Consecration, Hoc est corpus meum, M^t. 2^.
This is my body: whereas the Text plainly shows, that these were not the
words of Consecration (as also some Schoolmen confess) for Christ had
Consecrated before in his blessing, or giving of thanks* after which, and after
he had broken the bread, giving it to his Disciples, he uttered these words,
This is my body. But what is your Transubstantiation improperly taken? Indeed
some of the Ancient Fathers speaking of the Sacramental Elements after
Consecration, being then set apart from common use, called it a Mutation,
saying, that the Elements were changed into another Nature; but withal they
express their meaning to be, not the changing of their substance, but of their
use, from being common bread and wine to become Sacramental, or Sacred. But
for Transubstantiation, they never so much as dreamed of any such kind of
Metamorphosis* or Metousiosis, or monstrous Paradox, as Transubstantiation. But
this your Distinction of properly and improperly, may perhaps prove useful for
to make a Reconciliation with Rom^ in this matter, and so to remove this
megakasma, so as both you and the Church of Rome may hold Transubstantiation
only with this difference, or rather verbal distinction, Rome holding it
properly, and you improperly.

L. ibid. As for communion in one kind, Christ's Institution to clear against
that.

P. And is not Christ's institution as clear against Tr^nsubstantiation, upon
which you immediately add this? And first even natural Reason, or the blind
light of Nature is against it. For the Heathen man can tell you, (...) D^^rum.
who is so mad or vain, as to believe or imagine that to be God, which he
eats? Although (says he) we call Bread by the name of the Goddess Ceres,
and Win^ by the name of Bacchus, etc. Again, to believe Transubstantiation is
against those very words of institution, This is my body, For these words are
an usual Sacramental Phrase, or manner of speech, which the Scripture uses
in all the Sacraments both of the old Testament, and of the new, As in all of
them to call the outword visible signs by the name of the thing signified, As
Circumsition was called the Covenant, Genesis 17.10. though but a sign of it
verse. 11. Genesis 1^.1^.^^
And a seal of it also Romans 4.11. so the eating of the Paschall Lamb it was a
Ex^* 12 1^.
memorial or commemorative sign and 2^
sacrifice of the Passover, and yet it is called the 11.2^
Passover So Baptism succeeding Circumcision, though it be a visible sign and
Sacrament of the washing of Christ's blood to remission of sins: And so as
Circumcision, a sign, and seal of the Covenant* yet it is called Tit. 3 5.
r^generation* being but a sign of it. And so also the Lords supper, the
Elements the^ein bread and wine Consecrated, being signs to remember, and
seals by Faith to apply Christ's death, the one is called his body, the other
his blood. And thus Christ's institution is as clear against
Transubstantiation, as it is against communion in one kind. Thirdly,
Transubstantiation is against the Article of our Faith of Christ's incarnation
of the Virgin, and of his sitting at Gods right hand, Act. 3 21.
whom the heavens must receive till his coming again. And so against our Faith
of his coming again, as before, seeing Transubstantiation makes him Corporally
present every day. And as for communion in one kind though it be commonly so
called, yet both improperly and untruly, For it is not communion so much as in
one kind, Transubstantiation being admitted, as Papists believe it, for they
destroy the very substance of the Element of bread, by their
Transubstantiation, and how then is it a communion in one kind? They have left
nothing of the bread, but the bare Accidents. And Accidents we know do not
constituere speciem, do not constitute any species or kind of things. Nay
according to the Rule of Philosophy, the Papists have, by taking away the
substance of bread, not left so much as the Accidents of Bread, but in a meeer
Phantasme, or Apparition For Philosophy and Logic teaches, that Accidentis
Esse est mess, The Being of an Accident i^ its immediate In-beeing in its
proper subject. Now the substance of bread is the proper subject of the
Accidents of bread, which are no longer the Accidents of Bread, then they
inhere in the bread; so as the Bread being destroyed, the Accidents are
destroyed. And if (as they say) the substance of Bread is vanished in
Transubstantiation: then certainly the Accidents. And less proper is it, that
accidents proper to bread, should have their inherence in humane flesh, as they
say, Christ's flesh is under the accidents of bread; as if it were colored over
with the accidents of bread, which yet cannot subsist, but in some body, yea
and in their natural and proper body, which is bread. Again, whereas you say
Transubstantiation was never heard of, till the Council of Lateran: it is true,
that ^s was never decreed to be believed and publi^kly received as a Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, till in the Council of Lateran under Innocent 3, as
before is touched: But it was ^
hatched before, and was privately crope into the bosom of many men's belief,
and there fostered as a tender Chicke, before it came to get spurs, and so to
be made a Cock of the Game in that Council. So also Communion under one Kind
(as you call it secundum Apparentiam) grew into use in sundry places, through
^egligence of the Priest, or otherwise, before it came to be Decreed in the
Council of Constance to be of necessity universally received.

L. p. 277. For Adoration of Images, the modern Church of Rome is too lik^ to
Paganism in the Practice of it.

P. The Modern, say you? Nay the Church of Rome has been an Old stickler for
Images, ever since her S. Gregory first set them up in Churches to become
Laymens Books. Wherein in process of time the Laity was so well read, and grew
such profound Proficients, that those dumb Masters had taught them to put no
difference at all between the Images, and the Saints themselves, whom they
represented. For the Images were laid so thick on with beautiful and lively
colors, as the eyes of the simple Beholders being dazzled therewi^h, were not
able to penetrate or pierce through them, to discern the Saints themselves, who
were far enough off. Whereupon the Images grew prouder and prouder, as taking
all the honor done to themselves, like the Ass that bore the Image of the god
^s^s^, he imagined that the people adored him. So as becoming every day more
gay then other, and to follow the fashions, even the clergy also began to fall
in love with them, and so to do^e upon them, as they not only adored them (and
that as devoutly, as you do your Altars, and that which hangs over them) but
writ Books in commendation of them, and found out a Mystery, which the Heathen
never knew, nor acknowledged (the A^ (...) and (...) say.
learned of them at least) That Images were to be adored with the same honor,
that was due to the Saints they represented, as the Image of Christ* and the
Crucifix, and the Cross, with La^ria which is divine worship, due to Christ,
and to God (as they distinguish) the Images of the Saints with Doulia, such a
worship, as they have devised for the Saints, and (if you knew all) no way
inferior to divine worship: and the Image of the Virgin Mary with a certain
worship, which they call Huperdoulia, which is proper (say they) to the Virgin
Mary; a worship (I will warrant you, if it were well examined) above that
worship, which they give to God himself. And all these worships they give to
the very Images themselves respectively. Nor are they any small ^ools that
teach these things, as no less then Aquinas among the Schoolmen, and
Bonaventure (both Saints for this their meri^) and Bellarmin^ among the
Jesuits, besides many more of such l^arned R^bbi^s. In so much, as their
golden Legends, and other Authors report, that the said S. Thomas coming into a
Church, in Naples, a goodly Cruifix saluted him, saying, My good friend Thomas,
thou have written well of me: what recompense d^st thou desire* He answered the
Crucifix, None but your self. Now p^rhaps i^ was of good massy Gold, or
Silver. But this by the way. Thus we see those simple A. B. C. Books (and
scarce that) which a^ first were only for simple Laics, became in time Books
to teach those that were of the highest form in their Schools, even their
Angelical and Seraphicall Doctors. And thus even in them came Augustins words
to be verified, which he then spoke of the Heathen: Qu^s intuetur simulacrum,
etc. Who beholds an Image that is not so affected with it, as to believe that
to be God which he sees, and adoreth? And again* Plus valeat ^imulacr^ ad
incurvandum in foelicem animam, quod oculos habent, etc. quam ad corrigendum*
quod ^on vident, etc. Images are of more force to crook an unhappy soul, that
they have eyes, and ears, and mouth, and nose, and hands, and feet: then to
correct it, that they see not, hear not, speak not, smell not, handle not,
walk not. As David says, Psalm. 115.
They that make them, are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in them, that is, that adore them. The Makers and worshipers, learned and
unlearned, are even as blockish, as the senseless Images themselves, as the
Prophet Esaias also says, Esa. 44.19.
chap. 44.19.

Besides, had not Rome a finger at least (if not a whole hand) in that Decree
of the 7 th General Council of the 2. of Nice, for worship of Images, though
then they went not so far as Divine worship in words at least, until the
worship it self do prove it. And how many good and Godly Emperors were most
grievously vexed and troubled from time to time by the Bishops of Rome, for
causing the Idolatrous Images in Churches to be broken down, and cast out.

But what more? Modern Rome is too like to Paganism in the practice of
Image Worship. Too like? Nay does she not far outstrip the Heathen in this
her Idolatry? Da veniam verbo: pardon the word, Idolatry; as being too gross a
word to brand the Church of Rome withal in all your Book, and therefore I
suppose more gross, then your tender Ears can well brook to hear to be laid
to Romes Charge, or cast in her dish, as being too bitter a sauce, and able to
put the good motion of Reconciliation quite out of taste. And (it seems) it is
Religion with you to call Image Worship Idolatry, or an Image and Idol, because
that second Council of Nice made a Decree; Qui sacras Imagines Idola vocant
Anathema: They that call the sacred ^mages Idols, let them be Anathema: or such
as allege against them sentences of Scripture, against Idols; let them be
Anathema. So loath are you to come under that cursed Councels Anathema. But a
spade is a spade. And if Modern Rome outstrip old Heathen Rome ^n the Idolatry
of Image Worship: and if the Heathen were Idolaters: then let Rome pass for an
Idolatresse. But the old Heathen, though they adored the Images, yet when it
was objected to them, their usual answer was, that they worshipped not the
Image it self, but that which it represented; as Lactantius, and Augus^ine,
and others report of them. But your Modern Rome teaches and professes (not
only practices) that she gives the same honor to the Image, which is due to
that, which it represents, and that the honor or worship of Christ is
terminated in his Image, or Crucifix, or Cross, and does not pass, through
it, or beyond it; that is, reaches not to Christ, but is wholly intercepted
and preoccupated by the Image. So Atheistically impudent is that Who^^ grown in
her Idolatry of Images, that ^he surpasses all the Heathen that ever were. But
you cite a saying of Cassender, That in this present case of the Adoration of
Images, the Church of Rome came full home to the superstition of the Heathen.
Full home: that is somewhat more like yet, then too like. But it seems you have
Cassanders ancient Copy, which has not passed through the fire of Romes Index
Expurgatorius, which would never have suffered such an Heresy as this to escape
a Deleatur. And you know (I suppose) that Cassanders works are marked out in
their Indices to be purged of all such stuff, as this is. Then, after sundry
other passages out of Romish Authors, bewraying their gr^sse Idolatry, but
teaching it only, none I hope does practice it tho: say you; wherein you show,
that you have as good a hope of the learned Teachers of Idolatry, as hereafter
you show charity to their simple Disciples for their salvation
(notwithstanding) after all this (I say) you infer:

L. p. 280. These and their like, have given so great a scandal^ among us, to
some Ignorant, though I presume well meaning men, that they are afraid to
testify their duty to God even in his own house, by any outward gesture at
all. In so much, that these very Ceremonies, which by the Judgment of godly
and learned men, have now long continued in the practice of this Church, suffer
hard measure, for the Romish superstition sake. But I will conclude this point
with a saying of Beatus Rhenanus: Who could endure the People, says he,
rushing into the Church, like swine into a sty? Doubtless Ceremonies do not
hurt to the People, but profit them, so there be a mean kept, and that By be
not put for the Maine, that is, so we place not the Principal part of our
Piety in them.

P. Concerning These, to wit, Images, as also Ceremonies, we have spoken
something before, what more is requisite for this Passage, we shall briefly
add. And first, If Images in Churches so scandalous, why are you so curious
and zealous for the setting of them up, and the garnishing of them? Is it
because Afternoon-Sermons on the Lords days being put down, so as the people
having little employment for their Ears, they may instead thereof have such
goodly objects for their Eyes to gaze upon ( Populo ut placerent) and so by
such Books learn, that they may as well go to their May Pole, and spend their
time in beholding a Morice-dance, as gaze upon such dumb shows. But if they be
scandalous, you know who said, Math. 18.7^
Woe to that man, by whom the scandal comes. But to whom are they scandalous?
Alas, it is but to some ignorant (say you) though perhaps well meaning men. And
for such, it matters not much, if they stumble at those blocks. But perhaps
that ignorant, but well meaning man, who takes offenee at your Images, and for
that, and other your Idolatrous Romish superstitions about your Altars,
abhorres communion with you (perhaps, say I? Surely this is one sign of a true
Child of God, and of a well-meaning, and no ignorant Christian) is one of God
Allmighties fools, as you, and the world call and account them. And then hear
what Christ says again, Math. 18.6.
Who so shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it were
better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea. What think you of this, as small account as
you make of those your ignorant well meaning men, who are scandalized by your
many Romish superstitions? And the least true believer in Christ, however you
take him for an Ignoramus, yet he knows more of Christ, then you do: and if
you have more litterall knowledge, the greater is your sin, in both giving
scandal to such, and punishing of them, for not sinning against their
Conscience so scandalized.

But are only ignorant well-meaning men offended with your Popish or Romish
Images, and ragged Relics of superstition and Idolatry, wherewith your
Churches are pestered, and the pure worship of God corrupted, so as they are
afraid to testify their duty to God in that place, which you call his house?
Certainly, if they be such, as are indeed ignorant of Christ, and have not the
power of Religion, and the Spirit of Christ in them, but such Protestants at
large, as look to be saved by their well-meaning: these are least of all
affrayd to testify such duty, as you do, as taking your superstition for the
best part of their Religion (as well as you do) being brought up in no other
School, but yours. But such as are offended, wherefore are they affrayd? Of
doing their duty to God in his house? What, call you that Gods-house, which you
make the Tyring-house of all your superstitious guises, and the stage or
Theater of your pompous service (wherein you please your selves, and not God)
and that his Temple, wherein you erect an Altar to the Devil? Do you startle
at it? I say, To the Devil. For is not that the Devils Altar, whereon our only
True Altar Jesus Christ is crucified afresh, denied, and destroyed? And is not
all superstitious, and will worship, and that Altar-worship, a sacrifice
offered to the Devil on your Altar? Does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 10.20
that the things, which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed to Devils, and
not to God? Why, they meant it to God, they erected their Altars to God, and
not to the Devil. Act. 17.23*
Agnosto ^eo: To the unknown God, was that Altar in Athens dedicated. How then
was it to the Devil? Because it was a strange worship, which God never
commanded; The Altar was strange, and so the service too. And even so is your
Altar, and Altar-worship and service: though you pretend it, and intend it to
God, and to Christ; yet because therein you do with Number. 16*
Corah and his company offer strange fire, and strange incense, such as he has
not commanded, and such, as whereby Christ Jesus is denied, and renounced: it
is no better, then the service of the Devil. In the Law we read, that all Number.
30.9*
strange Incense of man's devising, was straightly forbidden to be offered to the
Lord. Yea whosoever Number. 30 38.
made any composition of Incense like unto that, which the Lord commanded, was
to dye the death. For the breach of which Law in this point, besides that of
Corah and his Company, we have a terrible example in Lev. 10.1, 2*
Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, who took either of them Censers, and put
fire therein, and put Incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not: And there went out fire from the Lord, and
devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord. And it is noted also of them,
that Number. 3.4.
they had no Children, so as their Name and Memory perished with them. Now
Incense signified Rev. 5.8. and 8.3.
Prayer and the service of God, which if it be not that which the Lord has
expressly commanded, it is death to him that offers it, or devises it. So as
your Altars, and Altar-service being such, as the Lord has not commanded, but
forbidden and condemned, being Esa. 29.13.
taught by the Precept of men, and are a denying of Jesus Christ (as before is
proved) your sin therein is so much greater, then that of the Heathen; for
they offered upon a strange Altar to the unknown God: but you with your Eyes
open at noonday do presume to set up Altars of wood and stone of your own
devising, and thereon offer the strange Incense of your Prayers and service,
thinking them to be the more effectual, and more acceptable to God, because
they are offered up upon your Altar. For which your high presumption what can
you expect but terrible Heb. 10.26, 27.
Judgments, and fiery indignation, which shall destroy the adversaries? such
as (the Apostle there says) sin willingly (Ekousios) that is, wittingly and
willingly, after they have received the knowledge of the truth, for whom there
remains no more sacrifice for sin.

And yet for all this, do you call such ignorant, though perhaps well-meaning
men, that refuse to communicate with you in your Romish superstitious
Idolatrous Altars and service. I tell you, who ever they be that do so, they
are out of all question the dear Children of God. And are they not warned by
the Apostle to beware of all such 1 Cor. 10.21
will worship? Ye cannot drink (says he) the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils. If
then your Altars, and Altar-service be a worship done to the Devil, because it
is of man's presumption in devising and imposing it, whereby Christ, and his
true worship is overthrown: call you such service a duty to God? No, God
abhorres it, as he did the Altars of Bethel, set up for the Calves, as he did
Aarons Calfe, though they said, These are thy Gods o Israel, which brought thee
out of Egypt. Even as you say, Christ, God Allmighties seat is there, the
Mercy-seat there, the Sanctum Sanctorum there (as in your Printed allowed
Books) Christ, that redeemed Israel out of Aegipt, there. No surely, as those
by their false representations, and Altars, worshipped the Devils: so do you;
as before is showed. Ye have no shift for it. So as when truly Religious
Christians see you set up and use all your Popish Superstitions in that place,
which you call Gods house: so your Altars, Images, Adorations, Praying toward
the East* where your Altar stands, and a Crucifix over it, and round about
guarded with your Images: have they not cause to be afraid even to step over
your Church-threshold? And may I not here justly and rightly apply to your now
Church of Englands Altars and Images, that which the Prophet Hosea does to
revolted Israel^? Hos. 10.11.
Israel is an empty vine, he brought forth fruit unto himself (to wit his own
Devises in Religion) according to the multitude of his fruit, he has increased
the Altars, according to the goodness of his land, they have made goodly
Images. Their heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty, he shall break
down their Altars: he shall spoil their Images.

Ye^ by this means, your hoysing up your Altars and Images, well-minded
Christians come now to be afraid of your old Ceremonies allowed by statute.
They now begin to find they smell rank of Romish superstition, and to appear
to be links of the same Chain, now made up with your Altars, and other
Superstitions, whereby they see themselves bound, and carried captive back to
Babylon and Aegipt again. Whereas till your New came in, their stomach did
(though with much difficulty) digest the Old. But now it is with many
Christians, as with Man, who seeing a bare hand, and foot, and habit of one
that is a notorious thief, yet till they come to see his face clearly, cannot
by those judge whose parts and members they be, whether an honest man's, or a
knaves: so the Church of England, having formerly seen but a hand (as in
signing with the Sign of the Cross) and a leg, or foot (as kneeling at the
Sacrament) and a habit (as a Surplice) and all these 3 being called by Hooker
in his Eccles. Politi^.
some of note, The three innocent Ceremonies: she generally took them to belong
to some honest Matron: but now Popery beginning to put off her mask, and to
show her face more clearly then before, as in hoysing up of Altars in all
Churches, setting up of Images in many, and repayring of some old, as in Paul's,
and other Cathedralls, and Chapels, Adorations before, toward, and to them,
Publication of Popish Pamphlets in English by Authority, oppression of Gods
word and Ministers, open and allowed Profanation of the Lords day; open and
most terrible Persecution of Gods witnesses testifying against such notorious
Innovations, and the like: And now, that the Church of England openly
professes and proclaims to the world by you in this your Book (if indeed
she have made you her mouth)* that she and the Church of Rome are one and the
same Church, no doubt of that: Now (I say) men, and even the most ignorant
(unless they be stone-blind) begin to see, The Old Ceremonies suspecte^*
that all those Ceremonies formerly so pressed by the Prelates, whereby they
held the poor peoples noses to the grindstone, and yoaked their perhaps tender
Consciences, were but the hand, leg, foot, habit of the whore of Babylon, who
durst never have showed her impudent face so boldly in these days, where the
Gospel has been so long professed, and the beams thereof (till now with such
Rev. 9.
mysts out of the bottomless pit, darkened) had shinned forth so bright: had
not your Old Ceremonies ushered her in; so as now, as those 1 King 20.
Syrians with halters about their necks, when Ahab said of Benhadad, He is my
brother, caught the word presently out of his mouth, replying, Thy brother
Benhadad: so the Church of Rome, being styled by you a In your f^rmer Namel^ss^
Boo^^.
sister of England, and you being in all things suited Sister-like in Romes
Rites and Relics, dare and does quickly catch the word out of your mouth, Thy
sister (if not, Thy mother) Rome; so as the Proverb may come to be in all other
things verified, Like Mother, like Daughter, if you may prove the Father.

Again, One thing I cannot well pass over, which seems to me very ridiculous,
where you say, that by the judgment of godly and learned men, those former
Ceremonies have continued in the practice of this Church. Now who knows not,
that these Ceremonies have so continued even by the judgment of profane and
ignorant men. And what needs then the judgment of godly and learned men for
the matter, as to testify this? Except you mean by the judgment of godly and
learned men, that godly and learned men have had most cause to know it, by
undergoing the severe judgment of Censure of suspension and silencing, and
other vexations, only for not conforming to the practice of your Old
Ceremonies, as many do now, for not conforming to your New. Or else you so
shuffle these words in, and so pack them together, that when they meet with a
Reader, that weighs your words more by the sound, then by the sense (or rather
want of sense) he may run away with this apprehension, as if godly and learned
men had in their judgment approved of those Ceremonies; whereas few godly and
learned, but rather wished them all long ago at Rome again, from whence they
came.

But to come to your Conclusion out of Rhenanus, which by putting it down with
approbation, you make to be your own: Doubtless Ceremonies do not hurt the
people, but profit them. Doubtless? How prove you that? Nay doubtless, we
have already proved, that both they do hurt, and no way profit the people;
they are good for nothing, for no body, unless for you Prelates, to uphold and
exercise your Tyranny over Gods people, and to bring Fees into your Courts. And
Beatus Rhenanus spoke according to the Time, and Place, and Church he lived in;
although he was a moderate man, and saw more, then he durst speak of. And the
same Rhenanus (as was before touched) in his Annotations upon T^rtullian, and I
take it in that Book, out which you cite this sentence ( De Corona Militis)
observes, how sundry Heathen Ceremonies crope into the Church, by occasion of
many old men newly converted to Christianity, whom it was hard to waine from
their old Heathenish fashions, which therefore were thought fit to be admitted,
as not hurting, but profiting those old Heathen new Christians. But godly and
learned men (as I said before) could tell you what infinite damage your
tyrannical pressing of your Ceremonies upon men's Consciences has brought to
the Gospel, and so to the souls of men, by depriving them of so many worthy
Ministers, only for Nonconformity. But this is one special end, for which
you so press your Ceremonies, to suppress Godly and learned Preachers, and so
the sincere Preaching of the word of God, that the people being brought up in
ignorance and profanesse, might be the less sensible of bearing the yoke of
your Antichristian Tyranny over them. But as for your Carnal Ceremonies, which
the Apostle says are good for nothing, Col. 2.23*
pros plesmonen, in comparison of satisfying the flesh, the carnal pride of
will-worshipers: we have spoken sufficiently before.

But Rhenanus adds a qualification: so there be a mean kept. I think you
might have done well to have omitted this, till you had been better acquainted
with this mean; of which before. And the Author might have expressed this
Mean a little more fully, thus: So there be either no Ceremonies at all, or if
any, those very few, and those few not pressed, with rigor, or necessity upon
men's Consciences, but left free to every one to use them, or not, according to
the Christian liberty, which Christ has purchased for them, as is said before.
Whereas you are not satisfied with a few Ceremonies, nor with the Old, but you
must have New added, with a Tot quot, and all of them you press so hard upon
the Conscience, as you wring blood. And this is all the Mean you keep.

Lastly, So the By be not put for the Maine: that is (say you) so we place not
the principal part of our Piety in them. And do not you so? For you put your
Altar, and all the solemn Service, and Ceremonies of Devotions and Adorations
attending upon it, even all your humane Inventions and Will worship, for the
very Maine of all your Religion. Do you not? I know you willingly confess it.
And what is the By, but Gods-word, and the sincere Preaching thereof, which you
put By, and by seting up your Altar-service, do thrust out of the Church by the
head and shoulders, as is noted before? And I say, The Maine, the All and some
of all your Religion, is your Altar: On this your Goddess, all your other
Devotions and Ceremonies, as so many Hand-mayds give their devout attendance.
Your face prays toward your Altar: your body boweth toward your Altar: your
second solemn service (as the secundae Mensae) for your daintier Cates, must be
served up upon your Altar, which the maine Body of the Church must not taste of:
your Third service (which is instead of the Preachers concluding prayer and
blessing after his halfe-houres Sermon) must be served by your Priest at your
Altar, when with his blessing he dismisses the people with an Ite, Missa est;
And all the while of your solemn Second and Third service your Serving men in
their Liveries, or Rich Copes, stand and give their Attendance about your
Altar: your Crucifixes and Images, like the Cherubims, have their aspect and
respect upon your Altar: All must come and offer at your Altar, while for joy
your Organs merrily play. Thus as the Romish Altar-service (as Bellarmine tells
us) is the maine substance of all their Religion: just so is yours. That Is the
Maine But What Is the By then? Namely all the Intralls or Inwards of external
Devotion and worship, these are the appurtinances, these are the By. What are
those Inwards? The Inwards of True External worship, are Faith, Fear of God,
Love of God, Zeal of Gods Glory, sincerity of heart in spirit and Truth. Now
these with you are altogether the By; for these you have laid quite By, as
before.

L. p. 280. F. (Fisher reports) After this, we all rising, the Lady asked the
Bishop whether she might be saved in the Romain Faith? He answered she might.
L. What? Not one Answer perfectly related? My Answer to this was General,
for the ignorant, that could not discern the errors of that Church, so they
held the foundation, and conformed themselves to a Religious life. Page 285. We
have not so learned Christ, as to deny salvation to some ignorant silly souls,
whose humble peaceable obedience makes them safe among any part of men, that
profess the foundation Christ. And page 288. some Protestants there be, which
do as stiffly and as churlishly deny (All Papists) salvation, as they do us.
And 283. In this False Charity of the Prelate
Our Charity is not mistaken: and if it be mistaken Charity is better, then
none at all.

P. From all these words together, we observe this one Maine, That silly
ignorant Papists, living and dying in the Romish Faith, may be saved; with
these conditions: 1. If they discern not the error of that Church: 2. So they
profes the foundation Christ: 3. So they conform to a Religious life, in an
humble and peaceable obedience. The second Maine I observe is, That we ought
not to deny to such in that case salvation And that upon these Reasons, 1.
Because we have not so learned Christ. 2. Because it is stiffnesse and
Churlishness in Protestants, to deny all Papists salvation. 3. That in
granting them salvation, it is true Charity not mistaken. 4. That if Charity
herein be mistaken, it is better then none at all. Of all these brefly.

First then I Answer: That the Roman Faith being Infidelity it self, it is
impossible, that any living and dying in that faith, can be saved. And we have
before proved it to be flat Infidelity, and Apostasy. Nor will it excuse any
Ignorant, that he discerns not this Infidelity, and Apostasy. For ignorance,
though it excuse a Tanto (as the Schoolmen speak) from the muchness^ of sin,
yet not a Toto, from the Maine of sin. A man that is blind, and knows not the
danger of the way he walks in, does as well fall into the pit, as he that
seeing, runs headlong into it? The Heathen knew not, that they lived and dyed
in Idolatry and Infidelity: yet they were damned for all their ignorance.
Secondly, for their Professing the foundation Christ: Is Profession sufficient?
Many (says the Apostle) Tit. 1.16.
profess Christ, that in works do deny him, being abominable, disobedient,
and unto ^very work Reprobate. Is it enough then to profess all that is in
the Creed (did ignorant silly Papists know what their Latin-Creed means) and
yet want faith? Again, they profess, as they are taught. How is that? They
are taught this one Maine Principle, That they must be saved not by Faith
only, but by their good Works, whereby they must merit their Salvation. Now
this all Papists, learned and unlerned, profess. This (unless they cease to
be Papist) they live and dye in; and so they are necessarily and certainly
damned. For to add any thing to Faith in Justification, is damnation; as
before it showed. And says the Prophet, Io^. 2.8.
They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. But, Thirdly, you
say, They may be saved, so they conform to a Religious life. Now what is the
Religious life of a Papist, and especially of a silly ignorant Papist? Namely,
to go to Shrief, or Confession to the Priest, his Ghostly Father, as often as
may be (as the Fernall Glory, published by your Chapleins license, teaches) or
at the least once a year against Easter: to keep his Lent-fast strictly, so as
upon pain of damnation, or grievous penance, not to eat an egg all that time,
and so observe all othor Fasting-dayes in the year, together with all
Holidays: to say over their Beads every day in repeating their Pater Noster,
Ave Mary, Creed, and ten Commandments, ^f either they be so learned, or
devout: to go to their daily Mass and Mattens, where it is their safety to
understand never a word, nor to say Amen to the Priest, but by the sound of his
voice: which they understand no more, then the chattering of a Magpy: to call
upon such a Saint, his special Mediator, and say a Pater Noster, and Ave Mary
before such an Image, and especially of their Lady: and a thousand such like
observations, wherein a Popish Religious life consists. And so this is the
Religious life of your ignorant silly Papist, wherein living and dying, he may
be saved, if he may believe your Doctrine. But to this you add, An humble and
peaceable obedience. To What? Or to whom? As to the Priests Ghostly Discipline,
when he injoynes sore penance, as whipping-cheare in Lent, or the like. Or if
you mean peaceable obedience to the Civil Magistrate, as in England: that must
be according to their Ghostly Fathers direction and limitation: they must not
take the Oath of Supremacy, nor in some cases, the Oath of Allegiance, when it
makes for the Catholic Cause. And though to satisfy the Law, and save his
purse, he come once a month to Church, and hear your service: yet Sermon he
must not hear, especially if the Preacher be Puritannicall, for that might
turn him quite from his Popery. And thus such, partly by their peaceable civil
life, and partly by their humble Popish Religious life, so living and dying may
be saved.

And therefore to such silly Ignorants, we must not deny salvation. Why so? For
first, We have not so learned Christ, say you. We? What we? We, to wit, you,
and your present Church of England. And surely you had not need to deny
salvation to that Church, with which you and your Church is one and the same
Church, least otherwise you might leave your selves as little hope of
salvation, as others do them. But this is a piece of your learning of Christ,
it seems, to believe, that a silly ignorant Papist, that knows not the right
hand from the left, that is drowned in Ignorance, blindness, superstition,
Idolatry, Infidelity, and as a drowned man knows it not, may securely wrappe
himself in the shroud or mantle of his silly ignorance, and so go to heaven.
Thus have you learned Christ. But We, We (I say) that renounce all communion
with the Whore of Babylon, and with all her Abominations, Ephesians. 4.21.
have not so learned Christ (as having heard him, and been taught by him, as
the truth is in Jesus) as to believe there is salvation to be hoped for of any,
but such as walk according to Christ's rule, and live and dye in his Faith. And
what is Christ's rule? Even that which follows in the same place, verse. 22, To
put off, and renounce the former conversation of the Old Man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, wa^king (v. 18.) in the vanity of our minds,
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through ignorance (as the Gentiles) because of the blindness of their heart,
who being past feeling, have given themselves to all ^^s^viousnesse, to work
all uncleannes with greediness: Whereupon the Apostle adds: But have not so
learned Christ, so, as to think to be saved in a Heathenish life drowned in
ignorance: (from which you cannot distinguish the life of an ignorant Papist,
except that it is infinitely more stupid and fuller of gross ignorance, and
all abominations, then the Heathen were; and saving that Papists profess the
name of Christians) We have not (I say) so learned Christ. What is then the
learning of Christ? To put off the Old Man, and that ye be (says the Apostle)
renewed in the spirit of your mind, putting on the New man* which after God is
created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. This is the learning of Christ.
So as without this learning, neither any silly ignorant Papist, nor the most
pregnant, acute, learned Arch-Prelate can be saved. We must have both the
Righteousness of justification by Faith imputed, and of Sanctification of the
spirit of Christ inherent, and shining forth in a holy life and conversation.
It is not a Pope-holynesse in keeping of a Lent, fast, or worshipping of an
Altar, and such like counterfeit holiness of man's devising. This you learn not
of Christ. For Christ says, Mat. 15.^*
In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commadements of men, or
humane Traditions. This holiness saves not, but shuts men out of the Kingdom
of Heaven.

But secondly, You call it stiffness, Protestants Churlishness, better then
the Prelates Charity.
and churlishness in Protestants to deny all Papists salvation. We shall by
and by see your Charity to Papists, which is so extreme great, as we need not
wonder at your malice against those some Protestants you speak it. Is it
stiffness to avouch the truth? And if they do bebaiousthai (as the Tit. 3.8*
Apostle exhorts Titus) constantly affirm, what not only is truth, but also
necessary to be spoken, as being a matter of such moment and consequence, as
concerns the savation of souls, by denying salvation, to whom it belongs
not, and when men are seduced in a false persuasion thereof: call you this
churlishness? Certainly this churlishness in so denying, is better then your
charity in affirming a falsehood. Nay what will you say, if this, which you call
churlishness, be found to be true Charity? when your Charity will be found to
be deadly hatred against the soul of that silly ignorant Papist? For true
Charity ever consists with verity: else it is no Charity, but vanity. Now those
Protestants, which deny salvation to all Papists living and dying in the Roman
faith, do it upon sound and solid grounds, even upon clear evidence of
Scripture. For the Roman Faith is not the true Christian Faith; as we have
proved. And without the true Christian Faith, no salvation. And that one
Doctrine of Justification by works (were there no more) which all Papists
profess and hold, is alone sufficient to shut out all Papists, living and
dying therein, from salvation. This being so clear, should Protestants grant
notwithstanding a possibility of salvation to any Papist, living and dying in
that Romish faith, they should utter a manifest untruth and falsehood, and so
should bewray themselves to be notoriously uncharitable. How? First to
Protestant Professors: 2. to Papists. To Protestant Professors, causing the
weak at least to waver in their faith, and make them the apter to be seduced
by Romish Priests and Jesuits, who prevail not a little with vulgar
Protestants, and that by this very Argument which you hold, That Protestants
(yea the Primate of Canterbury) grant a possibility of salvation in the Roman
Church. Whereas we (say the Jesuits) deny salvation to be had in the
Protestant Church. Although I hope they will not extend this to the Church of
England, which you say is one and the same Church with that, of which Rome is.
Again secondly, Protestants in not affirming this truth, Then it is impossible
for any Papist, living and dying in the Roman faith, to be saved, should be
very uncharitable to the Papists themselves. For seeing them running on in a
way, which is full of false ground, and deep pits, covered over with green
leaves, and the end whereof is certain and unavoydable destruction: should
they not cry out unto them, to abandon that way, and by all means and speed to
get them out of it, they were very uncharitable. And the Scripture calls this
hatred of our Brother. As Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy broth^r in thy
heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. And for
ignorant Papists, we are not to cast off all hope of them, but erranti comiter
monstrare viam, show those wanderers the right way, instructing them with
meekness, proving 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the
truth, And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil,
being taken captive of him at his will.

Ob. But for Protestants to have no better an opinion of Papists, and of their
Religion, would (as you tell us before) make the rent wider, which you are loath
to do. The rent is too wide, so to be sowed up with the rotten thread of your
Charity. Nay such your Charity keeps Papists the further off from the true
Protestant Religion, when they may be provided of salvation nearer home, and
that so easily too. But however, the truth must be spoken, Aug. de Praedest. et
Gratia*
as you ^old us before. As Augustine says in the point of Predestination, at
the Preaching whereof some in his days (as too many in ours) taking offense,
he answers, Numideo tacenda est veritas, etc. Is the Truth therefore to be
concealed, because some unjustly are offended with it to their damnation: and
not rather to be spoken, that he which is able to receive it, may receive it to
his salvation? And here the Papists take offense at Protestants, for speaking
the truth, it is not scandalum datum, but acceptum, not an offense given, but
taken. And though some take offense, yet others weighing by reason, may thereby
through Gods grace forsake their error, and embrace the truth. If they will
not, we have freed our own souls, and Truth is Truth still. We must keep our
distance, and not (because they will not come to us) go the half way at least
to draw them to us; as before. As the Lord says to his Prophet concerning
revolted Israel, Ier. 15.19.
Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them. And if thou take
forth the Precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. We must not mingle
and confound the precious and pure gold with the base dross, not truth with
error, not light with darkness.

Yet for your part, you say Thirdly, Not to deny Papists salvation, living and
dying Papists, to wit, in the Roman Faith, is not mistaken Charity; and if it
be, mistaken Charity is better then none at all. But first, we have showed,
that this is no Charity at all, but an erroneous opinion, arising from a spirit
destitute of the Truth, and too much in love with the Romish whore. And
Secondly, such mistaken Charity is worse then no Charity at all in this kind.
It were better, if ye had no such Charity. For your Charity toward your silly
ignorant Papists, in persuading them, that they are safe enough in any society
of men, and there is salvation for them living and dying in the Roman Faith, is
a nuzzling of them in their ignorance; and (like the Apes Charity to her young
one) a strangling of them with too much hugging, and bewrayes you to be of the
spirit of those false Prophets, that Eze. 13.22.
strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising him life* that v 11.
dawbe with untempered mortar, that Esa. 5.20.
call evil good, and good evil: that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness (and woe to such) that say, Ier. 6.14*
peace, peace, when there is no Peace.

Ob. But you will say, shall we shut out silly ignorant Papists from Gods
mercy. Nay you your self shut them out from Gods mercy, while you shut them up
in their blindness, and so from the means of Gods mercy. For means of mercy
they have none in their Popish Religion, and blind faith, and therein you lull
them fast asleep, while you tell them, so long as they are ignorant of the
Errors of Popery, they are safe among any part of men* Thus you shut them out
from Gods mercy (as much as in you is) when we by showing them the truth, and
their error, would lead them to Gods mercy. Nor do we deny, but God may in
the riches of his Grace and mercy prevent and overtake a silly Papist, in
causing him to embrace Christ by Faith, even when he lies on his death bed, and
truly believing in Christ, and so dying, he is undoubtedly saved. But dying
thus a true Believer, he dies not in the Roman faith, but in the saving faith
of Christ, which the Roman faith is not. So as thus dying within the Verge of
the Roman Church, yet he dies no member of the Roman Church, but of the true
mystical body of Christ. And this Charity we have toward silly Papists,
praying that God would show them mercy, in delivering them from under
Antichrists yoke, to take Christ's yoke upon them, and bring them out of
darkness into his mavelous light. To proceed.

L. p. 294, 295. Io. Frith says, Of the presense of Christ's natural body in
the Sacrament, Fox. Martyr. Tom. 2. page 943. Land. 1597.
that neither side ought to make it an Article of Faith, but leave it
indifferent. And B. Ridley, we confess all one thing to be in the Sacrament*
only we differ in modo, in the manner of Being.

P, And of this of Ridley you say ( ibid.) It Is well if some Protestants except
not against it. For this difference de Modo, of the manner of the Presence of
Christ's natural Body in the Sacrament, we have spoken before at large. And was
this Difference, trow you so small that cost both Ridley, and Cranmer, and
Frith their lives? For you cite them all 3 in one Page, calling them the
learned of those zealous in Queen Mary's days. Martyrs you do not call them:
beware of that. So as times karin for honor sake you mention them not. So you
cite Calvin a little before, whom in the High Commission you honored with the
Title of Rascal. And these Martyrs are they, whom one of your Divines of note
and worth (Dr. Heylin) in a Book licensed by your Chaplein styles with the
Honorable Title of Schismatic Heretics. But to let this pass for current
with you: The sum of your whole passage touching this point, from page 292.
to 296. is to persuade us to acknowledge a real presence of Christ's natural
body in the Sacrament, only differing from the Papists quoad moaum, as
touching the manner of presence. Now I confess this is a very pretty and ready
way to lead to your Reconciliation. But let me tell you, even words, and names,
and verbal expressions are of no small force many times, to lead men into
great errors, although at first they meant no harm, that used them. For
instance. The Primitive Fathers, when they began to call the Lords Table an
Altar: they little dreamed what an Altar it would prove afterward, as whereon
to offer up in sacrifice Christ's natural body* So when they called Ministers
Priests, they imagined not, that those Priests would prove afterward such
sacrificing Priests, as now are in the Church of Rome. And when they called the
Lords supper a sacrifice, which they meant to be Eucharisticall, of
thanksgiving, they never suspected, that this would become afterward a
corporal sacrifice of Christ's very body and b^ood. And yet these very Names so
taken up, gave occasion afterward of setting up the greatest Idol that ever
was in the world, as we see at this day. So dangerous is it to express Divine
matters by any other Name, then what the Scripture has given them. Seeing then
that in Scripture we find no such words as Real Presence of Christ's natural
body in the Sacrament: it is not safe for Christians to take them up. And so
much the more, because we see by experience the mischiefs, that this real
presence (so called and so understood, as the Papists do) has done in the
Church of God. How many Martyrs has it made? How much innocent blood has it
spilt? So as it has gotten (and that deservedly) a very bad Name. And it is
the Name, or Word, whereby the Romanists express their Great Idol in the Mass.
And David says, Psalm. 16.4.
Their Drink offerings of Blood will I not offer, nor take up their Names into
my lips. So as Christians ought not to use the Names of Idols, invented by man,
to express Divine things of Scripture by. Yea K. Hezechiah, when the Brazen
Serpent (which God himself had Number. 21.9*
commanded to be made for the present occasion in the Wilderness; though he
commanded it not to be kept for a Monument) began to be abused unto 2 Kin.
18.4^*
Idolatry, he brake it to pieces. And so in this case, though these words The
Real Presence, may bear a good sense: yet being, and that of long time abused
to the setting up and upholding of most gross Idolatry: we are to stamp it to
powder, and never use it more. And we have as little reason to be persuaded
hereto by your Lordship as by any. For as this word, Real presence, is very
suspicious, in it self, and much more in regard of the Papists abusing of it:
so it wants not suspicion, that you so commend it unto us. First, in regard of
the whole matter of your Book, which generally complyes with Popery: Secondly,
in regard of the main scope of your Book, which is to bring on a
Reconciliation with Rome. And Thirdly, and more especially, in regard of some
speeches, which have now and then dropped from you in public Court, where
speaking of Altars-placing, you said, you would have none to sit above
God-Allmighty; which must needs imply (as before is noted) that either your
Altar is your God Allmighty; or else God Allmighty has a local presence and
residence there upon your Altar. And so Fourthly, your eager zeal, in
promoting of Altars, makes us much to suspect your Real Presence, as fearing
all will not be well, when once we have taken up, and let down this Real
presence of God Allmighty into our bellies. And so also, Fifthly, your Priests
(by that Name) do increase the suspicion. And Sixthly, because you tell us
before of a Transubstantiation, taken properly, and improperly. And Seventhly,
Because you tell us by and by, that Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Forbearance
of the Cup, are but Disputed and Improbable Opinions. Lastly, it is used to
Idolatry: and so to be broken in pieces, as the Brazen Serpent was. And
therefore for all these Reasons, we desire not to be troubled with your Real
presence, but leave it to the Papists, or to you, to restore it where you had
it, or if you like it so well to use it, let it be to your self, or Chapel
at Lambeth, trouble not the Church of England with it any more, which desires
not more matter for a new Book of Martyrs.

Now to come to the Martyrs. First for Ioh. Friths words, Not to make it an
Article of Faith, but leave it Indifferent. First, However the words sound, we
must weigh them by the sense. And the best Commentary of his words, is his
death, which he suffered even therefore, because he made it an Article of his
faith to believe, that Christ was not Really Present in the Sacrament, as the
Papists do hold; and therefore on the contrary, he held it as an Article of his
faith, That Christ was only vertually and spiritually present to the Faith of
the Receiver, according to the true meaning of those Sacramental words, This
is my body; as a little before we showed.

Secondly, to take Friths words in your sense, does overthrow a Christians
faith, as touching the Sacrament, wherein the believer receives and applies by
faith the merits of Christ's death to the comforting, nourishing, and
strengthening of his soul. And a man is bound to believe aright concerning the
Sacrament, and to put a maine difference between truth and erro^^ therein. And
is it not an Article of Faith to believe Christ's body not to be corporally
present in the Sacrament, seeing he says, Mat. 26.11*
Me have you not always. Ioh. 16.7.
It is expedient for you that I go away: Romans 8.34.
who sits at Gods right hand: Act. 3.21.
whom the heavens must receive, till his coming again? And lastly, admit his
words may be stretched to the full breadth of your sense (which is erroneous)
we must measure all men's words by the Rule of Scripture in divin, matters. If
they dissent, or come short, or go over, or besides consider men are men. But
I say, we cannot conceive that those words of John Frith could have any other
sense, then that which was sound and good, considering (as I said before) he
dyed for that very difference in Faith touching Christ's presence in the
Sacrament*

Now for Dr Ridley, saying we differed in Modo, in the manner: It Is true. And
the manner is the whole matter of difference. Papists say, Christ's natural
Body is present: we that the merit and virtue of his Body broken upon the
Cross, and the merit and virtue of his Blood, shed upon the Cross, is present
to the believing soul in the Sacrament. I may express it by this similitude,
of the Sun, and the beams. The body of the Sun is in heaven, in its sphere
locally, and circumscriptively, but the Beams are on the earth. And when the
Sun beams shine into our house, we say, here is the Sun, though it be the
beams, not the body of the Sun. And so the Scripture says of the Sacrament,
This is my Body, because with the bread the faithful Communicant receives the
beams of Christ's Body crucified into his soul, his merits, but not the Body
it self. But the Papists say as much, as, The very body of the Sun is in their
house, when it shines. But enough of this here, having spoken sufficiently of
it before. Yet for a conclusion: If your Lordship hold it to be a matter so
indifferent, about the manner of Christ's naturall-bodyes presence in the
Sacrament, which you put upon the Martyrs, if you were put to it as they were;
would you be of their mind, and resolution, rather to loose Canterbury, life
and (...), then believe as the Church of Rome believes of the real presence.
But I leave you to the Resolution.

L. p. 297. Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Forbearance of the Cup in the
Sacrament, are disputed and improbable Opinions: yet so imposed* as this may be
enough for us to leave Rome, though the Old Prophet forsook not Israel. 3 Reg.
13. (And a little after) And therefore in this present case, there is peril, and
great peril of damnable both Schism and Heresy, and other sin, by living and
dying in the Roman faith* tainted with so many superstitions, as at this day it
is, and their Tyranny to boot.

P. I told you, I feared some such thing, when you commended last unto us the
indifferency of admitting of Terms of Real Presence. For now I perceive your
Real presence even in Transubstantiation it self, is but an improbable and
disputed opinion, as also Purgatory, and the Forbearance of the Cup. And by
Disputed, I suppose you mean Disputable, such as either has been disputed, or
may be disputed again* so as these things are matters of dispute, and
improbable. And sometimes a thing that is improbable, may prove true. For
Improbabile is not always falsum. It may seem improbable to us, and yet be
true in it self. But for Transubstantiation: is that which is clearly against
Faith, against Reason, against the nature of Christ's Body natural, against the
nature of the Sacrament, but an improbable opinion? And for Purgatory: Is that
which is against Faith, and overthrows the infinite virtue, merit, and efficacy
of the blood of Christ, but an improbable opinion? And is that, which you
confess to be against the express institution of our Savior Christ (as the
taking away of the Cup in the Sacrament) but an improbable opinion? And do you
so favorably call that, but a Forbearance, which is a most notorious and
shameless Sacrilege?

And then secondly, All this (say you) may be enough for us to leave Rome. May
be: Much may be: but Is not, I hope. And so long, well enough. And though Actu
it be, yet not affectu. But you might have said, All this, and much more
besides, if not only disputable and improbable things, but abominable and
damnable. But this is enough, were there no more. Yet (say you) the old Prophet
forsook not Israel. What then? Ergo the Protestants, though they might have had
cause enough to leave Rome, yet should have done rather as the old Prophet did,
not to have made a separation from Rome. Ergo they were not so kind, as the old
Prophet. But the old Prophet might continue in Israel upon better terms, then
the Protestants could have done in Rome. For Israel had no Inquisition, as Rome
has. And you confess that men might live in Israel, and enjoy the liberty of
their Conscience, seeing there was no Law made to restrain them from going to
the one Altar at Jerusalem, or to constrain them to sacrifice in the high
places. And yet that is more, then I believe can well be proved. For those 7000.
that had not bowed to Baal did hide themselves, as not daring to profess and
avow their Religion and Faith toward God, as before. So as it seems there was
no open toleration in Israel for any to go up to Jerusalem. And it can hardly
be thought, that Jeroboam being a great Politician, should give toleration to
his subjects to go up to Jerusalem to worship, least they should fall back to
Judah again, for prevention whereof the two Calves were set up, to keep the
people at home. The like policy used the High Priests, Scribes and Pharisees
to suppress those that should confess Christ, in making a Decree to Ioh.
9.22.34*
excommunicate them, and so in putting Christ to death, least his Kingdom
should put down theirs. And I hope your Hierarchy wants not the like policy,
for the rooting out of Puritans, the true Professors and People of Christ's
Kingdom, being Christ's Kingdom and yours cannot consist together.

But you conclude, somewhat dangerously, when you say, Therefore in the present
case there is peril, great peril of damnable both Schism, and Heresy, and
other sins, by living and dying in the Roman faith, tainted with so many
superstitions, as at this day it is, and their Tyranny to boot. This conclusion
you apply, not to the silly ignorant Papists (for you leave them secure, and
out of danger, as before) but to the knowing men of Rome, having showed them,
that though the silly ignorants may perhaps through the thick fogge and
Egyptian Mist of their palpable ignorance steal, or stumble into heaven: yet
for the learned, as A.C. and his fellows, it is danger, yea great danger to
live and dye (and that knowingly) in the Roman faith. But me thinks neither
here do you buckle your self to such a serious business as this is, so as to
pull these wilful men out of their puddle, wherein they wittingly stick so
fast. You do not with the spirit of zeal, which Jude requires in good
Ministers, saying, Jude 23.
some save with fear, a^prazontes, snatching or plucking them out of the fire,
hating even the garment spotted with the flesh. Nor do you with Peter's zeal
tell these men, Act. 2.40.
save your selves from this crooked and wicked Generation; such as the Scribes
and Pharisees, and Highpriests were. But you only tell them, There Is danger,
great danger. Of what? Of no less then Heresy and Schism, and other sin
too, living and dying in the Roman faith. Nay if there be but peril, though
great peril, these pregnant Wits have ways and wiles enough to avoid all such
perils; and that by the clean strength of their Art of equivocation, wherein
they are become the most expert Masters in the world. Except they have
forgotten it, it is so long ago since our Judges were wont to put them
shrewdly to it, as to confess whether they were Priests or no; which
confession then was as good, as to be hanged. And you say elsewhere, See before.
such can make a short cut to heaven, when they lie a dying, saying, They
renounce all their own merits (whither their many bad, or their few Good
merits, is not known) and rely only upon Christ's merits for salvation. As your
good Brother Stephen Gardener did at his death (as before But when they dye in
so good a mood, though they may seem (as Gardener seemed) to dye in the faith,
yet in charity they do not, while they leave not the same gappe open for the
people, by which themselves get through, concealing Justification by Faith from
the silly vulgar. In which desperate case had not your Lordships charity put in
to help at a dead lift, to teach them a blind way to heaven, which scarce any
Jesuits, before you, ever knew: What had become of them? But (alas!) As you
delude those silly ignorants, by telling them such a way leads to heaven, which
will carry them straight to hell: so on the other side you do but dally with
A. C. and his fellows, in telling them they are in peril only, when they are
in the very precipice of perdition. But if you intended to be their Ghostly
Father indeed, you should have told them plainly, Their Religion is Idolatry,
Heresy, Schism, Apostacy, Antichristianisme, Infidelity, and all manner of
In^quity, and Impiety, so as to live and dye therein is inevitable damnation to
all Papists whatsoever, but double damnation to those that know it. For as
Christ says, Luke 12.^7.48.
That servant, which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will shall be beaten with many stripes: But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes
But what should a man speak to Psa. 58.4.5.
the deaf Adder* that stoppes her ear, and will not hearken to the voice of
Charmers, charming never so wisely? I will follow my Lords Council, Mat. 15.14.
Let them alone, They be blind leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the
blind they shall both fall into the pit. And as he says to the Pharisees, Mat.
23.32.
Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers. But how come you to say, There Is danger
of Schism, living and dying in the Roman faith. What? Can a man be a
Schismaticke* being a Romanist? Then is not the Church of Rome her self a
Schismatic? And so the Church of England all one Church. And so your
Catholic Church, of which you and Rome are, all Schismatics? Look to it.

But I may not leap over that, which you have stumbled upon, namely, Romes
Tyranny to boot. And it were well, if such Tyranny were confined to Rome;
saving that all Tyranny is such, as it will not be confined to any place,
within any bounds. You say, that the Church of England, and that of Rome, are
one and the same Church. Certainly then, this One Church (what ever you pretend
of the Catholic Church) is of such a constitution, as whose very foundation is
Tyranny, because Hierarchicall. As Pope Hadoian *4. an English man, lying
extreme sick, said, That there was no life more wicked, then the Popes, whose
Popedom was founded in blood, and is maintained with blood, wherein he is
Romulus his successor, who in laying the first foundation of Rome, slew his
brother Remus. And wherein does the Tyranny of your Popedom in the Church of
England come short of the Popes, saving that he has a more powerful
Principality, then you have. Have not you in your hand, like that Roman
Jupiter, (the Pope) your thunderbol^ of Excommunication, to blast and cast out
of the Church whom you please, or those who do not please you? Do not the
Censures of your High Commission (like the Popes Court of Inquisit^^n) extend
to the spoiling of good Ministers and Christians of all liberty and livelihood?
You will say, You use no Page 298.
fagots, as Rome does. It Is true: it is not yet come to that. But whe^'s the
default? You only want a Law. But in the mean time, you want not your devises,
armed both with your own power, and borrowed of others, to afflict men worse,
then with death, as before is showed in the forenamed examples. And therefore
from all such Tyranny both English, and Romish, the Lord deliver us.

L. p. 299. I do indeed for my part (leaving other men free to their own
judgment) acknowledge a possibility of salvation in the Roman Church. But so,
as that which I grant to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as they
are Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the Foundation
Christ himself, not as they associate themselves wittingly and knowingly to
the gross superstitions of the Romish Church.

P. Now you speak a little more plain, then before. But how do you leave
other men free to their own judgment, when for not being of your judgment in
this point, you cens^re them of stiffenesse, and churlishness, and want of
Charity. And yet you your self say, that there is no possibility of Salvation
for Romanists as they are Romanists. So as your judgment is, That Romanists,
as, they are Romanists, have no possibility of Salvation. Ergo no Papist, as a
Papist, living and dying in the faith and Religion of Popery, can possibly be
saved. And just so say those Protestants whom you Censure for stiff, churlish,
and uncharitable. Only you qualify it with this Condition, If they wittingly
and knowingly associate themselves to the gross Superstition, of the Romish
Church, so as still you save harmless your silly ignorant Papists, that know
nothing at all, whether they do and believe right, or wrong. And you
distinguish, That, as Romanists, they cannot be saved, but as Christians,
believing the Creed, and holding the foundation Christ. But we told you before,
that your silly ignorant Papists do not so much as understand or know the very
letter of the Creed, how much less believe it? If they can mumble over their
Creed as many a blind Priest does his M^sse, it is in a strange tongue, and they
say it for one of their blind and superstitious Prayers, as they do their Ave
Marie. So, that way, what hope, or possibility can they have of salv^tion? And
for holding the foundation Christ: to that we have before sufficiently proved
the Contrary. But say you they are Christians. So you say, they are Romanists
too. As one telling the Emperor Sigismund of Iulianus the Cardinal, speaking
something in his Commendation: he answered, Tamen Romanus est: yet he is a
Romanist. And this Romanist is like the Colloquintida in the 2 Kin. 4.40.
pot of pottage, of which the young Prophets said to Elizeus, There Is death in
the pot. Or like the Eccl. 10.1.
fly in the Apothecaries box of ointment, it marres and corrupts the whole
ointment. And a man may say of your Roman Christians, or Christian Romanist
(which you will) as one said of a wicked Prelate, who was also a Temporal
Prince (as you be) when he gloryed of his greatness, as being both a Prelate,
and a Prince, or Earl: What shalbecome of the Bishop, when the Earl is in
hell? So what shall become of your Romanist, as a Christian, when your Christian
as a Romanist, is in hell?

L. p. ibid I am willing to hope, there are many among them, which k^ep within
the Church, and yet wish the Superstitions abolished, which they know, and
which pray to God to forgive their errors in what they know not, and which
hold the foundation firm, and live accordingly, and would have all things
amended, that are amiss, were it in their power. And to such I dare not deny a
possibility of Salvation, for that which is Christ's in them, though they
hazard themselves extremely, by keeping so closse to that, which is
Superstition, and in the case of Images comes too near to Idolatry.

P. Your Hope and Charity may be much, but in this can do but little. But it is
possible, that some may keep within the Confines of that Church-Dominions, and
more powerful Principality, and yet not be of that Church: as those seven
thousand in Israel forementioned. Of such (if any such there be) we may well
hope of their salvation: although they cannot live in those places, where
Popery bears sway, but with much danger to their bodies and estates, and some
to their souls too. As I persuade my self, for all your diligent Inquisition
and hunting with your Hounds, Beagles, and Prosecutions, or (if you will
persecutions in your High Commission, and other spiritual Co^ts, there are
many poor honest souls in England, that truly fear God, and abhor your
superstitions, and oppressions, but in regard of their bodies and estates
cannot be but in daily danger of falling into your Lions den, if but once
detected. But for others, who are sensible of your Tyrannical yoke, and
groan under the burdens of your superstitions and Ceremonies, yet have not
the heart, and courage of the spirit of Christ to withdraw their necks, but
endure all your bondage, so they may enjoy the fleshpots of Aegipt: however
they may wish to be free, yet you know the Proverb, Wishers and Woulders. And
so of those in the Church of Rome: some Errors some may see, and be sensible
of them, and wish them removed: but in the mean time, will they, nill they,
they must undergo them, and that even against their Conscience; so as me
thinks, this should somewhat abate and snibbe your willingness to hope of any
possibility of salvation for such, as against their Conscience, and for worldly
respects, live in known error. Nor can he possibly avoid it, so long as he
lives in and of that Church. For as Solomon says, Prove. 6.27, 28, 29.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and not be burnt? Can one go upon hot
coals, and his feet not be burnt? so who so touches a whorish woman, shall
not be innocent. Now he that lives in and of the Romish Church, lives in the
whores bosom, and is a 1 Cor. 6.16.
member of the whore. And perhaps many a one feeling how hot the bosom is,
wishes he were out of it; but has not the Power, being (as Solomon says)
plunged into a deep pit. Pro. 22.14.
The mouth of a strange Woman is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the Lord,
shall fall therein. And once in, it is hard getting out. Nor all a man's wishing
will do it. But (say you) he prays to God to forgive him his Errors, that he
knows not. What then? Is he the nearer salvation, when he still lives in the
error that he knows, and only wishes to be amended? And does not many a man
live in a known sin as whoredom, or drunkenness, or the like, and being
convinced of the foulness of it, and the many evils it brings upon him,
wishes he could leave it, and prays God to forgive him, and yet lives in it
still? Is he ever the near to mercy? Nay he is the further off, as being
habituated and hardened in his sin, known sin, wherein he lives unpenitently.
Whereas Solomon says, Pro. 28.13.
He that confesses, and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy: But he that
hides his sins shall not prosper. And you here bring some Papist in,
confessing the errors which he knows not, as praying God to forgive them: but
never a word of his confessing and praying God to forgive those errors which
he knows* and wherein he lives. So here is a hiding of his known errors. But
it were too gross to bring him in, confessing, and deprecating God for his
known errors, wherein he still lives, and though he wish them amended in the
Church of Rome, yet amends them not himself, nor do you tell us, that he does
so much, as wish them amended in himself, and therefore you prudently forbear
the mention of any such thing, as his praying to have his known errors
forgiven. For that should put a man into a desperate case, shuting him out of
all hope and possibility of salvation, to mock God to his face* in praying to
have those Errors and sins forgiven him, in which against his Conscience he
both lives, and resolves no other (though he wishes) but to dye.

But yet (say you such hold the foundation Christ. How? As they that held him
fast, when they crucified him. For such as live in known sin, and error, they
(as the Apostle says) * crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame. Such holding of Christ, is not to hold him as a
foundation, but to overthrow the foundation. For Christ dyed, not to hold to
deliver us from the punishment of sin, but from the guilt and dominion of sin,
by working in us Faith and Repentance. So as to profess Christ, and to want
these, yea to live in known sin and error, only with a faint wishing of
amendment, is not to hold the foundation Christ, but to make him a false
foundation, as if he were a Savior of such, as so live in known sin and
error, as they resolve no other, but to live and dye in it. And we have proved
before, that Romes Religion quite overthrows the foundation Christ: so as none,
living and dying in the Faith of that Church can be saved, and the more he
knows it, and yet lives in it, the greater is his damnation, though he wish
never so much to have the error amended.

But you say, Christ has a part in them. I answer with the Apostle, Heb. 6.6.
The Foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows them
that are his: and* let every one, that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. Lo, here be two things joined together, which must not be parted: 1.
The Lord knows who are his: here is Gods foundation, laid in his Eternal
Counsel and Purpose, according to that of the Apostle, O'us proegno, Whom he
foreknew (not foresaw) he preaestinated to be conformed to the Image of his
Son* etc. Here Is Gods foundation, that stands sure, and has this seal, The
Lord knows who are his. Now they that are Christ's, do so hold this
foundation, as that they are firmly built upon it; which is properly to hold
the Foundation. For if a house stand not upon the foundation, how can it be
said to hold the foundation? Now how come we to know, whether a man do thus
truly hold the foundation Christ or no? Why, if he be built upon this
Foundation. And what is it to be built upon this Foundation? The Apostle tells
us (which is the second part of this seal, that settles us upon this
Foundation) And, let every one, that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. Now to name the Name of Christ, is not to profess Christ, as
nominall Christians, as Papists do. To apply this then to your hopeful
Papist, or Christian Romanist: He names the name of Christ, he professes
Christ. Thus say you) he holds the Foundation Christ. No say I: No, says the
Apostle. For being a Roman-Christian, he professes, he practices, he lives
in the Religion and faith of Rome, to wit, Popery; and this Pop^ry is iniquity,
yea the very Mystery of Iniquity, and the Religion of the Whore of Babylon,
whose golden Cup of Christian Profession Revel. 17.
is full of abominations, and spiritual fornications. This being iniquity, he
that holds the foundation Christ, must depart from it: Or else, for all his
naming the Name of Christ, he holds not the foundation of God; nor does God
know or acknowledge that man to be one of his, he is not Revel. 7.^.4.6 and
sealed. And therefore your hope of such, that are thus purblind, seeing their
error, but not departing from it, is as vain, as your charity toward those,
that are stone-blind. And you add: Hold the Foundation, and live accordingly.
That is, have the bare name of a Christian, and live and dye a Papist; which to
do, you must needs confess, cannot stand with the possibility of Salvation.
And then what becomes of your hope? For how can holding the foundation, and
living accordingly stand with the profession and practice, Faith and Religion
of Popery? And know ye not, Mat. 7.21.
That not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he (says Christ) that Does the will of my Father, which is in
heaven. And what is that will? That every one that names the Name of Christ,
depart from Iniquity. What Iniquity? All Iniquity. But what is iniquity? All
iniquity is either moral, or spiritual. Moral iniquity is all that, which is
a breach of any of the Commandments of the second Table, as murder, Adultery,
theft, falsewitnesse, covetousness, lust, dis^bedience to Parents, and lawful
Governors in lawful things, and the like. Spiritual iniquity, is such* as is
against the Commandments of the first Table, as Infidelity, hatred of the
Truth, Idolatry, as in the worship of Images, will worship, superstition in
Gods worship, taking of Gods name in vain, in professing Christ, and obeying
Antichrist, profanation of the Lords Sabbath day, etc. Now all such iniquity,
both moral, and spiritual, even all such Ephesians. 6.12.
spiritual wickednesses in high places a true Christian must not only wrestle
against, but depart and flee from. Otherwise, though he shall say to Christ in
that day, Mat. 7.22. Lu. 13.26, 27.
Lord Lord, H^ve we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out
Devils, and in thy Name have done many wonderful works (as perhaps the
Mountebank Friars and Priests will say of their 2 These. 2
lying wonders, the marks of Antichrist) (Lo here, all in Christ's name, no
less) yet Christ will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye
workers of iniquity. Thus Christ professes, he knows not those, that only
profess him. So as, whatever Papists may boast of, or pretend, and profess,
that they are Catholics, that they are Christians, that they hold the Creed,
and live a Religious life, as their Ghostly Fathers teach them (as we noted
before) yet living and dying Papists, Christ shall certainly say unto them all,
as well the stark blind, as the purblind, and as well both these as the knowing
men of Rome, Depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity, ye Idolaters, ye
Infidels, ye Antichristians, ye Hypocrites, ye blind and ignorant: I never knew
you.

And you add, They hazard themselves extremely, by keeping so closse to that,
which is superstition, and in the case of Images, comes too near to Idolatry.
Thus I perceive you will not raise up your voice one note higher, then to
superstition, or at the most, too ^eare Idolatry. Not Idolatry outright, only
bordering closse upon it, too near it God wot, as Purgatory is too near
hell, only a Wainscot between, and how soon burnt down, and long ere now, with
so hot a fire on both sides, so as it is to be more then feared, Purgatory and
Hell, by this time, are become both one, and so while your too near Borderers
upon Idolatry, your worshipers of Images, might hope to find some cold comfort,
when they should be in their hot Purgatory, that by the virtue of a few Masses,
they may quickly be dispatched thence, they find now such a confusion and
mixture of Hell and Purgatory, that they cannot find the way out. And so near
Idolatry is your case of Images, that it is not possible for the subtilest
Schoolman to distinguish between them, such is their not only contiguity, but
continuity, the Scripture calling an Image an Idol: cidolon, being in the
Grammatical and common construction an Image, and in the Ecclesiastical use
of the Word, any Image or Representation which men have devised to set up for a
Religious use, as in or by it to worship God or Saint. And we have showed
before, that if the Heathen in the worship of there Images were Idolaters: then
how much more the Papists, which both in their Doctrine and Practice do far
outstrippe the Heathen. Nor in the case of Images alone, are Papists most
gross and desperate Idolaters, but also in the worship of their breaden God,
and in their worship of Angels, and Invocation of Saints, making them so many
Gods, as also the Cross it self, which they both invocate, and worship with
Latria, which they call divine worship; as before.

L. p. 302. Worth once mislead, is of all other the greatest misleader.

P. And who of more worth in the account of some in the world, then your
Lordship. If then this worth be misled (as your Charity and Hope of misled
Papists) it becomes of all other the greatest misleader. For this worth is
become the greatest misleader both of Papists and Protestants, both of the
Church of Rome, and of the Church of England. And that the greatest too. And I
am persuaded, the Church of England, since it professed the Gospel, never had
such a monstrous and Bayeyard-like bold misleader, as this Great worth of
Canterbury has proved to be, or will certainly prove in effect, if it find as
blind Disciples to deal witthall, as it self is a Master. Although it is much
hoped, that if any Man has conceived such an high Opinion of your worth, as to
account you for the most Profound Divine, the most Pregnant Politician, and the
most potent Champion of the Church of England, the very Reading of this your
Book, with a corrected judgment, will either convert him from this error, or
at least prevent, that this error of your Doctorship shall not Commence, or
Proceed to the degree of Heresy

L. p. 303. It Is safest to believe the Article of Christ's Descent into hell, as
both the Churches of England, and of Rome, do agree upon, that is, That he
descended into the place of the damned. And this is the truth.

P. Surely, if this be the truth, that Christ descended locally into hell, the
place of the damned, it were safest to believe it, whether you and Rome consent
in the belief of it* or no. But because you believe, as the Church of Rome
believes, will you thereupon conclude, This is the truth? Certainly we have the
more cause to suspect that truth for a falsehood, wherein you and Rome do both
agree. But how true your belief with Rome is, and how true this Truth, we have
before sufficiently discovered. But will this hold for a good Rule, that in
what you and Rome agree it is safest to believe it? You agree in Altars,
Priests, Sacrifice, all manner of will worship, Antichristianisme, and many
things more forespecified: Ergo is it safest to believe these things? Or for
whom safest? safest for all those, that affect, to be of your Church Tryumphant
here, and would not come under your persecution. But how agrees this with that
which you add ( ibid.) that Rome will not endure this, that Christ descended
into the place of the damned, but only in Limbum Patrum, a Region in the upper
part of Hell Ergo rather then fail, if Rome will not believe as you do, That
Christ descended into the place of the damned, you will believe as she
believes, that he d^scended in Limbum Patrum. For agree you must: and that is
the safest belief.

L. p. 307. I my self have heard some Jesuits confess, that in the Liturgy
of the Church of England, there is no positive error.

P. It Is a sign then your Liturgy agrees pretty well with the Romish Messal,
as is noted by the way before. For surely such a Testimony from a Jesuits
mouth, gives us the more cause of suspicion, that all is not so well in your
Liturgy, as it should be. As Diogenes said, when the people applauded him: he
began to suspect himself, that he had committed some absurdity, or other,
saying, Wherein have I miscarryed my self, that this people does so commend me?

L. p. 318. Though Dr. White, late Bishop of Ely, was more able to answer for
himself, yet since he is now dead, and is thus drawn into this Discourse, I
shall, as well as I can, do him the right, which his learning and pains for
the Church deserved. And I grant as well as he, that there must be some one
Church or other, continually visible.

P. First, for Dr. White, he being now dead (which he was long before) I will
say no more, but this: For his deserving pains for the Church (the Church of
England you mean, as now it stands, the same Church with that of Rome, and of
the same Faith with her; and of which Faith he also declared himself to be,
when he told a Minister, that the Difference between the Church of Rome and of
England in the Doctrines of the sixth Session of Trent, and by name, of Grace
and Justification was little or nothing) how great it was, his Works extant can
witness; as namely his Approbation prefixed to your now Brother of Chichester;
his Appeal to Caesar, wherein is maintained the whole Body of your Arminian
Heresy, together in all, or most of the grossest points of Popery, as worship
of Images at least with Doulia, and the like, and assaying to prove the Pope
not to be Antichrist, as if he would solemn e coelo tollere: also Dr. Whites
Book of the Sabbath, to prove no Sabbath to Christians, and the fourth
Commandment not to be Moral, for the keeping of one day in the week, as the
Lords Day: allowing also of vain sports, and profane pastimes on that Day: and
commending of praying toward the East, where your Altar is placed, and such
like stuff: in all which he so well deserved of your Church of England, as he
scarce had his fellow; only if he were now living again, he would yield the
Bucklers to your Lordship as the bravest Champion of the now Chuch of England
that has risen up in this latter Age, or yet succeeding times may hope to
produce.

But let us now hear the right, which your Lordship does him, and which his
pains for the Church deserved. But first* let me tell you, you forget here to
give him his Title of Lord Bishop, which you indeed gave him in the very first
page of your Book. But now his Lordship is dead let not Lord and Bishop be
separated in any case, no not by death it self. For indeed Lord-Bishop is a
peculiar Title, differencing you from all true Bishops indeed, as the Scripture
commends for the only Bishops, as is showed before: yet I know not how it is
come to pass, that in the best Reformed Churches beyound the Seas, the Pastors
are never called Bishops. I suppose it is, because as Kings of old were styled
Tyranni, and that in melior^m partem, until degenerating into Lawless Tyrants
indeed, good Kings would thereupon never after be called Tiranni, but Kings: so
the Reformed Churches, seeing how the name of Bishop gr^w to be odious, the
Office and Calling of it being changed (...) that of a Parochial Pastor into a
Diocesan Lordship, and so (...)* have for this cause laid aside the Name of
Bishop, though otherwise the Name is good, as it pertaines to the true (...)
and Presbyters over particular Congregations, as is before showed: so as the
Reformed Churches do herein as the Ancient Romans did, who when their Kings
turned Tyrants, the l^st whe^of was Tarquinius surnamed Super^us, for his
extreme (...)* they for ever banished both the name of Kings, and (...) out of
their Commonweal. But let us see, how you recompense the omission of this
Lordly Title in this place, to such a well deserving man. You add: And I
grant, as well as he, that there (...) be some one Church or other continually
visible. A^ well a^ he. This then may seem to be some recompense, by way of
honor, and (...) some doing of him Right (for indeed his main reward he had in
his life time: and what he has now I cannot tell) that the Lords Grace of
Canterbury is pleased to Grace the late Lord Bishop of Eli, by being of the
same opinion with him. Well: what is the Opinion? That there must be some one
Church or other continually visible; That some one Church or other has still
been visible, I shall not grudge you. But take my meaning withal. Some false
Church or other has been (though why must be, I see no reason; saving that
there 1 Cor. 11.19
must be Heresies even among the Churches of God) continually visible, ever
since the Apostles times. And the Church of Rome for Instance has bore the
bell away: which degenerating into an Antichristian Church, has been still
visible, though not always in one and the same place, but most. What at Rome,
and sometimes at Aninion in France* (for where the Popes Court is, there is the
Church in its glorious conspicuity) yet sometime without a Head, sometime with
two Heads, sometime with three Heads, that a man might say, The Porter of
Heaven-gates had three Heads, as the Poets fained Cerberus the Porter of Hell
to have had. But for the true Church of God, that may sometimes be hid. For
first (as we showed before) there was no true Church visible among the revolted
Ten Tribes. Secondly, not in 2 Chronicles 28.
Ahaz his time, when he shut up the Temple* and and served Idols in every
Corner of Jerusalem; and then where was the Church visible the while, when the
whole public service and worship of God was suppressed, the Temple being shut
up. Again, also in Ioah his time was the like, as ye may read, 2 Chro. 24.17.
to 22, etc. Lastly, when the Temple was burnt, and all the people of God
dispersed Captives in Babylon, where they could Psalm. 137.
not sing one song of Sion: Where was then the visible Church the while? But
you will say, They might have Synagogues in Babylon. But you cannot prove it.
And the Prophet Esaias says, That Esa. 42.22.
they were hid in Prisons: As many of Christ's dear servants are at this day in
your Church of England. And what say you for that 30 days Interdiction, that
no man should make any suit, to God or man during that space. Where was then
the Church visible But that was but for 30 days. But you and Dr. White are for
a continual visibility. And it seems you herein jumpe with the Jesuits, who
stand upon a continual visibility every day, alleging that of Christ Mat. 28
20.
And lo I am with you pa^as tas e m^meras, which our English turns, Always,
but they, Vulgar Latin, (...) Di^r.
All the days, to wit, everyday Which they do, to puzzle Protestants in
showing their visible succession every day without fail, since Christ's time.
But you will say perhaps Daniel was found praying in those days. But he was
but one single Man, and so not Ecclesia, a Church or Congregation. And if he
prayed with his Family, it was but in his private house, and you will hardly
allow that for a visible Church, but rather call it a private Conventicle. And
if with this Family, then (if at least you had but sent your Pursuivants) not
only Daniel, but (according to the Kings strict Decree) his whole Family
should have been cast with him into the Lions den. So during the Egyptian
servitude, what conspicuity of a Church in Israel? Now and then perhaps, in
some godly Families, there might be two or three assembled. Yet this private
still, visible you will not call it. For you will not allow Churches in private
Families, though they Romans 16.5.
were in the Apostles time. And such Churches (so visible, as two or three are
visible when you see them, but the world takes no notice of them as Churches)
Christ never fayles to have in the world. And these Congregations in private
Families, being driven from your public Idolatrous Superstition in your
Churches, are so hid many times, that your bloodhounds cannot trace them, or
hunt them out. But as for such a Conspicuous, Glorious, Visibility of
succession of such Prelaticall Heads of Hierarchicall Churches, though such may
be always in some Country or other resplendent, eminent, and apparent, yet
Christ's poor Church the while may be, and commonly is hid, as little stars,
especially where such great Mat. 13.6.21*
Luminaria as your Lordships spread out your hot and fiery beams. As the
Woman, the Church (as before; which here we recapitulate, to encounter two such
Giants) when she fled from the Dragon, and his flood of persecution into the
Wilderness, who saw her then and there? And when the whole world was turned
Arian, where was the true Church visible? And so since Antichrist came to his
Xenith, or Vereticall point, to his Meridian brightness, how has Christ's
Church been hid in corners, as among the Merindolians, Cabriers, Waldensis, and
others, who were still persecuted by that Beast, and his Crew. As Solomon
says, Pro. 28.28.
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves. And so we may truly say, When
Prelates rise, and bear sway, and grow most resplendent and predominant in
their Potent Principalities: then Gods people hide themselves. And the Apostle
says of the believers, in the Old Testament, in times of persecution, or
captivity, or of the Maccabees. They wandered about in sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, of whom the world was
not worthey: they wandered in Deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves
of the earth And who were all those trow you, but the true Church of God? And
how was then the Church of God visible, but that one might see another. But
such you will not allow to be visible Churches: 1. because you cannot see them:
2. because you do not allow to be Churches visible, no more then you do the
Reformed Churches in Geneva, and among the Can^o^s, and those mountains, where
you cannot see them; which is their safety, as not to feel you. And where was
the visibility of Gods true Church in England, in Queen Mary's days, in the
midst of the black tempest of persecution, where you could not discern one
true Professor and Protestant, but by the light of that fire, which was by the
Prelates kindled to burn them for Martyrs? Or if you, or your Beagles had
hunted among the Woods, perhaps ye might have found half a dozen poor souls
under some Tree shading them from the present heat of persecution, where they
did solace their souls with having among them some few leaves of St. Paul's
Epistles, which they read to strentghen and arm them against their ^urne came.
Call you this a visible Church? But you will say, The Church of England was
then visible and conspicuous in the Bishops, and the public Congregations
throughout the Churches of the land, where Divine service, or Mass, was sung
or said every day. Then was the Church visible in Bonner.
Edmund of London, and Gardener.
Stephen of Winchestr, and other their Associates, who were as Zealous
Champions for the Church of England then, as you are now. So as that Church
then (as now) was no less sensible, then visible, when sitting most
conspicuous in their Courts they condemned Christ's true Church for an
Hereti^ke, delivering it over to the seculer power for a burnt sacrifice. And
was not this that Church then, of which you tell us, when you say, Our Church
was just there then, where Romes is n^w? So as we need make no doubt, but your
now conspicuous Church of England was one and the same with that in Mary^s
days; only that Church by virtue of a Law, burned the Saints of God: and you
without Law bury them quick You a^e all for a conspicuous visibility of a
Prelaticall or Hierarchicall Church. But Christ's true Church as before) is
otherwise: which has for the Bishop of her soul, 1 Pet. 2.25.
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is no Non Resident Bishop, but perpetually resident
and present with all his Congregations. Yea Mat. 15.20.
where but two or three are ass^m^led in his Name, there is He in the midst of
them. He says not In a Cathedral, or other Church; but indefinitely,
Wheresoever: as in a Chamber, in a private room, Act. 1.^3.
as the Apostles were for fear of the High Priests. During which time, where
was the conspicuous visibility of the true Church, until the day of Penticost
came, when there was a new Church coll^ctive of Act. 2.
all nations under heaven? Again, Christ says not, Where there is a
multitude: but, Where two or three: nor assembled, in a Prel^t^s name as
members of a Prelaticall Church, but, In may Name says Christ) in the faith of
me, according to my word: then and there am I in the midst of them, to rule and
protect, as King, to teach as Prophet, as Priest to present their persons and
sacrifices to my Father. These, these are those Churches or Congregations,
which you scorn and scoff at, and which you persecute and punish as
^alefactors for so assembling, as where Christ is present among them: which
plainly bewrayes your selves to be the false Church, which you say must be
continually visible

L. p. 320. A Church may hold the Fundamental point literally, and as long as
it stay^s there, be without controwle, and yet err grossly, dangerously, nay
damnably in the exposition of it. And this is the Church of Romes case. For
most true it is, it has in all Ages maintained the Faith unchanged in the
expression of the Articles themselves: but it has in the exposition both of
Creeds and Councels quite changed and lost both the sense and meaning of some
of them. So the Faith is in many things changed both for life, and belief, and
yet seems the same. Now that which deceives the world is, that because the
bark is the same, men think this old decayed tree is as sound, as it was at
first, and not wether-beaten in any age. But when they can make me believe,
that painting is true beauty. I Will believe too, that Rome is not only sound,
but beautiful.

P. First here I must note the perplexed and confused frame of your first
sentence. You say, A Church may hold the fundamental point literally, and as
long as it stays there, be without controwle, and yet err grossly,
dangerously, nay damnably in the exposition of it. As much as if you had said,
That a Church may hold the fundamental point literally, and err grossly,
dangerously, nay damnably in the exposition of it, and yet be without
Controwle. As for, As long as it stays there, namely in holding the
fundamental point literall^* how is it without controwle, when notwithstanding
the holding of the letter, it err grossly, dangerously, nay damnably in the
exposition of it? For you join and jumble all together, the holding of the
letter, and the overthrowing of the sense, and yet want controwle. And what is
the letter, where the sense is lost? What Is the bark, when the pith and marrow
is gone? As I^rome says, Gods word stands, non in verborum cortice, sed in
medulla sententiarum: not in the bark of words, but in the pith of the sense.
Well: And this is Romes case, say you. How? Most true it is (say you) that it
has in all ages maintained the faith unchanged in the expression of the
Articles themselves: but it has in the exposition both of Creeds and Councels,
quite changed and lost the sense, and meaning of some of them. So the faith is
in many things changed both for life and belief, and yet seems the same. Here
again do you not most pitifully enterfere? Faith is lost in the exposition,
and yet kept in the expression of the Articles. Have not you lost sense in this
expression, except you can recover it by a better exposition? For you separate
the expression from the exposition. So you leave the Articles as a dead
carcass, without a soul. For there is no faith kept in the expression of the
letter, without the true exposition of the sense. And if the sense be lost, the
faith is lost. And what expression of faith do you call that, which is
abstracted from the sense? But Rome has lost the sense but of some of them. Of
which? And whether of Creeds or Councels? For here you shuffle both together
too, as making Councels of equal Authority with the Creeds. I did not think
before this (nor yet) that Councels Decrees are to be taken as Creeds. Only I
might have learned of you before, That Councels Decrees, though they be
erroneous, must bind all to obedience: and then sure, they are little inferior
to Creeds: saving that those may be reversed by another General Council, but
these not.

But however, Rome is the same bark of a Church still. Ergo a true Church
still. Why, the Bark is not the Tree: no more then a Sheep-skin is a Sheep No,
nor yet has Rome so much as the bark of the true Church of Christ left. Look
upon her outward hew and habit: and there we shall find nothing, but the
habitements of the Revel. 17.3, 4, 5, 6.
great Whore, and the Ensigns of Antichrist with his Church Malignant, warring
against the true Spouse, and Church of Christ. And both these we find in that
one Chapter, where the Woman is set out to the life Her Habilements: She fits
upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads
and Ten Horns, and she is arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with
gold, and precious stone, and Pearl, having a golden Cup in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications: with a Label on her forehead
to know her the Better, a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother
of Harlots and abominations of the Earth: and she is drunken with the blood of
the Saints. And a little after we see her Ensigns set up, and those be her ten
Horns, the power of Kings, which she instigateth to ver. 14.17.
make war with the Lamb, and those on his side, the Called, and Chosen, and
Faithful. Now the Whores habit is not the habit of Christ's Spouse. This is not
the bark of the weather-beaten Tree of Gods Church* whose outward beauty is
Cant. 1.5, 6.
black, but inwardly is Esaias. 6.13.
glorious, outwardly blasted as an Dan* 4.11* 12 etc. Jude. 12.
Oak, but the holy seed is the substance thereof. And if by black you
understand the bare name of a Church, and profession of Christianity: That she
has changed too, as the Snake does her skin slipping off the old, and taking
on a new. For she is not content to be called Christ's holy Church, but the
Roman Catholic Church. Whereas Christ's Church is not denominated from any
place. And as she is the Roman Church, so the Papal Church, being denominated
from the Pope as her Head. Ergo none of Christ's Church; for this acknowledges
none for her Head, but Christ alone, who is the root of this Vine, and Olive
Tree, that ministers sap and fatness unto it. If therefore Rome be any Tree at
all, she is such, as is in Daniel, the Emblem of the Old Babylonian Tyranny
and so a Type of Romes Babylonish usurped Power: That Tree stretched out its
boughs over the whole Earth, under whose shadow all the Beasts must have their
sanctuary, as Rome applies, that of the Psalm 8.6, 7. And is this Tree (say
you) but wether-beaten? Or but in some things unsound? When it has lost not
only the bark, but the pith of Christ's Church; being all rotten within? Being
such a Tree, as Jude describes, dendron phthinoporinon akarpon, dis apothanon,
a corrupt Tree without fruit, twice dead, and to be hewed down, plucked up by
the roots, and cast into the fire. So as Rome is altogether naught, Intus and
incute, Pith and Bark, Root and Branch, Fruit and Leaf. Only a painted Tree,
by which painting (as you say) she deceives the world, and your Lordship too,
while you would be glad to take her with all faults, and be reconciled to her,
taking her painting for true beauty, or at the least on her outside more
beauty, then painting, and in her inside more soundesse, then corruption. For
you say, In some things only, both for life, and belief corrupted.

L. p. 321. Dr. White said only, that some Errors of the Church were
fundamental reductive, that is, if they which embrace them, did pertinaciously
adhere to them, having sufficient means of Information. And again expressly,
That none were damnable, so long as they were not held against Conscience.

P. Thus we come to know Dr. Whites judgment, and therein yours also. But
against you both, as erroneous in this point, I allege the Scripture. What
says Christ of the Pharisees. Mat. 15.14.
Let them alone, They are blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the
blind, they both fall into the ditch. So you may see here (if ye be not blind)
that blindness is damnable. But you will say, This was obstinate blindness,
fighting against the light, It Is true, that the blindness of the Pharisees was
obstinate, against the clear light, and their own Consciences: but the blind
people whom they led, were simply blind, out of mere ignorance, and so not
against their Conscience: and yet both the leader and the led, fall into the
ditch of damnation He that drinks deadly poison ignorantly perishes, as he
that wittingly drinks it. The poison is in it self mortal to all that drink
it, with what mind soever they do it. And such is the poison of sin and
error. Only he that erres of ignorance, is more easily recovered, then one
that is obstinate in his error: and both, living and dying in the same error,
as of infidelity, and the like (which all Popery is) both are tormented in
hell, but the obstinate more then the other: yet God is just in punishing both.
So as all error is damnable in all, but in some more, in some less. And it is
of the same righteous judgment of God to deny to the ignorant means, and to
others the right use of the means, by withholding his grace: and accordingly he
is just in punishing all with a due proportion. And so there is a difference
between simple Papists living in the midst of the Egyptian darkness, where
there is no light, nor means of knowledge, and simple Papists living in
Goshen, where the light shines where the Gospel is preached, and do close
their eyes wilfully, so as they obstinately refuse to see or hear* The sin of
these certainly is much more damnable, then of the other, who have no means at
all* Again, Errors that are in their own nature damnable, are damnable in
whomsoever they be, only in some more, in some less, but we cannot say, they
are to some damnable, and to others not damnable. All sin in its own nature
is damnable, and brings damnation with it to every Mothers son: is it then
damnable to some, and not to others? Romans 5.12.
Did not death come upon all men, in as much as all men had sinned? And is not
Error whether in life, or belief, whether in the ignorant, or men of
knowledge, sin? Thus you and Dr. White mazzle ignorants in sin. And if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the pit. But enough of this.

L. p. 32^. I would feign so any one point maintained by the Church of
England, that can be proved to depart from the Foundation.

P. Would you see it again? We have proved it before, and that abundantly,
that you maintain not one, but sundry points, wherein you depart from the
foundation. Look before, and you shall see how you depart from the Foundation
in your Tyrannical Hierarchy or Prelacie, in your Altars, in overthrowing the
Doctrines of Grace, in destroying the Doctrine and Practice of the 4 th
Commandment in sanctifying the Lords day, in forbidding Meats and Marriage at
certain times, which the Apostle calls directly and expressly a departing from
the Faith, and Doctrines of Devils. Look back, and see.

L. p. ibid. There is a latitude in the faith, especially in reference to
different men's salvation. To set bounds to this, and strictly to define it for
particular men. Just thus far you must believe in every particular, or
incur damnation, is no work for my pen.

P. For the ground of this your speech, you quote Bellarmine in the Margent. I
thought you raked it out of some puddle, seeing the Fountain it self, the
Scripture, affords you no such corrupt stuff. Nay more then that, you express
your self in far worse terms, then Bellarmine does For Bellarmines words,
which you quote, are these, Multa sunt de fide, quae non sunt absolute
necessaria and salutem: There be many things of Faith* which are not absolutely
necessary to salvation. But you bring it down to every man's salvation, as if
some things of faith were more absolutely necessary for some men's salvation,
then for others. I pass by Bellarmine, and insist upon your own words, leaving
him to clear himself, There is (say you) a latitude of faith, especially in
reference to different men's Salvation O^ saving and justifying faith, you must
mean, no question: For what faith is necessary for every man's salvation, but
the saving faith, which comprehends in it whatsoever faith is requisite and
necessary to salvation, as the belief of Scripture to be the word of God* as
is showed before. And this saving faith is the faith of all them, that are Heb.
^.^4*
heirs of salvation, to wit, of all Gods Tit. 1.1.
Elect, and all the Jude 3.
Saints. But it seems with Father Bellarmine you have an Implicit faith for
your ignorants, and an Explicit for you that are great Clerks: or the letter of
the Creed for those, and the sense for these. But I handled this also before.
Only you propound a Paradox, which is no work for your pen; wherein you are
the wiser not to take upon you to read or expound such riddles, had you been so
wise, as not to have propounded ^. And yet it is the work of every good
Minister of Chr^^t to teach the people what to believe, and to exhort them to
grow in Grace* and knowledge, and Faith, and so Col. 2.7. Phil. 1.9. Act. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 2 Pet. 1. Heb. 6.1. etc.
declare unto them the whole Coun^el of God, and to keep nothing back, and to
build men up in knowledge more and more unto perfection. As the Preacher says
Eccles. 12.9.10.11.
Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge, yea he
gave good heed, and sought out, and set in Order many Proverbs, The Preacher
sought to find out acceptable words* and that which was written, was upright,
even words of truth. The words of the wise are a^ Goads and Nails fastened by
the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. But this is not
a pattern for you to follow, neither by your tongue, nor pen. You have other
employment for them. But though we cannot set a bound to faith, in respect of
perfection of degrees, yet we ought to teach the people all the parts of saving
faith and knowledge, striving unto perfection. And besides it is the duty of
every good Minister of Christ, to limit and set bounds to all the negatives of
faith, in discovering all manner of sins and errors, which are all contrary,
and enemies to faith and salvation. For which end, they must open all the ten
Commandments, as Christ did Mat. 5. and all other points of saving Doctrine,
in the Scriptures. Now though you have not the skill or will to set bounds how
far men shall believe: yet you want no will, nor power to inhibit and
restrain Preachers, showing them how little a way they must go in teaching
the people, and so consequently how little a way the people must go in
believing and saving knowledge: as in restraining and forbidding to preach the
Doctrines of Grace (as before) forbidding Lectures, and especially all Sermon^
on the Lords day afternoon, forbidding long Preaching at any time, forbidding
expounding of the Catethisme, as many of your Prelates do, and the like. Thus
you can finely set men bounds how little thy shall believe, or know of God to
their salvation. That Is a work, if not for your pen, or hand, yet for your
head, and not unlikely of your hand and pen too.

L. p. 327. The Romanists dare not believe, but as the Roman Church believes.
And the Roman Church at this day does not believe the Scripture, and the Creeds
in the sense, in the which the ancient Primitive Church received them.

P Dare they not? How then say you there is possibility of salvation in the
Roman Church for any, when it condemns and accurseth saving faith and
justification thereby, with other saving truths? For if the Papists dare not
believe, but as their Church believes, then they are bound to good behavior,
they dare not believe to their salvation. And if they dare not believe to their
salvation, then they cannot be saved. And if they cannot be saved, what
possibility of salvation for them, living and dying in that faith? And here,
Why do you no^ say in the sense of the Scriptures themselves, and not of the
Primitive Church? But you do not like the Scripture sense, except the Church
interpret it. You allow not Scriptures to speak for, or testify for
themselves. You are the same man still. And as we said before, you do wisely
in that, to stop the mouth of Scripture, as Ahab did Michaiahs, for it never
speaks good of you, but evil always.

L. p. 232. I will acknowledge every fundamental point of faith, as proveable
out of the Canon, as we account it, as if the Apochryphall were added unto it.

P. As if Apocryphalls were any divine proof at all of the fundamental points
of faith in Scripture, or ought any way in that respect to be so much as named
with the Scripture. Apocryphalls (says Jerome) may be read for instruction of
manners, but not for confirmation of faith, as before.

L. p. 336. I have lived, and shall (God-willing) dye in that faith of Christ,
as it was professed in the ancient Primitive Church and as it is professed in
the present Church of England.

P. As you handle the matter, there is a vast difference between the faith of
Christ professed in the ancient Primitive Church, and that which is now
professed in the present Church of England. For the Ancient Primitive Church,
taken properly and strictly, as sometime in your Book (as before) you put it,
was that wherein the Apostles lived. Now will ye be tried by the Ancient
Primitive Church of the Apostles held and professed? What say you my Lord, for
your faith in this case? Will you put your faith and Religion to the trial of
the most entire and upright J^ry, the Twelve Apostles? Certainly if you decline
this trial, it is a shrewd suspicion that the faith of yours, wherein you are
so resolute to live and dye, is not right. Therefore for shame of the world, you
must at least profess or pretend, that you will be tried by the the Faith and
Religion which the Apostles and the true Church of God in their time (as being
the most Pure, Prime, Ancient Primitive Church) held and professed. First then:
That Primitive Church neither held nor professed, nor practiced any
Hierarchicall government And yet I* are say, you resolve to live and dye
Primate of Canterbury, and Metropolitan of all England. Altars, but only the
Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.10. (as it is formerly proved) but you and your
Church of England both set up and worship Altars, and ^each the people both by
your Books and practice to do so too, and force Ministers to erect Altars, or
force them out of their Churches. And this Faith and Religion also I dare say
you resolve to live and dye in. Thirdly, The Apostles, and the ancici^nt Cor.
16 1. Ioh. ^0.19, 26. Act. 20.^. Rev 1.10.
afternoon, as in the f^^enoon, never forbidding, but still exhorting to preach
in season and out of season, giving no liberty to vain and profane sports and
Pastimes either upon that day, or any other day, but admonishing Christians to
abhore them as Gal. 5.21. ^ Pet. 4.3. To. 13.13, 14.
Heathenish: and is this the faith and practice of the present Church of
England at this day, wherein you resolve to live and dye? Fourthly, The
Apostles and ancient Primitive Church in their days taught, held, and
professed all; and none of these Doctrines were forbid to Ministers to be
preached; but they were commanded of God to declare the whole Council of God to
his people. Is this your faith and practice of the Church of England, wherein
you resolve to live and dye? Fifthly, The Apostles and the ancient Primitive
Church in their days, taught, professed, and Is this the Faith, which you and
the present Church of England professes and practices, and wherein you
resolve to live and dye? Sixthly, The Apostles and the ancient Primitive Church
in their time condemned the forbidding of Marriage and of Meats, as a Doctrine
of Devils, taught by seducing sp^ri^s, and a departing from the faith of Christ
Is this that faith and Religion, which you and the present Church of England
hold, profess, and practice, and wherein you resolve to live and dye? O ye
Prelates, O thou Church of England, blush, and be ashamed of that Faith,
Profession and Practice of yours, so (...) contrary to that Faith which the
holy Apostles taught, and that pure and Primitive Church in their times
embraced, and professed: and be not so desperately bent, as being so clearly
convinced of these thy foul practices, to profess and vow notwithstanding to
live and dye in them: least herein, your condition prove (as it must do)
infinitely more desperate and damnable, then that of the Jesuits themselves,
whose knowledge (by your own confession) of their wicked and damnable F^^ours,
with their obstinate persisting in them, and res^sting the truth, yea even the
Holy Ghosts Testimony therein, leaves them, as without excuse, so without all
hope of salvation, as to whom nothing remains (as the Apostle upon the like
occasion, says) but H^b. (...). H^^. 6.4, 5, ^* 8.
a fearful expectation of Judgment, and of fiery indignation, which shall
devour the Adversaries.

L. p. 338. Yea, but he says again, That I acknowledge there is but one
Saving Faith, and that the Lady might be saved in the Roman Faith, which was
all the Jesuit took upon his soul. Why but i^ this be all, I will confess
it again. The first, that there is but one Faith, I confess with St. Paul,
Ephesians. 4. And the other, That the Lady might be saved in the Roman faith or
Church I confess with that Charity which St. Paul teaches me, namely, to
leave all men, especially the weaker sex and sort, which hold the foundation,
to stand or fall to their own Master, Romans 14.4. And this is no mistaken
Charity.

P. This you confess, that as there is but one saving faith, so this faith is
in the Church of Rome, The saving faith not in the Church of Rome
as in and by which the Lady may be saved. And of this one faith with the
Church of Rome, you and your Church of England are, if you hope to be saved
with Rome by her saving faith. This is the All and sum of your Confession.
Now we have clearly proved before, that the faith of the Church of Rome, is not
that one saving faith of Gods Saints and Elect, which the Scripture every where
speaks of. For first Romes faith is in its kind and nature (and that by their
own confession) a dead faith: but the saving faith is a Gal. 2*20*
living faith. faith they may go to hell, as they say of their Fid^les
Fornicarii, Adulteri, etc. therefore Romes faith is no saving faith: for the
saving faith is so called, because it effectually, perfectly and certainly
saves all those that have it, as Christ says, Joh. 5.24. Thirdly, The Romish
^aith, is a doubting, wavering, uncertain faith, or rather opinion^ and wan
hope, as the Council of Trent defines, accu^sing certain^y of believing:
whereas the saving faith is a certain^ assurance, and clear Heb. 11*^*
evidence, a plerophoria as Heb 10.22. Romans 4.21.^ a full assurance or
perswasi^n in the truth of believing, though not in fulness of degrees of
perfection in all, and at all times, the operation of it being many times
hindered by corruptions, and infirmities of the flesh, and manifold
temptations. Fourthly, Romes faith, is, and may be without hope and charity:
but true saving faith is never without hope and charity; for it is the sure Heb
11.1.
foundation of things hoped for, and it Gal 6.
works by Love. Fifty, The Roman faith is not the Justifying faith, for the
Sess. 6.
Council of Trent says, Faith justifies not, till Hope and Charity come to
it, Graces, and works in us, do justify: whereas true saving faith is therefore
called the Justifying faith, because it is that only Grace, whereby as an
Instrument applying Christ and his righteousness, and not as works in us, the
believing sinner is justified, Romans 3.28. so as though this saving justifying
faith be never without hope and charity, no more then fire is without light and
heat: yet hope and charity have no hand at all with faith in justification; so
as not even faith it self as it is a Grace inherent, with hope and charity,
does justify, but only as it is considered as a hand or instrument applying
Christ, as before. But the Roman Faith (as the Council of Trent confesses)
justifies not as an instrument or hand applying Christ, whereby his
Righteousness is of God imputed to the believer (which Imputation the Council
in plain terms accurseth) but only as a Grace and work inherent hope and
charity. Sixthly, saving faith is not only a justifying faith, whereby we stand
righteous in Gods sight, having Christ's Righteousness imputed: but also a
sanctifying faith, as Act. 26.18. called therefore a holy Faith, Jude 20. as
whereby a man is regenerate, borne again, made a member of Christ, and partaker
of his Spirit, and lives and dies in holiness: but the Roman Faith does not
sanctify; for they confess, that wicked, ungodly, and profane persons may
have it* and go to hell with it, as before. Lastly, saving and justifying
faith is a spiritual soul by the spirit of God, and it is his sole work,
without the concurrence or man's Will, which is not free, until Grace has
given it both life and freedom: but the Roman Faith is confessed by them in
the Council of Trent, not to be a mere work of Grace, nor at all of
sanctifying and saving Grace, in the first act of believing: but after the Will
of man is but a little stirred and moved by a certain Grace, which they call
the first Grace, which they confess not to be the saving and sanctifying
Grace, then thereupon they have the merit of Congruity to receive the second
Grace, whereby hope and charity come to be added to faith. And this is the
express Doctrine of Trent. The Conclusion then is, That neither the Lady, nor
any Papist living and dying in the Roman Faith, nor your self, nor any in the
Church of England, that hold and profess no other Faith, then the Roman Faith,
can possibly be saved, living and dying in that Faith and though you tell us
again with great confidence, as a most certain Truth, that it is no mistaken
Charity to grant a (...) of salvation to a Papist living and dying in the Roman
Faith: yet we have so discovered this your Charity before, as I Hope your
Charity will be no more so mistaken. Only here I must tell you withal, that as
you either wilfully, or most ignorantly and (...) rather, mistake that one
saving faith of the Apostle: so do you also that Charity, which you say he
teaches you. Does the Apostle teach you such a Charity, as teaches you to
believe and affirm that, which is contrary to the clear Truth of the
Scripture? is it your Charity to attribute a saving faith to the Church of
Rome, which without all Charity accurseth the only true faith, and the truly
faithful of Jesus Christ, which profess that only saving faith? Whereas you
must know, that Charity, which the Apostle there teaches (Romans 14.4. alleged
by you) is in judgeing Charitably of your Brethren, in the use of things
indifferent* For there the Apostle speaks of eating, or not eating: of
observing a day, or not observing: whereupon he infers, Who art thou, that
judge another servant. To his own Master he stands or falls; so as in
such cases Christians must judge Charitably, and not rashly censure others,
that do not as themselves do, in things simply indifferent. This is then the
Charity, which there the Apostle teaches. But have you learned this Charity of
the Apostle? You tell us, This Charity the Apostle teaches me. The Apostle
teaches you true Charity: but it does not thereupon follow, that you have
learned that Charity of the Apostle. Do you deal so with your Brethren in the
use of things indifferent, as not to judge them this way, or that way* in the
using, or not using of them? Do you leave them to their own Master Christ* to
stand or fall? Nay do you not cause them necessarily to fall by the stumbling
blocks of your Ceremonies, which you say, are things indifferent, and yet you
impose such a necessity upon the observation of them, as they altogether cease
to be indifferent, and become a y^ake of bondage to the People of God? And if
they be so strong that they will not thus fall down to your Ceremonies, no more
then the 3 Children would to the Kings Image: what then? What Charity use you
then toward them? Do you leave them to their own Master to stand or fall? Not
such thing. But you take upon you to be there Master and Lord, and to be their
Judge, and to Judge them, while sitting in your High Commission Chair, you
convent them, censure them, as by Susp^nding, Silencing, Depriving, Degrading,
Dispossessing, or Fining, Imprisoning, undoing of their wives and children, and
without all hope of remedy, or mercy from you, till they shall acknowledge the
Justice, yea and perhaps the Clemency of your Court in dealling so mercifully
with them. This, This is that Charity which you have learned, and which you
daily put in practice, so as in this kind, never any was more zealously and
fervently Charitable, then your self. But this Charity you never learned of
the Apostles, nor did he* or Christ, or any of the Apostles ever teach you any
such Charity. No sure, This wisdom, This Charity of yours (as James speaks)
comes not from above, but is Earthly, sensual* and Divelih. If you have no
other Charity but this, the Lord deliver us from your Charity. And so I leave
you to your mistaken Charity. Only for Conclusion hereof: Immediately before
you tell us, you will dye, as you live in that faith professed in the Church of
Engdand. Here you say, Rome holds the same faith: Ergo as you live so you will
dye in the Roman faith* And secondly, Ergo The Faith of the Church of England
and of Rome is one and the same Faith: as before you tell us they are one and
the same Church: and at after (as page 3^7) they are of one and the same
Religion, not different. Thus you have made a fine Confusion: and this you
mean to make your final Conclusion. Such is your Faith: such your Religion:
such your Charity: all mistaken. The foulest, and fearefullest mistaken, that
ever any man was overtaken with.

L. p. 339. The truth is you do hold new Devises of your own, which the
Primitive Church was never acquainted with. And some of those so far from
being conformable, as that they are Halting and (...).
little less, then contradictory to Scripture.

P. And is it not as true, that in holding new devises, which the the Primitive
Church (of which we spoke but now) was never acquainted with, you may shake
hands with Rome and her Jesuits? who may therefore retort upon you that of the
Poet, Parcius ista viris tamen objicienda memento,
Novimus et qui te:
Be sparing such things to us to object:
Who know the like do on your self reflect.
And we have showed before, how both Romes new devises, and yours (for they are
all one and the same) are not only (as you still mince the matter) little
less then contradictory to Scripture: but do directly overthrow the clear
and evident truth (...), and that also even in fundamentalls. And what say you
to Romes new-old devise of worshipping Images (to instance in no more, though I
might in many, yea in all Romes Popish Doctrines, as Popish; as before) is it
but little less then contradictory to Scripture? Does not the Scripture say,
Thou shall not worship any graven Image? And what says Rome, I pray you? Or if
you, or she, for modesty sake will not tell us; or if she dare not say in plain
and express terms, and in form of a Precept, Thou shall worship Images: yet
ask her whorish practices, and her pretty devises, wherewith she allures her
children to the adoration of them, and that even to dotage, as by promising
them pre^ty lakons, and new-nothings, as pardon of sins for so many years for
praying so many Avies and Pater nosters before such a (...), or Image: is not
this Equipollent to a Commandment? yea their very setting up, and ad^ring
these their ga^ Gods in their Churches, the place of worship, is it not an
inviting and silent whispering in the Peoples ears, worship and fall down
before these sacred Images and Relics, giving them the same honor, that you
give to the Saints, which they represent, as divine honor to the Cross, and
Crucifix, as they teach, as we have showed. Is not here a full and home
contradiction to the Scripture? Contradiction what it is.
For Contradiction is not only in an express Negative, but in an impi^^^
Negation, when such and such a Doctrine does necessarily imply a contradiction
to the Scripture. And in this kind all the Doctrines of Popery (whereof we have
given sundry Instances before) are direct contradictions to the truth of the
Scriptures.

L. p. 340. It does not follow, since the Council of Trent has added a new
Creed, that this Roman faith is now the Catholic* Halting again.
For it has added extravea, things without the foundation, disputable, if not
false Conclusions to the Faith. So that now a man may believe the whole and
entire Catholic faith, even as St. Athanasi^^ requires, and yet justy refuse
for Dr^sse, a great part of that, which is now the Roman faith.

P. Is it so then? Has the Council of Trent added a new Creed, and so Roman
faith is not now the Catholic, but to be refused as dross, extraveous,
false, without the foundation? How then does this agree with that faith, which
even now you confessed; that the Church of Rome had and has the saving Faith,
that One Faith of the Apostles, as whereby a Papist, living and dying in that
Faith, may be saved? And if Rome has added a new Creed, how holds she still
that one Faith? Prelates Contradiction.
And do not you believe Romes new Creed? For what is this Creed? That the Roman
faith is now the Catholic. How is this then a new Creed, That Romes faith is
now the Catholic? For (say you) it has added extravious things, without the
foundation, Disputable, if not false conclusions to the Faith. Is this all?
Par^urient M^ntes. I expected here some monstrous evidence against the Church
of Rome, when you began to tell us she had brought forth a new Creed. But this
your Rumor will not be taken for a Creed, without some sounder proof, then we
see you yet bring, for all your fair flourish. For what is this new Creed? Alas,
a poor Cento patcht up of certain extravious things. What? without the
Foundation. Good enough yet, so long as n^ Canon against the Foundation, or a
mine of Powder to blow up the foundation. Only without the foundation? Alas,
that is not worth the talking of. If the new Creed be of things only without
the foundation, you may leave them out of your Creed, as things not necessary
to be believed, or at least, not to be believed of all Christians, alike; as
you teach us before, and Bellarmine too, that All things de fide are not
necessary to be believed of all men, or are not necessary to salvation. And
perhaps Bellarmine means Romes new Creed you speak of, which though the Council
of Trent has made it to be de fide, yet it is not necessary for every man to
believe it, or not absolutely necessary for every man's salvation. But what
more? 2. Disputable. As you said before; Disputed Qu^stions. Disputed, and
Disputable still: Ergo what can you make o^ such a Creed at the worst, but some
disputable matter, not yet sufficiently discussed, though determined in the
Council of Trent, and sit perhaps to be reserved to be determined upon some
clearer demonstrations in your next General Council, whose Decrees then, true
or false, shall be received as your Creed. And (as we said before) things
Disputable may yet prove to be truth, being thoroughly scanned: and thus Romes
ne^^ Creed may prove as Credible, as you call it disputable. But any more yet?
yes: if not false conclusions. If? Which receiving a fair interpretation from
your mouth, may be all one, as if you had said, Not false Conclusions, because
as yet Disputable. And while things are but disputable, and in dispute, they
are as yet no false Conclusions. For the Premises of the Argument must go
before the Conclusion. But yet your Conclusion is somewhat (...). For you say, A
man may believe the whole and entire Catholic faith, and yet justly refuse for
dross a great part of that, which is now the Roman faith. What? Dross? And,
Ius^ly refu^e as Dross? What, are you that man, that may do thus* And will
you do thus? Nay, you for your part have bound your hands from taking any
thing as dross, which Rome has put in her new Creed. For those things, even
the worst of them, you say are disputable. Therefore not yet concluded and
determined for Dross. And if you shall now take those things for dross, which
with you are but disputable, how can you justly do it: For if metal be in
dispute among the r^siners, it is not presently doomed for dross, being yet in
their best judgments but disputable: the Test must first try it, whether it be
dross or not. And so it is the Test* or the Testaments of Christ, that must
try all false metals, shine they never so gold like, and discover and condemn
them for Dross. And surely my Lord your single judgment (through never so
singular) will never be taken by any, as solid enough to preponderate the
Decrees of a whole Council, as Trent, to conclude those Decrees to be Dross,
both after you have called them but disputable, and after Rome has Decreed
them for her new Creed. But you go no further yet, then Posse: a man may take
them, etc. And you may in time come actually to take those disputables for no
Dross, but good Current Coin, not only passing for Current in Rome, but also
in England, as holding the same Creed, and being one Church. So as a little
more Allay then Ordininary shall not disable the currantnesse of it. And what
is there in all Romes new Creed of Trent, which you say is of things
Disputable, which is any worse dross, but rather as good silver, as those her
Altars and other superstitions, which you have borrowed of her? Which were they
but soundly disputed, would prove dross indeed, as formerly also is proved.

Again, here you confine the whole and entire Catholic faith to Athanasius
his Creed You might have at least taken in the other two Creeds to boot: and
yet not all of them together will make up the adequate Rule of the whole and
entire Catholic faith. For the Catholic faiths full latitude, whole and
entire, cannot be measured, but by the line and Rule of Scri^ture alone, The
only R^m. 6*1^*
tupos did^kus as the Apostle ca^ls (...) the Matrix or Mold, wherein faith
must be cast (...)) to receive its perfect form* which is not, cann^^ be
whole, and entire, but as it is according to the whole and (...) Scripture
conformed And you add:

Popish faith infi^ility, by the Prelates confession.
L. p. 3^2. No man can properly be said to believe the whole Creed, that
believes not the whole sense, as well as the letter of it, and as entirely.

P. Now you told us before, that Rome has lost the sense of the Creed, at
least in some things: whence I conclude, upon your own words, that Rome holds
not, believes not the whole Creed, and consequently she has lost and
overthrown the whole Creed. For overthrowing the sense of any one Articl^, she
overthrows the whole; as before. And in a word, the Church of Rome overthrows
the whole Creed, in overthrowing the first word of it, Credo, I believe: which
gives denomination, life, and being to the whole. And a maine flaw in the
foundation, overthrows the whole building. And that Rome does this, is clear:
for, as she has made a new Creed all of dross: so she has coined a new sense
to the Credo of the old Creed. For she does not believe the Creed with a
saving, justifying, lively faith (as is showed before) but has cancelled and
accursed it in her Council of Trent. And so though she hold Credo Deum,
believing that there is a God, as even the Heathen do (for quae gens tam
barbara, Ci^ de Natu^a Deorum.
etc. what nation so barbarous, that believes not there is a God; as the
heathen Roman Orator said) yet she does not hold any other Creed of God. For
she holds not simply and absolutely (no more then you) Credo Deo, believing God
speaking in the Scripture, but dependently upon the Authority and
Interpretation of the Church. And least of all does she hold Credo in Deum,
which is the justifying and saving Faith, as Augustine, Bernard, and others of
the more Ancients distinguish and define. Augu^t. Bernard.
For as Bernard says, Credere in Deum, est credendo diligere, credendo in eum
ire, and ei uniri, etc. To believe in God is by believing to love God, by
believing to go into him, and to be united unto him. Now this faith Romes is
not: for (as is showed before out o^ the Council of Trent) their faith is
without love* and does not go into God, but with which going to hell, they are
separate from God for evermore. So as the Article or Decree of Trent having
destroyed the old Credo in Deum, she must have some new Credo, or else none at
all. And you do ibid. rightly interpret the word V^g^es, which Athanasius
expresses the ^ustif^i^g faith of the Creed by, namely sound and entire: so as
if it be not a sound and entire faith, such as the Scripture commends, and is
proper to all true Believers, the Elect, a (...) is to no purpose. And a little
after you say:

(...) This is true Divinity that he which hopes for salvation, (...) whole
Creed, and in the right sense too (if he be able to (...) it.)

P. Till this If, hemmed in with a Parenthesis, I was half in hope you had
assented to my former speech, That the Church of Rome in not holding the right
sense of the Creed, overthr^ws the wh^le. But your Parenthesis so hedgeth in
your silly ignorant, that it is a sanctuary to secure their ignorance from
R^m^s damnation; so as though they have no hope of salvation, yet they are in
no fear of Romes damnation, as being not able to believe the whole Creed,
because not able to comprehend the right sense of it within the narrow
circumference of their shallow brainpan. But behold closse by another hedge:

L. p. 343. To hold the Creed inviolate, is not (as I take it^ the holding of
the true sense, but not to offer violence, or a forced sense and meaning upon
the Creed, which every man does not, that yet believes it not a true sense. For
not to believe the true sense of the Creed, is one thing: but it is quite
another, to force a wrong sense upon it.

P. Thus still the Lady, and all silly ignorant Papists, if ever by their
blindness they shall happen to stumble upon salvation, trusting to the mere
simplicity of their ignorance, living and dying in the Roman faith, not knowing
what it is, nor able to believe any one Article of the Creed in a right sense:
may thank you, for thus encouraging them upon this hope of possibility of an
impossible salvation. And the case stands thus: The Church of Rome in her
Council of Trent has put a forced sense upon the Creed, and so has made a
violation of the faith: This forced sense Romes Clergy in the Catechism of
Trent forces and presses upon their blind people to believe: Now tell me,
What difference is there between the forcing of a false sense upon the Creed,
which the Council of Trent has done, and all Romes Clergy conveys the false
sense (if any at all) as ^ank poison into the minds of their Blindlings, so
far as they are capable of any error (being capable of nothing else) and the
voluntary receiving and embracing of that false sense, and that not only in
believing it, but so obstinately adhereing to it, as they will not, they dare
not (as you before confess believe otherwise, though the truth be tendered
unto him: which is the general condition of all ignorant Papists. And being in
this case, what way now can you find out for them, which may bring these
misbeleevers; or rather no-beleever, to salvation. What hope can you give them,
that have no faith? And what faith can they have, that cannot bel^eve, that
cannot, may not, dare not, have no means, to comprehend the r^ght sense of the
Creed, but the forced sense that Rome puts upon it and them?

L. p. 349. As for Origin, I think, he was the first founder of Purgatory

P. This here of Purgatory bordering so near your last Passage of your
misbeleeving Papists, gives me occasion to imagine how necessary it were for
you to be the first Inventer of some other place in hell, like unto that Limbus
Infantum, where provision may be made to intertaine your silly Infant-Papists,
that are not able to give any one reason of that hope of salvation, which you
force upon them, and which you have been the first inventer of. That as Popish
Infants dying without Baptism, go to their Limbus, where they are sensible
neither of joy, nor pain: so your silly ignorants, having no sense of any true
faith and knowledge of God, or of themselves here, when they dye, they may go
to such a like place or Limbus, where they may neither enjoy bliss, nor suffer
pain. But a word of Purgatory in the mean time. For the first Founder of it,
in my poor reading I find the Heathen Plato in Timaeo.
Plato. For he tells us, as of 3 sorts of men in this world, some very good,
and some stark naught, and some indifferent: so he fits 3 places for these 3
sorts after this life: 1* Elysium, the Elysian fields, meaning thereby a place
of pleasure, as, Paradise, into which went those immediately, who were very
good: 2. Hell, whither the very worst went: 3. a middle place, or lake, into
which the moderate or indifferent men were cast after death, and after a
certain time there, as a year, or two, or more, as they were less or more
good or bad, being well purged, were cast forth again, Whence they went into
the Elysian fields. And Virgil also, a heathen Roman Poet, did afterward take
and borrow this from Plato, expressing it in his Aeneads. And so from these two
might Origin borrow his Purgatory, and the Church of Rome from them all three,
might out of this lake of Plato, or Pluto if you will, borrow so much Bitumen,
or Pitchy matter, and so casting into it the stone Asbestos, which being once
kindled, is not quenched again, it became the hot-burning lake of Purgatory,
as namely for the purging of Indifferent men, such as are neither hot nor cold:
neither Believers, nor Infidels: neither Christians, nor Heathen: neither good
fish, nor flesh: Indifferent between Papists and Protestants: half for Christ,
and half or rather All for Belial: Reconcilers of light and darkness: of
Truth and Error: or (as the Papists say) such as had only venial sins, not
thoroughly purged with holy water in this life, and therefore must be purged with
fire, what water could not do, until after a Venal Mass chanted for their
souls, they should be delivered, and so pass the Pikes into the El^sian
Fields. And this is both Authority and Antiquity sufficient for your Purgatory,
though you bestow much sweat in this hot Stove, and in pursuing this Ignis
fatuus, yet happily it may purge you^ Reputation of that venial opinion, which
men have of you.

L. p. 375. Rome, but with all other particular Churches, and no more then
other Patriarchall Churches, was and is radix existentiae, the root of the
Churches existence And, The uni^ersall Nature and Being of the Church, has no
actual ^xistence in all her particulars. And this I say for her existence
only, not the purity or form of her existence, which is not here considered.

P. These words confirm what you have said before of your Catholic Church,
consisting of particular Patriarchall, Prelaticall, or Hierarchicall Churches
throughout the world, all of them visible, and conspicuous; in these it
existeth as in the root: this existence may be without the consideration of
purity, as a Church may be a true Church of Christ, and yet not be holy. Having
then answered these things before, it is sufficient for this. And this still
confirms what I have said of Christ's true and only holy Catholic Church,
which is a matter of faith in the Creed. This true and only holy Catholic
Militant Church of Christ has for its prime Radix, or Root Christ, in whom it
existetth, subsisteth, and has its being. Then it is diffused into all the
members of Christ's mystical body, all the Elect, over the world, or in any
corner thereof, to the end of the world, and has no existence at all in the
Hierarchy, or Prelacie, or in any one visible Church, or particular place, or
Country, but it lies hid, as the sap in the root, in all the Persons of the
Elect only, and the substance and Col. 3.
life thereof is hid with Christ in God, the Romans 11.
Prime root. And the existence of this Catholic Church cannot be considered
possibly, without Purity, and Holiness* for it exists no where, but in purity
and holiness: so as every person is holy, in whom it existeth: And so much for
this.

L. p. 370, 371. But if she be not the Catholic, nor the root of the
Catholic Church, yet Apostolic I hope she is* Indeed Apostolic she is, as
being the sea of one, and he a Prime Apostle. But then not Apostolic, as the
Church is called in the Creed, from the Apostles, no nor the only Apostolic.
Visible, I may not deny, God has hitherto preserved her, but for a better end
doubtless then they turn it to.

The Church of Rome indeed Apostolic? Why so? As being the sea of one, and he
a prime Apostle That was Peter you mean sure. He was a Prime Apostle, though
not the Prime. (...) sometimes James is placed before him, Gal. 2.9. And Paul
was no whit inferior to those 3. James, Peter, and John, who were Pillars, and
seemed to be somewhat. And in this respect may you not possibly mean Paul,
rather then Peter: for Paul (we are sure) was in Rome, and there preached,
though in prison. But we read no where in Scripture, that Peter was at Rome,
much less that he sat there Bishop of Rome, and so fixed his Chair there. If
therefore you mean Peter, and pitch upon him (though the Popes are feign to use
sometimes two strings to their bow, and to challenge their succession both from
Peter and Paul, and some stories speak both of Peter and Paul, as Bishops
there.) I say if you pitch upon Peter, how do you prove that Peter was at
Rome: and if at Rome, whether Bishop there: and if a Bishop there, why
consequently must that Sea be still Apostolic, O'uk e'n te Kathedra ea
proedria, all' e'n to^s e'rgois. Herodian. lib. 1.
seeing non seeds, sed fides, not the seat, but the Faith makes Apostolic.
But there be many reasons and arguments from Scripture, some that Peter was not
at Rome, others, and those more demonstrative, that he was never Bishop of
Rome, as Pontifex, or Prelate, such a Bishop as you mean. I have seen a Book
Printed in English by Authority, which proves that Peter was never at Rome.
And this he does by computing and comparing the times and other Circumstances
in the Acts, and Paul's Epistles with those Histories, which say he was there,
and Bishop there, which stories neither agree with the Scripture, nor with
themselves, nor with other Histories profane. And if Peter were at Rome, how
comes it, that Paul being there, does not in all his Epistles make mention of
him? Was Peter either so obscure, as Paul should not know him to be at Rome? Or
so proud of his new Prelacie, as not to acknowledge his fellow Apostle, now a
Prisoner? Or what was it, that Paul does not so much as mention him? Because
Peter, being for the Circumcision, Allotrioepiskopein. 1. Pet. 4.15.
should a'llotrtoepiskopoin, take Paul's Bishopric over his head, who was for
the Uncircumcision, whereof Rome was the Metopolis? Or had Peter with Demas
forsaken Paul; embracing this present world in a Lordly Bishopric? But let it
be given you, that Peter was at Rome, and Lord Bishop of Rome: what then? Ergo
is the Church of Rome indeed Apostolic? Did Peter leave his Apostolic
Bishopric by an Intayle ^o all his successors in Rome? Are ^hey Apostolic,
when they are become Apostates from the faith? Alas, alas: your words utter
your spirit, but no truth Only one thing you deliver, as doubtless, where you
say, Visible I may not deny, God has hitherto preserved her, but for a better
end doubtless, then they turn it to: Visible: Ergo the Pope is Peter's
successor: Ergo the sea of Rome is indeed Apostolic: Ergo a true Church of
Christ. For visible it is. Revel. 17.
It is indeed that visible and conspicuous City on its seven tops or hills
(whereon it stood in John's time and now that Woman, that sits and rides mounted
on her seven-headed, ten-horned Beast. Visible with a witness, otherwise all
her pomp would loose the Grace, if it wanted spectators, as her Scarlet, and
Purple, and Pearl, and Precious stones, meta polles phantasias, with her great
pomp. Visible no question, and so visible, and sensible too, as otherwise we
could not know her to be the Great Whore. Thus she was showed first to John in
a visible representation, by which we also come to know her to be the same
Woman, when we do but look upon her. Well, visible we all grant her to be.
What more? God has hitherto preserved her. That Is true too. For even the
wickedest men upon earth, and the most Tyrannical states, that they are for a
time, yea and a long time too preserved in life, and do prosper also they owe
it to God. But to what end are the wicked preserved? Their final 2 Pet. 2.9.
Phil 3.19.
end is destruction, to which they are r^served, as Peter speaks, and Paul too.
Cain and his Posterity (whose Family was a type of Antichrists succession)
continued and were preserved, and grew great, for almost two thousand years,
till at last the Flood swept them all away. But of Rome you have better hopes,
doubtless. Genesis 6.
For you say God has preserved her for a better end doubtless, then they have
turned it to. Now doubtless I will show you what that better is, for which God
has hitherto preserved that Woman, which has been made drunk with the blood
of the Saints. 2 These 2.8*
Whom (says the Apostle) the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming And Rev. 14.8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication. And Rev. 18. read the whole Chap^er of
Romes ruin. Yea and all that partake with Rome, shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, etc. Rev. 14 9* 10. What the Scripture has spoken of Romes
fall, would fill a Volume. And is not this the best end, that God is pleased to
preserve her for, when he shall be glorified in executing his justice and
judgments upon her for all her abominations, and for all the blood of his
Saints which she has shed? And in her confusion God will magnify and exalt
the Honor, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which tha^ Woman and her Crew had
oppressed, and the Saints shall triumph over her. Yea, says the Lord, Rev.
18.20.
Rejoice over her thou heaven, and the holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has
avenged you on her. And Chap. 19.1, 2. I heard (says John) a great voice of
much people in heaven (that is, in the true Church of Christ) saying, Alleluja,
salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God: For true and
righteous are his Judgments, for he has judged the great Whore, which did
corrupt the Earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants at her hand. Behold here for what a glorious end, the Lord has
preserved that Great Whore. But it seems you do not mean to make one of that
Company, either to sing Alleluja, or to say Amen, when the Lord shall be
magnified in that day. For you hope doubtless for better, then all this. And
so I am persuaded you have the like hopes, that God has preserved and
prospered you thus long for no less, then to be after scores of years in a
flourishing estate here, Canonized for a Saint in heaven, for all the blood of
the Saints, both of their souls and bodies, which you have shed. Wherein you
may have as much hope for your self, as for old Mother Rome, and all one. But
I leave you to the Righteous Judge, who knows how and when to glorify himself,
as well upon the wicked his enemies, by destruction, as in his own Saints and
servants by deliverance. Rev. 14.12.
Here is the Patience of the Saints.

L. p. 375. Truly I say the same thing with him. Neither may a Protestant, that
is resolved in Conscience that the profession of the true faith is in the
Church of England go to the Romish Church, there and in that manner to serve
and worship God.

P. Thus you jumpe with the Jesuit in this, that, as he says, It Is not
lawful for one affected, as the Lady was, that is, for one that is resolved of
the truth of the Roman Church, to go to the Church of England, there and in
that manner to serve and worship God: so, etc. Why, will you let the Jesuit
run away with it so? Do you not know that the Law of England injoynes all
Papists under penalty to come to your Church? Now does the Law injoyne that,
which in it self is unlawful for a man to do, that is otherwise resolved in
Conscience? Nor is this Law repeald, though (as before) it be a ^leep, and
grown justly in the sheath. Now reconcile these two. And what say you then in
the Case of Conscience touching your Ceremonies? There be some Ceremonies*
which the Law prescribes to be observed in your Church. Now a poor soul is
not in Conscience persuaded, that he ought to conform to such Ceremonies of
necessity imposed, as being against Christian ^^^erty, and Christ's Prerogative
royal, in being sole King over his Church, ruling in the Conscience of his
People. Well you say, in this case such a man is bound against his Conscience
to observe such Ceremonies? And if he be not bound, why do you so severely and
terribly punish him, for not daring to do that, which is against his
Conscience? Whereas the Papist, otherwise resolved in Conscience, you hold not
bound to come to your English Church. And so of your Protestant, for going to
the Romish Church, being against his Conscience. Will you not allow to the
Conscience of the first as good Law, as you do to the two last? Again, you
allow a greater and larger liberty of Conscience to your Protestant to go to
the Romish Church, then the Jesuit does to his Romanist, to come to your
English Church. For he allows not his Romanist to come to your English Church,
that is resolved in Conscience of the truth of the Roman Church, that it is a
true Church, and that the truth is there: whereas you do not allow your
Protestant to go to the Romish Church, that is only resolved in Conscience,
that the profession of the truth is in the Church of England Now there is great
difference between the truth, and the profession of the truth. So as he that is
resoled in Conscience, that the truth is only professed in the Church of
England, and is not withal resolved, that the truth it self is in the Church
of England, may with more liberty go to the Romish Church, then the Romanist
may come to yours, that is resolved of the truth of and in the Romish Church.
So as herein also the Jesuit has the advantage of you. Again, if the Jesuit
did mean, by the truth of the Roman Church the profession of the truth in that
Church, he therein comes no whit behind you. For the Church of Rome as well
makes a false profession of the truth, as your Prelaticall Church of England
does. Again, you make it no great matter of difference in this case between
your Protestant and the Romanist, whither this or that go to each others
Church, so his Conscience put not a bar. As you tell us a little after, That
the Church of Rome, and the Protestants, do not set up a different Religion* Of
which in its place. And here also you put no difference, but that the Romanist
does as well serve and worship God, after his Roman manner in his Idolatrous
Mass, as your Protestant does after your English manner. And perhaps the
difference will not be found so great between you, but that you will well
enough agree, when you have cast up your reckoning. But now, what if one of
your simple Protestants, be not resolved in Conscience of the profession of the
truth in the Church of England, more then of that in the Church of Rome? Is it
not then lawful for him to go to the Romish Mass? With ^ou it seems so, so
his Conscience hinder him not. And what Conscience has your ignorant
Protestant to hinder him in this case? Nay, I will say more: What knowing
Protestant have you at this day in the present Church of England, since the
publishing of your Declaration before the 39* Articles (which makes some of the
principal of them to bear a double and contrary sense) that is, or can be
resolved in his Conscience, that either the true faith, or so much as the
Profession of the true faith, is in the Church of England? For those Articles,
which contain the Doctrine of your Church, you confess to be ambiguous, and
doubtful, and do not resolve either way, but leave your Church in suspense:
how then can any Protestant of the Church of England be resolved in Conscience,
that the Profession of the true faith is in the Church of England, when neither
your self seems to be resolved, or at least you do not resolve your Church
concerning your Articles what to believe? Which being so, may you not fairly
hence conclude, that it is lawful for any Protestant of the Church of Engdaud
to go to the Romish Church, there and in that manner to serve and worship God
until he shall be resolved in his Conscience, that the profession of the true
faith is in the Church of England: which resolution is not like to be, till
your Lordship has resolved them, which is the true and orthodox sense of your
Articles, and that by a public ed^ct athenticke, and every way equal to the
former; as in the case of General Councels, when the errors of one must be
obeyed, till another, equal to that, shall reverse it. As before. But in the
mean time, unless you make the more have with your Edict for Resolution, your
whole Church of England is now at liberty to go to Mass and so to turn
Romanist, as having nothing to restrain them (were there but Masses enough to
intertaine them, as no doubt there be Priests enough for the purpose, had they
but Churches (so long as their Conscience is not resolved of the profession of
the true faith in the Church of England. And so the Broad Gates are set upon
for the Consummation of your so much wished and plotted Reconcliation with the
Church of Rome. And you add:

L. p 376. Nor do the Church of Rome, and the Protestants set u^ a different
Religion (f^r the Christian Religion is the same to both) but they differ in
the same Religion: and the difference is in certain gr^ss^ corruptions, to the
very indangering of salvation, which each side s^y^s the other is guilty of.

P. By Protestants here, it is plain enough you mean those of the Church of
England, not those of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, I am sure of it.
For they utterly renounce the Romish Religion and Faith as Antichristian, which
you avow for Christian, the same with yours. But they differ (say you) in the
same Religion. How? They do not set up a different Religion, and yet they
differ in the same Religion? I understand not this Babylonish language. But
wherein then do they differ in the same, and undiffering Religion? In some
certain gross corruptions, say you. But in some, not in all gross
corruptions, which are indifferent, and common to you both. And what gross
corruptions are common to both, those shall not be put in the reckoning of
corruptions at all, each covering other with the mantle of Charity. Yea such as
you both agree in, are the very substance of your Religion. And the whole
substance of the Romish, yea of all Christian Religion (says Bellarmine) is
the Mass. This then must be That same undiffering Christian Religion, which
you both set up. And herein how much do you dister? Have you not both your
Altars, the main substance, on the service whereof all the rest attend, as your
Priests, Sacrifice, Images, Crucifixes, Adorations, Organs, curious music,
and many other devises for your pompous service, your Liturgy differing more
in the language, then in the matter and form? But you will say you differ in
Transustantiation. Yet you are willing to have a real Presence confessed* and
professed with you, as is noted before. But you say, the difference is in
certain gross corruptions indangering salvation. On which side? Each side
(say you) charges other. I have heard two butter women scold, and each laid to
other grievous things, and the one said, Thou playdst the whore, and the other
said, Thou playdst the whore. Which of these (trow you) was the honester Woman?
She happily that had less played the whore, then the other, which perhaps was not
for want of will, but opportunity. You and Rome charge each other with gross
corruptions, which yet, are one and the same in both. Does not thus the shame
of both the more appear? Your gross corruptions on both sides can agree well
enough, if you can be quiet. Yea and that to the indangering of Salvation too.
For have you not (to be silent in the rest) both your Altars, which are alone
sufficient to sacrifice upon all your faith and salvation, and so to leave you
neither faith nor salvation in Christ, as whom also you sacrifice thereon,
together with your faith and salvation? For we showed before, that your Altars
do overthrow and deny Jesus Christ the only Altar of true believers* If then
you both do agree in the grossest corruptions, as those whereby your salvation
is not only endangered, but destroyed, which is the maine of your Religion
wherein you differ not: what need there be any odds between you for the rest?
Both sides complain of each other, both have their corruptions, and gross ones
too, such as overthrow salvation. Then let your conscious ingenuity confess to
each other, and your conscientious Charity Det veniam ille facile, cui ven^a
opus. Senec.
pardon each other. And so let the world be troubled no more with your
Differences, but be good friends, and agree as sisters.

L. p. ibid. It may appear by all the former Discourses, to any Indifferent
Reader, that Religion, as it is professed in the Church of England, is nearest
of any Church now in Being to the Primitive Church. Therefore not a Religion
known to be false. And thus I both do, and can prove, were not the deafness
of the Aspe upon the ears of seduced Christians in all humane and divided
Parties whatsoever.

P. You do wisely to put it to the judgment of the indifferent Reader, who
unless he be a most indifferent man between your Church of England, and that
of Rome, and so undifferent from you both in judgment and affection, to whom
this which you say shall appear to be true. For no such thing can appear to
any Reader, that is not so affected, as to believe your bare word, so soon as
ever it sounds in his ear, or whose eyes do not look through the false
glass of your Perspective. Indeed you have proved to all men sufficiently both
by this your Discourse, and by your Practices, that you and Rome do not set up
a different Religion. We all believe it. And consequently we believe, that
herein you come full as near to the Primitive Church as Rome does, always
excepted Romes lineall Pedigree from Peter; and you know you are a Degree once
removed. And how near you both come to the Primitive Church of the Apostles
especially, the primest and purest, we have before showed sufficiently. And if
you come nearest, who (I pray you) are furthest off? Surely the most pious, the
most religious, the most zealous, the most painful and faithful preachers of
the Gospel, the greatest contemners of the world, the most humble and meek,
the most patient in suffering persecution for the truth, the most pure and
precise in their life and conversation, the most exact conformist to the only
Rule of Faith and true Religion, the word of God; such as are not ambitious,
covetous, carnal, and worldly minded, envious, malicious, cruel, haters and
persecuters of Gods word, of his Ministers and people: Such, such (I say) must
be furthest off from the Doctrine and practice of the Apostles, and of the most
pure and Primitive Church in their time, if you the Prelates and Churches of
England and Rome come the nearest unto them.

L. p. 377. But is there no superstition in Adoration of Images? None, in
Invocation of Saints? Se Page 27^.
None in Adoration of the Sacrament?

P. Yes: and gross Heathenish Idolatry too, yea and infidelity to boot;
though you would mince it never so small into a matter of superstition only.
And may not I say to you: But is there no superstition, yea no Idol^try, in
your Adoration of Altars? (yea and worse then that of the Papis^s: for they
worship their God, you the Altar.) None, in your Adoration of the Name JESUS?
None, in bowing before your Crucifixes over your Altars? No inducement at least
to Idolatry in your goodly Images erected in your Churches? No (...) smell of
Popish superstition and Idolatry in your Adorations in the presence of such
Im^ge^? The Sinag^g^ (...).
Jews would not ^o much as stoop to tie the latchet of their shoe in the
place, where an Image was, least their bowing might seem to be to the Image.
And who knows, with what mind you do your humble and lowly D^votion before
such sacred Relics? And (to sum up all together) is there no superstion,
yea no Idolatry in all that will worship of yours, and of the Church of Rome,
attended with so many Rites and Ceremonies of man's invention? For what is all
Will Worship, but Idolatry, yea and the highest kind of Idolatry? As Vincentius
says: V^ncent. (...) Haer.
What are strange Gods, but strange errors, for that Heretics reverence their
Opinions no less, then the Gentiles do their Gods? And Aug. De (...). C. 83.
Augustine says: It is the vilest and (...) kind of Idolatry, when m^n worship
their own fancies, observing that for a Religion, which their erroneous and
swelling minds imagine. Thus we see ( Dr Bilst^n.
as a learned Divine of the Church of England, and of great Eminency said)
that a corrupt and vicious Religion (such as Popery is, and such as you have
made yours of the Church of England, Will worship (...) of (...).
not a different Religion* (...) an inward and ghostly worship of Idols, which
(says he) Prince ought not to (...) at, or tolerate, seeing no man, and
therefore no Prince can (...) two Masters. For (says he) if God be truth, they
which presume to worship him with lies (as in contrary faith must needs come to
pass) serve now not God, but the Devil, a liar himself, and the father of
(...), whose service no Christian Prince may so much as (...)* so he* Thus our
Divines of the Church of England in former ages shall (...) up as witnesses to
condemn you in the day of Judgment, who teach and maintain things contrary to
that truth, which they delivered.

L. p. 378. What not prove any superstition, any error at Rome, but by pride,
and that intolerable. Truly I would to God A.C. saw my heart, and all the pride
that lodges in it.

P. This you speak to A.C. as to a Jesuit, or some Friar, or some Priest. All
is one: such a one being a Ghostly Father, you may safely sub sigillo
Conf^ssionis, or sub stola, under the seal of Confession, or under the Friars
frocke, under the Rose (as we say) open the windows of your Breast, and let him
look in, and view all the Rooms, and corners of your heart, to see what pride
has taken up her lodging there; and so the world shall be never a whi^ the wiser
for it. But you need not to wish any such thing. The pride of your heart cannot
so easily be hid, as that you need wish, with Momus, if there were a glass
window in your Breast, for men to look in and see it, much less a subtle
prying Jesuit. Alas, though the glaring light of it blind your own eyes, that
you cannot see it your self: yet any other, that is but purblind, may through
the Glass, or spectacles of this your Book see the monstrous multiformious
shape of it, had they not seen it before expressed in the Capital Characters
of your most insolent, and all daring practices. And that you yet see it not,
there is not a more infallible argument or sign of a more monstrous proud
heart, which is ever self blinded But look to it. What says Ier. 17.10.11.
Jeremy? The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who
can know it? I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins, even to give
every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doing^s

L. p. 379. I hope God has given the Lady mercy.

P. Namely, that same Lady, who formerly had been either brought unto, or
confirmed in that Romish Religion, by that which you resolved her in, namely,
That she might be saved, living and dying in the Roman faith and Religion;
wherein it seems, as she lived, so she dyed. Now truly my Lord, If God did give
her mercy, it is little God hamercy to you. But what ground have you for this
your hope? Even as much, as for giving her hope, that she might be saved,
living and dying in the Roman faith. Is it so easy trow you to send such a
Lady to heaven securely wrapped in the Mantle-lap of her silly ignorance? But
what if she be now in hell? Are not you guilty of her damnation, by muzzling
her in her blind ignorance, as wherein only you taught her to place the hope
of her salvation? But you told her of some danger But you did not possess her
with such a fear of the danger (as both there was cause, and you should have
done) as you puffed her up with the hope of safety, and that in the only
confidence of her silly ignorance; so as her vain hope overcame just fear. And
if now by this means she be in hell (as you set her in the ready high way)
look you to it; Paries cum proximus ard^t, Tunc tua res ^gitur: if she by your
leading be fallen into the pit, what is like to befall you the leader when, the
blind, leading the blind, both fall into the pit? But if God has had mercy on
her, it was not since her death, by delivering her out of Purgatory, i^ she
dyed a Papist: but before her death, by delivering her from her Popery, worse
then any Purgatory, causing her to renounce and repent of that, and to believe
in his mercy, and Christ's merit only for salv^tion, without which faith of
Christ ^here is no hope of mercy And we showed before, that this faith of
Christ is not the Roman faith, but quite opposite unto it.

L. p. ^88. But it is time to end, especially for me, that have so many things
of weight lying upon me, and disabling me from these Polem^ck ^isccurses;
besides the burden of sixty five years complete, which draw on a pace to the
period set by the Prophet David, Psalm. ^0. and to the Time, that I must go,
and give God and Christ an account of the Talent committed to my Charge; in
which God, for Christ Jesus sake, be merciful to me, who knows, that however
in many weaknesses, yet I have with a faithful and single heart (bound to
(...) free Grace for it) labored the meeting the blessed meeting of Truth and
Peace in his Church, and which God in his own good time, will (I hope) effect.
To him be all Honor and Praise for ever. Amen.

P. How fitly does this your Conclusion suit with, and succeed that, which was
last mentioned, as matter for your more serious and sad meditation, and which I
cannot but tremble (...)! And well weighing also the words of this your
Conclusion with all that you have written in this your Book, and with all your
Practices in your life (all so uniforme, and suitable) I am surprised with great
astonishment. The reasons hereof will further appear in the more particular
animadversions upon your words asunder. And because we use to take most
special notice of a man's last words: give me l^ave to take a full and
particular view of yours here, as being, though not the last words of a dying
man, yet the final Conclusion of this your Book, which so soon as I have read
over, it passes away tanquam Fabula as the Prophet speaks of a man's life ^al.
90*9.
as a ta^^ the is told. And as we look, tha^ however you have dealt in your
Book, yet in the close of all you should deal heartily, ingeniously, and
cordially, and not dubble with God, and the world, and with your own
Conscience: yet for my part, as the Spirit of sincerity and truth (without
flattery, or respect of Persons, where the truth is wronged) has rnd does run
through all the veins of this my Reply to your Relation: so I shall by Gods
grace close all with the same spirit, not sparing you to the last, where still
you give just cause. And the truth cannot better, nor more seasonably be spoken
home, then as to a dying man, who though he have been never so notorious an
hypocrite* and desperate man in the Course of his life, yet when he lies upon
his deathbed, and utters some words, which seem to savor of some
sensiblenesse of his Condition, then, if ever, there may be some hope of
working upon him (as when the iron is hot) by putting home unto him, and laying
before him his former life, that so at the last, though late (as the Thief on
the Cross) he may through Gods mercy be brought to repentance, and so to
salvation. Although examples of such penitents indeed and in truth, be very
rare. For as one observes, August.
One Thief was saved on the Cross, that none should d^spaire: and but one,
that none should presume. ^or the saying too ordinarily proves true, Qualis
vita, finis it^: As a man lives, so he dies. And Paenitentia sera, raro vera:
Late Repentance is seldom true. And the Prophet gives the reason of it: Ier.
13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his hew or skin? Or the Leopard his spots? Then may
ye also do good: that are accustomed to do evil. For as one ^aith, Consuetudo
peccandi, tollit sensum pecca^i: Custom of sinning, takes away the sense of
sin And where there is no^ sense of sin, there can be no Repentance for sin.
And therefore commonly, when a man that has lived wickedly, and has been used
to lying and dissembling all his life, comes to ^ay on his death bed, or at the
last gasp, Lord have mercy upon me: however we may not judge him, leaving him
to his Judge, yet this is no sufficient argument to persuade us, that this is
(...) Repentance. For lightly when such men, promising and vowing, it God
restore them, to reform their life, do recover: they 2 Pet 2 22.
^^turn ^s the Scripture speaks) with the dog to his vomit, and with (...) that
is washed, to her wallowing in the mire. According to that (...) or Apology:
(...) Demon, Monachus tunc esse volebat:
(...) Demon: nec tamen est Monachus.
Which (...) thus: (...) was (...), the De^il a Monk would be:
(...) was well: the ^evil a Monk was he.
But I must not do you wrong in applying of these things to you: or that I
have any hope of doing good upon you even now at last, in the close of all:
seeing you give me no encouragement of hope at all this way. For in all this
your Closse, not a word expressing the least sorrow for your most enormious
iniquites, but on the contrary you justify them, and glory in them. Wherein
you show the pride of your heart to be out of measure desperate, and not to be
named with the pride of that Pharisee. For though he gloryed in himself, yet
he gloryed not in his evil, but in those things that were in themselves good
and commendable, and for which he gave God thanks, as the Author of them: but
here I find a proud Prelate vaunting in his impiety, and in all his wicked
practices, the aim whereof is, to reconcile the Church of England, and that of
the Whore of Babylon together, and all under a fair pretense of the meeting of
Truth and Peace. And not content herwith, he must needs make God, and his free
Grace the Author of all this Mystery of Iniquity, and deep hypocrisy, which
here he veileth under the name of a single heart.

But stay before I begin, is there no hope of doing good upon you? It is not
impossible, but that the greatness of your zeal for this Peace, has been so
strong in you, as whereby you have been persuaded, whatsoever you either have
done, or yet can further do, for the effecting thereof (be it by throwing down
of Gods word, casting out his Ministers, chasing away G^ds people, howting out
all power of holiness out of the Land, and so removing all such impediments,
as you thought stood in your way, and that per ^as, aut nefas, by right or
wrong all wa^, and is well, yea very well done. Happily the lovely and amiable
name of an Imaginary Truth, and deceitful Peace, and counter^et Church: and
the strength of your belief, that Rome was yet a true Church, and so true,
that England and she were and are one and the same Church, no doubt of that,
did so wholly possess you, that ^o bring England and Rome together again, you
thought even (...) of the Truth it self to be true piety, and the (...) of the
peace of all to be an establishment of unity, and confusion of light with
darkness to a perfect Reconciliation. Yet this I must say wi^hall, as Christ
said, M^t. 23.
If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! And if
in all that you have done for the advancing of this your maine Project, you
have not wilfully (...) against the ^ight of your Conscience, and so gone on in
that (...) course with a high hand: certainly it seems to me a (...) highest
admiration, and so much the more, (...) have long lived in the midst of such a
clear (...)* as no Age since the Apostles has seen a greater; though now of
late it has suffered (and that since your elevation especially) no small
Eclipse. But if my words shall have no better effect with you, then only to
convince you, and discover your damnable Hypocrisy, jam liberaui animam meam,
I have now freed mine own soul. And now to your words.

It Is time for me (say you) to end. And I say (as I said before) it had been
(in my judgment) much better for you, if you had never begun this work. But
it is well, that at length (as Job speaks) Job. 16.3.
vain words have an end. Though it be not for this reason, that you make an
end. But you allege those many things of weight lying upon you. What, what
weighty things has this mighty Apostolical Man lying upon him? Such as the
Apostle had, 2 Cor. 11.28.
The care of all the Churches? That you pretend too, while you would so feign
have Altars up in all the Churches in England. But the Apostle adds there: Who
is weak, and I not weak? Who is offended and I burn not? Can you say so? You
can say, Who is offended at my Ceremonies, and I burn not with zeal against
that man, till I have consumed? But why do I name the Apostle? Your many things
of weight lying upon your shoulders: are State-matters, high and deep
State-mysteries, the burden of a vast Island, heavier then Etna it self. What,
such, so weighty, so many things lie upon your weak shoulders? Enough to
press you down as low as hell. What do not you profess to be a Priest? a
Clergy man? And is not the Charge of that one Profession, being rightly
executed (had you ever felt the weight of it) a burden heavy enough to break
your back, (which as one said) the shoulders of Angels would tremble under?
And the Apostle speaking of a Ministers office, says, Onus Aetna (...).
Proverbu^m.
No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that
he may please him, 2 T^m. 2 4.
who has chosen him to be a soldier. But it seems you are none of those,
whom Christ has chosen to be his soldier, except he chose you for such a
purpose, as he did but one man of the twelve. For you are one that warreth, and
as Judas, the Captain of the rout against Christ in his Ministers and members.
But you entangle your self with the affairs of this life. And by this means
you have the more power to war against Christ's Kingdom. So as Ieromes speech
may take place here: Negotia^orem Clericum, and ex inope divitem, ex ignobile
gloriosum, tanquam quandam pestem ^uge: Hier^n. ad (...).
A negotiating or Polypragmaticall Clerk, or Clergy man, and who of poor
bcomes rich, of base vainglorious, fly from him, as from a kind of Plague. But
who has compelled you to take the burden of so many and great things upon
you? What did the Pillars of the State shake and tremble, and threaten a fall,
and thereupon (...) in, and put under your shoulder to stay it up? As the Pope
at the Council of Lateran dreamed, that the Lateran shook and was ready to
fall, but that Dominicus came in the nicke, and upheld it; whereupon the next
day the Pope made Domi^i^us the Father of his Order. And so well may you prove
a supporter of the Popes Lateran, but how a supporter of Civil States, I know
not, nor meddle with, but negatively, showing a disparity and incongruity
between your Profession, and that, saying that you are rather a Civilian, then
a Divine, as having proceeded Doctor, not in Divinity, but of the Civil Law.
But suppose you had been compelled to it. Io^ 6.15*
Christ would not be made King, when they would have forced him. For Ioh. 18.36.
his Kingdom was not of this world. But yours is. And your shoulders are able
to bear two such intolerable burdens, as never any man in the world could
bear one of them well, and as he should do Well, I will say no more but this,
Luk 12.48*
To whom much is committed, of him shall much be required.

But you add also another reason, why it is time for you to end: as bearing now
the burden of 65. years complete. A great age, and yet I suppose you feel it
not to be a burden. If you do, then as the Poet says, Ho^at*
Solve senescentem mature sanus equum, ne
Peccet ad erremum ridendus, and ilia ducat.
And you say, it draws on apace to the Period set by the Ppophet David, Psalm
90. You mistake the Penman: for it was Moses. But to let that pass, as a
common mistake: and as a Law, which it seems you have imposed your self, and
observed throughout your Book, not to cite any Scripture without perverting of
it. Does your Lordship hope to reach the period of threescore and ten? Alas,
should you live out but one Lustrum of five yea^es more, what would become of
(I say not, the Civil state, but) the poor Church of God yet in England? But
our comfort is, The Lord Jesus Christ is both against you, and above you. In
the mean time were it not safer for you, to think of a shorter period of your
life least promising to yourselfe, and sleeping in the security of so many
years more, you should be suddenly taken napping, as that rich man in the
Gospel, to whom it was said, Luk 12 20*
Thou fool this night shall they take away (...) soul from thee. And besides,
you are Psalm. 73.1^.
^et in a slippery place, (...) you may fall into sudden destruction, as in a
moment; as the Prophet says. So as there is less confidence to be put in
that, then in your Age. And therefore bethink your self how sudden the time
may be, that you must go, and give account (as you say) to God and Christ of
the Talent committed to your Charge, which you cannot so easily answer before
that Judge, as you could do in the Star Chamber. And remember what you said
to the Jesuit ( page 316.) Our reckoning will be heavier, if we thus mislead on
either side, then theirs that follow us? But I see I must look to my self,
for you are secure? And are not you full out as secure, as the Jesuit? But in
that, you pray that God for Christ's sake would be merciful to yo u. But is
that enough to wipe off all old scores, to say, God be merciful to me? When
the Course of a man's life has been a very Enmity and Rebellion against Christ:
when he has spent the Talent of his Strength and Wit, Means, and Friends to
the dishonor of God, in oppressing Christ's word, persecuting his Ministers and
People, profaning and polluting the service of God with humane Ordinances, and
will worship, forcing men's Consciences to conformity, and the like: do you
think to salve all with a Lord have mercy upon me? Nay, you seem to be in good
earnest, when you say, and pray, if God for Christ's sake would be merciful
unto you. But wherein, or for what, should God for Christ's sake be merciful
unto you? Which of your sins, your scarlet sins, your Episcopal sins, do you
confess to God, and (because public) unto the world, that truly repenting of
them, God for Christ's sake may be merciful to you? Do you confess and repent
of your persecuting of Gods Ministers and People, for their Conscience sake?
Nay you are so far from this, that you say, God forbid (not, God forgive)
that I should persuade to persecution in any kind, or practice it in the least.
So as you in all this persecute none; no, not you; nor yet persuade others to
it; nor dissuade, neither. And yet you still continue a persecutor, as
accounting it not a sin, but a virtue, not vicious, but rather meritorious, to
root out the Puritans. And what say you to your more then Barbarous shedding of
the Innocent Blood of Gods servants, and Christ's witnesses, mangling their
Bodies, and breaking them in pieces, causelessly separating Man and Wife, to
satisfy your wicked malice, and so to murder them with your intolerable
oppressions? Do you crave mercy of God for this? Or is your guilty Conscience
still seared, and stupefied? Is your heart still hardened? Do you need no mercy
for such cruel shedding of Innocent blood? David Psalm. 51.
confessed his bloodshed, and found mercy. But you continue your cruelty still
in cold blood. What? Do you think, that because Gods people are as sheep
appointed for the slaughter, and you the chief Butcher, therefore you sin not,
in devouring and spoiling so many good Ministers with their Families and
Flocks? O stupid Conscience! O desperate soul! And so still desperately you
go on, in justifying your self in all that you have done, and calling God to
be witness too: saying, Who knows, that however in many weaknesses, yet I have
with a faithful and single heart ( Blaspemy of the Prelate against Gods (...)
Grace, as if that had been the Author of all his wicked Pract^ses.
bound to his free Grace for it) labored the meeting, the blessed meeting of
Truth and Peace in his Church. O shameless hypocrisy! O blasphemous wretch!
Does God know? Is God the Author of all thy impiety, iniquity, cruelty* craft,
hypocrisy and dissimulation, of thy faithless and false heart, in thy
plotting to bring thy false Truth, and thy turbulent Peace with the Whore of
Babylon, that notorious enemy of Christ and his true Spouse his Church, to a
meeting, to a blessed, yea to a cursed meeting?

O GOD, thou searcher of all hearts, behold this blaspemous Wretch, calling
thee for a witness of his notorious and perfidious false heart, and ascribing
it to thy free Grace, as the moving and helping cause of all his impious
practices. O Lord, Be not merciful to any wicked Transgressor, that dare thus
desperately take thy sacred Name in vain, and make thy Grace, the father of
his graceless actions See thou not, o thou All-seeing, and All-revenging
GOD, how this man has been a prime Instrument of oppressing thy Word? of
forbidding it to be preached (therein denying and destroying the Doctrine of
thy free Grace, which here he hypocritically names) of persecuting thy
faithful Ministers and People even to root them out? Of proclaming
Libertinisme in the public profanation of thy Sabbaths, and violation of thy
holy Commandment? Of setting up Idolatrous Altars, to the denying of the Lord
Jesus Christ, our only Altar, whereon our Persons and sacrifices offered up
unto thee, are accepted of Thee? Of bringing into thy worship sundry
supers^tious Idolatrous Rites and Ceremonies, in Adoration of Altars, Names,
praying toward the East? Of setting up Images and Crucifixes those Idols in
the public place of Worship? Of putting down preaching of thy holy Word upon
thy holy Sabbaths especially in the Afternoones, when there is most need, and
people should be aptest, and best at leisure generally to hear? Of enlarging
and making heavier the yoke of Bondage and Tyranny upon the necks of thy
People, in increasing of more Ceremonies, to the intolerable vexation of thy
Children, and incrochment and usurpation upon Christ's Kingdom, and royal
soverainty, as sole King over his Church, and Lord of the Consciences of his
people? Yea Psalm. 10.
surely thou have* seen all these things; for thou beholdest mischief and
spite, even to requite it with thy hand: and therefore the poor commits
himself unto thee: For thou art the helper of the fatherless. Therefore, arise
o Lord; o God, Lift up thine hand, forget not the humble. Wherefore does the
wicked contemn thee, o God: He has said in his heart, Thou will not require
it. But Lord, break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evil man; seek out his
wickedness, till thou find none. For wherefore should the Heathen say, where is
their God? Psalm. 79.10.
O let our God be known among the Heathen in our fight, by the revenging of the
blood of the servants, which is shed And let the sighing of the Prisoners come
before thee: according to the greateesse of thy power preserve thou those, that
are appointed to dye. And render unto our Neighbors sevenfold into their
bosom their reproach, wherewith they have reproched thee o Lord. So we thy
People and Sheep of thy pastture will give thee thanks for ever: we will show
forth thy praise to all Generations.

Now, to return to you again and so rid my hands of you. All that you have
done, is (you say) for the blessed meeting of Truth and Peace. This is the
upshot of all, Englands Reconciliation with Rome. So as when these two are
reconciled (as I doubt they are already, while you hold us in expectation,
until you expect but time (the Contract being already made) for Confirmation)
when this is come to pass, then will be a blessed meeting, a mercy meeting For
it is a meeting of Truth and Peace. Indeed when Truth and Peace, in the true
sense, do meet, it is a blessed meeting indeed. But what Truth? What Peace? The
Truth is, When this Peace is once Consummate, that it comes to be openly avowed
and professed (for which we must not look for a General Council, that is but a
flourish, and a Blind, while you are undermining the Bulwark of our Truth, and
the beauty of our Peace) then (as when Herod and Pilate were made friends) you
shall see (which is already in execution) open persecution of all true Piety,
and Purity, and perturbation of all true Peace, and that not only in the
Churches of God, but in Civil states and Kingdoms, when for the maintenance of
this Peace, Princes shall be set against their People, and People are forced to
stand for the liberty of their Consciences against Prelaticall Antichristian
Tyranny. For what is Romes Truth, but Treachery? And what is Romes Peace, but
Perturbation, perplexity, confusion, Babylon, even to all those, that
confederate with her? Ye^ your hope is, that God in (...) good time (...)
meeting. God will certainly effect, and bring to (...) Council and Purpose, in
his good time for the good of all his People, and the confusion of all his
enemies, and theirs. And one of his Councels and Purposes he has declared to
be (which shall certainly, and I trust very shortly come to pass, and in due
(...)) the destruction of the Whore of Babylon, together withal (...), that
are linkt in a league with her, and that under a pretense ^f the blessed
meeting of your Truth and Peace. And then Rev 19.1, 2 ve^s. ^.
sha^b^ (...) that great voy^a of much People in heaven (to wit, in the
Chu^ches of Christ) saying, Alleluja: salvation, and Glory, and (...) Power
unto the Lord our God; for true and righteous are his ^udgements, for he has
judged the Great W^ore, which did corrup^ the Eearth with her fornication, and
has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. Amen. ALLELUJA.

Pantote Doxa Theo. June, 26. 1639.
FINIS.

