A SERMON NECESSARY FOR THESE TIMES, Showing the nature of Conscience, with
the corruptions thereof, and the repairs or means to inform it with right
knowledge, and stir it up to upright practice, and how to get and keep a good
Conscience. To which is adjoined a necessary, brief, and pithy treatise of the
Ceremonies of the Church of England. By ANTHONY CADE Batch. of Divinity.

2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, etc. Printed by the Printers to
the University of Cambridge. And are to be sold by John Sweeting near Popes
head alley in Cornhill. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN, MY VERY
good Lord and Patron.
RIght Reverend Father in God, I have often with great comfort related among my
friends what I observed about five years agone at my being at Buckden (an
ancient house belonging to the Bishopric of Lincoln) how bare, naked, and
ruinous I had seen it in former times, and now worthily repaired and adorned by
your Lordship: The cloisters fairly pargetted and beautified with comely
coportments and inscriptions of wise counsels and sentences; the windows
enriched with costly pictures of Prophets, Apostles, and holy Fathers; and
beyond all, the Chapel for Gods immediate service, most beautifully furnished
with new Seats, Windows, Altar, Bibles, and other sacred books costly covered,
clasped, and embossed with silver, and gilt with gold; with Basin,
Candlesticks, and other vessels all of bright shining silver; and with stately
Organs curiously colored, gilded, and enameled: no cost spared to set forth
the dignity of that house dedicated to Gods worship: And the whole service of
God therein performed with all possible reverence and devout behavior of your
own person, and all the assembly; and with the organs of sweet ravishing
angelical voices and faces of young men, lifting up with heavenly raptures all
the hearers and beholders hearts to heaven, and enforcing me to think and
meditate, When such things are found on earth in the Church Militant, Oh what
unconceivable joys shall we find in heaven, in the Church Triumphant! We have
great cause to glorify God for your Fatherhoods excellent care and cost, in
this and many At Lincoln, Westminster, Cambridge, Oxford, etc. Where this
Bishop has built chapels, libraries, etc. or garnished and furnished them
with excellent books and maintenance for Scholars.
other places, where (as I hear) you have done the like: As also now more
lately, for our most excellent worthy-minded Archbishops Grace, who prosecuting
his own and some other Bishops preparations, has now notably begun, and
happily gone forwards with the repairing of that most honorable ancient
monument of Christendom, S. Paul's Church in London, to the comfort of all good
hearts, and glory of our nation; and also to work an unity of faith, and
uniformity of practice in the service of God, and by all possible means to
win all adversaries thereunto: which would be an incomparable joy to all true
Christian hearts.

But to return again to Buckden, to my observations there, and to my present
purpose; I did also ordinarily speak among my friends, of the government of
your great house, with all subjection and gravity; and of your hospitality
(such as S. 1. Tim. 3.2.
Paul prescribes to Bishops) entertaining your numerous guests with bountiful
provision, and feasting them with variety and plenty of all good things, (but
with exemplary sobriety in your own person) and with wise, learned and
religious discourse, as wholesome for their souls, as your meats for their
bodies. But this I pass over now slightly, as beside my present purpose: for
my purpose was only to show, how by the former sight of your house and
Chapel, and the manner of Gods service therein, I well understood your
Fatherhoods religious mind and intentions; but much better by your private
words to my self afterward, viz. That your desire was, to have the Consciences
of all people (preachers and others) in your Diocese, rightly informed, and
soundly convicted of the lawfulness, and persuaded to the practice of the
established service of God, with the Rites and Ceremonies of our happily
reformed Church; and that your self would lead them the way, and give them a
fair S. August. epist. 86. in fine. Si consilio meo acquiescis, Episcopo tuo
noli resistere; and quod facit ipse, sine ullo scrupulo sectare. In using Rites
and Ceremonies.
example. This gladded my heart more then the rest. So that, not long after,
being appointed by your Lordship to preach at a Visitation at Leicester, I
addressed my self to improve my best service to God and his Church, to our
gracious Sovereign Gods immediate deputy, to your Lordship the general
spiritual Father of these parts, and to our Country both ministers and
people, for the better settling of their Consciences in these and other
necessary points.

My sermon presently upon the hearing procured me thanks from many, even from
the contrary-minded (formerly) and many desired copies or the publication, as
did also some of your own officers; which I also promised. And shortly after,
having made my copy ready (with some additions which time would not give me
leave to utter; and with a brief Appendix at the end, fitter for young
preachers to read at home, then for people to hear from the pulpit) I gave it
to a friend to procure the printing: but my friend unfriendly kept it in his
own or his friends hands so long, that till near the end of this last year I
could not get my copy again. At last having recovered it, and communicated it
to some other learned judicious friends, they again importuned me for the
publication, as a thing that undoubtedly would do much good to many unsettled
souls. To which now I have condescended.

My good Lord, I beseech you (and all my Readers) to bear with my long
preface. I thought it necessary to let the world know the two occasions, one of
my preaching, the other of the late publishing of this sermon. Now, such as it
is, I send and dedicate it to your Fatherhood, whose it is by the first
appointment and all the service it can do: and so is the Author thereof

Your Lordships in all humble service and observance to be commanded ANTHONY
CADE.

ROMANS 2.15. Which (Gentiles) show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while (or,
between themselves) accusing, or else excusing one another.


SAint Paul, to move all men to seek salvation by faith in Jesus Christ (which
he propounds chap. 1. verse. 16. and prosecutes chap. 3. verse. 21.) shows in
these first chapters, that all men are in themselves inexcusable sinners; The
Jews sinning against the law written in their Books, the Gentiles against the
law written in their Hearts.

This sentence convicts the Gentiles; but, by an argument a minore ad majus,
much more confounds the Jews for sinning not only against their Natural law,
but aagainst Gods law supernaturally revealed.

It has three general parts.

First, The very Gentiles have a Law-book in their hearts, written by the God
of Nature.

That is, God has given such a natural light and life unto men's souls, as
enableth them to discern what is honest or dishonest, right or wrong; and
moves them withal to do good actions, and avoid evil. This, in respect of the
Discerning light, Basil. tom. 1. in princ. Prove. bom. 18.
is by Basil called Natural judicatorium, a natural judgment: The Schools
call it (...), records of the law of Nature preserved in man's heart, for the
rule of his life. In regard of the Liveliness of it, exciting and stirring up
men to perform their duties, Origin calls it Paedagogus Animae sociatus,
Origin. lib. 2. in Epist. ad Romans
A schoolmaster accompanying the soul, to teach man his duty and call for
performance. Philosophers glance at it in their Bonus genius.

Secondly, Conscience (as it were scientia cum alio, sive consensus cordis, id
est, voluntatis cum scientia) witnesses with God, and with us, or against us,
whether we have performed this law, or not: and to that end, it writes a second
book, a Record, History, or Chronicle of all our counsels, courses, thoughts,
words, and works: which S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. bom. 2.
Chrysostom calls Codex, in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur, A book
wherein our daily sins are written.

These books shall be opened at the last day: and the dead shall be judged of
those things which are written in the books, according to their works, Revel.
20.12.

Thirdly, Our discursive thoughts, comparing the Law-book (which shows what we
should do) with our Chronicle (which shows what we have done) produce a third
thing, a conclusion, either excusing and acquitting us (for doing according to
the law) or accusing and condemning us (for doing against the law.) And thus
Conscience has a power to comfort us (against all accusations, distasts, and
reproaches of men) when we are in the right; and to check us having run into
erroneous opinions or unjust actions, though for our profit or pleasure, and
with the worlds applause. So have we three parts of the text: the first De
jure, the second De facto, the third De (...), of judgment.

The works of the Law written in the Gentiles hearts, concern God or our
neighbor. 1. Part.


Concerning God, the Gentiles knew, 1. Deum esse: 2. Qualis esset: 3. Adorandum
esse. 1. That there was a God: 2. That he had many transcendent properties: 3.
That he was to be worshipped. This S. Paul shows Romans 1.20. The invisible
things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they
(the very Gentiles) are without excuse.

As Seafaring men, lighting upon an unknown Island, when they find hedge-rows,
houses, and towns, know it is inhabited by Men, for these are not the works of
Beasts: So the mere Gentiles viewing the Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, the
Land and Seas, Woods, Rivers, and all kind of Creatures, far exceeding the
wit of Man to devise them, or his power to make them, or any the least of them,
conclude presently,



Eternal. 2. He must also be Almighty, that could make all things of nothing,
and sustain such a mass of creatures in such excellent manner, so many 1000
years. 3. He must be most Wise, that made them all in such order, variety,
multiplicity, and distinction, every one perfect in his kind; nothing
defective or superfluous in any creature: So wisely, that without great
wisdom, study, and observation, not any one of them can be understood. 4. He
must be more excellent then his work, having in himself all the perfection and
excellencies that can possibly be found in any or in all his works laid
together: since from him they all proceed. 5. He is also most Good and
Bountiful, that has made all for man's use or benefit, and given man wit and
power to manage them all, even creatures much stronger then himself; to conquer
and pass over the boisterous seas upon his devised wooden tottering bridges;
and to make use of all things in the world for his profit and pleasure. 6. He
must needs be also most Just, to reward those that are like himself, good and
beneficial to mankind; and to punish those that live disorderly; for the
continuation of the world.

See D. Ames Medulla theologiae, lib. 2. cap. 5.
Prayers, Temples, and Priests, whereof we read plentifully in Poets and
Historians of all Nations. Sacrifices they offered as chief rents in
acknowledgement that of him they held whatsoever they possessed; and as to the
author of their life, safety, protection, preservation, and all other
blessings; and as a kind of thankfulness for benefits received, and prayers
for continuance and increase of their happiness. The divine scriptures mention
the readiness of the Lycaonians at Lystra, Acts 14.12, 13.
to sacrifice oxen to Paul and Barnabas for healing a creeple born lame,
thinking them to be gods come from heaven in likeness of men. And testimony of
the Gentiles prayers we have in Jonas his shipmen upon the stormy seas,
praying to their gods, Jonah 1.5, 6.
and urging him to pray also. It seems also that all Nations were taught by the
light of nature in prayer to bend the knee, to hold up their heads, to lift up
their eyes, 1. Cor. 11.4, 5, 14, 15.
men to pray bare-headed, women covered, all with great reverence: as the
histories of the Syrians, Chaldeans, Bellar. De effect. sacr. lib. 2. cap. 29.
says, Many ceremonies were in a sort instituted in nature, and therefore
common to ill heathen, and all sects: as, To lift up the eyes or hands to
heaven, to bow the knee, to knock the breast when we pray to God.
Egyptians and other nations declare, and the Fathers observe. Aug. de civ.
Dei. Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. Cicero de natura deor.

No Nation in the world, but worshipped God after one fashion or other. Some
((...)) had false gods: some ((...)) had many gods: none were merely ((...))
without God. A God they knew there was in general (though they erred in the
particular, and somewhere erected altars Act. 17.23.
to the unknown God:) and for their gods worship they ordained Temples, Priests
and Ceremonies, not without great honor, cost, and magnificence: witness the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus, the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, of Jupiter Amon,
of Isis and Osyris in Egypt, with many other: And great Kings and Princes were
their Priests; Rex idem hominum Phaebique sacerdos.

And though the vulgar had opinions of many gods, yet the wiser sort
acknowledged but one; as the books De Mundo ascribed to Aristotle, and Philo,
say. The same God in regard of several offices, was called by several names;
as, for moderating the seas, called Neptune; for moderating the winds, Aeolus,
etc.

For duties toward their Neighbors, The Gentiles knew and practiced the
substance of the whole Second Table: at least, so far as concerned outward
duties. Children honored and obeyed their Parents, as Sichem did Hamor, Genesis
34.4. See D. Williams Church, lib. 3 cap. 3. page 347. Gen 20.4, 5.
not presuming to take a wife without his consent and employment. Murder every
where most abhorred and grievously punished. Abimelech King of Gerar would not
come near Sarah (hating Adultery) when he knew she was a man's wife. The
Roman Lucretia prized her chastity above her life. 1. Cor. 5.1.
Incest unheard of among the Gentiles. Wives subjection to their husbands
commanded by Ahasuerus: Esther 1.
And compulsion to drink more then a man list, forbidden by the same Gentile
Monarch. Wrong, oppression, theft, defrauding any man of his right, forbidden
by the general rule, Reusner. in Symbol. Imperat. lib. 1. Symb. 29.
Fac quod vis pati; and, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, Do nothing
to another which thou would not have done to thy self. Reusnerus (in
Symbolis) cites many heathen authors which deliver that rule. It was the
common Which he learnt of his mother Mammaea, the scholar of that great Origin.
Isaacus Casaub. Annot. in Julium Capitolinum.
word of Alexander Severus, which he caused also to be proclaimed by his
heralds, whenever he punished his subjects or soldiers which had wronged
any man. And for all other moral and civil righteousness, honesty, justice,
temperance, sobriety, providing for the poor, helping the distressed, speaking
the truth, observing leagues, contracts, and promises, avoiding perjury,
punishing vice, honoring virtue and living orderly, the Gentiles had many
excellent laws, wisely made and carefully observed. The general observation of
these in all nations, showed the substance thereof to be natural notions and
principles written in their hearts: and the variety of their promulgations and
penalties in several nations argued deductions and consequents, drawn from
those natural notions, by the force of reason.

These natural laws the most wise Creator did write in the hearts of men, for
these causes.

1. Causes and reasons thereof.
That there might be a perpetual difference betwixt men and beasts. Had God
given man a strong wit, understanding, policy, and not withal a Conscience, or
natural law to guide him; he had been of all Creatures the most dangerous.

2. To preserve humane society, and keep men's actions in some tolerable limits,
by ordaining good laws, to bridle the disorderly, and protect the innocent in
quiet possession of their rights, and for the common good: Aug. de civitate
Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. Romans 1.
else (says S. Augustine) Quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia?

3. To be an aid to man, better to search out the Creator and to serve him. We
may say of God as Seneca said of Nature, Perditura fructum sui, si solitudini
ostenderet: He had lost the fruit of his work, had he showed it only to beasts
which could not understand it: so God had lost his glory, and man his felicity.

4 S. Paul adds, (Romans 1.20.) To make the impious and unrighteous unexcusable,
if they did not according to that law, which their own Conscience dictated unto
them.

This was an inestimable benefit of God,

And that these laws are undoubtedly just and equal, written by God himself
(as the first Tables) and so legible, and in such plain characters, that the
unlearnedest man may read them, though he know no letters of any other book;
and in such a language as men of all nations and tongues may understand them:
and that a man has this book for his counselor at home with him; he need not
make long journeys to seek for a counselor, or tedious waiting to attend his
leisure, give costly fees to attain his counsel, which happily may prove
doubtful and untrusty: he has this his bosom friend, free, faithful,
patient, as near and as true to him as his own soul; with whom he may confer
again and again, at his leisure and pleasure, till he be fully resolved what he
may lawfully do, or must avoid. And

This is yet a greater benefit, Book, Paedagogus animae sociatus. Origin.
but a Schoolmaster also, to urge us to learn and perform our duties: Monet,
and movet: movendo docet, docendo movet. God knowing our ignorance, Conscientia
est speculum, fraenum, calcar, and flagellum.
gives us this book to instruct us; knowing our headstrong inclination to evil,
gives us this bridle to restrain us; and knowing our dullness to all good
duties, gives us this spur to quicken us. And all this is our Conscience,
which, if we do amiss, shall scourge us. But

As the benefit is great, Notions, and our hearts against the Motions of our
Conscience. For this is to be wilfully blind, when we may see, or wilfully
wicked when we do see our duty, and do it not. This is plainly to rebel
against God himself, to thrust his Deputy out of his throne and office: This
is to provoke the Lord to give us up to our own hearts lusts, and to have no
further care over us: as Romans 1.24, 26, 28. And this is to draw upon us a most
dangerous consequence, by degrees through the custom of sin, to make our
Conscience senseless, seared, cauterized, or to choke and kill it, or in such
sort to extinguish the light and life thereof, that the greatest sins will be
practiced without any check or remorse, to the intolerable hurt of the Church
and Commonwealth, the shame of our lives, the damnation of our souls. Ephesians.
4.17. The Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind: 18. Having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: 19. Who
being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work
all uncleanness with greediness.

In regard of these benefits and dangers,

First, to keep our Law-book pure and perfect, lest it misleade us to sin, in
stead of righteousness.

Secondly, to read it and follow it diligently, lest it cease to be our guide,
and become our accuser.

The first man Adam, before his fall, Ad bonum nil impediebat, ad malum nil
impellebat. Magister lib. 2. did. 25.
had it pure and perfect, ability to know his duty fully, and to perform it
thoroughly: But upon his fall, he lost his perfection, that is, the excellency
of the image of God, both in Knowledge (Coloss. 3.10.) and Righteousness and
true Holiness (Ephesians. 4.24.) And in this his depraved image he begat his
children: Genesis 5.3.
In whom, though the life of Conscience was left, and light enough for
performance of outward, moral, civil, and some religious duties, for
preservation of humane society and common life; yet no sufficient light to
attain to the knowledge of the mysteries of saving religion: as the Trinity of
the Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; the manner of our redemption by the
incarnation and passion of the second person in Trinity; the pardon of our
sins, by his merit; our regeneration by his Spirit; our resurrection to life
eternal; and other points. The natural man conceives or perceives them not,
he thinks them foolishness, they are only spiritually discerned, 1. Cor.
2.14.

As the natural Conscience was short in these things, so it was much corrupted
in other things. The Gentiles Romans 1.18.
held the truth in unrighteousness, Verse. 21.
became vain in their imaginations, their foolish heart was darkened, the 22.
professors of wisdom became fools. They 24.
dishonored their own bodies with lusts and uncleanness. In the four last
verses of the first chapter to the Romans Saint Paul exhibites a long
Catalogue of their foul overflowing sins, which they not only practiced, but
took pleasure also in the practisers thereof.

For remedy of which evils, Remedies by wise men,
the Philosophers and wife men of the Heathen have written many books,
laboring to revive, renew, and enforce the laws of nature, with reasonable
deductions therefrom. Tully, in his books of Offices or Duties, lays this for
his ground, Naturam si sequamur ducem, nunquam aberrabimus; If we follow the
guidance of Nature, we shall never stray from our duties: and others tell us,
Conscientia est liber, ad quem emendandum omnes scripti sunt libri; Conscience
is a book, for amending whereof all books are written, so far as concern men's
actions. These men have taken great pains herein, husbanding and improving the
light of natural reason to the highest pitch, to their own great honor, and
the worlds great good.

As also good Princes have, And good Princes.
by the aid of these wise men, published and established many worthy laws, for
their own honor and service, and for the common good and happiness of their
subjects.

But our most gracious God, Divine and supernatural remedies, by the Scriptures
as he is infinitely above all in providence, wisdom, and goodness, so he
has declared his far more excellent Will and Laws to his people, for his own
honor and their happiness; inspiring some choice men in the Old and New
Testament with divine Revelations, and testifying their Mission, Commission,
and Doctrine to be immediately from him by divine miracles, as seals unpossible
to be counterfeited by any wit or power of men; appointing them to deliver by
word to the present, and by writing to the future ages, his holy Laws, for the
manner of his service, the guiding of their lives, and the attaining of
felicity. And these are the sacred books of the Scriptures. And Ministry.
And he has added yet another provident ordinance, The sacred Ministry, men
separated from other affairs, and consecrated to Gods public service, and the
peoples edification, directing their preaching to these two special ends; The
one, to open the meaning of these holy Books, and teach the people to
understand and imprint these Laws in their Conscience: The other, continually
to work upon their affections, to excite and stir them up often to read
them, and carefully to practice them.

And this is the excellency of Christian Religion, above all Philosophy and
humane laws or learning; which could never perfect the Conscience, nor purify
the heart, nor stir up the affections, with such holy doctrines, rules, or
principles, nor cause such a constant and universal practice of all kinds of
virtue and goodness, nor procure such blessings temporal and eternal upon
persons and nations, as these holy Books, and the continual urgent preaching
of them, does perform.

But, be the remedies never so good, yet if they be not employed, applied, and
continually renewed, Satan and Sin are so busy to assail, so potent to
prevail, and we so impotent to resist, so willing to yield, that corruptions
will easily creep into our lives and Consciences. As we may observe

1. Causes corrupting the Conscience.
By the vehemence and disorderlinesse of our corrupt affections, lusts, or
passions (whether love, hatred, covetousness, ambition, pride, fleshly lusts,
or any other) blinding and carrying many away into sinful courses, thinking in
those passions evil to be good.

2. By Custom in sin: For, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati.
what many do, is thought lawful for all. Thus stealing of garments was
lawful with the Lacedaemonians, many wives at once with the Turks, deadly fewd
and stealing one side from another among our borderers; they thought it stood
well with Religion. Sir Thomas More (Lord Chancellor of England in king Henry
the 8 his time) writes, The borderers would hear mass before they went to
steal, and pray God so to bless them that they might do harm and take none.
Amongst us, of late, drunkenness, pride, and such like vices, are thought
lawful, because usual, and practiced without check of Conscience. These blot,
blurre, or fill up the deep graven letters of our Law-book with dirt, or bring
us asleep in sin, that we cannot easily spy or read them.

3. By interlinings of false precepts or principles of false teachers: as, to
this precept, Love thy neighbor, the Pharisees added, And hate thine enemy:
which interlining Christ put out again, and restored the text to his old
integrity, Matthew. 5.43. as he did other doctrines of men, Matthew. 15. and 23.

4. By mistaking error for true religion: as our Savior said to his Apostles,
John 16.2.
They that kill you will think they do God service. Saint Paul once thought
that he was bound in Conscience to persecute Christians; Acts 26.9. Phil 3.6.
he did it of zeal: Acts 13.50.
and so the devout and honorable women, and chief men persecuted Paul and
Barnabas, and cast them out of their coasts, moved by erroneous devotion.

By the like error, they that call themselves Roman Catholics (deceived by
Jesuiticall doctrine) persecute the true Catholics that constantly hold all
necessary saving doctrine grounded on the holy Scriptures, Articles of 1562.
art. 6.
and universally received in the Primitive Church (as the Protestants do) and
refuse only the corrupt novell doctrines brought in by later Popes, Art. 22.
Art. 37.
and submission to their government: these they persecute, and seek by all
means, even by treasons, insurrections, and murders of Princes, and massacres
of people, utterly to root out, and think such courses not only lawful but
meritorious, and that they are bound in conscience to practice them, especially
upon their Popes excommunications. A conceit and doctrine strange and
monstrous, never heard of in the Church of God, of a thousand years after
Christian religions first planting, and until Satan was Revel. 20.2, 3, 7, 8.
Greg. 7. formerly called Hildebrand, by many Helbrand, as one that brought this
wilde-fire from hell into the Church; for from heaven it could not come. James
3.13. a wisdom earthly, sensual, devilish: aedificat ad Gehennam. This
Gregory was the first Pope that deposed any Princes, etc. as says old
Frisingensis, and late Onuphrius. See Cades Justification of our Church, page
42, 43. and page 46, and seq. and lib. 2. page 64. and seq.
loosed and permitted to deceive the nations. Then Pope Gregory the seventh
began first to depose Princes, embroyling the Christian world with unchristian
wars, kindling that fire which has been kept burning by many succeeding
Popes, and is still kept alive, blown continually with the breath of Jesuits,
and other the Popes Incendiaries.

But the weapons of the first best Christians, even against persecuting
tyrants, were patience and prayers, not treasons, murders, rebellions. We read
in Scriptures of wicked Princes reproved by the Prophets, but neither deprived
of their state, nor subjects animated to rebel, nor forreiners to invade. And
if any Christian Prince were excommunicated, that made him not in worse state
then a Heathen (with loss of his goods, government, or life) but Matt. 18.17.
sicut Ethnicus, sequestered from the blessing of the Church and Sacraments
only. The ancient Churches censures never proceeded further.

But, howsoever that late unchristian doctrine is still maintained in the books
of a great number of the Popes flatterers, that are maintained by him in wealth
and dignity: yet a great number also even of the learnedest Divines of the
Church of Rome hold the contrary, For this point read the B. of Rochester de
potest. Papae, cap. 8. who cites many authors. B. Whites reply to Fishers
answer, page 572.
and write books in confutation thereof; confessing plainly, that the Pope (by
virtue of his office) has not any power or authority to depose Princes, or
dispose of their Crowns or lives, for any cause, crime, or good whatsoever.

Whereupon most of our English Roman Catholics have (contrary to the Popes
briefs, Cardinal Bellarmines letters, and other Romish Rabbines persuasions)
taken the oath of allegiance, and thereby insinuate a real confession (in this
main point) that the Pope, Cardinals, Conclave, Counselors, and greatest
Doctors of that Church, may err, and lead them into damnable sin, and
therein may and ought to be disobeyed. And since the infallibility of that Pope
and Church has been the greatest (if not the only) ground of holding them in
many errors, without searching into them: that ground being now acknowledged
to be unsound, there is great hope of their coming to us in other points of
difference (as they have done in some already) if we be not averse and hinder
it by our dissensions at home. Oh that we could recover that blessed unity of
doctrine and good life of that one holy, primitive, ancient, Catholic Church!

Yet observe another malice and policy of Satan! Some Protestants too nice
Conscience against Church-ceremonies.
if he cannot make us swallow these Camels, he will endeavor to make us strain
at Gnats, and in hatred of the Papists large Conscience and gross sins, to
make our Conscience too strait, and stick at things indifferent, as Caps,
Surplesse, kneeling at Communions, Crossing the child after he is baptized,
and such like rites or ceremonies. Our people, by the blessing of God, hold the
substance of saving religion entirely: we do not tear and wound Christ's body,
we only strive about his garments. My desire is to take up this strife, and to
keep that seamlesse coat unrent, because I see our adversaries (passing over
their own great ones) make themselves sport at our petty dissensions. To stop
their mouths therefore, and satisfy our otherwise good Christian brethren,
whose Consciences are afraid to receive these Ceremonies, give me leave to
impart unto you my meditations touching this point: which I shall do the
plainliest and briefliest, by answering a few questions.

Quest. 1. Does erring Conscience bind?

Answer. It does bind; so that he that does against it, sins: Because
whatsoever the Conscience dictates, it dictates sub ratione voluntatis Dei, as
it informs us of Gods will, and so it has in it self the force of the Divine
will, and is in stead of God unto us, as Gods Lieger Ambassador, to show us
our duty, and call upon us to do it: therefore as long as we understand and
acknowledge it to be so, it binds us unto obedience as unto God. To do
therefore that which thy Conscience says is unlawful (or while thou doubtest
it is unlawful) is to incur damnation, Romans 14.23. He that doubts, is
damned if he do it, because he does it not of faith: for whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. Though it be clean in it self, yet to thee it is unclean, if
thou think it so, as Saint Paul says there, See Ames de conscien. lib. 1.
cap. 3. n. 13. and cap. 4. n. 6. and Rob. Sandersons ser. upon Romans 3.8. Cicero
Offic. lib. 1. Been praecipiunt, qui vetant quicquam agere, quod dubites aequum
sit an iniquum: aequit as lucet ipsa per se; dubitatio cogitationem significat
injuriae.
verse. 14. He that does against his Conscience, does against the will of God,
quamvis non materialiter and vere, tamen formaliter and interpretative, though
not in matter and truly, yet in form and by interpretation; because he does
that which he thinks is against Gods will. And this is reduced to the lack of
the fear of God, to venture to do that which thou judge God has forbidden,
and so has written in thy Conscience, which must be Gods witness with thee,
or against thee, and whereby thou must be judged.

Quest. 2. May a Christian Prince urge his subjects to observe such ceremonies
in Gods service, as he knows to be lawful, though some subjects think them
unlawful, or doubt of their lawfulness?

I must answer this question, by first laying some grounds thereof in a few
Propositions.

1. See Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 14. and 30. D. Burges Answer, page
81. and seq.
It is absolutely necessary that in performing the outward works of Religion,
some outward rites and ceremonies be observed. For, people cannot meet
together, Gods service cannot be performed, Religion it self (whether true or
false) cannot possibly subsist or continue, without times, places, orders,
customs, words and actions prescribed and observed: as Saint Augustine urges,
Tom. 6. Contra Faustum, lib. 19. cap. 11. and seq.

2. See D. Burges Ansvv. page 8. and seq. and page 75. and seq.
The same ceremonies in particular are not prescribed in Scripture for all
Churches.

The substance of Religion must be the same in all places; ceremonies may
vary: as S. Augustine and S. Ambrose jointly teach. Aug. epist. 118.

For one manner of discipline may fit a free city, another a large kingdom:
one in peace, another in persecution: one under heathen kings, another under
Christian: one in a Church newly planted, another in the settled State. Our
Savior instituted the Communion in a chamber, and after supper; we in our
settled Church celebrate it in Temples, and in the morning: Luke 24.30, 31, 33,
35. Act. 2.46. 1. Cor. 11.21, 22. 1. Cor. 11.19.
for Christ's Apostles and the faithful in their time celebrated it in private
houses, and any time of day.

In the spring of the Church the feasts of love were of good use, which S. Paul
in short time found fit to be abrogated. See my Justif. or Countercharm, page
209, 210, 211.
Threefold dippings in Baptism, standing (not kneeling) at prayers betwixt
Easter and Whitsuntide, and many other things used by the Ancients, are now
generally left off. So that

3. Particular Churches are left to their own wisdom, to choose such
ceremonies as may best fit them, 1. Cor. 14.40. and verse. 26. Calv. Inst. lib.
4. cap. 10. sect. 30. D. Burges page 75. and seq.
observing S. Paul's general Canons, Let all things be done decently, and in
order: and, Let all things be done unto edifying.

Since, beside the internal substance of religion, some outward things must of
necessity be done in the public assemblies of the Church (which we call
ceremonies) how those must be done, and to what end, S. Paul here prescribes:
the manner, orderly, without confusion; decently or comely, for reverence; the
end, for edification, to stir up the assemblies minds, the better to
consider of the holy mysteries, and embrace the inward virtues. One of the
notes which Gregorius de Valentia makes of the Church, is, That it is the most
orderly society in the world.

Many mislike our Church-rites, because no where commanded in Scripture. I
answer, No more are those which they like. Is the Cap and Surplesse no where
commanded? no more is the nightcap, nor black cloak or gown. Is kneeling no
where commanded at Communions? no more is sitting, nor standing: and so of the
rest. But where are any of these forbidden in Scripture? If neither commanded
nor forbidden, and yet some decent ornaments and gestures commanded in
general: then the particulars are left to the wisdom of the Church, to choose
either this or that. Hereupon we find that

4 In several particular Churches, the rites have been several and different,
and not censurable by other Churches.

Because the several Churches made choice of such orders as in their own
judgment agreed best with S. Paul's canons of Order, Decency, and Edification
in their times and countries. The Queen (an emblem of the Church) was not
only glorious within, Psalm. 45.
(by holy and heavenly doctrine) but without also, standing in a vesture of
gold, wrought about with diverse colors, that is, diverse comely orders and
ceremonies, as S. Augustine interprets them, Epist. 86. toward the end.

Now the judgment of some particulars, may not prejudice or censure others,
because the opinions and reasons of men are often different upon one and the
same point, and each one abounds in his own sense: as, for the gesture in
receiving the holy Communion, some condemn kneeling, as Popish and
superstitious: others condemn standing, as Jewish and irreligious: others
condemn sitting, as an irreverent and unmannerly gesture to receive so
heavenly a blessing.

But the determination of this point I will show you in the words of two
ancient grave learned Fathers, Aug. epist. 86. in fine, and epist. 118. paulo
post initium.
Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose. Saint Augustine in his 86 epistle, and
again in the 118 epistle, writes, how his mother Monica being with him at
Millain, was much troubled in mind because there they fasted not on
saturdayes, as in her country they did; and that, to satisfy her the better,
he asked Saint Ambrose his advice: who answered, I can give you no better
advice, then to do as I do: When I am at Rome, I fast on saturdayes; when here
at home, I fast not: Sic etiam tu, ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem
serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi: Do you so also; to
what Church soever you come, observe the custom thereof, if you will not
offend any, nor have any offend you. This satisfied his mother: and himself
often repeating it in his books counted it as an Oracle come from heaven. Here
we see even in cities of the same country of Italy, there were several
customs and ceremonies: and Millain was no more bound to the orders of Rome,
then Rome to those of Millain: which I wish all good men to consider well, and
to rest satisfied in these things with the judgment of these two great lights
of the Church, Ambrose and Augustine; and all good women, with Monica, not to
be of those men's minds, Aug. ibid.
Qui, nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihil rectum existimant, that think nothing right
but what themselves do. Saint Augustine says there determinately, Epist. 118.
Greg. Epist. lib. 1. cap. 41. In una fide nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae
consuetudo diversa.
Totum hoc genus rerum liberas habet observationes: Nec disciplina ulla est in
his melior gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere
viderit Ecclesiam, ad quamcunque forte devenerit: The observation of all the
sorts of these things is free, and at liberty: neither can there be any better
rule for a grave and wise Christian, then to do as he sees that Church do, to
which he chances to come. And he concludes his 86. epistle thus, Si consilio
meo libenter acquiescis, Episcopotuo in hac re noli resistere; and quod facit
ipse, sine ullo scrupulo vel disceptatione sectare: If you be willing to rest
upon my counsel, do not resist your Bishop in this matter; but what he does,
follow you, without scruple or arguing.

5. In National Churches, or whole Christian Kingdoms, who shall be judge to
set down and impose what is decent, orderly, and fittest for edification? Shall
private men? That may not be; for their opinions are various: and then in
several congregations we should have several ceremonies and fashions, Read
Socrates eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 22. and Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 19.
one crossing and condemning another, with much disquietnesse and offense, Quot
capita, tot schismata (says Saint Hierom) endless distraction and confusion.

If no private men, then we must conclude, The King (or chief governor of the
whole national Church) must be the supreme judge, and none other; and that for
two reasons.

1. He only has power to gather together the most godly, wise, and learned
men in the whole kingdom, and (if need be) to have the advice and judgment of
the best learned in other nations, by whose grave counsels he may with great
maturitie of judgment set down orders fittest for the whole national Church.

2. He only has power to impose them upon all congregations within his
dominions, for unity and uniformitie, and to inflict punishment upon the
offenders: for, Lex sine coertione nulla est; To make a law, and not compel
men to keep it, (and so let every man still do what he list) is to no purpose.

Therefore the conclusive answer to this second question is, A Christian Prince
may, yea and ought to impose upon his subjects such ceremonies in Gods public
service, as he knows to be lawful and convenient for order, decency, and
edification; and compel men to observe them, for the preservation of unity,
uniformitie and peace of the Church in his dominions. And

6. They that resist such Magistrates in such things, do grievously sin
against God. They resist the ordinance of God (says S. Paul, Romans 13.2.) and
procure to themselves damnation: And, (verse. 5.) Ye must needs be subject, not
only for Necessitate externa.
wrath, but also for Necessitate interna.
Conscience sake.

Quest. 3. What is then to be done, when thy Prince (Gods deputy, and in Gods
stead) commands thee, and thy Conscience (Gods deputy also, and in Gods stead)
forbids thee the same? since in obeying thy Prince, thou sinnest against thy
Conscience; in obeying thy Conscience, thou sinnest against thy Prince: in both
against God, because they both have their authority from God to command thee,
and to bind thee under pain of damnation, not to offend.

The answer then to this third question is, The Conscience must be reformed:
For otherwise, here is a labyrinth so enclosing the poor soul, that as long as
the Conscience continues in this error, it is unpossible to come out without
sin. Therefore I wish that all good means may be used to avoid sin and
damnation.

On the Magistrates part, Mr. Slater in Romans 2. Mr. Masons sermon. at Norwich,
etc. page 70.
I wish (with many other good men) these cautions to be observed: and I find
they have been well observed.

1. That great care be taken for amending the Law-book of Conscience; that is,
for better information of the erring, and resolution of the doubting
Conscience. As Ezra gathered all the people together (Nehem. 8.1, 3.) read the
law unto them, and he with others made the people to understand it (verse. 7,
8.) and in the chapters following they all made a covenant of obedience to the
Lord. This order also took Jehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 17.7, 8, 9. and Chap. 1 9.4.
Vide Camdeni Annals Elisabethae, page 26. edit. Lugd. Batav. anno 1625.
2. Chron. 17. and 19. So did the Protestants in reforming the abuses crept
into the Church. Our Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, first caused the people
to be taught and rightly informed throughout the land, and after that
established the reformation.

2. That the scrupulous be not too hardly dealt withal upon any sudden
proceeding: for they sin not willingly, but of a pious humility and
fearfulness to offend God, and therefore are much to be pitied, and better
instructed.

3. That compulsion or punishment be not hastened so long as there appears a
desire and godly endeavor to be better informed. But

4. These things being first well performed, first sufficient information
offered, secondly a tender usage of the parties, and thirdly a convenient time
given to settle the Conscience; men not yielding may be accounted refractarie
and obstinate, Aquin. in Ep. ad Romans cap. 14. lect. 2. To avoid scandal of
little ones, a man must defer the use of things lawful, till a reason may be
rendered to remove the scandal: but if the scandal still remain after the
reason rendered, it seems not to proceed from ignorance or infirmity, but of
malice, and so belongs to the scandal of Pharisees. See Masons sermon. page 56.
and Zanchius de redempt. cap. 17. fol. 493.
rather then tenderconscienced: they seem not now to be errones but turbones,
contumacious troublers and disquieters of the peace, unity, uniformitie, and
happiness of the Church, which Christian Kings are bound in Conscience to
preserve: and as they have in love used all good means to win the humble, so
now in justice they must punish the disorderly, to preserve unity. I dare not
say (as S. Augustine said of unity in sound doctrine, Pereat unus potius quam
unitas: but, in our discipline, I may boldly say with our laws, Maereat unus
potius quam unitas. For, continuance in error through wilful neglect of the
means of better information, is censurable of obstinacy, and disobedience both
to God and the Prince.

On the peoples part, I wish these things to be seriously considered.

First, since it has pleased Almighty God to give us wise, religious, and
gracious Princes, nursing Fathers and Mothers to his Church, Mr. Slater in Romans
2.
who have already banished the intolerable tyranny, corruptions and abuses
crept into the Church, restored us to free liberty of Conscience, and peace of
pure religion, and by good laws, officers, and other provident and potent means
protected and preserved it and us: We the subjects should take this for a
benefit inestimable, not abuse it to the liberty of new opinions, or to the
loosenessse and dissolution of public government; but to be most thankful to
our Princes for it, give them all possible content, and yield our selves more
willing and ready to all civil burdens.

Secondly, See B. Jewels Apology, edit. Londin. 1591. page 170.
that these constitutions were first and chiefly directed to those true
necessary ends prescribed by S. Paul, Order, Decency, and Edification: and
secondarily (with respect to former ages, and the present state of neighbor
nations) to the greatest grace and honor of our Church, in that (beside the
inward substance of doctrine) they make the very outward face of our Church as
like as may be to the most ancient and purest Churches, which yielded so many
thousand Martyrs for the testimony of the truth in their times, and lately also
in Queen Mary's time a number more, living and dying in the liking or practice
of them. And thirdly they tend to the stopping of the mouths of our clamorous
adversaries, which charge us with continual newfanglednesse, and utter mislike
of the fashions of the most ancient glorious Primitive Church. This is showed
plentifully in the Appendix hereunto annexed.


Thirdly, that our ceremonies are confessed by the most excellent Divines of
foreign reformed Churches to be no way unlawful or forbidden by the word of
God, either in direct words, or by necessary consequence: Neither are they
imposed as things absolutely necessary to salvation, or as parts of Gods proper
worship, but as things merely in their own nature indifferent: Nor as things in
themselves binding the Conscience, further then as they are commanded by the
Magistrate: Neither commanded by the Magistrate as things perpetually
necessary, but to be altered or abrogated by the wisdom of the governors, as
may best fit their times and nations. And they have been so ordinarily used
without scruple of Conscience, by the most godly both ancient and later
Martyrs, who never suspected any Heathenisme, Judaisme, Papisme, or
Superstition to be nourished by them.

Lastly, let it not be passed over without due thankfulness to God, and great
joy to our hearts, that our Church continuing in the use of these ceremonies
has been continually blessed with such constant peace, prosperity,
happiness, and honor, as no other reformed Churches have ever yet attained
unto. Therefore, let not us be led with a spirit of contradiction, or
singularity, but think humbly of our selves, reverently of our rulers, and of
the godly learned, and have always a desire to be rightly informed, and
meekness of mind to yield to the truth, when it is once made evident, and
having always one eye fixed upon the nature of things indifferent (and
therefore lawful) and the other upon the duty of a subject to his sovereign
(and therefore necessary.)

Generally, (to conclude this whole part) here is 1. A necessity of much
hearing and reading of the word of God, for the right information of our
Conscience, and storing our natural Law-book with supernatural principles and
directions both for faith and life: and consequently, here is

2. A necessity of learned, diligent, and conscionable preachers, not only to
imprint true rules in the books of men's Consciences, but also to stir and
rouse them up to look into and carefully to read their book, against the
spiritual lethargy, sleepiness, dullness, and lothnesse which either custom
of sin, love of the world, fashions of men, or policy of the Devil, brings
upon them. And herein we are greatly to magnify our gracious God, who has
furnished our Church with abundance of able and diligent preachers, See K.
James his letters to the Archb. and the Archbeth letters to other Bishops anno
1622. and K. Charles his proclamation and letters to the Archbish. in his two
fust years: the copies may be had in every Registers office, by order.
young and old. In the youngest sort, our young Samuels, young Daniels, young
Timothies, I do much reverence Gods gifts and graces: but withal I heartily
desire them advisedly to read, and diligently to practice the profitable
directions of our Gracious Princes, the Defenders of our faith, our late
learned and judicious King JAMES, and the inheritour of his fathers piety as
well as of his kingdoms, our present King CHARLES: who finding unexpected
increase of Papisme, Anabaptisme, and other Sects, in this clear light of the
Gospel, and in this plenty of Preaching, thought good (by their Proclamations
and letters to our Bishops) to give to all preachers, and specially to the
younger sort, directions (yet no other in substance, then S. Paul gave to young
Timothy) how to behave themselves more profitably in their teaching, then
formerly some of them had done. The chiefest directions were these. 1. To
forbear all deep, needless and endless questions, too hard for the peoples
capacity, and tending rather to strife then edification, as Saint Paul does,
1. Tim. 1.4. and 6.4, 5, 20. and 2. Tim. 2.16, 23. 2. To continue in the
doctrine already established (and for the essence, substance, effect, or
natural inference, comprehended in the Articles of the year 1562, the
Homilies, and the two Catechismes, the lesser and the greater) by which
doctrine, superstition, idolatry, and heresy was driven out, and this blessed
reformation happily settled in our Church: and thus Saint Paul did also, 1. Tim.
1.3. 2. Tim. 1.13. and 3.14. like that of the Galat. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.3. To use
diligent Catechizing in the after-noons, and to confine all their teaching to
those two special heads of true faith and good life, as S. Paul does, 2. Tim.
1.13. 1. Tim. 1.5. and 2. Tim. 2.22, 24, 25.

These directions of our Princes, and Canons of Saint Paul (commended unto us
both by Regal and Apostolical authority) I wish may be thoroughly observed by
us all: aiming above all things at the sound and profitable informing and
exciting of our peoples Consciences in all saving truth and Christian duties,
as the chief 1. Tim. 1.5, 6, 19. and 3.9. Heb. 10.22. and 13.18.
end of all our preaching, whereby we shall by Gods blessing make the Church
Ephesians. 4.14.
firm in faith, Matt. 5.8. Tit. 1.15.
pure in heart, 2. Tim. 2.22. Romans 12.18. Matt. 5.9.
peaceable in life, and Acts 23.1. and 24.16. 2. Cor. 1.12.
precious in the eyes of God and men.

Thirdly, here is a necessity also that the hearers be well catechized in the
grounds of Religion, gathered out of plain places of the Scriptures, and write
in their Conscience all the fundamental points and necessary doctrines of
Religion, by hearing, reading, observing; and learn to draw out of them good
uses for practice and guide of their lives, as a good Matt. 13.52.
Scribe well instructed to the kingdom of heaven, or a good householder, that
for all uses can bring out of his treasury things new and old: that they may be
able, not only to instruct their families at home (their 1. Cor. 14.34, 35.
wives, their Ephe. 6.4.
children, and as Abraham did, Genesis 18.19. and Joshuah, Josh. 24.15. and David,
Psalm. 101.2, 6, 7.
servants) but also to 1. Joh. 4.1. 2. Tim. 3.5, 6. Matt. 23.15.
try the spirits of teachers whether they be of God; not to 1. These. 5.20, 21.
despise prophesyings (or preaching) but to prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good, (for that precept was not given only to Pastors and
Doctors, but to the whole Church of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1.) as the
Acts 17.11.
Bereans tried the doctrine of Paul and Silas; They received the word with all
readiness of mind, but they searched the Scriptures daily, whether these
things were so: As our Savior bids, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, Try the spirits, Matt. 7.15.
Beware of false prophets, and of the Matt. 16, 6, 12.
leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces.

Fourthly, a necessity also of some ancient learned men, and long students,
such as have read the ancient Fathers, and Ecclesiastical histories, to show
the rites and ceremonies (beside the doctrine) of the ancient Primitive Church
in the best and purest times. You may hear with much profit and comfort all
Preachers, even the youngest in their freshest wits, memory, and strength, for
points of salvation, taught in the holy Scriptures, within their reading, and
compass of study: but for rites and ceremonies trust only the graver and
well-read Divines, which have searched Antiquity; that our Church-rites may
come as near the purest and ancientest Church as may be, without any
affectation of noveltie.

Hitherto I have spoken of the first part of my text, The Law-book of
Conscience, with the properties, causes, uses, manifold depravations, and
necessary reparations thereof. Now I proceed to the second part, The Chronicle
of Conscience.

II. PART. Their Conscience also bearing witness.
AS formerly witness to the truth and equity of the Law-book, and thereby
exciting us to the work thereof: so now a witness to God and to our hearts
whether we perform the Law or not.

For, Conscience preserves a memorial of all a man's actions.

It is not a dead but a living book annexed to the soul; and as it has in one
part the rules to guide our life, so it writes in another part the course of
our life, and is (as I said before) Gods Lieger Ambassador, both to put man in
mind of his duty, and also to observe what he does: and (whether a man look on
his Law-book or not, whether he mind his duty or not) Conscience sits silent
and close in a corner of his heart (like a Register in his office) continually
noting and writing the man's courses, plots, devices with all their material
circumstances, how they swerve or agree with the instructions set down in the
Law-book, without any partiality, as Gods true and faithful witness: and this
is Saint Chrysostomes Codex, Chrysostom. on Psalm. 50. homil. 2.
in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur, A book wherein our daily sins are
written.

The Conscience is an individual (or unseparable) companion of a man's soul: it
walks (though invisibly) in the same gardens with him, sits at the same table,
lies in the same bed. Many men are unmarried, but none lives single: they may
walk, speak, and think without other companions, but never without their
Conscience, that is still partaker of all their counsels: that not only hears
and sees, but writes down and records (as in a Chronicle) all things done, said
or thought.

By this Chronicle of our lives, we may find written (whether we minded it or
no, while it was in writing) undeniable records testifying whether we did this
or that, or whether we did it not: as in sin; David willingly forgot, hid,
and covered his grievous sins, 2. Sam. 12.13.
thinking they should never come to light: but after nine months Nathan opened
his Conscience, and compelled him to confess it. So it was with Judas. Matt.
27.3, 4.
So the Conscience of Joseph's brethren was not minded by them, Genesis 42.21, 22.
till their affliction in Egypt made them look into it, and then they saw their
cruelty to their brother written in large letters, and convicting them of
sin. So of our innocence; 1. Sam. 24.11.
David's Conscience showed him he had not conspired against Saul. Samuel could
boldly say, 1. Sam. 12.3.
Whose ex have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded? whom
have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe? Moses could say
of Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and their companies, Number. 16.15.
I have not taken an ass from them, neither have I hurt any of them.

Let no man sin then, (mill testes) a thousand witnesses in his own bosom,
or one as strong as a thousand, which will testify his own secretest sins to
his own sorrow and shame, when God cites it. While traitors think their
practices remain covered and unknown, they are somewhat hearty to deny: but
when their own letters or other accusers privy to their facts are produced
against them into the open light, 1. Sam. 25.37.
then their hearts (like Nabals) die within them. Or as a murderer having left
two men for dead, and being afterward apprehended for suspicion, and stoutly
denying all, now when he sees one of them brought in alive, able to see him and
to speak, then he cries out, Alas! art thou alive? then I am undone: so a
wicked man would deny all; but when God brings forth his living Conscience to
accuse him, then he is stricken dumb, and finds he is undone. I read of a
Philosopher, that hearing his creditour was dead, kept the money (which he had
borrowed without witnesses) a night or two: but after some struggling with his
Conscience, he carried it to his Executour, saying, Mihi vivit, qui aliis
mortuus est, He is alive to me, though he be dead to others. Oh offend not thy
Conscience, which always watches thee, and writes up thine own sin and
shame against thee. Turpe quid ausurus te sine test time.

O Ahab! 1. Kings 21.
how cunningly and closely contrivest and conveyest thou thy mischievous
practices against a poor innocent! Will not a palace, a kingdom content thee,
where thou may live in love, in honor, in wealth, and pleasure; but thou
must have Naboths vineyard too? and to get it, rush headlong into such damnable
courses, as to counterfeit a Religious fast, making a show of Devotion a cloak
to cover an odious sin, (which is the height of impiety) and to suborn false
witnesses to accuse an innocent; corrupt the Judges, under color of law, to
condemn him; to take away his livelihood, and withal his good name, and the
pity and compassion of his neighbors and beholders (which is the height of
Tyranny;) yea worse, (if any thing can be worse) then stoning him to death and
depriving himself and his children of inheritance and life? And does not thy
Conscience check thee for all this? Surely Conscience had written it up: but he
minded it not for joy of his fine contrived excheat, till coming from taking
possession he met the Prophet Elias, to whom he said, Have thou found me, 1.
Kings 21.20.
O mine enemy? Why his enemy? Oh his Conscience now accused him of his
wickedness, which had made both God and good men his enemies: and now at last
he found (in stead of magnifying his house, and establishing his posterity)
what an evil covetousness he had coveted to his own house, what a vengeance he
brought upon himself and his posterity.

Oh Absalom! how well might thou flourish, if the favor of a King, the love
of a kingdom, the beauty of thy person, wealth, honor, and pleasure, with any
moderation, would content thee! But thou art sick of the Father, and ambition
carries thee headlong into treasonable courses and untimely death. Thou
colourest thy foul practices with fair pretenses, hiding thy intents from the
abused people, while thine own end is hid from thy self. God sees all, thy
Conscience writes all, while thou needlessly and heedlesly runnest a full
careere to thine own destruction.

And thou David, See 2. Sam. 12. and the chapters following.
from the shepherds staff raised to the Kings scepter, and now settled in thy
kingdom in great wealth, peace, honor, and prosperity; will thou now forget
thy self so far, that thine own hundred sheep will not satisfy thee, but
thou must take thy neighbors only ew that lies in his bosom? will thou
commit so foul an act? and yet a fouler, to murder the right innocent owner?
and to do it the closelier, will thou betray the Lords guiltless army into the
enemies hand, and cause his name to be blasphemed among the heathen? and will thou hereby draw plagues upon thee and thine, and cut off thy prosperity when
thou need not? and does thy Conscience all this while sleep, and will never
awake? No, no; thy Conscience is writing all the while a chronicle of all thy
doings: and after nine months, when the child is born, Nathan will open thy
book, and make thee read thine own sin, which will cost thee many tears,
and much heart-grief, and many afflictions from thine own subjects, from thine
own children, all thy life long after.

For our innocence and good works, Hic murus aheneus esto, Nil conscire sibi,
nulla pallescere culpa, Horat. Integer vitae, scelerisque purus, non eget Mauri
jaculis, nec arcu, etc. Idem.
Conscience alone gives sufficient comfortable testimony. A clear Conscience
is a brazen wall, to keep off all the darts of sin or shame which ill tongues
can throw against us. He that is of sound life, and free from ill-doing, has
his heaven within him, and may say with S. Paul (2. Cor. 1.12.) Our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards. In midst of
slanders and uncharitable surmises of malicious men, comfort thy self with the
witness of thy sincerity and innocence, as S. Paul did there: and Acts 23.1.
Men and brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God unto this day.
And Acts 24.16. Herein I do exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void
of offense toward God and toward men: and near his death (2. Tim. 4.6.) Now
(said he) I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, etc.

Our Conscience also will witness, 2. Cor. 5.5. Romans 8.14, 15, 16. Ephesians. 1.13,
14 2. Cor. 1.22.
we are guided by Gods Spirit, are in Gods favor, have received the earnest of
our inheritance, the Spirit of adoption, although we feel still imperfections
in our selves, as S. Paul did, Romans 7.21, etc. or whether we do our good works
in hypocrisy, and for our own by-ends, which may be profitable to others, but
neither please God nor our own Conscience soundly as they ought to do.

Thus (to apply it only to our present meeting) Preachers may find it written
in their Conscience, See Gabr. Powels consideration of the ministers
supplication to the Parliament 1606. page 11, 12.
whether their preaching has been directed to Gods true service, for his
glory, and the right information and falvation of his people; or whether to
their own praise, to show their learning, eloquence, and wit, or to please and
humor their patrons, friends, and people for maintenance and preferment. I
wish we all could say with S. Paul (Acts 20.26.) I take you all to record this
day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, and have taught you all the
counsel of God: and Acts 24.16. and 2. Cor. 1.12.

Our Visitours and their inferior officers may find written in their
Consciences, Morum or Nummorum visitatio, D. Boys in a visitation Sermon.
visiting to do good to the Church or to themselves. Sure I am, these offices
and meetings were ordained for good; and the execution thereof does much good
in our Church, to see that ministers do their duties, preach true and
profitable doctrine, and that diligently, live honest and unoffensive lives,
and be examples of all goodness to their flocks; to see whether
Church-buildings, furniture, books, vestments, and especially people be in good
order. They that do all these good offices, deserve good recompense for their
pains and care; their persons and offices are venerable, honorable, and
exceeding profitable to the Church.

But the good performance of the best Visitours may be much hindered by corrupt
or negligent underofficers, D. Boys, ibid.
or spectacles, to see Omnia been in billis, when there is rather Omnia male in
villis, and their feeling is better then their seeing: and so no good
reformation follows, because no good information went before. I can go no
further but only advise men to look to their Consciences, lest they become
partial causes of the continuance of any evil in the Church, and thereby
derive much of the guilt and punishment upon themselves: whereas by
conscionable execution of their office and trust, they may procure much good to
the Church, settle true peace in their Conscience, and derive upon themselves
many blessings from God, with love and praise from men.

But I must hasten to the third part of my Text, and hasten through it.

III. PART. Their thoughts accusing, or excusing.
THeir discursive thoughts, by comparing these two books together (the one
containing Facta, the other Regulam factorum) the Law of God, and the Chronicle
of our lives, either accuse and condemn for their disagreement, or excuse and
acquit for their agreement. The first book makes the Proposition or Major of a
Practical Syllogism, Thus thou must do. The second book makes the Assumption
or Minor, Thus thou have done. The Conscience, with the discoursing thoughts,
out of those Premises draws the Conclusion, Ergo thou have done evil, or well;
against the law, or according to it; and therefore art to be accused and
condemned, or therefore art to be excused and acquitted. This is the Natural
judicatorium of Damascen, the Natural judgment seat of the God of nature
placed in man's heart.

The Law says, He that lives in damnable sin, shall die: Thy Chronicle
says, Thou live in damnable sin, and names it: Thy thoughts conclude, Ergo
thou shall die. Again,

The Law (fulfilled by the Gospel, Matthew. 5.17. Romans 3.31.) says, He that
repents and believes in Christ, shall not die but live: Thy Chronicle says,
Thou repentest and beleevest, for thou bring forth fruits of faith and
repentance, etc. Thy thoughts conclude and assure thee, Ergo thou shall not die
but live.

The daily meditation and discoursing of these things is very acceptable to
God, and profitable to us: for it works in us a right judgment of Gods ways,
Ezekiel. 18.25. with due thankfulness, and heedfulnes to his laws; and in our
lives, humility, repentance, and carfulness; and to all others equity, and
lenity, Tit. 3.2, 3. Gal. 6.1, 2.

But oftentimes the Conscience seems to be asleep, Hindrances of the
Consciences working.
and does not compare these books together; it stirs not, troubles not the
sinner: partly because the vehemency of his desires to accomplish his projects
of covetousness, ambition, or lusts of the flesh, etc. carries him on with
such earnestness, that he minds not his Conscience: and partly, because the
devil politickly presents him with such objects and projects, as may withdraw
his mind, feed his fancy, and occupy his thoughts otherwise, with meditating
wholly upon the profit, pleasure, satisfaction and contentment that sin
promises him; and upon devising, plotting, contriving, and practicing the
means how to bring his purpose to pass, and how to couch all close together,
to keep secret, cover, and color all to deceive the eyes of the world: that he
finds no time to think on God, his benefits, nor his own duty and danger. And
partly, Facti sunt sugitivia cordibus suis.
because after the accomplishing of his sin, he is indeed loath to look into
his Conscience, lest it trouble him, and make him to forsake and repent his
sin, which he so dearly loves, or drive him into sorrow and melancholy. So
that if he feel any little prick of Conscience, he labors to smother and choke
it, or withdraw his thoughts from it, by seeking pleasant company, gaming,
sporting, minstrelsie, feasting, drinking, or one device or other. But (alas!)
very lamentable and damnable is those men's estate, that thus turn the deaf care
to the suggestions of God or their Conscience, Romans 1.18.
that withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and by violence hinder the
working thereof in their hearts: that suffer the devil so far to delude them,
as to force their hearts to think the checks of Conscience to be nothing but
fits of melancholy, and qualmes of folly; The mischief of neglecting the
motions of Conscience.
and labor to put them away by idle vanities or sinful courses, and so cozen
themselves of a great benefit of God, an especial means of their salvation:
for this breeds impenitencie in most grievous sins, Isa. 44.18. yea witless
presumption that all is well with them, Rev. 3.17. And thus a number (by the
policy of Satan, the strong man that keeps the house in peace where he is
master, Luke 11.21.) live and die stupid and senseless either of their present
sin, or following vengeance. They put away all thought of the evil day, glut
themselves with all fullness of wealth and pleasure, Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6. There
are no bands in their death, Psalm. 73.4. They spend their days in wealth or
mirth, and suddenly go down to hell: therefore they say unto God, Depart from
us; we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.13, 14.

But when God in mercy moves a man's heart to turn his eyes to view his
Conscience, The rouzing of Conscience by the Lord, happy:
as he did David's by sending Nathan to him, 2. Sam. 12. and as Christ looked
back upon Peter, Luke 22.61. and as at S. Peter's preaching the Jews were
pricked at the heart, Acts 2.37. Then a hearty and happy repentance follows to
salvation.

If God vouchsafe not this to wilful sinners, By the devil, wretched;
then the devil keeps his deluded captive hoodwinkt, and lulled in security,
till he have him fast, and past all likelihood of recoverie: which when he
finds, then he rouzes the sleeping Conscience, opens the woeful book, and
compells the wretched sinner to read it, whether he will or not, to drive him
into desperation. Thus he dealt with Cain, Ahithophel, Judas, and infinite
others. Take Judas, as in Judas.
for all. The devil put into the heart of Judas to betray his Master: and to
that end, doubtless, he put out of his heart all care of duty and Conscience.
But when he had (according to his desire) accomplished his sin, then the
devil rouzed his Conscience, and urged him to read his abominable deed; he
could not withdraw his thoughts from it, but might say with David (Psalm. 51.3)
My sin is ever before me. For what ailed Judas else? he had no disease in his
body, he was able enough to trot to the Temple to the Priests and Elders, and
to talk reason: his state was bettered, he had got money enough to purchase a
whole field: he had got the rulers and Statesmens friendship: his
fellow-disciples had lost their hearts, and hid their heads for fear of losing
them too: his Master Christ was going the way of all flesh, subject to every
man's hurt, no man to his, in common reason. What was there now therefore to
cross, vex, or discontent Judas? Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 86.
Non potuit acerbos Conscientiae stimulos and flagella perferre, says S.
Chrysostom: nothing but this, His conscience pricked and whipped him intolerably.
That was the enemy that had him now in chase, and pursued him without end or
measure: (...).
he was his own tormentour, might be at peace with all men, could not with
himself: he feels a worm ever gnawing him, a fire within endlesly burning him;
like a man sick of a burning fever, that shifts from side to side, from bed to
bed, from room to room, but finds no ease; for he carries within him that
which scalds and torments him: or like a dear stricken with a barbed arrow,
that runs over hills and dales to run away from his pain; but (haeret
lateri lethalis arundo) the deadly arrow sticks in his flesh, and shogs and
galls him. So it is with Judas and his conscience: he can neither avoid it, nor
endure it. Death it self is not so painful or terrible as it: he ventures on
death, and hangs himself to avoid it: yet thinking death to be terminum, he
finds it but gradum malorum; he thinks it an end of his miseries, but finds
it an entrance into greater: one woe is past and ended with him in this world;
but there follow a thousand in the other world that will never have end. Bodily
diseases may be cured, or mitigated, or the sense taken away by death; sores
may be helped by Chirurgerie, poverty by friends, imprisonment by liberty,
banishment by restoring, reproach by time: but all these (were they the best in
the world, and in the highest degree) cannot cure the Conscience afflicted with
sin. Damocles sword hanging over his head ready to fall, Balthasars
handwriting on the wall, made all the music harsh to their ears, the meats
unsavourie to their taste, their attendants irksome, and all things cumbersome
to their eyes: so the apprehension of present death, or due deserved vengeance
seizing upon their souls, distastes all the pleasures that this world can
afford. A fearful thing, when we have grievously offended the supreme Judge,
that we can neither pacify him, nor fly from him! when he sends our own
Conscience as his officer to arrest us, there needs no other Apparitour to
summon us, no Bailiffe to fetch us, no accuser to give evidence against us, no
nor judge to condemn us, nor executioner to torment us: our own Conscience will
do all this alone, and that in most terrible manner. Thus Judas was continually
dogged by his Conscience to death. David said, Psalm. 51.3. his sin was ever
before him. A woeful thing! he could not look off it: nay, it was ever before
God also, when he said, verse. 1. Blot out mine offenses: they stood written up
before God as memorials, Col. 2.14.
and as hand-writings against him till blotted out. Cornelius his prayers and
alms ascended up before the Lord for a memorial; so do sins. Alas, Acts
10.4.
that we will have our sins written up, when we might have our prayers and
good deeds written up both in our Consciences, and before God also for
memorials! when we might have Angels sent (as to Cornelius) to guide, direct,
Act. 10.3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 16.22.
protect us, and finally to carry up our souls to heaven, (as Lazarus) we will
have lying and damned spirits sent (as to Ahab) to deceive, 1. Kings 22.21, 22.
destroy, and bring us to hell! Cain cried, Genesis 4.13.
My sin is greater then can be forgiven; and, Whosoever shall find me will
slay me. Ah woeful! Innocent Abels blood cried from earth to heaven for
vengeance on the one side: Genesis 4.10, 13
and wicked Cains conscience cried within him for vengeance on the other side:
What shall the poor sinner now do?

Oh let us first take heed we sin not against our Conscience: Vastans
conscientiam.
and though some feel not these wounds, or grieve not at them presently
(through the senselessness or numnesse of their choked Conscience) yet the
often stabbing will breed such inward festring, corruption, and putrefaction,
that when the Lord touches it, they will roar and gnash their teeth, or grow
unconsolable, and often make away themselves as Judas did. Therefore let us be
careful to keep our conscience waking, tender, sensible, easily offended with
the least touch of sin, by continual meditation of Gods laws, and of the
necessity of sanctification, and by consideration of our own frailties, and
suspicion of our own inclinations: otherwise we may swallow down sin without
perceiving it; and though our Conscience stir not now to prevent sin, it
may stir hereafter to afflict us for it, as in Cain, Joseph's brethren, David,
Judas: the evil of poisons is not felt in the going down, their taste may be
sweet and pleasant, but their operation afterward deadly. Oh, if thou knew
how that flattering and amiable face of sin, brings after it a deadly sting,
punishment, and vengeance upon thee and thy posterity, thou would hate
thine evil courses as hell and damnation. The providence of God is mavelous,
but just: the just man's water of affliction he turns into wine most comfortable
and cordial; the unjust man's wine he turns into water. Sceleris est in scelere
supplicium, Wickedness becomes a scourge unto it self: but (Psalm. 37.37.) Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.

But no man is perfect and upright as he ought to be. As Noah, Genesis 6.9. Job,
chap. 1.1. Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. Saul, Phil. 3.6
outward, notorious, gross sins, offensive to the world: but none 1. Joh.
1.8. Romans 3.23. Gal. 3.22.
without sin. If we find our Conscience accuse us, and has written up in
our chronicle against us, not only sins of infirmity, but also some gross
sins offensive to God and men, and to our selves: is there no remedy, but
(with Judas) absolute desperation and destruction? God forbid. Yes, (the Lord
be praised for his great mercy) there is this one remedy, By sound
repentance, and faith in Jesus Christ, to get them wiped out: for the blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; but not without repentance on our
part, 1. Joh. 1.7.
and faith taking hold of his mercy. First let the Conscience be soundly
wounded, and truly sorrowful for offending God; let the sting of sin be
thoroughly felt, and the wounds of sin searched to the bottom, though it be
with much pain and grief: for to skin over a sore before the deadly corruption
be let out and cleansed, is very hurtful: and so is ministering of comfort to a
man not repentant: Christ calls them only that labor and are heavy laden with
the burden of their sins: Matthew. 11.28.
such only he came to ease, and heal. Only to the repentant faithful the
blessed promises of the Gospel belong. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. hom. 2. In codice
scripta sunt peccata tua: spongia peccatorum tuorum lacrymae tuae sunt: grandis
carum virtus. The martyrs bloodshed is precious, so sinners tears. Peter after
3 denials of Christ, by bitter tears, abstersit peccatum suum and recepit
pristinam dignitatem. ibid.
They only may get the records of sin cancelled, or blotted out, as
repentant David (Psalm. 51.1.) prayed, According to the Multitude of thy
mercies, O Lord, blot out my transgressions: and as S. Peter counseled, Acts
3.19. Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out; out of
the book of Conscience (which pricks you, Acts 2.37.) and out of all other Gods
records standing as memorials against you. Thus did Luke 22.61, 62.
S. Peter, when Christ looked back upon him, and put him in mind of his sin;
he went out and wept bitterly, and delevit quod deflevit, he wept and wipt out
his sin. Thus Psalm 6.6. and 51.
David washed his bed, and made it swim. And the woman-sinner (Luke 7.38.)
thereby procured that blessed absolution, Thy sins are forgiven thee, thy
faith has saved thee, go in peace, verse. 48, 50. and thus The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1. Joh. 1.7.

If we have a good Conscience (either not having sinned against it, If our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence to God, and whatsoever we ask of
God, we shall receive. Romans 8.15, 16, 17. Matthew. 7.11.
For as dutiful children receive all necessaries which they ask of their
earthly fathers, so shall we of our heavenly, being his children by adoption.

But because the heart is deceitful above measure, take heed you be not
deceived: Jer. 17.9.
for many men brag of a good Conscience, but few men have it.

S. Bernard delivers four sorts of Consciences: two not good, two good. 1.
There is a Conscience quiet, but not good: 2. There is a Conscience neither
quiet nor good: 3. There is a Conscience good, but not quiet: 4. There is a
Conscience both good and quiet.

1. The Conscience quiet but not good, Conscience quiet, but not good. See Mr.
Slater upon Romans
may be a broad or large Conscience, swallowing down any sin without feeling:
or brawny, seared, senseless: or sleeping until God in mercy, or the devil in
policy awake it. This is not good; it proceeds from ignorance, delight or
custom in sin, or want of a sound faithful ministry: a dangerous
sickness, not felt, and therefore not desiring the cure.

2. The Conscience neither quiet nor good, Conscience neither quiet nor good.
is too stirring in small matters, too senseless of greater: such is, first,
the erroneous, accusing more for the use of a ceremony, then for disobeying
the Magistrate: and secondly, the superstitious, disquieting more for breaking
our fast on a fish day, or omitting a few Ave Mary's, then for drunkenness,
cozening our neighbors, or for treasons, rebellions, massacres of Princes and
people: but thirdly and especially the despairing conscience, which for sin
against God afflicts too grievously and endlesly, admitting no comfort of Gods
mercy and Christ's merits. This Conscience through the devils strong delusion,
or their own despair (if so it continue) is past physic. These two are in the
two extremes, the one too careless and fearlesse, the other too careful and
fearful; both dangerously evil. Conscience good, but not quiet.


3. The Conscience good, but not quiet, accuses for breach of Gods law, and
fills the heart with sorrows and fears, yet grieveth more at his fault then at
his punishment; and therefore tends to good, and seeks for comfort. 2. Sam.
24.10, 17.
So David's heart smote him for numbering the people (as trusting to them rather
then to God) and prayed that he might be punished and they saved. This is a
good Conscience, and is known by these signs. First, except in the violence of
temptation, it holds the principle, Psalm. 73.1. Psalm. 42. and 43.
Yet God is loving unto Israel; and, O my soul, why art thou so disquieted
within me? hope in God, for I will yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God: And he seeks to the Lord in good time for
reconciliation and pardon: as David, Psalm. 51.1, 8, 12. etc. And he resolves
with Job, chap. 13.15. though the Lord should kill him, yet to put his trust in
him. Secondly, he is careful to use the means, and hungerly hangs upon the
ministry of the word: no physician in the deadliest sickness more welcome,
then he that declares Gods mercy to one thus afflicted: he receives him as the
angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.15. Romans 10.15.
more dear to him then his own eyes. Oh how beautiful are the feet of them
that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!
Thirdly, he continues in the ways of Gods commandments usually with more
strictness and zeal then others less troubled. And this Conscience is blessed
with a happy success; for such men are now in their physic, they Matt. 5.4, 6.
hunger after comfort, and shall be satisfied. These Matt. 12.20.
bruised reeds Christ will not break, nor quench this smoking flax. Into these
Luke 10.30, 34.
wounded and half-dead travelers, the good Samaritane will pour the oil and
wine of his mercy. These are they whom our Savior so lovingly calls, even
them that Matt. 11.28.
labor and are heavy laden with the burden of their sins, to give them ease
and rest. Therefore as they said to blind Bartimeus by the way side, Mark 10.49
Be of good comfort, for he calls thee: so I may say to all afflicted
consciences laboring for pardon and peace, Be of good comfort, Jesus calls
you.

4. The Conscience both good and quiet, Conscience both good and quiet.
is that which after due knowledge of his own sin, repentance, faith,
reconciliation, finds and feels Romans 5.1. and 8.1, 14, 15, 16.
peace with God: this is a Prove. 15.15.
continual feast, the Christians jewel worth all the world, 1. Joh. 3.21.
heaven upon earth. This ministers comfort and joy both in life and death: for
Romans 14.8.
whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords. Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for good to us. Romans 8.18.
Our sufferings in this world are not worthy to be compared to the glory
prepared for us in the next. We have comfort in all judgments, even in the
expectation of the 1. Joh. 4.17 2. Tim. 4.8. 2. Cor. 1.12.
great day. Our inheritance is a Luke 12.32.
kingdom, 1. Pet. 1.4.
incorruptible, undefiled, immortal: 1. Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor care heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Therefore when we
have beaten our brains, and imagined the greatest joy and felicity that our
hearts can think; yet we may still say, This is not it; August. in Psalm. 26.
Enarrat. 2.
for all a man can possibly think, comes short of it, as S. Augustine speaks.

Such troubled, and such quiet Consciences are both good: the one feels the
Lord is strong, the other sweet: the one in sharpness, the other in sweetness
runs the ways of Gods commandments: the one is in the battle, the other in
the victory; the one in the way to peace, the other in possession; the one
feeds hungerly, the other is satisfied: both are blessed.

Now to procure and preserve a good Conscience, I commend unto you these means:
Means to procure and preserve a good Conscience.


First, every morning before we rise, to consider (as good husbands do) what
business we have to do that day, what company, what temptations we are to meet
withal; then to look into our law-book of Conscience (or Gods word) how to
carry our selves purely and profitably therein. This must be our Psalm. 119.105.
lamp and light, our verse. 24.
delight and counselor, to make us wiser then our verse. 98.
enemies, verse. 99.
teachers, verse. 100.
ancients, Matt. 10.16.
wise as serpents, innocent as doves, the only way to Psalm. 119.9, 11.
cleanse our ways, and make them Josh. 1.7, 8.
prosper. This, as David said, was the blessed man's practice Psalm. 1.2.
day and night. Shall the wicked Psalm. 36.4.
devise mischief upon their beds, and shall not the religious meditate upon
goodness to be performed, sin to be avoided, Conscience to be kept clear?
Shall men study upon the Princes laws to live securely here, and not Gods
people upon Gods laws to live happily for ever? God commands, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9
Thou shall talk of my laws when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, or
sit in thy house, or walk in the way: they shall be in thy heart, hand,
forehead, posts, and gates. Therefore let us learn and consider our duty
beforehand, and make vows to perform it, resolving never to be withdrawn from
it by fear, favor, lucre, pleasure, or any earthly thing; and pray to God to
give us his grace and Spirit for constancy, heedfulnesse, and good success
therein.

Secondly, at night before we sleep, let us look upon our chronicle, and search
in that book of our Conscience what we have said or done that day. Psalm. 119.59.
I thought upon my ways (says David) and turned my feet unto thy testimonies:
I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments. The golden verses of
Pythagoras taught natural men, (...). Pythag. aur. carm. Chrysostom. in Psalm.
50. hom. 2. Antequam veniat tibi somnus, profer in medium codicem, Conscientiam
tuam, and reminiscere peccata tua, si quid in verbo, sacto, cogitatione
peccasti.
Not to admit sleep into their eyes, till they had thrice run over all they had
done that day, that they might detest and amend the evil, delight in the good
and continue in it. S. Chrysostom teaches the same to Christians: Before the
approach of sleep (says he) produce thy book, thy Conscience, and remember
wherein thou have offended in word, deed, or thought. And Eusebius Emissenus
says, Let every soul speak to it self in the secret of his heart, How have I
spent this day? without sin, without envy, backbiting, murmuring? have I
profited my self, or any other by good deeds, or edification? have I not lied,
sworn amiss, yielded to my lusts, done hurt to some body? who shall restore me
this day, which I have lost in vanity, or spent in evil? Optimus ille
Trapezita (says Climachus) He keeps his books evenest (his layings out, and
his comings in) that every night books all his receipts and expenses, and makes
all straight before he sleep. We should so search our Consciences, and judge
our selves without partiality, that when we come before the Judge, Coelo
descendit (...). Juven. Domine noverim me, noverim te. Bern. Psalm. 132.3, 4, 5.
he may say, I need not judge this man, for he has judged himself already, 1.
Cor. 11.31. And as David vowed, I will not climb up into my bed, nor suffer
mine eyes to sleep, etc. until I find out a place for the temple of the Lord,
an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: So let us resolve, I will not sleep
till I make my body the temple of the holy Ghost; 1. Cor. 6.19. Matt. 21.12, 13.
I will not rest till I have swept and cleansed it from all sinful
filthiness, as Christ did the temple at Jerusalem: that I may sleep with a
clean heart to my God, and rest confident of safety under his protection,
saying with David, Lord, Psalm. 4.8, 9.
thou have (now) put gladness in my heart: I will (now) lay me down in peace,
and take my rest; for thou, Lord, only make me dwell in safety.

Thirdly, when our seventh day, dedicated to Gods service, approaches, as God
looked back upon all his works of the six days, so let us look back upon ours:
that if we find all well, we may bless God for it; if any thing still amiss,
reconcile our selves to God more thoroughly, and use this seventh day (as it was
ordained) for sanctification, for deprecation, for information, for excitation
and stirring us up to all good duties, yea and for alms, and resolution of
restitution for all wrongs done by us, and pardoning offenses done against us.

Thus having washed our selves seven times in the seven days of the week (as
Naaman did seven times in Jordan, 2. Kings 5.
by the Prophets appointment) the leprosy of our sins may be cleansed away,
and our Consciences (as the flesh of his body) become pure and tender (as of
an innocent child) to our incomparable comfort. And these things we should
renew and perform most exactly in our preparation to the holy Communion, 1.
Cor. 11.28.
and at the beginning of the new year, looking back into the old, how we have
served God, how he has preserved us, and wherein we have offended, looking
forward into the new, with purpose to be new creatures, as old things are past
away, and all things become new, 2. Cor. 5.17.

All this is as possible as it is profitable. See it exemplified in an
honorable man, an exemplarie Christian, This is written by a worthy Minister,
Mr. Jeremy Dyke, in his Epistle dedicatorie before his brothers book, entitled
The deceitfulness of Man's heart.
the late young Lord Harrington: (be it ever remembered, for Gods glory, his
honor, and our imitation) His course was, to keep a catalogue or diarie of his
sins against God, and every night, or the next morning to review the faults
of the day past; every seventh morning or night before, to review the faults of
the whole week; and at the end of every month, to surview the whole months
transgression: All this, the better to know and humble himself, and renew the
practice of his repentance. And the day before the receiving of the holy
Communion, he always humbled himself with fasting, prayer, and confession.

The Lord of heaven find us so always occupied, that at our death we may
receive that blessed welcome for the well employing of our times and talents,
Matthew. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in little,
I will make thee ruler over much: Enter into thy Masters joy.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE FOREGOING SERMON, Concerning the Ceremonies of the Church
of ENGLAND. By the same Author.

printer's device of the Printers to the University of Cambridge, an oval
device featuring a woman with the sun in one ha nd and a cup in the other
(McKerrow 416b) HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
Alma Matter



Printed by the Printers to the University of Cambridge 1639.

To the Reader.
Dear Christian Reader, understanding that this Sermon has done good to many,
that either heard it, or read some notes of it; and that if it were published,
with some Appendix added, proving our Ceremonies to be approved by the reasons
and testimonies of other learned, reverend and pious men, it would do much good
to many more: I have taken the pains to add such an Appendix: Wherein I might
have alleged reasons out of many other worthy Authors (Archbish. Whitgifts
books against Mr. Cartwright, Dr. Bridges, Mr. Richard Hooker, Dr. Covel, Dr.
Spark, Dr. Gardener, Dr. Powell, Dr. Collins, Mr. Francis Mason, Mr. Ambrose
Fisher, and others:) But because I write specially to such younger and poorer
ministers, as either are not able or willing to purchase many costly books of
this subject, or not at leisure to read them; I have thought best to refer
such Readers (if they be not satisfied with my short Abstract) specially to
three of the last (who have read and weighed all which the former Authors have
written, with the replies and answers) to wit, our Reverend Bishop Mortons
Defense, printed anno 1618. Dr. Burges his answer to the reply of a namelesse
Author (who labored to confute, or elude B. Mortons Defense) printed anno
1631. and Mr. John Sprint his Cassander Anglicus, printed anno 1618. These
(and, I hope, the least, shortest, or lowest prized of these) will satisfy any
reasonable Reader, if he turn in them to the larger handling of the points, by
my allegations. Their reasons are occasionally dispersed through their whole
books: but I have here collected and referred them to certain heads (or
chapters) for the Readers better ease in finding them, and judgment in
weighing them; often contracting their larger discourses into fewer words,
where they may be abbreviated; and only using their words at length where they
are more necessary and urgent, then shorter could be.

These few short chapters (I hope) will pass, and be read, where greater
volumes will not. And this I have done simply and plainly, without respect of
gaining any credit or applause of learning to my self, but only of their love,
and out of an earnest desire to draw them with a good Conscience, willingly and
cheerfully to do that, which otherwise of necessity they must do.

A table of the Chapters and Contents of this APPENDIX.
CHAP. I. Our Ceremonies are Adjuncts, not Parts of Gods proper worship, and
alterable. Set forms of prayers are of Divine institution. CHAP. II. Our book
of public prayers and Ceremonies made known to the famousest foreign Divines,
were approved by them all. CHAP. III. Answering the objection of Significancie.
CHAP. IIII. Answering the objections drawn from the old Testament, and of
things formerly abused by the Jews and Heathens. CHAP. V. Answering the
objection of Ceremonies abused formerly by Papists. CHAP. VI. Three
particulars, the Surplesse, Cross in baptism, and Kneeling at Communions,
cleared. CHAP. VII. Our Ceremonies commended for their ancient and profitable
use. CHAP. VIII. Imposed by lawful authority, they may not be omitted without
sin.
CHAP. I. Our Ceremonies are enjoined as Adjuncts, not Parts of Gods proper
worship, and therefore alterable. Set forms of prayers are of Divine
institution, and always used in Gods Church.
IT is the constant doctrine of all Divines and Churches both Ancient and
Modern, that God has sufficiently comprehended and perspicuously delivered the
whole substance of his own proper worship, and things necessary to man's
salvation in the holy Scriptures; and that these things must evermore be the
same in all Churches, and unalterable. But the circumstances and ceremonies of
his public worship (as of place, time, ornaments, gestures, etc.) for the more
reverent and devout performance thereof, he has left to the wisdom of every
particular or national Church to make choice of, so that all things be done
according to that general rule (the Canon of Canons) delivered by S. Paul, 1.
Cor. 14.40, 26. Let all things be done decently, orderly, and to edification.
These things the Lord left to the liberty of every Church, partly because they
are not of the substance of his worship, or of men's salvation, but adjuncts
only: and partly because one form thereof cannot fit every country or age,
but must be varied and applied to several nations and times, as shall be found
most convenient. Thus teaches Saint Hierom epist. 28. ad Lucinum, concluding
thus, Vnaquaeque provincia abundet in suo sensu. And thus Saint Ambrose and
Saint Augustine (who is accounted The mouth of the Fathers) epist. 86, and 118,
and 119. and alibi passim. Totum hoc genus (say they) liberas habet
observationes. And thus that old common saying, Dissonantia jejunii non tollit
consonantiam fidei. And thus Zanchius (the great reformed Schoolman) tomo 8.
Loco 16. De traditionibus Ecclesiasticis, page 821, etc. And thus all other
late Divines, as will appear full enough in our chapters following. And thus
our Church professes in our book of articles, Anno 1562. Artic. 34. Every
particular, or national Church, has authority to ordain, change, and abolish
ceremonies or rites of the Church ordained only by man's authority, so that all
things be done to edifying. And in the preface before the book of common Prayer
confirmed by act of Parliament, touching ceremonies, we have these words, We
think it convenient that every country should use such ceremonies as they
shall think fit to the setting forth of Gods honor and glory, and to the
reducing of the people to a most perfect and godly living, without error or
superstition: and that they should put away other things which they perceive to
be most abused, as in men's ordinances it often chances diversely in diverse
countries. And these words also, These Ceremonies are retained for a discipline
and order: which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore
are not to be esteemed equal with Gods law.

See here how vain and ignorant their doubt is, that think our Ceremonies are
imposed as parts of Gods proper worship.

And whereas some mislike that any set form of prayers should be imposed in the
public service of God; I wish them to consider better, that God himself not
only allowed but imposed such, and his best servants used such. Numb. 6.23. On
this wise (says the Lord) shall ye bless the children of Israel, saying, etc.
the three verses following set down the very words to be said: and Number. 10.35,
36. there is the set prayer which Moses must pronounce when the Ark was to go
forwards, All the Psalms are prayers or praises of God, in set forms, and
words answering the length and number of music notes.
and when it was to rest. And Deuteronomy. 26.3. the set form of words to be said at
the offering of the first fruits: and verse. 5. and 13. And Psalm 92. was made
properly for the Sabbath day, and Psalm 22. for every morning, and Psalm 102
for times of affliction. This appears by the titles of these Psalms. The
like is 2. Chron. 29.30. And we find Romans 1.7. 1. Cor. 1.3. 2. Cor. 1.2.
Galat. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Saint Paul used the same set form of words or prayers
without variation. And our Savior Christ himself (Matthew. 26.39, 42, 44.)
prayed three several times saying the same words: and Saint Mark has the
like, Mark 14.39. Beside the Lords prayer, which our Savior himself prescribed
to his Apostles, Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. which prayer
they used in the administration of our Lords supper, as Saint Hierom
witnesses, lib. 3. contra Pelagianos; and Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 63. And it
was used generally in all Liturgies or public prayers; as is manifest by S.
Augustine, epist. 59. by Saint Hierom and Gregory in the places above cited,
and Saint Ambrose lib. 5. de Sacr. cap. 4. and Saint Cyrill Catech. 5. mist.

If any object, that prayers should be varied according to the variety of
occasions; let him consider, that these formerly mentioned were so and so are
ours, in our Common prayer book. There are general prayers for general, and
particular for particular occasions; as for rain, fair weather, in time of
dearth, famine, wars, plagues, or sickness: Baptismes, communions,
marriages, visitations of the sick, burials of the dead, etc. and thanksgivings
varied upon various occasions, for these and the like cases. In all which, I
cannot imagine what any godly sober-minded man can find to stumble at. And if
any man think them too short, let him remember that Christ condemned too much
speaking (like the Heathens) Matthew. 6.7, 8. adding this reason, For God knows
our needs before we ask: and long prayers are as well notes of hypocrisy as of
true Christianity, Matthew. 23.14.

CHAP. II. Our public prayers and Ceremonies being made known to the famousest
foreign Divines, were approved by them all.
THe Ceremonies of our Church, and our book of public prayer were made known
to the most famous and best Divines of other reformed Churches then living, by
books thereof translated into the Latin tongue, and by many letters, and much
conference betwixt them and our Divines; and by many of them much commended, by
all approved to be lawful, one only excepted. Doctor Burges having searched
the writings of them all, concludes that not any one can be produced (except
Wigandus alone) that held our Ceremonies simply unlawful. Burges page 560,
561. Even Mr. Cartwright himself (our English standard bearer to
Non-conformists) after his long opposition and much writing, at length
complains that he was misunderstood and wronged, as if he held the
unlawfulness, whereas he held only the inconvenience of our Ceremonies, lib.
3. page 241. And the same man having written sharply in his first book against
the Surplesse, yet upon more mature consideration became more moderate in his
third book, and (page 75.) called it a simple inconvenience, and a thing in its
own nature indifferent, and that it ought to be worn, rather then the
ministry forsaken, lib. 3. page 262. Hooker Eccl. polit. page 243. And what
is said, by him and others, of the Surplesse (which was most stuck at by many
English) is to be understood much rather of the rest of the Ceremonies, and so
was intended by those authors; to wit, that they are in their own nature
indifferent, and not unlawful. And this will appear more fully in the whole
discourse following. Mean season, hear the testimony of Alexander Alesius (a
worthy Scot, of great account and note:) he much commends our book of Common
prayer, and the ordering of our Church according thereunto, and calls it
Praeclarissimum and divinum factum, and says, The virtue and piety of the
English herein would rejoice many hearts, and help their endeavors to do the
like, and grieve the enemies of the truth for the good success and progress
thereof: and he complains that any contentious minds should move any to
mislike it, and (as if they only were wise) stir up unnecessary questions
and disputations, neglecting the knowledge of necessary things. And he adds,
That the contention of brethren about this book, comes from the Devil, who
failing one way, seeks another way to do mischief to the Church. And finally he
says, This book is profitable of it self, and the reading thereof will do good
to many, and at this time it seems to be offered unto us from heaven. Proem.
before his translation of the Common prayer book, in script. Anglican. Bucer.
fol. 373, 375. Sprint, 124, 125.

CHAP. III. Our Ceremonies are not to be condemned, but commended for their
Significancy.
CEremonies should be significative of moral virtues, so they be not counted
operative as Sacraments (ordained by God) of spiritual graces conferred by
them, as Bishop Morton well distinguishes, Defense cap. 3. sect. 4.

Many of the Romish Ceremonies are not only significative, but thought also to
be operative (as Exorcismes, Holy Water, Crossings, Spittle, Exsufflation,
etc.) to drive away the Devil and to work supernatural effects. These we
condemn; for none can ordain such operative Ceremonies, but God only that can
give the supernatural effects. For,

Sacraments have a double signification, Bish. Mort. ibid. sect. 5.
one ad modum signi, another ad modum sigilli, and therefore are both
significant and signant, by conjoyning whereof they are Operative and
Exhibitive by Gods ordinance and promise, performing also that which they
signify and seal: as Bellarmine also teaches, libro 1. de sacram. in genere,
cap. 11.. 4. and 5. definit. And therefore no man or Angel can institute a
Sacrament, but God only: as Bellarmine confesses, De Matrimonio lib. 1. cap.
2.. Posteriore modo: agreeing herein with Melancthon, Calvin, Chemnitius, by
him there alleged.

But our Ceremonies signify only moral duties, giving us occasion to think
and meditate of them, but neither seal nor exhibit them. If, when I put on my
ministerial ornaments, I am presently put in mind of my duty, since God by
the Church has distinguished me from my flock, to be their minister, that is,
to be their mouth unto God in offering to him their prayers, confessions,
deprecations, and thanksgivings, and to be Gods Ambassador and mouth unto
them, to show them his will, to proclaim his gracious pardon for their sins
upon their faith and repentance, and this stirs me up to perform that great
office with the greatest care, wisdom, faithfulness and reverence that I can:
Is there any hurt in this? And if the people seeing me come in such ornaments
into my place, do presently consider, This man (though of Acts 14.15.
like infirmities with us) yet is the messenger of the God of heaven, and by
office is more then an ordinary man, Romans 1.1. Acts 13.2.
separated from all worldly business to a more excellent work, to be Gods 2.
Cor. 5.20.
Ambassador, sent unto us Acts 26.18.
to open our eyes, to turn us from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, etc. To him has our Blessed Savior committed the ministry
of reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.18, 19.
to reconcile us sinful creatures to God our glorious Creator: Him we ought
to hear as Luke 10.16.
God himself; and reverence him, not so much for his personal virtues or
state, (as many do only) as for his great office, which he now comes to
perform for our unspeakable good. If thus the people meditate, and stir up
themselves with joy and reverence to hear and obey; can any man find fault
with this, or not rather much commend it? Surely it is both ordinary and
commendable in them to do the like, when the Ambassadors of other great
Princes come to declare their gladsome messages of peace, amity, prosperity,
and worldly happiness. And if such Ambassadors be known by their distinct
robes and ornaments, from other men; why not Gods Messengers by theirs? They,
by their glorious vestures shining with gold, silver, precious stones, pearls,
and worldly pomp, signifying and setting forth their kings magnificence: We by
our grave black gowns, far from the bright-coloured garments and braverie of
the world; and above all with the white linen Surplesse, resembling the
vestments wherein the angels appeared in the Revelation (the ministers of the
Gospel being ordinarily called angels, Rev. 2. and 3.) fitly signifying
cleanness, innocence, holiness, and brightness both of doctrine and life
(as Bucer to B. Hooper. Scrip. Anglican. fol. 682, 707, 709. and to Alasc.
Bucer, Martyr loc. com. fol. 1085
Martyr, Zanch. de Redempt. cap. 16. fol. 445. a. Sprint page 130. and seqq.
Zanchius show the Surplesse does better signify, then any woollen garment can
do.) If thereby both minister and people be put in mind of such duties and
virtues, what inconvenience can come of this? And the like may be said
respectively of the rest of our Ceremonies: the Cross is significative of our
constancy; kneeling, humility; standing, our readiness to profess and
maintain the doctrine of faith, etc.

Our best Divines say, Our Ceremonies ought to be significant: else they are no
Ceremonies, but like a day without light. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. 15.
Calvin inveighs against the Papists pomp of Ceremonies, that like unto dumb
shows teach nothing, nor are understood. Mart. loc. com. class. 2. cap. 4. p.
198.
Peter Martyr says the like, instancing in their Priests muttering the words
of Consecration in secret: which is also condemned with many other, by Dr.
Reynolds, Confer. page 569, etc. and page 574, 575, 576.

B. Bish. Morton cap. 3. sect. 39
Morton proves that the Church may ordain significant Ceremonies: as, 1. The
ancient Church did ordain standing in Prayer (and not kneeling) on all the
Lords days, and on every day betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, in memory and
profession of Christ's resurrection. 2. The feasts of Easter and Whitsuntide,
which feasts have continued (as Zanchius witnesses) ever since the Apostles
times, observed in all Churches of the world. These were significant rites,
appropriate to actions of religious worship: which the Nonconformists do not
deny.

D. Burges in answer to the namelesse replyer, Dr. Burges answer, page 399.
observes that the replyer passes with silence this objection of these two
feasts, as not knowing what to say: for, to condemn the feasts, were to
condemn all the Churches of God, which have used and do use them to this day:
and to yield them lawful, is to confess that the Church of God may ordain
significant Ceremonies: for it is manifest, They were ordained by men, and are
significant of Christ's death and resurrection, and memorials of the benefits
thereof, and excite us to piety, faith, and hope, morally; though not
operatively, as Sacraments do by divine institution.

Finally, Dr. Burges ibid. 401.
They that condemn significant Ceremonies, yet have striven for sitting at
Communions, in token of rest, and fitter to signify our coheirship with
Christ: In their Admonition and Treatise against kneeling, and Altar Damasc.
And they commend the Communion Table as fitter then an Altar, to signify our
spiritual feasting.

CHAP. IIII. Not forbidden by the Scriptures of the old Testament, by the
judgment of the best Divines, ancient and modern.
BUt it is alleged, that the laws of the old Testament for abolishing of all
monuments and relics of Idolatry, do bind us as much as they did the Jews;
namely that precept of Deuteronomy. 7.25. The graven images of their gods shall ye
burn with fire: thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor
take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein; for it is an abomination to the
Lord thy God: and chap. 12.3. Ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their
pillars, and burn their groves with fire: and ye shall hew down the graven
images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place: and
Isai. 30.22. Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images of silver, and
the ornaments of thy molten images of gold: thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence.

To this is answered, 1. That these things prescribed by Moses and the Prophet,
King Edward and Queen Elisabeth worthily performed, See Mr. Masons sermon at
Norwich, page 42, etc.
and left no idols nor their coverings to be abolished by their successors.
Our Surplesses (by some in that point condemned) are no such things, but like
the ancient ornaments of the ministers of the Gospel in the Primitive times,
before idolatry settled in the Church: and if some Surplesses in the middle
times were used as instruments of idolatry, they are vanished; ours are new,
and were never so used.

2. That although not the coverings of idols, yet other particular things
abused to idolatry may afterward be lawfully used by Christians, as the
creatures of God, Psalm. 24.1. 1. Tim. 4.4.
so it be without scandal. And therefore those laws do not so much bind us as
they did the Jews. This is S. Paul's doctrine concerning meats offered to idols,
1. Cor. 10.26. For learned men observe, that there were usually sold in the
markets these three things; 1. The heads of beasts sacrificed to idols. 2. Some
parts of the body belonging to the priests, being more then they needed to eat.
And 3. some pieces carried home by such as returned from the sacrifices, which
they might spare. And of these, Saint Paul says, it was lawful for Christians
to buy and eat, at home or at feasts, if they knew not that any man was
scandalized thereby. This particular may serve for a rule in other particular
things which have been polluted (the pollution being taken away or unknown, or
no offense taken at it) they may be safely used as the good creatures of God.
Aug. epist. 154.
Which Saint Augustine counted so plain that it needed no further explication:
but he gathers out of Deuteronomy. 7.25. that the gold and silver, or other riches of
idols may not be taken to men's private uses, lest they seem to destroy the
idols for covetousness, not for piety: yet such things may be converted to
Gods service, as wicked idolatrous men may be converted to his service; and as
the water of fountains dedicated to false gods may be used for baptism to the
true God; as bells rung to the service of idols, and temples dedicated to them,
may be rung and used to the true Gods service, (and so have been used in the
Primitive Church, and in later times in England, France, and all the Christian
world over, and may well be done without scruple of Conscience, Calvinaepist.
23, 24. Aug. ibid. Josh. 6.19, 24
says Calvin) And this S. Augustine confirms by Joshua his preserving the
silver, gold, and vessels of brass and iron, useful for Gods service, to be
kept in Gods treasury, when all other things in the taking of Jericho were
accursed and destroyed; Judges 6.25, 26.
and by Gideons sacrificing a bullock unto God, and burning it with the wood of
the grove dedicated to Baal, by Gods own appointment.

Thus we have the judgment of the apostles delivered by Saint Paul, and the
judgment of the ancient fathers delivered by Saint Augustine, of this point.
Now for the judgment of later Divines of reformed Churches, we may well
wonder, that the Non-conformists allege Calvine, Martyr, Grynaeus, Wolfius,
Burges page 619.
Vrsinus, Machabaeus, Zanchius, Simlerus, Zepperus, our book of Homilies,
Doctor Fulk, and others, for their opinion. Surely they mistake them: for in
plain places of their writings, they say the plain contrary.

Calvine (on Deuteronomy. sermon. 32, page 310) says, We make no conscience now, of
turning the temples, which were Idol-houses, unto the service of God, which the
Jews ought not to do. And (sermon. 57. on Deuteronomy. fol. 344) This law, forbidding
the handling of gold and silver, served but for a time, for God trained up that
people like little babies. And Mr. Parker yields that Calvine is of a contrary
judgment to them. Martyr. loc. com. class. 2. cap. 12. page 349.
Parker on the Cross, part 1. page 36. Peter Martyr says that Princes and
commonwealths may now lawfully convert to public use the gold, silver, etc.
of idols; which the Jews might by no means reserve, Burges page 1087.
because it was forbidden to the Jews. The same Martyr (epist. ad Hooper. page
1087.) says, We must take heed, that we press not the Church with too much
servitude, as to think we may use nothing that has been Popish. The ancient
fathers took the temples of idols, See our 30 Canon.
and converted them into holy houses of God: and the revenues which the
Gentiles had consecrated to their gods, and to the Vestal virgins, they turned
to maintain the ministry: yea the very verses of Poets serving the muses,
idols, comedies, theaters, and to pacify their gods, Ecclesiastical writers
(the holy Fathers) use and apply so far as they find them fit, good, and
true, to Gods worship; directed by Saint Paul, who disdained not to cite
Menander, Aratus, Epimenides their words or verses. Furthermore, who knows not
that wine was consecrated to Bacchus, bread to Ceres, water to Neptune, olives
to Minerva, letters to Mercury, songs to the Muses or to Apollo, to idols, or
Devils? all which we doubt not to apply as well to sacred as to civil uses.
Thus P. Martyr.

Zanchius also plainly denies these laws now to bind as then they did. Zanch.
de Redempt. lib. 1. page 648. which also may be showed in the rest of the
Authors alleged, says Dr. Burges, page 619.

For other things abused, See Burges page 591.
Shall we not bow the knee to God (as 2. Chron. 6.13. Ezra 9.5. Acts 20.36.)
because bowing was abused to Baal? 1. Kings 19.18. nor the body and head to the
ground (as Joshua 7.6. 2. Chron. 7.3.) because many did so to idols? Isai. 2.8,
9. nor lift up our eyes in token of expectation (as Psalm 123. 1. Mark 6.41.
John 11.41. and 17.1.) because some did so to idols? Ezekiel 18.6. nor stretch
out our hands to God in prayer (as 2. Chron. 6.13. Psalm 63.4. 1. Tim. 2.8.)
because some did so to strange gods? Psalm 44.20.

The example of Hezekiahs abolishing the brazen serpent is also urged, for the
abolishing of Ceremonies formerly abused. But I answer, The example of Hezekiah
teaches Princes to use their liberty, as he did his. The Church may be purged
of things idolatrously used, two ways: one by abolishing them; the other by
taking away the abuse only. The first way he used, by taking utterly away the
brazen serpent: the other he used, in sparing Solomon's chapels built for
Ashtoreth, Chemosh, and Milcom, heathen gods, (1. Kings 11.7.) for they stood
still till Josiahs time, (2. King. 23.13.) yet God gave Hezekiah this
testimony, (2. Kings 18.6.) Hezekiah clave to the Lord, and departed not from
following him, but kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses. But
howsoever many excellent Divines exhort Princes to imitate the zeal of Hezekiah
and Josiah: yet they say not that private Christians may do it without
authority.

CHAP. V. As our Ceremonies are imposed by our Princes, and used by us, they
differ much from the Papists.
THere is great difference betwixt the Papists Ceremonies and ours, even in
things of the same substance. Suarez in Thom. tom. 3. q. 65. sect. 2. Burges
583, 584.
Their Suarez shows us that Ceremonies are so far Ceremonies, as they are to
be observed in the use of some sacred action, of which they are not the
substance. And after, These Ceremonies differ among themselves vel ritu, vel
fine, in their use or end: meaning, that where the rite or thing used, is the
same in it self, yet in a different use, or to another end, it is not the same
but another Ceremony. And thus, Bowing the knee in the masse-time, is a
different Ceremony from bowing to the altar, or to the crucifix, or to the
host, or to the chalice: and so our Cross upon Baptism, is a different
Ceremony from theirs applied to other uses. Burges ibid. 443.
When bowing the knee was used in the service of Baal, it was a Ceremony of
idolatry: but when it was used to God, it was no monument of idolatry. It is no
monument which does not monere, nor is instituted or fixed to that end. As a
Tomb without an inscription is not a monument but a grave. The inscription
applying it to the memory and mention of the party there intombed, makes it a
monument: and applied to another name there latelier buried, quite alters the
nature of it, and makes it a new monument. So also, no metal is moneta, money,
but in respect of the Governors stamp upon it: alter the stamp, and stamp the
Spanish pieces with the English arms, and then it is not Spanish money, but
English, though the metal and substance be still the same. By the like reason,
bowing to Baal is no monument of religious bowing to God; nor (after that)
bowing to God, any monument of the idolatrous use of bowing to Baal: likewise
the use of the Cross with us, is no monument of the Popish abuse, no more then
the Popish abuse was a monument of the lawful use of it in the Primitive
Church. Present intention and professed use of an indifferent Ceremony is all
the impression or inscription that it has: even as the Elements in the Lords
Sacraments are only sacramental in the sacramental use, and not before or
after; as the water used in Baptism.

Dr. Burges in a digression ( page 475. and seq.) shows great differences in
the operative virtue, holiness, necessity, and worship of God which Papists
place in their Ceremonies being wondrous many, from our few and plain, ordained
only for comeliness, order and edification. And page 285. Ours are merely
significative, theirs believed also to be operative (as exorcismes, crossings,
sprinkling of holy water, oil, chrisme, exsufflation, ringing of hallowed bells
and such like, to drive away the Devil) ours arbitrary, theirs held necessary:
ours of moral duties only, theirs signifying and shadowing out divine graces,
procuring, and meriting them at Gods hand. Our small threeds (I hope) may well
pass through the needles eye, where these their Camels cannot. 295.

CHAP. VI. The Surplesse, Cross at Baptism, and Kneeling at Communions,
approved.
BUt this is better seen in the particulars, which our people do most stick at;
the Surplesse, the Cross, and Kneeling at the receiving of our Lords Supper.

Of the good use of the Surplesse amongst us, I have said enough in the third
chapter: now of our difference from the Papists. Among them the Surplesse might
not be used, until some Bishop or his deputy had solemnly hallowed it with
prayers, to defend the wearer from the Devils assaults, and with many
crossings, and holy water sprinkling: which done, no public act of
ministerial service might be done without it (except in the Mass, which
required higher gear.) The Mass Priest, either with the Surplesse, or without
it (at his choice) must put on the Missal furniture, the Amice, Alb, Tunicle,
Stole, and the rest: otherwise he sins mortally. These things Dr. Burges
shows and proves out of their own books, page 475, 476.

It is not so with us: we use the Surplesse only as a decent distinctive
garment, as also the additions of hoods (showing learned men's degrees in the
Universities) may assure us. In which use, the Divines of reformed Churches do
allow it, according to the examples of the ancient Fathers, Chrysostom. Hom.
83. in Matt. Hieronymus lib. 1. cont. Pelag. Of this judgment is Zanchius, De
Redempt. cap. 16. Pet. Martyr loc. epist. Hooper. fol. 1087. citing Chrysostom
and Cyprian. Bullinger and Gualter citing Theodoret, hist. 2.27. Socr. 6.22.
Polanus, Zepperus, etc. Thus Mr. Sprint, page 88. Melancthon and Benhagius
counseled ministers to wear the Surplesse, rather then with foolish
frowardness to trouble and hinder the Church. Council. Melancth. part. 2. fol.
91, 92. Sprint, page 129. Bucer wrote that godly men might use these garments
godly. Martyr calls the Surplesse a thing indifferent, which makes a man
neither godly nor wicked. Calvine would not have men contend de pileo and vest
linea. Beza would not have churches forsaken for Surplesse, Caps, or such other
things truly indifferent: to whose writing herein subscribed Nicolaus
Colladonus, Simon Goulartius, Francis. Porta, Henric. Stephanus, and finally
Mr. Cartwright himself: Sprint, 130. and seq. Bucer. script. Angl. Censura,
fol. 458. etc. Martyr. loc. com. fol. 1085, 1086, 1127. Calv. epist. 120. fol.
217. Beza epist. 8. fol. 77. Grindallo, and epist. 12. fol. 98, 99.

Of the Cross in Baptism, our use is, 1. Lawful, 2. Safe, 3. Profitable, 4.
Necessary.

1. See our 30 Canon.
Lawful, By the judgment of the Primitive Church, which used it, and gloried
in it, without any thought of superstition: for which cause it was retained
also by the reverend Fathers and great Divines in the days of King Edward 6.
of which, some suffered banishment, some death, for the testimony of the truth:
and such as returned from exile in Queen Elisabeths time, continued the use of
it. You must condemn all these grave, ancient, and late-learned Divines,
Fathers, Martyrs, if you condemn us: if you absolve them, you absolve us.

Add unto them, The late harmony of confessions of other reformed Churches,
allowing it, and also the most learned particular Protestant Divines: Bucer,
who says, It is nec indecens nec inutile: Beza, who bids, rather use it, then
forsake the ministry; and, Vtantur ipsi, sicut par est, liberate sua.
Hemingius, Adiaphora sunt: let not schisms arise for them. Zanchius, It may be
used without superstition, yea with commendation, and without peril, and
binds not the Conscience. Polanus, It was used by the Fathers without sin:
so says Zepperus, and Mr. Perkins, and Goulartius, cited by Mr. Sprint, page
138. and seq. Bucer. script. Anglic. censur. cap. 12. fol. 479. Beza quo prius
fol. 98, 100. Heming. Syntag. ad 4. leg. decalogi, 33, 34. fol. 365. and
comment. in 1. cap. Joan. he says, Minime improbo signum crucis. Zanchius
compend. Relig. loc. 16. de tradit. eccles. fol. 654. Polanus, in Ezech. cap.
9. verse. 4. fol. 258. Zepper. de Sacrament. cap. 16. fol. 357, 358. and de
polit. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 10. fol. 57, 58. Mr. Perkins, Problem. tit. Signum
crucis, sect. 1, 2, 3. fol. 83, 84.

2. Safe: without doubt, See our 30 Canon, Thirdly etc
as it is used by our Church with sufficient Cautions and Exceptions against
all Popish superstitions and errors. For, 1. it is no part of the substance of
Baptism: but being used after the infant is fully and perfectly baptized, it
neither adds any thing to the virtue and perfection of Baptism, nor being
omitted does detract any thing from the effect of it. And in this use we hold
conformity with the safe and honorable Primitive Church, but no conformity
with the later Papists: as Dr. Burges well shows. Dr. Burges page 476. and
seq.
Our ministers (says he) do not cross themselves, nor the people, nor fonts,
water, Communion table, cups, or the bread and wine, or any other of Gods
ordinances, all which their priests are bound to, for their consecration; and
without which nothing is with them consecrated or holy. We cross not the
child before baptism, on the forehead, breast, or any part (which their
priests must do, to drive away the devil, and to make the Sacraments efficacy
more easy and strong.) And after baptism, we cross not the infant with oil,
chrisme, or without, on the crown (as their priests must do, to give them their
full Christendom, lest they die before confirmation.) And at confirmation, our
Bishop is not to cross the forehead with chrisme, or without (which in Popery
is enjoined as an essential part of their Sacrament of confirmation.) Thus Dr.
Burges there: who also recites manifold abuses of the cross among the
Papists, page 584. and seq. worthy to be read, but too long to be here inserted.

3. Profitable: for as by Baptism we receive a great blessing, so we must be
mindful to perform a great duty. As the infant by Baptism is made a member
of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritour of the kingdom of heaven; that
is, a partaker of all benefits purchased by Christ (adoption, grace, and glory,
in their times:) so by being received into the Church militant for a time, he
must take upon him the cross of Christ; Matt. 10.38. Luke 9.23.
or his cross, and follow Christ, and that daily: of which duty to put him in
mind, he is signed with the sign of the cross upon his forehead, in token
that he is to become a faithful, constant and valiant soldier of Christ, and
(as our book speaks) not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
but manfully to fight under his banner, against sin, the world, and the
devil, etc.

This is profitable, not only to the newbaptized, but to all the assembly, to
put them in mind of their duties promised in their baptism: who can be
content to receive benefits, but are often forgetful of their duties.

4. Necessary: See our 30. canon in the end, and our last chapter here.
though not to the essence of the sacrament of baptism, yet necessary to be
added to the solemnity of baptism, for the reason before-said: Necessary
also, and not to be omitted without sin; because it is commanded by lawful
authority. And whereas the 30 Canon says, By this lawful ceremony the child
is dedicated to the service of Christ; It must be understood only, Declared to
be dedicated, says Dr. Burges, page 476, etc.

But concerning another point, which Dr. Burges adds [That, if the infant be
in peril of death, not likely to live to make profession of Christ crucified,
our book directs us to baptize it, but not to use the crossing, etc.] because
happily some man might take his meaning to be that our book forbad the crossing
in that case: I desired our most learned and judicious Bishops judgment of
this point (among others) who most fatherly and lovingly wrote me this answer,
with his own hand.

I do conceive, that unless it be certified, in this particular case, that the
child was formerly admitted into Christ's congregation, and signed with the
sign of the Cross, there is no warrant in the Liturgy to omit that sign, I
certify you that all is well done -- and that this child is received into the
number of the children of God -- How is he received, For though the word
Receiving go before the Crossing, (as the 30 Canon says) yet they are
conjoined.
but by that form of receiving expressed in Public baptism, We receive this
child into the congregation of Christ's flock, and do sign him, etc. The other
interpretation and inference of Dr. Burges would open a gap to palliate
inconformity, by causing the midwives, or some one else to be meddling with
every inconformable man's child, and so draw it to this case of Private
baptism, to avoid the signing of it with the sign of the Cross.

JOHN LINCOLN.

In the Primitive Church also, Oecum. (...) mox a baptismo, initio Ecclesiae,
ob persecutionem.
laying on of hands was used presently upon the baptized, to confirm and
strengthen them against the persecutions of those times.

Concerning kneeling at the receiving of the holy Communion, We find that
kneeling, bowing the body, or falling on their faces in most reverent sort was
used by Gods people upon any sign of Gods presence or grace exhibited unto
them: as, 2. Chron. 7.3. When the children of Israel saw how the fire came
down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the
Lord, saying, For he is good, and his mercy endures for ever. The like we
read Levit. 9. verse. the last. And there came a fire from before the Lord, and
consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the
people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces. If any man think this was
lawful only at the extraordinary or miraculous tokens of Gods presence; let
him consider these ordinaries. Psalm 132.7. We will go into his tabernacles,
we will worship at his footstool. The Hebrew text of this is translated
verbatim by Pagnine and Montanus, thus, Incurvabimus nos scabello pedum ejus?
and by Tremelius and Junius, Incurvamus nos [honorem exhibentes] ante scabellum
pedum ejus: and Psalm. 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his
footstool: for he is holy (margent, Or, It is holy) Pagnine and Montan.
Incurvate vos scabello pedum ejus, Tremelius, Ad scabellum pedum ejus. Gods
people worshipped not the footstool, but God at or before his footstool: as,
Psalm. 95.2. Let us come before his presence (ante faciem ejus, Tremel.) 6. Let
us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker; to wit, in
his Temple, or before his Temple, as did Ezra (Ezra 10.1.) When Ezra had
prayed, confessed, wept, and cast himself down before the house of God.
(Pagnine, Cum concidisset coram domo Dei: Montan. Procidens ad facies domus
Dei: Tremel. Prosternens se ante domum Dei.) He worshipped not the house of
God, but the God of that house. Why may not, why should not we do the like at
the receiving of these holy mysteries, without idolatry, or any breach of the
second commandment?

Protestants, that do not hold a transubstantiation, or turning of the
substance of the outward elements into the substance of the very body and blood
of our Savior, need not, or cannot in reason think that our kneeling at the
receiving thereof is a worshipping of the creature: yet because they verily
believe and know that these are Sacraments and seals unto us, ordained by
Christ to signify and represent unto us the breaking of his body and shedding
of his blood for our redemption; and more, to confirm and deliver unto us the
assurance of our salvation purchased by him; and also to convey it unto us, as
by certain conduit-pipes, by his power, wisdom, and mercy, ordained the
inestimable benefits of his death and passion: in regard of this incomparable
use and benefit, we cannot receive them with too much humility, reverence, and
thankfulness.

Therefore kneeling at the Communion has been used and allowed by the most
excellent Divines of reformed Churches. Sprint, 142, etc.


Calvine allows it in Orthodox professors, Epist. 292. fol. 479.

Beza epist. 12. page 100. edit. Genevae 1575. Geniculatio denique (says he)
dum symbola accipiuntur, speciem quidem habet piae ac Christianae venerationis,
ac proinde olim potuit cum fructu usurpari: (here is a confession of the
antiquity of kneeling, and the pious and profitable use thereof) but because
after that the new doctrine of Transubstantiation was brought into the Church,
and thereupon the worshipping of the elements, as if they were God himself, he
thinks it was well done to take it away: but he adds, Intereatamen cum ista
per se non sit idololatrica, idem de illis quod de proxime praecedentibus
sentimus; to wit, they are tolerable, and may be profitably used.

Bucer, epist. ad Joan. Alasc. says, Sacraments may be distributed to men
kneeling or standing, and as well in the Church, and in the morning, and to
women as well as men; though our Lord celebrated it in a chamber, in the
evening, and to men only. The substance remaining entire, such circumstances
may be changed.

Peter Martyr, Loc. com. class. 2. loc. 4. page 232. edit. Londin. 1576.
teaches that kings as kings should have care that sound doctrine and decent
ceremonies be maintained: and adds, Nihil interest si coenae Dominicae
sacramentum stantes, aut sedentes, aut genibus flexis percipiamus, modo
institutum Domini conservetur, and occasio superstitionis praecidatur. And, In
defens. ad Gardener. de Eucharist. part. 1. object. 1. fol. 5. he says, If
ones mind be applied, not to the elements, but to the thing signified;
adoration may lawfully be interposed, etc.

Vrsinus agrees with Martyr: as he professes, Exercitat. part. 2. fol. 835.
ad fol. 840.

Zanchius, Tom. 4. lib. 1. cap. 17. These. 10. de idololatria, page 531. These.
decima. Vt pie facit qui honor aliquo and reverentia afficit sacramenta: sic
idololatriam admittit, qui ea adorat and colit. The first part, that some
honor and reverence is due to the sacraments, he proves 1. by Saint Paul's
words, Worthily, and not discerning the Lords body (1. Cor. 11.29.) from common
and ordinary meat and drink: there ought to be worthiness, principally in the
mind, and reverence in the outward gesture of the body: and 2. by the common
consent and custom of all men, who come bareheaded, etc. and 3. by example of
men's reverence to the word of God preached and read; which though it be not
worshipped, yet is to be handled and heard reverently, as the word of God, and
not of men. The second part, That adoration and worship is not to be given to
the bread and wine, because they be still creatures, and therefore may not have
that honor which is only due to the Creator: which he explicateth, that
invocation and prayer for pardon of our sins, may not be made to them, for
that is a worship proper to God. Such kind of worship to the bread and wine
(as if they were Christ himself) in their elevations and circumgestations,
Zanchius condemns as idolatry: and so do we.

Zepperus de sacramentis cap. 13. fol. 321, 322. Sprint, 146.
teaches that we are not bound in the new Testament to the circumstances of
the time, place, site or position of body, (such as Christ used when he first
ordained the Sacrament) but may enjoy our Christian liberty in altering them.
Again, Polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 11. fol. 76. he says, These circumstances
may by our Christian liberty be differently appointed and observed.

The Low Country Churches, thus, 141.
In the administration of the Lords supper, let every Church impose or use such
Ceremonies as they shall judge most expedient, etc. Ex Actis Synodalibus
general. inferior. Germ. Middleburg. anno 1581. Can. 45. Sculting. Anachrys.
Hierarch. lib. 9.

The Bohemians receive this Sacrament, In genua procumbentes, kneeling on their
knees. Harm. confess.. 14. Bohem. fol. 120.

Saravia contra Bezam, defens. cap. 25. fol. 582, 147.
583. and Luther in Genesis 47. allow this ceremony of kneeling.

CHAP. VII. Our Ceremonies are commendable for their ancient and profitable use.
OUr Ceremonies (now questioned) are ancient and of good use: Sprint, page 170.
as that in ministering the Sacraments, the ministers should wear a white linen
garment. Zanchius de Redempt. cap. 16. fol. 445. who cites S. Hierom contra
Pelag. lib. 1. See before, chap. 6. See also our 30 Canon, that in baptism
they should sign the baptized with the sign of the Cross, Beza epist. 8.
fol. 75.
which signing Beza says is vetustissima; and so for kneeling at the
Communion, that it has a show of godliness and Christian reverence, and was
used cum fructu. Beza epist. 8. fol. 100.

The rites and ceremonies of Rome were not all of one suit: Burges 418.
Those of her virginity had some use, though after her fornication prostituted
to abuse: others were originally begotten of her body polluted, and so some are
in themselves, and in the simplest use of them, unlawful; as the images of the
Godhead, half-communions, etc. others such as in themselves were (sometimes)
lawfully used, as of indifferent nature: and such are ours now in question, as
Beza confesses, epist. 8. Where Sin and Ceremony are inseparably woven
together, we must separate from both, even from the ceremony for the sins
sake, and break the vessel that cannot be cleansed; but in accessory pollution
separable, cleanse away the pollution, and preserve the vessel. So the ancient
ceremonies which were pure among the Fathers, but by tract of time gathered
pollution among the Papists, may yet by washing and cleansing be restored to
their ancient sweetness, and used without sin.

The ancient Fathers and Churches had always some universal ceremonies, Dr.
Burges page 102. and seq.
which were not appointed in Scripture (as the feasts of Christ's Nativitie,
Resurrection, Ascension, Pentecost, etc.) Zanchius Tract. de Sacra scriptura,
page 279. And these customs were universal through the whole Church (though
there was for a time some difference in the time, yet none in the fitness of
the things) and these have continued to this day: if some pollution have
bespotted them, shall we not cleanse it away, and frame our selves to the
ancient custom? Is the custom of the whole Church despicable? of which S.
Paul says (1. Cor. 11.16.) We have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God. And again, Came the Gospel from you? or came it to you alone? Who is he
that dares thus to censure the universal militant Church? Augustine ( epist.
118.) says, Insolentissimae insaniae est, existimare non recte fieri, quod ab
universa Ecclesia fit: and he says (ibidem) that universal observations not
being written in Scripture, must be understood to be commanded and ordained by
general Councels, or else to come from the Apostles. Surely we hold it an
honor to our Church, Burges 458.
that we are come as near the Primitive Church, as we well could. So says
Bishop Jewel, Defense of the Apology, page 27, 28. And in the Preface before
our book of Common prayer, is this Profession, You here have an order for
prayer (as touching the reading of the holy Scriptures) much agreeable to the
mind and purpose of the old Fathers. And of Ceremonies, (ibid.) If some be
offended, for that some of the old Ceremonies are retained still: if they
consider, that without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any order, or
quiet discipline in the Church, they shall easily perceive just cause to reform
their judgment: and if they think much that any of the old remain, and would
rather have all devised new; then such men granting some Ceremonies convenient
to be had, surely where the old may be well used, there they cannot reasonably
reprove the old only for their age, without bewraying their own folly: for in
such a case, they ought rather to have reverence unto them for their antiquity,
if they will declare themselves more studious of unity and concord then of
innovations and new fanglenesse: which (as much as may be with true setting
forth of Christ's religion) is always to be eschewed.

The writers against our ceremonies, cannot deny that the Fathers practiced
them: but they did it (say they) without examining their lawfulness or
unlawfulness, as men busied in those hard times of persecution about more
substantial matters of religion, and not having time and leisure to look into
these inferior things. See Burges page 383, 384 and 627.
Thus the namelesse replier (upon Bishop Mortons Defense, cap. 3. sect. 29.)
shifts and shuffles off the ancient Fathers. But 1. This is a poor evasion,
and abusing of the Fathers; as if they said, The whole Church of Christ, even
in the days of most pure zeal and frequent martyrdom, was so wholly slack or
blind, that they continued by joint consent, in the use of unlawful
observations, without searching or knowing whether they were lawful or not. 2.
It is a vain evasion, because still in the better and calmer times of the
Church, (when there was leisure and time enough to examine them) the same
Ceremonies continued constantly, and generally practiced. 3. It is a confession
plain enough, that the ancient Fathers are in this point fully against them.
And as they elude the Fathers, so also the late Protestant Divines. When we
allege Luther, Calvine, Melancthon, Beza, Bucer, Martyr, Zanchius, and such
other zealous champions as God raised up against the purple harlot; or the
blessed Martyrs of our own nation ( Ridley, Cranmer, Hooper, Latimer, etc.) who
gave their lives in opposition to Antichrist, and were the men that gave
entertainment to these very Ceremonies: Burges 387.
Their answer is, Either their meaning is mistaken; or else, They showed
themselves to be but men (as if the Non-conformists were more then men;) or,
There is variety in some of them touching this point; or, Sometime they waver
in their words; or, forsooth, Some of them wrote in the dawning of the day:
Others lived in England, as Bucer, Martyr; Chemnitius was a Lutheran, Zanchius
of a timorous disposition; or, They were not well informed: and such other
gear: Whereby all men may see that these grave Divines were not of their
judgment. But they had rather cast dirt in the faces of the Lords worthies,
then confess any mistaking in themselves.

So that to dissuade these indifferent things, as unlawful, pernicious, or
evil, is bitterly to tax, disgrace, and condemn all the ancient Churches
primitive, and the grave Fathers thereof, yea the universal Church of Christ
not only in those times, but in the aftertimes, and all the reformed Churches
in these last times; and to appropriate all true knowledge, sincerity, and
godliness only to the Non-conformists of this only age and country.

CHAP. VIII. Our Ceremonies imposed by lawful authority, may not be omitted
without sin.
THe former objections being answered, and our Ceremonies cleared to be lawful
both by the late judicious Divines, and also by the Fathers and customs of the
ancient Church; Behold now the Necessity of Subjection to them, being imposed
by Lawful authority. For things in themselves indifferent do in a sort alter
their nature, when by lawful authority they be commanded or forbidden: for
then, being commanded, they may not be omitted; and being forbidden, they may
not be done. Beza epist. 24. fol. 142, 143. numero 6, 7. So says also our 30
Canon, in the end.

B. Morton shows, that although Ceremonies be humane in hypothesi (in
particular choice of some rather then of other) yet they are Divine in thesi
(by the general appointment or permission of God, saying, Let all things be
done decently, and in order, and to edifying, 1. Cor. 14.40, 26.) B. Mortons
general Defense, c. 1. sect. 22. And Mr. Cartwright says, of lawful
ordinances, that God commands them by the Church. And we are so far bound
in Conscience to obey them, as that we cannot neglect them without sin, says
Beza, ep. 24. So teaches also Calvine, Bullinger, Melancthon, Zanchius,
Vrsinus, alleged by Dr. Burges, Answer p. 276. Yea (says Beza) whosoever in
the Church of God (be they few or many) do pertinaciously and tumultuously
oppose themselves against the ministers of the Consistory, and will not obey
them in things not contrary to the word of God, they are of all men most justly
to be accounted and censured as manifest enemies to the Church, whose public
peace they trouble. Beza, epist. 24. page 149. Therefore Dr. Burges says, (
page 230.) What Church is there, that does not punish the disturbers of her
public peace more severely, then some other sins, which in their own natures
simply considered are unto God more offensive? For what is this but an
enervation or dissolution of good laws and government? Therefore let no such
man complain of the magistrates severitie, when the fault is in himself.
Crudelem medicum intemperans ager facit. And let no man pretend Offense either
of the people, or of his own person, for altering his judgment and courses.

For, Of offense.
1. All the offense that people take, grew from the error and indiscretion of
some preachers declaiming so earnestly against our Ceremonies: which offense
the preachers again may take away or prevent, if they will be as earnest and
diligent to inform their peoples Conscience aright, about the purpose, use, and
end of our Ceremonies, as they have been to lead them into error and mislike
of them, as Beza says, epist. 12. page 99.

The people also, which have been led by the reverence they bare to their
pastors, to embrace whatsoever they taught, without examination, I wish them
(with the Bereans, Acts 17.11.) to search the Scriptures whether those things
be so, and to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1. These.
5.21. Ordinary men in eating an apple, will cut out the rotten, the worm, and
the core, and eat the good only; and spying a spider, or any filth in a glass
of wine, will take it out, and not swallow down all together without
discretion. When we see a heap of goldfilings mingled with dust, let us cull
out the gold, and leave the dust; and neither think all is gold, nor all dust,
nor scorn the gold because of the dust mixed with it, nor esteem the dust
because of the gold, but separate them with good discretion. Learning, zeal,
and painfulnesse, is gold in the preachers; embrace it: but if any dust of
erroneous opinions be mixed with it, take not that for gold also. Oves estis,
sed rationales (says Saint Chrysostom) You say you are sheep, and must be
guided by your shepherds: yet you are sheep endued with reason, and may
perceive when they drive you into bogs or briers. Preachers (yea Saint Paul
himself, 1. Cor. 13.12.) see through a glass darkly, and know but in part: and
neither they nor you must think too highly of them, but soberly, according as
God has given to every man his different measure, Romans 12.3, 6.

2. We must know also that the Scriptures which teach us not to offend our
brethren (as 1. Cor. 8.9, 12, 13. and 10.28. and Romans 14.15, 16, 21.) do speak
of things in our own power, to do, or not to do; and not of things commanded by
the Magistrate, whom we must obey both for fear of punishment, and also for
Conscience sake, Romans 13.4, 5. And thus Dr. Saravia resolves; Scandal of the
weak cannot take place against a public law, to which subjects must submit.
Saravia Defens. diverse. grad. ministr. cap. 25. fol. 581. If it be a fault, it
is certainly a lesser fault to offend some ignorant people, then to offend the
governors: for that is only against Charity, this against Charity and
Duty, or Justice; an exemplary disobedience tending to the dissolution of
government.

3. When we perform obedience to magistracy commanding things in their own
nature indifferent, no man ought to take offense at us: if he do, the sin is
his, and not ours. It is Scandalum acceptum, non datum; and he must be better
taught. See for this two notable discourses of Ceremonies or traditions and
scandal, in Zanchius, tomo 8. page 814. and seq. edit. Samoneti, 1605.

This necessity of subjection, our judicious exiles and martyrs in Queen Mary's
time, did very well know, practice, and persuade; testifying thereby also their
good opinion of our Church service and ceremonies. Cranmer protested (if the
Queen would give him leave) that he with Peter Martyr and four or five others
would prove our Common prayers, Sacraments, and Ceremonies, lately set forth by
King Edward 6. to be more pure and according to Gods word, then any that had
been in England these thousand years before. Acts and Mon. fol. 1465. Bishop
Ridley and Grindall judged that nothing could be disproved in them by the word
of God. Acts and Mon. Dr. Tailor said, no Christian conscience could be
offended with any thing therein. Acts and Mon. fol. 1521.

At Frankford, when some exiles disliked them, other most reverend persons
stood strongly for them, as Thomas Leaver, John Jewel, John Mullins, John
Parkhurst, Laurence Humfrey, James Pilkington, Alexander Nowell, James Haddon,
Edwin Sands, Edmund Grindall, etc. all worthy men, Bishops, Deans, Doctors, or
Martyrs afterward: sealing the truth they held, with danger, exile, and loss
of their lives. See the discourse of the troubles at Frankford, fol. 16.23, 19.
Their diversity of opinions caused them also to seek the judgments of other
Churches and teachers, as Calvine, Beza, Bullinger, fol. 25, 199. Also Robert
Horn, Thomas Leaver, John Mullins, Thomas Bentham, William Cole, John
Parkhurst, Laurence Humfrey, etc. were fully determined to use no other order
or ceremonies then those aforesaid of King Edward. Discourse. fol. 16, 223. And
James Haddon, Edwin Sands, Edmund Grindall, Christopher Goodman, confidently
brought the same rites into the English Church there, fol. 22, 23. They also at
Frankford wrote unto the like Exiles at Zurick, persuading them to stand to the
death for defense of the same Ceremonies: and Mr. Fox was one of the 17. that
subscribed to the letter.

Add unto these, those other worthies, that in more peaceable times stuck at
our Ceremonies for a time: yet in time, upon better consideration, conformed
themselves, and used them. Bishop Hooper preached and wrote earnestly against
them, chiefly against Episcopal garments and Surplesses, and was imprisoned
for it, for a season: but his reasons were answered, and himself persuaded by
Bucer, Martyr, and Calvine, to conform: so that afterward he did wear the
ornaments, and preached before the King in the Bishops robes. Calvin. epist.
120. fol. 217. Bucer, Script. Anglican. fol. 705. de re vestiar. Hooper. Pet.
Mart. loc. com. ad finem inter epistolas, fol. 1085. Mr. Greenham protested he
would observe them, if they were enjoined him. Mr. Dearing used them. Bishop
Jewel, Dr. Whitakers, Dr. Fulk, conformed: so did Dr. Humfrey after long
standing out; as also Dr. Raynolds, Dr. Spark, Dr. Chaloner, Dr. Ayry, Dr.
Chaderton, Mr. Knewstubs; and very studiously persuaded others to do the like:
as did also Mr. Sprint, and Dr. Burges, having thoroughly examined all the
reasons pro and contra, and many other godly learned men, too long here to be
reckoned. And if any refuse them still, because they think it a disgrace to
their persons or ministry to alter their minds and courses, having never yet
used them, but rather spoken and preached against them: I wish them to consider
well, and follow the examples of these aforenamed worthy men.

But if these worthies of later times be not sufficient, let us set before our
eyes that ancient glorious light of Gods Church Saint Augustine, who in his age
wrote and published to the world two books of Retractations, wherein he
acknowledged and corrected the errors which he had committed in his former
books. These books showed that he religiously preferred Gods honor and the
Churches good before his own credit; and that he labored both by good report
and ill report to bring men to the truth, and sought (with Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
10.33.) not his own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved:
which turned to the great commendation of his ingenuitie and sincerity. And it
may teach all men to acknowledge with him, that since the Apostles times, the
knowledge of Gods ministers comes not unto them by sudden revelation or
infusion from God immediately, or all at once; but by succession and degrees,
by labor, study, search, conference, and contention with the erroneous. By
which means Saint Augustine profited in knowledge more and more to his lives
end; as Saint Peter exhorts all men to do, in his last words of his last
chapter of his last epistle. And therefore to profess our profiting in
knowledge, ought to be no shame unto us: and to confess our slips or errors
even publicly, to reduce men to the knowledge of some necessary truth, shows
our charity to them, our piety to God, and the sincerity of our own hearts.

Lastly, that I may speak generally to all country ministers and other
subjects, but chiefly to the younger and ruder sort, I say, We inferior people
may well think our Princes have reasons to do what they do, though we
comprehend them not: For we live as it were in low valleys and plains, and see
not far about us: but Princes sit as on tops of hills, and see both into former
ages, what was done then; and into foreign countries, what is done now, how all
things are and have been carried, with the reasons, circumstances, and events
of all: assisted also with the advice and judgment of the gravest, wisest,
learnedest Divines, and other choicest counselors of greatest experience: by
whose grave counsels, with due respect to former ages, and the present state of
neighbor nations, they set down orders fittest for their times and countries:
which we country people should not rashly censure, but willingly submit unto,
thinking humbly of our selves, and reverently of their wisdoms. Far be from
us that ridiculous fable (recited by Plutarch in the life of Agis and
Cleomenes) of the serpents tail, that would needs lead the body another while,
as if the head had already led it too long: but the tail wanting eyes and
brains, led the head and body into dangerous places, and mangled them all to
pieces: or that censure of Tully in his book De senectute: To the question,
Cedo, qui vestram Rempub. tantam amisistis tam cito? The answer was,
Proveniebant Oratores novi, stulti, adolescentuli.

We should think also seriously of that Medicall and Political rule, Omnis
mutatio periculosa: which S. Augustine applies to Church ceremonies; Where
lawful customs are settled (says he) though some other more profitable
perchance might be found out, yet Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etiam quae
adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat. The very change of settled customs,
though it help with some commodity, yet will it do hurt with the novitie. Which
occasioned the Locrines custom, that whosoever would bring in a new law
amongst them, should come and declare it to the assembly, with a halter about
his neck; that if it were not approved good for the Commonwealth, he might
presently be hanged, for his desire of innovation. To which purpose our late
gracious Sovereign King James (in his proclamation prefixed before the book of
Common prayer) has these words, Neither are we ignorant of the inconveniences
that do arise in government by admitting innovation in things once settled by
mature deliberation; and how necessary it is to use constancy in upholding the
public determinations of states: for such is the unquietness and
unstedfastnesse of some dispositions affecting every year new forms of things,
as if they should be followed in their unconstancie, would make all actions of
States ridiculous and contemptible; whereas the steadfast maintaining of things
by good advice established, is the weal of all Commonwealths.

FINIS.

