THE SPEECH OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND TO HER BELOVED CHILDREN.

HEu, heu Domine Deus, quia ipsi sunt in persecutione tua primi, qui videntur
in Ecclesia tua primatum diligere, gerere principatum; impedire salutem est
persequi Saluatorem.

Bernard. Alace Alace o Lord God, for they are cheesest in thy persecution, who
love the first and chief places and to bear rule: to stay the course of
salvation is to persecute the Savior.

Bernard. SImplicitas amentia, malitia sapientia nomen habet, virique boni
usque adeo irridentur, ut fere nullus qui irrideri possit, appareat.

Petrarch. Simplicity now carries the name of madness, malice the name of
wisdom, and good men are so derided, that almost no man can be found to be
derided.

Petrarch. Imprinted in the year 1620.

THE KIRK OF CHRIST IN SCOTLAND TO HER DEARLY beloved Children, wishes purity
and peace.
AS I your loving mother fearing to be finally deserted of my glorious Spouse
the Lord Jesus, and to be childles hereafter, have weeped sore in the night
this time bypast my tears are on my cheeks; Among all my lovers few to
comfort me, my friends have dealt treacherously with me, they are become my
enemies, Lament. 1. 2. So would ye my dear children dolefully cry out: The joy
of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning, the crown is fallen
from our heads, woe unto us that we have sinned, Lament. 5. 15. 16. If ye were
touched with the sense and feeling of your present estate, and could by the
thick shadows of this evening be brought to consider the comfortles
desolation of that approaching night of darkness, after so bright a day of
visitation. But so much the more dangerous is defection, and the mystery of
iniquity the more pernicious, that it proceeds from so subtle beginnings as
to your simplicity ar almost insensible.

It is not time then for me your dolorous mother to keep silence. But love and
fear press me to put you in mind, that it has been in all ages the holy
disposition and happy practice of all Gods people waiting for the appearing of
Jesus their Lord, te^dring the weal of his spouse, and taking to heart the
aeternall salvation of their own souls; to set A three fold consideration of
every Christian, ap plied to the present purpose and time.
continually before their eyes. 1. His inaestimable goodness toward his Kirk.
2. Her case and condition, while she is militant here on earth. And 3. in
consideration of the one and the other, the duty required and expected at
their hands, wherthrough in the goodness of God they have been safe from that
dreadful ruin, that has overtaken the wicked. And which I wish you my
beloved children to escape by calling to mind in like manner at this time of
your danger and my distress. First how wonderful the Lords mercies have been
toward me his Kirk in this nation. Seco^dlie my present case crying with the
complaints of a mother for help at your hands. And thirdly what is due from
your affection, places, and callings to me, in whose womb ye were conceived,
and by whose care ye are brought up to that which ye now are. That whatsoever
is commanded by the God of heaven, it may be diligently done for the house of
the God of heaven. For why should he be wroth against the realm of the King
and his sons, Ezra 7. 23. And that Christ may say to me yet once again: Thou
art beautiful my love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army
with banners. Cant. 6. 3. Words and motions of this sort as they have been, so
they will be but oil to feed the fire of the fury of such ince^diaries, as
make their own earthly particulars their highest projects; for the wicked
shall do wickedlie and none of them shall understand; yet by the grace of God
many shall be purified and tried and the wise shall understand. The greatest
wisdom of the greatest of you in other matters; and your gracious countenance
toward me, and the meanest of your brethren at other times, suffers me not
to doubt of your audience of any message or motion from heaven; but especially
be my mouth, which may either dis cover, or prevent any spiritual or
temporal danger. Now the spirit of wisdom and knowledge give unto you all
wise hearts, that in the sight of God ye trying things that differ may approve
things excellent (which is above the reach of the natural man) that ye may be
sincere and without offense till that day of Christ your Lord and mine.

THe riches of the unsearchable First of the great goodness of God to the Kirk
of Scotland.
favors of my spouse toward me have been so great, he has made his glory
to dwell so sensibly in this land, that I may boldly say, Mercy and truth
righteousness and peace had never since Christ's coming in the flesh a more
glorious meeting, and amiable embracing on earth, then ye have seen amongst
your selves in the roughe end of this northern Yland: which therefore has
justly obtained (to my no small comfort) a great name among the chief Kirkes
and Kingdoms in the World. A people that sat in In making the Gospel to shine
here beyond the light of other nations.
darkness has seen a great light, and to them who sat in the region of death
light is sprung up. To what nation under heaven (when now the sun of
righteousness has shined upon the most part of the world) has the Lord
communicated the Gospel for so large a time, with such purity, fulness,
prosperity, power, liberty and peace. The hottest persecutions had never
greater purity, and power; the most halcyon heretical times had never more
prosperity and peace; the best reformed Kirks in other places can hardly
parallel your fulness and liberty. And all these with such continuance, that
not only has he made the truth to stay with you, as he did the sun in the
days of Iosuah; but when the cloud of your iniquities did hasten it to go
down, in his mercy has he brought back the glorious sun by many degrees
as in the times of Ezekiah. Oh that ye had known the long pleasant day of your
visitation, and in this your day the things belonging unto your peace. Christ
has not only been one, and his name one, in respect of his prophetical
office for your information, of his priesthood for the expiation of your
sins, and intercession for you: but also has displayed his banners; and has
showed himself (few can say the like) a sovereign King in our Land, to govern
you with his own scepter erected in his Word, to cut off with his sword all
monuments of Idolatry, and superfluity of pompous ceremonies; and to restore
all the means of his worship in Word, Sacraments and discipline to the holy
simplicity and integrity of the first pattern showed in the mount; from the
which, by that wisdom of man which is ever foolishnes with God, they had
fearfully and shamefully swerved.

The sincerer sort of the bordering nations about you, have been so ravished
with that beauty of the Lord upon your Sion, with that crown of glory and
rich diadem Testified by their confessions' and wishes.
by the hand of our God set upon your heads, that they have made you the mead
of there religious wishes: they have with vehement desires longed to see the
things that ye have seen. And have not spared to profess, that in your case,
they would rather suffer themselves to be dissolved, then that one pin of
that holy Tabernacle so divinelie compacted should be loosed.

Within and amongst your selves that purity of profession received
universallie with so full consent, that Prince and Peers, Pastors and people
were all for Christ, one heart and one soul of these who believed, with such
evidences of Gods favor that the windows and gates of heaven seemed to be
opened, to rain down upon this Land spiritual gifts to save you, as sometime
they had been ready to power down rain to destroy the world, every hand
almost received some gift, and every head crowned with some grace, with such
success that it brought a rare unity, prosperity, and peace upon Kirk and
common wealth. With such power and presence of the spirit of God in converting,
comforting and confirming his people that Satan was seen fall like lightening
from heaven, the infidel and unbeleever casting himself down on his face, and
confessing that undoubtedlie God was amongst you, and in the midst of your
meetings, as the souls of his own secret ones can best bear witness, who
have been most submitted to that holy and happy simplicity, the effects
whereof yet remaining in the hearts of many, all worldly power be it never so
violent sall not be able to remove it.

And with such terror from God and the Kings Laws, that ye wanted not your
Theodosians publikly humbling themselves. The hardest hearted and haughtiest
were made to stoup. The Atheist either changed in heart, or in countenance, and
forced to play the hypocrite, the proudest papist, either made like you, or
made to leave you. Heresy never hatched within your walls, and the Babylonish
brood of schism in the infancy till this time was dashed against the sto^es.
Ye sought not then (my dear children) with John and James like great Princes
one to sit on the right hand, another on the left; nor to be busked with
earthly glory and Persian pomp, better beseeming the kings of the world, then
the kingdom of Christ. The Carbuncles, the Sapphires, the Emeraulds, the
Chrysolites; the gold, the precious stones, wherewith my foundation, walls,
windows, gates were set and adorned, were out of the Lords own thesaurie. Your
ambition was then set upon spiritual glory, the conquest of syn and Satan by
the powerful purity of the Word, Sacraments, and discipline. The joy of your
souls was to see Christ reigning in the midst of his enemies, his sword
dividing the father from the son, and the son from the father: yea and a
man from himself, parting the soul and the spirit, the joints and the marrow,
and ending in glory to God, and peace upon earth. Then were the tabernacles of
God amiable; then provoked ye one another with cheerefulnes to go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: ye were sure there to
learn his ways, and how to walk in his paths. Then found ye the Lord his
glory filling his Sanctuary, and one of the largest springs of the blood of
Christ from Eden watring the city of God, and glaiding your souls wearied
with sin. This was my beauty so truly glorious in the sight of God and his
Angels that all the glory of this life is unworthie to enter in comparison
with it. Better to you to have this glory under a crown of thorns with our
Savior, in a chain with Paul, in the Lions den with Daniel, then all the
splendour of Tiberius, of Nero, of Darius, wherewith the weak eyes of the world
are dazzled, and pitifully (to my great grief) bewitched.

And surely your forgetful ingratitude His goodness in the manner of the
working of her reformation.
were inexpiable, if with the matter ye remembered not the finger of God
wonderfully working in the means of that glorious reformation. We have to
regrate that the Atheism of these dreggs of times and manners is become so
gross, that all events now are sacrilegiously ascribed to second causes. If
Naaman his cure, or Anna her fruitfulnes, or the Egyptia^ or Babylonian
liberty had fallen out in these godles times, it had been counted foolishnes
and simplicity of men over religious, upon the ignorance of alterations wroght
by nature, or policy, to attribute them to God. Yet God is the Lord; Of him
and through him and for him are all things. Ezrah, Nehemiah, and the godly of
that time acknowledge no less the wonderful working of God in their redemption
from the bondage of Babylon, then their fathers did their deliverance out of
Egypt, Although the power of God was not so miraculous in the one, as in the
other. Consider a little, and mark the constitution of the time before this
reformation was wrought, the grandeur, pride, and insolences of my office
bearers the^; the averse disposition and induration of the personages both at
home and abroad, upon whom in man's eyes it did depend; the heathenish darkness
of idolatry and palpable blindness of superstition, wherein the multitude was
wrapped, and ye shall be forced to say, that he who would have intended a change
of religion, might have received that desparing answer, which a man of great
spirit and place, an enemy of Romish pride, and a desirer of reformation gave
concerning Luthers purpose. Frater frater abi in cell^m et dic miserere mei Deus
Brother, brother go to your cloister and say have mercy on me o God. All
seen second causes were posting on in a contrary course; or if any
possibility of alteration could have been imagined, what hope could there
have been thereof, except it had been wrought more gladij cruenta^di.
with the edge of the sword bathed in blood: as Grostead the Malleus Romanorum
hammer of Rome said a little before his death. Yet (to the endless praise and
wonderful goodness and wisdom of our God be it remembered) the great work was
so singularly brought about and perfected, that almost without blood, except
the blood of a few martyrs, (wherein through the same wisdom and goodness, for
commending and ratifying the truth, the mouth of the sword of persecutors was
dipped,) the whole body and shadow, substance and ceremonies, root and
branches of Romish Idolatry were at once cut off.

Thus by reason of the wonderful manner of Gods working, of my own feeling,
and yours of the wonders wrought amongst you, and of the testimony of others
both friends and foes about us, may not ye with one voice say and sing with the
Kirk, Psalm. 126. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, we were
like them that dreamed, then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue
with singing; Then said they among the heathen the Lord has done great things
for them, the Lord has done great things for us whereof we are glad.

And would God as your delivera^ce was in many things like that of Israel; so
your infidelity and unthankfulnes were not like theirs; there arose an other
generation which knew not the Lord, nor yet the work which he had done for
Israel. A generation not only unthankful, but contumelious against that
glorious work of God and worthy instruments thereof, and therefore ready to
bless that which the Lord has cursed, and to build that which he has
destroyed. For is there not start up of late within my skirts a new sect of
shameless misshapen formalists (my indignation cannot bear such monsters) who
blush not to join with my enemies the papists in breathing out reproachful
obloquies against your reverend fathers and brethren, Calvin, Beza, Knox etc.
as though their zeal against Romish idolatry (the deformities whereof by new
colors are now beginning to seem beauties) had been excessive; and by
disparaging their credit to bring the truth preached by them in suspicion, and
that glorious work of reformation, wherein they were so worthy instruments into
question. He that is the keeper of Israel vindicat his own cause from the
blasphemous mouth, and uncouth stratageme of this generation of vipers.

Finally that the Lord might show* His strong hand against all her enemies
foreign and domestic.
that he left nothing undone; have ye not experienced the blessing of Abraham;
has he not blessed them who blessed you, and cursed them who cursed you; he
has been not only our sun, but our shield. What instrument framed against
you has prospered? What tongue arysing against you has not the Lord
condemned? that all the world might know, that God was your savior, and the
strong God of Jacob your avenger. Your foreign enemies have been made the
objects of your pity, and so many as have rent my bowels within, have perished
tragically in their own divices. No sooner began they, till now, to reedifie
the cursed walls of Jericho, but they have been buried under the ruins of
them. All which has proceeded of his own good pleasure. If ye should say that
the cause were any worthynes in your selves above other nations, not only my
spouse Christ, and his faithful servant Moses would cry out against you, but
all the world that knows what ye are in other respects would laugh you to
scorn. The Lord who shows mercy on whom he will show mercy, has done it.
It is wonderful in my eyes, and should have moved the most obdured, and stony
hearts amongst you to melt, and answerably to spend themselves to his honor in
the duties of holiness and righteousness, which alas ye have not done, as now
shall appear by the sequel of your iniquities, casting me your poor mother
into so great a doole and desolation, which is the second point of your
Christian consideration propounded in the beginning.

Would God it might please The present distress and doleful face of the K^rk.
him to bless your senseless souls with a holy remembrance of that which ye
once were, and from whence ye are fallen. Ye would surely find, that as in
manners and conversatio^ from small beginnings by degrees ye are now come to
great abominations; so both in the life of your profession, and in the outward
worship of God, ye are further fallen from that which of late ye were, then now
your case is distant from that which ye fear.

To let pass the desperate profaness Crying sins of the godles multitude, and
lukewarmnes of the best preachers and professors.
of many crying sins even beyond the cry of Sodom (considering all the
circumstances of the mercy of God, of the means and space granted to you to
repent) by continual importunity deaving the ears of divine justice, that
had not the Lord had respect to some of his secret ones; who kneel before him
day and night to continue his gracious favor with you, misregarded of the
world, but my chariots and horsemen: had he not a purpose to prevent the
insolences of my enemies, I have said I would scatter them abroad, I would
make their remembrance to cease from amongst men, save that I feared the fury
of the enemy, lest their adversaries should wax proud. And which is
principal, did not the Lord for his own names sake, and the praise of his
mercy spare me, we had long since been consumed and the enemy had entered
within my gates. To let pass that lukewarmenes and careless mediocritie in the
matters of God, that neutrall adiaphorisme in my affairs, which has in it a
native and proper power to hasten at the hand of God the removal of my
candlestick, and to bring in the famine of the word. For how can the Lord
without indignation suffer men to esteem basely of the least circumstance,
which he wills to be observed. And not to insist in that fall from your first
love, decay of your wonted zeal, secret indevotion even in true christians:
where is that wonted power and demonstration of the spirit in preaching? that
cheerfulnes in holy exercises? that circumspect walking before God in all your
ways? that preparation to divine duties? that spirit of deprecations? that
spiritual profit of hearing, communicating, meditation, and conference? that
conscientious diligence in winning of others, and working upon your
acquaintance to bring them within the bosom of my love? that jealousy over
your hearts? that indignation against errors, idols, Apostates? Is not the
life of religion condemned under the names of hypocrisy, singularity,
melancholy, simplicity, puritanisme etc. And the light thereof either
smothered under the ashes of this errant tyme^, or put in a theefes bowet; so
that the godly now born down with a bastard modesty, and spiritual
pusillanimitie, dissemble and conceal the grace of God for eschewing the shame
and offense of the world, which the wicked not long since, did simulat, and
counterfeyt for currying of credit with me and my followers.

But leaving all these, I come to The glory of the Kirk turned into shame.
complain of the alteration made upon my outvvard face and government. May not
I now, as once the world becoming Arrian, pour out my sighs, and vvonder
how so suddenly I am changed from that which I was, and become that which
now I am. All the rites of Rome are not more odious to many now, then my
present ceremonial co^stitutio^ was to them of late. The forms and fruits of
preaching fearfully changed, the crystalline fountains of holy Scripture
troubled with the mudd of man's putide learning, the ministration of the
Sacraments brought in under a new guise of man's shaping, the painful
ministry turned into a busy Lordship, and these who are set over souls, and
should war unto God are become seculars, intangling themselves with the
affairs of this life; nothing but a pompous shadow for Gods simple service.
Demas and Diotrephes are become the paterns of wisdom and praeeminence;
Chrysostom is thrust out and Arsatius placed in his rowme, beloved Liberius is
set a side and lightlied, Foelix is set to feed the flock; prattling
tymeservers are become preachers, and powerful pastors put to silence; plain
and frequent preaching reproved, a redd liturgy commended; Alevite for a
Priest, and less then a levite for mouth and messenger to Gods people; Non
residents with their flattering varlots sit in the chaires of dignitic, fed
with plurality of benefices, and painful promoovers of the Kingdom of
Christ, and subverters of Antichrist with ignorance the mother of devotion,
borne down and despised, Laborers vexed with angvish of Spirit, and loyterers
live in wealth and ease, In the time of confusion, wicked men attain to
honors, and that seat of dignity In turbis pravus etiam sortitur b^norem et
quam dignitatis sedem quieta rep. desperate eam perturbata se consequi posse
arbitratur.
whereof in a peaceable common wealth they dispared, in the time of trouble they
hope to procure. Commandes are cancelled. Canons are made commandes. And as
Gerson complained in his time, a Monk more severely punished for going without
his cowle, then for comitting adulierie or sacrilege. Or as Chaucer, the Friar
more bound to his habit then a man to his wife. The duties of Ministers, and
edification of Christians tied to the sens^es practice of trifling ceremonies.
And hence we see it is, that old hypocrites are become professed Atheists;
Philadelphian professors are come to a Laodicean temper, Papists wax insolent
and obstinate, the faithful pastors either put from the building of the
Sanctuary, or forced to build with the one hand, and with Nehemiah to bear
off these corruptions with the other; the people through public contradictions
and present practices contrary to late preachings, know not what way to
incline. But as usually it falls out in multitudes when they are shaken with
contrary doctrines, and tossed betwixt error and truth, from being doubtful
in questions moved about religion, their hearts in end are opened, and
themselves made naked to receive every corruption and vanity. As the
contentions about Eutyches opinion thrust out Christ and brought in Mahomet.
Yea except the Lord restreyne and stay, they rush into Atheism in opinion, and
Epicureisme in conversation, where through the life of religion is utterly
extinguished. The case of religion herein not being unlike unto that of the
miserable woman in Plutarch, who^ her suitors divided amongst themselves in
members, because that every one could not have her whole. Thus she perished and
they were disappointed. What may be the final event, your sins may make you
justly to fear, what it shall be, the alpowerfull God, who rules all events,
knows well.

This ye may see at least, that pulpits and schools, taverns and alehouses,
town and village, Gath and Askelon, are all busied with these broils. Which
make me the daughter of Sion to complain and in doole to deplore that in so
distressed a case, there is no compassion in my sons. That of so many whom I
have brought forth and brought up, there be so few to comfort me, almost none
to guide me or take me by the hand. Yea after trial I find that my own
ministers and domestickes, beholding the invention of their own heads, and
concupisence of their own hearts, without respect to God or his word The
causers of her calamity, the same that have been in other Kirks heretofore.
are the prime authors of my calamity and actors of this my mischief,
according to the bitter complaint of the godly learned of old, searching the
causes of all the abuses, wherewith the glory of the christian Kirks my sisters
in the time of their peace has been blemished or defaced. I will content me
with two witnesses, who speaking of their own times, directly point at ours,
and taxing the enormities of the Kirks then, paint out in lively colors our
present corruptions, that we may see the coincidence of the course of sin and
may fear the similitude of judgments.

The one is learned Gerson about Some of the^ drawn out of Gerson a^ the
neglect of Scripture and multiplying of traditions.
the year 1420. who observed two principal causes of the sicknesses and
soars of the Kirk in his time. One was the neglecting of the laws of God and
direction of Scriptures, and the multitude of man's inventions. No tongue (says
he) is able sufficiently to express, what evil, what danger, what confusion,
the contempt of holy Scriptures (which doubtless is sufficient for the
government of the Kirk, for otherwise Christ had been an unperfect Lawgiver)
and the following of humane inventions has brought into the Kirk. For proof
hereof he adds, let us consider the state of the clergy, to which heavenly
wisdom should have been espoused. But they have committed whordome with that
filthy harlot, earthly, carnal, and divelish wisdom; so that the estate of
the Kirk is become merely brutish and monstrous, heaven is below, and earth is
above, the spirit obeys, and the flesh commands, the principal is
esteemed as accessorie, and the accessorie as principal. Yet some shame not to
say, that the Kirk is better governed by humane inventio^s, then by the divine
law, and the law of the gospel of Christ, which assertio^is most blasphemous.
For the Evangelical doctrine by the professors of it did enlarge the bounds of
the Kirk, and lifted her up to heaven, which these sons of Hagar seeking out
that wisdom which is from the Earth, have cast down to the dunghill. And that
it is not wholly fallen, and utterly overthrown and extinct, it is the great
mercy of our God and Savior.

The other cause of the Kirks ruin The ^vari^^ and ambition of Bishops*
he observed to be, the ambition, pride and covetousnes of Bishops, and their
Hierarchy. He ^pareth not to say, that in imitation of Lucifer they will be
adored and worshipped as God. Neither do they think themselves subject to any,
but are as sons of Belial that have cast off the yoke, not enduring
whatsoever they do, that any should ask them, why they do so, they neither
fear God, nor reverence men. Hence was it, that not only he, but innumerable
others of the wise men, and holiest of the Kirk, longed and looked for a
reformation, a long time before Luther was borne; wishing that all things were
brought back to that estate, they were in the time of the Apostles. And what
wonder, that perceiving among our selves, the same causes and many the like
effects, we tremble for fear of a more dangerous ^ecidivation.

The other witness is Nicolas Orem Causes out of Nicolas Orem: as the profanity
of kirkmen.
a man learned and pithic, who in a sermon before Pope Urban the fyft in the
year 1364, notes among many more, these causes of the approaching misery of
the Kirk. The profanitie of the Kirk beyond the synagogue, we know (says he)
how Christ rebukes the Pharisees, the clergy of the Jews for covetousnes 1.
for that they suffered doves to be sold in the temple of God 2. for that they
honored God with their lips and not with their heart, and because they said,
but did not. 3. for that they were hypocrites. To the first then let us see
whether it be worse to sell both Kirk and sacraments, then to suffer doves to
be sold in the temple. To the second, there be some who neither honor God
with their heart nor with their lips, who neither do well, nor say well,
neither do they preach any word at all, but be dumb dogs not able to bark,
impudent dogs that never have enough. And truly there be also some, whose
intolerable pride and malice is so manifesty and notoriously kindled up like a
fire, that no cloak nor shadow of hypocrisy can cover it. But are so past all
shame that it may be well verified of them, which the Prophet speaks, Thou
have gotten the face of an harlote, thou would not blush. An other cause is
the unaequal proportion Want of proportion in the Kirk.
seen in the Kirk, where one is hungry and starved, an other drunk, by reason
whereof it cannot be, that the state of the Kirk can long endure. As he clears
by the comparison of the proportions in Musik in common wealths, and in the
body of man, whereupon he infers. If in the body of the wealth
Ecclesiastical some who be the heads be so enormously overgone in riches and
dignity that the weak members of the body be scant able to bear them up, there
is a great token of dissolution and ruin shortly. A third cause is the pride
Pride of Prelates.
of Prelates declared in their great horses, troops of horsemen, the
superfluous pomp of their waiting men and great families. To them the Lord
speaks by the Prophet Amos, chapter 4. Hear you fatted kine of Samaria, ye that
do poor men wrong and oppress the needy, the day shall come upon you etc.
Besides these he allegeth Diverse other causes.
the tyranny of Prelates, which as it is a violent thing, so it cannot long
endure, the promoting of the unworthie, and neglecting of the worthy, the
tribulations of outward policy and co^motions of people, the refusing of
correction in the Princes and Rulers of the Kirk, the backsliding from
righteousness, lack of discreet and learned preachers, promoting of children
unto Kirk offices, and such other like. This sermon changing the name and time,
might seem to have been studied for our present estate. And happy were we, if
we were not miscarried with the perilous opinions, which he ascribes to the
Prelates of that time. One opinion is of them who think the Prelates to be
the Kirk, which the Lord will always keep, and never forsake. An other who
deferred time, thinking that the causes and tokens before rehearsed, have been
in the Kirk at other times no less then now. The third of such as say, Let
come what will come, let us conform our selves to this world, and take our
time with temporizers. And the last is of such as being unfaithful, believe not
that any such thing shall come. But so long as men are drunken with one or more
of those errors, what hope is there of happiness of recovery? We might hear
Henricus de Hassia in the year 1371. speaking that of our times which he said
of his own, That the Ecclesiastical governors in the primitive Kirk were
compared to the Sun shining in the day time, and the political to the Moon
shining in the night. But the spiritual men which now are, do neither shine in
the day nor in the night. But rather with the darkness of impiety, ignorance,
and licentious living, do obscure both the day and the night.

The renowned Bishop of Spalato, Causes brought by the Bishop of Spalato.
as holy Bernard before him, complains more bitterly of that damned couple of
crying sins, Avarice and Ambition, two monstrous beasts, and ravenous Harpies,
which have seized upon the hearts of Kirkmen in the time of peace; then of the
cruelty of persecution and craft of heresies, which seem to you to be the
most desperate and only evils. Then (says he) speaking in the person of the
Kirk, was I at my highest, and at my best esteem, whiles I went in a thin
coat, such as I was clothed with, when my spouse Christ Jesus betrothed
himself to me, etc. And afterward; They have thrust upon the world their own
inventions, and established their own ordinances, not drawn out of that
testament, which my spouse left to me and them, namely the holy Scriptures, but
craftily hammered out of their own capricious projects, and tending to the
prejudice of your poor souls my dear children. So true it is, that wealth is
a viperine brood of devotion. Co^^estae passim opes in tanti officij
reverentiam, pene causam reverentiae ^x^inxerunt.
Riches heaped together for reverence of so great a function, almost have
removed the cause of reverence.

And lest my calamity should seem common, or my present miseries to be less,
then the greatness Conclusion from Nazianzen.
of my bypast felicities, may not every feeling soul rightly affected toward
unity and verity, mournfully deplore this my estate in the words of Nazianzen,
describing the case of the Kirk in his time to this meaning. My mind (says he)
leads me, seeing there is no other remedy, to flee and convoy my self unto
some corner out of sight, where I may escape from the cloudy tempest of
maliciousness, whereby all parts are entered into deadly war amongst
themselves; and that little remna^t of love which was, is now consumed to
nothing. The only godliness we glory in, is to find out somewhat whereby we may
judge others to be ungodly. One of us observes the faults of another, as
matters of upbraiding, and not of mourning. By these means we are grown
hateful, even in the eyes of the heathen themselves; and (which wounds us
the more deeply) we cannot deny but we have deserved their hatred; with the
better sort of our own our credit and name is quite lost: the less we are to
marvel, if they judge vily of us, who although we did well, would hardly
commend us. On our backs they also build, that are leaud, and what we object
one against another, the same they use to the utter scorn and disgrace of us
all.

But I come now my beloved III. The duty required of us in respect of the two
former consideratio^s
brethren, to the conscience of your duty in this case (which was the third and
principal purpose) the religion whereof will bind so many as think seriously of
the exceeding bountifulness of God to me his Kirk, and upon my manifold
crosses here on earth.

One common duty of all is, that And first a common duty of humiliation urged
upon all.
seeing they be all under the guiltines of ingratitude, and are become a
sinful nation, laden now with iniquities, as ye have been with mercies
before, which do provoke the Lord to remove his kingdom altogether from you,
and to give it to others that would bring forth the fruits thereof (according
to the constant course of the severity of his Justice, both with his own people
the Jews, and with many other famous Kirkes in the East and West, given over
to believe that great lie, because they received not the love of the truth, and
rendered not to the great King, the fruits of his kingdom in due season) that
now before the fierceness of his wrath come on, all of you, from the house of
David to the house of Levi, look with melting hearts, and mourning eyes upon
him, whom you have pierced with your iniquities. Oh that ye had lights to
search your hearts, and hearts to repent for your sins in the evening of this
your day, that ye could turn unto the Lord with one heart before ye be
overwhelmed with darkness. At least, if in these godless and devotionless
days, wherein all your wonted fasting is turned into feasting, a general
humiliation cannot be obtained, ye that are the Lords own, and delight in his
tents, ye that love the beauty of Sion, and have access to the face of God,
contend with him by the spirit of deprecation, fill your chalmers with strong
cries, fill heaven and earth with the groans of his own spirit, pour out
tears day and night, take hold of the king of glory, wrestle with him as
becomes Israel, pray again and again with Abraham; let him not depart out of
your hearts, nor from his own tabernacles in this land; your God looks to be
entreated, loves to be importuned, he is loath to leave you altogether. No
sudden eclipse comes upon you, but like that of old when the glory of the Lord
departed by degrees: first, from the Cherub to the door of the house, Ezekiel.
10. 4. then to the entry of the gate of the Lords house, v. 19. then from the
midst of the city to the mountain toward the East side of the city, chap.
11. 23. Better keep his presence now, then seek him through the streets when
he is gone. Choose rather to mourn in Sion for preventing comfortles Babel,
then sitting desolate by the rivers of Babel, to burst out in bitter tears in
remembrance of sweet Sion. The trial begins upon Pastors, but ye know not upon
whom it shall stay.

The large time of so fair occasion Two things required eve^ of ordinary
professors. First, skill to* try the Spirits.
in the school of Christ, requires two things now at your hands. One is, that
ye be able to try the spirit, and to know with certainty what to follow. The
way to establish your selves, is not with the Romans to rest upon a blind
faith, receiving for truth whatsoever carries my name or authority; nor with
the rich man in the Gospel, to wish that one may rise from the dead for your
satisfaction. Neither as it was in the time of Eliah, to seek for a miracle
from heaven, nor yet to run to any on earth for decision of all questions; for
within and amongst your selves all are divided, and without Papists are your
enemies; Protestants are strangers to your secrets, and unacquainted with your
covenants and oaths: your comfort may be that your father died not intestate.
Let his testament be read with attentive reverence. Search his latter will
which he has left for a plain and perfect direction to his coming again.
Consider what is most agreeable to his wisdom, what makes most for his
honor, for the edification of your own souls, for the restraint of the
liberty of the flesh, and for the comfort of a distressed conscience, without
respect to the appearances of wisdom and humility among men, or to that which
seems most to serve to your worldly credit, that wooes your flesh, or courts
your carnal senses: for this will be a meager consolation, when the horrors
of God are upon your souls ready to be presented before his Justice. Continue
in the things ye have learned and are persuaded of, knowing of whom ye have
learned them. Have ye attained by a conscientious use of prayer, hearing,
meditation, conference, unto a persuasion of that which is now in debate; have
ye an inward witness testifying to your souls, that your teachers by their
fidelity, and the effectual blessing of God upon their labors, have carried
with the^ the seal of their ministry? Then continue and be not carried about
with every wind of doctrine to the hellish disturbance of the heavenly peace of
your souls. In the time of tentation ponder with your hearts what better
warrants ye have for some practices of religion more substantial in men's
estimation, and whether the motives of the one alteration may not as well
enforce the other. As ye should be able to try your selves, whether ye are in
the faith or not, which Paul requires of the whole Kirk of Corinth, so should
ye have skill to try the spirits, whether they be of God or not. For such are
perverted, as are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth.
And as in respect of the time ye ought to be teachers, and to be able to
edify every one another in the most holy faith, so are ye charged by the
Apostle Peter to be ready to give an account, even to your enemies of that hope
which is in you. He that has faith can try himself, can try the spirits, and
teach others, and give a reason both of his hope and practice before the
adversary.

The other is, that once having gained Secondly, readiness to suffer for the
least point of the (...) truth.
a godly resolution of the truth, you suffer nothing earthly to divert you from
the profession and maintenance of the same. It is now high time for you who
have been hearing of Christ so many years, to be put to your trial, how ye
have learned Christ, and to give proof of your passive obedience, when the Lord
calls you, no less then of your active. Offenses, schisms, troubles,
persecutions, have been in all times, and in every period of the Kirk has
opened a back door for a worldling to slip forth at. Others before us have had
their own trials, and these in the dispensation of God are now made ours. He
has never been a Christian in action, that has not been a martyr in
affection. And (let the world still sit in the chair of the scorners) that
professor that will not be a ceremonial confessor, would refuse to be a
substantial martyr. The smallest thread of the seamlesse coat of thy Savior,
the lowest hem of his garment, the least pin or latchet of that heavenly
tabernacle may be a matter of a glorious and comfortable suffering to thee. And
the less the cause be, it being Christ's cause, the more rare and acceptable is
thy testimony. The heart may be sound, and void of Idolatry, and yet the
outward action of adoration may prove Idolatrous. Knowledge is greater, and
Christ now more glorious, by confessions, martyrdomes, prescription of time,
and profession of all nations, then in the primitive times. He that now
counts it no religion to renounce a Christian rite, and receive an
Antichristian in place thereof, would not have spared of old, to set Antichrist
himself in the throne of Christ's kingdom. We are unthristie bankerupts,
wasting that thesaurie unworthily, every penny whereof was painfully and
narrowly gathered together. The worthy martyrs of preceding times, and glorious
instruments of reformation, if they were alive in these decaying days, how
would they be ashamed of so degenerated children? How ready would they be in
your places to suffer for the name of Christ? Or if ye had lived in their
troublesome times, spoiled of your goods, hated of the world, pinched in
prison, sequestrate from wife, house, and children, looking every hour for
death: consider what would have been your thoughts of infidelity, your words of
blasphemy, your deeds of defection.

If it please my glorious head to Your care and your comfort in suffering.
call you to suffer for his name, let your care be (as Peter has taught you)
1. to sanctify him in your hearts, and not to fear the fear of men. 2. to
be ready with your mouths to make apology to every one that craveth a reason
of your hope: and 3. to have a good conversation in Christ, that they who speak
evil of you may be ashamed. And let your comfort be, 1. a good conscience,
arising upon two grounds; One, that ye suffer for well doing, the other, that
the will of God be so: For howsoever all Christians be called to suffer, yet
every one is not called to every suffering. 2. your conformity with Christ.
And 3. the assurance of an happy out-gate by his power, who was put to death in
the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit, and now stands on the right hand of
the father to maintain his own, and to revenge himself upon his enemies.
Deceive not your selves with worldly policy, under the name of that heavenly
virtue of Christian prudence, which does nothing, intends nothing, admits
nothing, in deed, in word, or in show, neither by dissimulation nor simulation
against the honor of God, in prejudice of the least truth against the love of
your brethren, or the duties of your own vocation. Prudence never does the
least evil for procuring the greatest good, for avoiding the greatest evil.
She is careful of her own duty, and commits the care of the event to God, to
whom it pertaines. She is never so perplexed betwixt two evils, but her eye
sees an out-gate without falling into a third evil of sin. She teaches her
followers either with Cyprian in a matter so holy, as is the casting of a
little incense into the fire of an idol not to enter in deliberation; or else
after deliberation with that worthy Prince of Conde to make the right choice,
never to choose sin: to remit punishment to the pleasure of superiors, and the
success to the providence of the most high.

Beside that common necessity Special du^ of Pastors.
laid upon you all in general, there is a special duty at this time required
of my Pastors and leaders. The schools of divinity, which of late were a
pleasant Lebanon fortimbe^ to my buildings, are become dens of ignorance and
impiety, sinkes of schism and sedition for my subversion. The sons of the
Prophets are made enemies to prophecy; in stead of convictions of heresy,
hearing nothing almost, but the censures of sincerity: in place of the harmony
of Christ's Evangel deaued with dyted contentions about Antichristian
geniculation. Among their school Doctors sons of Ismael descended of Hagar,
R^conditae prorsum and occuitae eruditionis viri.
Mismah Duma and Massa, our toung-tied teachers Audi, vide, tace.
all men of profound and hid learning, the greatest Rabbi (but that he has no
hebrew at all) whom God has marked many ways in his speeches, preachings, and
practices, bitterly condemns them for heretics, who stand constant against
that, which of late he himself condemned of superstition and idolatry both by
word and by writ, yet extant among his scollers in his patched and plagiarie
collections written by many of their hands. Thus alas my glory is become my
shame, my fountain a puddle, my Na^oth, my beauty, is become my loathing, my
deformity. Hence forsooth shall be furnished that plenty of excellent
laborers cracked of, to fill the places of my faithful watchmen, for their
fidelity silenced and deprived. Had my worthy Pastors but the favor of papists
now, or popish monks of old, casten forth of their places, but not out of
their livings, our young divines forerunners (if ever any) of religions ruin,
would neither, like the lions whelps, make so great haste by their pricking
paws to get out of the matrix, and in into their rooms, nor yet make their
mother so pregnant and parturient. I may hope for some of Luthers spirit forth
of these Cloisters; and I beseech my God to give them the spirit of discerning.
But for the most part they were never taught to speak against papists for the
truth, to deal with the souls of people, nor to live as Christians, and yet
must lay their hands upon the Lord's Ark, temerating my sacred mysteries,
entering unrevere^ly with shoes, and all into my Temple, and making that holy
ministry a mean of temporal life unto themselves, more then a power of
spiritual life to others.

The discharge of their calling is conform to their education and entry, and
answerable to the wishes of the wicked people, and wiles of the worldly
patrones. In conversation they and others before them so lewd, that now it is
esteemed puritanisme in a Pastor not to be profane. Every man and minister
careful to walk before God, studious of Scripture, and given to any abstinence
in his diet, as of old he was set down by Ithacius in his Calendar of
suspected Priscillians: so now by men of Ithacius spirit, in the roll of
Puritanes, who cannot better to their judgment approve the soundness of
faith, then by a more licentious and loose behavior. The authority of many
preachers is so far from procuring credit to their doctrine, that to my great
grief, and discredit of the Gospel, that is thought by many in earnest, which
by a learned man was uttered in jesting, of a profane preacher, that he would
not willingly hear him say the Creed, lest he should take it for a lie,
coming forth of his mouth. This is it which carries with it a secret cause of
the conformity of the most part. For how shall he that makes no conscience of
moral duties in his conversation, count it religious to stand against
ceremonies in his vocation? Or how can he be a director of thee in rites, who
is a neglecter of himself in substance. The sons of Eli made the people to
abhor the offering of the Lord, and they were slain. When Nadab and Abihu
were consumed with fire from the Lord for failing in the outward duty of the
ministry, in a matter as might seem of small moment, Moses told Aaron his
brother, that the Lord would be sanctified of them that came near unto him.

Few of the best sort can plead innocent of the matter in hand. If people had
been more painfully instructed in times past, they had been better prepared for
the present difficulties. Had ye cleared your selves by your Apologetickes to
your friends in foreign parts, I had not been despised in the world: neither
had your reprochful defection been proclaimed among your adversaries. Had you
made your mean to your gracious sovereign, and laid before his merciful eyes
the pitiful cause of his own dear people, lamentably scandalized, and ready
to make shipwreck of their souls upon these dangerous, sands, and uncouth
rocks of novelties ^et in their way, his majesty's clemency had not suffered
matters to come to this desperate pass. If ye, who are the remembrancers of
the Lord, had not kept silence, had ye blown the silver trumpet in the midst
of the congregation in the days of the holy assemblies, had ye instantly
denounced curses against the reedifiers of Jericho, had ye informed judicious
professors in private and public of their own interest and my danger, had ye
withdrawn your presence, your countenance and concurrence from the ringleaders
of that course, had every watchman been watchful in his own watchtower,
defection had not gone on so far: at least your uncessant proclaims, and
continual protests would both have witnessed to the world, and to the
posterity after you, that defection was not universal, and also would have
given your selves some hope to be repossessed in your former liberty, not
betrayed of you by your wilful silence, but extorted from you by wicked
violence. Were this cloud past, and I restored to the sunshine of the
lightsome countenance of my God, ye would all be ashamed and blush at your
present mis-behaviour. In the time of peace ye would seem lions, In pace
leones, in praelio Cervi.
but when battle comes, you prove but Hearts. Could ye have looked that at the
first so many of Gideons armies would have fled home. But if the remnant were
faithful and forward, their noise and light would yet make Madian to flee.
They who have yielded under color of care for their congregations, but indeed
co^straint for fear of worldly losses, have brought the rest of their brethren
in suspicion, that either they will follow at last, or else that they deal
more obstinately then conscientiously. It were good therefore that ye cleared
your selves to the consciences of others by the evidence of reason, and sine
lift up your voice as a trumpet, that the deafest and deadest may hear: that
ye were instant in season and out of season, to show Israel their
transgressions, lest ye be guilty of their blood. Why should ye be ashamed
to cry that in the ears of others openly, which ye think with your hearts, and
speak among your selves secretly? Who shall stand for Christ, and suffer for
his crown, if ye fall away and betray his honor? If ye hold your peace,
Christ will tell you, that the stones will cry out, although whole multitudes
of you be silent. Suppose all Jerusalem should be offended at you, yet it
becomes you to cry, Thou son of David have mercy on us. And, blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord. Let schismatickes load you, according to
their malicious custom, with carts full of reproaches of schism and sedition,
yet ye must follow the example of those glorious ministers of God, who before
peace upon earth, did sing glory to God in the highest heavens. Ye must first
be pure, then peaceable. It is a cursed silence of the mouth, that makes the
conscience within to cry. Remember the example of Aphraades; remember the
modest virgins behavior, when she saw her fathers house on fire; remember the
cries of the dumb child of Craesus at his fathers danger. The woe is terrible,
that belongs to you, in case ye cry not. The Athenian Cynegirus detained the
Persian Gallie with his right hand, and when that was cut off, with his left;
and being mutilate of both, he spared not his teeth. No mean should be left
unassayed with God, and with men, to maintain the least parcel of truth for his
sake, whose truth it is, and who has concredit you with the blood of his own
son. As the Libellatici were odious of old, for redeeming from the Gentiles
their peace with money: so may ye be suspected of defection, and denial of the
truth, if ye shall redeem either your peace or places with promise of
silence. Away with halting, with luke-warmnesse, with shaming, to utter the
words of Christ in the midst of an adulterous and sinful generation, lest he be
ashamed of such, when ^ee comes in the glory of his father* with his holy
Angels. Promise of silence is a secret collusion, and indirect approbation of
the contrary course* a hardening of the adversaries in their wickedness, and a
deserting of your brethren in the cause of God. The occasion of the preaching
of the Gospel procured by dealing of this sort, is not unlike to Pilates
subtilitie, who thought meet to scourge Christ, for saving of his life. Moses
Exodus 10. 25. Daniel chap: 6. 11. John Baptist, Mark. 6* 18. had no such
wisdom. Albeit all thy speaking were but as the washing of a blackmore, yet
be not misled with the cunning and crafty offers of your adversaries. Their
intention is to cast you loose of your own order, to draw you on by degrees, to
make the number behind the smaller, the common clamor and complaint the less,
their own travels in cutting off the rest, the more easy and plausible. And
in the end, when ye have satisfied their desires, they shall be hardened in
their course, and ye condemned as unfavorie salt, censured by them as old
hypocrites, condemned by your own consciences as betrayers of the truth, and
complained upon by Gods people, who have heard his truth from your lips.

But then might I have good hope to be freed from this deluge of defection, and
that all my lower valleys would at last appear, if the tops of my mountains
were once discovered. If these who i^ the providence of my God are of greatest
estate, and have the first places in the kingdom, and high and honorable
meetings thereof, would go as far before others in zeal, as they are above
them in preferment. Men will mock me (as the servant of Strato the Syrian was
mocked at the election of a king) for looking to the West for the sight of the
sun rising. Yet as it was then first seen by that wise servant upon the tops
of the Western mountains: so my hope is in this night of desolation, to see
the beams of my wonted light first upon you of greatest place, and then upon
the lower ground, by obtaining at your hands a few reasonable petitions, which
I will then propone, when I have by your patience a little dis-burthened my
heavy mind, by demanding a few things at the Prelates, once my ministers, Who
are ashamed to hear what they have done, but have no shame Quibus audendi quae
fecerunt pudor est, nullus faciendi quae audire ^rubescunt. Illic ubi opus est,
nihil verentur, hic ubi nihil opus est, ibi verentur.
In doing of that which they blush to hear. Where need, i^ they are void of
fear: and where there i^ no need, there they fear: Charging and attesting
them, as they will answer to the Judge of all the world* to ponder my demands
unpartially, and in the presence of God to answer them secretly, in the
cabinets of their souls.

1. First, how they could so far Some demands proponed to the Prelates.
forget themselves in so short time, as to come to this measure of defection*
of pride and persecution? Would they not have answered, and did they not say in
the beginning of this their course, with Hazael, Are we dogs, that we should
do this mischief? And consequently what inexpected extremity they may yet
fall into, if they wilfully go on in this their wickedness, the end whereof
they cannot see?

2. Upon what warrant they can receive or urge the five Articles, which may not
as well enforce the whole ceremonies of England, yea the whole Romulean rites
of Antichrist, as being of one kind and quality, only differing in degrees.
And thus if they can think it tolerable to change my comely Christian
countenance into the painted Antichristian complexion of that Whore of Babel?

3. Whether the Episcopacie which they esteem the principal office in the
house of my God, has any pattern in the mount: and if it has, whether their
form of ministration be answerable to that institution, or to the practice of
any orthodox Kirk in the world, or to the caveats sworn unto by their own
mouths?

4. Whether in the sight of God they think the maintainers of the reformed
religion, or the late formalists more faithful in their callings, and
cons^ientious in their conversation? And therefore if it be not Pharisaisme to
pronounce of the fidelity of my pastors by their conforming to ceremonies: and
extreme malice to think that men in all other things studying to approve
themselves to God and the King, durst be bold to resist in these without
conscience, for respect to any popular opinion.

5 Whether that meeting of Perth be one of my lawful Assemblies, justificable
in the sight of my Lord and Savior, and the constitutions thereof concluded
for Canons, to be urged upon pain of deprivation: whereupon Ministers are
removed from their charges, and many souls famished, for whom he gave his
life, for not conforming to a platform blank as yet, and scarcely drawn in
the Idea of their own imaginations?

6 What warrant from Christ my King, and me, can be pretended for bringing my
ministry, and me, under this new bondage in the persons of intrants forced at
their admission to swear, and subscribe. 1. That they shall not only
maintain his Majesty's prerogative in causes ecclesiastical; which, what it
is, or what is the extent thereof, they do not well understand; but also the
present government of the Kirk, and jurisdiction Episcopal, in all places
where they shall have opportunity, either of private conference, or public
preaching: and that they shall be careful by reading to inform themselves,
to the end they may be the more able to withstand all adversaries opposite to
the same. 2. That they shall be obedient to their Ordinary, and all other
superiors in the Kirk, speak of them reverently, and in all their prayers
private and public, commend to Gods protection, their estate not allowed by me.
3. That they shall subject themselves to the present orders pretended to be the
ordinances of the Kirk, and to the orders, which shall be established by
consent of the said Kirk, meaning assemblies framed and over ruled by Prelates,
and to procure due reverence to the same at the hands of others, by all the
means, which they ca^ use. 4. That if they co^travene any of these points, they
shall be content without making any contradiction, to be deprived of their
ministry, and to be reputed perjured and infamous persons for ever. And by
these oaths and subscriptions, that they would consider, what mischiefs may
be wrought in the after ages, when they are dead and gone.

7 Whether it were more pertinent to deal with their brethren by reason or
authority? Ye are made Pastores facti estis, non percussores, nova atque
inauditae est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus ^xigit fidem. Aliud est quod
agitur typho superbiae, aliud zelo disciplinae: Plus erga corrigendos a^at
benevolentia quam severitas, plus cohortatio quam comminatio, plus charitas
quam potestas. Sed hi qui, quae sua sunt, quaerunt, non quae Iosa Christ's,
facile ab hac lege discernuntur and q^um domi^ri magis quam consulere subditis
quaerunt. Places honor, inflat superbi^ and quod provisum ad concordiam, ^endit
ad noxam.
shepherds, and not strikers. This is a new and uncouth sort of preaching,
which will enforce faith by strokes. Pride effectuates one thing, and
discipline another. Favor should be more used then severitie, exhortations
more then threatenings, love more then law. But by such forms it is easy to
disoern, who are they that seek their own, and who the things of Jesus
Christ, says the Canon law their own pattern.

8 By what conscience, reason or law, they have deserted their flocks and
pastoral charges, entered into civil place and pomp, breaking the caveats, and
contrary to their alleged commission for keeping of ministers in quietness
and peace, and vindicating the Kirk from poverty and contempt, have they taken
upon them the power of both swords against the whole subjects of the kingdom,
and summarily to confine, ward, imprison, discharge, silence, suspend, deprive,
autorize and exauctor at my ministers at their pleasure?

If the Lord should cause a terrible finger to come forth, and write these, and
a thousand other their presumptuous dittaes upon the wall over against them,
where they use to sit Balthazar-like in their sacrilegious pomp, abusing the
furniture of his house; their brightness would change, their thoughts would
trouble them; so that the joints of their loins would loose, and their knees
would smite one aanother. I have borne them, but to my grief and shame. They
have given me cause to pronounce the curses of Job upon the day of their birth.
For they neither care to be esteemed bastards themselves, nor to brand me with
the mark of an harlot. They prove Loammi, and would have me to prove
Apostaticall. Had these my forlorn hopes, but one sparkle of true love to my
spouse or me, they would resolve with Nazianzen, to undergo Jonas punishment
for stilling of this tempest, and to prefer my peace to their own preferment.
What can I do but mourn, entreat, protest, rebuke, expostulate. I call
therefore heaven and earth, their own souls, the testimonies of al who have
been acquaint with them, and their proceedings, to bear witness against them.
Beseeking and exhorting them by the salvation of their own souls, by the tender
mercies of Christ, by the precious drops of his blood, by that excellent price
of their redemption: if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any love to his glory, to his blood,
to his Gospel: and if there be any pity in their hearts to the breasts which
they have sucked, to this sinful land, and their own native kingdom, to
return to God, to repent them of their course, to leave off to allow, to
defend, to urge that, yea and persecute for that, which of late they were wont
to condemn, and even now almost could hardly have tolerated. Let them
forbear any longer (as it is to be feared, they have peevishly been doing) to
fight against God, to kick against the prick, to vaunt themselves proudly in
the glory of their munition. Their craft is known; can they dance naked in a
net, and think not to be seen? The seams of their black policies are sewed with
white thread. If they shall persist to stop their ears against all
admonitions, to harden themselves in rebellion against God, still to proceed in
their truculent breathings, Thrasonicall boasts, and tyrannous executions, and
shall for their backs and bellies, and the making up of their houses, make
havoc of the purity of Gods truth, and the liberty of the kingdom of his
son: As the Lord lives that sees them, he shall yet harden their hearts more,
and at last shall tread them in the wine press of his wrath, and there shall be
none to deliver them. Petition in ^ humility t^ the Nobility and Estate^ to
deal with his Majesty.


Now my petition, backed with the authority of a mother, to your honors is,
that for the glory of Christ's kingdom in this land, the adorning of his
majesty's crown, and quietness of his loyal subjects, the endless praise of your
selves, and flourishing of your honorable estate, and the particular comfort of
the Ministers and congregations within this realm in this time of distress
felt and feared. I may by your timous intercession at his gracious majesty's
hands, and uttermost endeavors debtfull to God from your place, obtain how*
soon occasion may be offered.

1 A sufficient and ready execution of former acts of Parliament made against
the fearful blasphemy of Gods name, profaning of the Lords day, and contempt of
his sanctuary, and service, so universally overflowing this land, not only in
the persons of poor ignorants, in a manner tied to these horrible crimes by a
cursed custom, and beggarly necessity: but even in the more honorable sort,
whose damnable example encourages their followers to sin without fear: with
such additions as may repress and restrain these crying abominations in all,
without respect of persons.

2 A safe liberty to enjoy the profession of our religion, as it is reformed in
doctrine, sacraments and discipline, and has been openly professed by Prince,
Pastors, and people of all ranks, your predecessors of worthy memory, your
selves and us, all yet living, these threescore years by gone, and above.

3 A full deliverance from, and a sufficient defense against all novations and
novelties in doctrine, sacraments, and discipline, and specially such, as by
constitutions of the Kirk, confessions of faith, louable laws of the country,
and long continued practice has been condemned, and casten out as idle rites,
and Romish formalities, under what soever pretense they plead for reentry.

4 That no act pass in derogation, or prejudice of the acts already granted
in favor of Reformation, liberty of Assemblies, convenient execution of
Discipline, etc. or for corroboration of new opinions against the same:
concerning whether Episcopacie, or ceremonies the shadow thereof, which for the
peace of the Kirk by heavenly wisdom should be rejected before they be
ratified.

5 That all ministers provided to Prelacies, and admitted to vote in
Parliament, be urged to observe the Act granted in their favors to that place;
especially the provision expressed therein.

6 The happiness to live under his Majesty, and his highness ordinary Judges,
and Rulers established by laws and custom, and that our cause he lawfully
cognoseed, according to order and justice, before any sentence pass against
our persons, places, and estates. In the name Trial to be made by the word.
of Jesus Christ entreating and commanding, all worldly and personal respects
set apart: ye look with a single eye upon the matter controverted, not
suffering your faith in Jesus Christ to be blamed with partiality: ye try all
with the touchstone of the Temple, and balance of the Sanctuary. Consider the
example of Moses, when he saw the Israelite and Egyptian fight. He spent no
time in rebuking them for the strife, but drew his sword, and slew the
Egyptian; But perceiving a debate betwixt two Israelites, he said. Ye are
brethren, why strive ye? If the intended novelties be Israelites, then may ye
say, Why strive ye; but if they be of that Egypt, from the bondage whereof, the
Lord your God miraculously has set you free, then may they not be reconciled
to the truth: but being slain by the sword of the Spirit, must also be
proscribed by your authority. Use By true zeal.
the trial of Elias against Baals Priests, (albeit without the miracle of
Eliah) take my bullockes and theirs, that is, the urged novelties, and the
possessed liberties, or alas the liberties that I once possessed, (for now
whether I possess them, or not, it is uncertain,) lay their pieces on the
altars, and on which God sends the holy fire of zeal in the powerful
preaching of the word, and consuming of sin, let that be received. When no
man By the fruits, and not by pretext of antiquity, or outward appearance.
was able to discern betwixt Alexander the son of Herod before put to death,
and a certain craftsman like unto him, who gave himself out for Alexander, as
though he had escaped by favor of the executioner: the noble and wise
Augustus by griping his hand, tried him to be an Artificer, and punished him
for his falsehood. Would it please your honors, whilst so many learned and wise
are deceaved with the counterfeit face of these novelties, but to gripe their
hand a little, and to try what has been their frootes, where they have been
admitted from the beginning: ye shall incontinent find that they have been void
of the sap of grace, and that their best works evidently declare, that they
never were begotten, nor blessed by the father of peace. Their own maintainers
confess that the controversy about them, has brought confusion, breach of
the second command of love, rent my body into diverse parts, divided my people
into diverse sects, and the sheep to despise their Pastors, and estranged them
from the love of their flocks. It has confirmed the profane in their
impieties, and given way to the common enemies, distracted the minds of the
multitude, and shaken their faith who for the most part knew no other
difference betwixt Christ and Antichrist, but that which consists in external
shows and formalities. It has brought the ruin of Christ's kingdom, and
increase of Satan's, partly in superstition, and partly in impiety. And in a
word, generally has put out the life of true religion, and brought in
Atheism. Be not satisfied with a fashionable and superficial trial, but
examine them from the very root, and from the ground rip them up. As wise
Nehemiah tried who had right to the Priesthood, by searching their lineall
descent from Aaron. It was not sufficient for them to clear their genealogy
by writ from Levi, and Coath: for so the children of Habaiah and Barzillai had
been admitted, and had brought the wrath of God with them. Men may allege, and
perhaps prove by writ, some such customs as they urge, for some hundredth years
in my neighbor kirks, but except it can be cleared, that they have their
pedigree from Christ, or his holy Apostles, they ought to be esteemed unclean,
and should not be received, as belonging to me, or my ministers. All these, and
many more, have vexed me before, and being man's inventions in the matter of Gods
worship, waxed old, and weak, (As it fares with every error contrary to the
course of verity which grows ever greener and stronger) and at last dying,
were cast out of my habitations, as vile and stinking carrion, that now the
opening of their grave raises a noisome fleur in every spiritual and
exercised sense, and if they be taken up again, shall make many poor souls
of weak constitution to perish through their pestilent contagion. It cannot be
denied, but they have been defended by some, and digested by others by way of
Interim, till opportunity of further reformation in the Kirks and countries,
where they had place. But before Perih ^y wants a pattern.
this time, we dare be bold to say, never any kirk, country, or co^scientious
Christian did so much as enter in deliberation: whether they should have been
repossessed, where they have been displaced. Let the two renowned masters of
Hooker and Saravia ^he^selves against the ^re^ entry of R^^es.
English ceremonies, profound Hooker, and fordward Saravia, be heard in this
point. The one says, In as much, as they go about to destroy a thing, which
is in force, and to draw in that, which has not as yet been received, and to
impose that which we think not our selves bound unto, and to overthrow things,
whereof we are possessed: that therefore they are to take them to the opponents
part, which must consist in one of two things: the one that our orders
condemned by them, we ought to abolish: the other, that theirs we are bound to
accept in stead thereof. And the other, A mult^ ^unt reform^^^ ecclesiae q^ae
^ineam ^ lam veste^ non admittunt, and pereorina^u^ ecclesiarum ministri and
insularum Iersae and Iern^ae, quae An^lcan^ ecclesiae annumerentur. Resp ^um,
qui in illis ecclesijs usum hujus vestis vellet introducere, a schismste non
posse excusa^i, sicut nec a superstitione quicquid contra ad suam excusationent
posset allegare.
he that would bring in the use of the surplice into the reformed Kirkes, where
i^ has no place, cannot be excused from schism, and superstition, whatsoever
he allege for his excuse. As he speaks of one, so he speaks of all.

The drierie lamentations, and heavy The moan of the Kirk of ^^d under the
burd^ of ceremonies.
complaints of the unsupportable burden of the ceremonial yoke, powered out in
all ages by the holy men of God, may provoke the compassion of the hardest
hearts. Augustine in his time complained, that the Kirk was pressed contrary
to Christ's merciful institution, with such a servile burden of ceremonies,
that the state of the Jews under the law, was more tolerable, then the
condition of Christians: seeing they were subject only to Gods ordinances, and
not to humane presumptions, as Christians are. How would he at this time have
mourned for the case of other Kirks, and for the peril that I am in! Erasmus,
Polidorus Virgilius, etc. ^ing the same ditta. It is a certain truth, many
ceremonies, little Quanto maegis accedit cumulo rituum in Ecclesia tanto maegis
d^trahitur non tantum libertati Christianae, sed and Christo, and eiu^ fide^:
dum vulgus ea quae^^t in ritibus quae quae eret in solo Dei filio Jesu Christo
per fidem.
faith. Look how much is added to the midding of rites, as much is withdrawn,
not only from Christian liberty, but from Christ himself, and his faith; while
the multitude seeks for that in rites, which they should seek in the only
son of God Jesus Christ. The greater bulk of bodily ceremonies, the less
spirit of true devotion. The true worshippers under the Gospel shall not say,
The Ark of the Lord* they shall forget all those outward ceremonies, and never
revive them. Moses his veil, far more all other things, that neither were
nor are from God, is removed, and now may we with open face behold the glory of
God. Then the sea about the altar was of brass, and could not be pierced with
the sharpest sight: but now our sea about the throne is glass, clearly
convoying the knowledge of God unto our minds. The Amphiscij can tell, that the
more shadow the less light. The shadow always accompanies the body, sometimes
it follows behind, but sometimes also it comes before. Ye may be sure the
dark body of error is not far off, when the shadows of ceremonies are at
hand; and justly may fear, that they are the harbingers sent before by Satan
(whatsoever be man's intention) to make place for their own substance. Oh, if
the Lord would open your eyes to see the subtle working of that mystery of
iniquity. The web may be divided in men's intentions, who possibly mind no more
for time to come, then they urge for the present. But in the justice of God,
punishing the world for the contempt of the truth, and in respect of Satan's
malice, bringing in his lie, it is all of one thread. And that which is begun
by one, may be wrought out by another, entering upon the preceding labors. Ye
see not this weed growing; but it will be perceived to have grown. The seeds
of Popery were secretly sown in the Primitive Kirk, and by degenerating ages
grew up to that monstrous height, which now the world wonders at. But alas all
our country wit is M^tanoia, after wit. My people are like the Athenians, who
(as Demades objected to them) never entreated for peace, but in mourning gowns;
that is, after they had suffered great calamity in battle. When afterward ye
are poisoned with error, and over laden with crosses, ye and your children
after you shall be forced to cry out upon your own madness and folly, that
would not see and resist the beginnings of so great evils.

The remanent sparkles of natures Li^h^ of nature, true policy, and common
equity against English formalities in our Kirk.
light, looking upon the common providence of God, may let your Honors see,
that it serves most for the prosperity of Kirkes and Kingdoms, that ilk
constitution and order in a society should sort with the nature, disposition,
and condition of the people. My people have from the liberal hand of their God,
external abundance for the honest sustentation of their bodies, with a
substantial, sound, and simple religion for the salvation of their souls. Yet
far from the artificial fulness, whereby the Tyrian spirits of the world do
disquiet their neighbor nations, striving to subject all to their forms, that
they may reign over all, as Queens; against the protestations made in all the
confessions of faith of other Kirkes. A single form of policy is more fit for
a plain people, and mean provisions, then the gorgeous show of a pompous port,
necessarily requiring rents, complements, and carriage, that neither this land
may bear, neither we nor our fathers have learned. Rites must have rents:
their service is both cumbersome and costly: they scorn the assignations of
our plotted poverty; they strive with Statesmen, Earls and Lords for place
and precedencie; they loath the preaching of the Gospel, and like better the
chief places of estate. The restitution of the Kirk to her wonted possessions,
and to her worldly dignities, must go on together with equal speed. Neither
can so long experience be denied, but that ordinarily the estate of the common
wealth accompanies the constitution of the kirk, as the morning star goes
with the Sun, which Constantine acknowledged in his grant to the Kirkes of
Africa, thus beginning his Epistle, Considering that the due observation of
things pertaining to true religion, and the worship of God, brings great
happiness to the whole estate and common wealth of the Empire of Rome: and
Charles the 8. of France lamentably experienced. For when he had fair
occasions to reform the Kirk of Rome at his pleasure, and to help the Kirk of
God, he neglected both: wherefore shortly after stricken with a sudden
sickness, he died, according to the forewarning of Savanarola; who told him
plainly, that he should have great success in his voyage to Italy, for
reforming the corrupt state of the Kirk, which if he did not, he should
return with dishonor, and God would reserve the honor of that work unto some
other. All the policy of Achitophel, and wisdom of Solomon, cannot establish
a kingdom, wherein the kingdom of Christ is misregarded. His true worship is
the pillar and wall of policies. If the Lord remove his truth from you, he
will deprive you also of your civil liberties, and give you over into the
hands of merciless enemies. If he spare not his own strength, and glory, but
give over the one to captivity, and the other to the hands of his enemies, he
shall respect you no more the^ the mire in the street. The nation and kingdom
that will not serve the Lord shall perish, and these nations shall be utterly
destroyed.

My faithful ministers, and obedient children to the meanest are all Gods
people, and his majesty's loyal subjects and faithful servants. The
testimonies of his love belong to them all for their comfort in this world, and
safe conduct to the world to come. As they fear God, they honor his
highness, they pray for him and his children, and all that are in authority,
that they may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God their Savior, who will
have all to be safe, and come to the knowledge of the truth. They wish from the
desires that lodge within their breasts, long life unto his Majesty, a secure
reign, a safe house, valiant armies, a faithful counsel, good people, a quiet
world, Et quaecunque hominis and Caesaris sunt vota. They stand by that
reformation, that has been so profitable and comfortable these threescore
years by past: giving more reasons for it, then has been, or can be clearly
answered. How can it stand then with the grounds, either of good policy, or
Christian equity, for removing dissentions, to yield respect, countenance,
support, and authority to the other party, neither having nor giving evidence
of reason for their pretended novations against the received truth. Although
the inferior law were inacted, (as God forbid) yet in all Christian Prudence it
ought to give place to the royal law of love, and unity, as being of a more
noble descent. But since unity forbids, and peace declares her miscontentment
in the beginning, how shall this ever contentious and unruly Hagar be heard to
contest with Sarah. Were not this a way to bring a further rent and desolation
upon the house of Abraham. Upon this ground, what great tollerations have been
granted by Christian Emperors, and Kings, all men know, who know any Interdu^
con^^ve^^ ^menus est* q^am rem^d^j^ d^licta incendere.
thing in History. It is better sometime to give connivence, then by untimous
cures to waken diseases. And as one said to Augustus, It is a special point of
wisdom not to suffer new names, or ought else, wherefra discord may arise.

The cause wherein they stand, Judgme^ts to be given not according to the
b^senesse of the defenders, but according to the truth.
and for the constant defense whereof they are traduced under the odious names
of Puritanes, precisians, schismatickes, Anabaptists, and the like, is an
article of your honors own worthy profession and R^spuite AEne^^ suscipite
p^um.
confession of faith, whereof the adversaries themselves were preachers, and
practisers of late, and have never yet made any public repentance for their
former heresies. Augustine could say. albeit in a different case, Let them
exercise cruelty Illi in vos saeviant qui nullo ^asi ^^r^re dec^p^i sunt,
quali vos deceptos vident, ego ^utem saevire in vot omni^^ non possu^, quos
sicut ^eipsum illo ^empore, ita ^unc* debeo sustinere.
against you, who never were deceived with the like error, wherewith they see
you deceived: but as for me, I am not the man that can be cruel against you,
whom I must bear with now, as I did comport with my self then. But they have
forgotten what they were, and make my ministers to find the truth of that which
is in the French proverb: Quison chien veult tuer, larage luyme^ sus. He that
is disposed to have his dog killed, will first have him thought to be madd.
As I will have them for their part to resolve with Daniel, to sustain the
wrong of such Assyrian nicknames, and by the grace of the God of Daniel, will
have them both to abstain from these impurities, and to profess the
detestation of the least show of them: So I would wish your honors upon the
other part, not to judge of them according to men's calumnies, but to the truth
of God. And consider upon your beds, who they are that yield, and what are they
that stand, and upon what inducements.

Ye can hardly point at any one of my ministers, but he is in some good
measure fitted for the work of the ministry. And howsoever according to the
diverse rooms in my habitation, less or greater, all have not the same
measure of light: some torches for more public places, and others smaller
lights for their own cottages: yet every one makes conscience of residence to
shine in his own room, both in the purity of doctrine, and life, to my great
joy and your benefit, by the blessing of God upon their labors* hardly any one
of the other side, but he is either, etc. They have large rents, if not great
wealth: the others portion is but mean. The one is encouraged with outward
assistance, the other enfeebled with cries, crosses, and ensuing dangers; the
one richly rewarded for proud practices, the other are boasted for painful
labors to clear and defend a just cause: the one, men of glorious state, and
great pomp in the world, the other trod upon as unworthy of the countenance
of the world. The one take leisure from their charge to invent and publish
their pleasure: the other have no time from the charge of their flocks, to
clear the truth. To the one, the presses are open and free: to the other it is
neither safe no^ possible almost to print a few words of this sort; fa^r less
labors of greater moment, and better use. The one gets money for their hungry
pamphlets: the other counts charges and hazard gain. The one are both parties
and judges of the cause: the other dare scarcely make provocation in public to
the Lord Jesus. The one finally by their defection rise, and become Princes of
the world: the other for their constancy are thrust down, and tied fast to the
cross. Whereby ye cannot but see, whether the love of the world, or the zeal
of God, be the spirit that blows in the sails of their affections. Know ye
not, that howsoever they be counted few, silly, and of base resolution, yet if
they esteemed not more of a good conscience, then they who make a covenant with
death and hell, and put the evil day far from them, they might speed as well
as others in worldly projects. Can it be denied, but they prefer the peace
of their souls, and purity of their profession, to the pleasures of the world,
wherewith others are pampered? Were it proclaimed by the Emperor, Let us take
from them auferamus illis nocentes divitias: ho^ enim facere est opus
charitatis.
these hurtful riches: for that were a work of charity, the zealots of this
course would grow key cold.

Suffer not then poverty, paucity, pusillanimity, prisonings, wardings,
difficulties of writing, printing, uttering and countenancing Gods cause, and
thousands of such disadvantages, be a prejudice to that truth, whereof ye are
convinced in your minds. Be not deceived with this new, fond, and false gloss
of indifferency: look to God, to his word, to the parties, to your own
souls, and to that great day of the revelation of Christ Jesus. As the pretext
of conformity. the visor of unity, the null-authority of a pseudo-synod,
wanting formality, fullness, and liberty, should not be a Gorgons head to
terrify them: so should it neither by serpe^tine slight deceive you.

In conformity there is to be respected, Conditions of conformity.
1. The substantial truth of God, wherein all true Conformitants must agree.
2. The sincere ministry, and sorts of ministers appointed by the son of God
for our edification in the truth. 3. Christ's incommunicable prerogative in
appoynting of the Sabbath, and solemn ministration of the word, sacraments,
and discipline. 4. The edificative use of these ministrations in the several
ages, Kirks, and kingdoms of the world. ^. A clear distinction between divine
and ecclesiastical rites, the indifferency in nature, the expedience of use,
the diversity in practice of ecclesiastical: according to the saying. It is
not possible Impossible fuerit omnes ecclsiaru^ qu^ per civitate^ sunt and
regiones ritus co^scribere. Nulla religio cosdem ritus custodit, etiamsi eande^
de illis doctrinam amplectitur.
to take up all the diverse rites of all Kirkes in all countries. No religion
observes the same rites, albeit it embrace the same doctrine of rites. The
attempt of the contrary, will still prove, as from the beginning, a malady a
thousand fold worse then the moraine of ceremonies. And without these
conditions, a conforming with men, is but a contesting with God. As for the
conclusions of men, Tout proposition human a autant d'authorite quel'autre si
la raison n'on fait la difference, Even so are the sentences of all Kirkes
equal, except the authority of the word make the difference. Belongs not the
judgment of discretion to all Christians? Shall my children with
weathercockes, be carried with every uncertain wind of men's mouths, like
fools run with the cry, and suffer themselves like beasts without reason to
follow the dreave. This were to make every constitutution like Nebuehadnezzar
his Image, and Roman-like to make the name of the Ki^k the rule of all
religion. Can that one null-assembly, the nakedness whereof is now laid open
to the eyes of the world, bear Quis ferat co qui a^^a^ q^a^piam syn^dum
praepo^^nt N^^inae. At quis non potius oderit eos q^i rejiciunt pa^u^ decreta,
and praeponunt rece^tio^a nuper A^^mini, contentione, and vi expressa. Qu^^ cum
illis hominibus societate^ ini^e velit, qui ne quide^ sua ipsi ^u^ntu^.
down all the formal, full, and free councels of this nation before, and all
the determinations and constitutions of your worthy forefathers of blessed
memory. Who can enter in fellowship with them, who defend not their own
conclusions? My ministers have clearly testified by their admonitions presented
to the Parliament holden at Perth in the year 1606. in general assemblies,
and at other occasions before and since, their detestation of all novelties and
novations of that sort thrust upon me. Many a one that has consented thereto
in show, and for worldly respects, resting yet unperswaded in their own minds,
and unable to persuade others of the contrary judgment, if they saw the day of
their liberty, and were free from the stroke of worldly inconveniences, would
cry with the Bishops of Asia, Not by Nos non nostra voluntate, sed necessita^e
adducti subscripsimus: non animo sed verbis duntaxa^ consensimus.
our own wills, but by necessity, have we been moved to subscribe: we consented
with our words, not with our hearts. And to declare, that that act was
unlawfully begotten, the fathers of it would deny that they begat it with that
face, and force, that it has brought with it into the world. Your honors may
remember also, your own religious provision expressed in that act, whereby
ministers are permitted to vote in Parliament. The particulars of their place
and office are remitted to be treated by his Majesty, and general assembly;
but prejudice always of my jurisdiction, and discipline, established by acts
of Parliament made in any time preceding, and permitted by the said acts, to
all general and provincial assemblies, and others whatsoever my presbyteries
and Sessions.

Men may muse at the matter, alleging that my children make The points
controverted are material.
mountains of mots, tragedies of trifles, and raise a noise about things
indifferent, circumstantiall, accidental, and that with their brethren. But
first it can be no prejudice to them, or the cause they maintain, that they
stand in it against their brethren: seeing they are defenders of themselves;
and not persuers of their brethren. The promise, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are they
who in the last time suffer against the beast, as well as they who in the first
times were persecuted by the heathen, belongs to them. For if the Lord
measured sufferings by the inequality of his enemies, and not by the equity of
the cause, there would be great disparagement betwixt the Martyrs put to death
by the Pope, and the persecuting Emperors. Neither is there any suffering
here, but for that which is papal. It is no shame for them to suffer that of
their brethren, which Christ suffered: neither is it honor to their enemies to
do that, which Judas did.

The Spirit of God Revel. 2. speaks more comfortably to the kirk of Smyrna, a
figure of the Christian Kirk under Constantine troubled with intestine enemies:
then to Ephesus representing the primitive Kirk invaded by the heathen. I know
thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich: and I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not. Fear none of these
things, etc. Let him therefore that is righteous, be yet more righteous, and he
shall have a crown in the end.

Next, let them be considered 1. in the urgers intention. Whatsoever they be in
valuation, they are not of so small moment. For albeit they be concluded by
way of counsel, and not of command; albeit that conclusion want a sanction;
albeit no punishment be determined by law; and albeit that Synod be known to
be null, yet they lay upon the transgressors, and for their cause, upon their
innocent families and congregations, the heaviest of all punishments, except
death: and to some equal with death, if not more bitter, and intolerable;
heavier then for non-residence, idleness, error, wickedness, scandal. In
deliberation they are talked of as indifferent, but in execution they are
enforced as most necessary. A necessary conclusion inferred upon indifferent
premises. Anticeremoniall Christians more rigorously used then Antichristian
practisers of ceremonies. Papists without prejudice to their lives, livings,
and liberties, enjoy the comfort of the country. To his Majesty's loyal and
religious subjects, is denied favor to sigh at home in the cause of public
and private grievances, and to go with the armies of Israel against the
^^ilistims of Rome. Let a man be Paul's presbyter in every, point, yet a more
of ceremonies shall mar him. Let him be a Demas, or Demetrius, a formalizing
ceremony shall accomplish him. Is not this to neglect the greater things of the
law? Is not this to make the precepts of God of no force for men's traditions?
To love themselves above God, and to be wedded more to their own wits, then
to his divine wisdom.

2 In their bitter effects of changes brought upon the preaching of the word,
ministration of the sacraments, discipline, confession of faith, and the whole
worship of God in so short time.

3 In respect of the practice of religion so frequently, and ordinarily to be
performed of all: that no man can either be ignorant or careless of any
point, but must be settled and thoroughly resolved in all, except he would hold
his soul on a perpetual rack, and make his whole devotion and service
doubtsome, and comfortless.

4 According to the confession of both parties, tending to the honor or
dishonor of Christ, serving either to beautify or deface his spouse, and to
the edification or destruction of weak Christians.

5 In the estimation of some holy martyrs: who, howsoever in their prosperity
they co^tended for them: yet near the time of their martyrdom, when their
minds were most unpartiall, condemned them for foolish and abominable. And in
the judgment of many worthy men, suffering bitter persecutions for the like:
as for officium Ambrosianum, the service of Ambrose against the lame Liturgy
of Gregory, and refusing to practice in matters of far less importance. If
ye look to the fountain, ye sustain a common cause with all the Saints,
who in any age have opponed themselves to the current corruptions of the Kirk
and Kirkmen in their time: such as Basil, Jerome, etc. The Albigenses
contemptuously styled Apostolickes, the Waldenses called Puritans, etc.

6 In consideration of the change brought upon me, and of the course of my
declining from my former perfection, my errors now may be smaller: and yet my
case is worse, then in my growing days, when I was wrestling against greater
infirmities. My lukewarmnesse then was a way to, and a degree of heat, but now
after my zeal, I am become Laodicean, waxing colder from day to day: And
increase (with Vincentius) I love; but defections and changes I loath. Our
bodies (says he) albeit in process of time they grow, yet they change not.
The same members, the same joints are in children, which are in men, though in
the one stronger and greater, in the other smaller and weaker. But if the shape
be turned into another kind, or any thing be added to the number of the
members, or taken from them, then either the body perishes, or becomes
monstrous, or at the least becomes weak. It is right so in religion, if we
begin to make cha^ges, whereof the kirk of Christ should be a diligent keeper,
changing nothing, diminishing nothing, adding nothing. I admit no alteration
for indifferent that tends to Apostasy, and not to accretion.

7 Considered in themselves, and not in relation to other things more
necessary. A leg or an arm is necessary for a man's body, yet not in that
degree, that it is necessary for the life, as the soul. I may live, and be the
kirk of God, so long as Christ by his spirit breathes faith into my soul. Yet
wanting the least thing which God has ordained, and receiving supply of a leg
of wood from men's artifice, I can never be beautiful in Gods fight, nor
cheerful in performing my own actions; but pines and dwines away, til at last
nothing be left, but a stinking carcass, unfit both for the habitation and
celebration of the majesty of my God.

8 Whatsoever they be in themselves, and in their own nature, yet falling under
our use and practice, they become to us either good or evil, and consequently,
either sin or acceptable service, wherein Scandal bears so great sway, that
for avoiding of offense propter scandalum, quod vel (...) imbecillita^e vel ex
ignorantia nascitur, declinandum, omnes quantum cumque rectae aut utiles
actiones quae ad animi salutem non sunt necessariae praetermittendae vel
occultandae aut saltem in in aliud tempus differendae sunt. Thom. 2a. 2^q. 43.
artic.
arising upon weakness or ignorance, all actions, albeit never so lawful and
profitable, which are not necessary to salvation, are either to be left off,
or kept up, or at least to be put off till another time. Woe be to them not
only who give offenses, but by whom offenses come.

9 The Fathers in the primitive times, partly preferring the Vernish of the
Jews religion, and the pomp of Paganism to Christian simplicity. And partly
with greater zeal then knowledge, desirous to enlarge the bounds of Christ's
kingdom, by drawing both Jews and Gentiles unto their profession, did change
sacraments into sacrififices, Pastors into Priests, Tables into Altars, Prayers
into Liturgies, Saturnals into Christmasse, etc. And pestered the Kirk then,
with heaps of their ceremonies. Quod consilium specie prudens, re anceps,
eventu infelix, hodieque lugendum and luendum est Ecclesiae says Tilenus,
whatsoever some talk now of his Palinod in particulars. It was not lawful for
the heathen Poets to borrow matter from traditions of Scripture, and in their
allegorizing vein to pursue them for their purposes of profanity. Less
tolerable for the spouse of Christ to beg ornaments from enemies, whether at
Jerusalem, or Athens. But farrest from indifferency, and most intolerable in
you, who ought to be wise by the doleful experience of others, to walk again
upon the same snares, after ye have escaped twice, to make shipwreck, to lick
up your own vomit, and to make your sins once of a simple die, now to be of a
scarlet color.

10 By reason of the warrant, which they seek without the bounds of the law and
testimony. Ye have no other Ephod, no other Vrim and Thu^mim but the light of
scripture. Herein as in the breast of your high Priest, may ye see and read
the will of God for your direction in all your actions, as they are actions of
a Christian, even your natural and civil actions, far more your religious
duties. So that albeit ye can neither conclude affirmatively, nor negatively
from the words of me^; yet were your knowledge as ample as the Scriptures, and
could your faith adequat the largenes of the revelation thereof, ye might
infer a conclusion both ways from them.

In all these considerations they can be no indifferent judges, that call them
indifferent. When it was objected by Mauritius the Emperor to Gregory, that
he busied the Kirk with a needless contention, when the question was about
the Quaedam frivola and innoxia, quaedam frivol^ and noxia.
name of universal Bishop: he answered, That some things are frivovolous, and
not hurtful, other things frivolous and hurtful: albeit indeed there be
nothing frivolous in the matters of God. Carnal men have coinzed with their
wit, a new Category of indifferent things: and have made the Genus summum their
own will. The prophetical and princely office of Christ is no less perfect*
then his priesthood. And he that either adds to his word or discipline, or
yeeldes not obedience to them in every point, can have no comfortable hope of
full redemption by his sacrifice. It is a fearful judgment, and a wide door
to final excecation and hardness of heart, first to revolt, and peevishly to
rebel against the light once received, and now to be guilty of affected
ignorance, closing your eyes against ingyring knowledge. Albeit Pastors who are
to teach others, in respect of their office and place, be bound to know many
things, which others of another condition and vocation are not, yet considering
the occasions and means offering things to your particular consideration, even
secular persons, and private men are bound to know and believe that, whereof
Pastors themselves not observing it, may be safely ignorant. Refuse not,
resist not the least truth of God for pleasing of your selves, or others.
Albeit any of my ministers might with Ambrose, speaking Hope of h^^ Ma.
gracious favor.
to Theodosius and Valentinian, say, touching his majesty, that it is neither
imperial to refuse the liberty of speking, Quod neque imperiale si^ libertate^
dicendi negare, neque sacerdotale quod sentiat non dicere. ^is causa vero Dei
quem audies si sacerdotem non audies: cuius maiori peccatur periculo: quis tibi
verum audebi^ dicere, si sacerdos non audeat.
nor pastoral not to speak that which he thinks. In Gods cause who^ shall ye
hear, if ye hear not Gods minister, by whose greater danger sin is committed.
Who dare be bold to speak the truth unto you, if the minister be not bold? Yet
far be in from them to utter any thing, that may exulcerat his meeknes, or
provoke their dread sovereign to wrath. As Emperors know (says Tertullian,)
who gave them the Empire, they know that it was even the same God who gave unto
them to be men, and to have humane souls, they will perceive that he only
is God, in whose only power they are so with him. My children acknowledge,
that after God, Kings are in order the second: and among all the first. It
becomes them to fear God, and honor the King, who should be as an Angel of
God, a defender of the faith, a nurse father of the Kirk, and a comfortable
refuge unto the poor, and simple, in time of need. It is no small part of the
hope of my happiness, that his majesty has declared, that by the grace of God
he is set and disposed, equally to love and honor the learned and grave men of
either of these opinions, avowing his sincerity in that religion, which he
ever constantly professed. And confessing, that if his conscience had not
resolved him, that all the religion professed by him and his kingdom, were not
grounded upon the plain word of the scripture (without which, all points of
religion were superfluous, as any thing contrary to the same is abomination) he
had never outwardly avowed it for awe of any flesh. He calls it the religion
wherein he was brought up, and ever made profession of, wishing his son ever
to continue in the same, as the only true form of Gods worship. He purges
the good men of the ministry that like better of the single form of policy
in our Kirk, then of the many ceremonies of the Kirk of England. That are
persuaded that their Bishops smell of a papallsupremacie, and that the surplice,
the corner cap, etc. are the outward badges of Popish errors. And praises God,
that there is a sufficient number of good men in this kingdom, and yet they
are all known to be against the form of the English Kirk. And shall ye think
now, that his Majesty will either cease to love, and maintain his own loyal
subjects for slow pronouncing a sentence in so old a controversy: or will
impair the liberties of the kingdom of Christ, who has added so largely to
his dominions? But rather as he is the Lords Lieutenant, bearing the sword to
punish transgressors; so as defender of the faith he will procure and protect
the liberty of his subjects, wherewith Christ has made them free, and save them
that they be not entangled again into the yoke of bondage. It is a work
worthier of his majesty's gift, and place, to begin to reform, where his
worthy predecessors left, then to end where they began. To set my sister of
England at liberty, which she has long desired, then to bring me, who have
been so long free, to servitude, which I never deserved. The speech of Gregory
brought by Beda, is very good. It pleases me; Sed mihi placet sive in Romana.
sive in Galliaru^, seu in qualibet ecclesia aliud invenisti quod plus
omnipotenti Deo possie place^e, solicit e^^g as. Et in Anglorum ecclesia^ qu^
ad fidem n^^ v^ est, institutione, praecipua quae de multie ecclesijs colligere
potui^ti, in^undas. Non enim pro loc^^ res, sed pro bonis rebus loca amanda
sunt. Ex singulis ergo quibusque ecclesijs quae pia, quae religiosa, quae rect^
sunt, elige: and haec quasi in fasciculum collecta apud Anglorum mentes in
consuetudinem depon^.
says he, that whether in the Roman; French, or any other Kirk, ye have found
anything, that may more please the Almighty God, that ye carefully make choice
of that. And in the English Kirk, which yet is but new in the faith,
whatsoever ye may collect of many Kirkes, by special institution, ye
establish: for things are not to be loved for places, but places for things.
His highness will never in the most indifferent matters upon his mere
pleasure enjoyne any thing that may destroy these poor and tender souls for
whom Christ died, which were to fall in the greatest breach of the law of
Charity. Prelates would have his Majesty to think, that his royal authority
is supported by the shadow of ceremonies, and would have the subjects to think,
that there is no support of ceremonies, but royal authority* Forbearing in
practice, only in love to the salvation of other brethren, without contempt,
will be esteemed of his majesty's wise heart, to be better service, and
obedience then their lies, and temporizing conformity: who bring the blood of
multitudes of souls upon the whole body of the country, a sin in Gods sight
worse then rebellion. How could his Majesty trust my ministers in any thing,
if he knew not (as Theodosius said to Ruffinus of Ambrose) that they will not
transgress the law of God for any respect to imperial power. Constantius
accepted of them as most loyal subjects to him, who were most faithful and
precise servants of God. I will never doubt, but his highness will think them
honester men, that give him that which is due, then that which he will not
take. Albeit Courtly parasites allege through want of better reason, that
ceremonies are not so much stood upon as obedience, even as God tried Adam with
one apple: yet his Majesty can tell them, that humane laws do bind the
conscience, not because of the mere will of the lawgiver, but by reason of
the utilitie and equity of the law. Non ex voluntate legislatoris, sed ex ipsa
legum utilitate, and ratione. And that it becomes Christian subjects to
profess disobedience in things evil, and against God, passive obedience in
things injurious, and unprofitable, and active obedience in things lawful,
profitable, expedient; wherein by Gods grace, my ministers shall be found most
cheerful and ready. That their scandal in this is not humorous, or
Pharisaicall, may be easily tried by their obedience to Caesar in all matters,
even of greatest difficulties, being ready, as becomes them, to spend their
goods, lands, liberty, and lives, for his preservation, and counting nothing
sufficient to redeem his happiness. The Lord reprove them who slander his
loyal subjects, and let the judge of all the world determine, whether of the
parties does better establish lawful authority. As he was reputed
sacrilegious in the time of Antoninus Pius, who set not up his Statue in his
house: so let him be Anathema, who carries not his Majesty's name and glorious
estate upon his heart to God, and prays not for his royal person, hopeful
progeny, and happy success to the Lord; with whom is wisdom and strength,
who looses the bands of Kings, and girds their loins with a girdle; who
leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrowes the mighty. In his hand is the
heart of the King, as the rivers of waters. Albeit in the judgment of men
longing for the final subversion of the truth, and defacing of the Kirk, my
most faithful Pastors be ready to slip with their feet, and to fall from his
Majesty's favor, yet will he, maugre the malice of men, scatter all the
clouds of their fear, and in the end, with Joseph, power out the bowels of his
compassion upon them. Neither wisdom nor authority can root out affection.
He will rather Neque Philosophia, neque imperiu^, ^olli^ affectus
with Antoninus Pius save one true subject, then slay many enemies. Kings ought
as rarely put in use their supreme prerogative, as God does his power of
working miracles. Remember, O King, that my glorious Spouse is the Prince of
the Kings of the earth, and will be supreme in his own kirk. Remember when
Theodo^ius, otherwise a religious Emperor, was desired to take order with the
tyranny of Flavianus, spiritual tyrants in the Kirk being no less
unsufferable then the civil in the common wealth. And when he had answered,
that he had taken upon him the defense of Flavianus, that Flavianus cause was
his cause, that the things objected against Flavianus, were objected against
him. That it was said of him, that he had grieved them, who^ he should have
made to rejoice, and had made the^ rejoice, whom he should have grieved.

Many speeches, as lots, are Supplication to the Nobility and Estates urged for
that end.
offered to your Princely consideration, but the disposition is of the Lord,
whom we pray to grant, that the best cause may have the first lot. And who
knows, but your Honors are advanced at this time to intercede for me, that his
highness may bless and reward you for hindering hard courses against his
harmless ministers, and most dutiful subjects, sincere professors of the
Gospel. Dorotheus and Gorgonius, men of great authority and place, and of the
Emperors privy chamber, when they beheld the punishment of one Peter with
them, spared not to say, Wherefore O Emperor, why do ye punish in Peter that
opinion, which is in us all? Why is that in him counted an offense, which we
all confess; we are of that faith and religion which he is off. The truly
noble Terentius for all other su^es, which the Emperor desired him to make,
craved only liberty for Christians, and being refused of that, gathered up
the pieces of his riven supplication, and could not be induced to seek any
thing else. The Lord requires not only profession, but confession at your
hands in this case. When can ye better make your affection known, then when
the Lord Jesus in the persons of his spouse, and your own mother, becomes a
petitioner unto you. As ye would wish to see his face in mercy in that day of
his second coming: make not by your unkindnesse his countenance to fall down
upon you now, send him not away with a repulse. He has run many times like the
Roe, or the young Heart, over the highest mountains of difficulties, to succor
you in your distress, when ye have called upon him. Let no pretended
impediment be an hinderance unto you to help his cause most instantly suing for
support at your hands. If there be any iniquity in my children, let them
suffer for it, spare them not. But if they be innocent, smite them not. Open
your mouth for the dumb. Judge righteously the afflicted and poor. Deliver
the oppressed, that they may offer sacrifice and pray for the life of the king
and his son. If hard courses be taken against faithful ministers and people,
let not your honors wash your hands of that harm. It is all one to do them
evil, and not to help them against wrong done by others. The host of Israel
spoke in great courage for the life of Jonathan, and Jonathan for David to the
danger of his life. Ebedmelech spoke a good word for Jeremy, and was saved
when his master Zedekias was slain. But curse ye Meroz, curse the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty,
although they had no hand against them. God that has given you grace and
credit with his highness, requires that ye bestow it upon his matters; and
that ye reserve it not for your own. Remember the example of that worthy
Courtier Nehemiah, who esteemed a liberty to build up the walls of the City
of God, a sufficient reward for all his faithful service. As your solicitude
is great to leave the common wealth, and your own honorable houses in good
case: so dilapidat not my liberty. Leave me not, of whom ye have both your
first and second birth in worse estate, to your own incredible grief, and the
desolation of your posterity. Invenistis marmoreane ne relinquit^ lateritiam.
Upon the wall that ye have found rather build a palace of silver, Cant. 8. 9.
It was that name of Jehovah, and holiness to the Lord put upon the head of the
high Priest, that was the greatest beauty, and crowned all the other inferior
ornaments. The truth of religion, and the purity of your profession, as it has
been, so let it still be your glory, and the luster of all those inferior
gifts, wherewith the Lord has enriched you. As this is the first great trial
of your hearts, Love to Christ and me: so it may be your last occasion. It is
not long, since the places, which ye possess, were filled with your ancestors
of worthy memory, (whose constancy in defending the liberty of Gods worship, is
frequently observed in your own history) who now are passed to their eternity;
and ere be long, according to the succession of generations one after another,
others shall have their time of your present dignities, both in degree and
continuance. Bend your wits and credit to do good, while ye have time. Hazard
not the happiness of your eternity. Do not that, which at the least, while ye
live, will be a bleeding wound in your souls. Set your eyes upon him, that is
invisible, and that recompense of reward: so shall ye esteem the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. And shall choose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. The Lord who searches the reigns, sees you, and the secrets of
your deliberation, and conclusions, and could make them to found again
outwardly in your ears, and to the hearing of others. All your thoughts are
legible to that piercing eye, from which nothing is hid. Look not what ye may
say for your excuse, or what one party may say against another, whether in
private conference, or public velltation by print, or dispute. But in the
sight of God consider upon your beds, by the light of his spirit, whether of
the two courses from the beginning ye find to be of, through and for God. And
we have no great fear, but ye shall be moved to break down that wall of
ceremonies, hurtful to all, and profitable to the souls of none: that both the
houses may be one, as the Lord himself abolished the Jewish ceremonies, and
put none in their place.

I have many children, some aged, some poor, some consumed with godly grief,
not so much for their own trouble, as for the decay of purity, and my
desolation. They would do all things for pleasing all parties, wherein God is
not displeased, and their consciences not disquieted. But the honor of God,
and peace of their souls, they dare not but regard. And albeit obedience to
the word should destroy their own and all other men's worldly estate, yet they
must still and uncessantly urge it. If in times past your honors have been
pleased to hearesome of them in pulpit, and in private, in the matters of
religion: and have not despised their speeches, when there was greater
probability for suspicion: there is greater reason now, when they are in
hazard of suffering, to believe, and take to heart, that which they say, and
require. Whereof as they must be cou^table to the eternal Judge of all the
world, so shall ye be for your hearing; and shall not escape his hand, if ye
harken not, for disobedience to the truth. The world may well dally for a time,
and make men so drunk with the wine of wickedness, that through security they
may think themselves safe. But be assured, when the Lord shall search
Jerusalem with lights, and enter to the fiery ^^yall, every abomination shall
kythe in the own colors. If ye hold your*peace, God will provide for his own
children. But behold he comes shortly, and his reward is with him, to give
to every man according as his works shall be. Albeit my messengers may now
cry with the prophet, Who believes our report; yet that dreadful sentence
shall make the soul once brought within the sight of death, to tremble and
quiver. God will not be mocked. If the righteous scarcely be saved, and God
spares not his Angels, where shall they appear, who make merchandise of his
truth; albeit at the highest rate of honor and wealth? The whole word of God,
his law, promises, and threatenings, his practices, and the works of providence
cannot prevail with the senseless souls of men. But death (so violent are
his persuasions, and his might so unresistable) at his first approach, shall
make every heart to believe and feel, that all the works under the Sun are
but vanity. The conscience and happy remembrance of one word uttered or
suffered for Christ, his crown, his truth, or his needy members, shall at that
strait fill the soul with greater joy, then all the crowns and kingdoms under
heaven. And what is then left to the godless, crafty, and merciles wretch,
that laugheth at my death, and daunceth at my funerals: when men afflicted cry
unto the Lord, and he hears them: But thou have proved in the end victorious,
Vici^^i tandem Galilae
O Jesus of Galilee.

I conclude with that of my beloved Bernard, I owe my self unto God for my
creation, what shall I give for my restoration, especially being restored
after such a manner: neither was ^ so easily restored as created. In his first
work he gave me unto my self: in his second, he gave himself unto me, and by
giving himself, he has restored me unto my self. Being therefore given and
restored, I ow my self for my self, and so ow my self unto God by a double
right. But what shall I render unto God for giving himself unto me. For though
I should give my self a thousand times for recompense, what am I in comparison
of him. And I add, that seeing all my well-doing can be no recompense unto him.
I wish the increase of his glory by a second restitution of me unto my self,
by giving himself now the second time unto me; and am content to be put to a
greater perplexity, not knowing what to render, that his mercies yet may be the
greater. O that it would please him yet again to pity me. At least, let all
the blessed of the Lord keep themselves from troubling the preachers of peace,
and bringers of blessings: let them be stout, steadfast, and play the men, that
they may all run out their course with joy, and report that excellent price
conquesed by the blood and bitter sufferings of Jesus Christ my spouse, now at
the right hand of the father; for whose revelation I am waiting daily, that my
marriage may be perfected, and I with all the Saints may enter into the joys
conquesed by his bitter suffering. To him with the Father and holy Ghost be all
glory, praise and honor for ever.

FINIS.

