A Prognostication everlasting of right good effect, fruitfully augmented by
the Author, containing plain, brief, pleasant, chosen rules to judge the
weather by the Sun, Moon, Stars, Comets, Rainbow, Thunder, Clouds, with
other extraordinary tokens, not omitting the Aspects of Planets, with a brief
judgment forever, of Plenty, Lack, Sickness, Dearth, Wars, etc. opening
also many natural causes worthy to be known.

To these and other now at the last, are joined diverse general pleasant
Tables, with many compendious Rules, easy to be had in memory, manifold ways
profitable to all men of understanding. Published by Leonard Digges Gentleman
Lately corrected and augmented by Thomas Digges his son.

























depiction of zodiac man

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngstone. 1605.

To the Honorable Sir Edward Fines, Earl of Lincoln, Baron of Clinton and
Say, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admiral of England,
Ireland, and Wales, and the Dominions and Isles thereof, of the town of Calice,
and marches of the same, Normandy, Gascoigne and Guian, and Captain general
of the Queens Majesty's Seas and Navy royal.
RIght Honorable, having of long time sundry ways found your Lordships great
favor, not only toward my father in his life time, but also toward his, most
bountifully continued sithence his death: I have carefully thought which way I
might some way yield a testimony of a greatefull mind. And perusing of late a
Book of my fathers to your Lordship dedicated, by negligence, or ignorance of
Correctors many ways depraved: I determinde both to amend the faults, and with
some additions to amplify the same, briefly also to touch and discover
certain errors touching matters of Navigations, transferred into our language.
And although I have in a peculiar volume for that purpose prepared to entreat
at large, delivering new Rules and Methods, hitherto in no language published,
nor to my knowledge of any foreign Nation practiced, not only in
demonstration void of all error, but also in practice feazible: Yet in the
mean, least further boldness by ignorance should increase, to derive us mo
erros from other nations, whereof our Seamen have learned too many already: I
thought good at the end of this book to note some of the most used and
esteemed, and among that faction held for Oracles, whereby indeed they have
been and are (in all nauigations) so misled, that were they not by sight of the
coast, and soundings better directed, then by any troth in their Art, many mo
vessels should daily perish. This present token therefore of dutiful goodwill,
I shall humbly desire your Lordship in good part to accept, meaning hereafter
(God sparing life) to honor your Lordship, and profit my country with matters
more rare. And in the mean while I humbly take my leave.

At your Lordship commandment Thomas Digges.

To the Reader.
TO avoid) gentle Reader) the yearly care, travails, and pains of other,
with the confusions, repugnances, and manifold errors, partly by negligence,
and often through ignorance committed: I have again briefly set forth a
Prognostication general, for ever to take effect: adjoining thereto diverse
profitable collections, and many pleasant conclusions, easy of all willing
ingenious to be perceived. Here note (Reader) whereas the eleuate Pole and
Meridian should be considered, in this work it is performed for London,
because I wish this Meridian, situation or clime the exact truth of things. If
any yearly practices in like matters agree not with my calculations, be
assured they are false, or at the least for other Eleuations or Meridians
supputated, and therefore little serving thy purpose. And that the late rude
inventions, and gross devises of some this year, and two years past
published might be of them perceived, then filed, and to serve to some profit:
I have purposed even now to put forth a book named Panauges, well serving their
turn, and so generally and most exactly al Europe, pleasant and profitable to
the learned, and no small delight to all manner of men. Another book is also
already come to thy hands, entitled Tectonicon, a treasure unto the Masons,
Carpenters, Land-meaters, correcting their old errors, wrongfully reckoned of
them as infallible grounds, teaching faithfully, sufficiently, and very
briefly, the true mensuration of all manner land, timber, stone, board, glass,
etc. And at the end containing an Instrument Geometrical appointed to their
use. Take in good worth these labors (loving Reader) and look shortly for the
pleasant fruits Mathematical, even such as have been promised by my friends,
and partly by me. Neither shall my desire to profit, here stay: but intends
further to proceed, if these seem accepted. As the good will of Printers not
had, kept the foresaid from you: so I trust the willing mind and excellency
of Thomas Gemini shall bring them shortly unto you. Certes my hope is, while
life remains, not to be unfruitful to this common wealth, with study and
practice.

Against the reprouers of Astronomy, and Sciences Mathematical.
I Am diversely occasioned (loving Reader) somewhat to write in the commendation
of the Mathematicals: which need not, but only to open the foolish rashness,
Vituperant qui simpliciter eas ignorant.
and rash foolishnes of such, which of late have in writing dispraised these
goodly arts. It is an old said saw, and true: Scientia non habet inimicum nisi
ignorantem. But to avoid tediousness, and chiefly for the more satisfying, I
refer all of that sort, which have tasted any learning (the rest not
regarded) to the first part of famous Guido Bonatus de vtilitate Astronamiae in
communi: where he writes contra illos, qui dicunt quod scientia Stellarum non
potest sciri ab aliquo: contra illos, qui dixerunt. quod scientia Stellarum non
est vtilis, sed potius damnosa etc. contra illos, qui contra dicunt iudicijs
Astronomiae, and qui reprehendunt eam, nescientes dignitatem eius, co quod non
est lucratiua. Also for brevity I appoint all nice Divines, or (as Melancthon
terms them) Epicurei Theologi, to his hie commendations touching Astronomy,
uttered in his epistles to Simon Grineus, to Schonerus, and to the peroration
of Cardanus 5. books, where he shows how far wide they allege the
Scriptures against the Astronomer, which make wholly with the Astronomer.
Melancthon writes and affirms: Arrogantiam esse cum summa stultitia
coniunctam, venari choragium aliquod gloria ex insectatione artium, quae sunt
graui autoritate doctorum prudentium receptae: he calls it manifestum
insaniae genus, declaring quod magis opus habent Medicis, quam Geometris,
aduising the learned not to give care unto their folly. Sinamus (ait) vnacum
Epicuro ineptire. Which counsel ^o I follow. Now therefore, ye enemies of all
good doctrine, either give an overthrow and that with your pen, or let famous
Guido, or learned Melancthon satisfy. If neither: certes I will shortly (God
sparing life) take some pain in publishing the wonderful unknown pleasant
profits of these dispraised high knowledges, and by that means to enforce
silence.

Now in few, for thy encouragement in these, thus I say and truly, the
ingenious learned, and well experienced circumspec^ student Mathematical,
receives daily in his witty practices more pleasant joy of mind, then all
thy goods (how rich soever thou be) can at any time purchase. Id tantum quod
pulchrum est, quod purum est, quod diuinum est, nihil mortale sapiens dulci
ardore amplectitur. Vt multa paucis: creed mihi, extingui dulce erit
Mathematicarum artium labor. Now to end: that learned Guido, that excellent
Guido Bonatus, shows what Astrology or Astronomy is, and ought not (says
he) by any mean to be reprehended, in that the most wise, yea, the holy
fathers have practiced that science. He proves it one of the chief sciences
Mathematical, Stulti negligunt and contemnunt: qui contradicit ambitiosus est:
qui maledicit, fatuus.
by the authority of the best learned, and by Aristotle in his Posteriorum.
How comes it to pass (loving Reader) seeing it is a noble Science, Et
Scientia est notitia vera conclusionu^, quibus propter demonstratione^ firmiter
assentimur, that it is counted vain and of so small strength: the secret truths
and most pleasant profits therein not desired, yea utterly despised, and of
some busy biting bodies rejected as very lies? Let no man doubt ignorance, the
great enemy of all pure learning has wrought this. Nam incertam vocat hanc
artem vulgus, propter errores, non arti, sed hominum indoctissimorum inscitiae,
and temeritati imputandos, qui citra delectum omnia effutiunt. Thus I leave
indigestly farther to trouble: favor me as I tender the furtherance of good
learnings, profitable to a common wealth. Fare most heartily well, unfeigned good
Christian Reader.

The Contents of this Book.
FRom the next side to the fifth leaf are contained the form of a Quadrant,
Square, Circle, Quantities, with a figure truly placing the said Quantities in
the heaven. From the fifth to the thirteenth, ye have the judgment of weathers
by the Sun, Moon, Stars, Comets, Rainbow, Thunder, Clouds, with
extraordinary tokens and aspects of Planets, etc. The 13.14.15. and 16. leaf,
show the causes of such alteration according to Aristotle. First of the
Rainbow, then Rain, Frost, Dew, Snow, Hayle, Winds, Earthquakes, Thunders,
Lightnings, Comets, Sun and Moon eclipsed, Quantities of the Planets, and
their placing ocularly demonstrated. The 17. the aspects of the Moon and her
signification in the 12. celestial Signs. The 18.19.20. what Sign the Moon
is in and shall be for ever, the meet time to let blood, to purge, to bathe,
to fell timber to sow, to plant, to graffe, cut, geld, etc. The 20. and 21.
have Tables for the Sunday letter, for the Golden number or Prime, for the
Epact and moveable feasts, many ways conducing. The 22.23. and 24. the age of
the Moon, the change and quarters for ever are declared, the Ebbings and
Flowings, the break of the day, the Sun rising, the length of the day and
night, the Twylight for all the year. The 25.26. and 27. show exact pleasant
ways for the day and night hour, with composition of meet instruments. From
the 29. to the 34. leaf, ye have the peculiar Calendar, very commodious for
the day and night hour. The 35.36. and 37. declare unfortunate days of the
whole year with a Calendar general, and Tables as general for the chief
fayres of England. The 38.39. and 40. contain pleasant Tables for the height of
the Sun at all hours, for right and squire shadow conducing also to the
composition of many instruments, etc. The 40. and 41. leaf, Colections easy
to be had in memory.
This Quadrant is appointed here to get exactly the length of Staff and Squire
shadow, how vnleuell soever the ground be, as I have sufficiently instructed in
the eight and thirtith leaf.



If ye list not to make a Quadrant, ye may use this very well: adding a plummet
and line, with sights or otherwise.

This instrument must be made in a plain fine metal plate, a foot, or more
square. Then it is pleasant for the hour of the day and night, either to be
fixed about your house, or moveable if ye list, by a needle to be placed where*
and when ye will.

The 26. leaf shows the making.


The good Mariner may long for the use of this Instrument: it serves
marvelously his turn.

Or thus, without the Square this Circle will serve well your purpose, being
exactly made and truly placed.



The Diameter, or breadth of this Circle, must be a foot^ or more, so is it
most commodious to serve his use declared.

I have placed ready to be conceived eue^ here at ye eye, the true quantities
or magnitudes of the seven Planets, the one to the other, and every one to the
Earth: which may satisfy the^ that scorned my last publishing, where I
declared the Globe of the Sun, to contain ye Globe of the Moon 7000. times. I
would they were able to conceive demonstration made: then ye truth more
evidently appearing, would pull scorning away.



I thought it meet also to put here this figure, showing the placing,
compassing, and distance of each of the foresaid Planets in the heaven: which
distances, at my last publishing were thought imposible. This figure wittily
weighed, may confirm a possibility to agree unto the true quantities
immediately before put forth, therefore not omitted here to be placed.

scheme of Ptolemaic universe

How to judge of weather by the Sun rising or going down.
THe Sun in the Horizon or rising, clear and bright, De obseruandis meteoris.
shows a pleasant day: but thinly ouercast with a clowd, betokens foul
weather. Also at the going down, the body diversely colored or red, and about
dispersed with like clouds, the beams red, and of length, pronounce great
winds, the next day from that part. Blackness in the Sun or Moon,
betokens water: Red, signifies wind.

The Element red in the evening, the next day fair: but in the (...) red,
wind and rain. Also the Sun beams spotted green, pale, or black,
gathered to a clowd, signifies rain. Further, the Sun at the setting
plainly seen without any cloud, declares a fair night to ensue.

Here note, Ptolome wills us diligently to observe the circle, or circles
about the sun. If it be clear, and the circle of no continuance, behold
fair weather: If many of them, wind.

Winds more vehement are signified, if that the circles be somewhat red, here
and there broken: but these obscured, thick, and black, look for cold, wind,
and snow.

What is spoken of the sun, touching the circles, the same is meant of the
Moon.

Note here that greater winds chance in the day, Note.
than in the night.

How weather is declared by the color of the Moon, and by the nature of the
sign wherein she is.
IF the Moon in the third of her change, yea, three days before the full, or
in the midst of the quarter be found of pure light, nothing compassing her,
the end direct up, she promises fair weather: but bent to red color,
provoke wind. Luna rubena ventar. pallo^ pluit. A^^a^lerenat.
The Moon pale or somewhat inclined to black, obscure or thick, threatens
rain.

Also by the nature of the sign, weather may be judged, thus according to
Steflerinus, Monte regius, Leupoldus, and famous Guido Bonatus, with others
well travailed in the mutations of air.

COnsider the nature of the sign where the Moon is at the change, Hot.
Eearthie. Airie. Watrie.
quarter, and full. It she be in hot and dry signs, as Aries, Leo,
Sagittarius, in winter a good token of fair weather: In Summer a great
signification of immoderate heat. If in earthy, cold and dry signs, as
Taurus, Uirgo, and Capricornus, in winter judge cold, frost, and snow to ensue:
but in Summer temperate weather. In ayrie and windy signs, as Gemini, Libra,
and Aquarius, much wind. If in watrie, cold and moist signs, as Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces, in winter wet weather: In summer a pleasant tempertaure.

ALso, the Sun in Aquarie: the Moon at the change there, or in Sagittarie, or
at the full in Leo, betokneth rain. The Sun in Pisces or Aries: the Moon in
Uirgo, Libra, or Sagittarie, signifies rain, especially in watrie dwellings.
The Moon in Aquarius or Pisces, look for change of weather, then chiefly she
troubles the air. The Moon also at the change, or rather at the full, in
Aries, Libra, Scorpio or Pisces, tempestuous weather follows. The Sun in
Aquarie, in Aries, Libra, or Scorpio, but chiefly in Leone: the moon then at
the ^ull, and that after rain or mis^ings, look for lightning thunder, etc. To
conclude, the Moon in Cancer, Leo, Capricornus, or Aquarius, aided with any
aspect, but chiefly with opposition or Quadrat of Uenus, rain follows.

The Judgment of weather by stars.
BEhold the stars whose magnitude you know b^st. If they appear of much light,
Cum maiora (...) en^m H^^ore (...) crastescitaer.
in bigness great, more blasing then they are commonly, it betokens great
wind or moisture in that part where they show: in winter, cold and frost. When
Stars seem to run in the Element, it shows wind. Affirm also alteration
of weather, if they ^ee few in number, clowdie, and of little light. Furth^^,
when dim Stars appear with long ^^^rie tails, judge winds and great
drought, the more in number, the greater effect. When Stars in the night (as
it is said) shoot or seem to fall, it argues wind in that part. If in
diverse places, inordinate winds, if in all places, then pronounce wind,
thunder, lightnings, yea weather most tempestuous.

The significations of Comets.
COmets signify corruption of the air. De Cometarum prodigijs, lege Cardanum
lib. 5. Fol. 83. and Antonium Mizaldum de Cometo graphia.
They are signs of Earthquakes, of wars, changing of kingdoms, great dearth
of Corn, yea a common death of man and beast.

Pontanus sic scribens: Ventorum quoque certa dabunt tibi signa Cometae: Illi
etiam belli motus, fraque arma minantur, Magnorum and clades populorum, and
funera regum, aquarum significant penuriam.

How by the Clouds, change of weather is perceived.
IF thick clouds resembling flocks, or rather great heaps of wool, (...)
gathered in many places, they show rain. Also when gross, (...), dark
clouds, right over the North part, or somewhat declining to the West are close
with the Earth, immediately follows rain. If they appear like ^illes, some
deal from the earth, a good token of weather ouerpassed. Black clouds
signify rain. White clouds appearing in winter, at the Horizon, two or three
days together, prognosticate col^ and snow.

Of the Rainbow and his effect touching alteration of air.
IF in the morning ye Rrainbow appear, it signifies moisture, Arcus nisi sole
aduerso non fiunt.
unless great drought of air work the contrary. If in the evening it show
it self, fair weather ensues, so that abundant moist air take not away the
effect.

Or thus.
THe Rainbow appearing, if it be fair, Non appare^ nisi cum vapores
ra^ifican^ur vel insp^^^antur.
it betokens foul weather: if foul, look for fair weather. The greener,
the more rain: redder, wind.

Of thunders what they signify.
THunders in the morning, signify wind: about noone, rain: In the evening
great tempest. Some write (their ground I see not) that Sundays thunder,
should bring the death of learned men, Signum futurorum bellorum.
Judges and others.

Mondayes thunder, the death of women.

Tuesdayes thunder, plenty of grain.

Wednesdays thunder, the death of harlots, and other bloodshed.

Thursdayes thunder, plenty of sheep and corn.

Fridayes thunder, the slaughter of a great man, and other horrible murders.

Saturdayes thunder, a general pestilent plague and great death.

How weather is known after the change of every Moon by the prime day.
Common tokens of weather meet for all manner of wits.
SUnday Prime, dry weather, Monday Prime, moist weather. Tuesday Prime, cold
and windy. Wednesday Prime, wonderful. Thursday Prime, fair and clear.
Friday Prime, mixed weather. Saturday Prime, moist weather.

Now ensue extraordinary tokens for the knowledge of weather.
SOme have observed evil weather to follow, when as watrie fowls leave the
sea, desiring land: the fowls of the land flying high: the crying of fowls
about waters making a great noise with their wings: also the seas swelling with
unaccustomed waves: If beasts eat greedily: If they lick their hooues: If
they suddenly move here and there making a noise, breathing up to the air with
open nostrels: rain follows. And the busy heauing of Moules: the appearing
or coming out of worms: Hens resorting to the perch or roust covered with
dust, declare rain. The ample working of the Spinner in the air: the Ant
busied with her eggs: the Bees in fair weather not far wandering: the
con^inuall prating of the Crow, chiefly twice or thrice quick calling, show
tempest. When the Crow or Raven gapeth against the Sun in summer, heat
follows. If they busy themselves in proyn^ng or washing, and that in winter,
look for rain. The unaccustomed noise of poultry, the noise of swine, of
peacocks, declare the same. The swallow flying and beating the water, the
chirping of the Sparrow in the morning signify rain. Rain suddenly dried up.
Woody couerings straighter then of custom. Bells heard further then commonly,
the wallowing of dogs, the alteration of the Cock crowing, all declare
rainie weather. I leave these, wanting the good ground of the rest. If the
learned be desirefull of the aforesaid, let them read grave Virgil, Primo
Georgicorum. At Bor. etc.

There be a multitude of other not extraordinary, but of the best known causes:
many for breuity here omitted, the most part not mentioned, because they pass
the capacity of the common sort, upon all the which the Astronomer does well
and learnedly conclude. I doubt not, there be also sometime unknown matters,
mittigating the aforesaid, or provoking tempest unlooked for, which neither
experience, ne learning has established. How unkind (these considered) yea how
far from worthy thanks giving are they, which in general headdely do
blame, checking bitterly the Astrologer, with these Iudiciarie matters (the
least part among a number of his most certain doings) when things fortune
contrary to expectation? Understand gentle Reader, the consent of a multitude
famously learned in their buckler, even in these matters Iudiciarie: who have
wayed a long time prudentlie, the great strength, the vehement force and
marvelous natures of all erraticall, and celestial constellations, with their
Angles, Radiations, Aspects, Affections, Stations, Progressions, Defections,
Dispositions, Applications, Preuentions, Refrenations, Contrarieties,
Abscissions, Conjunctions, Quadratures, and Oppositions, etc. Therefore extreme
folly, yea more then madness does he utter, which imbraydeth or backbiteth these
knowledges, not remembering the great and manifold benefits had through them,
and that with most certainty in all other doings.

What Meteoroscoper, yea who learned in matters Astronomicall, notes not the
great effects, at the rising of the star called the little Dog? Truly the
c^nsent of the best lea^ned do agree of his force: yea Pliny, in his history
of nature affirms the Seas then most fierce, wines to slow in cellers,
standing waters to move, dogs inclined to madness, then most wood. Further,
these constellations, Orionis, Arcturi, Coronae Captae, Sucularum effectus.

and cum and. and cum aut cum, etc.


Orion, Arcturus, Corona, rising, provoke tempestuous weather. The Kid and
Goat, winds. Hyades, or Succulie, rain. What Meteorologer consents not to
the great alteration and mutation of air, at the Conjunction, Opposition or
Quadrat aspect of Saturn, with either two lights? Who is ignorant yea meanly
truailed in Astronomy, that Jupiter with Mercury or with the Sun, enforces
rage of winds? What is he that perceives not the fearful thunders,
lightnings and raines at the meeting of Mars and Venus, or Jupiter and Mars?
etc. Leave for shame to oppugn these judicials strongly authorized. He that
any other part carpeth, may seem more then mad. Al truth, al experience, a
multitude of infallible grounded rules are against him. Certum est omnibusque
notum. quod ^oeli motus, signorum ortus and occasus* planetarum aspectus and
coniunctiones luminarium Eclipses, etc. certissimam (...) habent causam. Quis
iam sanaementis negabit eorum effectus saepe innotescere, vtpote bella, fames,
grandines, aeris perturbationes, elementorum commotiones, terrae mot^s, and
similia? Positis causis natu^alibus, and non impeditis, sequitur effectus.

The learned that lists ingeniously to prognosticate of weather, will not
only discreetly wey all before written, but consider also with them the
aspects of the Planets following, and their combustion in the 12. Signs, with
the conjunction of fixed stars, mansions of the Moon, Ascendent, Climes, etc.
Also the times or quarters of the year must be noted diligently, (as ensues)
and judgment accordingly pronounced.

Of the year divided into four quarters.
THe Spring time is hot and moist and continues so long as the Sun is in
Aries, (...) power over the breast..
Taurus, and Gemini, which is from the tenth of March unto the 12. of June. The
Summer is hot and dry, counted from the beginning of Cancer, to the end of
Uirgo, (...) Power over all (...).
that is from the 12. of June to the fourteenth of September. Harvest is cold
and dry, counted from the beginning of Libra to the end of Sagittarie, counted
from the 14. day of September to the thirteenth of December. Winter is cold and
moist, continued from the beginning of Capricornus, to the end of Pisces, that
is, from the twelfth of December, to the tenth of March.

Here follow the aspects of the Planets, for the better judgment of weather.
BEfore I declare of Planets and the signification of aspects. it behooves
briefly to open what I call Planets, and what aspects, and how they are
charactered and figured. Understand there be seven moveable Stars pleasant
to the sight called Planets: the highest Saturn: then Jupiter: Mars: Sun:
Uenus: Mercury: and the Moon, next to the Earth.

Now when I desire to express Saturn, I write this figure. for Jupiter this.
for Mars this. Thus of the other as their characters declare. All Radiations or
Aspects are expressed as follow. A Conjunction is thus figured. and it is when
another Planet is joined with the Sun or Moon, or others among themselves,
within one degree or less.

The Sextile Aspect or Radiation, is thus expressed, and it is within 60.
degrees the one from the other. The Quadrate aspect thus, 90. degrees
distanant. The Trine thus, separated 120. degrees. The Opposition thus, 180.
degrees the one is distant from the other.

Lo here they follow in order: the characters of the Planets and Signs also.

Conjunction, Sextile, Quadrate, Trine, Opposition.

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,

Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.

Yet for more plainness behold this figure.



The signification of the aspects of Planets among themselves: for the
judgment of weather.
THe conjunction or meeting of Saturn with Jupiter, in fiery signs,
enforces great drought. In watery signs, floods, continual rain, general
ouerflowings, etc. In ayrie signs, plenty of Winds.

The Quadrature, Sextile, and cum.
or Opposition of Saturn with Jupiter, in moist Signs, causes troubled air,
by Hayle, Wind, Rain, Thunder, etc. before and after.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Saturn with Mars, in watery Signs, declare in Summer rain,
often showers with hail, thunder and lightning.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Saturn with the Sun, chiefly in cold Signs, show dark
weather, hail, rain, thunder and cold days.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Saturn with Venus, in Winter, engender cold and rain,
principally in moist Signs: in Summer, mittigation of heat.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Saturn with Mercury, in watrie signs, bring rain: in hot
or dry Signs, drought: in Summer, thunder, lightnings and tempest.

The conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Jupiter with Mars, in moist Signs, declare thunders,
lightnings and rain: in winter snow, or clowdie thick weather.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum,
or Opposition of Jupiter with the Sun, great and most vehement winds.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Jupiter with Venus, in moist Signs, cold and mis^ings: in
the other Signs fair weather.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Jupiter with Mercury, great winds.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum.
or Opposition of Mars with the Sun, in fiery Signs, drought: in watrie,
thunder and rain.

The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Mars with Venus, in moist
Signs, rain, and tempest. and cum.


The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Mars with Mercury, in hot
Signs, great heat: in dry Signs, drought: and cum.
in watrie, rain sometimes, thunders, lightnings, with sudden fierce winds*

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Venus with Mercury, causes
rain: in Summer they provoke tempest, the more if they agree in watrie Signs.
Note what is said of the Conjunction, Quadrature or Opposition, the same is
also meant of the Sextile and Triue, but they are of less signification, so the
learned notes.

A declaration of weather by aspects of the Moon with the Planets.
and cum.
THe Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with Saturn in moist
Signs, brings a clowdie day, cold air, according to the nature of the
Sign: If she go from Saturn to the Sun, by conjunction or otherwise,
harder weather ensues.

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with Jupiter in Aries
or Scorpio, shows fair weather, white dispersed clouds.

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with Mars in watrie
Signs, rain. In hot Signs, diverse colored clouds are made all the Element
over. In Summer often thunder.

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with the Sun in moist
Signs, rainie weather. The more if the Moon go from the Sun to Saturn.

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with Venus, chiefly in
moist Signs, ra^ne follows. The Moon going from Venus, and Mars, more
variety of weather.

and cum.
The Conjunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moon with Mercury in moist
Signs, shows rain an wind, the m^re when the Moon passes from Mercury to
Jupiter, then great winds follow.

How the weather is judged by the Oriental and Occidentall station of Planets,
with their Combustion in the 12. Signs Celestial.
First of the Plenets in Aries.
SATVRNE in Aries combust, that is to say, in
under the beams of the Sun, makes a clowdie dark troubled air.
Oriental, I mean in the morning appearing before the Sun, fair weather.
Occidentall, that is to say, showing himself after the Sun going down,
betokens great winds.

Jupiter in Aries combust, a token of rain: being Occidentall, it brings
clouds, and dewes: Oriental, fair pleasant weather. in


Mars in Aries combust and Occidentall, good weather: in
contrary Oriental.

Venus in Aries combust Occidentall, moystnesse, great winds: in
Oriental, thunders and raines.

Mercury in Aries combust, tempest: Occidentall and Oriental, in
fair windy weather.

Of Planets in Taurus.
SATVRNE in Taurus combust and stationarie, in
brings thick clouds, thunders and troublesome weather.

Jupiter in Taurus combust, indifferent weather: Occidentall, in
pleasant showers.

Mars in Taurus combust, a quiet air: but Oriental, windy. in


Venus in Taurus combust, thunders, etc. Occidentall, fair. in


Of the Planets in Gemini.
in
SATVRNE in Gemini combust and Occidentall, drought.

in
Jupiter in Gemini combust, a good signification.

in
Mars in Gemini combust and Occidentall, heat.

in
Venus in Gemini combust and Occidentall, wind.

in
Mercury in Gemini combust, wind.

Of the Planets in Cancer.
in
SATVRNE in Cancer combust, dark weather, great winds and troublesome
weathers: Occidentall, caulmer.

in
Jupiter in Cancer combust, brings caulme and pleasant weather.

in
Mars in Cancer combust, great heat.

in
Venus in Cancer combust, a quiet caulme time.

in
Mercury in Cancer combust, tempestuous weather, chiefly on the Sea:
Occidentall, caulmer.

Of the Planets in Leone.
in
SATVRNE in Leone combust, makes winds and mislings.

in
Jupiter in Leone combust, pleasant winds.

in
Mars in Leone combust, Occidentall, drought.

in
Venus in Leone combust, drought.

in
Mercury in Leone combust, winds.

Of the Planets in Virgo.
SATVRNE in Virgin combust, is a significatour of infirmities. in


Jupiter in Virgin combust, manifests abundance of things. in


Mars in Virgin combust, like unto Saturn. in


Venus in Virgin combust, drought: Oriental, contrary. in


Mercury in Virgin combust, drought, raging seas: in
Occidentall drought.

Of the Planets in Libra.
SATVRNE in Libra combust, shows infirmity of sight: in
Oriental, cold winds.

Jupiter in Libra combust, indifferent weather. in


Mars in Libra combust, brings moisture. in


Venus in Libra combust, moist air. in


Mercury in Libra combust, winds. in


Of the Planets in Scorpione.
SATVRNE in Scorpio combust, air: Occidentall, frost: in
Orientalll, cold North winds.

Jupiter in Scorpio combust, rain: Occidentall, bitter weather. in


Mars in Scorpio combust, dclareth moisture: Oriental, winds. in


Venus in Scorpio combust, rain, both Occidentall, and Oriental. in


Mercury in Scorpio combust, raging weather, chiefly Oriental. in


Of the Planets in Sagittarius.
in
SATVRNE in Sagittarius combust, cold rainie air: Oriental, cold and frost.

in
Jupiter in Sagittarius combust, much rain: Oriental worse weather.

in
Mars in Sagittarius combust, drought.

in
Venus in Sagittarius combust, rain: Occidentall wind and cold.

in
Mercury in Sagittarius combust, rain: Occidentall, clear air.

Of the Planets in Capricornus.
in
SATVRNE in Capricornus combust, signifies dark weather, with South winds:
Occidentall, cold: Oriental, north winds.

in
Jupiter in Capricornus combust, moist air: Occidentall, increasing the same.

in
Mars in Capricornus combust, clowdie: Occidental, some heat.

in
Venus in Capricornus combust, cold air: Oriental, rain.

in
Mercury in Capricornus combust, rain both Oriental and Occidentall.

Of the Planets in Aquarius.
in
SATVRNE in Aquarius combust, cold air: Occidentall, dangerous seas:
Oriental, rain.

in
Jupiter in Aquarius combust, Occidentall, rain.

in
Mars in Aquarius combust, drought: Occidentall, and Oriental, plenty of
winds.

in
Venus in Aquarius cumbust, clowdie: Occidentall, hot: Oriental, rain.

in
Mercury in Aquarius combust, snow: Occidentall, more cold: Oriental, rain.

Of the Planets in Pisces.
SATVRNE in Pisces combust, brings clouds: Occidental, in
rain.

Jupiter in Pisces combust Oriental, caulme waters. in


Mars in Pisces combust Occidentall, drought: Orintall, in
lightning and thunders.

Venus in Pisces combust, cold: Occidentall, disposed to snow. in


Mercury in Pisces combust, moist air. in


Thus much of the judgment of weather.
SEeing that I have now sufficiently declared how, by what rules and tokens
weather is judged: I think it convenient to adioyne here a brief collection,
how Plenty, Scarcity, Sickness, Death, Alterations, Troubles, Wars, etc. are for
ever perceived.

A rule to prognosticate the aforesaid by the falling of Newyeares day.
IT is affirmed of some, Sunday.
when Newyeares day falls on the Sunday then a pleasant Winter does ensue: a
natural Summer: fruit sufficient: Harvest indifferent, yet some wind and
rain: many marriages: plenty of wine and honey: death of young men, and
cattle: robberies in most places: news of Prelates, of Kings: and cruel
wars in the end.

ON Monday, a Winter same what uncomfortable: Monday.
Summer temperate: no plenty of fruit: many fancies and fables opened: ag^es
shall reign: Kings and many others shall dye: Marriages shall be in most
places: and a common fall of Gentlemen.

ON Tuesday, a stormy Winter: a wet Summer: Tuesday.
a diverse Harvest: corn and fruit indifferent, yet herbs in gardens shall
not flourish: great sickness of men, women, and young children. Beasts shall
hunger starve, and dye of the botch: many Ships, Galleys and Hulkes shall be
lost: And the bloody Flixes shall kill many men: All things dear, save corn.

Wednesday.
ON Wednesday, Lo a warm winter: In the end Snow and frost: a clowdie Summer,
plenty of fruit, of Corn, Hay, Wine and Honey: great pain to women with
child, and death to infants: good for sheep: news of Kings: great wars,
battle and slaughter toward the midst.

Thursday.
ON Thursday, Winter and Summer windy: A rainie Harvest: Therefore we shall
have ouerflowings. Much fruit: plenty of honey: yet flesh shall be dear:
cattle in general shall dye: great trouble, wars, etc. with a licencious
life of the feminine sex.

Friday.
ON Friday, Winter stormy: Summer scant pleasant: Harvest indifferent: little
store of fruit, of wine and honey: corn dear: many bleare eyes: youth shall
dye: Earthquakes are perceived in many places: plenty of thunders, lightnings,
and tempests: with a sudden death of cattle.

Saturdy.
ON Saturday, a mean Winter: Summer very hot: a late Harvest: good cheap
garden herbs: much burning: plenty of Hemp, Flax, and honey. Old folk
shall dye in most places: Fevers and Tercians shall grieve many people: great
muttering of wars: murders shall be suddenly committed in many places for
light matters.

NOw that I have opened diverse ways, both for the learned and unlearned, how
weather to come at all times may be well judged and known, etc. I thought it
meet, for further knowledge therein, not to omit here the natural causes of
such and so many alterations of air. Lo, therefore orderly they follow.

Natural causes, conducing to all the aforesaid: and first of the Rainebow.
THe Rainbow is the shining and rebounding of beams of light, that turn to
the contrary vapor again in the cloud. It declares sometime rain, and
many times fair weather: when the one, and how the other, is before opened.

Of Rain.
Rain is a cold vapor, an earthly humor, or fumosities, out of waters or
earth drawn up by the virtue of the Sun, to the nether part of the middle
space of the air, there through cold thicked, then dissolved: Thus engendered
falls on the earth.

Here I leave to speak of miraculous raines, as Milk, Blood, Quare lapides
pluant, lege Plin. lib. 2. cap. 44.
Flesh, Iron, Wool, etc. For more satisfying in these, read Plinius in the
second book, 58. chapter.

Of Frost and Dew.
A Cold moist vapor, Ros aestate, prum^ hyeme ^it.
a little way drawn up in the day through faint heat of the Sun, descends
in the night, dissolved on the earth, there congelated or resolved into water,
the one called Frost, the other Dew. The last is a sign of fair weather in
the Spring or Harvest.

Of Snow.
IT is a moist vapor, Nix, humor modice concretus,
drawn up to the middle region of the air, then thicked, and frozen into the
body of a cloud: So congelated descends.

Of Hayle.
A Cloud resolved into water, in the fall congelated, makes Hayle. The higher
it comes from above, Grando pluuia in descensu congelata.
and the longer it tarieth in the air, the rounder hayle.

Of Winds.
Ventorum ergo mate^ia, calida and sicca exhalatio.
Wind is a multitude of dry exhalations, drawn up from the earth: and above
the earth enforced here and there.

Of Earthquakes in the most quiet time.
Quemadmodum in nube toni^ruum, sic in terra tremor.
Plenty of winds, entered into holes, cones, or caves of the earth, which
absent from above the earth causes quietness: the violent brusting out of
them (the earth closed again) is the Earthquake: Signum est futurorum bellorum.

Tokens of Earthquakes to come.
Signa terraemotus.
A Fiery cloud, appearing in the element like a little pillar, is a token of
Earthquakes to come. The obscurity or darkness of the Sun, without clouds,
and strangely colored, bloody or otherwise, is a token of Earthquakes.

Also when Well water and others are troubled, or salt, or infected by savor,
etc.

A great quietness of air by land and sea, and chiefly the long absence of
winds.

Also strange noyses heard, as clamours of men, rushing of harness, mournings,
lamentations, etc. All these have been observed to signify Earthquakes at hand.

Of thunders and lightnings.
Fulgetrum prius cerni, quam tonitrum audiri, cum si^ul f^ant certum est, Plin.
lib. 3. cap. 56. contra. Austo.
THunder is the quenching of fire in a cloud. Or thunder is an exhalation hot
and dry, mixed with moisture, carried up to the middle region, there thicked and
wrapped into a cloud: of this hot matter coupled with moystnes closed in the
cloud, grows a strife, the heat beating, and breaking out the sides of the
cloud with a thundering noise: the fire then dispersed is the lightning.

Thus for the learned: Tonitruum soni^us est, qui ed^^r quando nubem rumpit
halitus. Fulmen fl^mma, vel repentinus est ignis, qui ex collisio^^ nubium, aut
ruptura nascitur. Aristotle affirms the lightning after thunder, but the fire
does first appear, in that the sight is before the hearing. If this satisfy
not, read the second of his Met^oron. Here follows a note of lightnings.

There be three kinds of Lightnings, dry, moist, and clear.
Dry do not burn but cleave, part or divide. Moist, Note.
burn not, but alter color. The clear are of marvelous natures: Full
barrels by it are emptied. It melts money in the purse, it breaks the
sword, the purse and scabberd not perished, yea, wax in them vnmolten.

Of the Comets or flames in the night.
A Comet is a flame working in a dry, hot slimie exhalation, Ventorum causa.
drawn up to the highest part of the air. His matter or substance after it is
burnt, and dispersed, provoke winds.

The natural cause of the Sun cclipsed.
NOthing else is the Eclipse of the Sun, but the direct putting the body of
the Moon between the Sun and the earth, or between our fight and the Sun,
which chance only at the change.

A Corollarie.
BY this, Miracle.
gather the darkness at Christ's death no to stand by natural eclipticall
cause: but by supernatural, or miracle. For it was at the full Moon,
Scriptures witness: which enforced Dionisius Arcopagita at the time of his
passion, to speak thus* Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi machina
dissoluitur.

The cause of the Moon eclipsed.
THe Sun being in the contrary point to the full Moon, Vniuersalis est
Eclipsis Lu^c. Non semper in nouilunio, sed in capite and cauda.
enforces the shadow of the earth then directly put between the Suns and the
Moon, toward the Moon, hiding more or less of the Moon, as she differs
from the Eclipticall. Some observe pestilent plagues, sudden battle, great
dearth, to ensue th^se Eclipses: which all I desire God to a^ert from his
chosen. Many other things by these Eclipses are gathered, as Longitudes of
Countries, the Quantity of the Sun, containing the bigness of the Earth
162. times: the compass of the earth 21600. miles: whose thickness, according
to Archimedes rule is 6872. miles, and eight eleuenths of a mile. The quantity
of the Moon is the 43. part of the earth. Omnium planetarum ad terram
magnitudo.
The Sun contains the Globe of the Moon 7000. times. Saturnus
comprehends the bigness of the earth 91. times. Jupiter, 65. times. Mars,
once, and ten sixteenths. Venus, the 37. part. Mercurius, one. 32000. part of
the earth.

Note here, that Alfraganus affirms the least fixed Star perfectly seen,
is big as the whole earth.

HAec non erunt admirationi, si globi capacitatem ex longitudine diametri
quaesieris. Continet enim solis dimetiens terrae dimetientem quinquies and
semissem. Dimetiens ad terrae dimetientem vndecim ad duo.
Estque proportio diametri Solis ad terrae dimetientem, quae est numeri vndecim
ad duo, quintupla sesquialtera. Cubus solis mill tercentum vnam and triginta
parts tales continet, cuiusmodi terrae cubus octonas complectitur. Cubus enim
numeri vndecim, est mill tercentum vnum and triginta. Cubus vero binarij, qui
est terrae, Cubus 13.13. Terrae, 8.
octo. Subducto quoties id fieri potest, minore cubo qui est terrae, a maiore
qui est solis, cognoscitur cubi ad cubum proportio, and quanto Sol mayor terra
sit. Inuenimus ergo octo centies, sexagies sexies, in mill tercentum vno and
triginta.

Dimetiens terrae ad diam. 17. ad 5 Cubus terrae 14913. Cubus 125.
Terrae Diametros Lunae dimetiens complectitur ter, and duas eius diametri
portiones quintas: estque ea proportio dimetientis terrae ad Lunae diametrum,
quae est septendecim ad quinque tripla superbi partiens quintas. Cubus numeri
septendecim est quater mill nonagenta terdecim. Cubus numeri quinque est
centum viginti quinque. Maiore cubo per minorem distributo, reperimus numerum
certum viginti quinque, tricies nouies in quater mill nonagentis terdecim:
quod paululum a superioribus obseruationibus differt.

The quantities or rather true proportion of all the Planets unto the earth,
ocularly demonstrated by figure following.


Mercury is but a point in respect of these quantities.

BY these five Globes are represented the true magnitudes of the seven planets.
One Globe or like magnitude appointed for Saturn and Jupiter: Even so for the
Moon and Venus: the rest have several Globes (as ye may see) according to
their quantities.

The nature, course, color, and placing of these seven Planets, according to
Ptolomie.

Saturn is the highest and slowest in proper motion, cold, dry, and pale,
like unto Lead color, requiring thirty years to end his course. Di. 9. ad.
2.
IVpiter is next under Saturn, temperate, fair and bright: his course is
performed in 12 years. Di. 32. ad. 7.
MArs is hot and dry of fiery color, in two years ends his course. Di. 7.
ad 6.
THe Sun is placed in the middle of all the Planets: most clear and bright,
the well of pure light: every year finishing his course. Di 11. ad 2.
VEnus is next to the Sun, cold, moist, and clear: yea more bright then
Jupiter, her course is like unto the Suns: never above 48. degrees from the
Sun: called the morning star when she goes before the Sun, coming after
the Sun she is named the evening star. Di. 3. ad 10.
Mercury is next under Venus, somewhat shining but not very bright: never
above 29. degrees from the Sun, his course is like to Venus, or the Suns
motion.
THe Moon is lowest of all the seven, running over the whole Zodiake in 27.
days, and eight hours, and somewhat more. Di. 5. ad. 7.
For more plainness of that which is opened, now shall follow a figure, by the
which ye may perceive how the O^be of the one Planet compasses the other.
Also, how these Planets are placed in the heaven: yea, which Planets is highest
from the earth, and which nearest unto us. Consider well this figure, so needs
no farther declaration.



Ye may here behold first th Elementall part subject unto alteration,
consisting of the four Elements, first Earth and Water, whereon we are: then
Air and fire. The other Etheriall part, (which the Philosophers call quinte
essence) contains the ten Orbs: the bigger compasses the next lesser, as
the figure before shows. It begins at the Moon, then Mercury, Uenus,
etc. in height more and more. As the figure declares Saturn to be the
highest Planet: so is the Moon lowest.

The distance or miles that the Moon is from the Earth and every Planet from
other.
Haec incredibilia viden u^ tantum ijs qui Mathematicis demonstrationibus non
assueuerunt, etc.
AS some have published, it is from the Earth to the Moon, 1570. miles.

From the Moon to Mercury, is 12812. miles.

From Mercury to Uenus, as many miles.

From Uenus to the Sun, is 23437. miles and a half.

From the Sun to Mars, is 157^5. miles.

From Mars to Jupiter, is 18721. miles.

From Jupiter to Saturn, as many miles.

From Saturn to the firmament, 120485. miles.

The whole sum from the Earth to the Firmament, is 358463 miles and a half.

Here Demonstration might be made of the distance of these Orbs, but that
passes the capacity of the common sort.

The natural operations of these Planets by conjunction, opposition etc.
ensues: but more largely of me opened in a pleasant book shortly to be
published. First here will I end the natural causes of many Suns and Moons:
then of the Planets by conjunction.

The natural causes of many Suns or Moons.
Milichius notes the king of Pole to have seen 6. Suns at once.
THese come to pass, when a thicker cloud is gathered toward the side of ^he
Sun or Moon, in the which the broken beams of the Sun do leave the fashion
and very form of that Sun. Thus as follows, says Plinius in his second
book of the history of Nature, and 31. chapter. No more Suns are perceived
in our time then three: and they are never seen, either above or beneath the
Sun, but on the sides: never in the night, but only at the Sun rising or
going down.

What is to be chosen or avoided under every aspect of the Moon, with her
signification in the 12. signs touching the same.
THe Conjunction, Quadrature, and cum
or Opposition of Saturn with the Moon, causes an evil unlucky day for all
matters. Leave therefore to have to do any manner way: nothing shall prosper or
come well to pass then attempted. cum
Yet the Sextile or Trine of Saturn with the Moon, declares a convenient
time to til, delue, or dig, to sow, to lay foundations, to erect or repair
houses, yea, a meet time to obtain suites of fatherly farmers. The Moon in
Capricornus or Aquarius, in vel
brings this latter effect of the Sextile and Trine.

The Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, vel cum
Quadrature or Opposition of Jupiter with the Moon, shows a fortunate day,
chiefly to obtain suites of Kings, noble Princes, Prelates, of Lawyers and
Religious persons: and a meet time to study, to journey, to take an honest
matter in hand. The Moon in Taurus, in Leo, in vel
or Sagittarius, shows the same.

The Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, vel cum
Quadrature or Opposition of Mars with the Moon, warns thee not to match thy
self that day with warriors: notwithstanding very good and most meet to
finish all manner fiery works: naught to journey: yet most convenient for
valiant Captains to work their feate: to lead, encourage or stomach their
soldiers: most unmeet to treat peace, to take servants, or to seek
friendship.

The Conjunction, vel cum
Quadrature or Opposition of the Sun with the Moon, declares a very
unhappy day for all matters: therefore attempt nothing, ne any manner suite,
neither plant, build, ne journey. Yet the Sextile and Trine are very fortunate,
specially to obtain suite of Kings, Princes, and other Nobles. The Moon in
Aries, enforces the effect of this latter part. in


vel cum
The Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, Quadrature, or Opposition of Venus with the
Moon, causes a day most apt to obtain all suites of women, good i^ woo, to
attempt marriage, and to follow al manner of pleasures, and pleasant pastimes:
not unmeet to hire servants, to let blood, etc. The Moon in Libra or Pisces
provoke the like.

vel cum
The Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, Quadrature or Opposition of Mercury with the
Moon, promises a fortunate happy day to buy and sell: very good to enter
children in liberal Arts: an apt time for the Uersifier: good to use
Merchandise, to journey, to send embassage, to give accounts, and such like.

in vel.
The Moon in Gemini, Cancer, or Virgo, enclineth even to the same aforesaid.


The Moon with the Dragons head, shows a luckie day for all matters: with the
tail, contrary.

Now ensues a table showing what Sign the Moon is in, and shall be for ever:
declaring also the meetest time to let blood, to purge and to bathe.
THe Table has at the head seven titles. The first months: the second days:
then the Prime: the twelve Signs: the times to let blood, to purge, and to
bathe.

Here is to be noted, that those days are good for these purposes, which be
signed with this letter G. and those evil days, that are no^ed with B.

This Table declares for ever, in what Sign the Moon is or shall be at any
day in the year. It serves also very well to let Blood, to Purge, and Bathe.
Months. Days. Prime. The 12. Signs. To let Blood To Purge. To Bathe. A
table for letting of blood, etc.
Febr. Noue^. 1 3 Aries. G B G March. 2 Aries. G B G 3 14 Taurus. B B B
Decembre. 4 6 Taurus. B B B 5 Gemini. B G April. 6 17 Gemini. B G 7 9 Cancer.
G G May. 8 1 Cancer. G G 9 Cancer. G G 10 12 Leo. B B G 11 4 Leo. B B G June.
12 Virgo. B B B 13 15 Virgo. B B B July. 14 7 Libra. 15 Libra. 16 18 Scorpius.
G G 17 10 Scorpius. G G Auguste. 18 2 Scorpius. G G 19 Sagittarius G G 20 13
Sagittarius. G G 21 5 Capricornus B B B Septembre. 22 Capricornus B B B 23 16
Aquarius. G Ianua. Octo. 24 8 Aquarius. G 25 Pisces G G 26 19 Pisces. G G 27 11
Pisces. G G

Seek out under the titles of the Months, the name of the month, whose day
you must look out right against the month, vnger the title of days, and
there begin to tell downwards, 1.2.3. etc. to the end, if it so require, and
then from the beginning, if need be, until ye have reckoned the number of the
day that you seek. Look what number it falls upon in this table under the
title of days, that number keep in mind. Then seek under the title of the
Prime, the Golden number for the year, right against that, leftward under the
title of days: begin to tell downwards, 1.2.3. etc. until you have reckoned
the number which you did keep in mind. Against that, toward your right hand
under the the title of Signs, is the sign wherein the Moon shall be that
day. Even then under the other titles, ye shall find in right order for
letting Blood, for puring and bathing, according as they be noted with G. which
is good, and B. signifying bad.

Example.
The sixth day of March in the year of our Lord 1555. I desire to know what
celestical sign the Moon does then occupy. I find first the name of the
month, that is March: and the day as follows, in the next order of this
table. I begin here to tell right against my month, at the figure of 2.
saying, 1.2.3. etc. so I have at the end and count of six days this figure 7.
which I keep in mind. Now I must seek out the Golden number for the year
aforesaid, under the title of the Prime here, that is 7. against the which on
the left side is 6. There ye must begin again to count 1.2.3. etc. until
you come to your number 7. So on your right hand in the row or order, you shall
see Uirgo, the celestical Sign that the Moon is in: and after that these
three leettrs B. which declare bad, or evil to let Blood, to Purge, or Bathe,
agreeable to the titles in the head G. there had signified good.

Forasmuch as letting of Blood, Purging, and Bathing, Inundations, Floods,
Timber sailing, Sowing, Planting, Graffing, Cutting, etc. depend chiefly on the
Sign wherein the Moon is, which I have even before plainly opened: I thought
it meet to have them now orderly touched as follows.

Profitable Rules
A conducible note for letting blood.
LEt blood at no time without great cause, for it brings weakness and many
infirmities. If ye do, Malum minui, vel purgationibus vti, tempore caloris,
propter defectum humoris.
see it be after good digestion, and fasting, in a fair temperate day. Beware
before of all manner exercises, bathings, watchings, and carnal copulation,
etc. After use fine meats, of light digestion, abstaining from all the
aforesaid, until the fourth day.

These Signs are most dangerous for bloodletting, Ill to let blood in
the Moon being in them: Taurus Gemini, Leo, Uirgo, and Capricornus, with the
last half of Libra, and Scorpius. The rest are all good, so the Moon bear no
dominion in that member which ye cut: as follows.

Behold this figure.
bloodletting man

The Dominion of the Moon in man's body.
Aries. The Head, and Face. Taurus. The Neck. Gemini. The Arms, Hands,
Shoulders. Cancer. The Breast, Stomach, Ribs. Leo. The Heart, Back. Virgo.
The Bowels, Belly. Libra. The Raynes* Nauill, Buttockes. Scorpius. The Secret
members. Sagittarius. The Thighs. Capricornus The Knees. Aquarius. The
Shinnes, Legs. Pisces. The Feet.
FRom the change to the first quarter, a meet time to let young men blood.
From the first quarter to the full, good for middle age. From the full to the
last quarter, apt for aged folk. From the last quarter to the change, best for
old men.
Signs meet for the Complexions.
Aries. For the Flegmatike: the Head, and Thighs excepted. Sagittarius. For
the Flegmatike: the Head, and Thighs excepted. Haec diligentissime obseruare
oportet solertem. Medicum, nisi maiora peri^ula cogant.
Libra. For Melancholic: Buttockes, and Legs excepted. Aquarius. For
Melancholic: Buttockes, and Legs excepted. Cancer. For Cholerike: Breast,
Members, and Feet excepted. Scorpius. For Cholerike: Breast, Members, and
Feet excepted. Pisces. For Cholerike: Breast, Members, and Feet excepted. For
the Sanguine, all be apt that tofore are named good.
In the Spring time, let blood at the right side. In Harvest time, at the left
side. The learned Physician will consider, beside all that is said, the
Conjunctions, Oppositions, and Quadrat aspects of the Planets: with many other
things Astronomicall, most necessary, both in blood-letting, purging, bathing,
etc.
For to take purgations, and to bathe.
THe meetest time to take purgations, etc. is neither in hot, nor cold days:
that is, from the tenth of March, to the twelfth of June.

Further by rules Astronomicall, Good to purge in
it must be performed when the Moon is in cold, moist, and watrie signs, as
Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces: comforted by aspects and radiations of Planets,
fortifying the virtue of the body expulsive.

The Moon in Aries, Taurus, and Capricornus, naught. Bad to purge.
One cause of vomiting the purga^ion is, if the Moon have aspect to any Planet
retrograde.

The Moon in these Signs following, very good to bathe: Good to bathe in.
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces.

These ensuing are evil to bathe, Taurus, Uirgo, Capricornus. Bad to bathe


Of Inundations or floods: of timber selling, sowing, planting, graffing, hair
clipping, shauing, and gelding.
THe flood is biggest at the full: because then dispersing her virtue, The fall
of Timber.
she fills all places with moisture. By common experience joined with
learning I know, at the full, the Moon lodeth all bodies with humors: and so
are emptied, growing to the change. Of this some gather the fall of timber at
the change, more to the purpose then other times, wanting the superfluous
moisture, the cause of putrefaction, Omnis putredo ab aqueo humido. ortum
habet. Schoner wills from the 15. day unto the 22. day of the Moon trees to
be felled, and that after Midsomer to January. So timber is strong, sound, and
void of worms.

To sow: Taurus, Cancer, Uirgo, Libra, and Capricornus, Good to sow.
are best in the increase of the Moon.

To plant or graffe, is best when the Moon has her being in any sixed Sign,
either in Taurus, or Aquarius in the increase. To plant or graffe.


To cut hair
Hair cut grows well, the Moon increasing, being in Taurus, Virgo, or Libra.

Cutting, Shauing, Clipping, in the wa^e causes baldness: what is then cut,
grows little. Caluitium prohibet oleum Tartari.

The best time of Cutting is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, in the wane.

These two round Tables that now ensue, conduce to the rest following
A Table for the Sondaies letter and Leap year.
The year 1554. G. was Dominical. The next year 1555. F shall be. Then E, unto S.
Mathies day, and D. under him unto the end of the year. So orderly, rightward
in this Circle for ever. Where two letters are, that is the Leap year.

Or thus for the Leap year.

Divide the year of our Lord by 4. if nothing be left, it is the Leap year,
The remain notes the.1. the.2.02.3. years, after the Leap year.



When ye have gone round about the years, of these two Tables, begin again.
A Table for the Golden number, or Prime: and also for the Epact.
Seek out the year of the Lord, under it, is the prime. The^ the Epact. Which
changes every year at the first day of March, the Dominicall letter and
Prime, the first of January.



The prime. The sondaies letter. The first Lent sunday. Faster day. Rogation.
whitsontide. Betwixt whitsond. and midso. 16 February. March. April. May.
wek. days 5 d 8 22 26 10 6 3 e 9 23 27 11 6 2 A table for moveable feasts.
13 f 10 24 28 12 6 1 2 g 11 25 29 13 6 0 A 12 26 30 14 5 6 10 b 13 27 May. 1.
15 5 5 c 14 28 2 16 5 4 13 d 15 29 3 17 5 3 7 e 16 30 4 18 5 ^ f 17 31 5 19 5 1
15 g 18 April. 1 6 20 5 0 4 A 19 2 7 21 4 6 b 20 3 8 22 4 5 12 c 21 4 9 23 4 4
1 d 22 5 10 2^ 4 3 e 23 6 11 25 4 2 9 f 24 7 12 26 4 1 g 25 8 13 27 4 0 17 A 26
9 14 28 3 6 6 b 27 10 15 29 3 5 c 28 11 16 30 3 4 14 d March. 1. 12 17 31 3 3
3 e 2 13 18 June. 1. 3 2 f 3 14 19 2 3 1 11 g 4 15 20 3 5 0 A 5 16 21 4 2 6 19
b 6 17 22 5 2 5 8 c 7 18 23 6 2 4 a 8 19 24 7 2 3 ^ 9 20 25 8 2 2 f 10 21 26 9
2 1 g 11 22 27 10 2 0 A 12 23 28 11 1 6 b 1^ 24 29 12 ^ 5 c 14 25 30 ^3 ^ ^

The use of this Table appointed for the moveable Feasts.
THis Table contains, in the first title the Prime: in the second, the
Dominicall letter: in the third, Lent: in the fourth, Easter day: in the fifth,
Rogation day: in the sixth, Whitsunday: in the seventh, how many weeks and
days are between Whitsunday and Midsommer. Which all appear by their titles.

Ye shall consider by the little round Table before put forth, what number the
Prime is that year, whereof ye require to know all these aforesaid: and seek
that number under the first title of this Table ensuing. Then seek under the
second the Dominical letter, next after the Prime for that year: which title
ensues the Prime. Directly against the same Dominicall letter, toward your
right hand, in the same line, ye shall find under the titles, what month and
day, every one of these aforesaid shall happen.

Example.
I would know this year of our Lord 1555. These moveable Feasts: the first
Lent Sunday, Easter day, Rogation days, Whitsunday, and how many weeks
betwixt Whitsunday and Midsommer day. First I find the Prime this year 17.
which 17. I look out under the title of Prime in the Table before. Then I
seek in the next order, and after the Prime, for the Dominicall letter that
year. Now in right order, according to the title, I find the third of March
to be the first Lent Sunday: the 14. of April Easter day: the 12. of May
Rogation: the 2. of June Whitsunday: and 3. weeks and 1. day betwixt
Whitsunday and Midsummer day. Thus for ever.

How to know the age of the Moon then the change, and quarter for ever.
By the Prime the change is known, but uncertainly: therefore here omitted.
FIrst learn the Epact (as I have instructed) for that year ye seek to know
the age of the Moon, then reckon how many days are past of the month, which
day ye desire to know the age. Put that number to the Epact. Then begin at
March, and reckon for every month from him orderly one, until your said day,
including both the month of March, and also the month of your said day. Add
all these days unto your former number, putting away as many thirty days as
ye find. The rest is the age of the Moon. The age found, the change is
known. If ye add seven days to the change, ye have the first quarter: then
seven days, and somewhat more, shows the full: and so to it adding seven
and more, brings the last quarter thus, by seven unto the new Moon.

Example.
In anno Bisextili vnum add
The tenth day of January, the year then being 1555. I desire the age of the
Moon, I find the Epact until March ensuing to be twenty six, that added
unto ten, makes thirty six, then eleven for the months from March to
January, including both months, bringing forty seven: now thirty pulled
away, leaves seventeen the age of the Moon.

Now ensue the perfect Tables, declaring the true hour and minute of ebbing
and flowing in most coasts of England.
Example.
The first day of January, I desire all the aforesaid: that is, the break of
the day: the very minute of the Sun rising, the length of the day, and also
of the night: the Sun going down, and the twylight. I find on the right
hand of January these numbers running down, 1.10.20. which declare the first
day, the 10. day, and twentieth of that month. Now to my purpose. I require the
break of the day, etc. The first of January in the Table, under the title, on
the right hand of this figure 1, I see 5. hours, and 54. minutes, that is six
of the clock wanting 6. minutes. The rising of the Sun in that order, is
just at eight, as this figure 8. there declares under that title in the row.
The length of the day, eight hours: the length of the night 16. hours: the
Sun setting is at four: the twylight at 6. and 6. minutes. Even thus for the
tenth day, and also for the twentieth of that month, in the rows according to
their titles in the head of my Tables.

How to work by proportion, when the day is not found.
I Would know all the aforesaid: the first day of January, I take for example
the break of the day. Remember the first day of January, I did find the
break to be at five of the clock and 54. minutes: and the tenth day I may
find the break of the day to be at 5. and 44. minutes, that is 10. minutes
less. I see now 10. days do give me 10. minutes less: I see therefore ( by
proportion) the fifth day must give 5. minutes less than 5. hours 54. minutes:
which is 5. hours, 49 minutes my request. Thus for all the other titles.

The hour of the night by the Moon, is otherwise found than before, and that
diversely.
THe hour of her rising known, as is opened, How by the Moon the night hour
is found.
and a mark then made where she shadoweth, in any true fixed or moveable Sun
dial, the hours and minutes from that mark all the night after are to be
added to her rising. If more than 12. surmount, only that above 12. shows the
true hour and minute. If at the rising she may not be seen, then by the Sun
rising, in that very Sign (with the help of this Almanac) you may perceive
what hour she would note at her rising. Therefore from that mark, count.

An other way.
Of ebbing and flowing.
WHen the moon is at the full, look what hour her shadow shows in any Dial,
that is the hour of the night. After she is past the full 28. hours, ye must
add one hour: But before the full, pull one from that ye find in the Dial.
If twice 28. two hours, etc. so have ye the hour of the right.

How the hour of the day, by Right shadow, that is, by any thing directly
standing up, is known: and by Squire shadow also.
FIrst it behooves you to have a Staff, or any other thing divided in 12.
equal parts. When ye list to have the hour, set up directly your divided
Staff on a plain level ground, or board, etc. Note the just length of the
shadow, what parts it contains. With those enter your month in the peculiar
Calendar following: beholding diligently under the name of the month, the
small enclosed Tables: considering well, which of those small Tables are
nearest unto your day: and that judge by the sign, or day there noted. That
table serves your purpose: where you must look out the parts of the shadow
before ^ound, or near unto it: under or over the which the hour is set, before
or after noone. Note the two pricks there, signify half a part more then is
noted: one prick, half a part less. Here it is also to be noted, that every
table has within, two rows of figures: the upper is for the Staff, the other
for the Squire shadow. And whatsoever is before said of the one, that same is
meant here of the other, saving of the Composition.


The Squire must be divided from the inward angle to the end of one side, in
12. equal parts: even so from that angle the other side into 24. like parts,
as this figure shows.

These to the witty suffice.

The composition of an Instrument for the hour of the night which is also a
perfect Dial for the day, and excellent for the Mariner.
THe taking of an Altitude supposed, I could exactly in few (and that without
an Instrument) satisfy. For want of ye knowledge,

The use of these Tables.
WHen you will know the full Sea, seek out the name of the place, where you
desire the full water, in the head of the Tables: or learn the points of the
Compass there noted: or if you list, know of some mariner, what Moon makes a
full sea there: a Southwest or South Moon. etc. Then ye age of ye Moon found
under ye place or point of ye compass, shows in right order the hour and
minute of the full water. The ebb then is manifest.

Example.
I desire to know the full water at London bridge, the year of our Lord 1555.
the sixth day of February. I find by rules before put forth, the 6 day of
February the year aforesaid, the Moon to be 14. days old. I see also under
the title where London is S.W. which letters signify that a Southwest Moon
makes a full Sea there: and that is at 2. of the clock, and 12. minutes past.
This is well perceived in the first Table before put forth, if you run down
to ye 14. day of the age of the Moon, under London title.

A note of the hour of the day and night.
THe ingenious may gather near about the hour of the day and night, by the
Moon: consideration had of the points in those Tables of tides before noted.
For the hour is orderly put under the point of the compass.

Every part or point containing 11. degres and: this compass is well figured
near about the Center in the instrument following for the night hour, because
ye may by it have a delectable large use of these tide tables.

How by the first of the tide tables, ye may readily know when the Moon
comes into the South, when she rises and sets: with her continuance on
the earth.
Seek the age of the Moon (as is opened) then resort to the first tide table,
looking out that age there: So under the South point in right order the hour
appears, when she comes unto the South. Then has she spent half that
arcke that the Sun would have had in that Sign* which pulled away, shows the
rising: that half arcke also added to her coming unto the South, declares
her going down. The arck then that the Sun would have had in the sign, is her
continuance on the earth.

A Table at all times plainly and briefly declaring the break of the day: the
hour and minute of the Sun rising: the just length of the day: the length of
the night also: the very minute of the Sun setting: and the twylight.
Months Days. Break of the day. Sun rysinge. Length of the day Le^gthe of
the night Sun settinge. Twylyghte. Days. Months. of the day. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. ber. 10 6 ^ 8 11 7 37 16 23 3 40 6 0 10 Dec. 20 5 58 8
10 7 40 16 20 3 5^ 6 2 1 Ianu. 1 5 54 8 0 8 0 16 0 4 0 6 6 20 Noue. ^ 10 5 44 7
49 8 21 15 39 4 11 6 1^ 10 7 20 5 35 7 34 8 52 15 8 4 26 6 25 1 5 Febr. 1 5 15
7 13 9 34. 14. 26 4 47 6 45 20 Octo. 5 10 5 0 6 56 10 8 13 52 5 4 7 0 10 8 20
4. 50 6 36 10 47 13 13 5 24 7 10 1 5 Mar. 1 4 20 6 19 11 22 12 38 5 41 7 40 20
Sept. ^3 10 4 0 6 1 11 58 12 2 5 59 8 0 10 16 20 3 40 5 41 12 37 11 23 6 19 8
20 1 13 Apr. 1 3 8 5 18 13 23 10 37 6 42 8 52 20 Aug. 12 10 2 40 5 1 13 57 10 3
6 59 9 20 10 15 20 2 10 4 43 14 33 9 27 7 17 9 50 1 11 May. 1 1 30 4 25 15 9 8
51 7 35 10 3 20 13 10 0 30 4 12 15 35 8 25 7 48 11 30 10 Iul. 13 20 Continual
day. 4 0 15 59 8 1 8 0 Day continual. 1 7 Iu. 1 3 51 16 17 7 43 8 9 20 (...) ^
^0 3 48 16 23 7 37 8 12 10 Minutes to be added, to the L^g^^ H. M. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M.

The use of this table.
COnsider the Month and day, that ye require any of the to foresaid: and seek
in this Table that same under the title: proceed in right order, so ye have
your purpose. If the uery day be not found, take the nearest of your table. Or
by proportion the truth is given: which all by Ensample following shall
plainly be declared.

Q^in Southampton. Portsm^th Redban Aberde^ Grauesende. Du^dee. S And. Age of
the Moon London Tinmot Hertlepole. Berwyke. Erith. Lies. Du^bar. Falmot South.
S b w. S S w. S w b S S w. S w b w w S w w b S. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.
H. M. H. M. H. M. 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 1 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 The first table for
the Titles.
1 ^^ 2 2^ 3 6 3 51 2 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 3 5 24 6 9 6 54 7
39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 4 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 5 7 0 7 46 8 30
9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 6 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 7 8 36 9 21 10
6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 8 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 9 10 12
10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 10 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 3^ 10 13
11 3 11 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24
11 9 11 54 12 39 13 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 14 2 12 2 57 3 42
4 27 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 12 48 1 33 2 ^8 3 3 16 3 48 4
33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 17 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 18 5 24
6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 19 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 20
7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 21 7 48 8 33 9 13 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51
22 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 23 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 1^ 7 57 8
42 9 27 24 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 25 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15
8 48 9 33 10 18 ^1 3 26 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 27 12 36 1
21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 28 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27
29 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 30 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 North. N b E
N n E N e b N N E N e b E E n E E b N.

Foy Lin. Hu^ber. weimot. Dertm. Plimot. Bristo. Milfo. Bridgwater. Portl.
Peter. port. Age of the Moon. Orkn. Pole. Orwel. Diep. Lux. Lenoys. Boloig.
Dover. Harwick Yarmot. Calice. East. E b S. E s E S e b E S E S e b S S s E S b
E (...)
H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 6 4^ 7 33 8 18 9 3 1 9 48 10
33 11 18 12 3 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 2 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 3
11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 4 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45
11 30 12 15 5 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 3^ 12 18 1 3 6 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11
36 12 21 1 6 1 51 7 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 8 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39
1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 9 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 10 5 0 5 45 6 30 7
15 2 48 3 33 4 18 5 3 11 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 12 6 36 7 21 8 6
8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 13 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 14 8 12 8 57
9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 16 9
48 10 33 11 18 12 3 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 17 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54
10 3^ 18 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 2^ 19 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27
10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 20 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 1^ 1 3 21 1 4^ 2 33
3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 22 2 ^6 3 21 4 6 4 5^ 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 23 3 24
4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 24 4 ^2 4 57 5 42 6 2^ 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 25
5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2 4^ 3 33 4 18 5 3 26 5 48 6 33 7 1^ 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51
27 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 28 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7
27 29 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 30 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 West. w
b n w n w n w b w n w n w b n n n w n b w

make upon a plain board, or rather fine plate, a Circle: the bigger the
better: part it into 360 portions, thus.

The Circle made divide it in 6 not moving the compass: then every of them in
6. and each of those last in 10. so have you 360. parts. Then charactor it,
beginning at the North thus 10.20 30. etc. (as in the figure) going toward the
East, and ending at the North with 360. Now lay a ruler on a Center, even with
some divisions, drawing through to the extremes of the Circle a line. Then
cross that with another. These two must divide your circle in 4. equal parts:
which lines show the very East, West, North and South, when by a Meridian or
square dial, with a needle rectified, they are placed.

Now to the end, set a small straight wier, a foot or more long with a Uane in
the top, plum upright in the Center: and there fasten it.

Thus this Instrument is finished, to be fixed about your house, equidistant or
level with the Horizon: having a needle if ye list, in it, truly to plage it,
when and where you will.

That it may be also a Dial for the day, you must pull straight lines from ye
extremity of your circle outward, to every fifteenth part decking them with
Charactors conveniently as ye see the figure, your rule keeping the Center.
Thus when the Sun shines* the shadow of the wier shows the true hour: the
Uane, the winds, etc. being truly plaged, well placed, and reared as
follows, The points of the compass are drawn within the circle, and about
the Center every point containing 11. degrees and a half. The instrument as
you see is enclosed round about with a Square, for the Mariners aid.

Truly few words cannot express the excellency of this Square for their use:
No otherwise to be opened, then learned Gemma has invented and plainly
declared: here omitted of me, not fully occasioned now to write that way. I
have appointed a meeter place for this and like matter. In the mean time I am
ready in word and deed, to further the desirefull in this or any other.

Behold this instrument for Navigations most commodious, the use of which is
here only put forth according to my invention.


The right rearing and placing of the Dial tofore mentioned.
LIft up handsomely your Instrument or Dial toward the North in some meet
place, the side of a squire lying on it, until the plummet and line, In winter
the contrary superficies or Plain, shows the day hour from to
centred in the extreme upper part of the other side of your Squire like long,
cut all that Squire side which lies on your Instrument, the fifth part only
except: Then move your Instrument, hither and thither, this or that way, until
the shadow of the wire fall upon the hour of ye day, keeping diligently your
height before. Your Dial thus fixed, declares all the year long, the exact
hour and parts thereof. No Dial in truth excels this. Have in
remembrance, that this Instrument must lie level, nothing at al reared, for
the hour of the night by star.

To get the exact hour by two Stars of the first light, with an Instrument
or Circle, tofore divided, first of me invented, calculated and practiced.
THe Instrument equidistantly set and plaged, Fit filo aut digito, absque
regula exactissime.
as is declared in composition, ye ought to lay the edge of a ruler unto the
wire, the other nether end touching the Instrument, moving here and there still
touching the wire, until either Star does offer it self with that edge, and
that by the judgment of the eye. Then put down discreetly your ruler (ever
touching the wire) the hinder end not moved, observing how many parts are cut
from the North, to the edge of the Ruler. Enter with them the peculiar Calendar
following: seeking out your month, placed in the midst of every Table: then
the day of that month must be there found.

Note that every table has on the sides, the days thus ordered
1.5.10.15.20.25.30. Know, the order or row of figures which is right against,
or nearest your day, serves the turn. The number or parts before cut by the
ruler, and now found in the row of your table, shows the precise hour. If it
be too little, that hour over the head or under is not yet come: if contrary,
it is past.

How these two bright stars, being of the first light, are found: the one
called Aldebaran or Oculus Tauri, the other Alramech.
By what means these Stars are known.
THe best way is thus: The month and day known with the true hour of the
night, enter your Table considering that month and day, observe what parts
belongs there to that star and hour. Then resort to your Instrument,
laying the edge of your ruler, as many parts from the North Eastward,
circumspectly lifting up the edge close by the wire, so the fair star
shines even with that edge.

Or thus grossly.
Another way to find them.
OCulus Tauri is ever a meet rod and a half to the eye under the seven
stars, and somewhat North of them in the rising: Alramech is contrary to him
plaged, accompanied with three little dim stars, a rod from him by the
judgment of the sight: in the form of a Triangle, thus.



Behold this figure: the great Star does represent Alramech: the other three
in the Triangle, which is placed always with him, but commonly there does
appear but one Star of the Triangle. NOW ENSVETH THE needful, necessary,
peculiar Calendar tofore mentioned: with Instruments belonging thereto. The
composition and appliance of the said Tables, with the pleasant use of them,
are before sufficiently opened: therefore further declaration here, might seem
superfluous.

A necessary Instrument to find exactly the hour of the day and night diverse
ways, with the help of this peculiar Calendar.
For the night. 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 108 113 143 165
190 213 59 79 5 112 129 150 172 197 220 63 47 10 113 136 158 183 206 227 68 78
15 123 144 166 192 214 233 71 81 20 130 151 173 199 220 239 75 86 Oculus Tauri.
25 137 158 183 207 228 244 79 90 30 144 165 191 213 233 249 82 91 January has
xxxj. days. From midnight unto day. 81 93 105 121 143 168 196 1 86 96 110 127
151 177 205 5 89 101 116 135 160 139 214 10 Alramech.
93 105 122 143 169 198 213 15 98 111 128 152 179 207 230 20 10 116 135 159 190
216 286 25 190 121 144 168 193 222 242 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

12 11 10 9 8 7 H For the day. 10 Staff 26 39 49 83 550 0 shad. 0 Squire 4 4 3
2 0 0 shad. Alramech*
H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 H gr. 20 Staff 32 34 42 65 209 0 shad. 10 Squire
4 4 3 2 1 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 H 30 Staff 27 29 35 119 0 shad.
0 Squire 5 5 4 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 0

For the night. 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 169 194 216 62 73
83 95 ^culus Tauri.
5 174 199 222 64 25 86 98 10 184 207 228 68 79 70 102 15 191 214 234 71 82 94
106 20 198 220 233 75 86 93 111 25 205 226 243 78 88 110 116 Alramech.
30 February has xxviij. days. From midnight unto day. 108 124 146 172 201 225
1 111 129 153 180 207 231 5 117 136 126 190 216 227 10 122 144 169 158 223 213
15 128 152 278 206 230 248 20 134 159 188 214 236 252 25 30 1 2 3 4 5 6

For the day. 12 11 10 9 8 7 H 8 Staff 23 25 30 42 80 6 6 shad. 0 Squire 6 6 5
3 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 H 18 Staff 20 21 25 54 61 226 shad.
10 gr. Squire 7 7 6 4 2 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 H 12 11 10 9 8 7 28 Staff 17 18
22 29 45 112 shad. 20 Squire 8 8 6 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5

For the Night. 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 50 70 81 93 15 120 From evening to midnight. 5
62 74 84 95 108 125 10 65 76 87 99 113 131 15 69 80 91 103 118 138 20 72 83 94
107 123 146 25 75 86 98 112 129 153 30 80 90 102 117 136 161 Alramech.
March has xxxj. days. From midnight unto day. 142 168 196 222 241 1 47 173
201 227 245 5 155 183 210 232 250 10 63 192 218 238 255 15 71 200 225 243 259
20 180 208 232 249 262 25 191 26 237 254 267 30 Alramech.
1 2 3 4 5 6

12 11 10 9 8 7 H gr. For the dry. 11 Staff 15 16 19 24 37 74 shad. 0 Squire 9
9 8 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 H 21 Staff 13 14 16 21 30 54
221 shad. 10 Squire 11 10 9 7 5 2 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 H 31
Staff 11 12 14 18 26 43 112 shad. 20 Squire 12 12 10 8 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4
5 6

For the night. 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 92 104 118 138 164
Alramech.
5 94 107 123 145 171 10 98 111 129 153 180 15 101 117 125 160 189 20 106 122
144 168 198 25 111 128 152 178 207 30 117 135 159 189 215 April has xxx.
days. From midnight unto day. 103 218 230 255 1 199 225 244 258 5 207 231 248
262 10 215 236 253 266 15 223 243 257 270 20 230 248 262 274 25 Alramech.
236 252 266 278 30 1 2 3 4 5

12 11 10 9 8 7 6 H For the day. 10 Staff 0 11 13 16 23 36 76 shad. 0 Squire
14 13 11 9 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 H gr. 21 Staff 9 9 11
15 21 31 58 267 shad. 10 Squire 16 15 12 9 7 4 2 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 12 11
10 9 8 7 6 5 H 31 Staff 8 8 10 14 19 28 49 139 shad. 20 Squire 18 17 14 10 7 5
3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

For the Night. 8 9 10 11 12 1 117 136 160 190 216 From evening to midnight. 5
120 142 168 196 222 10 128 152 178 206 230 15 134 159 188 214 235 20 143 168
169 222 211 25 151 177 206 230 248 30 160 189 215 235 253 May has xxxj. days.
From midnight unto day. 237 253 267 278 1 Alramech.
241 256 269 280 5 247 261 273 285 10 252 266 278 288 15 257 270 281 292 20 26^
274 285 296 25 266 278 288 300 30 1 2 3 4 5

12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H gr. For the day. 12 Staff 7 8 10 13 17 26 43 100 shad. 1
Squire 20 18 15 11 8 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H 22
Staff 7 7 9 12 17 24 39 82 2580 shad. 10 Squire 21 19 15 12 8 6 4 2 shad. H 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H 32 Staff 6 7 9 12 16 23 37 74 565 shad.
20 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

For the Night. 8 9 10 11 12 1 161 191 261 237 254 From evening to midnight.
Alramech.
5 169 197 223 242 257 10 180 207 231 249 262 15 191 216 237 254 267 20 199 224
243 259 271 25 207 231 249 262 275 30 216 237 254 267 279 June has xxx. days.
From midnight unto day. 269 279 290 301 1 270 282 292 303 5 Alramech.
274 285 297 308 10 279 290 301 15 28^ 293 304 20 286 297 308 25 290 301 382 30
1 2 3 4 5

For the day. 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H gr. 1 Staff 6 7 9 12 16 23 37 47 565
shad. 20 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 9 8 7 6
H 12 Staff 6 7 6 12 16 23 36 72 453 shad. 0 gr. Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 0
shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 H 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 23 Staff 6 7 9 14 16 23 37 74 565
shad. 10 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

For the night. 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 219 239 255 263 280 5
225 244 2^9 272 283 10 233 250 264 275 286 15 238 254 267 279 290 Alramech.
20 243 258 271 283 293 25 249 262 275 226 297 30 254 267 279 290 300 July has
xxxj. days. From midnight unto day. 290 302 83 1 Alramech.
293 304 86 5 267 79 90 10 301 82 93 15 304 86 98 20 308 89 101 25 Oculus Tauri.
82 93 106 30 1 2 3 4 5

12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H gr. For the day. 3 Staff 7 7 9 12 16 24 39 82 2580
shad 0 Squire 21 19 15 12 8 6 4 2 shad H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H
14 Staff 7 8 10 13 17 26 43 100 shad. 0 Squire 20 18 15 11 8 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H 24 Staff 8 8 10 14 19 28 49 139 shad. 10
Squire 18 17 10 7 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

For the night. 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight* 1 255 267 279 291 302
Alramech.
5 259 272 284 294 304 10 263 275 286 297 79 Oculus Tauri.
15 267 279 290 300 81 20 270 282 292 303 86 25 274 285 296 303 88 30 278 288
299 81 92 August has xxxj. days. From midnight unto day. 82 94 107 122 141 1
86 98 111 126 146 5 89 102 116 132 154 10 93 105 119 138 160 15 Oculus Tauri.
96 110 125 144 167 20 100 114 130 152 174 25 104 118 136 158 183 30 1 2 3 4 5

For the day. 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H gr. 3 Staff 9 9 11 15 21 31 58 207 shad. 20
Squire 16 15 12 9 7 4 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 H 14 Staff
10 11 13 16 23 36 72 shad. 0 gr. Squire 14 13 11 9 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
H 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 24 Staff 11 12 14 18 20 43 111 shad. 10 Squire 12 12 10 8 5
3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

For the night. 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 267 279 290 301 82
93 5 270 281 292 303 85 96 Alramech.
10 273 285 296 307 88 100 15 271 287 293 80 91 104 20 208 291 302 83 94 103 25
284 295 305 87 99 105 Oculus Tauri.
30 287 297 80 91 103 117 September has xxx. days. From midnight unto day.
106 120 139 161 186 1 109 124 194 166 192 5 113 129 150 173 199 10 117 135 155
180 204 15 123 142 164 189 212 20 Oculus Tauri.
128 149 171 195 219 25 134 155 180 204 215 30 1 2 3 4 5 6

12 11 10 9 8 H For the day. 3 Staff 13 14 16 21 30 54 221 shad. 20 gr. Squire
11 10 9 7 5 3 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 12 11 10 9 8 7 H gr. 14 Staff 15 16 19
24 37 73 shad. 0 Squire 9 9 8 6 4 2 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 H 4
Staff 17 18 22 29 45 112 shad. 10 Squire 8 8 6 5 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5

For the night. 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 27^ 2^^ 29^ 80 92
104 117 Alramech.
5 279 290 30^ 82 94 107 122 10 284 ^9^ ^^5 ^^ 98 111 127 Oculus Tauri.
15 286 68 79 90 10^ 116 133 20 290 71 82 93 106 121 140 25 294 75 86 98 111 126
146 30 297 79 90 102 116 132 154 October has xxxj. days. From midnight unto
day. 135 157 181 205 226 243 1 141 262 288 210 231 247 5 147 270 195 218 237
252 10 Oculus Tauri.
154 178 202 225 242 256 15 162 186 210 230 246 260 20 169 194 217 235 251 264
25 177 202 224 241 255 268 30 1 2 3 4 5 6

12 11 10 9 8 7 H For the day. 4 Staff 20 21 25 34 61 206 shad. 20 gr. ^
Squire 7 7 6 4 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 7 H gr. 14 Staff 23 25 30
42 79 6896 shad. 0 Squire 6 6 5 3 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10 9 8 H 24
Staff 27 29 35 19 shad. 10 Squire 5 5 4 3 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4

For the night. 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 287 298 80 92
104 117 135 156 5 290 302 82 94 107 122 147 163 10 294 305 87 98 111 127 147
117 Alramech.
15 29^ 80 91 103 117 135 156 180 20 303 83 95 108 123 142 165 189 25 307 88
10^ 113 129 105 173 198 Oculus Tauri.
30 81 92 104 119 136 158 183 206 November has xxx. days. From midnight unto
day. 1^^ ^^^ ^^ ^^ ^7 ^^0 281 292 1 188 211 231 2^^ ^61 273 285 296 5 196 218
237 252 265 ^7^ 2^8 10 204 225 243 257 269 281 ^9^ 15 213 232 248 261 274 285
297 20 Oculus Tauri.
220 238 ^5^ 266 278 290 12^ 25 227 244 258 270 282 293 135 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

12 11 10 9 H For the day. 2 Staff 32 34 42 65 209 shad. 20 gr. Squire 4 4 3 2
1 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 12 11 10 9 8 H gr. 13 Staff 36 39 49 83 550 shad. 0 Squire
4 4 3 2 0 shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 12 11 10 9 H 22 (...) 40 ^5 57 104 shad. 10 Squire
3 3 2 1 shad. ^ 0 1 2 3

For the night. 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 From evening to midnight. 1 81 92 115 119
136 158 183 107 5 84 90 109 124 144 166 192 214 Oculus Tauri.
10 89 11 115 132 153 173 201 222 15 93 10 120 139 161 186 209 230 20 98 111 127
147 169 191 217 236 25 152 116 133 154 177 202 224 242 30 107 122 141 163 188
211 231 248 December has xxxj. days. From midnight unto day. 228 244 258 271
283 293 135 1 234 259 263 275 286 122 144 5 240 255 267 279 291 129 163 10
Oculus Tauri.
246 260 272 284 265 138 153 15 251 264 276 287 124 147 134 20 256 263 280 291
132 155 184 25 Alramech.
261 273 285 296 140 165 194 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

12 11 10 9 H For the day. 2 Staff 43 47 92 122 shad. 20 gr. ^ Squire 3 3 2 1
shad. 12 Staff 45 49 65 131 shad. 0 gr. Squire 3 3 2 1 shad. 22 Staff 43 47
62 122 shad. 10 Squire 3 3 2 1 shad. 31 Staff 40 45 47 104 shad. 20 Squire 3 3
2 1 shad. H 0 1 2 3

The general Calendar.


Thus ends the Peculiar Calendar, very commodious for the day and night
hour. I here adjoined the Instrument without the Square, which sumay ffi^e for
the whole use of the toforesayd Calendar, with the help of the Squire and
Staff.

I May not here omit a Calendar general divided into two parts, whereof the
first contains six months, from January to June:

The second, other six months, from July to December. In this Calendar are
set forth the Fe^stiuall days, the entering of the Sun in the Signs
celestial, the evil days noted with one prick. For a further declaration of
those evil days: read this following.

The year has xxxiii. evil days general for ever.
January has eight such days: the first, the second, the fourth, the fifth,
the tenth, the f^fteenth, the seventeenth, the nineteenth. Drink white wine in
this month.

February has three days* the viii. the x. the xvii. These not so evil, the
xxvi. the xxvii. the xxviii. Eat no potage of Oaks, or Mallows: they are
venomous.

March three days: the xv. the xvi. the xix. this not so evil, xxviii day.
This month all sweet meats are good.

April two days: the xvi. the xxi. These not so evil, the vii. the viii. the
x. the xx. Use hot meats, of light digestion.

May three days: the vii.xv. the xx. These not so evil, the iii. the vi. Rise
early, and use breakfast.

June two: the iiii. the vii. These not so evil, the x. the xv. the xxii. Sage
and Lettise are good to eat. Cold water fasting hurts not.

July two days: the xv. the xx. Abstain from carnalitie.

August two days: the xix. the xx. These not so evil, the i. the xxix. the
xxx. It hurts not to abstain from potage, and all hot meats, and drinks
of spicerie.

September two days: the vi. the vii. These not so evil, the iii. the iiii.
the xxi. the xxii. Eat good fruit.

Octtober one day: the vi. These not so evil, the iii. the xvi. the xxiiii.
Good wine is wholesome this month.

November two days: the xv. the xix. These not so evil, the v the vi. the
xxviii. the xxix. Bleed not.

December three days: the vi. the vii. the ix. These days not so evil, the
xv. the xvii. the xxii. Bleed not over much. Warm not thy legs at the fire.

Now ensues the general Calendar.
The first part of the general Calendar: from January to June. January.
February. March. Days April. May. Iu^e.:A Circu^ci. d d 1 g b ^hi. Iac. e:b e
Purifi. e 2 A c f c f f 3 b.d g:d g g 4 c e:A:e A A 5 d f b f Epiph. b b 6 e.g
c g c c 7.f:A ^ A:d d 8.g b c b ^ in e 9 A c f:c:f f 10.b d.g d in g g in 11 c
in e A Barna. e A A Spring. 12 d f in b in f Hilar. b b 13 e g c Su^mer. g c
Valen. c 14 f A d A d:d 15 g:b.e b e:e 16:A c f:c:f f 17 b d g d g g 18 c e A e
A:A 19 d f b f b b 20.e:g c g c c ^1:f A d A d d 22 g b.e b e e 23 A Georg. c f
c f A^th. f 2^ b d g Ioa^ bap. d Co^. Pau. g g Anu^. 2^ c Marc. e A e A A 26 d
f b f.b b 27 e g c g.c c 2^ f A d ^A d 29 g b e Pe. Pa. b e 30 A c f c f 31 d

The second part of the general Calendar: from Iulie to December. July.
August. September. Days October. Nouem. December. g.c Pet. Vin. f 1 A d Om. sa^. f
A d g 2 b e Om. an^. g b e.A 3.c f A c f.b 4 d g b d g c 5 e.A c e Dog beg. A:d
6:f.b:d Nico^. f b:e 7 g c:e g c f Na. Ma. 8 A d f Co^. ma. A d g 9 b e:g b e A
10 c f A c f b 11 d g b d g c 12 e A c in e A d 13 f b in dwyntes. f in ^ b in
e in 14 g in c e:g c f Heruest. 15 A:d.f A d g 16 b. e g b e Dog end A 17 c.f.A
c f b 18 d Luc. g b d:g c 19 e:A c:e:A d 20 f b d f b.e Mathe. 21 g c e Tho.
ap. g Ma. mag. c f 22 A d f A d g 23 b e g b e Bartho. A 24.c f A c Iac. Apo. f
b 25 d g b Na. do. d g c 26 e A c Steph. e A d 27 f b d Io. eua^. f b e 28 g
St. Iud..c e Innoce. g.c decol. Io. f Micha. 29 A.d f Tho. A.d g 30 b e Andre.
g b e 31 c A

Lo the brief use of this general Calendar.
ENter the Column where your Month is no^ed in the head, ye shall there
find running down the column the Festiual days of that Month, the entry
of the Sun in the celestial signs, the evil days pricked, etc.

I would have placed in this Calendar the Fayres and Terms also: but that
cannot remain continually true. For those that ensue moveable Feasts are
moveable, and therefore may have no certain place. For the Terms also, note
these precepts following. The Fayres shall be declared by two Tables immediately
ensuing this Calendar General.

How to know the Terms.
KNow that Easter Term always begins the 18. day after Easter, reckoning
Easter day for one: and ends the Monday next after the Ascension day.

Trinity Term begins the Friday next after Corpus Christi day, and ends
the Wednesday fourtnight after.

Michaelmasse Term begins the 9. or 10. day of October: and ends the 28.
or 29. of November.

Hillarie Term begins the 23. or 24. day of January: and ends the 12. or
13. day of February.

FINIS.
General Fayres.
A Table containing the Month, day, and place of the principal Fayres of
England, to be augmented at pleasure, in order following.
January.
THe sixth day of January, the fair is at Bristow, and also at Salisburie. The
first of Lent at Exce^er.

February.
The second day at Bathe, at Maidstone. The 14 at Feuersame. On Ashwensday at
Lichfield, at Roystone, at Tamworth. The first Monday in Lent, at Ciciter, at
Abington. The 24. at Henley upon Thames, at Teukesburie.

March.
The 4. Sunday in Lent, at Stamforth, at Sudburie. The fi^t Sunday, at Grantam.
The Monday before our Lady day, at Salisburie. Palm ^euen, at Wisbitch. The
13. at Wic. The 25. at Northamton, at great Chare, at Waulden.

April.
The 5. day at Wallingford. The 7. at Darby. The 9. at Bickelsworth, at
Billingsworth. At Easan^ the Monday after. The Sunday after Easter, at Louth.
The 23. at Charing, at Ipswich, at Antill, at Hinigam, at Gilford. The 25. at
Darbie. The 26. at Tenterden.

May.
The 1. day, at Stow the old, at Reading, at Maidstone, at Leicester, at
Chensford. The 8. day at Beuerley. Ascension day, at Brimingham, at S. Edes, at
Bishops Statford. Whitsunday, at Kingstone upon Thames. Trinity Sunday, at
Rowch. At Cranebroke the 19. day. The 27. day at Lenham.

June.
On Corpus Christi day* at Couentrie, S. Edes, at Bishop T^anford, at Rosse. The
9. at Maidstone. The 11. at Okingam. The 23. at Shrowsbury, at S. Albones. The
24. at Cambridge, at Gloucester, at Lincoln, at Windsore* at Colchester. The
29. at W^llerhampton, at Peterborrow. The 17. at F^lkstone. The 24. at Harisam.
The 8. at Hetcorne.

A Table containing the Month, day, and place of the principal Fayres of
England: to be augmented at pleasure, in order following.
The 11. day, Horse fair at Partney, at Nabor, at Felix. July.
The 12 day at Lid. The 15. at Pinchbacke. The 17. at Winchcome. The 20. at
Uxbridge, at Catesby. The 22. at Marleborow, at Winchester, at Colchester, at
Tetburie. The 25. at Bristow, at Dover, at Chilham, at Ipswich, at Northampton,
at Darbie, at S. James by London, at Reading, at Louth, at Malmsburie.

The 1. day at Feuersame, at Dunstable, at S. Edes, August.
at Budforth, at Marram Church, at Wisbich. The 9. at Rumney. The 10. at
Bedforth, at Fernam, at Strodes, at Blackamore, S. Lau, at Waltom. The 24. at
London, at Teukesburie, at Sudburie, at Norwich, at Northallerton, at Dover, at
Rye. The 28. at ashford.

The 8. day at Cambridge, at Sturbridge, September.
at London in Southwarke, at Smide, at Reculuer, at Partney three Lady days.
The 14. at Waltain Abbey, At Wotton under hedge, at Spalding. The 21. at
Croydon, at Holden in Holdernesse, at S. Edmondsburie, at S. Iues, at Haldy
Lanam, at Wiltemall, at Sittingborrow, at Dover, at Estry. The 29. day at
Canterbury.

The 6. day, at S. Sithes besides Norwich. October.
The 13. at Graves end, at Windsore, at Marchfield. The 18. at Ely, at Stanton,
at Charing. The 23. at Harford, at Ciciter, at Newmarket.

The 2. day at Kingstone, at Blechingly. November.
The 6. at Newport Pond, at Stanly. The 11. at Dover. The 13. at S. Edmonsbury.
The 20. at Hyth. The 23. at Sandwich. The 30. at Rochester, at Maydenhead.

The 29. at Canterbury. The 5. at Pluckly The 6. at Spalding. December.
The 7. at Sandhurst.

BEcause I understand many are desirous how to get exactly the just length of
Staff and Squire shadow before treated of, upon vnleuell grounds, or
otherwise wheresoever it be, yea, without either Squire or Staff: I have
calculated a Table following thoroughly satisfying the^, so that they get the
height of the Sun any way: or as I shall now instruct.

Behold this Instrument called a Quadrant the just fourth part of a Circle,
even such a Circle as I taught you before to make for the night Dial:
containing the fourth part of his divisions, that is 90. degrees, only two
sights and a plum line added, to be placed at the beginning of this book, as
ye may there, and here see. I have here also put the Scale to the Quadrant,
which serves well for shadows, and as well for heights. The use of this Scale
is declared in my book called Tectonicon.

quadrant

How by this Instrument to get the height of the Sun at all times.
LIft up handsomely your Quadrant, the Sunbeames persing the sights. The Plummet
and Line then at liberty falling, notes there ye degrees of height at ye
present, with the which ye shall enter this table immediately following, to get
then, and in like manner at all other times, the just shadow of the Staff or
Squire.

A Table general of Shadows, right and contrary, for every grade of the
Suns heyght: The thing causing Shadow, supposed 12 parts.
Heyght of the Sun. Staff. Shadow. Heyghte of the Sun. Staff. Shadow.
Heyghte of the sun. Staff. Shadow G g P M G G P M G g P M 0 90 Sha W. 30 60
20 47 60 30 6 56 1 89 687 34 31 59 19 58 61 29 6 3^ 2 88 343 43 32 58 19 12 62
28 6 23 3 87 228 59 33 57 18 29 63 27 6 7 4 86 171 37 34 56 17 47 64 26 5 51 5
35 137 10 35 55 17 8 65 25 5 6 6 84 114 10 36 54 16 30 66 24 5 21 7 8^ 97 49 37
53 15 52 67 23 5 6 8 82 85 28 38 52 15 21 68 22 4 51 9 81 75 46 39 51 14 49 69
21 4 36 10 80 68 3 40 50 14 18 70 20 4 22 11 79 61 44 41 49 13 48 71 19 4 8 12
78 56 27 42 48 ^3 20 72 18 3 54 13 77 51 59 43 47 12 52 73 17 3 40 14 76 48 8
44 46 12 26 74 16 3 26 15 75 44 47 45 45 12 0 75 15 3 13 16 74 41 51 46 44 11
35 76 14 3 0 17 73 59 15 47 43 11 11 77 13 2 46 18 72 36 54 48 42 10 48 78 12 2
32 19 71 34 51 49 41 10 26 79 11 2 20 20 70 32 58 50 40 10 4 80 10 2 7 21 69 31
16 51 39 9 43 81 9 1 54 22 68 29 42 52 38 9 22 82 8 1 41 23 67 28 16 53 37 9 3
83 7 1 28 24 66 26 57 54 36 8 43 84 6 1 16 25 65 25 44 55 35 8 24 85 5 1 3 26
64 24 37 56 34 8 6 86 4 0 50 27 63 23 33 57 33 7 48 87 3 0 38 28 62 22 34 58 32
7 30 88 2 0 25 29 61 21 40 59 31 7 13 89 1 0 12 30 60 20 47 ^0 30 6 56 90 0 0 0
Heyght of the Sun Squire Shadow. Heyht of the Sun. Squier. Shadow. Heyght of
the Sun Squyre. Shadow

The use of this Table, and first for staff shadow.
Example.
I Suppose the height of the Sun, taken by the Quadrant, 34. degrees: Now I
require the exact length of Staff and Squire shadow. For right shadow, first
seek out the degrees in the left part of the Table, and under this title the
height of the Sun: if they be not in that left row downwards, resort to the
next row and like title, until ye find the degrees: then in right order
toward the right hand, in the next Column under the title of Staff shadow,
are 17. parts, and 47. minites, your desire.

For Squire shadow, titled contrary Shadow.
Seek your degrees in the right part upward, at this title Height of the
Sun, in the bottom of this Table: then shall ye find on the right hand of
34. degrees, in the next colume, eight parts and six minutes: that is the very
length of Squire shadow when the Sun is 34. degrees in height.

OCcasioned I cannot here omit another Table faithfully supputated for the
Suns altitude, by the which with quick speed the hour is known. This
Table conduces manifold ways, yea, to the composition of diverse and many
Instruments: as Quadrants, Nauicles, Cylindres, Rings, etc.

Behold now it does ensue, and also the brief use of it.
A Table of the Suns altitude, for every hour: the Pole mounted.51. degrees
30. Minutes, exactely calculated. When the Sun enters the 22 grade of, he
touches our (...) 4. in the morninge. Entering the 22 of he ryseth at 8 in the
first (...) at 5. in the first of, at.7. Note in all my tables* one p i(...)
following the Minutes, dimi^^sh^th: two, augmenteth (...) some small quantitye.

Hours before n. 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 Hours after n. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Si. G S
G G M g M g M g M g M g M g M g M g M 30 0 62 0 59 43: 53 45 45 42: 36 42: 27
23: 18 11 9 28: 1 31. 25 5 61 54: 20 10 61 37* 59 21. 53 26: 45 24. 36 25 27 6
17 54. 9 9. 13: 15 15 61 9: 10 20 60 30: 58 17. 52 23. 44 32 35 35 26 16. 17 3
8 1^. 0 16 5 25 61 41: 0 0 5^ ^2: 56 3^. 50 55: 43 6. 34 ^3. 24 56: 15 41: 6
50. 0 0 25 5 557 34. 20 10 13 17: 54 15 48 48: 41 10. 32 22. 23 6. 13 50 4 5^:
0 0 15 15 4 52: 10 20 53 21: 51 26: 46 12: 38 46: 30 6. 20 52. 11 34. 2 34. 0 5
25 51 43: 0 9 0 0 ^^ 11. 43 11. 35 53 27 2^. 18 1. 8 59: 0 0 2^ 5 48 12: 2^ 10
46 20^ 44 37. 39 51 32 53: 24 32. 15 27. 6. 8: 0 0 15 1 44 25: 10 20 ^2 23: 40
51: 36 18 2^ 34: 2^ 24: 12 25: 3 6. 0 5 2^ ^0 2^: 0 0 3^ 3^: 3^ 58 32 3^. 26 7:
18 ^. ^ 16. 0 0 25 5 36 30 20 10 34 32. 3^ 4 28 55: 22 3^: 14 51: 6 7 0 0 15 5
32 35. 10 2^ 30 4^. 29 16. 25 18 19 14: ^1 33 3 2: 0 5 25 28 ^^ ^ ^ ^ 0 27 0 25
40 21 51: 15 50: 8 3^. 6 0. 25 5 25 1^. 20 10 23 39 22 22* 18 42: 13 1: 5 45: 0
0 15 15 2^ 8. 10 20 20 43. 19 29 15 55. 10 23* 3 17 0 5 25 19 26: 0 0 ^ 18 18.
17 6 13 38: 3 3. 1 15. 25 5 17. 19. ^0 1^ 15 3^. 14 48: 11 55. 6 3^: 0 0 15 15
15 51. 10 20 15 23. 14 13: 10 52: 5 3^. 0 5 25 15 6

Brief Collections.
The brief use of this Table.
SUppose the height of the Sun taken by the Quadrant, eight degrees and 13.
minutes, the Sun being in the beginning of Aquarie, or Sagittarie, I seek,
and find in this table and in the row which directly answers and eight
degrees and 13. minutes: that is agreeable to 9. or 3. of the clock in the
head of this Table. Therefore I pronounce, that when the Sun was 8. degrees and
13. minutes in height, entering or, it was precise nine of the clock in the
morning or three at after noone.

Thus at all times ye may know the just hour.

Ye may also conclude the height of the Sun at all times, the place of the
Sun known, and the hour. Note, when the precise numbers either of height,
or degree of the Sun are not found in the Table, then make proportion
according to the difference, etc. Practice, better than many words, opens
this. Now to end this matter: this following to him that has tasted these
knowledges, I write.

Dato loco Solis and eius altitudine, horam ipsam calculare.
DVc sinum inuentae solaris altitudinis, in sinum arcus semidiurni, and
productum divide per sinum altitudinis meridianae eiusdem Solis, and
prouenientis inde partium numeri sumito arcum, quem tandem in horas vertas.
Collectus horarum numerus quaesitam indicabit horam: ab ortu quidem Solis, si
altitudo fuerit antemeridiana, vel ab occasu, si eadem Solis altitudo acciderit
post meridiem.

NOw having some occasion, I could here adioyne a brief Supputation Sinicall,
touching most workings Astronomicall, but how far that passes the capacity
of the common sort of men, they that be travailed know. For this cause I
leave to give any precepts this way: desiring provocation meet to have to do
in the like: then God suffering, my pen shall not stay to open ready chosen
general ways, for pleasant Astronomicall operation.

HEre shall now follow briefly collected certain rules, performed before by
Tables: but now done by quick supputation, to be had in memory: by that,
avoiding caryage or burden of books.

A way to get the Golden number or Prime without a table.
Add unto the year of our Lord 1. then divide that sum by 19. the remain
is the Prime or Golden number.

The Epact is thus ever found.
Multiply the Prime by 11. divide by 30. the remain is your desire. These two
numbers begin at March, their use is chiefly to find out the change, quarters
and full Moon, as ensues.

A rule for the Change, Full, and Quarters of the Moon.
PUt unto the Epact all the months from March, including the month of March:
pull then that sum from 30. the remain shows the day of the change.

Here note the full Moon is the 15. day after the change. Also if the remain
be less then 15. substract that less from 15. the rest is the full Moon.

If the remain pass 30. substract it from 45. then the full does also appear.

To conclude, if from the full Moon ye pull 15. days, ye have the change
going before. The change had, the quarters are known, by adding or pulling
away seven days.

For the age of the Moon, work thus for ever.
Add to the days of your Month the Epact, and also as many days more as are
months from March to your month, including both months. Now substract
thirty, if ye may, the age then remains.

Now shall be declared what Signs and degrees the Moon differs from the
Sun, by the which is gathered at all times, the Sign and Grade wherein she
is.
Multiply the age of the Moon by 4. divide by 10. the quotient shows the
Signs that the Moon differs from the Sun. The remain augmented by 3.
brings degrees to be added. Ye must put these Signs and degrees to the place
of the Sun. The product, I mean the increase or end of all these Signs and
degrees in order counted from the Sun, declare the place of the Moon in the
Zodiac.

The place of the Sun in the Zodiac is thus found.
FIrst know that the 11. day of January, the Sun is entered into. The 10. day
of February. The 11. of March.

The 11. of April. The 12. of May. The 12. of June. The 14. of July. The 14 of
August. The.14. of September. The 14. of October. The 13. of November. The 12.
of December.

This known, the place of the Sun is well found, adding for every day past
any entrey, 1. degree.

Example.
I Require the place of the Sun the 21. day of August. I find that the Sun
is entered in the 14. day of the month. I must for every day past any entry
add 1. degree. There are seven days past that entry, then I conclude the
Sun ready to have place in the 8. degree of the 21. of August.

To know how long the Moon shines.
FOr her shining in the increase, multiply the age of the Moon by 4. In the
wane augment the rest of the age which she lacks of 30. by 4. and divide by
5. The Quotient shows the hours: the remains if there be any, multiplied by
12. brings minutes to be added.

How the moveable feasts are found readily.
Seek the change of the Moon in February, for that year ye require these
moveable Feasts. Note what day it falls on, the next Tuesday is
Shrouetuesday. But if the change be on Tueseday, the next Tuesday ensuing is
it. The next Sunday is the first Sunday of Lent. Six Sundays after is Easter
day. Add 35. days, or 5. weeks to Easter day, ye have Rogation Sunday. To
that add 4. days, so ye have Ascension day. Then have ye 10 days to
Whitsunday. Seven days after is Trinity Sunday. And four days after is
Corpus Christi day.

Without Tables, at all times to know the Tides.
Learn as is declared the age of the Moon: also remember the hour of the
Full or Change, for your place or point which does never vary: these known,
work thus.

Example.
WHen the Moon is ten days old, I desire to know at what of the clock it
is full sea at London bridge. Multiply ten by forty eight, so have ye four
hundred eighty: divide that by sixty, ye have eight hours. To that add
three, which is the hour of the full or change appointed for that place. All
then comes unto eleven of the clock high water at London bridge. If any
thing remain they are minutes of an hour. If the hours amount above twelve,
cast the twelues away, the rest is your request.

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
Having of late (gentle Reader) corrected and reformed sundry faults, that by
negligence in printing have crept into my Fathers General Prognostication:
Among other things I have found a description or Modill of the world, and
situation of Spheres Celestial and elementarie according to the doctrine of
Ptolomie, whereunto all Universities (led thereunto chiefly by the authority
of ( Aristotle) since have consented. But in this our age, one rare wit
(seeing the continual errors that from time to time more and more have been
discovered, besides the infinite absurdities in their Theoricks, which they
have been forced to admit that would not confess any Mobilitie in the ball of
the earth) has by long study, painful practice, and rare invention delivered
a new Theoricke or Modill of the world, showing that ye earth rests not in
the Center of the whole world, but not only in the Center of this our mortal
world or Globe of Elements, which environed and enclosed in the Moons Orb,
and together with the whole Globe of mortality is carried yearly round about
the Sun, which like a king in the midst of al reigns and gives laws of
motion to the rest, sphaerically dispersing his glorious beams of light
through all this sacred Celestial Temple. And the Earth it self to be one of
the Planets, having his peculiar and strange courses turning every 24 hours
round upon his own Center: whereby the Sun and great Globe of fixed stars
seem to sway about and turn, albeit indeed they remain fixed. So many ways
is the sense of mortal men abused. But reason and deep discourse of wit having
opened these things to Copernicus, and the same being with demonstrations
Mathematical, most apparently by him to the world delivered: I thought it
convenient together with the old Theorick also to publish this, to the end such
noble English minds (as delight to reach above the baser sort of men) might
not be altogether defrauded of so noble a part of Philosophy. And to the end
it might manifestly appear, that Copernicus meant not (as some have fondly
excused him) to deliver these grounds of the earths mobilitie, only as
Mathematical principles feigned, and not as Philosophical truly auerred: I have
also from him delivered both the Philosophical reasons by Aristotle and others,
produced to maintain the Earths stabilitie, and also their solutions and
insufficiency, wherein I cannot a little commend the modesty of ye grave
Philosopher Aristotle, who seeing (no doubt) the sufficiency of his own
reasons in seeking to confute the earths motion, uses th^se words: De his
explicatum est, ea, qua potuimus facultate: howbeit his disciples have not with
like sobriety maintained the same. Thus much for my own part in this case I
will only say. There is no doubt, but of a true ground, truer effects may be
produced, then of principles that are false: and of true principles, falsehood
or absurdities cannot be inferred.

If therefore the Earth be situate immovable in the Center of the world, why
find we not Theoricks upon that ground to produce effects as true and certain
as those of Copernicus? Why cast we not away those Circles Aequa^tes and
motions irregular? seeing our own Philosopher Aristotle himself the light of
our Universities has taught us: Simplicis corporis simplicem oportet esse
motum. But if contrary, it be found impossible (the Earths stabilitie being
granted) but that we must necessarily fall into these absurdities, and cannot
by any mean avoid the^: why shall we so much do^e in the appearance of our
senses, which many ways may be abused, and not suffer our selves to be
directed by the rule of Reason, which the great God has given us as a lamp to
lighten the darkness of our understanding, and the perfect guide to lead us to
the golden branch of Verity amidde the Forest of errors.

Behold a noble Question to be of the Philosophers and Mathematicians of our
Universities, argued not with childish inventions, but with grave reasons
Philosophical, and irreproueable Demonstrations Mathematical. And let us not in
matters of reason be led away with authority and opinions of men, but with the
Stellified Poet let us say: Non quid Aristoteles vel quiuis dicat eorum:
Dicta nihil moror, a vero cum forte recedunt.
Magni saepe viri mendacia magna loquuntur.
Nec quisquam est adeo sagax, quin saepius erret.


Ratio dux fida Sophorum.
THe Globe of Elements enclosed in the Orb of the Moon, I call the Globe of
Mortality, because it is the peculiar Empire of death. For above the Moon they
fear not his force: but as the Christian Poet says, Omne quod est supra
lunam, aeternumque bonumque.
Esse scias: nec triste aliquid Coelestia tangit.
Quicquid vero infra lunae conuexa creauit
Omniparens, natura malum est, mortisque seueras
Perpetitur leges and edaci absumitur aeuo.


Again.

Omne malum est infra lunam, nox atra, procellae
Terribiles, frigus, caler, importuna senectus,
Pauperies malesuada, labor, dolor, improbitas, Mors.
Supra autem lunam, lucis sunt omnia plena,
Nec non laetitiae and pacis, non tempus and error,
Et MORS, and senium est illic, and inutile quicquam.
Foelix o nimium Foelix, cui sedibus illis.
Tam pulchris and tam incundis tamque beatis
Viuere concessum est, supremi munere Regis.
And again.

Singula nonnulli credunt quoque sydera posse
Dici Orbs, Terramque appellant sydus opacum,
Cui minimus Di^um praesit, etc.
In the midst of this Globe of Mortality hangs this dark star or ball of
the earth and water, balanced and sustained in the midst of the thin air
only with what propriety which the wonderful workman has given at the
Creation to the Center of this Globe, with his magnetical force vehemently to
draw and hale unto it self all such other Elementall things as retain the
like nature. This ball every 24. hours by natural uniform, and wonderful
sly and smooth motion rolleth round, making with his Period our natural day,
whereby it seems to us that the huge infinite immovable Globe should sway and
turn about.

The Moon Orb that enuironeth and contains this dark star, and the other
mortal, changeable, corruptible Elements and Elementary things, is also turned
round every 20. days.31. Minutes, 50. seconds, 8. thirds, 9. fourths, and 20.
fiftes: and this Period may most aptly be called the month. The rest of the
Planets motions appear by the Picture, and shall more largely be hereafter
spoken of.

Herein good Reader, I have waded farther then the vulgar sort, Demonstratiue
and Practice, and God sparing life I mean, though not as Judge to decide, yet
at the Mathematical bar in this case to plead, in such sort, as it shall
manifestly appear to the world, whether it be possible upon the Earths
stabilitie to deliver any true or probable Theorick, and then refer the
pronouncing of sentence to the grave Senate of indifferent discreet
Mathematical Readers.

Farewell, and respect my travails as thou shall see them tend to the
advancement of truth, and discovering the monstrous loathsome shape of error.

A perfect description of the Celestial Orbs, according to the most ancient
doctrine of the Pythagoreans, etc.


A PERFECT DESCRIPTION OF THE CELESTIAL ORBS, according to the most ancient
doctrine of the Pythagoreans: lately revived by Copernicus, and by Geom^triall
Demonstrations approved.
ALthough in this most excellent and difficile part of Philosophy in all times
have been sundry opinions touching the situation and moving of the bodies
celestial, yet in certain principles, all Philosophers of any account of all
ages have agreed and consented. First that the Orb of the fixed stars is of
all other the most high, the farthest distant, and comprehends the other
Spheres of wandering stars. And of these straying bodies called Planets, the
old Philosophers thought it a good ground in reason, that the nighest to the
Center should swiftliest moan, because the circle was least and thereby the
sooner ouerpassed, and the further distant, the more slowly. Therefore as the
Moon being swiftest in course, is found also by measure nighest, so have all
agreed that the Orb of being in moving the slowest of all the Planets, is also
the highest: the next, and then: but of and there has bin great controversy,
because they stray not every way from the Sun, as the rest do. And therefore
some have placed them above the Sun, as Plato in his Timaeo: others beneath, as
Ptolomie, and the greater part of them that followed him. Alpetragius makes
above the Sun, and beneath, and sundry reasons have been of all sides
alleged in defense of their opinions. They that follow Plato (supposing that
all stars should have obscure and dark bodies shining with borrowed light
like the Moon) have alleged that if those Planets were lower than the Sun,
then should they sometime obscure some part of the body of the Sun, and also
shine, not with a light circular, but segmentarie, and that variable as the
Moon: which when they see by experience at one time to happen, they conclude
with Plato. On the contrary part, such as will maintain them beneath, frame a
likelihood by reason of the large space between the Orbs of the and. For the
greatest distance of the is but 64. semidiameters of the earth: and to the
nighest of the Sun are 1160. so that there remains between the and the
1905. semidiameters of the earth. And therefore that so huge a space should not
remain empty, there they situate the Orbs of and Venus. And by the distance
of their Absides, whereby they search the thicknes of their Orbs, they find
that they of all the rest best answer that situation, so as the lowest of Orb
may reach down almost to the highest of the Moons, and the top of to the
inferior part of Sphere, which with his Absis should reach almost unto the
Sun. For between the Absides of by their Theoricks, they supputate 177.
semidiameters of the earth, and the^ the crassitude of Venus Orb, being 910
semidiameters both very nigh supply and fill the residue. They therefore will
not confess that these Planets have any obscurity in their bodies like the,
but that either with their own proper light, or else being thoroughly pierced
with solare beams, they shine and show circulare. And having a straying course
of latitude, they seldom pass between the Sun and us: or if they should,
their bodies being so small could scarcely hide the hundred part of the Sun,
and so small a spot in so noble a light could hardly be discerned. And yet
Auerrois in his Paraphrasis on Ptolomie affirms, that he saw a little spot in
the Sun at such time as by Calculation he had forecast a corporal
Conjunction. But how weak this their reason is, it may soon appear if we
consider how from the earth to the lowest of the Moons Orb there is 38.
semidiameters of the earth, or by the truer computation according to Copernicus
52. And yet in all that so huge a space we know nothing but the air or fiery
Orb, if any such be. Again, the diameter of the circle whereby Venus should
be carried nigh 45. grades distant from the Sun, must needs be six times
greater at the least, than the distance of that circles lowest part from the
earth: than if that whole circle comprehended within the Orb of Venus should
be turned about the earth, as needs it must, if we will not attribute to the
earth any motion, we may easily consider what rule in the Heavens so vaste and
huge an Epicicle, containing a space so many times greater than the earth,
Air, and Orbs of the Moon and also, will make: especially being turned round
about the earth. Again, the reason of Ptolomie* that the must needs be placed
in the midst of those Planets that wander from him at liberty, and those
that are as it were combined to him, is proved senseless by the motion of the
Moon, whom we see no less to stray from the Sun, than any of those other
three superior Planets. But if they will needs have these two Planets Orbs
within an Orb of the Sun, what reason can they give why they should not
depart from the Sun at large, as the other Planets do, considering the
increase of swiftnes in their motion must accompany the inferior situation,
or else the whole order of Theoricks should be disturbed? It is therefore
evident, that either there must be some other Center, whereunto the order of
these Orbs should be referred, or else no reason in their order, nor cause
apparent, why we should rather to than to. or any of the rest attribute the
higher or remoter Orb. And therefore seems it worthy of consideration that
Martianus Capella wrote in his Encyclopedia, and certain other Latins held,
affirming that and do run about the Sun in their spheres peculiar, and
therefore could not stray further from the than the capacity of their Orbs
would give them leave, because they encompasse not the earth as the others do,
but have their Absides after another manner conuersed. What other thing would
they hereby signify, but that the Orbs of these Planets should enuiron the
Sun as their Center. So may the Sphere of being not of half the amplitude of
Venus Orb, be well situate within the same. And if in like sort we situate
the Orbs of, and, referring them as it were to the same Center so, as their
capacity be such as they contain and circulate also the earth, happily we
shall not err, as by evident Demonstrations in the residue of Copernicus
Reuolutions is demonstrate. For it is apparent that these Planets nigh the
Sun, are always least, and further distant, and opposite, and much greater
in sight, and nigher to us: whereby it cannot be, but the Center of them is
rather to the, than to the earth to be referred: as in the Orbs of and also.
But if all these to the Sun as to a Center in this manner be referred, the^
must there needs between the conuexe Orb of and the concaue of an huge space
be left, wherein the earth and Elementarie frame, enclosed with the Lunarie
Orb, of duty must be situate. For, from the earth the Moon may not be far
removed, being without controversy of al other nighest in place and nature to
it: especially considering between the same Orbs of and there is room
sufficient. Therefore need we not to be ashamed to confess, this whole globe
of Elements enclosed with the Moons sphere, together with the earth as the
Center of the same, to be by this great Orb, together with the other Planets
about the Sun turned, making by his revolution our year. And whatsoever
seem to us to proceed by the moving of the Sun, the same to proceed
indeed by the revolution of the earth, the Sun still remaining fixed and
immovable in the midst. And the distance of the earth from the Sun to be
such, as being compared with the other Planets, makes evident alterations, and
diversity of aspects: but if it be referred to the Orb of stars fixed, then
has it no proportion sensible, but as a point or a Center to a circumference,
which I hold far more reasonable to be granted, than to fall into such an
infinite multitude of absurd imaginations, as they were feign to admit that will
needs wilfully maintain the earths stabilitie is the Center of the world. But
rather herein to direct our selves by that wisdom, we see in all Gods
natural works, where we may behold one thing rather endued with many virtues
and effects, than any superfluous or unnecessary part admitted. And all these
things, although they seem hard, strange, and incredible, yet to any
reasonable man that has his understanding ripened with Mathematical
demonstration, Copernicus in his Reuolutions according to his promise, has
made them more evident and clear than the Sun beams. These grounds
therefore admitted, which no man reasonably can repugne, that the greater Orb
requires the longer time to run his period: the orderly and most beautiful
frame of the heavens does ensue. The first and highest of all is the immovable
sphere of fixed stars, containing it self and all the rest, and therefore
fixed: as the place universal of rest, whereunto the motions and positions of
al inferior spheres are to be compared. For albeit sundry Astrologians
finding alterations in the declination and longitude of stars, have thought
that the same also should have his motion peculiar: yet Copernicus by the
motions of the earth salueth al, and utterly cutteth off the ninth and tenth
spheres, which contrary to all sense the maintainers of the earths stabilitie
have been compelled to imagine.

The first of the moveable Orbs is that of, which being of all other next unto
the infinite Orb immovable, garnished with lights innumerable, is also in his
course most slow, and once only in thirty years passes his period.

The second is, who in twelve years performs his circuit.

Mars in two years runs his circular race.

Then follows the great Orb, wherein the Globe of mortality enclosed in the
Moons Orb as an Epicicle, and holding the earth as a Center by his own
weight resting always permanent in the midst of the air, is carried round
once in a year.

In the fifth place is Venus, making her reuolutio^ in 9. months.

In the sixth is, who passes his circuit in 80. days.

In the midst of all is the Sun.

For in so stately a Temple as this, who would desire to set his lamp in any
other better or more convenient place than this, from whence uniformly it
might distribute light to all: for not unfitly it is of some called the Lamp
or light of the world, of others the mind, of others the Ruler of the world.

Ad cuius numeros and dii moueantur, and Orbs
Accipiant leges, praescriptaque foedera seruent.
Trisinegistus calls him the visible God. Thus does the Sun like a King
sitting in his throne, govern his Courts of inferior powers: neither is the
Earth defrauded of the service of the Moon: but Aristotle says, of all other
the Moon with the Earth has nighest alliance, so here they are matched
accordingly.

In this form or frame may we behold such a wonderful Symmetry of motions and
situations, as in no other can be proponed. The times whereby we the
inhabitants of the Earth are directed, are constituted by the reuolutions of
the Earth: the circulation of her Center causes the year, the conversion of
her circumference makes the natural day, and the revolution of the produces
the month. By the only view of this Theorick, the cause and reason is
apparent, why in the progressions and Retrogradations are greater than in, and
less than in, why also in Venus they are more than in: and why such changes
from direct to retrograde Stationarie, etc. happens, notwithstanding more
risely in than in, and yet more rarely in: why in Venus not so commonly as in.
Also why and are nigher the earth in their Acronicall, than in their Cosmicall
or Heliacall rising: especially, who rising at the Sun set, shows in his
ruddie fiery color equal in quantity with, and contrariwise setting little
after the Sun* is scarcely to be discerned from a star of the second light.
All which alterations apparently follow upon the Earths motion. And that none
of these do happen in the fixed stars, it plainly argues this huge distance
and immeasurable altitude, in respect whereof this great Orb, wherein the
Earth is carried, is but a point, and utterly without sensib^e proportion,
being compared to that Heaven. For as it is in perspectiue demonstrate: every
quantity has a certain proportionable distance whereunto it may be
discerned, and beyond the same it may not be seen. This distance therefore of
the immovable Heaven is so exceeding great, that the whole O^bis magnus
vanishes away, if it be conferred to that Heaven.

Herein can we never sufficiently admire this wonderful and incomprehensible
huge frame of Gods work proponed to our senses, seeing first this ball of the
Earth wherein we move, to the common sort seems great, and that in respect
of the Moons Orb is very small, but compared with Orbis magnus wherein it is
carried, it scarcely retains any sensible proportion: so marueilously is that
Orb of annual motion greater than this little dark Star wherein we live.
But that Orbis magnus, being (as is before declared) but as a point in respect
of the immensitie of the immovable Heaven, we may easily consider what little
portion of Gods frame our Elementare corruptible world is, but never
sufficiently be able to admire the immensitie of the rest: especially of that
fixed Orb garnished with lights innumerable, and reaching up in Sphericall
Altitude without end. Of which lights Celestial it is to be thought, that we
only behold such as are in the inferior parts of the same Orb: and as they
are higher, so seem they of less and lesser quantity, even till our sight,
being not able f^rther to reach or conceive the greatest part of the rest, by
reason of their wonderful distance invisible unto us. And this may well be
thought of us to be the glorious Court of the great God, whose unsearchable
works invisible we may partly by these his visible, conjecture: to whose
infinite power and Majesty, such an infinite place surmounting all other both
in quantity and quality only is convenient. But because the world has so
long a time been carried with an opinion of the Earths stabilitie, as the
contrary cannot but be now very imperswasible, I have thought good out of
Copernicus also, to give a taste of Reasons Philosophical alleged for the
Earths stabilitie, and their solutions: that such as are not able with
Geometrical eyes to behold the secret perfection of Copernicus Theorick, may
yet by these familiar and natural reasons be induced to search farther, and not
rashly to condemn for fantastical, so ancient doctrine revived, and by
Copernicus so demonstratiuely approved.

What reasons moved Aristotle, and others that followed him, to think the
earth to rest immovable as a Center to the whole world.
THe most effectual reasons that they produce to prove the Earths stabilitie
in the middle or lowest part of the world, is that of Gravity and Leuitie. For
of all other the Element of the earth (say they) is most heavy, and all
ponderous things are carried unto it, striving (as it were) to sway even down
to the inmost part thereof. For the earth being round, into the which all
weighty things on every side fall, making right angles on the superficies,
pass to the Center, seeing every right line that falls perpendicularly upon
the Horizon in that place where it touches the earth, must needs pass by the
Center. And those things that are carried toward that Medium, it is likely that
there also they would rest. So much therefore the rather shall the earth rest
in the middle, and (receiving all things into it self that fall) by his own
weight shall be most immovable. Again, they seek to prove it by reason of
motion and his nature: for of one and the same simple body, the motion must
also be simple, says Aristotle. Of simple motions there are two kinds, Right
and Circular: Right are either up or down: so that every simple motion is
either downward toward the Center, or upward from the Center, or Circular about
the Center. Now unto the earth and water in respect of their weight, the motion
downward is convenient to seek the Center: to Air and Fire in regard of their
lightness, upward and from the Center. So is it meet to these Elements to
attribute the right or straight motion, and to the Heavens only it is proper
circularly about this mean or Center to be turned round. Thus much Aristotle.
If therefore (says Ptolomie of Alexandria) the Earth should turn but only by
that daily motion, things quite contrary to these should happen. For his
motion should be most swift and violent, that in four and twenty hours
should let pass the whole circuit of the Earth: and those things which by
sudden turning are stirred, are altogether ^onmeet to collect, but rather to
disperse things united, unless they should by some firm fasting be kept
together. And long ere this, the Earth being dissolved in pieces, should have
been scattered through the heavens, which were a mockery to think of: and much
more, beasts, and all other waights that are loose could not remain unshaken.
And also things falling should not light on the places perpendicular under
them, neither should they fall directly thereto, the same being violently in
the mean while carried away. Clouds also and other things hanging in the Air
should always seem to us to be carried toward the West.

The solution of these Reasons, with their insufficiency.
THese are the causes, and such other, wherewith they approve the Earth to rest
in the middle of the world, and that out of all question. But he that will
maintain the Earths mobilitie, may say that this motion is not violent but
natural. And these things which are naturally moved have effects contrary to
such as are violently carried. For such motions wherein force and violence is
used, must needs be dissolved, and cannot be of long continuance: but those
which by nature are caused, remain still in their perfect estate, and are
conserved and kept in their most excellent constitution. Without cause
therefore did Ptolomie fear least the Earth, and all earthly things should be
torn in pecces by this Revolution of the Earth, caused by the working of
Nature, whose operations are far different from those of Art, or as such
humane intelligence may reach unto. But why should he not much more think and
misdoubt the same of the world, whose motion must of necessity be so much
more swift and vehement then this of the Earth, as the Heaven is greater then
the Earth? Is therefore the Heaven made so huge in quantity that it might with
unspeakable vehemency of motion be feuered from the Center, least happily
resting it should fall, as some Philosophers have affirmed? Surely, if this
reason should take place, the magnitude of the heaven should infinitely extend.
For the more this motion should violently be carried higher, the greater
should the swiftness be, by reason of increasing of the circumference, which
must of necessity in 24. hours be past over, and in like manner by increase
of the motion, the Magnitude must also necessarily be augmented: thus should
the swiftness increase Magnitude, and the Magnitude the swiftn^sse infinitely.
But according to that ground of nature: whatsoever is infinite can never be
passed over. The Heaven therefore of necessity must stand and rest fixed. But
say they, without the heaven there is no body, no place, no emptiness, no not
any thing at all whether heaven should or could farther extend. But this surely
is very strange, that nothing should have such efficient power to restrain
some thing, the same having a very essence and being. Yet if we would thus
confess that the Heaven were indeed infinite upward, and only finite
downward in respect of his sphericall concauitie: much more perhaps might that
saying be verified, that without the heaven is nothing, seeing every thing in
respect of the infiniteness thereof had place sufficient within the same. But
then must it of necessity remain immovable. For the chiefest reason ye has
moved some to think the Heaven limited, was Motion, which they thought
without controversy to be indeed in it. But whether the world have his
bounds, or be indeed infinite and without bounds, let us leave that to be
discussed of Philosophers: sure we are that the Earth is not infinite, but has
a circumference limited. Seeing therefore all Philosophers consent the
limited bodies may have motion, and infinite cannot have any: why do we yet
stagger to confess motion in the Earth, being most agreeable to his form and
nature, whose bounds also and circumference we know, rather then to imagine
that the whole world should sway end turn, whose end we know not, no
possibly can of any mortal man be known? And therefore the true motion
indeed to be in the Earth, and the appearance only in the Heaven: and that
these apparances are not otherwise then if the Virgilian Aeneas should say:
Prouehimur portu, terraeque vrbesque reced^nt.

FOr a ship carried in a smooth Sea with such tranquillity does pass away,
that all things on the shores and the seas, to the sailors seem to move, and
themselves only quietly to rest with all such things as are aboard with them*
so surely may it be in the Earth, whose motion being natural and not forcible,
of all other is most uniform and vnpeeceiueable, whereby to us that sail
therein, the whole world may seem to roll about. But what shall we then say
of Clouds and other things hanging or resting in the air, or tending upward,
but that not only the Earth and sea making one Globe, but also no small part
of the air is likewise circularly carried, and in like sort al such things as
are derived from them, or have any manner of alliance with them: either for
that the lower Region of the air being mixed with earthly and watrie vapors,
^ollow the same nature of the Earth: either that it be gained and gotten from
the Earth by reason of Vicinitie or Contignitie. Which if any man marvel at,
let him consider how the old Philosophers did yield the same reason for the
Revolution of the highest Region of the air, wherein we may sometime behold
Comets carried circularly no otherwise then the bodies Celestial seem to be,
and yet has that Region of the air less conuenience with the Orbs
Celestial then this low part with the E^rth. But we affirm that part of the
air in respect of this great distance to be destitute of this motion
terrestrial, and that this part of the air that is next to the Earth does
appear most still and quiet, by reason of his uniform natural accompanying
of the Earth, and likewise things that hang therein, unless by winds or other
violent accident they be tossed to and fro. For the wind in the air is
nothing else but as waves in the Sea. And of things ascending and descending in
respect of the world we must confess them to have a mixed motion of right and
circular, albeit it seem to us right and straight, not otherwise then if in a
ship under sail a man should softly let a plummet down from the top along by
the mast even to the deck: this plummet passing always by the straight mast,
seems also to fall in a right line, but being by discourse of reason weyed,
his motion is found mixed of right and circular. For such things as naturally
fall downward, being of earthly nature, there is no doubt but as parts they
retain the nature of the whole. No otherwise is it to these things that by
fiery force are carried upward. For the earthly fire is chiefly nourished with
earthly matter: and flame is defined to be naught else but burning fume or
smoke, and that the property of fire is to extend the subject whereinto it
enters, the which it does with so great violence, as by no means or engines
it can be constrained, but that with breach of ^ants it will perform his
nature. This motion extensiue is from the Center to the circumference: so that
if any earthly part be fiered, it is carried violently upward. Therefore
whereas they say, that of simple bodies the motion is altogether simple, of the
circular it is chiefly verified so long as the simple body remains in his
natural place, and perfect unity of composition: for in the same place there
can be no other motion but circular, which remaining wholly in it self, is
most like to rest an immobilitie. But right or straight motion only happen to
those things that stray and warder, or by any means are thrust out of their
natural place. But nothing can be more repugnant to the form and ordinance of
the world, then that things naturally should be out of their natural place.
This kind of motion therefore that is by right line, is only accident to those
things that are not in their right state or prefection natural, while parts
are disioyned from their whole body, and covet to return to the unity there
of again. Neither do these things which are carried upward or downward
besides this circular moving make any simple uniform, or equal motion, for
which their leuitie or ponderositie of their body, they cannot be tempered,
but always as they fall (beginning slowly) they increase their motion, and the
further the more swiftly, whereas contrariwise this our earthly fire (for other
we cannot see) we may behold as it is carried upward to vanish and decay,
as it were confessing the cause of violence to proceed only from his matter
terrestrial. The circular motion always continues uniform and equal, by
reason of his cause which is indeficient and always continuing. But the other
hasteneth to the end and to attain that place where they leave longer to be
heavy or light, and having attained that place, their motion cease. Seeing
therefore this circular motion is proper to the whole, as straight is only unto
parts, we may say that circular does rest with straight, as animal cum aegro.
And whereas Aristotle has distributed simplicem motum into these three kinds,
A medio ad medium, and circa medium, it must be only in reason, and
imagination, as we likewise sever in consideration Geometrical, a point, a
line, and a superficies, whereas in deed neither can stand without other, ne
any of them without a body.

Hereto we may adioyne, that the condition of immobilitie is more noble and
divine than that of change, alteration, or instabilitie: and therefore more
agreeable to Heaven than to this Earth, where all things are subject to
continual mutabilitie. And seeing by evident proof of Geometrical
mensuration, we find that the Planets are sometimes nigher to us, and
sometimes more remote, and that therefore even the maintainers of the Earths
stabilitie, are enforced to confess, that the earth is not their Orbs Center,
this motion circa Medium, must in more general sort be taken, and that it may
be understand that every Orb has his peculiar Medium and Center, in regard
whereof this simple and uniform motion is to be considered. Seeing therefore
that these Orbs have several Centres, it may be doubted whether the Center of
this earthly gravity, be also the Center of the world. For gravity is nothing
else but a certain procliuity or natural coveting of parts to be coupled with
the whole: which by divine providence of the Creator of all, is given and
impressed into the parts, that they should restore themselves into their unity
and integrity, concurring in Sphericall form. Which kind of propriety or
affection, it is likely also that the Moon and other glorious bodies want not,
to knit and combine their parts together: and to maintain them in their round
shape, which bodies notwithstanding are by sundry motions, sundry ways
conveyed. Thus as it is apparent by these natural reasons, that the mobilitie
of the Earth is more probable and likely than the stabilitie: so if it be
Mathematically considered, and Geometrical mensurations every part of every
Theoricke examined: the discreet student shall find, that Copernicus, not
without great reason did propone this ground of the Earths mobilitie.

A short discourse touching the variation of the Compass.
Marvelous (no doubt) is that natural propriety of the Magnes, whereby the
needle touched immediately turns to some one certain point of the Heavens,
and after sundry motions hither and thither, finds rest only in one place
and point. And albeit this point in several Horizons be different, yet in any
one Horizon it rem^ineth always permanent, and therefore it plainly appears
that the same proceeds of some constant permanent cause natural, and not of
any mutable uncertain cause accidental. But what this cause should be* no
man hitherto has truly discovered. To omit apparent absurd opinions, the most
probable of those that have been given and generally best allowed, is the point
Attractiue, which should be of such virtue as to draw the needle touched always
toward the same point: but whether this point should be in the heavens or
earth, is another controversy. Such as will have it in the earth, affirm it
to be a huge mountain or rock of Magnes stone, distant from the Pole
certain grades, which drawing the needle to it self, always causes it to
make an angle of variation from the Pole of the world, save only under the
Meridian that passes by the same Attractiue point. But the error of this
opinion will soon be found of them that shall upon this supposition, and two
different angles of variation, search out the place of that point Attractiue
(the same being in that Intersection of the two Circles of position by the
variations determined) and then confer that with some third angle of
variation: whereby it shall plainly appear that in the earth no such one
Attractiue point can be imagined, as shall by circle of opposition produce such
variations as in Navigations have been discovered. And to place this point
Attractiue in any of the heavens, it would appear more absurd. For whether the
Heavens move, and the Earth rest immovable, or the Earth move, and the great
Orb of stars be permanent, as of necessity the one or the other must be
true (considering a motion is apparent) it must necessarily follow, that his
alteration should be in continual alteration every hour and moment of the
day: but by experience we find the contrary, and therefore may necessarily be
inferred, no such Attractiue point in that Heaven. So that having found by
these trials this imagination of a point Attractiue, and such instruments as
have been upon that ground devised, but mere vanities, I have somewhat further
sought. And among sundry imaginations that I have Mathematically handled, I
think it is not amiss to propone one to be considered, weied and examined by
exquisite trial of Geometrical demonstration, and Arithmeticall calculation:
for it is no question for gross Mariners to meddle with, no more then the
finding of the Longitude. And therefore I cannot a little wonder at the blind
boldness of Sebastian Cabotto, and some others, that being ignoran^ both in
Geometrical demonstration, and Arithmeticall Symicall calculations, have
nathelesse taken upon them in these most diffi^^le questions to promise
resolution, being no more able or likely to perform it, then an Ox to fly
between two mountain tops. Those sciences being the only win^s to eleuate our
gross senses to matter so high and mystical, let such content themselves with
the praise of painful hard, far traveled mariners, and for their new
discoueries let them learn Apolles lesson: Ne suitor vtra crepidam. Of these
two Problemes thus much I promise for the invention of the Longitude, I will
(God sparing life) deliver means as exact, certain* and feazible, at all
times of the year in what place soever, is by Eclipses. And for the other if I
deliver not the like, at the least s^ far I will wade therein, that such
blind boldness knowing s^m^what more their own imperfection, shall in such
mysteries vs^ more modesty.

An Hypothesis or supposed cause of the variation of the Compass, to be
Mathematically weied.
AS the Axis of the Earth, notwithstanding all other motions remains as it
were imm^ueable, and yet in respect of the sphericall form of the Earth in
every several Horizon makes a several line Meridionall, by reason of the
section made in the superficies of the Horizons by Meridians, having all that
Axis as their common diametre, so may it also come to pass of the line of the
needle and his varation, the needle being always permanent in one plain
superficies, according to the several section of the plain wherein it
rests, and the Horyzon there may be continually made, in every plain new
variations. More plainly to open this imagination, thus I say: that as in a
pair of balance of equal weight there is a certain motion to and fro before
they find their true place of rest (the same being only in the level of the
Horizon) which comes to pass as Copernicus affirms, by the attractiue
Center of the Earth, who drawing unto him either weight with like force,
finding the subjects like also, compels them to rest in the superficies like
distant from that Attractiue Center: so in the needle being a body endued with
two several properties, the one of Gravity and Leuitie, which being equally
poyzed, forces him to abide in the Horizon: the other being Magneticall and
received by the touch, which causes him to rest always in that one Meridia^, to
the Magnes appropriate, it thereby comes to pass, that after sundry
ballancing this way and that way, it only setleth in the common section of
this peculiar Meridian and the Horizon. So that even as in Dyals the line of
the style only accords and concurreth with the Meridian line, in such as are
void of declination, but in all such playnes as are declinatorie, the line of
the style varieth from the Meridian line, and the same angle of variation also
alters as well in respect of inclination as declination: so I suppose this
variation of the compass to be nothing else but the angle comprehended between
the Meridian line, and the common section of the magneticall Meridian and the
Horizon in the Horizontall plain, and this Angle to be always exactly equal
to the Angle contained of the Meridian line, and line of the style: The
Longitude of the place proponed accounted from the Magneticall Meridian, b^ing
equal to the declination of the Dyals plain superficies, making computation
from South to East Cyrcularly, and the Latitude of the place equal to the
complement of the inclination of the same superficies Ho^ologiall. Of the
verity of this supposition I could easily determine, if there were any trust
to the observation of Mariners: but having found by experience their gross
usage and homely instruments, where half a point commonly breaks no square:
and also their repugnant tales that have trauayled the very self same Uoyages,
I cannot yet resolve.

Upon due examination of this Hypothesis there may happily fall out a strange
Paradox, not thought of hitherto, that these vulgar maryne Chartes desynate
with Parallele Meridians, and right lined Rumbie, being of themselves
apparently false and err^nious: yet used without rectification of the compass,
may bring forth true effects, and so two errors concurring produce a verity.

Errors in the Art of Navigations commonly practiced.
FIrst, all their Chartes are described with straight Meridian lines running
equidistant or Parallele, which error is most manifest to any that have tasted
but the first principles of Cosmographie, considering they are all great
circles, and concur in the Poles.

SEcondly, they suppose that running upon any of their points of their
Compass, they should pass in the Circumference of a great circle, and
therefore in the plain Charte describe those winds with straight lines: but
therein are they greatly abused, for the Ship stenning the North and the
South, only makes her course in a great Circle: East or West she describes a
Paralle, and being stirred on any other mean point, (the Compass being tru^ly
rectified) she delin^ateth in her course a Curue or Helicall line, neither
straight nor Circular, but mixed of both: and therefore to set forth these
winds in the Chartes with straight lines is most erroneous,

THirdly, their rule to know Latitude by the Pole star, adding or
substracting from his Altitude according to the situation of the grades, is all
false, and that worst i^, cannot be amended: but be it never so well rectified
to one climate, yet is it false in all other.

FOurthly, their ta^ing of the Sun with their Balis^ile (as they term it) is
most false: and whereas some finding the error thereof, have gone about to
remedy the same by cutting off a part at the end, thinking thereby it might
approach to the Center of the eye, they increase thereby the error* and make it
more false. For visus non fit a puncto, as they suppose. And this error is
much like the other of the Pole star and situation of the guards: for be it
never so well corrected by section to any one Altitude, then shall it be false
for all other, as to any skillful in Perspectiue it is easily demonstrate.

This error I have already reformed, Demonstrati^e, and Practice in my book
lately published, entitled Alae seu Scalae Mathematicae.

Also the rules they have to know how many leagues they shall run upon every
point to raise one degree in Latitude, are also mere false. For they search
that Arcke Itinerall as though it were the Hypothenusa to a right angled
triangle, whose sides are circles of contrary nature, the one a Parallele, the
other a great circle, and therefore without all sense seek they by proportion
of right lines to deliver their quantity.

But besides these errors, they have one great imperfection yet in their art,
and hitherto by no man suppli^^, and that is the want of exact Rules to know
the Longitude or Arckes I^inerall, East and West, without the which they can
neither truly g^ue the place or situation of any coast, Harborough, Road or
Town, ne yet in sailing, discern how the place they sail unto bears from
them, or how far it is distant, whereby they are enforced long before they
come at any Coast, all night to strike sail, no other ways then if they were
upon it, thereby loosing the benefit of prosperous winds, in such sort
sometime, that whereas keeping a true course they might have been quietly at
Road, they are by contrary and adverse tempests carried far off, and so not
without great charge to the owner, pain to the company, and peril to the
vessel, are enforced to wast their time, which grows of their ignorance,
that they neither have true Rules to direct themselves the nighest course, ne
yet treading their beaten paths can assuredly decide of their certain place.
For reformation of these errors and imperfections, new Chartes, new
Instruments, and new Rules must be prescribed. Wherein I have prepared in a
peculiar volume for that purpose to entreat, wishing in in the mean time that
such as are not able to reform these faults, will abstain to teach our
Countriemen more errors.

FINIS.

