THE RVLE OF FAITH*

OR, AN EXPOSITION OF the Apostles CREED, so handled as it affords both Milk
for Babes, and strong meat for such as are at full age.

By that worthy servant of Gods Church, Master NICHOLAS BIFIELD, late Minister
of Gods Word at ISLEVVORTH, and by him in his life time fully perfected and
transcribed, so much as is now published for the benefit of Gods Church, by his
Son, ADONIRAM BIFIELD.

1 PET. 2. 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1626.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND Religious Knight, Sir THOMAS POSTHVMVS HOBY, and
to the honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady MARGARET his wife, A. B. wishes
the increase of grace here, and the fruition of glory hereafter.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
THere are many ways to attain to seeming honor here upon earth; there is
no way to attain to true honor, besides this of Piety and Virtue: Godliness
brings the best gain, the greatest honor unto a Christian: others may be more
rich, none are more honorable then they: others may be more esteemed of by the
men of the world, none have more honor both with God and good men then they:
as Solomon says, The wise shall inherit glory, but fools, dishonor, though
they Pro. 335.
be exalted: this is the inheritance of the godly, who is the only Wise man:
So that I may now say with our Savior, your Worships have both chosen the
better part, which shall never be taken from you: I having ever observed it to
have been your greatest ambitions, to be true Christians: which alone makes you
more excellent then your neighbors: neither have you made choice of Religion
as many Hypocrites and Time-seruers do, making it a stalking horse, a
footstool to the seat of preferment; making choice of Religion for nothing
else but only for the advancing of themselves and compassing of their own
private ends: no, your end and aim has ever been in all your services and
employments, both to advance the glory of God, as also to further the peace and
welfare of this Church and Commonwealth wherein we live, and whereof God has
made your Worship a worthy member. This indouldens me humbly to present this
ensuing Treatise unto you both: which may be called the Rule of Faith, the
Symbol or Badge, whereby a true Christian may be distinguished, and known
from all Jews, Turks, Atheists, Papists, Heretics, counterfeting
Temporizers, and false Professors: the Doctrine of the Creed, containing in it
the substance of Christian Religion, Taught by the Apostles, Embraced by the
ancient Fathers, and Sealed by the blood of the Martyrs: The exposition of
which Creed, so far as it was perfected by the Author, I here present unto you
both, desiring that it may shelter it self under your protection; many reasons
enforcing me thereto: first, that honor, and Singular Love, which you both
have showed unto those that Labor in the Word and Doctrine: as you are
patterns of Piety, so are you Patrons of pious and godly men, and of their
labors: secondly, that love and respect which you were pleased in particular
to express unto the Author of this Treatise (my dear Father, now with God)
which since his death, you have been pleased to continue both unto the fruit of
his Brain, as also to the fruit of his body, this imboldens me to commit this
Posthumus to your protection: thirdly, that good esteem which you have ever
had of this work, manifested, both, when you were pleased to be diligent
hearers of it when it was preached, so long as you were both resident in those
parts, as also by your earnest desire of the publishing of it, for the benefit
of Gods Church: and I doubt not but that you will now favorably receive that
which formerly you have so highly esteemed, and so much desired: lastly, that
special duty which I my self owe unto you both for your extraordinary Love,
and (by me undeserved) favors which you have been both pleased to show unto
me, since it pleased God to deprive me of the benefit of such a Father; this my
duty binds me, with all humility and thankfulness to acknowledge them,
therefore do I willingly take this opportunity, humbly to present this ensuing
Treatise unto you both, not doubting but that you will receive it into your
Patronage: so that whilst you believe, and countenance and defend the Truth,
The Truth shall make you free: These things do, and the God of Truth and Peace
shall be with you: now the God of all grace make you perfect, confirm,
strengthen, and establish you, and bless you with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things through Christ, with temporal blessings here, and with eternal
blessings in his Kingdom, Such shall be the daily Prayers of

Your Worships humbly devoted, ADONIRAM BIFIELD.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, it was the Authors purpose, if God had spared him life so
long, to have finished this Exposition upon the Creed; but man purposes, and
God disposes. It pleased God to ^aish his course, before he had finished this
work; So much as now is published, comes unto thy hands, as it was left fully
perfected by the Author in his life time.
yet God in his divine providence has so disposed of it, as that you may find
the substance of those Articles which are not here perfected, to be handled in
some of his other labors, unto which briefly I refer you: For the ninth
Article, concerning the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, I
refer you to his Treatise called The Principles, or, the pattern of wholesome
words, Chap. 23. And whereas The Communion of Saints consists of two parts:
First, The communion of the members with the head; Secondly, The communion of
the members among themselves: for the former read his Exposition upon the
Colossians, Chap. 1. verse. 18. page 121, 122, 123. for the latter, read his
Exposition upon the third of Peter, ver. 7. page 169. for this title, Saints,
read his Exposition upon the Colossians, Chap. 1. ver. 1. page 7, 8, 9. If you
would be directed how to carry your selves in this communion amongst the
Saints, and toward the godly, read his little Treatise called The Rules of a
holy life, Chap. 25. For the tenth Article, The forgiveness of sins, I
refer you to his Book of the Principles, Chap. 24. as also to his Exposition
upon the Colossians, Chap. 1. verse. 14. page 108, 109. Would you know what
course to take to be delivered from your sins, then I refer you to his little
Treatise, called The Doctrine of the beginning of Christ, or, The Catalogue of
sins, Chap. 2. page 14. For the eleventh Article, The resurrection of the
body, I refer you to his Book of the Principles, Chap. 26. For the last
Article, Everlasting life, I refer you to his Exposition upon the third
Chapter of Peter, ver. 7. where this is largely handled from page 141. to 163.
The Author has handled most of these things in diverse parts of this Treatise,
called the Rule of Faith, which you may easily find out by the use of the
Index: These things I thought good to acquaint thee withal for thy help and
benefit: as also to show that by the divine providence good supply, even out of
the Authors own works may be made of that defect, which by his immature death
may be thought to be in this Rule of Faith. That which is required on thy part,
is diligence and care to treasure up in thy heart these wholesome and sound
words contained in this Treatise, that so thou may walk according to this
Rule, knowing that as many of you as walk according to this Rule, peace shall
be upon them and upon the Israel of God.

Thine in the Lord, ADONIRAM BIFIELD.

THE CREED.
OF THE CREED IN GENERAL.
Text, 2. Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form or Pattern of Sound words.
THere have bin in all Ages of the Church since the giving of the Scriptures,
two ways; by which the Ministers of the 2. Ways of Preaching.
Church have taught men the knowledge that is necessary to Salvation: The one
was to make choice of some Text of Scripture, and to expound it to the people,
and thence to 1. By Text.
make use of it. Thus they did in Ezra his time, Nehemiah 8. 4. 7. 8. and thus
did our Savior Christ at Nazareth, Luke 4. 16. 17 etc. and it is noted in that
place, that it was our Saviors custom so to do. Thus did Philip, Acts 8. 30.
35. The 2. Without Text.
other was without being tied to any particular Text, to handle the ma^ne body
of Doctrine, as was most necessary for the people that were to be instructed.
Thus the Sermons of the Prophets were not the exposition of any particular
Text, but a solid and complete collection of all that matter which at that
time were needful for the people. And this course also did the Apostles hold
in their Epistles and Sermons to the Churches, choosing out so much matter out
of the revealed Will of God, as was most behoouefull for the Christians, to
whom they writ or preached, only confirming what they taught by the
Scripture. Both these courses have bin followed in the Christian Churches to
this day: only amongst us with this difference: That the instruction out of a
Text is used in Churches, and the instruction without a Text in Schools.

But that both these courses may be held in popular teaching, is manifest, by
the proofs before: and it is manifest, And both expedient.
that if Divines for the profit of their hearers, would undertake solidly to
set before the people the whole body of Theology, and show them at once all
the choice things they are to believe concerning God or Christ, or the
Creation, or the like, it cannot but in some respects be much more profitable,
then to cleave only to the exposition of whole books of Scripture or
particular portions: because by the former course the people may see
altogether, that which by the other way they should hear but by piece and at
several times, only as the Texts will give occasion. I observe not this to
disgrace the godly course of preaching by Texts, but rather to show that both
are needful: and as I conceive, it were much to be desired; That Divines every
where would teach the people the whole frame and body of the Doctrine of
godliness.

The Apostle Paul in this place shows, that besides their The Apostles
Pattern.
course of instructing the Churches in particular Doctrines, according to
occasion; they did extract into one body, the Heads of all Religion, which they
did in all places carefully unfold, and preach upon unto the people; and these
Heads thus gathered together, as the principal things handled in all the
Scriptures, the Apostle calls here the pattern of wholesome words, and were
divided into two general Heads or Titles, Faith and Love.

Now there are also two ways of handling these heads of Religion; the one more
plainly and briefly, by way of Catechizing: the other more largely and exactly,
by way of Methodicall Doctrine: The one is necessary for young beginners in
Religion, and the other needful to build up a people in the knowledge begun in
them.

Having therefore by Gods gracious assistance heretofore handled the body of
Divinity after the first sort, in the extract of principles and Doctrine of
foundation only, with some explication of them: I now intend by the like
gracious assistance of God, to go over all the body of sacred Theology, in a
more exact manner, adding those Doctrines that may serve to build you up in the
larger knowledge of those glorious Mysteries of true Religion. And long
dilating with my self upon what Foundation to raise this new frame; I at
length resolved upon the Apostles Creed, where I find all the Doctrine of
Faith collected into one fair body, ready to my hands.

And in discourseing of these glorious Truths, I intend to The method
intended.
observe a mixed course of Teaching, that both sorts of hearers may find matter
of profit: Here will be plain things for the simple, and more higher
Contemplations for the more Judicious.

Two things I especially intend in handling these Articles of Faith; the one is
the apparelling of each Article, with the glorious furniture I find made fit
for it in any part of the Scripture: and this is by way of Exposition. The
other is the discovery of the many and singular uses we may put such glorious
truths to, in the whole course of our lives: and this by way of use.

Now then for an Introduction in general, this Text gives us occasion to
consider of two things,

1. What the Creed is. 2. What we are bound to do with the Creed.
For the first, the Apostles own words, do tell us, what What the Creed is.
such sound abridgements of the chiefest Mysteries of Religion are, they are
Patterns, forms or frames of wholesome words; where two things are said:

1. That they are wholesome words. 2. That they are Patterns. What wholesome
words are. Unwholesome doctrines of two sorts.

They are wholesome words both by way of opposition to doctrines that poison
and corrupt the minds of men: and by way of difference from such truths as
for the present and in some respects are not wholesome to the hearers though in
themselves they be wholesome.

We may observe by diverse passages in the Epistles of the Apostle, what kind
of Doctrine he accounts to be in it self 1. Corrupt doctrine.
unwholesome, as all false Doctrine contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ:
such as was Justification by works, the forbidding of marriage and meats, the
denial of the Resurrection and the like: and this he calls (...), to teach
other Diverse sorts of corrupt doctrine.
Doctrine. Such corrupt stuff the Apostles also accounted all the vain
ianglings of men with pride and perverseness wrangling about words, or
disputing of needless things, and those he calls (...) and (...) and (...),
etc. 1. Tim. 1. 3. and 6. 4, 5. ^0. Further unwholesome words, the Apostle
accounts all their curiosities and vain speculations in Philosophy, as when
out of the liking of the writings of old Philosophers, they brought in Angel
worship into the Churches, Colos. 2. 8. 19. and such stuff also was that which
the Apostle condemns under the name of traditions of men, that is,
superstitious observations, when the inventions of men are urged with opinion
of holiness or necessity, Col. 2. 8. 20. of this nature were profane and old
Wives fables, 1. Tim. 4. 7. and such is all that stuff men haunt after that
will not be wise to Salvation, but curiously search after things not reueiled.

Secondly, true Doctrine may be unwholesome: and so we find diverse instances
in Scripture: as first, when the truth is How many ways true doctrine may be
unwholesome. (...).
so varnished by the enticing words of man's wisdom, that the power of God is
not observed or regarded, and the conscience is not intended to be informed.
When men in delivering the truth, study to show their own wits, more then the
glory of Gods Truth; this is not wholesome for the hearers, and therefore
exclaimed against, and protested against by the Apostle in diverse places, 1.
Cor. 1. and 2. Colos. 2. 4. Secondly, the time is spent in knottie and obscure
places, that are neither easy, nor necessary to be understood, and in handling
whereof, scandalous or dangerous conceits may be raised in men's minds. Thus
the hard places of the Apostle Paul's writings were perverted as the Apostle
Peter complains, 2. Pet. 3. 17. Thirdly, when disputations about things
indifferent are brought in, when the questions are doubtful, and the weak may
be entangled, Romans 14. 1. Fourthly, when the Word of God is divided
unskillfully, and ignorantly: as when strong meat is given to Babes, and strong
men can get nothing but milk.

Thus as they are wholesome words. Secondly they are said How the Creed is a
Pattern.
to be Patterns: the Collection of the choicest truths into one frame or
body, is called here a Pattern: and so the Creed may be said to be a Pattern
of wholesome words, because in the Creed there is as it were a short, but lively
resemblance of all those truths in a little room which are at large, and
dispersedly handled throughout all the Bible: and therefore, fitly was the
Creed called the little Bible. Yea, it may be called a pattern, because we may
compare with it all the truths we read of in Scripture, and mark how they
agree with, or suite to the Articles of our Creed, and because we may try all
Doctrine we hear, and free our selves from the Intanglement of such
controversies about opinions that agree not with, or belong not to our Creed.

As the Decalogue is a pattern of all duties to be done, and Note.
the Lords Prayer a pattern of all requests to God, so the Creed is a pattern
of all Doctrine to be believed.

Thus of the description of the Creed, as the words of the Apostle fitly serve
for it. The more manifest description of it will appear afterward. The
keeping of this pattern follows.

When the Apostle exhorts Timothy to the keeping of this pattern, he may be
understood to speak to him as a Minister, What great respect we should have of
the doctrines contained in the Creed.
or as to a Christian in general. As a Minister he is enjoined with all care to
endeavor to preserve the purity of Doctrine, and with great respect to teach
often, and powerfully those points of Doctrine which were expressed in the
pattern, as the principal truths he should aim at in the course of his
Ministry. He should not through desire of vain glory affect Curiosities, or
Novelties, but build up his Hearers in all the knowledge he could infuse into
them by continual teaching of those doctrines. If he speak to him as a
Christian in general, then this is the point of Doctrine the Apostle aims at,
that all Christians be exceeding careful to get the distinct knowledge of the
maine Articles of the Christian faith, and above all Doctrines keep those as a
great treasure. And so in particular, since we have in the Creed such an
excellent frame of the Doctrines of faith, we must hence learn that it is our
duties to regard these Doctrines with all respect.

There be twelve Reasons, why we should be in a special manner desirous to
hear, learn, and make use of the doctrine 12. Reasons why we should greatly
desire to be instructed in the Articles of our Creed. 1. From the Commandment
of God.
of these Articles of our faith.

1. Because we see here it is the commandment of the Apostle, that we
should keep this pattern of wholesome words. The Apostle saw it was a
Doctrine of excellent use for the Churches, and therefore to be learned and
kept as a great treasure: and the Commandment to keep them imports, that
whatsoever we are ignorant of, yet we should not be ignorant of these points,
and whatsoever we forget, yet these things we should be sure to remember, and
whatsoever we wanted affection in, yet in these things we should strive to be
greatly affected. It is therefore a sin of great unfaithfulness to neglect
these points, and shows we are too wise in our selves, if we have no mind to
learn and keep such things, as God in his wisdom has in some special
manner charged us to regard.

2. Because God himself is the immediate Author of these 2. From the Author of
it.
Doctrines: it is God only that opens this School of Faith: These are lessons
that are to be learned (not from wise men as many other things) but from God
himself, to whom alone the glory of revealing these high Mysteries belonges.

3. Because the matter here contained is Doctrine of the highest nature, that
was ever taught or learned in the world: 3. From the subject matter.
what higher Doctrine can there be then of God and the Church of God? no
Science has such a Subject. The Phisickes entreats but of the natural body;
Astronomy but of the heavens; all the Mathematics, but of some particular and
inferior subjects; and so all Arts: only Theology, and in Theology the
Creed intreates of a number of most choice Mysteries in divine things. All the
Doctrines here are such as natural reason or sense can say little or nothing
to: for except it be in the first Article, nature is altogether silent in the
rest. And for this Reason we should be wonderfully desirous to be employed
in these knowledges: for to be taken up with easy things belonges unto the
Vulgar, but to be informed in things removed from the senses, belonges to the
wise only.

4. Because the Doctrine of the Creed has bin received in 4. From antiquity
and universality.
all Ages of the Church; it is Catholic Doctrine: it has bin entertained
with great Honor in all Christian Churches: that Doctrine which all Christians
in all Ages of the world have learned and admired should be much attended to
by us; and such is the Doctrine of the Creed. The Creed is the confession of
the whole Church of God since Christ: and if we read and respect the
confessions of particular Churches, yea of particular men, then how much more
ought we to study the confession of the Church universal; it containing the
faith, in which all the Martyrs and Saints of God lived and dyed.

5. Because it is matter that is infallible: for besides that we 5. From the
infallibility of it.
believe nothing here, but what has bin in all Ages received (except it be
in that point of Christ descending into Hell) so all those Articles are
grounded upon express Scripture (except before excepted) that there can be no
doubt of the truth of them, if we will believe the Scripture, and therefore we
should with the more willingness attend to these Doctrines, seeing they are
not in the number of those truths that seem to be opposed, not only by the
judgments of learned men, but by the Word of God, the meaning of Gods Word
appearing not so clearly to us in those things.

6. From the sufficiency of the Doctrine of the Creed: It 6. From the
sufficiency of it.
contains all things necessary to be believed to salvation: All things I say,
necessary for babes in the proposition, and for strong men in the exposition.

7. From the necessity of knowing and believing these 7. From the necessity of
it. Fides integra est Copulatiua.
things: these Articles must be believed or we cannot be saved: Yea, all these
Articles must be believed of necessity: to fail in any is desperately
dangerous.

8. From the Permanencie of these truths. Here is that 8. From the
permanencie.
said that will abide in a Christian, and is indelible.

9. From the consideration of the condition of many hearers: some are but new
beginners, and others though for the 9. From the condition of most hearers.
time they might have bin teachers, yet need to be taught these principles:
Yea, need to be taught them again: being such as those, Heb. 5. 12, 13. It is
in these things also, that the better sort of hearers complain of their
ignorance.

10. We were tied in our Baptism unto the doctrine contained 10. From our bond
in baptism.
in this Creed, and so we stand bound before God and the Angels to learn it
and keep it as a great Treasure.

11. From the consideration of the manner of propounding these Articles, they
are set dnwne in the Creed plainly, and so 11. From the manner. It is verbum
abbreuiatum, Parvum Euangeliu^, the little Bible. 12. From the many uses of it.
they clear our judgments; and withal briefly, so as we need not fear
our memories, it is short in words but great in mysteries.

12. Lastly, because of the singular use may be made of these doctrines, there
is great use of the whole, and great use of every part of it: other Sciences
for the most part add nothing to us, but to our knowledge only, or little to
our practice especially, so as to advance our happiness: now there are many
commodities arise from the knowledge and keeping of these truths, as

1. Contemplative delight: Men are delighted with the smell of 1. Voluptas
theoretica.
flowers, and the sight of colors, how much more may, and ought our minds to
be delighted in the observation and meditation of such glorious truths as
these: for these Articles do exhibit to the believing soul, the glory of God
to be veiwed in the things of greatest excellency, even the choicest things
wherein God has made known the wonder of his goodness unto man. And therefore
these things are good for meditation all the days of our lives, if we had once
but the skill to open the glories are here contained. Many Christians are much
distressed about meditation: They complain they cannot tell what to think of
profitablie: In the Creed is contained the abridgement of these shining
doctrines upon which we may, and ought always to look and wonder.

2. The restoring of the Image of God in our minds: for by bringing in these
knowledges, we set up again the frame 2. Gods Image in these.
of the Image of God in our minds, which lies utterly defaced in us till the
light of these doctrines begin to shine in our understanding: we are
purblinde, yea we are stark blind so long as we are ignorant in these
grounds.

3. The nourishment of the whole soul: The soul of man takes not food
further then it lays hold upon these and such like 3. Nourishment.
truths, and when these are thought on and applied soundly, al things in the
soul will thrive and prosper: and the more is this to be regarded, because in
these Articles is contained food for all sorts of Christians: for here is
milk for Lac parvulorum Cibus fortium.
little ones in the proposition of these Articles, and meat for strong men in
the exposition of these: and all wholesome food.

4. The Creed contains the substance of those Articles of agreement 4. Here
we see the Articles between God and us.
made between God and us: so as we may easily and daily thence take notice of
the maine points that are treated of between God and us: The condition of the
covenant on our part, concerning either faith or practice, all that is
required of us (in effect) in respect of faith is here set down.

5. By the dexterous use of these doctrines, we may try all Religions 5. The
trial of contrary doctrine. Parvus Iudex.
in the world: for here is the root of faith, the touchstone to try things
that are to be believed, the square by which they are to be measured: it is
that little Judge in matters of quarrel about Religion: for whatsoever
doctrine is contrary to the Analogy of faith in these things may be safely
rejected, and must be.

6. It is the very Charecter of the Church: and serves to distinguish 6. It
distinguishes us from all misbeleeuers.
us from all other professions of men in the world: as first, from mere
naturalists, that believe no more concerning God and religion then they can see
by the light of nature as it is now corrupted: and so it distinguishes us from
the Philosophers: and therefore much more from the common sort of Gentiles, that
entertained opinions monstrous, and against the very light of Nature: secondly,
from the Turks, who though they receive some truths from the light of
Scripture, yet rejecting most of these fundamental truths, and entertaining a
multitude of blasphemies of their own against the Christian faith, are
worthily condemned as men without the pale of the Church: thirdly, from the
Jews, because they deny all the Articles concerning Christ: fourthly, from
all sorts of Heretics, that have erred from this faith, in some of the
Articles concerning Christ, such as are the Arrians and Papists at this day:
fifthly, from such as have but a wandering opinion concerning God in any of
these Articles, so as they only know them by conjecture or hearesay, and have
not entertained them with distinct assurance into their hearts: and such are
multitudes of people of all sorts even in the Visible Church. Alsted. Catech.
To conclude, every word almost of the Creed does pierce the sides of some or
other heretical or blasphemous men. As we believe one God, against the
Gentiles; the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, against the Antitrinitans; Creator
of Heaven and Earth, against Carpocrates, Cerinthus and the Ebionits; we
believe that Christ is the Lord, against Valentinus, who acknowledged him to
be a Savior, not a Lord; and that he is our Lord, against those in Origens
time, that said he was the Lord of God; and that he is the only begotten
Son, against the Arrians; conceived by the holy Ghost, against Apollinaris,
Valentinus, and Eutiches; that he was dead, against Basilides; and rose again,
against Cerinthus; and sits at the right hand of God, against Praxeus; and
we believe one Catholic Church, against the Donatists and Nouatian; and the
Communion of Saints, against Sectaries; and the Resurrection, against the
Sadduces and Cerinthians, and the like. 7. It is full of comfortable uses.


7. Lastly, there is scarce any word in the Creed but it contains some uses of
Consolation, and therefore we should attend unto it, and keep it as a great
treasure, because there are so many springes of joy that will ever flow
abundantly into our hearts, if the fault be not in our own carelessness,
ignorance or unbelief.

The Use should be therefore to inflame our hearts to a desire after the
understanding and power of these Doctrines, and having learned them to keep
them in the closet of our hearts, as our greatest treasure on earth. I know
there is naturally in the hearts of the most hearers a kind of desire to hear
new doctrines, and to be taught in things above the consideration of these
principles, but we must be altogether displeased with our selves, ^f we find
this intemperance in our desires: It would argue a great loathing of Manna, and
a secret despising of the greatest part of the Word of God (which is employed
about the propounding and urging of these doctrines) if we should suffer our
hearts to slight these grounds, and first Truths: It is a sign of a narrow
and base heart, if there be not room to receive with gladness this precious
seed. Men are loath to be accounted Babes, and therefore affect not the
doctrine is fit for them, but look too high, and reach after things that are
not so useful for them.

And thus in general.

The Title of the Creed.
Ephesians. 2. 20.
THe Creed has two things in it to be considered of: The Title and the
Articles of faith comprehended in it: the Title, usual and ancient, is the
Apostles Creed. Where is noted the Authors of these doctrines, and the kind of
doctrine. The Authors were the Apostles: the kind of doctrine is a Creed:
first of the Authors. How the Creed is the Apostles.


All men grant the Creed to be the Apostles: but yet all agree not about the
sense, How the Creed may be said to be the Apostles: for some think it is the
Apostles Creed, because the Apostles made it and compiled it in the form as it
now is. Others think it is the Apostles Creed because it contains the
substance of their Doctrine, though it were not made by them. 2. Opinions.


The first sort conceive thus: That the Apostles after Pentecost when they had
received the holy Ghost, met together in Jerusalem, and considering that they
were to depart one from the other into diverse parts of the world, they agreed
upon the substance of all that doctrine which they would teach all abroad the
world, and accordingly digested it into this form, that thereby it might
appear that their doctrine every where Ruffin. in Simbo. Apost.
did agree; and that so, false Teachers might be discovered, when they should
in any place under pretense of preaching Christ, oppose or conceal any part
of the necessary Christian faith. Of this opinion were some of the Fathers:
Some of the Schoolmen afterward went so far, as to name which part of the
Creed was made by each of the Apostles, as That Durandus, etc.
Peter should say, I believe in God the Father Almighty; and John should say,
Creator of Heaven and Earth; and James should say, I believe in Jesus Christ
his only Son our Lord; and so the rest of the Apostles cast in each one a
part, till by them all the whole Creed was finished.

But this opinion cannot be true, as may appear by diverse reasons, some
probable, some infallible. It is not probable the Apostles digested it in the
order it is: for why needed it to be made by all the Apostles peice*meale, and
not rather by one Apostle alone? Secondly, there are terms used in the Creed,
are no where used in the writings of the Apostles, as the words of descending
into Hell, and the Catholic Church. Thirdly, the Apostles Catechism
entreated of faith and love, 2. Tim. 1. 1^. but this Creed intreates only of
faith. But there is one Reason which is infallible: for if this Creed had bin
written by the Apostles, it had bin Canonical Scripture, and must have bin
re^d in our Bibles, which no man ever affirmed which I read of.

2. The second sort of Divines therefore are in the right opinion, who conceive
that the Creed is the Apostles in respect of the matter, not in respect of the
form. It is the Apostles, because the doctrine contained in it, is that which
all the Apostles with one consent did teach unto the world, and have left
confirmed in the Apostolical writings in the New Testament. And for this
Reason we ought to attend to the doctrines here to be entreated of, as being
such truths, as are not founded on the testimony of any ordinary man, but even
of the Apostles themselves.

Quest. But may some one say; Is it not the Prophets Creed Quest.
as well as the Apostles. or are not these Articles to be found in the writings
of the Prophets as well as the Apostles, or are there some truths necessary now
to Salvation, that were not necessary in the Old Testament?

Answ. I answer that the maine substance of the doctrine of the Creed was
known and taught by the Prophets in the Old Testament, as in general
concerning one God, and the Messiah, and eternal life, etc. but there are some
things peculiar in the Creed unto the Christian Church, and of necessity to
Salvation: as the more open and clear doctrine of the Trinity: the particulars
about the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ, and the estate of the
Catholic Church, these being clearly reueiled are now necessary to Salvation.

Quest. Some one will say; but how came the Creed then into the Church, who
made it, or when was it made?
Answ. I answer, that it seems clear that it came not in all at once, but
that in the Apostles days it was much shorter: It is manifest, that our Lord
and Savior commanded to baptize men in the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost. Whence came the custom of examining those that were
baptized about their faith: Who in the first times answered briefly, and for
the most part, but concerning the Trinity or concerning Christ, which was
chiefly then in question: We may observe that Philip would not baptize the
Eunuch, till he had confessed his faith, Acts the 8. which imports that it was
the manner then to admit none of years to baptism, till they had professed
their faith, and that some kind of short form was then in use: What the
precise form was, cannot be certainly known: but it is likely, their
confession went not further then the Trinity: Now these Articles concerning the
Trinity, were enlarged for the prevention and repressing of sundry Heresies,
as they did or were likely to spring up in the Church. But that the whole Creed
as it is now, was not verbatim in the The most of the Articles concerning
Christ are to be found, Act 2. from v. 22. to v. 37
first Ages, may appear in that the confession of faith in the days of
Martialis, Ignatius, Irena, Tertullian, Origin, and those of their times did
not proceed further then the Trinity: In the first book of Socrates his
Eccless. Hist. Chap. 19. we find, The Creed thus recited.

We believe in one God the Father Almighty, and in the Lord Jesus Christ his
Son, begotten of him before all worlds, true God, by whom all things were
made which are in heaven, and which are in earth: Who descended, and was
incarnate, and suffered and rose again, and ascended into Heaven, and from
thence shall come again to judge the quick and dead: and in the holy Ghost,
in the Resurrection of the flesh, in the life of the world to come, in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and one Catholic Church, reaching from one end of the
earth to the other. In Saint Ambrose his time, the baptized was asked three
questions: as first, do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, and the
baptized answered, I believe, and then he was dipped under the water:
secondly, he was asked, do thou believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Cross, and he answered I believe, and then was dipped again: thirdly, he
was asked do thou believe in the holy Ghost, and he answered, I do believe,
and was the third time dipped. Ambrose lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 7. so that it is
probable, that the Creed was not fully finished in this form it now is, till
about the fourth age after Christ: And thus of the Authors of the Creed.

To conclude therefore this point concerning the Authors of these Articles, the
Creed is called the Apostles Creed in two respects: first, to distinguish it
from all other Creeds. There have bin diverse Creeds made in the several ages
since Christ, some by particular writers, some by Counsels: of particular
writers, Athanasius Creed does most excel, which is the Creed set down in the
book of Common Prayer, next before the Letany: and of Counsels these are the
chief Creeds, the Nicen Creed, which you may find in the book of Common
Prayer, also set down in the order of the Communion, as also the Creed of the
Ephesian Synod, and the Creed of the Calcedonian Synod, read Am. Pol. synt.
Theol. lib. 2. cap. 2.

Now this Creed is called the Apostles Creed, to show that the Churches did
hold it to be of greater authority then any other Creed, and that other Creeds
are but as it were expositions of this Creed.

Secondly, it is called the Apostles Creed, to give it authority above all
humane writings, even those that have much or most excelled. The confession of
National Churches have been worthily had in great request, so have the Creeds
of the Counsels, and so have the Apocripha Scriptures: but yet none of these
have attained to the honor of this Creed. The translation of the Canonical
Scriptures in respect of the words are humane, though in respect of the matter
and order they are divine: and these of all humane writings are the best, yet
not without the defects of the Translators, whereas the original in both
Testaments is divine both for matter, order, and words also. Thus of the
Authors. The kind of writing follows.

Creede]Symbolum is the word used in the most Christian Churches and is
plainly agreeable to the original word, the Creed being first penned in the
Greek tongue.

If the word be derived of Syn and bolus, then it may signify two things:
first, a morsel, or as much as a man may well swallow at once: and so the
whole Scriptures containing but the divine furnishing of Gods Table as it were,
the Creed contains each particular Christians morsel, so much as he may and
must swallow, and receive down into his heart, without leaving any of these
Articles out: secondly, a draught, even as much as a net can take at once. The
sea is the Word, the fisherman is the Christian man, the Net is faith, the
Creed is as much as the faith of the Christian can take at a draught out of the
Sea of doctrine contained in the Scriptures. But it is more likely the word
should be derived of Syn and (...), and then it may signify all or any of
these five things:

1. A Shot: it containing the reckoning which the Apostles made for the
Churches, being deducted or cast in, out of the several writings of each of
the Apostles.

2. A Watchword, or any sign in the time of war, by which the Soldier might
be distinguished from spies or strangers, and so might show to what captain or
colors he belonged: so the Creed is the Military sign by which the true
Christian is distinguished from all spiritual spies and forreiners: it is Gods
Watchword.

3. The Motto or Poesy, or word given in men's Arms: so the Creed is the
Christians Motto, his word which is set in his Arms, being made noble in blood
by Christ, and so able to give the Arms of his spiritual house and kindred.

4. A token or Bill of Exchange, by which a man is enabled to trade or receive
commodities: By the Creed the Christian may trade for any spiritual
commodities.

5. A Passeport: Christians are strangers and Pilgrims, a great way from home,
and the government of the Christian world, will not let a man pass without his
authenticke Passeport: Now by his Creed the Christian man may pass and find
entertainment in any part of the Christian world.

As for the name Creed, it is not easy to tell when it first came up in our
Language, but it is certain it comes of the first word which is in Latin
Credo, rendered I believe.

But by the way; if these Articles be a Creed, then they are not a Prayer, nor
to be said as a Prayer, as the ignorant multitude does abuse it

Thus of the Title.

I Believe.
Mark 9. 24.
IN the Creed it self we must consider: first, matter of duty which is in the
word Believe, which is the hand or claspe The Analysis of the whole Creed
that takes hold of all and every of the Articles: secondly, matter of
doctrine, which may be cast into two Heads, as it concerns God or the Church:
for the Lord does not vouchsafe to comber Religion with the whole doctrine that
might concern the estate of all men out of the Church: concerning God, the
Articles look upon all three persons: and in the doctrine of the Father,
amongst his attributes, singles out his Almightinesse; and amongst his works,
looks upon his making of Heaven and Earth. In Christ faith looks upon his
Person and his Office. In his Person it acknowledges his divine Nature as Gods
only Son; and his humane Nature in these two words (viz.) conception by the
holy Ghost, and birth of a Virgin. His Office is considered according to his
estate both of Humiliation and Exaltation. In his Humiliation is considered his
sufferings: first, in body in that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was dead
and buried; and then in soul, in that he descended into Hell: In his
Exaltation, faith viewes his Resurrection, Ascension, and Session at the right
hand of God, and his coming to Judgment. Concerning the holy Ghost, the
Church has retained and maintained that truth in all ages without any great
opposition, and therefore that Article is very barely set down: the greatest
quarrels were raised either by Gentiles against the doctrine of God the
Father; or by Heretics against the doctrine of Christ the Son; which made
faith speak out more distinctly in the doctrine of these two persons. Thus of
God.

Concerning the Church, two things are to be noted: Properties or Privileges.
Her properties are two, holy and Catholic. The goods or Privileges of the
Church are either in this world, or in the world to come. In this world there
is Communion of Saints and forgiveness of sins. In another world faith sees
and wonders at the Resurrection of the body and the life Everlasting.

I Believe.]

This word I believe, is not a word only of a Christian addressing himself to
lay hold upon these treasures contained in the Articles following, but it is
the word of a man making answer: The question is suppressed, but the Answer is
expressed: for as it is true that a true believer is often questioned, so it is as
true, that by his Creed, he answers all that can be said to him: for here is
contained, that Answer of a good conscience spoken of 1. Pet. 3. 2^.

This form of answering came first in at Baptism in the Primitive Church: for
before the party to be baptized was admitted unto Baptism, he was examined
(as the Eunuch was by Philip) and did answer by making confession of his faith
in this or the like form. Neither is this the answer of the Christian at the
time of his Baptism only, but all the days of his life: for if God ask him,
what he has to do to take his words into his mouth, or what he makes among
his servants? or if the devil ask him, why he lives not in his sins, or
contrariwise, why he dispaires not, or why he entertaines doctrines of which
their can be no Reason given? or if the Law ask him, what shift he can make
with all his sins, having broken every Law; and with all the curses due to him
for his sins? or if the world ask him, why he lives so retiredly, and keeps
not company with the men of the world, and seeks not, or admires not the
pleasures of life, or the honors and favors of great men, or the Riches of
this world, and why he suffers so much disgrace, and affliction, which he
might avoid if he would do as other men do? to all or any of these or the
like questions, he still answers, I believe in God, etc.

Belief or Faith is diversely accepted: sometimes it is taken for fidelity or
faithfulness, or assent: and this sense it has among the Philosophers
aswellas among the Divines that are Christians, but all the other senses
following it has only among Christian Divines. And so it is taken sometimes
for the doctrine of faith, 1. Cor. 13. 13. Phil. 1. 27. sometimes for the
profession of faith, and so Simon Magus believed: sometimes for the things
believed, 1. Tim. 1. 19. Jude 3. But most usually for the gift by which we
believe, and so it is taken here.

But what is it to believe these Articles? it is not to guess at them that they
are true, or to conceive some probable hope that they may be justified; nor is
it, to say them over; nor is it only to live in such places where such
doctrines are taught and defended: but to believe, must have these six things
distinctly in it: for to believe, is,

1. To understand the meaning and sense of these Articles: this is so necessary
as it is impossible we should believe, when we know not what it is we
believe: yet this is the least thing in faith.

2. It is to assent to all this doctrine that it is the Truth.

3. It Is to esteem and like this doctrine above all other kinds of doctrine
in the world, which is contrary or different from it, and accordingly to joy in
it, and be much affected with it.

4. It Is to profess it, and openly to declare my self resolved to live and
die in the belief of this doctrine: and so this profession has in it two
things: first, a Separation from such societies of men as receive not this
faith: secondly, Apology for it, so as to defend it, and contend for it, Phil.
1. 27. Jude 3.

5. It Is yet more, and that is, to rest in the happiness contained in this
doctrine of the Creed, as it contains all that excellent treasure which is
sufficient for our eternal salvation, and our chi^fe good.

6. It Is lastly, to join our selves to true believers, as to the only
excellent people in the world, with sincere affection to them, and desire of
fellowship with them: for this is such a faith as works by love.

So that this believing here, has in it all the three faithes spoken of by
Divines; for to understand and assent is the work of Historical faith: To
esteem and profess is the work of temporary faith: To rest upon this
happiness by Christ, and to join in hearty fellowship with the godly, is the
work of justifying faith.

Now, because some of these things in believing may be found in reprobates as
well as the Elect, and that the heart of man is exceeding deceitful in the
point of faith, and the devil applied his temptations, with all subtilty and
power, to deceive men in their believing, therefore unto these things which are
comprehended within the nature of the believing here mentioned, I add the
distinct consideration of such things as must be found in the manner of our
believing: we must look to it how we believe these Articles, for we may be
many ways deceived: for,

1. We must believe them with the heart, and not confess them with the mouth
only, Romans 10. 10. and to believe them with our hearts, is to believe them in
deed, not in show; to believe them voluntarily, not upon compulsion; to
believe them affectionately, not coldely, or dully: our faith must be a lively
faith, not a dead faith.

2. We must believe them personally; each one must have his own faith: It Is
not enough to join our selves to such men as do believe them, but every one
must get him a faith of his own: The Just must live by his own says, Hab. 2.
5. and therefore we say I believe, not they believe, or we believe: We say, our
Father when we pray, because we may pray one for another; but we say not we
believe, because we cannot believe one for another.

3. We must believe, explicitly, not implicitly: It was one principle in the
Kingdom of Antichrist to the intent that the people might be kept in
blindness, to teach them, that it was enough for them to believe, as the
Church believed, without inquiring into particulars: and therefore they tell a
tale to this end, how the devil tempting a man, and urging him to tell how he
believed, the man answered, as the Church believed; and the devil asking him
how the Church believed, he answered as I do, and hereupon the devil ran
away and was vanquished. And it may well be, the devil durst ask him no more
questions, for fear least he should get out of his Snare, now that by these
answers, he had made it manifest he was fast in: for he that takes not in the
doctrine of faith par^icularly, takes it not in at all: for as the Child may
starve though you set before it a whole loaf of bread or other provision, if
you cut it not for him, bit by bit, so is it with us in believing: To set the
body of faith before us, and not teach us how, after it is divided, to take any
part, is to starve our souls. To be short then, we must look to it, that we
understand and believe these Articles not in the whole lump only, but in the
parts; not by trusting to other men's judgments, but distinctly taking notice
of each doctrine of faith our selves.

4. We must believe all the Articles of the faith totally, not in some parts
only; faith is copulative here: we must believe all or none. He cannot be
sound in the faith, that is corrupted in his judgment about any these
Articles: faith, that is, a sound faith believes all that is written.

5. We must believe with application. It is not enough to believe, that these
doctrines are true, or good, but we must believe that they belong to each of
us in particular, or else we shall have little profit or comfort by them. What
can it comfort us to believe that these things are, or that others shall have
the benefit of them, if they belong not to us? Thus I must believe that I have
the benefit of Gods power or providence, and of Christ's Incarnation and
Passion, and exaltation, and that I am a member of the Church, and have my
part in his privileges. This is a maine thing to be attained; for a reprobate
may go so far, to believe that these doctrines are true.

6. We must believe with all Christian simplicity: which should have two things
in it: first, we must cast away all trust in our own merits: It is a
compounded and corrupted faith that believes any of these things upon the
persuasion of his own merits or deserts: To believe aright, and merit cannot
stand together: true faith casts out merit. For, if they which are of the law
inherit any of these treasures, then faith is void, and the promise and gift of
Gods grace of none effect, Romans 4. 14. secondly, we must believe so, as we will
give glory to God, though the things to be believed, be never so unlikely to
carnal reason, or be things absent, and not yet given, or things above our
understanding in the full glory of them, our faith must not be curious or
unquiet, to bind God to give us a reason of his promises or actions. Herein we
must take heed, that the Serpent beguile us not, nor seduce us from the
simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, 2. Cor. 11. 3. Yea this is the glory and
triumph of faith, in these things without doubting to give glory to God. Our
faith must be the substance of things hoped for, and the demonstration of
things not seen. We must believe eternal life, though we must die; and a
blessed resurrection, though we shall be rotten in the grave; and that we are
Justified, though sin yet dwell in us; and that we are blessed, though yet
exposed to much miseries, etc.

7. We must believe with full assurance; we must not waver or doubt, but be
fully resolved and established in the persuasion of these things and our right
in them, Colos. 2. 2. 1. These. 1. 4. this we ought to labor for, and this may
be had, and therefore we should give all diligence to get this full assurance
of faith: I grant that a less degree of faith, may be true faith, as shall be
showed afterward, but yet this is that which we should strive for, that we may
effectually glorify God by believing.

8. We must believe with perseverance: we must so give entertainment to these
sacred truths, now, as that we also mean to live and die in this faith. The
faith that is temporary will little avail us, we must so provide that our
faith may last to the end. And therefore the word is I do believe, in the
present time, not I have believed, or I will believe, to note, that there must
be no time wherein a Christian may truly say now I believe not. Now that we
may not be deceived herein, we must look to three things. First, that we cast
off all carnal ends in our profession of faith: and look to it that we take
not up the profession of religion for sinister respects, as many have done, for
such ends as these, to wit, to get credit, and the favor of men, or to make
themselves capable of the preferment of this world, or to show their gifts; or,
which is worse, to cover secret wicked practices, or open faults.

Secondly, that we build not our Faith upon wrong Causes or grounds, such as
are the respect of any man's person or opinion or the intising words of men's
wisdom, or the mere colors and probabilities of men's arguments; but be sure
we place our Faith upon the Word of God.

Thirdly, that we be not deceived with the seeming effects of Faith, but learn
to distinguish between the force of the Word upon our hearts, when we are
merely as it were patients, and the force of the Word working a habit or
action in us. I express my meaning thus: Many a man lives in a place, where
the word is taught in the power and glory of it, comes to hear without any
care, or purpose to regard, or profit by it; yet the truth in the delivery of
it so shines in his heart, that he is not only convinced, but for the time
delighted, and hears with great gladness, as feeling his heart to be warmed
with the doctrine he hears: yet cares not for it when he is gone away, nor
makes any use of it at all, as being destitute of any gift by which he should
receive or apply the doctrine: so that this heat in his heart did not arise
from any habit in him receiving the Word and making use of it, but only from
the forcible penetration of the doctrine. As a stone that is heated by the
beams of the Sun, that neither had heat in it self before, nor keeps heat
when the Sun has done shining, but is a mere patient. Now this hearer has
not so much as a temporary Faith: for he that has the temporary Faith, has
a kind of habit be gotten in him, so as he does receive the doctrine, and
keep it after a sort, and from the force of it so kept, does bring forth some
fruit; and so the seed received into his heart, is like grass upon the house
top, or seed sown in stony places, where there is a little earth mingled
withal: whereas he that believes aright, and so will hold out, has the
natural stoninesse of his heart dissolved by the word, and is so affected with
it for the present, that he receives it so as it tarrieth in him, and grows in
him, and he brings forth the sound fruit of Reformation of life: and his seed
abides in him, it cannot utterly be destroyed, but Faith in him is like the
tree of life, that will every year bring new fruit: Whereas in Nature the
corn that is sown, after one harvest is destroyed, in respect of that
particular grain that was sown. Nor may any say, that he cannot know whether
he shall hereafter keep his Faith; he can judge of his Faith what it is now:
for, if he get a sound Faith it will keep, and besides, he believes with
perseverance, that does resolve for ever to rest in that Faith, simply for the
evidence, worth, and use of the doctrine believed, for he that has but a
temporary faith, as he does receive doctrine, but for certain advantages, or
carnal ends, so can he not get his heart at that very time, to a resolution to
cleave eternally to that doctrine of Gods grace.

9. It is not yet innough to resolve to keep the faith, and to preserve the
doctrine, but we must look to it, that we lay it up in a clean place, which
is a pure Conscience, 1 Timothy 3. 9. and that we keep it there clean from the
mixtures of men's devises: being curious in the businesses of our faith, to let
in no private interpretations, but to resolve to believe only as Gods word
does bid us believe: we must take heed, and not admit carelessly any
interpretations of the Articles of our faith, that any sort of men will bring
to us, but we must still have an eye to Gods word, to see all expounded by the
word, 2 Pet. 1. 20. 19. 16. we must receive nothing here, no not in the least
part of the apparrelling of these truths, which is not agreeable to some
pattern in the book of God.

Lastly, we must believe these Articles, but not all with one kind of faith:
for some of these things we believe in; that is, place our trust and
confidence, and all hope of happiness in them; so we believe in God, and in
Jesus Christ, and in the holy Ghost: but other things we do not believe in,
but believe, as the properties and privileges of the Church, as we may
discern by the difference of speaking in the Creed. We say I believe in God,
but do not say, I believe in the holy Church, etc.

The use may be first, for information: we may hence gather that there are but
few sound Christians in any place: there are but few that believe their Creed,
observing all the duties and conditions required in belief, and consequently,
but few that receive the benefit of the Gospel, or that shall be saved. This
will appear if a Trial could be made even in the places that are most
populous, and abound most with Christians in name. For, if all the sorts of men
be cast out, that have not a faith agreeable to this doctrine, there will be
but a few left: as for instance.

1. Cast out all such worldly minded people as have not at all regarded their
Creed or the Doctrine contained in it: undoubtedly some such there are, who
scarce learned their Creed at all, and live so without God in the world, as
they never regarded Religion at all with their hearts.

2. Cast out all such as understand not their Creed, many can say the words,
who yet never were instructed concerning the meaning, and have not any
competent measure of knowledge concerning the sense of the Articles. Now it is
impossible these should be true believers.

3. Cast out such as know perhaps the meaning, but assent not to the doctrine:
They cannot tell whether these things be true or no: nor how to approve them;
and is there not in all places diverse men, that are of this humor? are there
not men that will be of any Religion? That are temporizers?

4. Cast out such as believe that all the doctrines be true, but it is by such
a says as the devils have: for the devils believe the doctrines to be true,
but so, as they hate it, and the teaching of it, and all such as thrive in
knowledge and profession of it. Are there not multitudes of people with us,
that discover this kind of devilish quality? do they not from their hearts
loath preaching? do they not from their hearts hate such as are the best
believers? do they not readily and spitefully speak evil of such as fear
God in every place? these cannot be right, that believe loathing.

5. Cast out such as believe with a dead faith: that is such as find no manner
of fear, nor virtue, nor operation in these doctrines: but can take in a great
deal of the literal knowledge of these truths, and yet it has no power to
work upon their hearts: These have not so much faith as the devils have; for
they believe and tremble, that is they are afrighted and extremely amazed at
the thought of the fulfilling and accomplishment of these truths, considering
their own misery. Whereas multitudes of Christians, hear of belief, and
talk of these things, and are not a whit moved either with fear or sorrow.

6. Cast out such as have but a temporary faith. And in them consider: first,
what they have in their faith, and then by what things it may be manifest that
their faith is insufficient: for the first, these men are not altogether
without faith, they have knowledge of the meaning of the doctrine of the
Gospel, they assent to it and are assured it is the truth and can prove it,
and they hate not the doctrine but rather like it and love it. And besides,
their belief of these things works much upon them: for they hear the Word
with Joy, Mat. 13. yea and are moved and persuaded to reform their lives, and
by it escape much filthiness which is in others and was in themselves, 2. Pet.
2. 20. and they do join themselves to, and keep company openly with such as
fear God, as Judas and Demas did with the Apostles: and do spend much time in
reading the Scriptures and good books, and may be forward to reprove or punish
vice and wickedness in other men as Iehu was, and yet all this
notwithstanding* their faith is vain: which will appear to their consciences
if they consider these things in them:

1. That they believe not with application to themselves: They lay not hold on
these things by a particular faith. They place not their happiness in the
persuasion of their interest in these truths.

2. That they are not reformed in the^ beloved or gainefull sins: there be
some sins they know by themselves which they desire not to leave, and
therefore never repented of them. Judas would not leave his covetousness, nor
Herod his lust, nor Iehu his Idols, etc.

3. That they are apt to fall away from the liking they have of Religion, which
they may find in themselves when they are at the best, if they examine
themselves in these questions. Whether for these things they would loose the
favor of their carnal friends, and their credit in the world? whether they
would suffer for these things if times of persecution should come? whether if
they might have their hearts desire in worldly or sinful things, they would
not aband on the care of these things? And they may find it by this, that if
they fall out with any that are the chief for Religion in the places where
they live, they meditate not only a forsaking of such as they are fallen out
withal, but even a relin quishing of their forwardness or care for profession
of religion it self: those that find such corruption in their hearts, had
need to take heed to their standing least they fall: for though a timely
reconciliation with men, restore them to their former course of profession
again, yet this trial of their hearts, may tell them, that at length for such
or the like occasions they will fall clean away, if they get not better
footing in the Kingdom of God.

4. That all this profession is undertaken for carnal and corrupt ends: as
either to get credit with religious persons, or to avoid the penal Laws of
Princes, or to cover some vices they are prone to, or guilty of, or to
advantage their estates in worldly things, or out of desire to excel others in
gifts or the like.

5. That the joy which they feel is but a false joy and unsound: which
appears both by the causes of it, and by the effects. By the causes, for they
joy in hearing the Word for these or the like reasons: because the doctrine is
new, or because it is handled with unexpected learning or wit, or because it
fits their humors or affections, or because it is doctrine that is generally
comfortable, and sets out the happiness of such as are of their Religion, or
because the things spoken of are admirable in themselves, or because the
doctrine makes against such and such as he likes not. And such as are the
causes, such are the effects. For this joy makes them more proud, and
careless, and conceited, and contemptuous many times of others. Whereas the
true joy arises from the solid application of the things heard to himself,
and from the persuasion of his right unto these comforts by and through Jesus
Christ. And withal this joy does soften the heart, as the dew from Heaven does
the ground, and makes the true Christian more humble and mortified, and more
desirous to be rid of sin, and more to love God, and goodness, and godly men.

Now if all these sorts be cast out, it is easy to conjecture, that few will
remain to be reckoned for true believers.

Secondly, this doctrine of believing should move all sorts of men in the
Visible Church, to try and examine themselves 2. For Trial.
whether they be in the faith or no, 2. Cor. 13. 5. And to this end every
Christian may profitably employ himself, if in his examination he look to
four things: Four ways of trial. The contraries of says.


1. He must be sure, that he be not guilty of any of the things that be
repugnant to faith: There are some things so contrary to faith, that where they
are, faith is not. Such as are,

1. Natural infidelity, whereby the heart is not only void of 1. (...).
the knowledge and belief of God and true Religion; but also when the means
of knowledge is offered, has habitual struglings and desires that there were
neither God, nor any bond of Religion.

2. Carnal security, when the soul is at rest, and securely contemnes Gods
Justice in the threatenings against his sins. 2. Security.


3. Resisting of the truth, when men that daily hear the Word, 3. (...).
do with hatred of the truth either oppose it outwardly, or reject it inwardly.

4. Presumption and confidence in our own strength, works, merits,
righteousness, or worthiness. 4. Presumption.


5. A professed resolution against the assurance of faith, when 5. Professed
doubting.
men bring in an Academicall doubting, and persuade themselves that no man
ordinarily can know or be assured of his Salvation.

6. Notorious wickedness and profaneness, when men drown 6. Wickedness of life.
themselves in lewd courses, and follow their lusts without care or remorse.

7. Apostacy, when men fall away from the Religion they have 7. (...).
professed, with a Total disregarde of the known truth.

8. A general kind of wavering in the doctrine of faith and 8. Wavering.
continual unsettledness both of judgment and affection.

9. Desperation, when a man rages, and is tormented with the 9. Desperation.
horror of Gods Justice, without respect of Gods Glory or any hope, or desire,
or prayer for Gods Mercy in Christ.

He therefore that would try whether he have a true belief or no, must in the
first place try whether none of these contraries of faith possess not his
soul: for if they do, it is certain he has not faith.

2. He must carefully separate and distinguish faith from such things; as have
some kind of likeness, or agreement with it, and yet are not faith: In his
Trial he must take heed, that he take not some other thing for faith: such
as are, rash Credulity, Hypocritical profession, Presumption, opinion, humane
Knowledge, experience, or Hope. For the first, there is a light kind of assent
which men give unto doctrines in Religion, without any knowledge of the warrant
and proof of them from Scripture: whatsoever effects this Credulity have, yet
is it not faith, because that is ever grounded upon the Word of God. Nor may
he mistake an outward hypocritical profession of the true Religion for faith:
Profession of Religion, when it is destitute of the love of God, hatred of
sin, trust in Christ's merits, charity to men, and patience in afflictions,
do no way commend a man to God, much less is it true faith. Thirdly, many
Christians entertain Presumption insteede of faith: They are resolved upon it,
that God is their Father, and Christ died for them, and they are the children
of God and true Christians, and all this without any word of God rightly
applied. Fourthly, Opinion in matters of Religion may be taken by some for
faith, but yet it is not: for Opinion is natural, faith supernatural and
given of God: Opinion is founded upon humane testimony, faith upon divine:
Opinion is doubtful and wavering, faith is firm and certain. Fifthly, nor
may humane Knowledge be taken for faith; for though they agree in this, that
they are both employed about things true, and such things as sense cannot reach
to, yet they differ manifestly: faith is Gods gift, and a light supernatural:
but knowledge is a habit gotten by us, through the help of the sparkles of the
light of nature, and exercise, and teaching: for the comprehending of the
things of faith, there is daily need of the inspiration and illumination and
quickening of Gods spirit: But the things of knowledge may be attained by the
force of man's own wit and industry: faith is grounded upon the truth and power
of God, besides and above the strength of nature, and the judgment of the
whole world: Knowledge is grounded upon natural causes and principles, to omit
other differences. Sixthly, nor must that persuasion which arises from
experience, and the fulfilling of things be taken for true faith, because faith
lays hold upon things before the event also, Heb. 11. 1. Nor lastly, is faith
and hope all one, for faith sees Christ exhibited, and present in the Word and
Sacrament, Hope looks for him to be revealed from Heaven: Faith believes what
God has promised, and Hope waits for performance, faith is assured of
eternal life, and Hope expects it to be revealed: Faith is the foundation of
Hope, and Hope is the nurse of faith. Thus he must cast out things that are
only like unto faith but are not faith.

3. When he has thus cast out the contraries of faith, and finds himself
free from them, and withal has provided that he is not deceived with the
things that have a likeness unto faith and are not, he must then in the third
place, look to it that he take not a wrong faith for the right faith: for
there be many kinds of faith, and one only that is the faith that will
justify us before God: and so the right faith is not,

1. That political faith, which is a virtue employed about humane 1. Fides
politica.
contracts and societies: to believe aright, is more then to be faithful in
promises, or to be trusty in employments, or to be just in our dealings, or
to keep our words to men.

2. Among the faithes that are found only in the Church, it is not the
Symbolicall faith, that has nothing in it, but an outward 2. Symbolica.
auouching or professing of the true Religion.

3. Nor is it contained in that faith called Historical, which has 3.
Historica.
nothing but the understanding and assent unto the word that it is true, but
wants application and life.

4. Nor is it that temporary faith, of which was entreated before: but is such
a belief as contains in it all the six things 4. Temporaria.
before mentioned.

5. Nor is it that faith they call a Moral faith, by which a man 5. Fides
moralis, which some call Credulitas charitatiua.
believes out of charity, that other men are Gods Elect and true Christians.

Lastly, when he has freed his heart from the mistakings may arise from any of
the former, he must then try himself by the direct signs of a complete and
effectual faith, and these things which essentially belong to the true
believer: and so a man may have comfort that he is a true believer.

1. If he can show the warrant of his faith, from the Testimony of Gods Word
in the Scriptures: A man may then comfort himself that he is not deceived in
his faith, when he is able to prove these doctrines of faith by the evidence
of Gods Word, Acts 17. 10. 11.

2. If he believe these Truths also with Application to himself.

3. If he find his heart so established, that he can resolve to suffer for
his faith, and can abide the Trial of reproaches, losses, or any Persecution
from the world, and this he can endure simply for the love of God, and the
truth, and not for carnal or corrupt ends, Phil. 1. 2^.

4. If he find in his heart and life, the lively fruits and effects of faith:
such as are,

1. Solid and true joy and comfort: The true believer carries his heaven about
him, when he carries his Creed in his heart. These doctrines are as a daily
spring of rejoicing upon all occasions: and these joys are glorious and
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. ^. Phil. 1. 25. It is otherwise with the hypocrite and
unbeliever: for he through unbelief carries his hell about him: And for want
of this Sunshine of comfort is daily and secretly afrighted, and disquieted in
himself: Yea, these very doctrines of faith many times torment his soul.

2. A combat with the unregenerate part: If these doctrines be rightly
believed, a man shall find in himself, that these truths do resist and
fight against the corruptions of our own nature, even the most secret evils
of our hearts, and will not rest till they have mastered the flesh wi^h the
lusts thereof, or else they cause unspeakable sighs and groans and sorrow
after God, for the presence and power of rebellious corruptions: The true faith
will by no means brook the polluted and evil disposition of the heart, Acts
15. 9.

3. The liberty of the heart from that banishment and imprisonment in which it
lived before without God: so as now by the light and encouragement of these
truths, the heart discernes Gods free grace in calling us to his presence, and
is well persuaded of God, and therefore daily with an holy boldness goes unto
God in the use of his ordinances by the direction and assistance of his spirit,
Ephesians. 3. 12. Romans 5. 2. and 8. 38. 2. Cor. 3. 4. Gal. 4. 6.

4. The life of the soul: for true faith is the eye, hand, mouth, tongue,
teeth, stomach and heat of the soul, by which Christ is received and
digested, and that daily, by which food the soul lives for ever, Romans 1.
17. Hebrews 10. 37.

5. Victory over the world and worldly Relations and respects: for he that
truly belieues these things, knows no man after the flesh, and can deny
himself in his profits pleasures, credit, hopes or the like.

It overcomes both the trust in these things and the lusts after them, and
the temptations that arise from them, 1. Ioh. 5. 4*

6. Peace of conscience: The right knowledge and belief of these doctrines
breeds such an inward tranquillity, as passes all understanding of all men that
have not this belief, Romans 5. ^.

7. Good works, even all sorts of fair fruits: Even the fruits of love
toward God, in the duties of Piety to God, and love toward men, in the duties
of Mercy and Righteousness. This belief is the root; and the works of love
are the fruits of it: And these works it sets a man about with a desire and
resolution to obey God in all things, and that though it be opposed by devils
or men, Gal. 5. 6. The light of this faith gives a daily heat unto Charity,
Iam. 3. 17.

8. Hope and expectation of the singular glory of God in the treasures of a
better life. Which hope has such a power in the heart, that the believer is
not ashamed of any thing can befall him for the profession of his faith, Gal.
5. 5. Romans 5. 3. Heb. 11. 13. 25, 26, 35. 36, 37.

9. Confession of the glory of Gods Mercy and Power: The belief of these
things makes the dumb man speak in the celebration of Gods praises: The
mercy of God is never seen nor magnified with any life till faith come into
the heart: because we have believed therefore we speak, 2. Cor. 4. 13.

10. Contentation in all estates, Phil. 4. 11. and thus Faith is tried by the
effects.

Finally, men that have faith may know it by the Testimony of the holy Ghost
in them: He that believes has a witness in himself, even Gods spirit that
daily incourageth him in the knowledge of his right in these Truths, 1. Ioh.
5. 10. Thus of the second use.

Thirdly, the doctrine of Faith to such as can by these signs Use 3.
find it to be in them, is exceeding comfortable: such as have a true faith
should wonderfully rejoice in it: and the rather if they consider,

1. That Faith is a special gift of God bestowed of his free grace, John 6.
29. Romans 12. 3. Ephesians. 2. 8. Credere doni est non meriti. Aug.


2. That it is a gift that God bestows only upon his Elect, and therefore the
right Faith is called the Faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1. 1.

3. That it is given to all the Elect at one time or other: It is not given
only to Abraham or David or the like Eminent men: but is common to all sorts
of true Christians, Tit. 1. 4.

4. That it is a most precious gift: A gift which does wonderfully enrich a
Christian, and exalt him above all other men that have not Faith: as Reason
makes us to excel beasts, so does Faith make us excel men. And this will the
more manifestly appear, if we consider the singular effects of Faith.

The effects wrought by Faith have bin either extraordinary in some men, or
ordinary in every true believer. It has done extraordinary things in some men:
as it has carried some men to Heaven alive without dying: as Henoch and Elias,
Heb. 11. 5. Some men that had it could have removed mountains, and did
miraculously heal diseases, and raise dead men: but because these effects are
ceased, I pass from them, and consider only of the ordinary effects such as
are wrought by it in every believer: and these I call ordinary effects, not to
abase their singular glory but to distinguish them from the former effects.

Great are the things which Faith works, either to the Christian himself, or
to others.

To himself it brings and procures admirable things; for:

1. It Iustifies him, Romans 3. It makes him as righteous as ever Adam was: It is
accepted in stead of the righteousness of the Law, Romans 10. It clothes a man
with the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

2. It ingraffs the Believer into Jesus Christ: It is the bond that ties us to
Christ, and in Christ to God: by faith we are made members of his body.

3. It procures our adoption to be the sons of God: and so makes us greater
persons then if we were borne of the greatest bloods amongst men, John 1. 12.

4. It brings Christ to dwell in our hearts by his spirit, Ephesians. 3. 17.

5. It makes us capable and assured to obtain whatsoever we ask of God: It
obtaines many and matchless suits in Gods Court, Mark. 11. 24. Ephesians. 3. 12.
Heb. 10. 22.

6. It makes our works acceptable to God; whereas without it our best works
were unpleasing to God, Heb. 11. 6.

7. It obtains the greatest and best reputation: It breeds a good report,
Heb. 11. 39.

8. It is our life: we live by the faith of the son of God, Gal. 2. 20. and
it is our life, partly as it establishes upon us the assurance of a better
life, by applying and laying hold on the promises of God that concern eternal
life, John 3. 16. and partly as it feeds upon Jesus Christ, the most
sovereign nourishment for our souls: for, by faith we eat his flesh, and
drink his blood, John 6. and partly as it makes the means of natural life
to become blessed to us; for man lives not by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God: and besides, it gives us interest to
Gods promises that concern the blessings of this life; for in outward
blessings it is to us according to our faith. And partly, as by it, we are
kept to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. so as our faith will never leave us till we
receive the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9.

9. It obtains many and great victories, and triumphs in this world: and this
will the more evidently appear, if we consider seriously how many things are
opposed against the faith of every Christian: as the temptations of Satan,
which sometimes are like fiery darts, doubts, and fears, sense of daily
sins, the threatenings of the Law, the many chastisements of God, false
doctrine of all sorts, the dissentions of Teachers in the Christian Churches,
the perfidiousnesse of false brethren, impuritie in sin, the prosperity of
the wicked, the fewness of true believers, the contemptiblenesse of the Church
in the world, the falling away of many professors, the scorns of the world,
the delay of the performance of Gods promises, and such like: and yet faith
makes us daily against all these more then Conquerors.

What shall I say? All things are possible to him that believes, and Faith
procures more for us then Reason can Tantum possumus quantum credimus. Cypr.
reach to, Ephesians. 3. 19. 20.

Besides these effects which it works for the happiness of the believer
himself, it works strange and great things for others; for it brings his
seed and posterity into covenant with God: the believing parents make their
seed holy, 1 Cor. 7. Genesis 17. and the prayers of the believer procures great
and wonderful things many times for others, and besides, many times it keeps
of grievous Judgments, which else would fall upon wicked men in the places
where the believer lives.

Lastly, unto all the former Consolations, this may be added, that the faith of
the true believer shall not fail, but continue to the end. The seed of faith
will abide in him, 1 John 3. 9. Christ has prayed that faith may not fail,
Luke 22. 23. Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. 2 These. 1. 11. Phil. 1. 6. Romans 11. 29. Thus of
the Consolations.

As the doctrine of faith is exceeding comfortable unto the Use 4.
true believer: so it imports extreme terror and misery unto all such as are
destitute of true faith: for the unbeliever is no Christian; for the Christians
were called believers, to show that then a man was a true Christian, when he
was a true believer: By the right belief of these Articles men hold their
Christendom. Besides, till faith come into a man's heart he is shut up under
the arrests of the Law, and lies in a spiritual prison, charged with all the
breaches of Gods Law, which are debts impossible for him to pay, Gal. 3. 22.
And further without Faith it is impossible he should please God, and all he
does is sin, Heb. 11. 6. but which is most grievous, this unbelief will be
his eternal destruction: for this is the condemnation of worlds of men, that
they believe not in the light, but love darkness rather then light, John 3.
16. 17. 18. Mark 16.

Yea, there is matter also of humiliation unto many true believers, for not
looking better to their faith: and so godly men offend:

1. When they labor not to know their own faith, when they will not try
their estates, and make it sure they have Faith.

2. When they seek not help for the diseases and weaknesses of their Faith,
but being often assaulted with doubting are so sluggish as they will not seek
found resolution for their doubts.

3. When they instruct not their Faith in the particulars of Gods treasures,
nor employ it to a daily vnlocking of the riches contained in the Chists of
Gods particular promises.

4. When they esteem not Faith, but through unthankfulness smother the
acknowledgement of Gods singular gift herein.

5. When they weary their faith with doub^full disputations and will not
direct it to the study of necessary and glorious truths.

6. When they lead not out their Faith to train it in the day of peace
against the day of battle: when they ^^y not up provision against the evil
day, and do not before hand instruct their Faith how to hold out when trial
comes.

7. When men believe not so heartily, and with such full assurance as becomes
the excellency of the doctrines of Faith.

8. When Faith is kept idle, and men do not daily exercise their Faith about
the success and crosses of their callings, and about the labor and works of
love.

Lastly many Instructions necessarily depend upon this doctrine Use 5.
of Faith: for,

1. Such as want Faith should be effectually moved to use all courses to get
them a sound Faith: and there are many things may move men to believe, and
help to breed Faith: as,

First, men must effectually consider upon Motives unto faith on Gods part: and
especially such as are taken from his mercy and goodness: to think on it how
good and gracious God is, should make men believe his promises, and receive his
grace offered: and the rather, if they seriously ponder upon these things in
Gods goodness. First, that it is free: he stands not upon desert: he offers
love love to his very enemies, Romans 5. 10. Secondly, it is exceeding great,
able to forgive all sin and supply all wants, Psalm. 36. and 108. 5. Ephesians. ^.
4. 1. Pet. 1. 3. Thirdly it is inuiting: God does offer his mercy, he sends
abroad his Proclamations to offer pardon and favor in the Gospel, yea he
beseeches men to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. Fourthly, it is indefinite,
he offers Mercy to all sorts of men, to the World, to every creature, Col. 3.
11. Ioh. 3. 16. Mark 16. 16. F^fthly, it is natural: It is not against his
nature, as it is for a covetous man to be bountiful. Mercy pleases him, Micha
7. 18. He was never angry with any for believing, but extremely displeased
with men for not believing, John 3. 16. 17.

Secondly, men must carefully avoid all the lets of faith, and mark what
keeps them from believing: Whether it be any beloved sin, or some venomous
objections, or the cares of the world, and the fond excuses that belong
thereunto, or carnal wisdom and self conceitednesse in hearing the Word, or
procrastination, or corrupt opinions, about the possibility or necessity of
believing, or the like: and in particular some Christians must be warned of
that strange impediment, namely, when men judge themselves unworthy of Eternal
life, and so put off the promises of God through unbelief.

Thirdly, men must attend upon the means of begetting Faith, they must compel
upon themselves the care thereof: They must pray God to give them the spirit of
Faith, and to help their unbelief: They must cry to God with tears for this
thing, Mark 9. 24. and withal, they must attend to the Word of Faith, which
is the Gospel, so waiting upon the public Ministry, as they study the
promises of God exactly, and seek resolution of their doubts, and direction
about Faith in private.

Thus concerning such as want Faith.

Secondly, such as have Faith must be careful to look to these things,

1. They must with all watchfulness keep their Faith as they would keep
their lives: providing that they may abide in the Faith to the end, and never
deny their first Faith, 1. Tim. 1. 19. Acts 14. 22. 1. Tim. 5. 12.

2. They must be careful to employ their Faith, both every day by learning how
to live by Faith and in the times of trial to see to it, that they cast not
away their confidence. Yea, he should strive to show forth such a power of
believing in all the effects of it, that his Faith may be spoken of through the
World, Gal. 2. 20. Heb. 10. 35. Romans 1.

Hitherto of the maine body of the doctrine of believing with the Uses. Before
I pass from it, It will be profitable to answer certain questions that may
arise in men's minds about believing.

Quest. 1. Whether the Apostles would have us believe no Quest.
more then is contained in the Creed, seeing the Creed is called their Creed?
Answ. All doctrines of Faith may be reduced some way to the Articles of Faith
in the Creed, as being either expressed or Answ.
employed there. We are bound to believe all things written in the Prophets and
Apostles books, that is, so far as they are revealed unto us. But the
doctrines contained in the Creed, are such as none may be ignorant of without
danger of damnation: simple Ignorance in other truths is not damnable, so as
these things be rightly believed.

Quest. 2. How can Faith be said to be one, Ephesians. 4. 5. seeing Quest.
in the manner of setting down the Creed, every Christian has a Faith of his
own, because he says, I believe?
Answ. There is but one Faith in respect of the Object or thing believed, which
is especially the grace of God in Christ, Answ.
which was the particular Object of Faith from the beginning of the world since
the fall. But there are many Faiths or gifts of Faith, in respect of the
Subject, that is, the persons believing: for so there are as many Faiths, as
there are believers.

Quest. 3. Is every Christian bound always to make profession Quest.
of his Faith?
Answ. 1. We must always make profession by our deeds, Answ.
that is, we must always live as becomes the doctrine of Faith.

2. We must in our words never for any cause deny any doctrine of Faith.

3. If we be called upon by lawful Authority, we must give answer to every
man, that asks a Reason of our Faith.

4. In other causes we are bound to make profession in words so far as we
have calling and fitness to do it to the glory of God.

Quest. 4. Whether all true believers do believe these Articles Quest.
alike, with the same measure of Faith?
Answ. No: for Faith is wrought in men by degrees, and so some have a weak
Faith, and some a strong Faith: Faith is Answ.
formed in the soul, as the body is in the womb; for in framing the body in
the womb, there is first the brains and heart, and then the veins, sinews
arteries, and bones, and then afterward all is covered, and filled with flesh
unto a just proportion: So is it in the soul, for first, there is wrought a
small degree of saving knowledge, and spiritual desire after God in Christ,
and then flows from thence the veins and sinews that take hold of the
promises of grace; and lastly, by degrees, as our knowledge and experience
increases, the whole body of Faith grows after a complete manner formed in
us, when our hearts are filled with increase of sound and solid knowledges: but
because this point touches the spiritual freehold of many godly Christians,
I would therefore beat it out more distinctly: And so four things are to be
considered: 1. How it may be known that Faith is weak. 2. How weak Faith,
may be known to be a right Faith. 3. How the believer may be comforted, that
finds he has but a weak Faith. 4. Admonition to him that is weak in the
Faith, not to rest in that condition, for diverse reasons.


For the first, a weak Faith is easily discerned by these signs and the like
to them.

1. By daily doubts of Gods favor, and fears least their estate be not right.

2. By ignorance, not only in many ordinary truths, but in many of the
promises of the Gospel, Matthew 8. 26. and 16. 8.

3. By the hasty and violent unquietness of the heart in adversity, even in
the daily and lesser crosses of life, and by those sudden fears in time of
danger, notwithstanding Gods promise, and the experience of Gods assistance and
deliverance: and by the unrest of the heart if there be not present help,
James 1. 5. 6. Mat. 14. 30. 31. Luke 18. 8.

4. By the daily cares of life, about food and raiment, Mat. 6. 31.

5. Aptness to stagger, and be carried about with the wind of contrary
doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 13.

6. Fear of death.

For the second, a weak Faith may be discerned to be a true Faith by these
signs.

1. By the constant and earnest desire of Gods favor in Christ, Psalm. 10. 17.
Mat. 5. 6. Revel. 21. 6.

2. By their grief for their unbelief, and frequent complaint of it, Mark 9.
24.

3. By their constant desire after the sincere milk of the Word, 1. Pet. 2. 2.

4. By their fear to offend God, in the least evil they know to be a sin.

For the third, the believer may be comforted many ways, though his Faith be
but weak: for,

1. Christ has promised, that he will not break the b^uised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax, Mat. 12. 20.

2. Weak Faith does apply the mercy of God, and the benefits of Christ's death,
as well as a strong Faith: as a weak or paraliticke hand will receive a gift,
as well as a sound and sted die hand: he that has a weak sight, though he see
not so well as he that has a persect sight, yet he sees so much of the light
of the Sun, as may serve his turn to walk safely. Though an Infant cannot
eat so much as a strong man, yet he eats so much as preserues life, and makes
him grow.

3. God has received him that is weak in Faith, Romans 14. 13

4. The power of God is manifested in their weakness, 2. Cor. 12. 9.

Lastly, the weak in Faith must be admonished to look to their Faith, and to
labor for growth: Though God accepts their weak Faith in the beginning of
their conversion, yet he likes not the neglecting of Faith, and continuing in
ignorance and unbelief, Heb. 5. 12. Besides, so long as they continue in
weakness of Faith, they keep themselves without many and singular comforts.
Though weak Faith be sufficient to Salvation, yet it is not sufficient to
consolation.

Hitherto of the Nature of Faith: The ground of Faith were worthy to be
considered: for it is not enough to know that we must believe, or what things
are to be believed, but upon what ground or warrant we do believe it. And so
here I might consider of the Word of God as the ground of Faith or Principium
fidei
original of Faith: for he that will ever prosper in believing these Articles,
must be resolved of these things:

1. That the things he believes are warranted to him by the testimony of God
himself; for no humane testimony of particular men, or of the whole Church,
can be the ground of a man's Faith.

2. That the books of the Prophets and Apostles are the very word of himself,
and so infallible.

3. That the writings of the Prophets and Apostles are every way perfect and
do contain all things necessary to be believed in the matter of his Religion.

4. That he can see how each Article of his Faith is grounded upon the Word of
God.

5. That he will cleave unto this Word of God all the days of his life, as the
principal means of his direction and comfort and of his further increase in
Faith and knowledge; for his knowledge and Faith comes in but by degrees, and
in part, and the truth is opposed by his own reason corrupted, and by the
suggestions of the devil, and by almost infinite varieties of opinions,
against all which he resolves to cleave to the Word of God as his perpetual
warrant.

But because, this principle concerning the Word of God, is not expressed in
the Creed, I will therefore forbear, the proof and explication, and
illustration of these things which concern the Word of God.

And I conceive that this Head of the Word of God was left out in the Creed in
the first Age of the Church, for two reasons. The one was, because as then it
was not questioned so much as the rest of the Articles. But the other Reason is
the most important, and that is, that these doctrines of the Creed though they
be principles, yet are of another sort then these doctrines that concern the
Original, perfection or authority of the Scriptures: for these principles are
conclusions framed, out of those principles concerning the Word: and so
contain a frame of doctrins which are built upon the granting of the former:
or thus they are distinguished from them: These are parts of Theology, whereas
the Word of God, is not a part, but principiu^ cognoscendi, the foundation of
Theology. The doctrines concerning the Scriptures are not properly Articles of
Faith, but grounds or the foundation of Faith. Not things to be believed so
much as things by which we believe.

I Believe in God.
Psalm. 11. 1.
HItherto of our duty in the first word I believe: The doctrine to be believed
follows, and it concerns either God or the Church. The doctrine that
concerns God, looks upon him, either as Father, or Son, or holy Ghost. In
the first Person of the Trinity Faith sees and wonders at his Nature, his
Relation, his Power, and his Works. His Nature in the Word God, his Relation,
in the word Father, his Power, in the word Almighty, and his Works, in the
words, Creator of heaven and earth.

The first thing we are to study to know and believe is God. This is the first
doctrine of the Creed: there are many things should inflame the hearts of
Christians to a great desire after the doctrine concerning God and his nature:
as,

1. It is the most glorious subject of all others in the world: no doctrine can
tell us of such marvelous things as the doctrine of God does.

2. It is the end of our Creation: all other things though made by God, yet
they have no discerning of him. Now God made man, and gave him a reasonable
soul, that he might see God, and the great works he had done; else in the
Visible world, there had bin none to know or praise God: Nothing therefore can
be more contrary to the end of our Creation, then if we spend our time, and do
not labor to know and praise God.

3. The whole doctrine of Religion, is called Theology, which word in the
original, taken a funder, is a speech or doctrine concerning God: to signify,
that without the true knowledge of God, there can be no true Religion or right
understanding of any thing: God is the principal Subject of all Religious
doctrine.

4. Of all doctrines this is most profitable for us: for the doctrines Vt
pecudes a pecudibus absque homine: Sic homo ab hominibus absque deo, gubernari
(...). Tylen.
that concern God, have the most power over our lives to reform them and to
make us careful of good works Colos. 1. 10 and even the more we know of God,
the nearer we come to the perfection of our natures: Besides these doctrine do
fill the heart more then any other truths. Yea, it is eternal life to know
God and Christ: It is Heaven upon Earth: It is the very beginning of the glory
of Heaven, which consists in the Vision of God, Ioh. 17. 3.

5. To want the knowledge of God is extremely base and uncomely for a
Christian. It is a poor thing to be pleased with the knowledge of other
things and be ignorant of God; and the rather, because what we love or admire
in other things that are good, are most perfectly in God and no where else.:
besides, shall we be ignorant of him, from whom we receive al good things, and
from whom al things might make us happy are to be expected? Is not he liberty,
life, glory, sufficiency, blessedness, perfect and holy pleasure and the Rest
of spirits, as a Father says? Further, Bernard.
shall not we know him, that is every where? Can we go no whither from his
presence, and shall we in all places be be still without God, who yet fills
Heaven and Earth? It is a true Theorem in Divinity, that God only has a
being, other things cannot be said to be: Men are the best of visible (...).
creatures, and the Prophet says, all Nations before him are nothing: If men
are nothing, not worthy to be Esaias 40. 17.
reckoned as things that have being, much less other Creatures?

These things are scarce worthy to be said to be, of which it may be said
either it was not, or it will not be: then it will follow: that the knowledge
men get in other things, is to know nothing; then we know something when we
know God: finally, a necessity lies upon us to be rightly informed concerning
God: if to speak or think vilely of men be an offense, what is it to
conceive or think erroniously, or meanly, or basely concerning God?

The consideration of these and such like motives should stir up in us a great
willingness to be taught concerning God: but before I break open the
particular assertions concerning the Nature of our most glorious God, there are
certain general considerations that must take up some Room in our hearts,
and it is profitable for us to approach unto the contemplation of God by
degrees; and therefore by way of Preface, I conceive these things are needful
to be thought on:

1. How hard a thing it is to attain the knowledge of God.

2. By what means the dark heart of man is guided to the understanding of God.

3. How far forth God may be known.

4. What Rules must of necessity be observed by all such as can have any hope
to know God.

For the first: of all knowledges it is the hardest to attain the true
knowledge of God, and there are many things that hinder and hide God from us:
as,

1. The transcendent glory of Gods nature, the brightness of which is such,
that the eyes of our minds are not able to look upon it, much less can any
senses of our bodies attain him, Genesis 32. 29. Judges 13. 18. God is invisible,
we cannot see him: he is ineffable, no words can tell us what he is: we may
reckon a thousand things and yet none of them August.
is God, whether we look about the earth, seas, air, or heavens, God is that
thing which no opinion can reach: He is more then words can tell, or thoughts
can think. God is such a thing, as when we name him, he cannot be named;
Hillarie.
when we go about to estimate him, he cannot be estimated; when we go about
to compare him, he cannot be compared, when we would define him he
increases bigger then any definition. He is greater then all words, then Tert.
all senses, it is peculiar to God to exceed knowledge: we may admire by
silence, but cannot express him by words: Nissen.
and the Reason is, that which is finite can hold no proportion with that which
is infinite. And therefore he that would define God had need to have Gods
Logic, for no man's Logic can reach to it: for though nothing be more present
every where then God yet nothing is more incomprehensible. God is immense, and
therefore who can tell (as one says) the length of his Eternity, or the
breadth Bern.
of his Love, or the height of his Majesty, or the depth of his Wisdom. And
though it be true, that there are diverse names given to God, yet those names
do not explicate what God is, but only so much of him, as of us can be
conceived; for that which is said of God is not God, because he is Plato. He
is Vbique presens sed latens, vbique totus sed immensus.
ineffable: The Heathen man could say, that it is a hard labor to find out
the Father of the world, but having found him, it was impossible to describe
him with fit words, especially to make the vulgar sort to conceive of him. And
therefore he is fitly styled, a light inaccessible.

2. The defect of measures hinders us. All the things by which August.
we try and measure other things are of no use in describing God: for he is
good without quality, great without quantity, every where whole without place,
everlasting without time, he makes all sorts of mutable things, without
mutation in himself or suffering any thing: he needs not a body to make him
to be, nor a place to make him to be here, nor Ioh. de Comb.
time, to make him to be now, or hereafter, or heretofore, he needs no subject
in which he should subsist, or to which he should adhere. He is merciful
without passion and Lord Trelcat.
of all things, without addition of any thing to his wealth.

3. We want the benefit of similitudes: for Gods nature differs infinitely
from the natures of all other things, and therefore nothing can be found to
liken God to it, without singular injury, Esaias 40. 17.

4. God does not now appear to us as he did to the Fathers in the first Ages
of the World.

5. We are destitute of the help of Demonstration a priori as they call it in
Schools. There was no essence before him, nor any thing that might leave the
name or nature of a cause of his being.

6. We are in and of our selves much more unable to conceive of God then we
were at the first in our Creation, by reason of our fall from God into sin.
The light we had being put ou^, and nothing left but sparkles; these sparkles
left, breed more smoke in our minds then either heat or light: for,

1. There is in us naturally a world of Atheistical conceits strange opinions
about God, as appears not only by the variety of strange Religions, but also
by that natural Atheism which every man by occasion feels in himself, when
(...).
he either doubts of God, and thinks things that be altogether disagreeing
and disproportionall to the Nature of God.

2. A singular debility and impotencie to take in the doctrine of God,
especially with affection into our hearts.

3. A slippery kind of Leuity in our minds, that what we do receive we loose,
and forget, or else change into other conceits. Lubriea and desultoria: Humana
mentis leuilas. 77. l.


4. An unspeakable kind of sluggishnesse and unwillingness to be at pains
to study this doctrine.

5. What knowledge of God does come into our minds, for the most part we
stain it miserably, with villainous and filthy thoughts and desires.

6. God has revealed to us but only his back parts, in this life we cannot
see him face to face, Exodus 33.

7. The devils use all their methods to keep men without the knowledge of God.

8. The world distracts us and deuoures usually the time should be spent about
the study of God.

9. God himself, that he may be revenged on the ingratitude of many men does
hide himself out of the way from them.

And it is necessary we should take notice of this difficulty of the knowledge
of God, both to humble us, and to quicken us to the more diligence and to make
us more thankful, if God be pleased in any measure to reveal himself to us.

For the third, though it be thus extreme difficult to know God, yet we must
not despair of it as of a thing impossible: for though the creature of it
self cannot conceive God, yet God can reveal himself to the creature,
according to the the creatures capacity.

God that dwelt in the secrets of Eternity, only known and seen to himself,
since the Creation, has bin pleased to come out of his secret seat, and by
certain means or degrees to make himself known to men: as,

1. By planting in the mind of man certain natural and common Notions, and
general principles concerning God: These were and are in every man like little
sparkles of light and fire fastened in men's minds, and such as by glimpse show
some little conceptions of God.

2. By Apparition: God was pleased in the first Ages of the world to appea^e
unto men, and by some certain visible signs of his presence to acquaint
himself with man.

3. By the book of the creature: for by unfolding before man in an open and
^^sting show, the various forms and shapes of things which he made, he by them
did augment the light of the natural sparkles, and evidently confirm and
prove his Divinity, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness to man, Romans 1.

4. When none of these were sufficient to bring man to a perfect knowledge of
God: nor to so much as might save his soul, and bring him into happy
fellowship with God, God was pleased in the book of Scripture, to extract out
of the infinite depths of knowledges which were in his eternal mind, a frame
of descriptions, and testimonies concerning himself, and his will, and this in
his due time by degrees he gave unto the Church, and is contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

5. To make all these helps more effectual unto the eternal blessedness of
the Elect, he sent his own Son who was the engraven form of his Person, and
his perfect Image, to take man's nature, and to come and dwell amongst us, and
through his humanity to make God as it were after a most glorious sort visible:
The Godhead shining through his flesh as the Candle through the Lantern,
Ioh. 1. and 14. 9. and in that nature he did himself teach and instruct man
concerning God. Heb. 1. 1.

6. He has made himself further known unto certain choice men by
inspiration, that is, by a special inlightning, and breathing of the holy
Gho^^.

7. He is daily discovered unto his children by effects, especially, by his
blessings, and benefits, and long-suffering, and manifold goodness, Exodus 34.
and among these by the entertainment he gives to the souls of his people in
his house, and by the ^oyes in his presence: Yea, so far is the Lord pleased
to reveal himself this way to his people that they are said not only to see
God, but to behold his beauty, Psalm. 27. 4. and 63. 2.

It is true, the unquiet heart of man is vexed, because God is not visible to
his eyes, as if the knowing of God by colors were the only pleasing way of
seeing him: Thy bodily eyes cannot see God, what then If thy eyes cannot
discern God, is it any greater thing; then that thy hands or feet cannot
discern other thing? God is discerned by such Instruments as are capable of
him.

But thou will say, not only thy eyes, but thy reason cannot reach God so as
to ease or please thy mind? I answer: that some things are infra rationem,
below reason, and so are all things discernable by sense only. Some things are
iuxta rationem, agreeable and discernable by reason, and so are a multitude of
things in nature. Some things are supra rationem, above Reason, and so are
diverse things in the doctrine of God, especially the Mystery of the Trinity
and the like. Now, though Reason will not reach here, yet God has not left
his children destitute, but has given them an instrument from heaven which is
capable of these things, and that is, Faith.

And yet God has not altogether abandoned the use of senses in his children
for the knowledge of him: for they know God by sight in his creatures, and by
hearing in the word, and by trusting in his blessings, 1. Pet. 2. 3.

That this point may be yet more clearly understood, we must consider the
different ways how God is known by several things: first, himself knows
himself with infinite perfection of absolute knowledge, and so he is known
only to himself: secondly, Christ man knows him by union, that is, by virtue
of his union with the divine nature, he does after a way unspeakable, and
inimitable see and understand the Godhead: thirdly, the Angels and Saints in
heaven know him by vision: they see God face to face, that is, they have a
perfect knowledge of Gods Nature according to their condition in heaven, and
do behold him in some most glorious representation of his presence: fourthly,
to men on earth he is known by revelation: and so after a different manner to
diverse men: As to some holy men by Inspiration, to all godly men by Christ, to
all men in the Church by the Scriptures, and to all men in the world by the
creatures and Reason.

The fourth point it remains to consider how far forth God may be known, by
these all or any of them? I answer: first, more generally, and then more
particularly: In general if we think of the full knowledge of God, the
Trinity is then only known to God himself and Christ man: God has a Name
that is secret, and wonderful, this can be known by no creature; by his Name
revealed he may be known: so as we remember that in this world he appears to
whom he will, and as he will, and not as he is. The most men conceive
wonderful little of Gods Nature.

The diverse forms of things in the world are beams, as it were, of the
divinity, but yet they show rather that he is, then what he is, or whence they
are rather then what he is.

Distinctly to consider of it we must note that God is known in this life.

1. But in his back parts.

2. But according to our model or capacity: God has extracted so much out of
the Ocean of the infinite knowledge which concerns his nature, as may be
taken in by our understandings.

3. This that may be attained to, for that part which is set out by words, is
expressed not by words that tell what God is directly but by such words, as being
in use amongst men, might lead us to some happy manner of discerning
concerning God.

4. The nearest knowledge we have is by effect, as it is either described in
Scripture, or wrought in providence: and so what God is in himself, himself
only knows, but what he is to us that in some measure he makes us know: his
glorious Nature is only known to himself: We see the Sun not as it is in
it self, but as it inlightneth: we look not up upon the body of the Sun, but
upon the beams of it that shine upon the hill, or upon the wall, or the like:
so is it in the knowledge of God: our natures cannot look upon his nature but
we discern him, by the shining of his working and by the beams of his
presence.

The difference also of the descriptions that have bin of God are to be thought
on: for there has bin a Philosophical consideration of God, and a
Theological. The Philosophical was had among the Gentiles, by the wisest of
them. The Theological has only bin had in the Church. The one looked upon
God only by the light of Nature and experience, and the other looks upon God
by the light of Scripture and Faith: But that Philosophical Light was
extremely deficient and far short of the Ecclesiastical Light: for besides
that the wisest of the Philosophers had much ado to separate the true GOD from
the many Gods worshipped by the Nations: they were altogether blind, in the
Mystery of the Trinity, and ignorant altogether of the highest praises of God,
(viz.) his mercies unto man in Jesus Christ: yea, there was scarce any
Attribute of God, that was rightly known with any life, without the Pale of
the Church.

Now that knowledge that is to be had of God, may be gathered three ways: by
Negation, Eminency, or Causation: By Negation, when we deny unto God
whatsoever is of imperfection in the Creature: and so we deny death, measure,
Mutation, etc. and say that God is Immortal immense immutable, etc. By
eminency when we give unto God in the highest degree, what we find to be
good in the creature, and so we say, he is most holy, most wise, most just,
etc. By Causation we may find out God by reasoning from the things he has
done.

The last thing to be considered of, is the Rules to be observed by us for the
attaining of the knowledge of God: for All means will be ineffectuall to us,
if we be not rightly prepared and disposed: we need a Religious mind in all
knowledges that concern our happiness, but especially when any thing is
spoken or thought concerning God: because all words are insufficient to tell us
easily and fully what God is: Commandment 3.

He therefore that would reach to the comprehending of the knowledge of God,
must be sure to keep these Rules.

1. He must cleanse and purge, and scour his heart from the filth and dross
of false opinions and strange and Atheistical conceits concerning God: yea,
he must wholly empty himself of all opinion concerning his own sufficiency
to conceive of God, of himself: for if it be true of other knowledges in
Religion, that a man must become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. it
is much more true in this doctrine concerning God.

2. He must then address himself to Gods Word, and resolve Non deus alienis
assertionibus sed suis estimandus est vocibus. Amb. Sine deo non cognoscitur
deus Hillar.

A deo discendu^ est, quicquid de deo intelligendu^. Hillar.

Sapientia secularis est temeraria inter pres diuinae dispositionis, Non pedum
passibus Sed deside rijs qu^ritur d^us Bernard.


to learn from thence how to conceive of God. God is not to be accounted of by
others assertions, but to be measured by his own words. We shall never learn
what he is, by asking what others say of him, but must here what he says of
himself: for God is not known without God, as one says, Of God we must
learn whatsoever of God we would understand.

3. He must resolve to spare no pains that is requisite for this study: he
must employ himself with great diligence to drink in his knowledge: for God
will appear only to studious minds.

4. A heart full of desires is requisite to these conceptions: The desire of
the soul must be after God, Esaias 26. 8, 9. He must be sought with a man's whole
heart, Psalm. 119. 10. else the mind will wander extremely. And because we
want that admiration, and delight we should have in this doctrine, therefore
we must judge our selves for our deserts, and labor by prayer to form these
desires in us: Especially, when in hearing, or reading any thing concerning
God, we find our hearts begin to be affected, we must strive to nourish and
inflame these desires or delights, or Rauishments, for then God is near: for
usually a fire goes before him (as the Psalmist speaks) as well when he
comes into our hearts as when he comes into the world.

5. He must be a godly man: for the pure in heart only see God, Mat. 5. 7. and
without Holiness it is impossible to see God, Heb. 12. 14. This knowledge
requires holiness, else of all doctrines it proves the dullest: discourse and
disputation does not comprehend God, but holiness as one says: and the Reason
is, because there must be some assimilation or likeness between our minds
and the knowledge of God: for as no part of the body receives the light but
the eye, and the eye receives it not but as it is like to the light, so it is
with the mind of man and the knowledge of God.

6. Above all other knowledges in Religion, in the doctrine of God he must
remember the Apostles Rule, to be wise to Sobriety, and take heed of
curiosity, and that in two respects: first, that he devoutly believe what he
finds said of God in Scripture, without prying or sifting of things by the
judgment of his own Reason. God would be believed on, Credi se voluit deus
non iudicari, non examinari, Naz.
not judged or examined: secondly, that he inquire not after things, which are
not revealed, but rest in the descriptions of God made in his Word. The Sun
must be seen, as it can be seen, and so much light must be taken, as can
be had with looking downwards, lest if we look for more light by gazing on
the body of the Sun, our eyes be not only dazeled, but our sight swallowed
up and lost: so is it in the knowledge of God. It strengthens and increases
the sight of the mind, if we look upon the beams of the everlasting Sun as
they shine in his word or works, but if we will needs be searching higher
after his Majesty, take heed lest we be swallowed up of his glory, Proverbs
25. 27.

7. And lastly, he must look to it, that his head be not distracted with
worldly cares: this knowledge requires a mind separated from the world, at
least from the intruding, and violent, and distresfull cares about the world,
and things thereof, 1. Cor. 7. 31, 32, 35.

Hitherto of the excellency, difficulty, means and measure of the knowledge
of God, together with the Rules to be observed for the attaining of the
Knowledge of God.

Three things remain to be opened, and thoroughly considered of;

1. What God is or the praises of Gods Nature. 2. What it is to believe in God.
3. The Uses of all.
For the right conceiving of the glorious frame of the praises of God, we may
safely and must carefully proceed in this order.

1. We must cast out of our minds all likenesses of any creature in heaven or
earth: God has flatly prohibited all Images of God, and all terestriall
likenesses, to be set up of him, in our Churches, houses or hearts:
Commandment 2. We must not therefore conceive that God is like any thing that
sense can set before us in heaven or earth.

2. We must in the next place take heed that we be not ensnared by the
misconceiuing of certain relative attributes given to God in the Scriptures:
Many things are said of God in Scripture, by way of sign, not by way of Image
or likeness: which we must so think of as to understand what they signify,
but not to fashion in our hearts the resemblances which the words import: for
instance,

1. Some things are attributed to God Ironically, not properly, as when the
Prophet ascribes deceit unto God, Ier. 4. 10. He speaks the words of the
false Prophets ironically, not his own words: with indignation alleging what
they said, which if it were true, God should deceive the people?

2. Some things are given to God Metonimically: as when God is said to be our
strength and fortitude, Psalm. 18. 2. Our strength and valor is not God, but he
is said to be so, by effect, because he works it in us: so he is said to
be our song, because he is the subject of our song, Exodus 15. 2. He is called
the hope of Israel, because it is he in whom Israel ought to hope, Ier. 14. 8.
so he is called our life Deuteronomy. 30. 19, 20. because he gives, preserues and
prolonges our life.

3. Some things are given to God Metaphorically, when the things spoken of, are
only found in the creature, and given to God by way of signification only, or
some kind of comparison: some of these Metaphores are borrowed from men, some
from other creatures.

1. From men, as when the parts, members, senses, affections, actions or
adjuncts of man, are ascribed to God: as for instance, God is said to have a
soul, Esaias 1, 14. which only notes his nature in a special manner of
Conception: so members are given to God: as his face to signify his favor;
eyes to signify his observing of things; Ears to note his regard of the
prayers of his people; Hands to note his particular providence or working;
Arms to note his power, etc. so senses are given to him, as memory,
forgetfulness, seeing, hearing, etc. which are only spoken for our capacity:
so are the affections of Joy, Anger, Hatred, Sorrow, Repentance, Jealousy, etc.
which only signify after an high manner some glory of Gods nature, which but
by such comparisons is inexplicable to us: so are the Actions, of Numbering,
speaking, hiding his face, tempting, lifting up his hands, descending, going up
on high, walking with men, striking, arising, laughing, visiting, etc. so are
the Adjuncts of greatness, time, clothing, books, charrets, etc. which things
are not in God in the letter but in the sense and signification.

2. From other Creatures, as when wings are attributed to him, as he is said to
be the Sun, Light, a Horn of our Salvation, Buckler, consuming fire.

4. Some things are given to God Synechdochically, as when the Son is called
the Father of Eternity, Esaias 9. 6. the Father and holy Ghost are not excluded.
When the holy Ghost is called seven spirits, being but one spirit, only to
note the variety and perfection of his working, Revel. 1. 4.

Thus of the two Rules for the distinct and safe informing of our selves
concerning God.

3. We must take heed also that we be not deceived about the forms in
which God appeared in the Old or New Testament: for these forms were
sanctified for the present to the use of the beholders to assure the presence
of God, or for signification, but when they were withdrawn, they were no
longer to be thought on, as any forms of conceiving of God, and therefore he
forbids all likenesses.

These things being avoided, we must then approach with fear and reverence to
consider of such things as are attributed to God in Scripture properly.

For the clear understanding of the doctrine of Gods Nature as it is properly
described in Scripture, we must consider both of the properties of his Nature,
and of the substance of it.

First, of the Properties, because these are next unto us, as I may say, or are
easiest to be discerned.

The glorious properties of God may be cast into two ranks or heads; for some
of them are such properties as are some way in the creatures by way of
Resemblance, certain sparkles or dropps are in us: upon which is printed a
kind of Image or likeness of God in those things, such are the life,
knowledge, holiness, and glory of God: some of them are such properties in God,
as are not so much as by any likeness to be found in any creature in heaven
or earth: such are his infinite greatness, eternity, Immutabilitie, and
allsufficiencie.

The first sort of Attributes are the easiest, and by reason of their either
effects daily amongst us, or likeness to some thing in us, may be profitably
first studied.

And so the Nature of God excells in four dreadful and matchless praises: or
there be four things in Gods Nature we should ever think on with admiration,
and adore with all Reverence and Devotion, and study to conceive of as fully
as we can from the singular Use they have in the course of our lives.

First, of the Life of God.

Life in GOD is admirable, and to be adored in these respects:

1. Because the life of all living creatures in general is in him: and so God
is the life and light of the world, John 1. 4. as he gives being and life to
all things: The whole world had bin a Chaos of darkness, if God had not given
it life, which he planted in several creatures by his admirable working.

2. Because in particular he is after a wonderful manner the life of us men.
Whether we respect our life natural or spiritual: for our natural life it is
he that inlightens every man that comes into the world, and gave senses motion
and reason to all men, Acts 17. 28. and for our spiritual life, it is he that
quickens all the members of Christ, by the special mouings of the holy Ghost
in their hearts, begetting them again after a strange manner by joining his
spirit to their spirits, and thus Christ lives in us: Hence this life is called
the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 17. and the life of Jesus, 2. Cor. 4. 11. Gal. 2. 20.

3. Because that life by which he lives in himself he inioyes after a most
matchless manner: who can describe the glory and shining of that life, in
respect of which God is said by an excellency to be the living God, Daniel 6.
26. 1. These. 1. vlt. Revel. 4. 9. and as a doctrine of singular glory the Lord
is pleased to swear by his life, Ezeck. 33. 11.

Some of the glories of this life of God we may in some measure distinctly
conceive of with admiration.

And so we should adore that God whose life is,

1. Independent: God has life in himself: He received it not from any other,
John 5. 26.

2. It is Eternal, he lives from Eternity to Eternity, Dan. 4. 34. He is
immortal he cannot die, 1. Tim. 1. 17.

3. It is not seated as in a part of God, as life is in us: but it is the whole
essence; is not only in it, but is the essence it self.

4. It is most perfect, in blessedness, and glory, he wants no means to
nourish it, nor helps to content it or make it happy, but is God blessed for
ever, Rom 11.

There is Use of this Knowledge of God: for, Use.


1. It shows the Vanity of Idolaters, that serve Gods that have no life,
Jeremy 10. 9, 10. 14.

2. Woe be to wicked men that sin securely, as if God was not or had no life,
It is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. If he live,
they must die, Heb. 10. 31. Ier. 23. 36.

3. Let all men be afraid, and take heed of sinning, and remember his
presence: for God is a living God, Daniel 6. 26.

4. Since GOD is all Life, we must be as lively as is possible in his
service: our consciences must be purged from dead works seeing we serve a
living God, Hebrews 9. 14.

5. We are bound in swearing especially to remember the Life of God: Thou
shall swear the Lord lives, Jeremy 4. 2.

6. We must not greedily covet after the riches of this world, seeing our God
lives to reward such as serve him and trust in him, 1. Tim. 6. 17. Heb. 12. 22.

7. Unto him we should go for all succor, support, strength, and preservation
both of natural and spiritual life: for with him is the well spring of Life,
Psalm. 36. Psalm. 42. 3. Deuteronomy. 30. 19, 20. and it should comfort us against all
the desperate miseries of this life: It is enough for Job, if his Redeemer
live, for he knows he will deliver him, etc. Job 19. 25, 26. John 14. 19.

Lastly, the through Meditation of the glorious life of God, should breed in us
a desire to adore and admire him, and praise him while we live, as they did,
Revel. 4. 9. for this very Reason.

Who would not wonder at that Father that had a 100. or a 1000. children, to
whom he had bin an instrument of Life: Oh then! why worship we not him that is
Father of spirits, and Fountain of all the life is in all the creatures in the
world? and besides lives in himself a life full of infinite shining and
perfection? Thus of the Life of God: His Knowledge follows.

The Knowledge of God is to be admired and adored as wonderful and matchless
in many respects.

1. Because God is a seipso sapiens wise of himself, he has not He is (...).
his knowledge infused into him, or any way given him, nor gets he it by the
instruction of others, or by the benefit or experience, or observation. This
glory of his knowledge he pleades, Esaias 40. 13. Romans 11. 34.

2. Because he is the Author of all that understanding skill or wisdom is
found in any of the creatures: As the Sun is And so he only is Intellectus
agens.

He is called Deus Scientiarum. 1. Sam. 2. 3.


the Fountain of all the Light is in any of the Corporal creatures, so God is
the Fountain of all that Light is in all understandings of men or Angels: It
is God that furnished Christ man with all those treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Esaias 11. 2. It Is from his Light that the Angels and Saints in Heaven
see Light, as the Father of Lights: and all the spiritual knowledge godly men
have is from above, James 3. 17. John 6. 45. Yea all the skill any men have in
their callings is taught them of God, as the Prophet Esaias shows in the very
case of Husbandmen, Esaias 28. 6* 26.

3 Because all his works are done with matchless skill and wisdom, none can
do like him, nor is his knowledge only Theoricall, Psalm. 104. 24. Esaias 40,
28. Even those things that seem to us to be done so as we cannot conceive a
reason of them or seem contrary to us and our rules, yet have wonderful depth
of shining glory and Justice and wisdom in them, Romans 11. 33, 34.

4. Because his knowledge is infinite, Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 147. 5. He is
omniscient, he knows all things: his understanding penetrateth into all
things. He knows himself, one person each other exactly, Mat. 11. 27. 1.
Cor. 2. 10. and knows all things without himself, Heb. 4. 13. 1. John 3. 20.
John 21. 17. All the creatures that were, are, or ever shall be, he knows
them, Acts 15. 18. Esaias 40. 26. Mat. 10. 26. 30. He knows all that is said or
done in the whole world, Psalm. 139. 1. etc. He knows things to come, as well as
things past or present, Esaias 41. 22, 23. 26. He knows the very thoughts of
the hearts of men, and sees them afar off, even before they be yet formed or
conceived, he can tell what all the men in the world think at all times, 1.
Chron. 28. 9. Psalm. 7. 10. and 94. 11. Ier. 11. 20. and 17. 10. Yea, he knows
all things which are possible to be, though they never shall be: To conclude,
he knows all things divine or humane, or Angelical, Celestial or
Terrestrial, good or evil, secret or manifest, universal or singular,
necessary or contingent, noble or vile, great or small, which are, or are not,
past present or to come, even things which shall never be.

5. Because his knowledge is most perfect, he not only knows all things, but
he knows them most perfectly: he knows not in part as we do, but exactly:
his knowledge cannot be increased or diminished: he learnes nothing, he
forgets nothing, Romans 11. 33. Psalm. 147. 5. And the perfection of his knowledge
appears: first, in the clearenesse and evidence of it: therefore all things
are said to be naked before him, Heb. 4. 13. and also in the distinctnesse of
it: he knows all things not confusedly, or generally, or in the mass or lump
only, as we are said to know a man that know not a thousand things in him:
thus God knows very sparrowes, and the very hairs of our heads and the number
of them, Luke 12. 7. Mat. 10. 29. And this also proves the perfection of Gods
knowledge, that his knowledge is immutable, he never varies, though things may
be subject to infinite alterations, yet Gods Knowledge of them is always the
same: His Knowledge is infallible: fourthly, the perfection of his Knowledge
appears in this, that he knows things holily: he neither adds, nor
detracts, and takes any thing according to the outward show or pretense, but he
judges not according to the face or person, but according to the Truth.

6. Because he knows the things after a manner incommunicable to the
creatures: for all things the creatures discern, they discern by one of these
ways; either by sense, as by the ministry of the eye or ear, or taste, or
touching, or smelling: or else they discern things by opinion, which is done
by coniecturing or ghessing at things by their causes or the like, or else by
Faith, when they know things by the report of others: Or else by knowledge
framed by reasoning, discoursing by the benefit of certain propositions, to
extract from thence the conclusion which breeds knowledge: or lastly, by
certain Images or species taken in by the sense, and imprinted upon the
Fantasy, which are thence offered to the understanding, by which the
knowledge of things is kept for contemplation, when the sense of the things is
lost. But God knows things by none of these ways, as being all imperfect, as
many Reasons might show. But he knows them all by his Essence, not by any
sense or special faculty: And that this may be understood we must note:
First, that the whole Essence of God is as it were wholly an eye, or a mind.
Secondly, that God is all things by Eminency. Deus est omnia Eminenter: as
they say in Schools. Thirdly, God contains all things in himself, and his
Essence is the example or pattern of all things, and therefore needs but to
look upon himself, and then he sees all things as in a glass: our
understanding is imperfect, and therefore depends upon the Objects, by which it
is as it were colored, and so while it strives to know other things is driven
to neglect, and forget it self, as the glass which is so colored from other
things which shine in it, that it does as it were loose his own color: but
God being infinite, and independent, is not bound to the things without him to
receive impressions from them, but in himself has the Ideas or forms of
them, and are but as it were little shadows or slender likenesses cast out
from the divine nature. Hence it is that the Knowledge of God is not liable to
the imperfections that cleave to the things to be known without himself: thus
he knows temporal things after an eternal manner, mutable things immutablie,
contingent things infalliblie, future things presently, dependent things
independently, created things after an uncreated manner.

7. Because he knows all things vno intuitu with one view, all at once: The
eye of man beholds many things at once as with one look it can see the Ants in
a Molehill, but if it will see other things, it must remove the sight. Now the
mind of man can at once take in a larger circuit to look upon, as a City or
Country, yea the whole earth, yea the whole world, but it is only in the
lump or ball, or whole mass of it: for if it would take the distinct
contemplation of things, it must remove from form to form, and from thought
to thought. Now Gods understanding takes all at once, most steadfastly, and most
perfectly, and so by a way more excellent then all the creatures in heaven or
earth. Gods Knowledge is not a successiue knowledge, as ours is, to take in
things by comparing, or distinguishing, or reasoning, etc. for all things
without God are but as a center or little point, which with infinite ease he
discernes: and therefore we must by the way take notice of it, that when we
read in Scripture of foreknowledge of things to come, or remembrance of
things past, that these things are called so in respect of us, not in respect
of God. They are not given to God properly, but are terms borrowed from our
use, the more distinctly to inform us of the branches (as it were) of Gods
knowledge.

8. Because Gods knowledge of things has such force in it; that when and where
he will, he can make the Creature feel the warmth and comfort of the
knowledge of him. It is a knowledge that has influences upon some creatures:
It refreshes and works more upon the soul, then the Beams of the Sun
upon the body. Thus when God is said to know the way of the Righteous, or
their souls in adversity, or the like, the knowledge is not a bare taking
notice, but an acknowledgement, or making of them to know, that he knows them,
or a powerful setting of the beams of his knowledge so upon them, that they
are thereby prese^ued, and wonderfully refreshed, and the like to this can no
created knowledge do, it can cast no influence upon the thing known, Psalm. 1.
6. 2. Tim. 2. 19. John 10. 14. 27. Exodus 33. 12. This appears by the contrary
when of wicked men God says, he knows them not, Mat. 7. 23. The consideration
of these surpassing glories in the knowledge of God, should serve for diverse
Uses:

1. It should breed in us with the Apostle, Admiration of those depths of
Wisdom and Knowledge of God, Romans 11. 33.

2. It may inform us concerning the vanity of Idols which have no
understanding, they cannot know, nor foretell any thing, and therefore not like
the true God, Esaias 41. 2^. And it may withal show us the truth of the Apostles
assertion that God only is wise, Romans 16. 27. His knowledge is such a
knowledge as darkens the respect of all knowledge in any creature: their
Knowledge to Gods is but as the light of a candle to the Sun. It is nothing
in comparison: And withal it may show us the fearful silliness of many
wicked men that have no shift to ease their own consciences, but to think God
does not see them. One would think there should be no such kind of men that
were so silly, but the Scripture shows the contrary, Psalm. 10. 11. Esaias 31.
2. Job 9. 3, 4, and 11. 11.

3. It may teach us diverse things,

1. To busy our selves with all industry to get knowledge, that we may in
some little measure be like unto God: seeing knowledge is so admirable a thing
in God, we should seek it more diligently and laboriously, then we would seek
silver, or gold or the greatest treasure in the world. This is urged from the
consideration of Gods Knowledge, Pro. 3. 13, 14, 15, 19, 20. and 4. 7.

2. To be afraid to sin even in secret, because the darkness hides not from
God, and day and night are all one with him. He is a God that tries the hearts
and reins, and divides between the soul and the spirit, and discernes the
very intents of the heart.

3. To give him glory even when he does such things as seem harsh to us: as
for instance, though we should see him pass by a world of wicked men, or throw
them into eternal torments, without showing mercy, yet we should be fully
persuaded of his Justice: and why? because he knows more by wicked men then
all the world does besides, and though as yet he does not reueile the whole
council of his will, and the reasons of his proceedings, yet the infiniteness
of his Knowledge and Wisdom should assure us that in the day of Christ we
shall hear of such deep and plain reasons as shall fully satisfy us.

4. To serve him with all our hearts without hypocrisy: for to what end is it
to dissemble with him, that knows us better then we know our selves, and sees
what is within us as manifestly as what is without, 1. Chron. 28. 9.

5. When any man lackes Wisdom, let him seek it of that God which has such
store, as he will give liberally and reproach no man, James 1. 5.

Lastly, it serves for great consolation unto the godly: God knows their
sorrow, when no eye pittieth them; he knows their innocence, when the wicked
say all manner of evil sayings; he knows their hearts desire is to be as
good as they seem, though the world condemn them for Hypocrites. He knows
they would feign please him, though their works be not perfect; he knows what
they stand in need of, and therefore will help them; he knows the malice,
fraud and intentions of all their enemies, though their diuises be hidden from
them. When we are in such straites as we know no way out, yet God knows how
to find means to deliver such as trust in him, Psalm. 1. 6. and 37. 18. Mat.
6. 31. 32. Esaias 40. 13. 14.

Thus of the Knowledge of GOD. His Holiness follows.

The Holiness of God comprehends two admirable Attributes in God, his
Goodness and his Justice.

The goodness of God is to be considered, as it is in himself, or as it is
showed toward others.

That goodness of Nature that is in God himself, is known only to himself
in the fullness of it: only two things we must conceive of by way of glimpse:
The one that he is good by his Essence. He is not good by participation of the
goodness of any other thing, nor is his goodness a quality, but his whole
Essence is goodness it self. The other is, that he is good in a most
unutterable degree: and therefore is called the chief good, of all things to
be desired, and without whom nothing can partake of goodness, and in whom is
no mixture of any evil. And in respect of the goodness in himself, he is
avouched by our Savior Christ to be only good. None has an independent
original goodness but God. All that goodness that is in any creature, is but
the print or footsteps, or resemblances of the goodness that is properly and
arche^ypically only in God.

The goodness of Gods Nature as it is showed to others is chiefly taught us in
Scripture, by such descriptions of it, as are fitted to our capacity.

The word in both the original Languages translated good, signifies also fair
or beautiful: and it is a true observation made by Divines, that in this life
we are affected with the sense of Gods goodness, but that Amiable sweetness
and beauty of Gods nature cannot be known till we come to heaven.

The Goodness of God showed in this life, and magnified in the praises of it
in Scripture is manifested five ways.

1. By his Love, or matchless louingnesse of Nature. 2. By his Mercy. 3. By
his Gratiousnesse. 4. By his Bountifulness. 5. By his Patience.
And chiefly these are considered of in Scripture as they concern man.

The Love of God to man is matchless, whether we consider the Acts of it, or
the properties of it.

In Love there is a threefold act: for it has in it, first, a desire by which
it is strongly carried to the union of the thing loved: secondly, a joy or
delight, in which it rests it self in the fruition of the thing loved:
thirdly, a will to procure what it conceiues to be good for the thing loved.
All these three are in a most high degree in God.

For first, he has showed his wonderful desire to be united unto men many
ways: as,

1. By assuming the Nature of man into a personal conjunction with himself in
the Mediator Christ.

2. By conuersing with man, by signs of his presence, visions, dreams,
Oracles, inspiration, and ordinarily by his ordinances, entertaining them
continually in his house.

3. By adopting men to be his children, and making their Natures like to his
own 1. John. 3. 1.

4. By providing for man an eternal Habitation in heaven where he may be
always about him in his glorious presence.

For the second, the Prophet Zephanie shows that he takes wonderful delight
in the service, and felicity of his people whom he loves. The Lord God is in
the midst of them, he rejoices over them with joy, he rests in his love, he
joys over them with singing, Zeph. 3. 17.

For the third, his will to procure them all the good they need, he showed by
sending his own Son, to recover them out of all misery, and provide for
them all things belonging to a blessed immortality: so God loved the world,
that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have life eue^lasting, John 3. 16.

The properties of this Love are likewise most admirable: for,

1. It is a most perfect, tender, love: comprehending in it al possible
kindness: such kindness as all Ages ought to admire, Epes. 2. 7. and such as
is sweet and better then life, or ought we have experience of in life, Psalm.
63. 3. He is therefore said to be love it self 1. John 4. 8.

2. It is first or preventing, it is not a love provoked by our love to him, but
he loved us first, that were unworthy of all love, as being indeed his
enemies, 1. Ioh. 4. 10. 19.

3. It is from everlasting, Ier. 31. 3. before we had done good or evil, Romans
9. 11. 13.

4. It is immutable, and to everlasting, no creature can separate us from the
love of God, Romans 8. 38. whom he loves he loves to the end, John 13. 1.

5. It is without respect of persons: bound or free, Barbarians or Scythians,
Jews or Grecians, are all one with him in Christ: He loves a poor man as
earnestly as a rich man: Colos. 3. 11. and how vile soever the condition of
Gods beloved ones be on earth, yet they are ever Honorable in his sight, Isay
43. 4.

Thus of the Love of GOD: His Mercy follows.

There are many praises of the Mercy of God in Scripture which should much
inflame and inamour our hearts: for,

1. His Mercy is abundant, 1* Pet. 1. 3. He is rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4.
exceeding rich, Ephesians. ^. 7. and it must needs be so, because his Mercy is as
his Essence, infinite, Psalm 103. 11.

2. His mercies are tender mercies, Luke 1. 77. he lays to Cordi est miseria.
heart our miseries: No Father can so pity his son, as God pitties us,
Psalm. 103. 4. 13. and how can it be otherwise seeing God is Mercy it self.

3. He is mindful of his Mercy, Luke 1. 54. He waits to show Mercy, Esaias 30.
18.

4. He reserues Mercy for thousands: he spends not his Mercy only on
Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Kings, etc. but he bestows his Mercy on all sorts
of people, so as poor men may enjoy the mercies of David, Exodus 34. 6, Esaias
55. 4.

5. His Mercies endure for ever: they can never be drawn dry, Psalm. 25. 5.
Luke 1. 50. Esaias 54. 10. Psalm 136. from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm.
103. 17.

6. The effects of his Mercy are admirable, considered either in general or
particular.

I^ ^enerall; and so,

1. He is Father of all that Mercy is in any creature, 2. Cor. 13.

2. His Mercy is over all his works; we can have to do with no work of God,
but we may taste of his Mercy in it, even of his tender mercies, Psalm. 145. 9.
which he reckons in many instances, Psalm. 136.

In particular; and so by his Mercy,

1. He elected us, Romans 9. 16. and thus he showed us Mercy before the world was.

2. In due season he visited us from on High, Luke 1. 77.

Sending his Son to pay our ransom, and so redeeming our lives from
destruction, Psalm. 103. 4.

Calling us out of the world to be his people, who were not his people, 1. Pet.
2. 10. forgiving us all our sins, Ex. 34. 6. Mich. 7. 18.

Quickening our souls that were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 4
saving us, and estating the glory of Heaven upon us, Tit. 3. 5. giving us the
knowledge of our Salvation, Luke 1. 77. 78.

3. In our very afflictions he shows us strange Mercy: for,

1. It is his Mercy that we are not consumed, Lament. 3. 22. He does not
destroy us, nor stir up his whole displeasure, Psalm. 78. 39. though he be
made very angry, yet in wrath he remembers Mercy, Hab. 3. 2. Nehemiah 9. 31. He
will not deal with us after our sins, Psalm. 113. 10.

2. In the hardest times of trouble, he will entertain his people that trust
in him with great goodness, Nahum. 1. 7.

3. He will turn cursings into blessings, and make the things that are
hurtful in themselves to be good for his people, Deuteronomy. 23. 5. Romans 8. 28.

4. He will not chide for ever, Psalm. 103. 9. but will repent him of the evil,
Joel 2. 12. 13. Though he may forsake his people, yet it is but for a time,
and he will return and receive them with everlasting Mercy, Esaias 54. 7. 10.
He will give a happy end out of all afflictions, Psalm. 34. 17. James 5. 11.
Deuteronomy. 4. 3^.

Thus of the Mercy of God.

The third thing that shows the marvelous goodness of Gods nature is his
Gratiousnesse, and that is a strange goodness of God, by which he is disposed
to do all he does for us, freely, without desert in us, Exodus 34. 6. and
this God would have proclaimed, that all might not only take notice of it, but
make use of it, Esaias 55. 1, 2, 3, 4. so as we hold all by his free grace, both
temporal things, Psalm. 44 4. and eternal things, Romans 3. 23, 24. Yea, God
has set up a Throne, which he calls the Throne of Grace, that all sorts of
men might daily make use of this matchless freeness in God, Heb. 4. 16.

This is a most eminent reigning disposition in God, and the shining glory of
it shall continue to eternal life, Romans 5. 20. 21. and we must take special
notice of it, to conceive aright of the praise of this gratiousnesse of God, as
the principal end, of all his Love and mercy to us, Ephesians. 1. 6, and c,

The fourth thing that shows the Goodness of Gods Nature is his
Bountifulness: and his Bountifulness is showed.

1. To all Creatures. The earth is full of his goodness, Psalm. 33. 5. He
feeds all the living creatures in the world with his hand every day, he
clothes the earth, and plants every year with more cunning Ornaments, then the
Robes of Princes, Psalm. 104. whole, especially verse 24, 25, 27. 30. and in
this very respect the glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: and God himself
does take great delight in his works of daily feeding and tending the
creatures, verse 31. and for this kind of Bountifulness, David vows to
praise God while he lives, verse 33.

2. To all men, Just and unjust, he not only causes his Sun to shine on the
unjust as well as the Just, Mat. 44. 45. but he has left great treasures in
the world as common to them both, as are the use of the most creatures, riches,
honors, long life, posterity, etc. for by these things no man can discern
either love or hatred, for as it falls to the godly, so does it to the
wicked, as well to him that swears as to him that fears an oath, Eccles. 9.

3. To the Elect in a special manner and so his bounty shines:

1. In their creation: not only in furnishing the mind of man with such
perfect gifts, nor only in planting man in that Garden of pleasure, but also
in setting him in this new world, as Lord of all things, and making all other
things for man's use.

2. In their Redemption, in giving them his own Son to ransom them, and
with him giving them all things, restoring them to all they had lost by the
fall, Romans 8. 32.

3. In their Sanctification, both in respect of the matter of grace, as also in
respect of the means of it: he has dealt bountifully in the matter of saving
grace, because he is the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. and every good gift
proceeds from him as the Father of Lights, James 1. 17. and so does his
bounty shine in the means of grace.

1. In the word: giving gifts to men, sometime extraordinary, as Apostles,
Prophets, and Euangetists, and ordinary, Pastors and Teachers, sent abroad to
preach the Gospel to every creature, Ephesians. 4. Mat. 28.

2. In the Sacraments, adding to his word and oath his seals to assure his
Immutablenesse, Heb. 12. and in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, feeding his
people with the flesh and blood of his own Son: A food better then the
bread of Angels, John 6.

3. In Prayer, promising to grant whatsoever shall be asked of him in the name
of Christ, Mark 11. 24. James 1. 5.

4. In their Salvation, providing for them an inheritance, immortal,
incorruptible, and that in the most glorious place of the whole world, the
Heaven of Heavens, when they shall live in his presence for evermore, enjoying
Rivers of pleasure at his right hand, 1. Pet. 1. 3. Psalm. 17. Tit. 2. 12.

The last thing that she weth the goodness of Gods nature is his Patience, and
his Patience is admirable.

1. If we consider the prouocations to move him to implacable displeasure, and
these arise either from the consideration of the persons that provoke him, or
from the things by which he is provoked: there are four things that might
irritate extremely, if we look upon the persons provoking. The first is
their Number: worlds of men by their sins daily transgress and offend
against God; if he look down from heaven, he may see what to loath in the
works of all men: scarce one of a City, or two of a Tribe that have any care
to please God. The second is their enmity, God is provoked by men that are his
professed enemies, and therefore might conceive just fury against them, there
being no reason why he should pity or spare them. Thirdly, it adds to the
provocation that they are his creatures: the work of his own hands; they
rebel against him that were made by him, and therefore the indignity of the
offense is the greater. Fourthly, their impotencie, he needs not fear them, he
might blow them away at once as a little dust of the Balance: he could destroy
them with frogs, and lice, and flies: and for the evils by which he is
provoked, what man or Angel can describe the haynousnesse of them? what heart
of man can conceive the horror of the sins of the whole world. All the
Commandments of God being broken by every man, many of their sins committed
with an high hand, crying to heaven for vengeance, Treasons daily and every
where, and these committed before the very face of God, no place so sacred, but
wretched men dare offend there, the frame of transgression beginning from the
womb, and holding on to the grave, and the offenders relapsing by breaking
their vows and covenants, from time to time, and to make up all, that
Traiterous man should yield himself to be wholly governed, and led forth
against God by the devil the Arch-enimy of God.

2. If we consider who God is that endures all this: he is infinite in
Holiness and Justice, infinitely hating sin and conceiving wrath against
sinners, and whose Office it is to be the Judge of the world, and has power
to Plague all oftenders at his will, Nahum. 1. 2. 3.

3. If we consider the manner how he exercises his patience; where observe:

1. That he is slow to anger, he is not easily provoked, Psalm. 103. 8.

2. That he can suffer exceeding long, Exodus 34. 6. as in the case of the
Israelites, they had tempted him more then ten times before he Plagued them,
Numbers 14. 12. 18. 19. 20. 22.

3. That where he does enter into judgment, he does not pour out his whole
displeasure, but proceeds by degrees.

4. That he sent a Savior, as a remedy for their sins, and punishes those
persons, but not till they have rejected the Salvation offered, John 3. 16, 17.

5. That he sends to his very enemies, before they seek to him, and sets up
his ordinances amongst them, as means to reclaim them, and with great
importunity and continuance urges men to save themselves from so great
destruction, 2. Cor. 5. 19. 20. 2. Chron. 36. 15. Esaias 65. 2. etc. and 42. 14.

6. It appears that he is infini^ely patient, that puts off the day of
Judgment to so long a day, 2. Pet. 3. 9. and thus of the manner of his
Patience.

4. If we consider the effects of his patience or the ends. He is patient that
men may repent and be saved, 2. Pet. 3. 9. Yea, thousands of men are saved by
Gods forbearance, that had else bin damned, if God had called for their
accounts sooner, ^. Pet. 3. 15.

Lastly, if we consider the cause of his patience: Some Judges spare to punish
some offenders, but it is, because they are Alyed to them, or because they give
bribes to be freed, or because they are great persons, etc. but Gods Patience
and forbearance is not wrought by any of these means, but it arises merely
from the goodness of his own Nature, he does it for his own sake, not for
any thing in them.

Thus of the Doctrine of Gods Goodness. The Uses follow, and so the knowledge
of Gods marvelous goodness of Nature may both inform us, and teach us, and
comfort us in diverse things.

As it serves for information. so it should compel upon us a most settled and
resolute judgment, especially in four things; for since there is such a
transcendent glory of good nature in God, whatsoever can be said or objected,
or whatsoever God does, we should vnmoueablie be established in full assurance.

1. That God can do nothing that is ill or unjust. He cannot be the Author of
any thing that is evil: so good a Nature cannot decree, or effect any thing
that is cruel, bloody or tyrannical, James 1. 13. 17.

2. That in afflicting punishment upon offenders he takes no delight in the
death of the very wicked, Ezekiel 18.

3. That no men can be saved by their merits. That great Salvation he
prouides for men, is merely out of his own bounty and not from their merits,
Romans 6. vlt. and 1^. 6.

4. That there can be no goodness in any creature comparable to the goonesse
of God: all the goodness, love, bounty, mercy, clemency, Patience, or grace
that can be found in Princes, Parents, Husbands, Wives, or Friends is nothing
in comparison of Gods goodness, which appears if we remember what was before
taught.

1. Because all their goodness was received from God, they had it not of
themselves.

2. Because it is not so great as Gods goodness which is immense; they may be
said to be loving, merciful, bountiful, etc. but GOD is love it self,
mercy it self, etc.

3. Because their goodness began but yesterday, a little while ago, whereas
Gods goodness was from everlasting.

4. Because their goodness is mutable, they may hate and loath whom they
formerly loved and pi^tied vehemently: and they may love and pity such
persons, as when they die, may perish in hell for ever, where they shall never
enjoy comfort by them more; whereas Gods love is immutable and everlasting.

5. Because they can show no such fruits of their love and mercy as God does;
they cannot ransom the world, nor quicken and raise the dead souls and bodies
of men, nor medicine the afflictions of them they love, to turn them to good,
nor subdue those mighty enemies, devils, sin, death, and hell, nor nourish
souls, nor give an immortal inheritance.

Secondly, the consideration of his glorious goodness should compel us:

1. To magnify him for his goodness, and strive to set out his praises, to
mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, according to his great goodness
showed to us, Esaias 63. 7. The Prophet David in many places urges this use
vehemently, using this form of exhortation in many places, Oh praise the Lord
for he is good, for his mercy indureth for ever, Psalm 106. 1. and 107. 1. and
118. 1 and 1^6. 1. and though worlds of carnal people cannot be inflamed to
the admiration of this matchless goodness of his, yet Israel, the redeemed of
the Lord, all that fear him, and have experience of his mercy should be
vehemently affected with desire to magnify his praises, as these places show.
Neither will it suffice, after a dull, or sullen manner to do it, but we are
bound to praise this goodness of God after a special manner: for,

1. We must study his praises herein, and strive to seek out with delight the
conceptions of his glorious praises, Psalm. 111. ^, ^.

2. We must be sure that Gods praises here be set out with affirmations and
language above the praises of all other things in the world: we must do it
abundantly, Psalm. 145. 7. and with our whole hearts, Psalm 111. 1. our souls
must bless him not our tongues only; Psalm. 103. 1.

3. We must not rest satisfied to praise him for a fit, but must strive to do
it for ever: all our life should be full of his praises, Psalm. 104. 33. and
good Reason, seeing we can never want matter and cause of praise, because the
earth is full of his goodness, Psalm. 3^. 5. and who can at once declare all
his praise, Psalm. 106. 2.

4. Nor will it suffice that we praise him, when we worship him in the word,
Prayer or S^craments, but we must talk of his praises one to another, and
labor mutually to heat our hearts by daily mentioning the glory of his Nature
and Kingdom, Psalm 145. 11.

2. Gods goodness should force us to repentance, and so it should diverse
ways. It has in it strong incitations, to humiliation, to cast down, to the
care of a new life. It should exceedingly humble us and break our hearts, to
think that we have so long, and so grievously transgressed against God, that
is so full of goodness toward us. It should make us tear our very hearts
with weeping, mourning and fasting, Joel. 2. 12. secondly, It leads us to
repentance also, as it gives us encouragement to come to him to beg mercy and
forgiveness: because mercy pleases him, Mich. 7. 18. and his Throne of grace
is always easy to come to, and he freely shows mercy and will multiply
pardon. There can be no such aggrauations of our sins, but if we repent, all
will be swallowed up in the seas of his goodness, Esaias 55. 7. Joel 2. 13. Heb.
4. 6. thirdly, it should continually fire us to the hatred of our sins, and
care to live righteously, and soberly and godly in this present world, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Titus 2. 12. who would not serve so good a
Nature?

3. It should set our affections all in a flame, and make us wonderfully in
love with God, seeing beyond all comparison, there is all that in Gods nature
which should kindle affections: Oh we should love him with all our hearts, and
all our souls, and all our might, both because he is so infinitely amiable in
himself, and shows it to us daily: as also because he seeks to be ours and
to unite us to himself. The Doctrine is wholly lost* if it will not make us
more in love with God: If such Love, Mercy, Bounty, Grace, and Patience,
cannot allure us then nothing that is good can.

The whole book of the Canticles sets out the Love should be in the Church to
God: Yea, it shows that the vehement passions of Love should be in us, because
all that can be Amiable is in him.

The desire of our souls should be ever after him, and the remembrance of
him: We should be much abashed, that any lover should show more affection to an
earthly creature, then we show to God. Our minds should still run upon him.
And because we may find a horrible unto wardnesse in our nature, and extreme
dullness in our affections, therefore we should make conscience of it, to
circumcise our hearts that we might more be in love with God, both by
afflicting our souls and judging our selves for our defects: and by cutting
off, and casting away all those delights that might steal away our affections
from the Lord, beseeching the Lord himself to direct our hearts into his love,
2. These. 3. 5. Esaias 26. 9. Psalm. 31. 19. 21. 23. Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

4. It should teach us to make more account of his love to us: and all the
signs of it, we should wonderfully joy in all the pledges of his favor,
esteeming his loving kindness better then life. Our very souls should be
satisfied as with marrow, Psalm 63. shall the Lord rejoice over us with joy
and take such delight in us, Zeph. 3. 17. and shall we so lightly esteem of
his favor, presence and all his love tokens? Oh the Tidings that GOD loves us,
should fill our hearts with indelible delights and admiration.

5. It should fully persuade us to rest upon God, and trust in him with all
confidence in all estates, even wholly to commit our selves and our ways to
his protection: who would not trust so good, so loving, so pitiful, so
bountiful a Nature? Blessed are they that are favored by him, and can trust
in his mercies, and show it both by their abundant contentation, and by their
continual recourse to him, to seek all needful good things from him that is
the Fountain of all goodness, Psalm. 34. 9. and 13. 6.

6. How should it make us long for the coming of Jesus Christ: and have to
that day: how should we desire to be dissolved that we might be prefent with
the Lord, and see his beauty face to face, and enjoy that unspeakable
sweetness of his Nature immediately: Oh what hearts have we, that do not even
hate life, for this very respect, because it hinders the Lords presence from
us, and keeps us absent from him whom our souls love, 2. These. 3. 5. 1. John
3. 2. Psalm. 31. 19.

7. It should especially fire us to a desire to imitate these sweet praises in
God, and to strive by all means to make our natures like to his: we should
from our hearts, seriously, constantly, diligently, endeavor to be bountiful,
merciful, free, patient, and full of Love, as our God is. We should never
think we had a jot of good nature in us, till we could in some sound measure
show a constant disposition in these things, 1. John 4. 11. Luke 6. 36. Romans
15. 4, 5.

Thirdly, this Doctrine of Gods goodness is wonderful comfortable if we
soundly consider our interest in the favor of him that is so loving,
merciful, gracious, and bountiful, and especially against our sins, and in
the case of Afflictions: for in both these, Arguments of great consolation may
be drawn from the goodness of his nature: as,

1. Against the burden and guilt of our sins, it may greatly ease our
hearts, and quiet our consciences, to know that he has set us under grace, and
freed us from the hard conditions under the Law, and so acknowledges
satisfaction in his own Sons death, and passes by without grieuance, a world
of infirmities in us, and is most ready to declare forgiveness of all our
sins, so as the Justification of life, by his grace shall exceed and overcome
the condemnation for our sins, Romans 5. 20. 21. Esaias 55. 7.

2. In the case of afflictions as was partly showed before; for he is of so
good nature,

1. That he will not consume us, but only try us; he will not afflict us for
his pleasure, but for our profit, Heb. 12. 18. Lament. 3. 21. Mal. 3. 17. Deuteronomy.
4. 31.

2. That he will not forsake us, nor chide for ever, Nehemiah 9. 17. 31. Psalm.
103. 8, 9. nothing shall separate us from his love, Romans 8. 38. Esaias 54. 7. 10.

3. That he will hear us graciously, when we come to him in the day of
trouble, Zach. 13. 9. Psalm. 118. 5. Exodus 22. 27. so as we may go boldly to the
Throne of grace to seek help, Heb. 4. 16. Nahum. 1. 7. Yea, he will show
himself to be a God of consolation, 2. Cor. 1. 3.

4. That we shall never be oppressed by our Adversaries though never so great
and malicious, Psalm. 1^8. 6. if so good a God be on our side, what can man do
against us? Psalm. 86. 14, 15, 16. and so in general out of all affliction he
will deliver and give a good end, Psalm. 34. 17. James 5. 11. He will repent
him of the evil, Joel 2. 13.

Lastly here is matter of great Humiliation.

1. To all ill natured, fierce, unmerciful, froward and cruel minded persons:
for hence it appears they are not of God: they that are of God are like to his
nature in some degree, but these natures are of the devil, 3. John 11. 1. John
3. 6. 10. John 8. 44.

2. To such as abuse this so great goodness of God, as they do that profane
the doctrine of it, by taking liberty from thence to sin the more securely,
and so turn the grace of God into wantonness: woeful is the condition of such
persons, for thereby they heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and deprive
themselves of all the benefits of Gods goodness, Jude 3. Romans 6. 1. Heb. 10.
29. Romans 2. 5. 4. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

3. To all wicked men, that are in disgrace with God: Oh what a misery is it,
to want his favor, or suffer his displeasure, that shows so much goodness to
all that serve him, Exodus 34. 7. John 3. 17. 19.

4. The best men in the Church, may be most heartily grieved for their own
deficiencies, that they cannot more admire, love, and praise his infinite
goodness.

Hitherto of the goodness of God: His Justice follows.

The Justice of God comprehends his Truth and his Righteousness. Gods Truth is
diversely magnified in Scripture: partly as it is in himself, and partly as it
is declared toward the creatures.

God is Truth in himself three ways.

1. In his Essence, as he truly is, and truly is such as he is said to be:
thus he is said to be the true God, Ier. 10. 10. Ioh. 17. 3. and thus he winnes
himself glory, and triumphs over all the Idols of the Gentiles, Ier. 10. 14.
1. These. 1. 9. and thus God is truly infinite, truly immutable, truly
immortal, truly wise, truly good, truly just, etc.

2. As he is that increated first and chief Truth, and that immutable
Archetype, exemplar, and Idea of all true things without himself as he is the
frame of all things in his mind: The true patterns of all things were in the
mind of God from eternity, and all created things are said to be true only as
they answer these patterns.

3. In his internal works: and so his decrees are all true: not one of them
mistaken, or disappointed, but have their precise and punctual accomplishment.

2. God is true without himself toward the creatures and so:

1. In his works: because all his works he does truly, there is nothing
counterfeit, or dissembled or fained in them, Revel. 15. 3. and 16. 7. He did
truly create, and does truly govern the world, call, justify, sanctify,
and will glorify the Elect, etc. Psalm, 11^. 7.

2. In his words: all he says is true. This is called the justice of his
words: and so,

1. All his Commandments are true: right Statutes, and true judgments, and so
they are as they contain an absolute platform of Holiness, and have no
imperfection, defect, or wickedness, or iniquity in them, Nehemiah 9. 13.
Psalm. 19. 8, 9. and 119. 86. 142. 160.

2. All his promises are true: and so the Covenant of grace is true, the
Gospel is the Word of Truth: Not a Tittle of the good word of God shall fail,
Zach. 8. 8. Ephesians 1. 13.

3. All his Threatenings are true, and shall be truly accomplished, Romans 2. 2.

4. All his Prophecies are true and faithful sayings, Revel. 22. 6. 7.

The Truth of GOD is yet further magnified in Scripture.

1. As it is the Fountain of all Truth in the creature: so God is called the
God of Truth, and the Light that inlightneth every man in the world; he is the
Father of all light in the minds of the creatures, Psalm. 31. 5. John 1. 9.
James 1. 17.

2. As it is eternal and immutable, and invincible, no parcel of Gods Truth
can fail, Psalm. 117. 2. Mat. 5. 18. and 24. 35. Romans 3. 3, 4. 2. Tim. 2. 13.
great is the Truth and will prevail: It may be overwhelmed with strong clouds
and mountains of darkness and error, and yet it will so struggle, and get
ground, that in the end it will destroy and consume what is exalted against it.
As we see in the consumption of the Kingdom of the man of sin.

The consideration of this doctrine of Gods Truth should first teach us diverse
duties: for,

1. We should strive to acknowledge and praise God for the glory of his Truth:
especially when we observe the experience of it, and can say this is the Word
or Truth of the Lord, and thus he has fulfilled it, Psalm. 89. 6. and 92. 2.
Isay 38. 19.

2. It should make us with all confidence to believe what God says to us,
though it be in things unlikely, or above carnal Reason. This is to seal to
it that God is true, John 3. 33. thus did Abraham and Sarah, Heb. 11. 23.

3. If any man want the Light of the Truth, let him come hither, even to the
God of Truth, and he will be the true Light to enlighten him: he is the
Father of Lights, and therefore let him pray with David that God would direct
him in his Truth, James 1. 17. Psalm. 25. 5. and 43. 3.

4. It should make us love the Truth and stick to it, without fainting or
discouragement, though all the world do oppose us, for the Lord will be
justified in his Truth, and it shall prevail. We should choose out that way
of life which God has directed us, and not doubt of the issue, for there is no
error or deceit in his ways, they will be found all true: Jerusalem should be
called a City of Truth, Gods people should trade more heartily for the Truth.
then any other people would do for any Merchandise. They should love the
Truth, but never sell it for any respect, Zach. 8. 3. 19. Pro. 23. 23. Psalm.
119. 30. Phil. 4. 8.

5. It should fashion us to the imitation of Gods Truth: we should be a people
that hate lying and falsehood, and all deceitful ways, we should speak truth
every man to his neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 24. 25. Zeph. 3. 13.

6. It should teach us in all straites to fly unto God, and believing his
promises, to plead his Truth for our succor, trusting upon him, and
committing our ways to him, Psalm. 31. 5. as knowing that Gods Word has bin
tried and purified in the fire seven times and never failed: and therefore we
should rest our selves under the shadow of his wings whatsoever danger or
adversaries we have, Psalm. 12. 7. and 36 7, 8. and 86. 14, 15. Revel. 6. 10.
11. Yea, if God do himself afflict us, yet we should be sure and fully
persuaded that his Mercy and Truth will never be taken from us, Psalm. 89. 34.
35.

7. It should teach us to serve God in all sincerity, without dissembling and
hypocrisy, and come near to him with a true heart: for God is Truth, and
cannot abide lying and hypocrisy: He cannot be deceived, nor will he accept
deceitful workers: as he is our God in Truth, so must we be his people in
Truth and Righteousness, Hebrews 10. 22. Zach. 8. 8.

2. This Doctrine of Gods Truth may also serve for singular consolation to all
the godly of whom such glorious things are spoken: How many sweet comforts and
promises are made in the whole Book of God? And how should it fill us with
refreshing to know that all these are true, and that heaven and earth may
sooner pass away then any jot of these good words shall fail of their Truth,
Psalm 146. 5, 6.

3. It may also inform us in diverse things: as,

1. That the Testimony of God is Authentical. His Word is only fit to judge
in all controversies: God is true, and all men are liars. It is a most
blasphemous impiety, to deny unto the God of Truth the fullness of sufficiency
to testify or conclude in the things of his own glory: what men say may be
false, but what God says must be true.

2. Concerning the woeful estate of all men that live in their sins without
Repentance: Oh how fearful is their estate, when all the curses written in
Gods Book, must vnauoidablie be executed upon them? God will not repent him
of the least word in his Threatenings: He is God and not man that he should
repent, 1. Sam 15. 29.

3. That true Religion will prevail: It may be resisted and overwhelmed for a
time, but they shall not prosper that hate the Truth. The Truth will get up
again, and overcome, because God is Truth, and the power of his Truth is as
great as the force of any other his Attributes.

Hitherto of the Truth of God: His Righteousness follows.

His Righteousness is to be considered more generally or more specially: in
general the Righteousness of God is magnified in Scripture six ways:

1. Because in himself he is most pure and holy, without any vice, sin,
defect or blemish; above all that Holiness can be found in all or any of the
creatures, Esaias 6. 2. 1. Samuel 2. 2.

2. Because in all his dealings he is most just, he does no wrong, there is no
iniquity in him, his ways are never unequal, Psalm. 84. 11. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

3. Because he is Author of all the Holiness is in the creatures, they have
nothing, but what they have received, they have all their Holiness by
participation.

4. Because his Righteousness for eminency is like great mountains, and for
vnsearchablenesse is like a great deep, Psalm. 36. 7. Job 37. 23.

5. Because he executes Justice in all places and at all times there are
yearly springs of justice from God, Esaias 45. 8.

6. Because his Righteousness cannot be abolished.

In particular his Justice is to be considered either toward godly men, or
toward wicked men: first, then of his justice toward godly men.

The justice of God toward godly men is described in Scripture either as it is
his justice of Anger, or his justice of Grace.

The justice of his anger toward the godly: he has showed two ways,

1. Toward their surety, Christ Jesus; and how fearfully he was displeased
with sin even in them, may appear, in that he spared not his own Son, but
abased him to the very condition of a servant, exposed him to the temptations
of the devils, and the disgraces and oppositions of unreasonable men, and laid
upon him all the curses of the Law; humbled him to death, even the death of the
Cross, powered out upon him his fierce wrath when he made his soul a very
sacrifice for sin, so as for very pain he sweat blood, etc.

2. Toward themselves, by scourging, and chastening them with all sorts of
afflictions when they sin against him, Psalm. 89. 34. and that in so grievous
a manner, sometimes that the whole world is searched for similitudes to
express their sorrows and miseries, as we may fee in the book of
Lamentations.

The justice of his Grace is that wonderful qualification of his wrath by an
agreement as it were between his grace and his justice, which he shows unto
them by many admirable consolations.

And so it is his Justice, and he confesses himself to be bound to them in
Justice.

1. To moderate all his Chastizements and that in four respects,

1. That they be not afflicted, but only in this life for he has not
appointed them unto eternal wrath, 1. Thessalonians 5. 9.

2. That he does not take his mercy and his goodness from them, Psalm. 89. 34.

3. That he does afflict them in measure with respect of their strength, Esaias
27. 8. Ier. 46. 28.

4. That he delivers them out of affliction in the best season, Psalm. 31. 5.
and 36. 11.

2. To forgive them as often as they come to him and acknowledge their sins,
1. John 1. 9.

3. To impute unto them the Righteousness of his Son, when they claim it by
believing, Romans 1. 17. and 3. 25.

4. To direct them in his work, and set them in the steps of his ways and
to help them to do his work, Psalm. 85. 13.

5. To countenance them while they do his work all the days of their life,
against the scorns and reproaches of the world, Psalm. 11. 7.

6. To perform unto them all he has promised them in any part of his word,
Esaias 45. 19.

7. To Crown them in Heaven, and therefore is the Crown called a Crown of
Righteousness which God gives as a Righteous Judge, 2. Tim. 4. 8.

The Uses of this Justice of God toward the godly, may be Use.
either for instruction or for encouragement: It should teach the godly three
things: First, with David to meditate of, and to make mention of Gods
Righteousness even of his only, there being no Justice in the world like to
Gods Justice, executed with so much dislike of sin, and with so much grace
too, Psalm. 71. 15. vlt. Secondly, it should breed in them a singular fear of
offending, seeing God is so Just, as to pursue sin even in his own. Thirdly,
they should learn patiently to bear affliction, and to endure the indignation
of the Lord, saying with the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, Mich. 7. 9. Daniel 9. 7.

Again, the consideration of Gods Righteousness and Justice may be a great
encouragement to godly men: for thence it will follow, that he that does
righteousness is certainly of God, 1. John 2. 29. As they discern
righteousness to grow and increase in them, so they may assure themselves,
that they grow more and more like God, yea, that God himself does fashion them
for himself: and again, is God righteous, then he will love righteousness,
and make much of such as any way resemble him, in true righteousness. The
righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance does behold the Just
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 11. 7. Lastly, what can be more comfortable then
that God should acknowledge himself bound in his Justice to do such excellent
things for us as is before mentioned: We should therefore study these things,
and think on them all the day, that our hearts may be daily refreshed by them.

Thus of the Justice of God toward godly men. The Justice of God toward
wicked men now follows.

Gods Justice toward wicked men is comprehended briefefly in two Heads: The
first is his Hatred of them: their sins do stir up in God an unmeasurable
loathing of them, so as nothing can be so loathsome to us, as every wicked man
is to God. His very soul does abhor him, Psalm. 11. 5. The second is the
Recompense he will give him. The vengeance of God shall light upon the head of
all the wicked: and this Recompense comprehends no less then all the curses
contained in the book of God: By the bitterness whereof God will pursue the
wicked man in his life, and in his death, and then for ever after torment him
with unspeakable Horror in Hell.

Now that this doctrine of Gods Justice may be the more effectual, in stead
of proving it by testimonies, I would especially urge two things: first, I
would give certain Reasons or demonstrations which may thoroughly confirm it,
That God will not be a whit better affected toward the wicked, and that his
wrath is fully as great as it is said to be in the Word of God, and rather more
then any created words can utter: secondly, I would take off their objections.
First, I would prove it to be most Terrible, and then most unavoidable.

That God will be exceeding Terrible in Justice against wicked men, may
appear to any reasonable mind by these Arguments, and such like.

1. If the wrath of Kings be as the Roaring of Lions, and as messengers of
death, how fearful then is the wrath of the King of Kings.

3. It is one of Gods Titles, he is thus styled: The terrible God, Nehemiah 9.
32. 33.

4. It may be gathered from the terror of his rebukes in this life in his word
or providence: his rebuks are called furious rebukes, Ezekiel. 5. 13. and they are
called sharp arrows shot into the hearts of the Kings enemies, Psalm 45. 5.
Now if his rebukes be so terrible, what will the full declaration and
execution of his whole displeasure be?

4. The wonderful wrath of God against sinners may appear by his Judgments
abroad in the world whether we consider the number of the effects of them: Are
there not Armies and changes of sorrows with which the Lord does vex every
part of the world? And does not the Lord by common Plagues sweep away
thousands of men by Wars, Pestilence, Famine, etc. and besides are not
strange punishments every day here and there upon the workers of iniquity?
What heart of man can stand before that fearful wrath of God, when he pursues
the sins of the Fathers upon the children? But above all these temporal
Plagues are those spiritual judgments executed upon worlds of men, whose
souls are smitten with worse then Egyptian darkness, shut out from the
vision or sense of God, possessed really by devils, etc.

5. If we think seriously upon the examples of men, that have felt the
bitterness of Gods displeasure: and they that have felt it, can best tell how
terrible it is.

1. Look upon those wicked men mentioned, Revel. 6. they were Captains and
Princes, and mighty men of the earth, and when they cry out to have the
Mountains to fall upon them, only to hide them from the face of the Lamb:
Let Christ come in the most amiable manner that he can, only let him tell the
wicked of Gods Justice, and the stoutest hearted fall into those fearful
Agonies.

2. Look upon godly men, that otherwise are Gods people, yet when God is angry
with them, for a season for their sins, in what grievous case have they bin in:
David said his meat was ashes, and he mingled his tears with his drink
because of the indignation of the Lord, Psalm. 9. 10. and if judgment begin at
the house of God, and be so sharp, where shall the sinners and wicked appear,
when the righteous do not escape? 1. Pet. 4. 18. read but the Book of
Lamentations, and you shall find that the Church had searched all the world
over to find out fearful and grievous things, to shadow out their sorrows
and distresses.

3. Especially what heart of man can look upon Jesus Christ the Son of Gods
Love, and consider his grievous Agonies when he felt the wrath of God: He was
but a surety for sin, had never done any thing to offend his Father, and yet
when he feels Gods wrath it makes him sweat for pain, yea he sweates blood:
Oh can it be that men should be so overcome with spiritual dotage, as to
think Gods Justice may be more easy toward them, that are the parties
offending, then it was toward Jesus Christ?

And as the Justice of God toward the wicked is terrible, so it is unavoidable.

If they say their riches shall ransom them, they must be answered, that a
great ransom cannot deliver them: God will not esteem their riches, nor their
gold, nor all their forces of strength, Job 36. 19. Ezekiel. 7. 19. Besides riches
can fly away in the day of Gods wrath, Job 20. 28. and if they remain, yet
God can bring men into straits in the midst of their sufficiency, and rain
upon them the fury of his wrath even they are is eating, Job 20. 22. 23.

Nor will their sins be forgotten, for they are written with a pen of Iron,
and with a point of a Diamond yea, they are graven upon their own Hearts: and
rather then God would want witnesses, the heavens should declare their
wickedness, and the earth should rise up against them, Jeremy 17. 1. Job 20.
27.

Nor can it ease them, that they see that godly men suffer the same afflictions
that they do: they may not gather from thence that God is no more displeased
with them, then he is with the most Religious: for there is a great deal of
difference between the fire with which God melts his own servants as in a
Furnace, and the fire of his enemies: for in the one God only intends to
refine and purify his servants, in the other he intends to consume his
enemies: he respects the strength of his servants, but respects the sin of
his enemies, Esaias 26. 11. Ier. 46. 28.

Nor may they say there are no Passions in God, and therefore no wrath: for
though it be true, that Passions are not in God, as they are in man, yet that
little helps them, but rather increases the terror, because wrath is in God
after a way agreeable to his nature, far above that wrath can be in man:
Man's anger is mutable and finite, Gods anger is immutable and infinite. And to
beat this into the heads of wicked men, God does ascribe to himself not only
the words of anger and wrath, but of loathing with his soul, jealousy, fury,
smiting with the hands, etc. Psalm 11. 5. Ezekiel. 22. 13. and 38. 18. 19. and
the more to affect men, when God is described as angry, a consuming fire is
said to go before him, and darkness to be round about him, the earth
trembling under him, and the hills melting at the presence of God, and the
heavens removing out of their place, etc. Psalm 97. 2, 3, 4. Esaias 13. 13.

Nor may they think to find means to escape: for the Lord has a mighty
arm, Psalm 89. 14. and he has his sanctified ones, and his mighty ones,
whom he commands for his Anger, Esaias 13. 3. and to show that there can be no
resisting, he is compared to consuming fire, and to a continual whirle-winde
upon the head of the wicked, which shall not return till it has accomplished
the mind of God, Heb. 10. 29. Jeremy 30. 23. ^4.

If they say we have escaped hitherto, I answer, that though his heart be set
in wickedness, because sentence is not speedily executed, yet he shall not
prolong his days; though he do evil an hundred times, the wrath of the Lord
hangs over his head and will fall down at length, Eccles. 8. 12. Job 31. 3.
John 3. 36.

Nor will their going to Church, or outward serving of God sometimes serve their
turn: for God will not accept of thousands of Rams nor Rivers of Oil, nor if
they would Sacrifice the Sons of their bodies, for the sins of their
souls, yet it will not avail them, Mich. 6. 6, 7.

If they think that God that made them, will pity them, and not destroy
them, they are deceived: for the Lord has answered long since that he would
not spare them; though he made them, yet he would not have compassion on them,
Esaias 27. 11.

If they think to escape because they are such a multitude, they are therein
also deceived: for the vision is concerning the multitude and wrath is upon all
the multitude Ezekiel. 7. 12. 13, 14. the glory and pomp, and the multitude shall
go down into hell, Esaias 5. 13, 14. Nations that forget God shall be turned
into hell, Psalm. 9. 16.

Nor will it ease them to think how hard a course this will be thought to be
by all sorts of men: for God will be justified in his sayings, and clear
himself though they condemn him, Psalm 51. 4. he will not respect the wise
in heart, Job 37. 24.

Neither may they persist in their wilful pretending that God is merciful,
and they can show it by diverse Scriptures, that God has bound himself to show
wonderful mercy to sinners: for all that mercy belongs to the godly only: and
besides, God has expreslely declared himself, that if any man hearing the
curses of Gods Law, shall bless himself in his heart, God will not be
merciful to that man, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

Finally they may not be confirmed against the fear of Gods Justice, by the
testimony of such Ministers as have publicly or privately, encouraged them by
promising peace and mercy, and contradicting the Doctrine of other Ministers
that have soundly urged the severity of Gods Justice: for God by the Prophet,
Ezekiel does at large threaten that he will break down those walls of vain
confidence which have bin built in the hearts of wicked men, he will find a
time, when their daubing with untempered mortar shall be found by the sinner
himself, to be utterly without any foundation of Truth, see the place at
large, Ezekiel. 13. 13, 14, 15, etc.

Thus you see the portion of the wicked, and this is the Heritage he shall have
from the Almighty, Job 20. 29.

The consideration of Gods Justice toward wicked men may serve for wonderful
abasement and humiliation to men that live in their sins without repentance.
Oh is it possible, can thy heart endure to hear all this, or can ever thy
hands be strong when the Lord shall have to do with thee? Ezekiel. 22. 14. Oh
woe to him that strives with his Maker, Esaias 45. 8, 9.

Oh but what must we do, is there no remedy for us, must we despair? I
answer no, but rather fear this dreadful God, for according to his fear will
his anger be, Psalm. 90. 11. and with all possible speed and earnestness
humble thy self before the Lord, and insomuch as by this doctrine thou may
see what need thou have of a Savior to quench all this heat of Anger, fly
to Christ Jesus, and never cease begging of mercy from him to thy soul. The
wrath of God is such a fire as all the water in the Sea cannot quench: It is a
fire can be quenched only with blood and tears. No blood will do it but the
blood of Christ, and no tears but the tears of the offender himself.

And let men take heed of Procrastination, for even the longer men stay in
sin, the fiercer will his fire grow: GOD heaps up wrath as men heap up
sin. It may come to that at length, that Gods anger may come to that degree,
as to be expressed by these words, to be called Ira furoris sui magni, the
anger of his great fury, Ira indignationis, the fury of his Indignation, Deuteronomy.
29. 24. Psalm. 78. 49. then God may swear they shall never enter into his rest.

Let men therefore take heed how they abuse Gods patience and mercy any more.

Godly men also from the consideration of the fearful Justice of GOD toward
wicked men, may learn four things,

1. To get out from amongst them and every one deliver his own soul from the
fierce anger of the Lord which will fall upon the wicked, Ier. 51. 45.

2. Never to fre^^^ their prosperity seeing so fearful things abide them.

3. When they see Gods hand upon the wicked, they should sanctify and exalt
the God of Judgment, Esaias 5. 16.

4. Ever the more terrible the wrath of God is toward the wicked, the more
heartily they should kiss the Son, and make much of Christ, by whom they are
delivered from so great wrath, Psalm. 2. vlt.

Hitherto of the Justice of God. The Glory of God follows.

The Glory of God is his wonderful excellency above all things, and so his
Glory is either absolute or Relative.

The absolute Glory of God is that in which he is glorious in himself without
relation to any other, and so he is glorious four ways:

1. In the Excellency of his Nature. 2. In his Blessedness. 3. In his
Liberty. 4. In his Majesty.
1. The Glory of his Nature is nothing else but his surpassing Excellenc^^
(...) all the praises belonging to his Nature: and so he is glo^^^s in
knowledge, goodness, Justice, greatness, omnipotency, etc. And this glory of
God is described in the doctrine of his Attributes and was the glory showed to
Moses, Exodus 33. 18, etc.

2. His Blessedness is his essential glory whereby he is after a matchless
manner most happy in himself, 1. Tim. 1. 11. and his happiness is to be
adored.

1. Because he abounds with all that can be possibly good to him any way and is
seated in such felicity, that no evil can come near him. 1. Tim. 6. 15. 1.
Ioh. 1. 6.

2. Because he perfectly knows all his happiness, and so has infinite liking
and joy in his condition.

3. Because he is sufficient to himself, and from himself, so as he needs not
any good thing from us, or any thing without himself. Psalm. 16. 2. and 50. 7.
14.

3. He is glorious in his liberty; and so he excells in a threefold liberty, as
he is free from compulsion, from servitude, and from misery: He is free from
compulsion because he is not tied to second causes, nor maistered by any higher
cause, but is, and does whatsoever he will without the Coaction of any
necessity without himself, Psalm. 115. 3. Esaias 40. 13. Daniel 4. 35. He is also
free from servitude, he is bound to none, indebted to none, subject to none,
Romans 11. 35. 36. He is also free from the burden of misery, he alone being
such by nature, that no kind of misery either of fault or punishment can
befall him.

4. He is glorious in his essential Majesty, which is an inconceivable
splendour or beauty, and shining brightness, beyond all that Majesty can befall
any creature. Thus God is said to be light and to dwell in the light which no
man can approach unto, 1. Tim. 6. 16. and thus he is the King of all Kings.

And in this absolute Glory, God does excel all the Kings of the earth.

1. Because his Glory is above all praise and blessing: so is not theirs,
Nehemiah 9. 5. Psalm. 145. 3.

2. Because the Kings of the earth do give him glory, and praise him, and owe
their Homage to his glory, Psalm. 138. 4, 5. God exceedes them in Glory more
then they exceed their meanest subjects, Daniel 4. 35. and no wonder, seeing
the glorified creatures in heaven throw down their crowns before him, as
acknowledging him only worthy to receive honor, etc. Revel. 4. 10. 11.

3. Because their Glory is mortal, but God is a King immortal, and his Glory
endures for ever, Psalm. 104. 31. 1. Tim. 1. 17.

4. Because he has it in himself, and from himself as was showed before.

Thus of his absolute Glory.

The Glory of God as it is in relation, is either internal or external.

The internal Glory of God as it is in relation, is the personal Glory, and
so is the Glory either that is proper to each Person in the Trinity, or else
that peculiar Glory of the second Person in the Trinity, as he is called the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, Heb. 1. 3.

The external Glory is that which comes unto God from the creatures as he
stands in relation to them: and so his Glory shines:

1. In his works, which are therefore called his Glory, and so both his works
of Creation, Psalm. 19. 1. and his works of Justice upon the wicked, Exodus 15.
6. 7. and his works of Mercy in delivering and saving his people, Psalm. 85. 9.
and 102 15. 16. and 108. 5. Zach. 2. 5. and works of omnipotency and wonder,
Romans 6. 4.

2. In the signs of his presence, such as he gave extraordinarily on earth, as
the cloud and pillar of fire, Exodus 16. 8. 11. or that likeness of consuming
fire on the top of the Mount, Exodus 24. 17. the cloud that filled the
Temple, 1. Kings 8. 10. 11. or the forms mentioned in Ezekiel. Chap 1. 28. and 3.
23. and* 10. 4. 18. and 11. 22, 23. or else such as he gives in heaven in the
presence of his Glory to the Saints, and this was that Glory of God which
Stephen saw, Acts 7. 55.

3. In his word, especially the Gospel, which is the doctrine of the Glory of
the blessed God, 1. Tim. 1. 11. 2. Cor. 4. 4.

4. In his children Israel, he calls them his Glory. Esaias 46. 13. and so are
the godly called, because they resemble God, and in that respect excel all
other people. All other men have therefore failed of Gods Glory, because they
have failed of his Image, Romans 3. 23.

And in these four ways of relation God is glorious, but it is with a glory
which himself has printed and stamped upon these things.

There is another way of glory which is in a special manner also called Gods
glory, and that is the glory which the reasonable creature gives unto God: and
consists especially in conceiving gloriously of God, and in praising of God,
and in worshipping of God, and in obedience, and so God is wonderful glorious
in that he does continually receive all sorts of praise and adoration from the
creatures both in heaven and earth.

And in respect of this true glory which is given unto God, God does excel in
glory, all the great Kings and Potentates that ever were in the world. The very
Angels in heaven do admire this glory of God on earth, Esaias 6. 3. and so his
glory excells:

1. In respect of praise: and so diverse ways.

1. Because from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, the
Lords name is to be praised, Psalm. 113. 3. all reasonable creatures are bound
to ascribe praise and thanksgiving to him: and so it cannot be true of any
Potentate on earth.

2. Because from all persons and actions glory comes to God: whatsoever we
are, we are to his glory, Ephesians. 1. 12. 6. 14. and whatsoever we do all must
be done to his glory, 1. Cor. ^0, 31.

3. Because in all the glory or praise given to the creatures, the first and
chief glory is due to God: their glory is subordinate.

4. Because it indureth for ever and ever, no end of his praises.

2. In respect of worship, for that is a glory only due to God: no creature in
heaven or earth may take it, or can receive it without infinite danger, it is a
glory he will not give to another.

3. In respect of Obedience: and so diverse ways.

1. Because the obedience due to God is from all persons in the world: and such
an authority never had any mortal man.

2. Because the obedience the creature owes to God is universal and unlimited
and without exception, whereas the obedience Princes can have is a limited
obedience, and subordinate, men must obey them so as they command nothing
against Gods Law.

3. Because his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, there shall be no end of
obeying him: whereas the time wilcome, when no obedience at all shall be due to
Princes, and that is when Christ has delivered up the kingdom to God the
Father, and shall no more rule men by the ministry of men.

Lastly, the glory of men can be no way comparable to the glory of God:
because all their glory they have received from him: for God is said to be the
God of glory, Acts 7. 2. the King of glory, Psalm. 24. 10. the Father of glory,
Ephesians 1. 19.

The Use should be first for instruction: and so it should chiefly teach us
to acknowledge this glory of God, to give glory unto God, and by all means to
ascribe glory to him: It is a singular wrong not to give God his glory. Now we
give God glory three ways:

1. In our hearts: and so diversely: first, when we labor to fill our hearts
with the knowledge of Gods glory in all the branches of it: the earth should
be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God as the waters cover the seas,
Hab. 2. 14. secondly, when our hearts stand still and wonder, and admire at the
glory of the Lord, our hearts are not rightly affected toward God till they
be inflamed and ravished with the contemplation of his excellency and
blessedness, Ezekiel. 3. 12. thirdly, we give God glory when we believe in him,
and from our hearts trust him in things that be otherwise unlikely to come to
pass. Thus Abraham, Romans 4. 20. fourthly, when we mourn and sorrow for our
sins: for men are said to give glory to God when they repent of their sins,
Revelation ^6. 9. fifthly, when we do from our hearts rejoice at any thing
that excells in Gods Word or works any way, acccounting our selves the more
happy that God is honored or glorified any way: sixthly, when in all service
done to God, we conceive of him, with the highest degree of reverence and
excellency we can: entertaining him into our hearts as the very King of glory,
Psalm. 24.

2. In our words: and so we give glory to God diverse ways also, as first, when
men confess secret wickedness openly, finding themselves sought after, and
pursued by God: Thus Achan gave glory to God Ioshuah 7. and thus the sinner
when he feels the rebukes, or chastisements of God should humble himself and
confess his wickedness before the Lord, Ier. 13. 15, 16. Malachie 2. 2.
secondly, when men give him praise and thanks for his mercies with all possible
affection, see Luke 17. 18. So the Samaritane gave glory to God, when he gave
thanks for the cure of his Leprosy* and thirdly, when men acknowledge the
hand of God and his providence: see Revel. 11. 13. 1. Sam. 6. 5. fourthly, when
in discourse men talk of the singular praises of God: and so we should make
his praise glorious, Psalm. 66. 2. our mouths should be filled with his praise
and with his honor all the day, Psalm. 71. 8. and 96. 2, 3, 4. fifthly, when men
take away praise from the creature, and so from themselves and give God only
the glory, 1. Tim. 1, 17. John 7. 18. Revel. 4. 11. and 5. 12. 1. Chron. 29. 11.

3. In our works we give glory to God: and so first by glorifying his Son:
by acknowledging and praising and honoring of Jesus Christ; and submitting our
selves to his ordinances, John 11. 4. and so also when we honor them that
fear God and bear his Image: secondly, when men abound in good works and the
fruits of righteousness, and grow in grace and knowledge, and so make the
Image of God more and more evident, suffering themselves to be so framed by the
doctrine of the Gospel, as to be changed from glory to glory by the power of
the Word, 2. Cor. 3. 18. Phil. 10. 11. 2. Pet. 3. 18. and 4. 11. Revel. 1. 6.
thirdly, when men worship God in the beauty of holiness, not only putting on
their best clothes, when they come to serve God, but clothing themselves with
their best devotions, and affections, and reverence, and humble adoration, 1.
Chron. 16. 28, 29. fourthly, when men submit themselves unto God, and let him
do with them whatsoever he will: they that ascribe dominion to him, ascribe
glory to him, 1. Peter 5. 10. 11. Lastly, when men do all that they do to the
glory of God, studying how God may be acknowledged or praised for all they
do, being in all things some way to the praise of his glory, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Ephesians. 1. 12. 14.

Thus we should learn from hence to give God honor and glory.

Secondly, seeing God is so wonderful glorious, we should be careful by all
means to get the knowledge of his glory into our hearts, that we may
throughout our lives be made happy in the contemplation of his glory: which
that we may attain unto, we must look to these Rules.

1. We must resort to, and love his house, for that is the place on earth where
his glory dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. and 63. 3. there he keeps the court of his
Majesty, Psalm. 84.

2. We must pray for the spirit of Revelation, to open the eyes of our
understanding, Ephesians. 1. 19.

3. We must not be without an effectual faith: for if we believe we shall see
his glory, John 11. 40.

4. We must rest in these descriptions and praises of God and continue in his
Word, and be sure we change not his glory into that which is abomination to
him, Psalm 106. 20.

5. We must be sure to repent of our sins and be truly turned to God, 2.
Cor. 3. 16, 17, 18.

Thirdly, all wicked men must needs be in a woeful estate, and that in three
respects: first, because this glory is departed from them: since the time sin
came into their hearts, they have failed of the glory of God: they have lost
the glory of God, in that they have lost the Image of God, Romans 3. 23.
secondly, because their foolish hearts are so full of darkness, that they
cannot see the glory of God, they want all that comfort and warmth arises from
the view and contemplation of the Sunshine of Gods glory: they cannot get so
much as the benefit of a good conceit of God, a veil lies upon their hearts,
2. Cor. 3. Esaias 26. 10. thirdly, because the time will come when God will
confound their hearts with the terror of his Justice, and the Majesty of his
glory, when he shall fight against them to destroy them, Esaias 2. 10. 19.

Lastly, this should be a wonderful consolation to Gods children, and that in
diverse respects.

1. Because this God that is so blessed, and full of Majesty, so adored by all
creatures, this God: I say so glorious, is their God: they have his favor in a
high degree, and by covenant has given himself to be theirs for ever.

2. Because God has called them to glory, and will glorify them with himself
in the Kingdom of Heaven, 2. Pet. 1. 3. Colos. 3. 4. and in the mean time:

1. God accounts his people in a manner all the glory he has in earth, Esaias
46. vlt.

2. The Spirit of glory and of God rests upon them, 1. Pet. 4. 14.

3. God accounts it a part of his glory to help them in all their afflictions,
and to forgive them their sins. And in these two things affliction and sin
lies all the discomfort of life in effect, Psalm. 79. 9. and his glory shall be
their Reareward to guard them from dangers, Esaias 58. 8.

4. He will keep them by his power, till he present them faultlesse before
the presence of his glory, 1. Peter 1. 5. Jude 24.

5. He gives them such tastes of that great glory to come, that it is a glory
to them to think of, and hope for that blessedness to be revealed upon them,
Romans 5. 2.

Thus of the glory of God, and so of the first sort of Attributes: that is,
those Attributes which they call communicable: which are so in God, as some
print or likeness of them are in the creatures.

The Incommunicable Attributes follow, and these are in God, as they say in
Schools, a Priori, the other a Posteriori: only I have handled the former
first, as most easy for us to understand, but lest the terms of communicable
Attributes should trouble the ignorant Reader, he must consider that when we
say these Attributes are communicable, we do not mean, that they are
communicable in respect of essence, but in respect of Act, effect, or Use.

As for instance, the goodness of God is not communicated to good Angels or
men, but the effect of it, which makes them good. If God should communicate
nothing, there would be nothing at all: and if he should communicate his own
essentialls, he should make as many Gods as he produced things. In short,
these Attributes are affirmed of God in the Abstract, but of men or Angels in
the Concret, God is Goodness, Wisdom, Justice. Men are only good, wise, Just.

The incommunicable Attributes are so in God, as they can be found in no
creature, nor any likeness of them. And these are three, (viz.) his infinite
greatness, his eternity, and his immutability. And these three as they are not
found in any thing but God, so are they as it were spread and powered out
through all the Attributes of the first sort: for God is Infinite. Eternal,
and Immutable, in Wisdom, Holiness, Life and Glory. And so these Proprieties
are as it were the Adjuncts or proprieties of the other Attributes.

First, then of the infinite greatness of God.

The infinite greatness of God, is that essential propriety in God by which
he is signified to be, of himself, actually and simply beyond all bounds,
limits and measure: and so his infinite greatness or immensiuenesse
comprehends:

1. His perfection of Nature. 2. His Omnipresence or Vbiquity. 3. His
Incomprehensiblenesse.
For the first, his perfection of Nature is such, as admits no bounds, nor
limits, nor measures: because he is without composition of parts: and because
he is all he is in act, not in power or possibility: and because his
goodness, Justice Wisdom, etc. is so great as nothing can be added to them
to make them greater, Job 37. 16. Mat. 5. vlt. and the consideration hereof
may,

1. Inform us, and show us whence all good and perfect gifts come even from
this infinite greatness of perfection in God, James 1. 17.

2. Humble us: what are we, dust and ashes, vile, and loathsome creatures, that
we should be favored or accepted of God, who is so infinite in the glory and
goodness of his Nature: even the more perfect God is, the more our
imperfections might trouble us, and at the least make us serve him with more
fear and trembling.

3. Teach us: we should follow the exactest pattern: and none like God, we
should therefore be followers of him, that we may be perfect, as our heavenly
Father is perfect, Mat. 5. vlt.

4. Comfort us: and so especially in the hope of a better life: how perfect and
glorious shall we be in heaven, when God shall be all in all in us: when that
which is so perfect shall come into us, then all that is in part shall be
abolished, 1. Cor 15. 28.

For the second, the Omnipresence of God is that unmeasurableness of his
Nature, by which he is wheresoever the creature is, or any place is, Psalm.
139. 8, 9. Isay 66. 1. Ier. 23. 24. thus God fills all things and penetrateth
into all things circumscribed or defined with no spaces of any places, reaching
to whatsoever either is or can be thought within or without the world. And
which is the more marvelous his whole essence is in the whole world, and in
every part of it, whole in this whole world, and whole without the world, shut
in no where, nor shut out any where, containing all things, and contained of
nothing. He may be truly said to be every where, and no where, as he is
contained of nothing. Nor is he thus present with all things only by his
power, but by his essence, for it must needs be a childish thing to imagine an
infinite power to proceed from a finite essence. The cause then of his
vbiquitie, Deus est Sphaera: cuius centrum est vbique. (...) nusquam.
is the unmeasurableness of Gods essence. God is such a sphere whose Center is
every where, and whose circumference is no where.

Ob. God is said to dwell in heaven, Ergo he is not every where, Psalm. 115. 3.
Object.


Sol. God is every where in respect of his essence, and said to be in heaven or
dwell there only in respect of the larger Sol.
manifestation of his glory and grace.

Ob. God is not with wicked men, Numb. 14. 42. Ergo not every where. Object.


Sol. God is with wicked men in respect of his essence, but Sol.
not with them in respect of his grace and favor.

Ob. God is said to depart from men, and to return to men, Object.
Psalm. 10. 1. and 6. 5. thus God departed from Saul: Ergo he is not every
where.

Sol. God does depart from or return to men, not by stirring his essence, or
changing his place, but in respect of the Sol.
declaration of his mercy or Justice, and so he departs either from wicked men
or godly men: from wicked men he departs, when he has not mercy on them, or
when he takes away the means of grace and lets them fall into hardness of
heart and so into perdition, or when he takes away the blessings he had given
them. He departs from godly men either when he withdrawes the sense of his
grace and favor from their sins or seems to deny them help or deliverance
in their distresses. He returns to the godly both inwardly and outwardly:
Inwardly when he restores the sense of his favor and the joy of his Salvation,
and when he goes on to work Faith and Repentance in them. Outwardly when he
declares his presence by outward effects, as by deliverance, or unexpected
blessings.

The consideration of Gods Omnipresence and Vbiquity may serve:

1. For information: and so to show how much we are bound unto God that will
dwell amongst us, and keep house in the Sanctuary. He wants not a place to be
in, that fills all places and cannot be contained in the Heaven of Heavens, 1.
Kings 8. 17. 2. Chron. 2. 6. Esaias 66. 1.

2. For instruction: and so it should teach us diverse things: as,

1. Not to abuse Gods presence in his house, so as to think that place or any
other does contain him; or to commit that Idolatry as to worship a God that
can be compassed about with a Church wall, Acts 17. 24. 2. Chron. 6. 18.

2. To take heed of sinning, though it be in secret: because God is in every
place, Ier. 23. 23. 24. Yea, to avoid the very Hypocrisy of the heart: because
he is a discerner of the thoughts, and sees and stands by every offense
committed, Hebrews 4. 12. and sees and hears all we say and do.

3. To strive to bring our selves to a continual remembrance of Gods presence,
and accordingly to walk before him in all uprightness, Psalm. 16. 8. Genesis 17.
1.

3. It serves to show the miserle and folly of wicked men: they can never
escape or fly from the wrathful hand of GOD: whithersoeuer they run GOD is
there, nor can any of their faults be hid from him, Amos 9. 1. 2. 3. 4. Psalm.
139. 7. etc.

4. It shows the folly of the Papists that direct to either he or she Saint,
to bring us or our suits to God: God is not far from us, but always present
with us, and therefore we need none of them to bring us to God.

Lastly, it serves for great consolation to the godly in all their troubles and
dangers, and against all the practizes and devises of their adversaries:
nothing can befall them but what God sees, and they need not fear, because
God is always by them to help them, Ioshuah 1. 9. Esaias 4^. 1. 2. Psalm 118.
6. 7. though all friends were absent yet God is with us.

Thus of the omnipresence of God.

His incomprehensiblenesse, is that dreadful transcendencie of the nature of
God, whereby it passes our understanding, so as his essence cannot be fully
conceived of by us: so as neither corporeal places, nor spiritual
understanding can contain God. His omnipresence makes him bigger then all
places, and his incomprehensiblenesse bigger then any created mind, Psalm. 145.
3. 1. Tim. 6. 16.

The incomprehensiblenesse of God is not without use, for it may serve:

1. To confute the makers and worshippers of Images, seeing God is above all
that which any mind can conceive, and therefore much more then any picture can
express: They sin fearfully, therefore in offering to us a God that can be
set out by so poor a resemblance. Images therefore are worthily called by the
Prophet teachers of Lies.

2. To teach us to worship God with all our minds, and all our hearts, and all
our might, striving to admire and adore, and daily to bless his unsearchable
greatness, Psalm 145. 2, 3. And for our direction in the right conceiving of
God, we should therefore wholly rest upon that way, and those descriptions he
has made of himself in his word, seeing else our understandings would err
altogether in ghessing at that which it cannot take in.

Thus of Gods infinite greatness, his eternity follows.

If God be considered in himself he is infinite: if in respect of our
understanding he is incomprehensible: if in respect of our senses he is
invisible: if in respect of our words he is ineffable: if in respect of place
he is incircumscriptible: and if in respect of duration or continuance he is
eternal.

Some things have both beginning and end, as the vegetables, Aeternus dicitur
quasi extra terminum.
and bruit beasts, and these are said to be temporal. Some things have
beginning and no end, as men and Angels, and these are said to be perpetual:
One thing has neither beginning nor end which is GOD and he is said to be
eternal.

A thing is said to be eternal, either improperly or properly: improperly, and
so two ways: First, when a thing is said to last a long while: and so the
ceremonies of Moses, and circumcision were said to endure for ever, Genesis 17.
Numb. 18. Secondly, when a thing has no end which yet had a beginning, and so
Angels, devils, the souls of men, Heaven and Hell are eternal But properly
God only is eternal, because he has neither beginning nor end, or is the
beginning without beginning, and the end without end.

Or this difference in the continuance of things may be fitly expressed by the
description of eternity made by Boethius. Eternity is the interminable, total,
perfect and together pleasant possession of life: for in this description each
word makes a difference between things in their duration: for first, some
things so continue that they have both beginning and end, as the bruit beasts,
these are barred out by the word interminable. Again, some things are
interminable in respect of essence, but have no life as the heaven of the
blessed: Thirdly, some things are interminable, both in respect of essence and
life, but their life is miserable and painful, as the spirits in hell: and so
they have not pleasant possession of life: Fourthly, some things have an
interminable pleasant possession of life, but it is not total: as all the
blessed in heaven before the day of Judgment: for they have a pleasant
possession of life, but it is in their souls, not in their bodies: Fifthly,
some things have a total possession of pleasant life, but it is not together:
so the Angels before the day of judgment have a total possession of pleasant
life, because their whole Nature lives blessedly, but it is not together,
because there is even in the Angels a succession of Revelations and so of
Joys, as things are from time to time discovered to them: Sixthly, some things
shall have a total possession of pleasant life and together too, but it is not
absolutely perfect, taking perfect here, for that which needs nothing besides
it self to make it happy: and so are the Angels and godly men after the day of
Judgment: because though they shall then totally and together enjoy a blessed
life, yet they shall even need their sustentation and preservation from God,
without whom they could not be; much less be happy: for though their
blessedness be perfect in their kind, yet it is not absolutely so, because it
is a blessedness they have not of themselves, but received it of God.

Thus of Eternity.

Now the Eternity of God is his essential propriety, by which is signified
that God can end in no time, nor can have any beginning according to time, but
being more ancient then all time, and more lasting then any end, is absolutely,
always, totally and together without succession.

For the explanation of this description, diverse things are to be noted:

First, that God is wholly without the measures of time: though he be eternal
yet he is not temporary: there is a great Expers temporis. (...) Plato. (...)
Pind. (...).
difference between eternity and time: for eternity excludes time: he saw
that, that said, time was the moveable Image of eternity: and he that said,
time was the Idol or Image of eternity: and so he that said, time was the flax
of eternity. Now when we say that time is removed from God, we mean from his
essence, not from his works: fitly the Prophet Esaias says, that God inhabits
eternity, Esaias 57. 19. God dwells in eternity but yet in time he is pleased as
it were to come out of those habitations of eternity to show himself abroad in
time by his effects or workings: and for the manifestation of himself, Soecula
condit rex Soeculorum.
he made times or the worlds, and is called King of Ages, Heb. 1. 12. 1. Tim.
1. 17.

Secondly, you must note in the description, that I say God is without
beginning in respect of time: which must be noted in regard of the doctrine of
the eternal generation of the Son of God: for there is a twofold beginning,
the one of order, the other of time. In respect of order or original, the
Son and Principium originis non temporis.
the holy Ghost had a beginning from the Father, but not a beginning in respect
of time. The beginning in respect of order is not excluded out of eternity, but
only the beginning in respect of time.

Thirdly, it would be noted that it is faid that Gods eternity is absolute: for
so it is differenced from all the euerlastingnes of the creatures which is not
absolute, but by gift, and a Posteriori, or a Part post as they say in
Schools, that is in respect of continuance yet to come: whereas Gods eternity
is not by grace, but by Nature, and a Priori, or a Part ante, that is in
respect of euerlastingnes without beginning as well as without end.

Fourthly, It is to be noted that God is said to be totally together And in
this respect eternity is said to be nunc semper slans, and time to be, nunc
semper fluens.
without succession; for properly eternity, has no spaces, or intermission, or
gappes in it, but is (...) that is, continual without any interruption, or
innovation.

Now in this absolute, infinite, interminable eternity, as in a most vast
Ocean, swimmes that little flowing drop which we call time.

Or thus, what we have by looking either forwards or backwards, rowed through
the small brooks of time past or to come, that which we next come to, is this
vast sea of eternity where we can never behold bancke or end.

That God is thus eternal, many Scriptures prove, Psalm. 90. 2. and 91. 8, 9.
and 102. 27. 28. Isay 43. 17. and 57. 19.

This Doctrine of Gods Eternity should teach us many duties:

1. To adore and magnify this King of Ages, that dwells in this vast eternity,
Psalm. 48. 14, 15.

2. To love him above all things, yea, above our selves: The thought of his
glorious eternity should make us think the more meanly of our selves, that
are but perishable and vile creatures, Psalm. 102. 27, 28.

3. It should teach us to leave doting upon time and the things that belong to
it, and with more care and earnest resolution to seek the things that may
bring us beyond the bounds of this miserable and mutable time, Psalm. 102. 27.
28. do not all these earthly things perish and wax old like a garment and
does not God endure for ever, even that God that offers to provide for us
euerlafting habitations in eternity also.

4. Have any of us at any time a just and lawful desire to seek some more
space of time, for dispatch of some special work for the glory of God, or good
of men, this doctrine tells us whither to go to ask time, even to God the
Father of eternity and King of Ages. Thus David, Psalm 102 25.

5. Since God is the Lord and Master, and King of time, by the right of his
eternity, since the times are in his hands, we should also submit our selves to
his will, and be content to leave our being here when he calls for us: and
rather seek how to die well, then in vain seek to live, when GOD will have
us die, Psalm 90. 1, 2, 3. 12.

6. Abraham learned from the very eternity of God, to make conscience of
worshipping him, Genesis 21. 33. and so should we: Yea, it should make us resolute
in Gods Service, though we were opposed by never so great or many men. It was
an excellent saying of the Martyr, when he said to this effect about Gallien
his Edict. We are commanded (says he) by the mouth of Gallien our Caesar,
that we should worship what the Prince worships: But (quoth he) I worship the
eternal Prince, the maker of times, and Lord of Gallienus.

There be diverse consolations also may be gathered from Gods eternity: for,

1. Then it follows from hence that Gods goodness and mercy to us is eternal
Hab. 1. 12.

2. We should be much affected with Gods singular love to us (that are but
bratts of time, and can claim nothing but what time can afford us) in that he
has called us out of the world, to inherit with him this most blessed
Immortality, and has provided for us habitations in that glorious eternity:
and so it should comfort us against the shortness of our lives, Psalm. 113. 12,
13 29.

3. Yea, it should comfort us, that God will visit us, and dwell in our hearts
in this world, that of himself dwells in eternity, Esaias 57. 15.

4. Our adversaries are in Gods hands who is Lord of time, and can cut them off
at his pleasure, Psalm 92. 8, 9, 10.

Lastly, all the good things God has promised us shall be accomplished, for
the Eternity of Israel cannot lie nor will repent, 1. Sam. 15. 29. which is
also true of the curses denounced against wicked men.

Thus of the Eternity of God: His Immutability follows.

In the Immutability of God two things are wonderful and to be adored.

1. That he is altogether and every way unchangeable. 2. That he only is
Immutable.
For the first, that God is altogether and every way unchangeable must be
proved and explained.

The absolute Immutability of God is proved by these places evidently, Psalm.
102. 27. 28. Mal, 3. 6. Iam. 1. 17.

For the explanation of this Doctrine: two things are to be noted, first, how
God is Immutable, and secondly, in how many respects.

For the manner of his Immutability, we must know that he is Immutable by
Nature and of himself: and so he differs from some creatures that have a
kind of Immutability. As the heavens after they are renewed shall never be
changed, and so the souls and bodies of the faithful after the day of Judge
meant: but these are thus immutable, by grace, not by Nature, by the gift of
God, not of themselves: whereas Gods immutability depends upon no other, but
he is so absolutely, and of himself.

Now God is Immutable in four respects:

1. In essence or substance, and so he cannot be changed to a-another essence
or Nature, he cannot die, as having Immortality alone, he is always in act,
he has not possibilities, he is not changed so much as by motion, neither in
respect of place or working: not in respect of place, because he fills all
things, and is simply immense and infinite: not in respect of working, because
he only has the glory to work, and yet be quiet in operation and immovable:
nor can he be changed by growth or alteration in substance, because being
immense, he cannot wax bigger by Augmentation, nor lesser by Diminution: and
finally, he cannot be changed by suffering from any other, as being that only
essence that is impatible. Thus the Psalmist says that God is always the
same. Psalm. 102. 28. and that the Lord stands upon in his Title, when he calls
himself, I am, or I am that I am, Exodus 3.

2. In nature or proprieties: for all his proprieties are to everlasting the
same: so he is always omnipotent, omniscient, most holy, wise, glorious, etc.
As he cannot die in respect of substance so he cannot lie in respect of
attributes, he cannot deny himself or do unjustly, as diverse Scriptures show.

3. In decrees: as is his essence, so is his Sentence Immutable, his counsel
must stand, and is for ever unchangeable, Heb. 6. 17. 18. Esaias 46.

4. In promises: all his promises he makes in his word are yea and Amen:
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but no jot or syllable of his Word shall
pass vnsulfilled, which is also true of his Threatenings, and of that platform
of Holiness given in the Law of Nature, and expressed in Scripture, Mat. 24. 35.
Mal. 3. 6. as also in his Prophecies, Revel. 22.

5. In his Gifts of grace bestowed upon his people: and so his gifts and
callings are without Repentance, Romans 11. James 1. 17.

If any should object that God was changed in Essence, because the word became
flesh, and God was made man: I answer, that though the word was made flesh, yet
his divine Nature was unchanged, for neither was the Deity turned into the
Humanity, nor was the proprieties of the Humane Nature derived unto the divine,
but remaining what he was (viz.) God, he became what he was not (viz.) Man.

If any should object That motion from place to place is attributed to God:
because God is said to depart from some men, and return to other men: That
has bin answered before in the Doctrine of Gods Immensitie: for God mooues in
respect of effect in us, being unmoved in himself: As a man that rows in a
Boat, looking upon the bancke, thinks the bancke goes from him, or comes
nearer him, whereas the bancke is immovable, and the motion is in the boat.
If we respect Grammar in these Phrases, God seems indeed to be moved, but if
we respect a more high and secret Philosophy, we then understand thereby that
God is immovable, but is said to move by returning, when by the working of his
spirit he makes us return to him.

If any yet object, that the Spirit of God was said to move upon the waters,
Genesis 1. 2. The answer is, that by that saying is signified no more then that
the holy Ghost by his power and moving did cherish and sustain that indigested
matter, as an Hen that sits upon her Eggs, to make them fit to be hatched.

If any say that Gods suffers mutation in his knowledge, because he takes in
the Apprehension of things present or to come, and is turned back to look
upon things past, I answer, that though God be full of all knowledge of things
past, present, and to come, yet he is not cast back to that which is past, nor
stands pondering upon that which is present, nor by hoping is stretched toward
that which is to come: because God sees all things with an eternal and
unchangeable view as has bin showed in the Doctrine of his Knowledge.

If any yet object, that God suffers because he receives worship from his
children, and is blasphemed by the wicked, and that therefore God should be
passible. I answer, that Passions are of two sorts, some transmutatiue, some
Intentionall. Some Passions work a Real mutation in the Object, as when fire
heates water, thus Passion is transmutatiue. Some Passions do only determine
the Action, as when I look upon heaven, heaven suffers Terminatiue, non
subiectiue, as they say in Schools, It suffers as the object of my sight, but
in it self undergoes no change, and this is Passion Intentionall: and such
only is the Passion in God. He suffers no alteration from any action of ours,
but is only the object or Term of our Actions good or evil.

If any object that God threatened to destroy the Ninevites, and that Hezekiah
should die, and yet he did not accomplish it, and that therefore Gods Word and
will is mutable: I answer, that those threatenings or predictions were not
absolute but with condition or respect, and therefore no change in Gods will.
Nineveh shall be destroyed, if respect be had to their merits, and unless
they repent: Now God is not bound always to express the condition of his
Threatenings, and beside, all legal threatenings had in perpetual doctrine of
them, the condi^ion of repentance annexed: The condition therefore being
performed by the Ninevites, God destroys them not, yet without change in his
will, it being but a conditional will. And for Hezekiah he must die, if we
respect second causes, yet in respect of Gods eternal purpose, fifteen years
must be added: Now this Threatening of death, being a Threatening of Trial, and
containing true grounds of it in Natural causes, shows neither dissimulation
nor mutation in God.

Thus it is manifested that God is Immutable. That he only is Immutable, is
easily proved, for that place, Psalm. 102. 27. says of the creatures that they
all perish and wax old as a garment, God remaining the same: and that some
Angels and men shall have Immutable Natures after the day of Judgment, is not
by nature but by grace, as was said before.

The Uses follow: and so Gods immutability may serve. Uses.


1. For Humiliation, and so first, to Image-mongers that will needs have God
resembled by pictures, what do they less then change the glory of the
Immutable God into the likeness of a mutable creature, Romans 1. 23. secondly,
for all men it should humble the best of us that think how glorious God is for
Immutability, and yet we so mutable as nothing can satisfy us: which
mutability as it fearfully appeared in our first Parents, so does it break
out in the disposition of all sorts of men: what fearful change do many men
make in Religion. Read of the Jews, Isa. 1. 21, 22. Of the Christians, Galat.
1. 6. and 3. 1. Thirdly this is a terrible doctrine for wicked men, for all
that he has willed and threatened, shall certainly come upon them; God cannot
change: He is not as a man that he should repent, as Samuel told Saul.

2. For Instruction, and so it should teach us three things: First, Patience in
all the changes of this life: God only is immutable; we must look for it to
be subject to many alterations. Secondly, the Celebration of Gods glory here.
We should praise him for ever, that is only Eternal, Immortal, and
Immutable; 1. Timoth. 1. 17. Thirdly, the Imitation of his unchangeableness in
things we know to be true and good, we should be immovable, such as cannot be
altered whatsoever befalls us, 2. Tim. 3. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 58. Such, and so we
should be in our faith, hope, charity, promises, and good works.

3. For Consolation; and so this doctrine should much refresh all godly
Christians, It should give them strong Consolations, as the Apostle says, and
so in diverse respects.

1. Because all Gods promises shall certainly be accomplished, as these places
expressly show, Number. 23. 19. Heb. 6. 17. 18. Wherein, God willing, more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise, the immutability of his
Counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, who have
fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us.

2. Because hereby they know they shall never fail of salvation, or fall from
grace, for the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, Romans 11.

3. Because hereby God himself would assure his people, that they shall not be
destroyed with temporal miseries, though they be afflicted for a time, as the
Lord reasons, Mal. 3. 6. For I am the Lord, I change not, and ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed.

4. Because when we come to Heaven, we shall by grace be made immutable too,
for then the Image of God shall be perfect in us.

Hitherto of the Immutability of God; and so of the attributes of both sorts.

It remains that we inquire after the Substance or essence of God, unto which
all these glories are attributed, and so two things are to be considered about
the Essence of God.

1. That it is spiritual. 2. That it is One.
First, that it is Spiritual: some essences have being only and not life; as
the Heavens, Earth, Seas, etc. and amongst these we must not look for God.
Some essences have life, but it is only bodily life; as trees, beasts fowls:
and among these gods Essence is not. Some things have a mixed life, partly
bodily, and partly spiritual: and such is the essence of all men, who consist
and live both in body and soul: but to find out God, we must look for him
only amongst minds. There are essences that are only mental and immateriall,
but yet compounded though not of parts, yet of power and act, as the Angels:
For, they are never in act that which they are in power, they are in
possibility still for diverse things may befall their Natures, and their
possibilities are finite too, God is then higher then these.

God then is a mind or Spirit above all Spirits humane or Angelical, unto
which essence of his if we add the former attributes, we do fully difference
him from all Creatures. Thus God is an eternal mind, infinite, immutable in
life, knowledge, holiness and glory.

Is God a Spirit, then these Uses will follow.

1. That we should conceive nothing bodily or terrene concerning Uses.
God; when we think of God we must not imagine of him any bodily form, for
that is to make an Idol.

2. We must hence learn to check and curb that natural desire in our
corrupt hearts to have God visible: we should be ashamed of that secret
rebellion of our hearts, that are often after a close manner unquiet and
discontented, because we do not see our God we serve: for God being a
spiritual substance must needs be invisible, and altogether imperceptible by
any senses: he could not be a true GOD, if senses might perceive him.

3. Since it is Gods glory to be a Spirit, we should heartily praise him for
our glory, which is our souls, for that he has made us minds also, and so
of more excellent essence then mere bodies be.

4. We should therefore learn to serve God in Spirit and Truth; It is the
service of Spirits that agrees best to Gods Nature, John 4. 24.

Lastly, we should therefore most seek such things as serve for the use of
Spirits. The treasures that are spiritual are far more excellent then bodily
and earthly things can be, even for this reason, because they bring us nearer
to God, and more properly commend us to him.

The second thing we are to know about Gods essence is, that it is one, and
but one. The Nicen Creed and Athanasius have it thus: I believe in one God:
which the Apostles Creed does affirm too, though not so expressly: for we say,
We believe in God, not in Gods, importing thereby that there is but one God.

Nor is God one by aggregation, or consent, or kind, or sort, but he is one in
number. By aggregation a whole heard of cattle is said to be one, by consent
many friends are one: by kind men and beasts are one, for they are living
creatures. By sort, all men are one, because they have all one Nature, and are
one sort of creatures: but God is one, none of these ways, but in number. And
yet to say God is one in number is not enough, unless we add absolutely one:
for Peter the Apostle is one man, though there be many other men, but he is
not a man, so as there is none but he; whereas God is not Vnus only, but he is
Vnicus also, he is one and but one.

That there is but one God these Scriptures show, Deuteronomy. 4 35. and 39. and 6. 4.
and 32. 39. 1. Cor. 8. 4. Concerning therefore meat sacrificed unto Idols, we
know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but
one.

The Uses follow.

1. Hereby is condemned the horrible Idolatry of the Nations in bringing in
that Poluthritis, or multitude of Gods: Uses.
for as the former doctrine, that God is a Spirit, does condemn Image-mongers
that resemble him, that is incorporeall by outward and bodily shapes: so does
this of the Unity of his essence show the lamentable Idolatry of the Gentiles,
and gives us all cause from our hearts to bless God that has rescued our
understandings from those fearful: blasphemies and misconceiuings of Pagans
and Heretics, unto the only acknowledgement of one true God.

2. If God be God only, many Christians that believe not many Gods in opinion,
are yet in a fearful case for setting up Gods of their own making: they
suffer miserable shipwreck by dashing upon the glory of the one only true God:
Thus sin they, that make their bellies, or their pleasures, or their riches
their God.

3. It should teach us, with all possible reverence to adore him, whom alone
all creatures are bound to serve and honor, who has no partner in his
supreme sovereignty, Psalm. 86. 9. 10.

4. If God be alone, it should teach us to love him, and trust in him alone,
seeing it is he only that claims this honor and homage from the creature,
and there is none like him in praises, or that can help us in misery, or
bring us to the best good, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 5. Mark 12. 29. 30. Esaias 37. 16. Deuteronomy.
32. 37. 38. 39. 1. Sam. 2. 2. 3.

5. Hence we may be informed, that we need but one Mediator, seeing there is
but one God, 1. Tim. 2. 5.

Lastly, the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 3. 6. concludes from hence, that therefore we
should live in peace one with another, and by no means break the Unity of
spirit, because we have all but one God.

Hitherto of the doctrine of the Nature of God.

Of Believing I entreated before, only we must know that these words I
believe must be applied unto each word and Article of the Creed: and so we must
here consider what it is in particular to believe in God, and what every
Christian should mean when he says, I believe in God. It is to be noted by
the way that he does not say I believe God, but in God: The ordinary
distinction of believing is not impertinent: It is one thing to believe that
God is, Credere Deum, or to believe God, Credere Deo, and another thing to
believe in God, Credere in Deum; for to believe in God, is first to know God,
as he has revealed himself in his Word and so to conceive of God according
to the former doctrine of his Nature: secondly, to be persuaded, That that God
is my God; and thirdly, to put all my trust in him, and to rest upon him alone
for all happiness.

Of the knowledge of Gods Nature before. And of the work of faith in believing
God to be my God, before. This believing in God here expressed urges
principally upon us the third thing, and that is that we must employ our faith
in a daily relying upon God, and confident affiance and trust in his goodness
and mercy toward us.

Now there are diverse Reasons profitable for us to think much upon, which may
not only prove the point, but frame in us a spiritual confidence in God. We
may with all safety and confidence rest upon God alone, and his favor, and
promises.

1. Because he has bound himself by his word and promises to be so good to
us, and has confirmed his promise by oath and by seal.

2. Because he is of such power to do us good.

3. Because he is of so good a Nature, and it agrees so well to his disposition
to perform his promises.

4. Because God is so well pleased with our trust in his mercy, Nahum. 1. 7.

5. Because God can be so fearfully revenged upon our unbelief.

6. Because there has bin such an vninersall experience of Gods care for all
that ever trusted in God. Who ever trusted upon GOD and was destroyed or
disappointed?

Is it required of us that we should beliue in God, then these uses will
follow.

1. It shows the difference in the relation of our faith, as it looks upon
men and upon God. We beliue men as the Uses.
Apostle Paul and our Teachers; but we do not believe in Paul or in our
Teachers, but in God alone.

2. It shows the folly of wicked men in pursuing the godly, as if there were
hope that they might drive them to such exigents, that there should be no help
for them; for they trust in God, and therefore can never be driven beyond all
refuge. I trust in God, says David, how say ye then that I should fly hence,
as a bird beaten from his rest, Psalm 11. 1.

3. It shows what use we should make of our insufficiency to conceive of God
fully: when our minds are beaten back from beholding his full glory, yet our
faith will catch hold, so as to make us trust in him, though we cannot fully
comprehend him. If we cannot receive him by contemplation, yet we may by
believing.

4. In as much as to believe in God is the very entrance into the Creed, and
the foundation of all the rest: It she was that many that are Christians in
name, are not indeed true Belieuers, because they do not believe in God: that
is, they do not trust in him: For it is manifest, that these sorts of
Christians that follow, do not believe in God.

1. Such as live in Ignorance, without the means or the gift of the knowledge
of God; as the Apostle says: How should they believe in him, of whom they have
not heard, Romans 10. 14.

2. Such as trust in their Wealth, Friends, Beauty, Gifts, Skill, Strength,
Revenues, Hopes, or Sins: The mis-placing of their trust, shows they
believe not in God.

3. Such as make no Conscience to use ill means to get out of distress, or to
obtain their desires; such as are resorting to Wiza^ds, lying, deceit, usury,
oppression, dissimulation or the like: For he that belieueth will not make
haste, Esa. 28. 16.

Lastly, all godly men should strive so to profess in words, as also by their
practice to prove it, that they do indeed believe in God, and rest upon him.

1. By resting in the praise and appellation of God.

2. By living without care, and therein being like little Children, and this we
do when we commit our souls and bodies, and lives, and children, and states,
and all our ways unto God. 2. Tim. 1. 12. Psalm. 37.

3. When in Adversity we run to him for refuge, and so make our moan to
him, that we rest with patience and good persuasion, that God will cause all
to work for the best to us.

It should much trouble us, if in soundness of practice we have not learned
this first lesson of believing in God: We should be much displeased with our
selves, if our hearts be unquiet and any way unapt to rest and wait upon God
Psalm 42. 12. and we should often beseech the Lord to help our unbelief.

Hitherto of the Nature of God, and of believing in God: The next thing Faith
takes notice of, is the Relations in the Godhead: and so God is the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost: for this term God is to be applied, not only
to the Father (which is the next word) but to the Son and holy Ghost as
follows after in the Creed: and therefore we must read with a Comma after
this word God, thus, I believe in God, the Father: to read without a Comma,
that is Heretical, for if we read thus, I believe in God the Father, it would
sound as if the Creed should say that the Father were God only, not leaving the
term God to be carried to the Son and holy Ghost.

Before then I come to speak of the Father, I must entreat of God as he is
three Persons, both Father, Son, and holy Ghost: And this is one of the
deepest and dreadfullest Mysteries in all Religion: where I must proceed in
this order: first, to prove the Trinity by Scriptures: secondly, to explicate
the doctrine: And thirdly, to answer certain objections might arise in men's
minds about it.

Because these things about the Trinity are most wonderful, and above the
reach of the creatures, we must seek testimonies to ground our consciences in
the belief of them such as may be firm and evident: It is a difficult thing
to bring the heart of men solidly to assent to such secrets as these, as are
not only beyond the sight, but above the reason of men, and the mind may
easily vanish into wild speculations, if we be not well grounded with sure
Evidence: nor can we have light from the book of Nature to inform us; for
what any Heathen man has spoken, of an Eternal mind, word and spirit, they
spoke by tradition from the Hebrews, and uttered it perhaps in a false and
corrupt sense. It Is the book of Scripture must only inform our faith herein.

The proofs for the Trinity are gathered, both out of the Old and New
Testament, and so they either prove there were more Persons then One, or else
expressly that there were Three Persons.

That there are more Persons then One is proved, by the term ELOHIM, which is
uttered in the plural number, as if it should sound Gods: as Genesis 1. 1. In the
beginning Gods or ELOHIM created Heaven and Earth: Created is in the singular
number, to show the unity of the Essence, and ELOHIM in the plural, to show
the Trinity of the Persons: so Genesis 1. 26. Let us make man in our Likeness,
Let us, shows more Persons, and likeness being in the singular number shows
unity of Essence. And verse 2. besides the Lord there is mentioned the Spirit
of the Lord sitting upon the waters Josh. vlt. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord
because he is ELOHIM sancti, holy Gods. And Jeremy 10. 10. The Lord is the
living Gods or ELOHIM, and King everlasting. Hos. 1. 7. I will save them in the
Lord their God. Genesis 19. 24. The Lord reigned from the Lord fire and brimstone.
Exodus 23. 20. 21. The The Lord sends his Angel whose name is JEHOVAH. Dan. 9.
19. Hear oh Lord our God for the Lords sake, Psa. 110. 1. The Lord said to my
Lord sit thou at my right hand, Ier. 32. 5. 9. and 33. 15, 16. The Lord shall
raise up a Branch, whose name is, THE LORD.

Now that there are three Persons, and no more nor fewer, is proved by places
more obscure or more express.

The Trinity has been observed in such places as these, Esaias 6. 3. where the
Angels say thrice Holy; and so where JEHOVAH is three times repeated, Numbers
6. 23. Esaias 33. 22.

But the most express places are in the New Testament. A manifest revelation
of the Trinity was in the Baptism of Christ. The Father speaking from heaven,
the Son standing in the River, the Holy Ghost descending like a Dove. Matthew.
3. 16. 17. and so in the Institution of Baptism, we are to be baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And Ioh. 14. 16.
17. I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter the Spirit
of truth; and the 1. Ioh. 5. 9. There are three in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit. And the like evidence is in these places, 2. Cor. 13. 13.
Tit. 3. 5. 6. Ephesians. 2. 18.

In the Explication of the doctrine of the Trinity, we must be wise to
sobriety, because it is wholly secret, rather to be believed, then to be
demonstrated, or described. It is a doctrine may be apprehended, but never
comprehended, no not by the light of grace, nor fully and wholly by the light
of glory, as being above the reach, not only of men but of Angels. A mystery
to be adored by humble faith and piety, not to be searched, without curious yea
furious temerity: For it is so admirable as Reason cannot express it, and so
singular that example cannot declare it to us: for the Images or Similitudes
borrowed out of the book of Nature, may rather show that the doctrine of the
Trinity does not destroy Nature, then give us any pattern which can sample out
the thing it self; and besides to err here, is the most dangerous of all
errors. For, as nothing is sought with more difficulty, or found with more
profit, so nothing can be mistaken with more peril. And August.
therefore as a Father said well, seeing we cannot find out what God is, we
must take heed, that we think not that of him which he is not; yet must we
not wholly neglect the doctrine, because a necessity lies upon us to believe:
and therefore, though men and Angels have cause to stand and wonder at this
secret, that God should beget a Son, and that from that Father and Son
should proceed that Spirit the Sanctifier, yet because God will be so
acknowledged of us, we must make use of our faith to believe, what our reason
cannot describe to us.

Three things then for our capacities are to be thought upon. The first
concerns the Matter of this Mystery. The second, the terms by which it is
expressed, and the third, the answer of certain Objections might arise in our
minds.

For the first, we are to consider what a Person is, and then how these three
Persons do agree one with another, and how they differ one from another.

A Person is an understanding substance, individual, and incommunicable, which
is not sustained in any other, or by any other. It is an understanding
substance, and so it excludes plants and beasts, which are no persons though
they be substances, and it is not sustained in any other, and so excludes the
humane nature of Christ, which is therefore not a Person, because it subsists
in the Divine Nature, and it is incommunicable, to distinguish it from the
Essence, which is communicated to all the Persons.

Four things are common to each Person in the Trinity. First, Truth, and so
each Person is the true God, having all the properties of God, and doing all
the actions of God, and receiving all the worship of God.

Secondly, Mutual Immeation or Immanencie, as they call it, which the Grecians
call, (...) and (...), by which none of the Persons are separate from the
Divine Essence, but subsist in it, and so all meet in the Essence.

Thirdly, Perfection, by which each of the Persons are not a part of the Divine
Essence, but the whole Divine Essence is in each Person.

Fourthly, Distinction, so as every Person is distinguished from the other
Persons, so as the Father is not the Son nor Holy Ghost, nor the Son the
Father or Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost the Father and the Son.

For the first of these things in common which is Truth, so as each Person is
the true God; It needs not much explanation for the sense: for under that Head
three things are given to each Person in common. First, the properties of the
Godhead, so as each Person is Eternal, Infinite, Immutable, in life,
knowledge, holiness and glory: and so Secondly, the Actions of the Deity are
common to every Person, according to that Rule in School: Opera Trinitatis ad
extra sunt indiuisa: The works of the Trinity, that issue outward, are
undivided: So the Father creates, the Son creates, and the Holy Ghost
creates: as there is one work, so there is but one worker, which is God in
three Persons. To make man in Gods Image, is common to all three Persons, Let
us make man, etc. Genesis 1. 26. so John 5. 19. what the Father does, the Son
does the same; and in many other places. And as they agree in working, so do
they in worship, all divine worship does equally belong to each Person.

For the second, which is the mutual seating or meeting of all the three
Persons in the same Essence, so as they are one in another, diverse Scriptures
prove: so Christ says, I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, John 14.
10. and this must needs be so, because the essence of God is infinite, and
therefore every person possessing it, it must needs follow, that wheresoever
one is, there the other are also, and that one is in another: so as there can
be no place, or thing, where one of them is, but there the other are also.
Excellent is that saying of that Father, concerning the three Persons in the
Trinity. Singula sunt in Singulis, etc. Each are in each other, and all in
each, and each in all, and all in all, and one all. He that sees this in
part, darkely, as in a glass, let him rejoice that he knows God, and as God
let him honor him and give him thanks. He that sees it nor, let him tend to
see it by godliness, and not to calumniate by blindness, for God is one, and
yet there is a Trinity, etc. Thus He.

For the third, the whole Essence is in each Person. They are all
consubstantiall not (...), of like essence only, no^ (...) of a diverse
essence, nor are they (...), that is, such as have one Nature common to them,
but not the same in number, as it is with men: nor are they (...), that is,
such as have every one a nature, that no other either person or thing has, as
the Sun and Moon have such a Nature as no other have, there being but one
Sun and one Moon, but they are (...), that is, all of the same substance,
Coessentiall, and Consubstantiall.

For the fourth, That the Persons are distinguished is common to all the
Persons, how they are distinguished, is that which is to be considered in the
next place: Distinction imports Opposition: Now there is a threefold
opposition, The greatest opposition is amongst contraries, for these fight one
against another. There is also a middle opposition which is in things only
disparate as they call them, as between men and beasts, so as a man is not a
beast. The least opposition is between things that are relate, as the Father
is not the Son, the Subject is not the Prince, and the like: this opposition
between things in relation, is in things that do in many respects agree, and
this distinction agrees to the Nature of God and is the least of all
distinctions.

The difference of the Persons, is two ways to be considered: for first, they
differ from the Essence, and then one from another.

The Persons in the Trinity differ from the Essence: which that it may be
understood, we must know that some things differ, Ratione, not Re: that is not
in deed, but in respect of our conceiving: as for instance, The Attributes of
God differ, but how? not in deed nor in themselves, but only in our cogitation
of them: and so the power of heating and of drying in the Sun, differs only
in respect of conceiving, for in the power it self there is no distinction to
be found, it is found only in our heads. But this is not the difference in
the Trinity: for the Persons differ one from another really, and would so do
if we never thought of them. A real distinction is grounded either upon the
respect of the essence of things, or in respect of the manner of being. A
distinction in respect of essence is not in the Trinity, for all the Persons
have the same essence; it remains then that the Persons in the Trinity differ
from the essence only in respect of the manner of their being: and so (in
short) differs from the essence, as the manner of a thing differs from the
thing it self. The manner of being in every thing does determine it: Now
things in respect of the manner are three ways to be considered of, for there
is the Modus. 1. Essendi. 2. Se habendi. 3. Subsistendi.
manner of the essence, the manner of having that essence, or the manner of
subsisting. The manner of the Essence is showed by Attributes, as when we say,
It is true, good, Just, etc. The manner of having that essence, is either with
or without dependence: as in the creature, the manner of their having their
essence is by dependence upon God: and in the Creator, the essence is had of
himself without any dependence. The manner of subsisting, is the furnishing of
a thing with peculiar Relation, including a Person. Now then the Persons in the
Trinity Non differunt (...) sed (...). Basil. Just. Mart. Dam. In Sancta
Trinitate est alius and alius non aliud and aliud. In Christo est aliud and
aliud non alius and alius.
differ from the Essence only in the manner of subsisting, because the Essence
subsists in one manner in the Father, and in another in the Son, etc. They
do not differ in Essence, (for all of them have the same) but only in the
manner of the subsisting of the Essence in each Person. In the Trinity there is
another, and another, but not another thing: there is another, that is, another
Person, there is not another thing, that is, not another Essence. In Christ
now, there is another and another thing, for his divine Nature is one thing,
and his humane Nature is another thing, and yet there is not alius, that is
another Person. But it is otherwise in the Trinity. The being of the Father is
the being of the Son, and the being of the holy Ghost, but to be the Father,
is not to be the Son, or the holy Ghost.

Thus the Persons differ from the Essence: They differ one from another four
ways. In order, in personal proprieties, in number, and in operation.

First, in order they differ: for the Father is the first Person, the Son the
Second, and the holy Ghost the Third: This Priority must not not be mistaken;
for one Person is not before another in time or in dignity but only in Nature,
or in order of Nature, so as one Person depends upon another: As the Sun is
before the beams of the Sun, not in time, but in order of Nature, because the
beams are from the Sun: so in the Trinity, the Son and holy Ghost are after
the Father, not in time, but because they receive the original of their
Persons from the Father, Relatiues are together in time: only note that Nature
here signifies the manner of subsisting, not of essence; for in respect of
Essence there is no priority in the Trinity.

Secondly, they differ in personal Proprieties: As the personal Propriety of
the Father is to be of himself in respect of his Person unbegotten. The
personal Propriety of the Son is Generation, or to be of the Father by
begetting: The personal Propriety of the holy Ghost, is to be of the Father
and the Son by Spiration or proceeding, and thus each Person differs from other
by incommunicable Characters.

Thirdly, they differ in number: they are the same in number in respect of the
Essence, because one God is Father Son, and holy Ghost, and yet in respect of
those Characters in the manner of subsisting, each Person has a subsisting by
himself, which in number is not the same with the other Persons: The Father
has one manner of subsisting in number, the Son another, and the holy Ghost
another: Note that I say each Person has his subsisting by himself, not of
himself. Per se, not ase.


Fourthly, they differ in operation: and so both in external and internal
operations. In external works though in respect of the things wrought, they
are common to all three persons, yet in respect of the manner of working, there
is distinction of the persons: for the Father works by the Son in the holy
Ghost: The Father works from none, the Son from the Father, and the holy
Ghost from them both, Genesis 19. 24. John 5. 19. 30. and 8. 28. and 16. 13. There
are two principles to be marked for the understanding of this point. The one
is, that the works of the Deity that are outward are common to all three
Persons. The other is, that look what order there is of existing in the
Trinity, the same order there is in working: as was said before, the Father
works by the Son in the holy Ghost. Thus Creation, Adoption, Sanctification,
are the works of the whole Trinity: as the Scriptures prove, that attribute
Creation to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Spirit, and so of the other
works all three Persons work the same, Apotelesma or work, but not all after
the same manner: as for instance, in the work of our Redemption, the Father
works by sending the Son, the Son by assuming our Nature, the holy Ghost by
sanctifying, and forming the body of Christ out of the flesh of the Virgin,
etc. so in the Creation the Father wills it, the Son by the holy Ghost effects
it. But this is withal to be noted, that as any outward work has more
resemblance in any part of it to any person in the Trinity, so it is more
specially attributed to that Person: so in the Creed and in the Scriptures too,
Creation is attributed to the Father, who being of himself, fitly gives being
to the creatures: Redemption is attributed to the Son, who as he resembles his
Fathers Image, is fittest to represent unto mankind, his mercy; and being an
eternal Word in the Fathers mind, does fitly by his Word tell us his Fathers
meaning. Sanctification is attributed to the holy Ghost, who as he is breathed
(as it were) from the Father and the Son, per modum voluntatis and amoris, so
does he fitly by breathing or inspiration inlighten and sanctify our wills
and affections.

And as they differ in external works, so do they in internal: for the
Father only begets a Son, the Father and Son (as it were) breathes forth the
holy Ghost: And thus of the matter of the Doctrine of the Trinity: the Terms
follow to be considered of.

These words Persons and Trinity, Essence, etc. were taken up in the Primitive
Church as the fittest words to express what they conceived of these glorious
Mysteries: The speech of man in many things extremely does want words. We say
three Persons, not as if thereby the mystery were uttered, but Dictum est tres
personae non vt illud diceretur, sed ne omnino taceretur. August. Non quia
Scriptura dicit, sed quia non contradicit. August.
that it may not be utterly concealed: for that which is of such ineffable
eminency cannot be expressed in such a word: we speak therefore of these
things (as the Father said) not as we ought but as we can. And again, the
same Father says, It has bin lawful for us for discourse and disputation
sake to say three persons, not because the Scripture says so, but because it
does not contradict it: and a kind of necessity brought the Ancient Church to
invent the words; for when Heretics would yield to the terms of Scripture,
and varied upon the corrupt senses they put upon the words, the Ancients were
driven to invent words which did express the true sense, that thereby the
Heretics might be tried whether they hold the right Faith or no: which terms
that before were promiscuously used in other learning, being in the days of
the first Christian Churches made free in the City of God, have ever since
enioned their freedom, and may not now be turned out, without suspicion of
contentiousnesse, self conceit, and Schism. The sense is in Scriptures,
though the words be not there. As the Scripture says, there be three in
Heaven, which are one, which the Church adds, the three are Persons, and the
one is essence. It adds not to the sense of the Text, but to the words: and yet
the Word Person is found, Heb. 1. 3. in For the original of these terms,
read Chemnitius de tribus personis diuinitatis.
the same sense (in a manner) as it is taken here. To bring in new words,
might bring in new errors, and it were a great wrong to cast out such words as
have done such service against Heretics, and are so fit to reduce the minds
of men, to understand the right way of believing in these high Mysteries.

But yet we must be warned that the terms do not always fully express the
thing, especially if we judge of the terms about the Trinity, as we do of
the same words amongst us in other things: As for instance, a Person in the
Trinity differs from a person among men or Angels; as for example, Peter, Paul
and John, are three persons, to whom our humane Nature is common: yet these
three persons differ one from another: first, in Substance, because each of
them have their substance of soul and body separate from the other: secondly,
in Time, one is younger then another: thirdly, in Will, Paul contradicts Peter:
fourthly, in Power, Paul labors more then all the Apostles: fifthly, in
Operation, Peter works amonst them of the Circumcision, and Paul amongst the
Gentiles. But it is not thus in the three Persons in the Trinity, Peter and
John are separate wholly one from another: whereas in the Trinity, the Father
is in the Son, and he in the Father, 1. John 3. 24. They may be far asunder
in place, but God the Father and the Son are never asunder, John 8. 29. and
in the Trinity there is in all one will, one power; all three Persons are
Almighty, all eternal, and all work the same work.

Ob. Some may say, it seems impossible, that three should 1. Object.
be one.
Sol. In one and the same respect: but not in diverse. Three Sol.
Persons cannot be one person, but three Persons may be one Essence. As the
Nature of man may be common to many persons, as to Peter, John, Paul, etc.

Ob. He that sees Christ, sees the Father, for he is in the Father, and the
Father in him: therefore the Father and the Son 2. Object.
are but one Person.
Sol. He that sees the Son sees the Father, because the Son Sol.
has the same Essence with the Father, and being manifested in the flesh
reueales the whole will of God: he is the same with the Father in Will and
Essence not in person.

Ob. If the being of the Father be not the being of the Son or holy Ghost:
then it follows that there are three diverse beings 3. Object.
and so three Essences.
Sol. The being of the Father notes the being of his Person not of his Essence,
and so three Beings are but three Persons Sol.
subsisting in one Essence: As the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Moon, and the light of the Air, in substance are one and the same light, and
yet three distinct lights; the light of the Sun being of it self, the light of
the Moon from the Sun, and the light of the Air from them both.

Ob. If there be more IEHOVAHS then one, then there 4. Object.
are more Essences then one, but here are more IEHOVAHS: for JEHOVAH reigned
fire and brimstone from JEHOVAH in heaven, Genesis 19. 24.
Sol. JEHOVAH is a Term, given to the Persons as well as to the Essence, and so
diverse IEHOVAHS notes diverse Persons, Sol.
not Essences.

Ob. The Son and holy Ghost had their beginning from the Father, therefore it
seems the Father only is God. 5. Object.

Sol. The Son and holy Ghost had the beginning of their Persons from the
Father, but their Essence they had of themselves, Sol.
as being common to all three Persons, so as every Person is (...), God of
himself.

Ob. Three and one makes four: if in God there be three and one, then three
is a Quaternity not a Trinity. 6. Object.

Sol. Three and one if they be things essentially and really Sol.
divided make four, but one and the same thing may have diverse relations or
manners of being which are distinct one from another.

Ob. He that is the whole Godhead, besides him, there can be no other in whom
likewise should be the whole Godhead: 7 Object.
but the Father is the whole Godhead, therefore the Son and holy Ghost are
not so.
Sol. The Mayor Proposition is false: for the whole Godhead Sol.
is in every Person, as the whole Nature of man is in diverse men.

Ob. The power of the Persons is not one, and therefore 8. Object.
how can their Essence be one: their power is not one, because the Father can
beget, and so cannot the Son.
Sol. The natural power of the Persons is all one, the personal Sol.
power differs.

Ob. How can the Essence begetting, and the Essence begotten 9. Object.
be all one? the Father begets, the Son is begotten, how can they be one then?
Sol. Distinguish between Generation and Communication, Sol.
and between Essence and Person: the Person begets and is begotten, but the
Essence neither begets, nor is begotten, but only is communicated.

Ob. If the Essence of the Father and the Son be all one, 10. Object.
then the Father was incarnate, for the Son was.
Sol. The Essence of God absolutely considered was not incarnate, Sol.
but the Person of the Son: who though he had the whole divine Nature in him
yet in respect of the manner of his subsisting did differ from the Father and
holy Ghost.

Ob. Whose operations are distinct, their Essences are distinct: 11. Object.
but the operations of the Persons in the Trinity, especially those internal
are distinct, therefore they have distinct Essences.
Sol. The Mayor is true of Persons that have a finite Essence, Sol.
but not of the Persons in the Trinity, who have an infinite Essence common to
them.

The consideration of this Doctrine of the Trinity should serve for diverse Uses.

1. It should strike us with amazement and admiration of the glory of God, and
remove the sense of our own insufficiency and narrowness of heart and
understanding, who are so overcome with glory that our minds are not able to
conceive of, or behold these wonderful secrets in the Divinity: It should
work in us an unspeakable fear and Reverence to think of the being of God,
that so infinitely excells the being of all creatures in heaven and earth.

2. It should compel upon us, more care and attendance of spirit in
worshipping God, so as we be sure we direct our service to him that is one in
Nature and three in Persons: for worship belongs equally to all three Persons.
And herein the Christian fundamentally differs from Pagans, Turks, and Jews,
and in heart becomes as one of those when he worships a God that is not three
Persons.

3. We are bound to take notice as of the common glory of all the Persons, so
of that special glory is due to each person, as we find it either described
in the Word of God, or expressed in the works of God.

4. We must take heed what we speak of the Trinity in Unity; for we may fall
upon such forms of speech, as may be extremely erroneous and dangerous: and
for the help of the ignorant, I will note diverse of the speeches which are
dangerous and unsound: as that there are three Gods, three Eternalls, three
Almighties, etc. or that the Essence is distinguished into the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; that God is threefold, or that there is a triplicity in God; that
God does beget another God; that the Father is another thing from the Son; that
the Son and holy Ghost have a beginning of their Essence; that the Person was
begotten or did proceed from the Essence: by discerning where the error lies
in these sentences we may try our skill in the former doctrine of the Trinity.

5. The Doctrine of the Trinity should be wonderful comfortable unto the true
Christian, because as the Apostle John shows there are three in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, which will avouch the happiness of the true
believer: and his comfort may be increased, if he consider what was before
taught, that all three Persons do join in the work of his Redemption, 1. John
5. 9.

Lastly, it is not unprofitable out of the Doctrine of the Trinity to show how
all sorts of Heretics have assaulted it, and bin confuted by it, which may be
briefly thus showed. We must believe that in the Trinity there is nothing
created as Dionisius would have it: nothing unequal, as Eunomius and Aetius:
nothing before or after or lesser then other as Arius said: nothing foreign or
serving to another as Macedonius said: nothing inserted by stealth or
persuasion, as Manichaeus said: nothing corporeal, or in fashion of bodies as
Melito, Tertullian and Vadianus said: nothing invisible to themselves as Origin
said, or visible to the Creatures as Fortunatus said: nothing diverse in motion
or will as Marcion said: nothing taken out of the Essence of the Trinity and
put into the Nature of the creatures, as Plato and Tertullian said: nothing
singular in office, or communicable to another as Origin said: nothing
confounded as Sabellius said. Aug. Tom. 3.

Thus of the Trinity in general.

The Father.]

This term Father is attributed to God both essentially and personally.
Essentially, and so the term belongs to each Person in the Trinity, as being a
term that follows the Godhead, Mat. 23. 9. and thus God is said to be a
Father diverse ways: as, first, by Predestination, because he inrolls the Elect
as Sons from all eternity, Ephesians. 1. 3. secondly, by Creation, because he
made things to be of nothing by his own power, thus Adam is said to be the
Son of God, Luke 3. 38. and and God is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.
9. thirdly, by temporal redemption, and so God is acknowledged for the Father
of the Israelites, because he made them a people to himself, and brought them
out of Egypt and gave them the outward privileges of his children, Esaias 63.
16. 11. 12. fourthly, by regeneration, when he changes our natures and makes
them like his divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. and so we are sons so soon as we
believe, John 1. 12. and so soon as he gives us the Spirit of Sanctification
and Adoption, Romans 8. 15. fifthly, by personal union, and so Christ in respect
of his humane nature is the Son of God: because that nature does subsist in
the divine Nature, Luke 1. Now all these ways God is a Father by grace; and in
respect of Regeneration, the second Person in the Trinity is called a Father
as well as the first, Esaias 9. 6. 7. and is said to have an offspring and
generation, Esaias 53. 10. Lastly, God is said to be a Father by Nature, and by
generation, as he begets a Son, consubstantiall with himself, and so the
first Person in the Trinity is called Father only, as he is the Natural
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the Creed here Faith beholds God as a Father principally in respect of
eternal generation, as the first Person in Trinity is the Father of the
second, but withal, as it extracts virtue out of that high Mystery, it lays
hold upon the Father of Christ, as he is our Father in Christ also: for Faith
is of that Nature, that when it lays hold of any thing, it will not off, till
it have gotten by contemplation and conclusion what may be collected any way
from thence.

We are first then to consider of God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and then as our Father.

As God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, these things would be proved
and opened.

1. That God does beget a Son. 2. That JESUS CHRIST is that Son. 3. The
manner of this Generation.
For the first, that God has begotten a Son, is a Mystery beyond the reach
and comprehending of all men and Angels, yet is it a truth in many Scriptures
charged upon us to believe, as namely, Psalm. 2. 7. John 1. 14. John 3. 16. 1.
Ioh. 3. 8. and 5. 13. Mat. 28. 19.

For the second, that the Lord JESUS CHRIST is that Son of God is apparent by
Scripture too, Romans 15. 6. Col. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1. 3. Mat. 16. 16. Mat. 3. 17. 2.
Cor. 1. 19. 1. Ioh. 1. 4. and 4. 15. and. 5. 20. 2. Ioh. 3.

For the third, how the Father did beget the Son, is unknown unto us, It is
a secret cannot be revealed to us especially in this mortality, Pro. 30. 4.
only by way of Negation, the Scripture entreating of it shows us that God
does not beget his Son as men beget theirs: for,

1. Men beget without themselves, so as the Son is divided from the Father:
but so does not GOD the Father beget Christ his Son, he is distinguished
from the Father but not divided, the Father begets in himself.

2. The substance of the Son amongst us, may be like the Father, but it is not
the Fathers substance. But in the Trinity the Father and the Son are of the
same substance, consubstantiall.

3. In corporal Generation, the Father deriues unto the Son but a part of
his substance, but GOD the Father communicates his whole substance to his Son.

4. The creature begets a Son that is mortal, but God begets a Son that is
immortal.

5. The creature begets in time, but God begets in eternity, which has three
differences in it: for first, the time may be named when the creature did
beget, the Creator begets before all time, Pro. 8. 22, etc. 30. secondly, the
creature cease begetting, but God the Father begets his Son eternally, he
always begets, Psalm. 2. 7. thirdly, the substance of the Father was before the
substance of the Son but not so in this eternal generation; Christ is of the
Father, but not after the father.

6. Among the creatures the Son is subject to the father, but in this eternal
and divine generation the Son is equal to the father: Subjection is due to
God the father from all creatures, but not from the Son, or holy Ghost, Phil.
2. 6.

7. Among the creatures, the father and Son are two things in number, but in
this divine generation it is not so; for the Father and Son, and so the holy
Ghost are but one God, 1. John 5. 7.

The Use may be either for information, or instruction, or consolation, or
terror: first, since GOD is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ by such an
inconceivable generation, we may thence learn:

1. The glory of our Saviors condition: He was before the world was, he was
with the father, brought up with him, as his eternal delight, more dear to
the father then any created nature can conceive of, the Son of his Love,
never father loved his son, so as God the father loves Christ, yea, he was God
with the father Consubstantiall, Coequall, Coeternall, Pro. 8. 22. etc. 30.
John 17. 25. Philippians 2. 6 Romans 9. 5.

2. The Original of all father-hood: The father of Jesus Christ was the first
father ever was, yea, the Creed gives the Title of father to God only, as if
there were no father but he: and so Christ says, Mat. 23. 9. call no man
father on earth, for one is your father, which is God: and indeed properly none
is a father but God: other fathers that are called so have the name only,
because there is in them a kind of Image or similitude of God the father, and
yet they beget so imperfectly in comparison of God the father, that they
resemble him, rather in that general that they do beget, then in the manner
of begetting.

Thus for Information.

2. Since God is the father of Jesus Christ we should be instructed:

1. To acknowledge this Mystery, and though we have cause to be abased for the
defect of our understanding herein, in that we cannot tell the fathers name,
nor what is the name of his Son, Pro. 30* 4. yet we should confidently believe,
as the very foundation of our Religion, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the
living God: upon the Rock of this confession is the Church built, Mat. 16. 16,
etc. It is a glory Christ stands upon to be acknowledged in the glory of the
only begotten Son of God, Ioh. 1. 14. If we acknowledge the Son, we have the
father, or else not, 1. Ioh. 2. 23. Yea, this is an honor God stands upon to
be glorified with one heart and one mouth of all his servants, even as the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 6.

2. To be fully established in the persuasion of the sufficiency and efficacy
of the obedience and passion of Jesus Christ for us: we may confidently call
him the Lord our righteousness seeing God is called his father: for his
obedience, is more then the obedience of a man, yea, of more value then the
obedience of worlds of men; and besides he is all in all with God the father
who so loves him, he can deny him nothing, etc.

3. To rely upon him for instruction. The father loves him and shows him all
things that he does or intends to do, and in Ioh. 5. 20.
him are all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and therefore we should hear
him always, in any thing he will reveal to us: yea, God the father charge
us with this duty, as the very use he would have us make of the knowledge of
his eternal generation, as appears by the voice from heaven mentioned, Mat 17.
5. While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud shadowed them, and behold there
came a voice out of the cloud saying, This is that my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased, hear him.

But especially this doctrine serves for consolation, and so is frequently
urged in Scripture: for if God be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ then
these comforts will manifestly follow to the believing Christian.

1. That God is well pleased with the sacrifice of Jesus Christ for our sins,
Mat. 3. 17.

2. That Christ is able to raise up the dead hearts of men with spiritual
life, for as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to
have life in himself, Ioh. 5. 26.

3. That in Christ we may have supply for all our wants, we may receive of his
fulness all sorts of graces needful for us as is from this doctrine gathered,
John 1. 14. 18.

4. That Christ is able to give us eternal life, and will perform even that
great gift at the time appointed to all that believe, John 3. 16. and 17. 2. no
believer shall perish.

5. That whatsoever he asks the Father for us, he shall have it, yea, that
our prayers prescribed by him shall be heard.

6. That nothing that is good for us shall be withheld from us: for if God
has given us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things also, Romans
8. 32.

7. That God bears a great affection even to us: for Christ has besought the
Father that he would love us with the Love he loved him, and that the warmth
and comfort of that love may be ever with us, John 17. 24. 25.

Lastly, if God be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, then vain are all the
consultations and rebellious proiects of wicked men against Christ and the
means of his kingdom: then also woe will be unto them, for God will make
Christ's enemies his footstool: he will bruise them with an iron rod and
break them like a Potters vessel: for unto the Son has the Father given the
ends of the earth, and whatsoever rebels against him shall not prosper: as from
this doctrine is inferred, Psalm. 2. and 110. 1.

Thus God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, Faith looks upon
God as our Father especially in Christ, 2. Cor. 1. 2. Gal. 1. 4. 2. These. 1. 1.
2. 1. These. ^. 11. 13.

God is our Father four ways: first, by Creation, and so principally in
respect of our souls, which he creates of nothing and infuseth into our
bodies: and so he is called Father of Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. secondly, by
Regeneration, because by his Almighty power he renewes spiritual life into our
souls that were dead in sin, 1. Pet. 1. 3. thirdly, by Adoption, when of his
mere grace he acknowledges us for children, Gal. 4* 5. 6. fourthly, by
Resurrection, because he gives a glorious being to our bodies that were rotted
and dissolved in the earth: and so as he was said to beget Christ in the day
that he raised him from the dead, Act. 13. so is he said to grant us the
Adoption of sons, when he restores our bodies to life out of the grave, Romans
8. 19. 21.

And this term of Father is given to these works of God, not unfitly for the
resemblance they have to the relation between a Father and Son in Nature: for,

1. God gives us a spiritual being, making us a soul or spiritual substance:
for as we call them Fathers, because we have our bodies from them, so God is
more fitly called a Father, because we have our spirits from him.

2. God renewes our natures, and begets them to be like his Nature: for being
regenerated we partake of the divine nature, being made to live Gods nature in
holiness and righteousness, and he may well be called a Father that begets that
which is like to himself: besides, by Faith we put on Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.
26. 27.

3. God gives us the right and privilege of Sons, and therefore is fitly
called our Father: for first he finds us food and raiment, Mat. 6. and
teaching, Esaias 54. 13. and attendance not only setting his Angels to look to
us, Psalm. 34. Heb. 1. but himself also carrying and bearing us in his arms
when any thing ayleth us, Esaias 63. 9. and 46. 4.

Secondly, he lays up for us as Fathers do for their children, Psalm. 89. 28.
and 31. 19. and appoints us the inheritance of Sons to be inioyed when we be of
full years, Rom 8. 16.

Before I pass from this point one thing must be added, and that is, that
howsoever God be the Father of all men in respect of the Creation of their
souls, yet Faith looks upon him as a Father in Christ, and so by Adoption and
regeneration, and therefore we must diligently examine our selves whether we
be sons and daughters to God by grace in Christ or no: for all such as are by
grace truly the Children of God have in themselves such signs as these.

1. They were borne by promise: the preaching of the Gospel did mightily work
upon them to the renewing of their natures, and infusing spiritual life into
their souls, Gal. 4. 29. Romans 9. 8.

2. They are all believers; they come to Christ for happiness and rely upon
him, and so have power to be the Sons of God John 1. 12.

3. They lay hold upon Gods covenant, and consecrate themselves to his service,
and love his name, and to be his servants, and in particular are careful to
keep his Sabboths, Esaias 56. 4. 5. 7.

4. They are children that will not lie: they are noe Hypocrites, they desire
to be as good as they seem to be, they abhor counterfeiting and
dissimulation, their spirits are without guile, Esaias 63. 8.

5. They are led by the spirit and mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13.
14.

6. They cry Abba Father: they have the spirit of prayer, they can call upon
God in secret, with affection and confidence, esteeming nothing more then the
Love and favor of God: And thus how God is a Father and to whom. The Uses
follow and so.

In the first place this should teach Gods children many lessons: as,

1. To give this glory to God, to acknowledge him as a Father, and daily so to
call him from their hearts. The first thing a child speaks in nature usually
is the name of his parents, and so the first thing in Religion should be to
call God Father: we can do nothing in Religion till we can call upon God, as
upon a Father: this is the very foundation of the Church, because all
effectual Religion is built upon this principle that God is our Father, 2.
These. 1. 1. Romans 8. 15.

2. We should live without care: as our Savior shows, Mat. 6. for we have a
Father to care for us, and he is a heavenly Father, and therefore both knows
what we need, and is fully able to help us, and besides he daily feeds the
fowls of the air, and yet he is not a Father to them, how therefore can he
neglect us, whom he has begotten as children to himself, ver. 26. 32.

3. If God be our Father then we must honor him: for we are bound to honor
our father and mother: all our care should be to obey him, and honor him, and
please him, and do our work so as others might glorify our Father which is
in heaven, Mal. 1. 6. Mat. 5. 16. liuin^ (...) ^as we shame not our fathers
house.

4. If God be our Father, we must stri^^ ^^ be like him, and to imitate his
nature, and carriage, and so we are urged to follow and imitate him in mercy,
Mat. 5. 45. 48. in Love Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. and in holiness, 1. Pet. 1. 14, 15.

5. If God be our Father, we should be quickened unto prayer, we should run
to him to make our moan in all our wants: But withal it imports two things we
should look to in prayer: first, that we avoid vain bablings, and
repetitions and affectation of length of prayer and the like: for we pray to a
Father that needs not vain and tedious discourses. The words of a child
should be humble and earnest and direct to the point, but not tedious as our
Savior shows, Mat. 6. 7. 8. secondly, that we pray in faith and not waver,
because we ask of a father: If earthly fathers can give good gifts to their
children, what will the heavenly father deny to his children, Mat. 7. 7. 16.
Yea, if God himself should fight against us with his terrors, yet we must in
prayer stick fast to this, that he is our father, and always keep this in our
pleadings to wrestle with God by this Argument, as the Church did in those
straites mentioned, Esaias 64. 8. 4.

6. If God be our father, we must then patiently bear his corrections,
seeing we endure correction at the hands of the fathers of our bodies, who many
times correct us for their own pleasure, therefore much more should we submit
our selves to the father of spirits, who never corrects us but for our profit.
And to desire to be without correction, is to be in the condition of bastards
and not of sons: if we would have God to love us we must be willing to let
him correct us, Heb. 12. 4. to the 10.

7. If God be our father, then nothing should more grieve us, then that we
have offended him by our sins, Ier. 31 18. Luke 15. 18.

8. If God be our father, then we must sort our selves with his children, and
avoid all needless societies, and unequal yoaking with the wicked of this
world, who are as like the devil as ever child was like his father, John 8.
2. Cor 6. 14 18.

9. We should in all welldoing rest in his praise, as being our father that
sees in secret. A child seeks no more then to be accepted of his father,
Mat. 6. 1. 4.

10. We need not therefore the help of Saints or Angels to bring us to God. He
is our father, we may go to him our selves, Esaias 63. 16.

11. Therefore we should call no man father upon earth, having so great and
gracious a father in heaven, Mat. 23. 9.

12. Therefore also we should live in peace one with another, seeing we have all
one heavenly father, Ephesians. 4. 4* 6.

Thus for instruction.

Secondly, many consolations arise from hence, if we believe that God is our
father: for then,

1. He will spare us as a father does his son that serves him, he will bear
with our infirmities, Mal. 3. 17.

2. Though he should correct us, yet he will not take his mercy from us. 2.
Sam. 7. 14.

3. We have right to Gods house: we may with great encouragement resort to all
Gods ordinances, because it is our fathers house: and if hard times befall us
in respect of the means of Religion, and that the enemies of the Church do
invade the Sanctuary, we must then go to God and plead our right, seeing his
house belongs to us and not to them: thus did the godly, Esaias 63. 16. 18. 19.

4. We may cast all our care upon God for he cares for us, Iam. 4* 9. Pro.
14. 26.

5. We shall be delivered from this present evil world: for, if God be our
father, he will provide for us in a better place then this, Gal. 1. 4.

6. Our title to the creatures is restored which was lost in Adam.

But these consolations will appear to be much the greater, if we consider not
only that God is a Father, but such a Father:

1. He is a father in heaven, not an earthly father.

2. He is a father almighty, he can do more for us then all the fathers in the
world.

3. He is an everlasting father, Esaias 9. 6. our natural fathers dye, but our
spiritual father lives for ever; and makes us live for ever too: for natural
fathers can give but a temporal being to their children, but God gives us an
eternal being; and therefore are we called the children of the Resurrection,
because our very bodies must not perish, but be made to live for ever also. The
son he always abides in the house, Luke 20. 36. John 8. 35. Romans 8. 19. 21.

4. That he is such a father as makes his sons all heirs, Romans 8. 16. all are
as if they were first borne, Ier. 31. 9.

5. That he is such a father, as gives the highest kind of inheritance;
therefore they are all heirs of a kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Mat. 13. 43. And such
a kingdom as is immortal and undefiled, and lies in heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4.
in regard whereof they have fellowship with his natural son Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 1. 9. Romans 8. 16. 17.

In respect of all which, we have not only good hope, but everlasting
consolation: and the more, if we consider, that we hold all this by no Natural
propagation, but by the mere grace and mercy of God our father, being in our
selves the children of corruption, Job 17. 14. and of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. And
therefore unto all the former Instructions, from hence this must be added, that
we take heed of that vile ingratitude and impatiency at any time, to repent us
of our repentance, or to think the case of wicked men better then the case of
godly men, for so we shall sin fearfully against God our father, and against
our own right, and against the whole generation of his children, Psalm. 73. 15.
Our life, and the glory of it, may by affliction be hid in God: and it does not
fully appear what we shall be, but it is enough for us that we are the sons
of God; for when Christ appears in glory, then shall we appear also as he is,
above the glory of all the Potentates and Kings of the earth, 1 John 3. 2 Col.
3. 3. 4.

Almighty.
Revel. 4. 8.
COncerning the omnipotency of God: Five things are to be considered:

1. The Proofs that he is Almighty. 2. The Sense, in what respect he is said
to be Almighty. 3. Why Omnipotency is attributed to the father here only. 4.
Whether there be any things God cannot do. 5. That God only is Almighty.
1. That God is Almighty, these places of Scripture evidently and expressly
prove, Genesis 17. 1. and 28. 3. Luke 1. 37. Revel. 4. 8. and 19. 6.

2. God may be said to be Almighty in diverse respects.

1. Because he has power and authority over all things: Omnipotent quia
omnium teneat potestatem: Ruffin.

2. Because all the might and power in the creatures was from him: all might
from him: they have no power but what they received of him.

3. Because he can perform whatsoever he says, promises, or threatens:
nothing is too hard for him to do, Ier. 32. 17. 27. Luke 1. 37. Genesis 18. 14.

4. His Almightinesse is magnified in Scripture, because he is able to give to
all the men in the world recompense according to their works, so as none can
resist his power, nor deliver out of his hands, Ier. 32. 19. Isay 14. 25. 27.
Deuteronomy. 32. 39.

5. Because he can do whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115. 3.

6. Because he can do more then he will: as he could send Christ many legions
of Angels to deliver him, but would not. He could raise up children to Abraham
of those very stones, but he would not. And this Omnipotency is called the
absolute Omnipotence of God, by which he is able to create 1000. worlds if he
would. The power to do what he wills, is called his actual power.

7. Because he can do wonderful things without help or Means: as he made
the World of nothing, and can effect what he will in heaven and earth without
labor, only by his beck or word, Esaias 40. 28. Psa. 33.

8. Because he can do all things: there is simply nothing that can be, but God
can do it: he is omnipotent, because all things are possible to him, even
things that are impossible to men and Angels, Mat. 19. Kings may do many great
things, but not all; some things they cannot do. They can make many living men
dye, but cannot make one dead man live: which God can do.

9. Because he is mighty by his Essence, by nature of himself: His
Almightinesse is his Essence, and his whole Essence is almighty, and therefore
all in God is Mighty; and therefore his Mightiness must needs be infinite.
He is not mighty in respect of some part or faculty as the Creature is.

10. Because he is always Mighty: great Princes may be wonderful powerful,
but they may dye, or their power be diminished; but God is almighty, yesterday,
to day, and forever, Revel. 4. 8.

For the third point, Almightinesse is attributed in the Creed to the Father,
not to import that the Son and holy Ghost were not almighty; but because,
when the father is said to be almighty, it must needs follow that they are
almighty also; because the father being the fountain and original of the
person of the Son and holy Ghost does communicate to them, his whole Nature,
and all the Attributes of the Divinity: And the Father being first in the
order of working, fitly is the power of working given to him in the first place.

For the fourth point: The things which God cannot do may be referred to five
Heads: for first, he cannot do things that be false or sinful: He cannot
lie, or deny himself, or do unjustly, as diverse Scriptures show. Secondly,
he cannot do things that be contrary to his Nature, he cannot dye or be
finite, or be ignorant of any thing, or be corporeal, or the like. Thirdly, he
cannot do things which he cannot will, or are contrary to his will: He can
do many things more then he will; but he cannot do any thing, which he
cannot will: for his will is as infinite as his power, nor can he do any thing
against his will, or contrary to his own purpose or decree. Fourthly, he
cannot do contradictories, to make one and the self same thing to be and not
to be at the same time, to make a Creature finite and infinite, in that wherein
he is finite. Fifthly, he cannot do things simply impossible; I say simply
impossible, for many things are impossible to men and Angels, which in their
own Nature are not impossible: As it is impossible for us to make a Cable to
go through the Eye of a Needle, but it is not simply impossible in it self,
and therefore God can do it: God is therefore called omnipotent, because he
can do all possible things. Neither do any of these Dicitur omnipotens
saciendo quod vult non patiendo quod non vult, Aug.
things argue impotencie, but do rather establish his omnipotency: Gods power
is not lessened because he cannot deceive or dye, etc. for it were impotency if
he could do these.

For the last, this also must be added, that God only is Almighty, this glory
belongs only unto him: for the most powerful creatures are finite, and cannot
do a world of things, and they received their power from God, and are or may
be let or resisted in things they can do, and their power will cease, if it
be not renewed and confirmed by God, Ier. 32. 18. 19.

The consideration of Gods omnipotency may first teach us diverse duties;

1. To strive by all means to set out the praise of Gods wonderful power and
works, that has done such great things in heaven and earth, Psalm. 15. 2. and
89. 11. 12. etc. Revel. 4. 8.

2. To walk before him in all uprightness, careful in all things to please
him, and to avoid all sin, considering what power he has to do us good if we
serve him, or to destory us body and soul, if we live in our sins, Genesis 17. 1.
Mat. 10. 28.

3. It should teach us in all dangers and difficulties, to believe in God and
rest upon him, so as when we know his goodness or promise to us, though we see
no means of deliverance, or performance of good things, yet we must give glory
to Gods power, and rest without wavering upon God, knowing that nothing is hard
or impossible to him, as Abraham believed God concerning his son Isaac, Romans 4.
18. and as Jeremy was commanded to trust God, when God enjoined him to
purchase a field, at that time when he was to threaten the inevitable
captivity, Ier. 32. 17. 27. etc. So 1 Samuel 14. 6.

4. In the experience of all our weaknesses, we should run to God for power
to support us: All might is in him, and therefore whither should we run for
power but to him: To him should we lift up our hearts for strength, Esaias 40.
28.

5. It should teach us to be patient in affliction when it is upon us, and to
tremble at his grievous judgments when they are upon other; his dreadful
power when it is declared should make us tremble, and be silent, and when his
hand touches us, we should not struggle, for it is in vain; what, can we
resist his power? Psalm. 39. 10. Esaias 30. 15. It is the Lord, and therefore be
quiet, let him do whatsoever he will.

6. The consideration of his omnipotency should be often thought upon, when we
come to pray unto God, for spiritual or temporal things. Our Savior Christ
in the Lords prayer gave us three stays, or mighty pillars to hold up our
faith in praying (to wit) Gods kingdom, and Gods power, and Gods glory, Mat.
6. 13.

7. We must hence be warned to take heed of despising weak Christians, to
reject them as either past hope, or void of grace, or not likely to hold out,
because of their many frailties, and ignorance, for God can stablish them, Romans
14. 4.

8. The Apostle Paul urges the consideration of Gods power, as an argument to
persuade to works of mercy: because God is able to enrich us, and to abound
toward us in all recompense, both in spiritual and temporal things, 2 Cor.
9. 8.

9. It should teach us to believe the power of God in the Sacrament, though the
outward signs may make no great show, yet our faith should be built upon the
inward operation of God, who will do all that, which either the signs
signify, or the word promises, Col. 2. 12.

10. It should make us the more wonder at Gods goodness and love showed to his
people, in that sometimes he lays chains as it were upon his power, only in
favor to them. As for instance, God cannot destroy Sodom till Lot be gone;
which yet is most easy for him to do, but for his love to Lot, Genesis 19. 22.
so God loves his people, that many a judgment would fall upon wicked men in
the places where they live, yet cannot, because of Gods affection to the godly.

Secondly, this doctrine of Gods omnipotency, reproues many men for sinning
against the power of God. Now men transgress against the omnipotency of God
diverse ways;

1. Such as plead his power, for the effecting of what is either contrary to
his nature, or will, or simply impossible; as many profane persons do, that
will needs believe that God can save them, though they live in their sins,
quite contrary to his word. And as the Papists do about the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, believing that Christ's body can be in many places at once, and so
in the Sacrament to be eaten locally and orally, it being simply impossible,
for a body remaining a body, to be in many places at once, in the same manner
and respect, as it is also without word or promise of God and Scripture.

2. Such as will not use the lawsull means appointed unto them either for
preservation or deliverance, reasoning most foolishly, God can keep me without
meat, therefore I will not eat; or can deliver me without means, therefore I
will use none: never considering that Gods Almightinesse is showed by working
in the Means, as well as without, and that God commands us to make use of his
power, by the means he has ordained to work by.

3. Such as by fearful Imprecations and Curses, awaken Gods power, to bring
upon them such fearful things, as they asked, but did not expect; as the
Jews, that wished the blood of Christ might be charged upon them and their
children.

4. Such as dishonor Gods power by putting their trust in Creatures.

5. Such as through unbelief rest not upon God, but think it is impossible
such and such blessings should be obtained, or such dangers or evils avoided,
Genesis 18. 14. Esaias 50. 2. Ier. 32. 24. 25. 27. 28. etc.

6. Woe unto the wicked that live in their sins: the Lord will plague them,
and none shall deliver out of his hand, or resist his wrath, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. The
judgments God will bring upon them cannot be avoided, Esaias 14. 25. 27.

Lastly, the consideration of Gods Almightinesse is wonderful comfortable:
first to the godly, and that many ways; for first, they need not fear any
wants, for they have a father that is almighty; and besides, they need not
fear any adversaries, for the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them,
Mat. 16. 18. and they shall overcome all adversary power, because he is great
that is on their side, 1 John 5. 4. though they should walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, they need fear no evil, Psalm. 23. 4. and for
spiritual enemies they need not fear, because God is able to keep their
souls which they have committed to him, 2 Timothy 1. 12. and we shall be kept by
his power to salvation, 1 Pet, 1. 5. Again, it may be a great comfort to them
in prayer, because God is able to do above all that they can ask or think,
Ephesians. 3. 20. 21. and further, Gods power may settle them and establish their
Faith and Joy, in those great works of God propounded and promised in his
word; such as are the forgiveness of all sins, the resurrection of their
bodies, and eternal life, 1 Cor. 6. 14. Moreover that God their father is
Almighty, may comfort them in this respect, because then by his power they also
may do all things. What is it a Christian cannot do, that has the use of
Gods power: Paul can want and he can abound, etc. by the power of Christ in
him, Phil. 4. 13.

But that these comforts may be effectual we must often pray that GOD would
open our eyes to see the exceeding greatness of his power to them that
believe, Ephesians. 1. 19.

Secondly, even grievous sinners may conceive comfortable hope from this
doctrine also: I mean such as have lived a long time under the power of strong
corruptions, such as are, swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, and the like; and
therefore now fear, that they can never be fit for the Kingdom of God. These
must remember Paul's argument for the Jews that had lived so long under the
power of unbelief (viz.) God is able to ingraft them in again, Romans 11. 23.
so should they hope that they also may be converted and saved, because God is
able to restore even them also if they be weary of their sins, and would be
rid of them. And therefore they should go to God, as the Leaper did to Christ,
and say, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, Mat. 8. 4.

Maker of Heaven and Earth.
Genesis 1. 1.
HItherto of the nature and power of God and the Trinity of persons: the works
of God follow. The works of God are of two sorts, some Internal, some
external. The Internal works are either personal or essential. The
personal works of God internal, are such as flow from each person in the
Trinity, according to the Characteristicall propriety of the person: such
works were generation of the Son, and proceeding of the Holy Ghost. The
Internal essential works were the decrees of God which he made in himself
from all eternity, concerning all things in the world, especially concerning
men and Angels, these works are common to all three persons, as flowing from
the essence of God. Now of these works the Creed makes no express mention,
because they are strong meat, and above the capacity of weak Christians.

The external works of God are of four sorts: for they are either the works
of Creation, by which he makes all things to be: or works of conservation,
by which he maintains the things he has made in their being; or works of
Reparation by which in Christ he restores what was ruinated by sin; or works
of perfection, by which he brings all things to their appointed end, and
especially makes the Church fully blessed in a better world.

The works of Creation are only mentioned in this Article. The works of
Reparation by Christ and of perfection, are handled in the Articles following.
The works of Creation are expressed in these words, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
By Heaven and Earth understanding the whole world, and all the hosts of
creatures that are in it. Now concerning the making of the world, four things
are to be considered.

1 Who made the world. 2 How it was made. 3 Why it was made. 4 When it was
made.
For the first: the Creation was a work of the whole Trinity: It is attributed
here in the Creed to the Father, because the Action of the Father was more
manifest and evident: as Redemption is attributed to the Son, and
Sanctification to the Holy Ghost. But yet it is evident by diverse Scriptures,
that each Person did work about the Creation: for of the Father there is no
question, and of the Son it is expressly affirmed, Colos. 1. 16. John. 1. 3.
Heb. 1. 3. and of the Holy Ghost sitting and moving upon the first water, we
read Genesis 1. 2.

For the second: God created all things.

1 According to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. which has diverse
things in it, for thereby is affirmed that he made all things.

1 Most freely, without compulsion or instigation from any other.

2 According to the Idaea of all things in his own mind: for as the Carpenter
first conceiues the frame in his head, and then builds according to that Idaea
in his mind: so did God build the world according to the eternal pattern
which was in Gods mind.

3 According to his own Decree: there was nothing created which was not
decreed, and nothing decreed to be, which was not created according to the
Decree.

4 Most advisedly: having from all eternity consulted, determined and foreseen
all was to be made.

Secondly, with a word only: he had none to help him, nor needed tools or
instruments, as men do to effect their works, Genesis 1. Psalm. 33. 9. Thirdly,
without labor or weariness, Esaias 40. 28. Fourthly, of Nothing: men cannot
build without Materials, but God made the world of Nothing, in respect of the
first matter of all things, Heb. 11. 3. for he made not the world of his own
essence, nor of any other preexisting matter: for though it be a saying, that
of nothing, nothing can be made, yet that is true in respect of us, not in
respect of God, and in respect of the order of Nature now, not in respect of
the beginning of Nature in the Creation. And though it be true that some
creatures were made of preexisting matter, as man's body was made of the dust of
the earth, yet that preexisting matter was created of nothing. Fifthly, all
good: all things at first were made good, not in appearance, but in deed, not
in man's judgment who might be deceived, but in Gods: he saw that all was
good, and so all creatures were good, in respect of excellence, distinction,
numbe^, fashion, and freedom from defects of faculties or power belonging to
each creature in his kind. Sixthly, not all on a sudden and at once, but in six
days: and that for diverse reasons: for God would have the creation of the
first matter of Nothing, to be manifest and distinct from the framing and
fashioning of bodies out of that matter: besides, thereby he showed his power
and freedom in producing the creatures: making them to be, before any natural
cause of them was, as to make light before the Sun and Moon was: and
further, thereby he showed his goodness and care for the principal
creatures, providing food before he brings in the beasts, and furnishing the
whole world sets man to live in it: and finally, he warnes us not to slip over
the meditation of his works suddenly, but with long and continual
deliberation: He created the world in many days, to intimate, that we should
not think a little time enough to wonder at so great glory. Seventhly, he made
all things without himself: for though all things are in God, as in their
cause and Author, in whom they live, move, and have their being, yet are they
out of God, in that they are no parts in God; nor the very divine Essence, but
have a nature distinct from the Nature of God: they are not separate from God
in place, as if they could be any where, where God is not, but are other things
then God is, and are not in God as a subject, to which they inhere or are
fastened. Thus of the manner how they were made.

Thirdly, the end why the world was made, was the glory of God, Prou. 16. ^4.
(that is) that the world might be a Glass or Theater of divine virtues, and a
Temple in which God would set forth, and teach, and make known to man his
power, wisdom and goodness, Romans 1. not that God by the Creation does get to
himself any glory, seeing he abounds in glory himself, so vnmeasurably, as
nothing can be added to it or taken from it: but only hereby he communicates
his glory to the Creature, and gave the creatures occasion to admire and
commend his glory: for by the Creation God makes himself visible as it were to
the Creatures that are reasonable: for though the Essence of God be invisible,
yet by the Creation his power or Attributes are set out to be seen and read in
that great Book of nature: and if any men see little of God in this mighty
Frame of his Works, it is not because God has declared himself therein but
obscurely, but because we are perverse and blockish, and full of native
darkness, by reason of sin, and the effects of sin in us.

Now, though infinite praises of God may be collected from the consideration of
the whole world, yet especially, his power, wisdom and goodness do shine in
his works. His power we may gather two ways: both in that he could make all
things of nothing, and that he could make such great things as well and as
easily as the smallest things, and things so many and diverse, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
Psalm. 89. 10. The goodness of God appears both in this, that he made all things
so good, and in that he has showed means so fit and convenient and powerful
to preserve life and being in every creature, Psalm. 104. providing for
creatures of diverse natures and appetites, diverse food, remedies, and Armor to
preserve and defend them. But especially, who can express the goodness of God
showed to men? Ephesians. 3. 18. Acts 14. 17. As for Devils, Serpents, or venomous
Creatures or hurtful, they were not so by Creation, but by defection and
sin, or as punishments for sin. The wisdom of God is admirably discovered
in the Creation, in that he has made all things in such beautiful order, and
has appointed to every thing such peculiar uses and ends, which they observe
(men only excepted) and that he gouernes them in such a constant, certain, and
perpetual course: every thing having not only his fit and proper place in the
Frame, but indewed also with such variety of uses and services.

Fourthly, for the time when the world was made, we must know that the world
and time were made together: so as all things were created in the beginning of
time: and the computation of the days or years since the beginning of the
world, has been kept carefully in the Church, the reckoning being made by
Moses and the Prophets in the old Testament, and since kept by the Christian
Churches, so as now the world is above 5600. years old. Before this time there
was nothing but God himself: and if any will needs ask What God did before
the world was? I may not answer as the Jews wickedly did, That he was making
many little worlds, which he destroyed again, and never liked any till this
Frame was up: but our answer must be, That secret things belong unto the Lord,
and reueiled things to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. or else that of Augustine, That God
was making Hell for the curious: or else, That the Frame of all things was in
the mind of God from all eternity, and so the world was as present to him
then, as now.

First, we may hence be informed and confirmed, that God Uses.
is only the true God, because he is Creator of Heaven and Earth, Esaias 45. 6,
7. if any plead, that he is God, the answer is at hand, let him make such a
Heaven and Earth, and we will believe in him, else not.

Secondly, the Creation of the World should teach us many duties:

1. To meditate of Gods works: and study the glory of God revealed in this
great book of Nature: all are required to learn to read here, and if men will
not take it well if their skill showed in any cunning piece of work be not
acknowledged or regarded, how much more cause has the Lord to be displeased
with us, for neglecting such a curious and glorious frame, so full of admirable
variety and skill? Wh^t account shall we make at the last day, we (I say) that
are so naturally bent to delight in shows, that are either sinful, or vain,
or imperfect, such as are pla^es, or rare sights as we call them, or Page^nts
or Maskes, or the like, and yet have no heart or will, to go out to see and
wonder at the m^tchlesse shows that God sets out before us in his works,
Eccles. 7. 15 Psalm. 111. 2, 3.

2. Nor is it enough to meditate of his works, but we must give him the glory
of them, by praising his power and wisdom and goodness showed in them, we
must strive to get a Language to that end, and so bewail our barrenness of
heart and words, as withal to beseech him, that requires us to learn his
praises, to teach us also to profit, and to give larger hearts and better
Language Revel. 4 11. Thus have the Worthies of the Lord done, Job, and David,
and Moses, who have set themselves in special manner to celebrate the praises
of God in his works: and of them we should learn to praise him, at least
make our selves skillful in their forms of praise, Psalm. 136. 5. 6.

3. Yea thirdly, this glory of God should swallow up all the glory of men, this
very work of making Heaven and Earth should check us for admiring and esteeming
so much of the creature whatsoever, since we have such a perpetual, and
surpassing cause of admiration of the Creator, Acts 14. 16.

4. Since God made all things, we should submit our selves to him, and let him
dispose of us, and all his creatures as he will he has just power in Heaven
and earth to give, or take away, or dispose at his own pleasure, Ier. 27. 5.
and 45. 3, 4, 5, 6.

5. It should teach us not to set our hearts too much upon the world, for that
God that set up this mighty frame of nothing, can and will pull it all down
again.

6. It should breed in us the fear of God, and care of serving him, and
obeying him, that has not only supreme right unto us, being his
workmanship, but sovereignty over all things, Psalm. 119. 73. Psalm. 33. 8, 9.
and 95. 6. all creatures else do his will.

7. It should teach us in all straights and need to fly to God for help: as
David shows, our help stands in the Name of the Lord, which has made
Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 121. 2. and 124. 8.

8. We should learn hence not to abuse the Creatures of God to ill ends,
seeing God has assigned his Creatures to their right ends for his own glory:
It is abominable to fight against God with his own weapons.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of the Creation of the World ought Sin makes God repent
that he made man. Genesis 6. 3. 6.
to be terrible to wicked men: because God by his works has revealed so much
of his glory as they will be left without excuse, Romans 1. and besides, having
appointed them to certain ends, in which they have corrupted themselves, he
will destroy them; as a Potter that sees his vessel will not be made fit,
dasheth it to pieces. And besides, hence they may know that God can want no
means to destroy them, seeing he has such Armies of his own creatures in
Heaven and Earth, which are all as his mighty ones, and sanctified ones, for
his anger against them. There is no way for them but one, which is, to meet
the Lord betimes by Faith and true Repentance, Amos 4. 13.

Lastly, this is very comfortable doctrine for the godly: for from the Creation
of the world they may gather,

1. That God will not cast them off, because they are the work of his hands,
Job 10. 3.

2. That all adversaries shall be defeated: whatsoever is provided against them
shall not prosper: because God made the Smith that blowe^h in the Coals, and
he will suffer no creature of his to be turned against them, Esaias 54. 17.

3. That God is able to provide for us, seeing the earth and heavens are his
and all that is therein, Psalm 146. 5. 6 and 24. 1.

4. That all the spiritual work that belongs to our souls may be effected,
he that created the world, and made us good at the first, can create the fruit
of the lips to be peace and can create clean hearts in us, Esaias 57. 19.
Psalm 51. 8.

5. That our bodies shall rise again: that God that could make all things of
nothing, can restore them out of the dust of the earth.

Thus of Creation in general. Now we are in particular to consider what was
made, (viz.) Heaven and Earth.

Heaven.] By Heaven is meant all that part of the world which is above the
Earth, and so it is taken, Genesis 2. 1. and 24. 5.

And so Heaven consists of three parts, and every part bears the name of
Heaven: The first part next to us is the Air and all that is between us and
the Moon: so fowls of the Air are called the fowls of Heaven, Genesis 1. 26.
The second part is the Firmament, in which are the Stars, Sun, and Moon,
Psalm. 19. 7. The third part is the Habitation of God and Angels, the seat of
the glory of God and his blessed one, where the body of Christ now lives, Mark
16. 19. and is called the third heavens, 1 Cor. 12. 2. and this is the Heaven
especially meant, Genesis 11. for when there he says, God Created heaven and
earth, and the earth was without form, etc. he notes that God used a twofold
way of Creation: some things he made immediately of nothing, as the Heaven of
the blessed: some things he made of matter which was first made of nothing: for
out of that Chaos mentioned, Genesis 2. did the Lord extract and form all this
visible world, both the firmament and light, and the elements and all
creatures; only spirits, and the Heaven of the blessed he made of no
praeexi^^ing matter, and that honor have the souls of men, which are
immediately created of nothing.

First, then we are to entreat of that Heaven where God in his glory, and
Christ in his glorious body are: and seeing by Heaven is meant all that is
contained in it by Creation, we are there to consider of the Angels too, and
both that Heaven and the Angels, belong to the invisible world, and the rest to
the visible.

Concerning that blessed Heaven, we are to wonder at the glory of the Lord in
creating it: if we consider,

1. The names given to it: It is called the Heaven of Heavens, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. 1
King. 8. 27. Psalm. 11^. 16. The Temple of God, Psalm. 11. 4. and ^8. 7.
Paradise, Luke 23. 42. The heavenly Jerusalem, or Jerusalem that is above, Gal.
4. 26. Heb. 12. 22. and in the same place, Mount Sion: The most holy place,
Hebrews 10.9. Our fathers house, John* 4. 2. The place of the Habitation of
God and his holiness, Deuteronomy. 26. 15. Psalm. 33. 14. Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.
22. The City of the Living God, Heb. 12. 22. a City having foundation, whose
Maker and builder is God, Heb. 11. 10. our Country, Heb. 11. 13. 14.

2. The substance of it: which is conceived to be of a marvelous excellent
nature, far more perfect and subtle then the substance not only of the
Elements, but of those visible heavens: which diverse gather thus. As any
creature is higher then the earth, so is the substance of it less gross and
material. As the waters are thinner then the earth, and the Air then the
waters, and the Element of fire (according to the common opinion of Divines and
Philosophers) purer then the Air: and the Essence of the mighty Firmament, yet
more pure then the four Elements, as consisting of a fifth Essence as they say
in Schools: and accordingly we see creatures fitted to each of these places.
Fishes that cannot live in the bowels of the earth, live in the waters: and
fowls of a more spiritual being fly in the Air. Now when we are ascended so
high, as the highest visible heavens, then do our minds conceive of that
glorious place of the blessed, made of a more pure Essence then any of these:
And though Divines say that the sustance of these heavens must needs be
corporeal and bodily which they prove by infallible reasons, yet are they such
a body, as we may call as it were spiritual, next in purity to the substance
of Angels and men's souls.

3. If we consider the qualities, admirable is the glory of that heaven of
heavens, whether we think of it Philosophically or Theologically:
Philosophically considered, it is a place void of all decay, alteration and
motion. A place that suffers not from without it self, any thing of natural
grieuance or violence, or annoyance. A place above all places, large and ample,
as containing in the bowels and circumference of it all this visible world.
But if we inquire after it as considered Theologically, we may see it in a
Mirror, but yet it is but darkely, no tongue of man can utter the glory of it,
noe, Paul himself that was there, yet could not declare what he saw, nor can
it enter into the mortal heart of man to think what it is; what is revealed in
Scripture in praise of it, is enough to ravish our hearts with desire after it,
if we were such as we should be. It is a place most lightsome: for God is said
to dwell in light vnapproachable, vnapproachable, I say to us mortal
cr^atures: It is light above all that light, the Sun or Moon can give to this
lower world: for there is no need of Sun nor Moon, which shine in respect of
that light, as a candle does to the light of the Sun with us: There is no night
there, and it is a light of a far more excellent and transcendent kind then
this light we have from the Stars or Sun or Moon: and that is the reason
why it does not penetrate to us, as being far above the capacity of our eyes
(as they are now) to see it. The Apostle says of this light, it was like unto
a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal, that is
always flourishing, and shining without any clouds or darkness: and how can
it be otherwise, seeing God himself and the Lamb is the light of it: there
flows from God, (being the place of his special glory) a created light from
God himself, I say, by which it is after an unspeakable manner enlightened,
Revel. 21. 11. 23. Whence it follows, that it is a place full of all
unspeakable refreshing, pleasure and delight: If the light of the Sun at
some seasons of the year can so please, how much more does this light of the
glory of God? What shall I say? It is a place that has nothing in it of evil,
and abounds in all that may content the glorified nature of the Creatures. And
how can it be otherwise, seeing there is no sin, nor no unclean person
there, and it is a place, that has the glory of the Lord, upon it, Revel. 21.
11. which is as much, as if he should say, that the glory of heaven does differ
from all the glory of any place on earth, as God differs from the Kings and
Potentates of the Earth, and therefore his chief house of Residence must needs
almost infinitely excel theirs. And the more is the glory of heaven, because
it is eternal, it cannot fade or ever cease to be: which is signified by
those golden and precious foundations, Revel. 21. Other Cities will decay,
because they are builded by man and of corruptible matter, but this City can
never decay, because God was the builder of it immediately and made it
incorruptible. To conclude, it must needs be a place of surpassing glory,
seeing all the Treasures of this world are searched out, and they can serve but
to give a little glimpse of the meanest part of the praises of heaven: as the
twenty one Chapter of the Revelations shows.

Before I come to the Uses some questions would be briefly resolved.

Quest. 1. Whether this Heaven was created or no, or was it eternal with God.
Quest.

Answ. It was created by God, is as said expressly, Heb. 11. 10. that God was
the builder and Maker of it: It being not the Answ.
Creator, It must needs be a creature.

Quest. 2. Where is this Heaven. Quest.

Answ. It is above all these visible heavens, Ephesians. 4. 8. Acts 7. 55, 56.
their opinion is vain that think it is every where: Answ.
for then Hell should be in Heaven.

Quest. 3. Why did God build and make this Heaven. Quest.

Answ. Not to be a place for himself to dwell in, for he needs no such place,
being Immense, and these Heavens cannot Answ.
contain him, he being in his Essence without and beyond all Heavens, 1. Kings
8. 27. but he made it that it might be a a place wherein he might manifest his
glory in special manner. but especially that in that place, he might give
entertainment unto such as by grace he had chosen to be his children, and
therefore is called the Fathers house.

The consideration of the Doctrine of this Heaven of Heavens, should make
violent impression upon our hearts, and that in three respects,

1. It should wonderfully abase us, to think how we have neglected the
knowledge, and care and desire after this glorious place: It should make us
hate our selves for our senselessnes and madness, that prefer an earthly
mudde-wall cottage, before such a princely or rather divine Palace; that are
in love with this earthly place, that is full of sin, sorrow, disgrace,
darkness, and death, and yet have no heart after a place so wonderfully free
from all evil, and so replenished with all good? Oh wretches that we are that
labor and care day and night to repair these glassie or mud-walled
Tabernacles of our bodies, and have no more mind to provide for that
matchless triumphing place of spirits.

2. It should wonderfully fire our hearts to the love of God, that has
provided for us such a place of glorious inheritance, of his mercy, love, and
grace, so happy, so lasting, so amiable; yea, what thanks can we ever give
him for the very comfort with which he has refreshed us, in telling us of
Heaven, that were such, as in our selves had bin so far from having it, as we
had never known of it by the light of Nature.

3. It should exceedingly transform our hearts into the earnest care and
endeavor to carry our selves so as might become the desire and assurance of
so blessed a place: we should show that we understand what a place Heaven is.

1. By avoiding every thing that is abominable, even all those sins that are
threatened with the want or loss of heaven: as remembering that that is no place
for unclean persons to live in, Revel. 21. 8.

2. By earnest endeavor to get the righteousness that may make us fit for
that kingdom, Mat. 6. 33.

3. By studying the the assurance of Heaven, above all other assurances
whatsoever.

4. By a conversation in heaven, directing our thoughts and affections after
heaven, remembering it above all delights, our minds daily running upon it and
employing our selves in such duties as might show that our hearts were in
Heaven, though our bodies be here: our prayers and all the parts of Gods
worship should savor of this knowledge, Phil. ^. 20. Colos. 3. 1. 2.

5. By a voluntary forsaking or contemning of the profits and pleasures of this
world, being content to find here but the entertainment of Pilgrims and
strangers, even such as are far from their own home, Heb. 11. 13, 14.

6. By invincible Patience in bearing all the assaults of life here, not
wearied with afflictions, considering this eternal weight of glory in heaven;
not dismayed with any terror of Satan, nor perplexed with any scorns of the
world, seeing the time will shortly come we shall be delivered from all these
things, and possess an inheritance that is undefiled and immortal in heaven:
and the less should we be troubled about the dissolution of our bodies, or
rather we should desire to get out of this earthly Tabernacle, that we might
come to dwell in that heavenly building, 2. Corinthians 5* 1. 2.

7. By our diligent labor to carry our Treasures, to lay them up in heaven:
that is our best house, and the only s^fe place where neither Rust no Moth can
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. What we have in heaven is safe
kept by the power of God, What we have on earth is uncertain, and therefore
our greatest care should be to send as many prayers and good works to heaven,
as accounting it the best treasure, and the wisest course so to employ our
selves, Mat 6. 20.

Thus of the Heaven of Heavens: Before we leave that invisible world, we must
entreat of the Angels, which are the Host of the Lord in that upper world.

That the Lord did a most glorious work, when he made the Angels, may appear
many ways.

1. By the names and Titles given them. They are called spirits, Stars of the
Morning, Sons of God, Principalities, and Powers, Thrones, and Dominions,
Seraphim and Cherubim, yea, Gods: all which show they were wonderfully made and
of great excellency.

2. By the substance he made them to be: for the substance of Angels is not
corporeal, and therefore purer then any bodies in Heaven and Earth, and so
pure as no senses can discern them: for though God only be simply (...),
Immateriall, yet Angels are Immateriall in respect of any Physical
composition, for they consist not of matter and form, as other Creatures do:
but have only that kind of composition, which they call Metaphysicall, for
they are compounded of essence or act and power.

3 By the place where he sets them when he had made them: for he seated them in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 3. 10. he made them to live about himself, in the
Chamber of his presence, always before his face. They were Creatures made of
purpose to live in the Court of the King of Kings.

4 By the numbers he made of them: Daniel said, he saw thousand thousands of
Angels, and an hundred times ten thousand thousand, Daniel 7. 10. Heb. 12. 22.
It is said, there is an innumerable company of Angels. He means, they are
more then man can number, not more then God can number: and the number is the
more to be admired, because the Angels do not marry, and so are not increased
by propagation.

5 By the manner of their being and working in respect of time and place: for
Angels are in place definitiuely, not circumscriptiuely, as they say in
Schools: that is, they are so in place that wholly they are there, they cannot
be said to be in another place, but yet while they are there, it cannot be
told by any creature, what room they take up, or how much place they fill, for
length, breadth, or height or depth: and so for time, they do not work in a
moment as God does: but yet in respect of us they work strange things in an
vnperceiueable time: and to shadow that out, they are described to have wings,
not that they have, but by way of signification, or resemblance.

6 By the gifts with which God endowed them, when he made them: I will
instance in their knowledge and power: for knowledge it must needs be great in
Angels: for besides the knowledge they had naturally by Creation, they know
strange things by revelation from God, and by experience gather many things
from the course of things in the world, or their causes in nature, and the
manifold wisdom of God is made known to Angels by the preaching of the
Gospel, which they see into with wonderful ability, though men be so dull and
blockish in hearing, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Ephesians. 5. 10. John 8. 44. Daniel 8. 16. and
9. 22. add to all these ways their supernatural knowledge of God, by which
they are enabled to stand for ever without falling from God. Great also is the
power of Angels, especially in working upon bodily creatures. One Angel could
kill almost all Senacheribs Army in a night; by an Angel was Peter fetched out
of prison, Acts 12. 7, 8. and Philip carried from place to place, Acts 8. 39.
and the Sodomits smitten blind, Genesis 19. and the Host of the Syrians frighted
with a noise they made, 2 Kings 6. 28. and without doubt, they can do strange
things about the souls of men. They have appeared to men in their dreams, and
as evil angels can tempt men internally, so may good Angels encourage and
counsel godly men, though they discern not who raises those comforts or
counsels: only Miracles of themselves they cannot do, nor can they know the
thoughts of the heart of man of themselves.

7 By the language in which God has made them able to treat one with another,
or with man or God: for it is clear, they use not any fleshly or corporal
language in as much as they have not bodies, and so no tongues: but they speak
one to another by a spiritual and heavenly language, without any audible sound
or vocal speech or noife, I say after an unutterable manner angellically, they
insinuate, instill, and communicate one to another, or to the understanding of
men, what they will. The delivering of the sense of the mind by voice, is an
inferior kind of means, because it agrees only to bodies: such Spirits as
are only minds and have no bodies, can converse one with another without
sound of words, in their own understandings as in a most clear
Looking-glass, showing what they will one to another.

Before I come to the use of this part, certain questions men might ask about
Angels, are to be resolved, as

Quest. 1. When were Angels created? Quest.

Answ. It cannot be certainly gathered, but it is probable Answ.
they were created the first day, when the Heaven of Heavens was created and
thence are called the Angels of Heaven. Moses speaks nothing of the Creation
of Angels, because that is not a knowledge that properly belongs to us: for if
the Theology for Angels were written, we should need another Bible. The
Creation and government of Angels containing as great variety of matter as does
the Religion of mankind.

Quest. 2. What are the offices of Angels, or what uses did Quest.
God make them for?
Answ. Angels serve for many uses. They are Apparitors Answ.
or servants about God, ready to receive Commandments from him* and they
worship God, by lauding and praising him in Heaven, Psalm. 104. 4. and 148. 2.
Esaias 6. 3. Luke 2. 14. Revel. 4. 8, 9. and 5. 13. and they are appointed as
special attendants about CHRIST as the MESSIAH, Mat. 4. 11. and they serve
also as ministering spirits to keep and attend upon the Elect men, Heb. 1. 14.
and manifold are the services which Angels do for men both in life and death.
In life they defend and keep them as a strong guard about them, Psalm. 34. and
91. and plague their enemies, 2 King. 19. 35. besides, the unknown service
they do about the souls of the godly by counselling or comforting them. And
in death they are about them, and carry their souls to Heaven, as they did
Lazarus his soul; and in the end of the world they will gather all the Elect
from the four winds of Heaven, and bring them to Christ.

Quest. 3. But why do you not entreat of Devils here Quest.
also?
Answ. There were no Devils by creation, GOD made Answ.
them not as Devils: and therefore it belongs not to the Doctrine of Creation
to speak of the evil angels, because that belongs to the Doctrine of the fall
of the reasonable Creatures.

Quest. 4. But has every particular man a good Angel and a bad? Quest.

Answ. It is probable that every Elect man has a good Answ.
Angel, as may be gathered, Mat. 18. 10. Acts 12. 15. but yet God is not so
tied but that he sends them extraordinarily, more Angels many times to help or
attend upon, it may be one man, Psalm. 34. 8. As for evil angels, we read that
sometimes one Angel has vexed one man, Job. 1. 12. sometimes one Angel has
haunted diverse men, 2 Chronicles. 18. 21. sometimes many Angels have haunted one
man, Luke 8. 30. But that every man should have a bad angel assigned him of
God, is no where to be found in Scripture.

The consideration of this Doctrine of the making of the Angels in such a
nature, and for such ends as before, should serve for diverse uses.

1 It should inform us concerning the wonderful love of God to us, that has
made such excellent creatures to do us such admirable service as to attend upon
us and keep us, Heb. 1. 14.

2 It should breed in us a great longing after the world to come, where we
shall not only enjoy the knowledge of, and fellowship with such glorious
Creatures, but shall be made our selves in glory, as the Angels in Heaven.

3 It should teach us diverse things: as first, not to worship Angels, for they
were all created by God: God made the Angels, and therefore worship is due to
him, and not to them that are but our fellow servants, Colos. 1. 16. Revel. 19.
Secondly, we should therefore carry our selves orderly in all places, especially
in the Church, because of the Angels, who are about us, and mark what we do,
1 Cor. 11. 10. Thirdly, we should therefore be patient and of good hope, and
full of faith in all afflictions arising from the oppositions of men, or
temptations of Satan, as being satisfied with this comfort, that they are more
that are with us then can be against us, and if our eyes were opened, we might
see so much as was showed to the servant of Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 16.

Hitherto of the Heaven of the blessed and the Host thereof, the Angels, and
so of the world that is now invisible to us: we next come down to consider of
this visible world, this world, I say, which is in our view, or may be seen:
and before I come to speak of the other two Heavens, I would briefly consider
of Gods glory in the general in the making of this visible world, not so much
for the matter of the creatures, or their natural forms or properties, or
their next causes, which belongs properly to the Philosophers, but for such
things as concern their first cause, which is God; or their end, which is Gods
glory; or their use, which is rather spiritual then corporal, in
demonstrating unto the soul of man the praises of God.

The maker of this visible world was GOD, as well as of that invisible world,
as is manifestly proved, Genesis 1. at large.

The end of making a world of bodies, as well as of spirits was not the
punishment of spiritual substances, for their sinning against God, as Origin
dreamed, but the setting out of Gods glory, in showing his wisdom, goodness
and power, Psalm. 19. Romans 1. and the furnishing of man for his happy being.

That our hearts may be affected with wondering at this great world which God
has made: we may profitably consider of it, either by thinking what it is
like, or by serious pondering what it is indeed.

This great world is like a great Garden thoroughly furnished, every creature
being as a pleasant flower exquisitely ranked in most comely order, the only
weeds that grow in this Garden, are wicked men: as it may be likened to a
great Book, in which God has written glorious things that concern the praise
of his goodness, wisdom and power: Every creature is, as it were, a distinct
lease of that Book, and the properties and uses of these creatures are, as it
were, the several lines and letters of that leaf: and the more admirable,
because it is a Book; the writing whereof is indelible, and the uses whereof
are universal: the Book so opened, that all men in all parts of the world may
see and read. Again, this visible world may be likened to a great and fair
house, most exquisitely buil, and contrived into several rooms, and every
room richly furnished; the Heavens are the Roof, the Earth the floor, and
the Elements the several rooms, and the hosts of creatures in each of them
the rich furniture: and this house is the more admirable for us, because it is
a house that every man dwells in, out of this house no man can be put, and it is
kept at the charge of the Landlord, and the Tenants pay no rent.

But to leave similitudes, there are in the general consideration of this
visible world diverse things may be briefly touched, which we ought to wonder
at, and to glorify God, for his making of things so: as

1 The apt disposition of every creature in his own place; which place is so
fit, as a fitter cannot be invented: if the Stars were fixed in the Earth,
or the Trees in Heaven, how disproportionable and uncomely would it be?

2 The exactness of the Cteatures in their working, in keeping their times and
seasons: how punctually does the Sun dispatch his race in 24. hours, and so
the Moon in her seasons: the Plants keep their seasons of the year for
bearing fruit, and the Stars for shining, as they have received commandment
and order from their great Commander, which is God.

3 That every creature serves for some use, and many of the creatures dispatch
exceeding much work, in the uses unto which the Creator has appointed them:
and every creature has a kind of exactness and perfectness in his nature
and being.

4 The strange variety of creatures set in this visible world, with their most
various proprieties: take any room of this house, who can count the number of
plants, trees, beasts, or men upon earth? Who can reckon the number of Seas,
Rivers, Ponds, Springs, or creatures in them: or count the number of Fowls or
Flies in the Air, or Stars in Heaven? And this variety is the more
wond^rfull, if we straightly consider that our God made them all: and that
they are all still preserved in their kinds to this day: and that they are
made all in such different forms and portraitures, not only one kind from
another, but one singular creature from another in the same kind.

5 The marvelous order and relation of the creatures in their kinds and
respect one to another, in regard whereof the Psalmist magnifies the wisdom of
God, Psalm. 136. 5. and this order is admirable if we consider the different
degrees of creatures, serving one to another in their kinds: as some things God
made to have being only, as the Heavens, Elements, Meteors, and Minerals. Some
things have being and life also: as the herbs and trees: some things having
being, life, and sense also, as the beasts and fowls: some things have being,
sense, life and reason also, as men; and these degrees so connexed, that the
latter includes always the former, and the inferior degrees serve the higher:
as the Heavens and Elements adorn and feed the Plants, the Plants feed the
Beasts, the Beasts feed and serve men, and men serve God. Again the order is
wonderful in the placing of these bodies so, as with unspeakable neerenesse,
each creature fills his place so, as there is no vacuum or emptiness between;
and besides, are so set, as though they be diverse of them directly contrary one
to another, yet are so set, as they destroy not one another, but preserve the
whole Frame. I omit many other things for breuities sake.

Out of these general considerations of this visible world, we may raise many
uses for our selves: as

1 We have cause to admire and wonder at the glory of God, that made such a
huge and strong building: wonder, I say, at him that gives place for all these
things to be in, and yet himself contained in no place; that moves all these
things, and yet is himself immovable; that made all these creatures, being
himself uncreated, and that showed such skill in the least things as is beyond
the art of all men to do the like.

2 We should be afraid to displease him, that is Lord of such Hosts, that
commands so many and great armies, and can by them at his pleasure suddenly
fight against us and destroy us.

3 Man has great cause of Humiliation when he looks upon this Frame, both
when he feels his ignorance, that can see so little into the glory of these
works of God, scarce discerning those things of them which their outward forms
manifestly off^r to his understanding, and especially to think of it, how all
other creatures have kept their first perfection, and still keep their places
and works, and do their work constantly in their seasons, obeying their
Creator and doing his will, and he only that was best provided for, and made
Lord of all, to be out of order, not to keep his rank, to live unprofitably,
and neglect the work enjoined him, to be, I say, the only creature in Gods
garden, that deserves the name of a weed fit to be rooted out, and the rather
because by his fault he has brought much hurt upon the whole Frame, and is the
cause of that vanity or misery which any of the creatures suffer.

4 We should heartily pray unto God, to teach us to read in this book of
nature and since he has furnished us with such a great and glorious Library,
to be pleased to teach us the skill to read and understand, and the rather
because he will judge us by the contents of this book of nature, as well as by
the book of Scripture, Romans 1.

5 Poor men, and men oppressed and pursued in the world, should not repine at
their distresses: what if thou want house or harbor, so long as thou have
liberty to dwell in this fair house, where thou have the Heavens for a roof,
and the Stars for windows, and the earth for a foundation; though hard
Landlords oppress thee in thy artficiall dwellings, yet thou art Tenant to
such a Landlord, for the use of his great house of the world, as while thou
live will not put thee out of possession of his house. Yea, such as have
great houses to dwell in, made by the Art of man, should yet take more pleasure
in their liberty to dwell in this house made by God, because it excels theirs,
more then a Princes Palace can do a Cottage.

6 God himself has given us certain Caueats, by way of prevention which we
must look to, when we read in this great Book. The one is, that we take
heed we liken not God to any of the creatures which are but the work of his
hands, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Esaias 40. 22, 25. The other is, that we reserve all worship
to God, and not worship any of the Host of Heaven or Earth, and therefore we
must not so much as swear by Heaven or Earth, or any thing that is not God,
Mat. 5. Ier. 5.

Lastly, hence we may gather a confutation of Idols and false Gods: If the
Pagans would have us believe that their Idols are true Gods, let their Gods
make us such Heavens, and such an earth, and we will believe them, Ier. 10. 11.
In the mean time, this mighty frame will assure us, that JEHOVAH is only God.
And thus in general.

I return now to the second Heaven, which is the highest part of this visible
World, called in Scripture the Firmament: and concerning it we may wonder at
these things:

1. The maker of these Heavens: and so the Scriptures do magnify the praises
of God, for diverse distinct things: as first, that he did spread out these
heavens like a curtain, and stretched them out as a Tent to dwell in, Esaias 40.
22. It was a great glory that he could make such vast and mighty creatures:
secondly, that he could make them alone without any help, Esaias 44. 24. and
45. 12. thirdly, that he made them only by his word, Psalm. 33. 6. fourthly,
that he has made them in such Wisdom as surpasses the uttermost of our
understanding to reach the full knowledge of these things. In these things it
was truly said long since, that we cannot order our speech because of
darkness, Job 37. 38. 39. Instance in the light of Heaven; where is the Way
where light dwells, and as for darkness, where is the place thereof, that
thou should know the path to the house thereof: or by what way is the light
parted and scattered through the world* Job 38. 19. 20. 24. fifthly, that he
has established them with such understanding, and power, as they continue,
notwithstanding their marvelous motions, and yet have nothing to hold them up,
no mighty Beams from North to South to bear them up, no rafters to fasten
them to, or the like: but are vpheld merely by the Word of his power, Pro. 3.
19. Heb. 13.

2. In Scripture we shall find observed concerning the Heavens, their strange
constitution and Nature, and that for diverse things: as first, for their vast
greatness, Esaias 40. 12. secondly, their shining brightness being like a
molten looking-glass, Job 37. 18. thirdly, their singular durablenesse and
lastingnesse, Deuteronomy. 11. 21. to which I might add their vnconceauable
swiftness in Motion: the Sun running his Race swifter then any Giant on
earth, or Foul in the Air, or ought that can be found here below, Psalm 19.

3. The end why those mighty heavens were made, which is chiefly to preach the
glory of the Lord to all the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 19. 1. which glory of God
in making them, is so great, that the glory of the Lord is said to cover the
heavens, Hab. 3. 3.

4. The ordinances of heaven, or the Laws which God has given to these mighty
creatures, or the covenant he has made with them, binding them to do his
will: granting them dominion over the earth by their influences which cannot
be resisted or restrained, Job 38. 33. 31. And couenanting with them, to
preserve them in their course, Ier. 33. 25. and binding them to keep their
seasons, and to do the work appointed them, as the Sun to lighten the world
by day, and the Moon and Stars by night, so as the Moon must know her
seasons, and the Sun his going down, Psalm. 136. 9. and 104. 19.

5. The Hosts or Armies of creatures that people the heavens: and these are
praised: first, for their comeliness, and hence it is said, that the Spirit of
the Lord garnished the heavens, Job 26. 13. secondly, for their Number, in
respect of which it is accounted an infinite understanding in God to number the
Stars and call them all by their names, Psalm. 147. 4. 5. thirdly, for their
subjection to God, in that they all are his servants and obey his will Psalm.
103. 21. so as God does whatsoever he will in heaven as well as earth, Daniel 4.
35. fourthly, for their uses: for besides the sweet influences of the Stars,
what comfort should we have in this visible world, if we had not the light of
the Sun: How would the glory of all Gods works lie buried in the dark, that
now by the benefit of the light, appear to us, and serve for our uses.

The consideration of the making of these mighty heavens should serve for
diverse uses: as,

1. Our souls should bless God, and give him thanks, because he is very
great, and has showed his great wisdom in making the heavens, and his mighty
power in stretching them out like a curtain, and all this through his great
mercy to man, which endures for ever, Psalm 104. 1. 2. and 136. 5.

2. Woe to wicked men that by their sins provoke God, they cannot escape his
wrath, God has compassed them in with the heavens, and can make the very
Stars of Heaven fig^t against them, Judge. 5. 20. and these Heavens will
declare their wicke^nesse, Job 16. 27. Nor can any thing they do be hid from
him, for the light and darkness are his creatures, and therefore no darkness
can hide from him, Job 22. 12, 13, 14.

3. When I consider (says David) thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained, what is man that thou art
mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou visitest him, Psalm 8. 3. 4.

4. Godly men may be much comforted with the knowledge of this that God made
the Heavens, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and that in diverse respects.

For first, they need not fear the signs of Heaven, nor the Constellations of
the Stars, nor the diuinations of Inchaunters: for as God can restrain the
Constellation of the Stars, Esaias 13 10. so there can be no divination against
God, Esaias 44. 25 and 47. 1^. secondly, because God has hereby showed that he
is able to provide for them and protect them, yea, he pleads the greatness
of his power in making the heavens, thereby to ass^re them, that there shall be
nothing too hard for him to do, that may concern their good, Zach. 12. 1. 2.
3. Esaias 42. 5. 6 and 45. 11. 13. 18. 19. thirdly, because God has professed to
make so great account of the Church, that he can take no delight in the works
of his hands, in planting the Heavens, if Sion be not planted, and her children
as the Stars in Heaven, Isay 51. 10. fourthly, because God has promised to
them better Heavens, when themselves shall shine as the Stars in the
Firmament, and they shall need no Sun, nor Moon to light them, but God
himself will be their everlasting Light, Dan. 12. ^. Revel. 21. 2^. and 22. 5.

Thus of the Starry sky or the second part of Heaven: The third part follows,
and that is the Air: This is the lowest and worst room of Heaven, and yet
excellent things are written of it for our profit in the Scriptures.

Of the Nature, properties, parts, and natural uses of the Air, the Scripture
takes little or no notice, but leaves that to Philosophy: the Furniture of
this Room is especially commended in Scripture: and so the holy Ghost singles
out diverse Considerations. First, about the Fowls of the Air. Secondly, about
the Meteors in the Air.

About the Fowls of the Air we shall find such things as these observed in
Scripture, and so offered to our considerations.

1. The Maker of them, which was God, Genesis 1.

2. The matter out of which they were made (viz.) out of the ground, Genesis 2. 19.

3. The Original of their names: for it was Adam that gave the names to the
Fowls, Genesis 2. 19.

4. Their inferiority to man, both in that wisdom is not in them, Job 28. 21.
and in that God has planted in the Fowls a natural fear of man more then any
other creature, Genesis 9. 2.

5. The care that God has for the very Fowls: for first, he knows all the
Fowls in the Mountain, Psalm 50. 11. secondly, he prouides food for them
without their own industry, Mat. 6. Psalm. 147. 9. thirdly, he has taught them
skill to build them Nests to dwell in, Mat. 8. 20. fourthly, he has provided
even for their delight: for they have their habitation by the springes, and
sing among the branches, Psalm. 104. 12. fifthly, God has provided for their
passage in the Air, and that so wonderfully, that it is reckoned among the
four things too hard for us to know, to tell the way of an Eagle in the Air,
Pro. 30. 19.

6. The Uses they serve for, both in respect of God, for the Fowls praise God
in their kind, Psalm. 148. 10. and in respect of men, to whom they are given
not only for their food and service, Genesis 9. 2. but as the companions of
their lives: and therefore it is noted as a judgment, to have the very Fowls
of the Air taken away, Ier. 4. 25 and 9. 10. Especially God has given to the
Kings of the Earth, a supreme rule over the Fowls of the Air in the places
where their subjects dwell, Dan. 2. 38.

7. The natural order among the Fowls: every kind knowing his season, Ier.
8. 7.

From the Contemplation of the Fowls of the Air, the holy Ghost in Scripture
raises diverse Uses: both to teach, and reprove, and terrify.

First, for matter of Instruction, he shows, that the very fowls may teach
us: first, to know that there is a God, and that he gouernes the world, Job.
12. 7. secondly, to live without carking care for food and raiment, and trust
upon God for the success of all our labors, Mat. 6. 26. thirdly, with all
thankfulness to acknowledge Gods goodness to us, that has made us wiser then
the Fowls of the Air, Job 35. 11. and gives us power over them, Psalm. 8. 8.
and that he has made a covenant with them in our behalf that they shall not
hurt us, Hosea 2. 18. and for that now in the New Testament God has taken of
these ceremonial restraints, and pronounced that all the Fowls are now clean
and lawful to be eaten or used, Acts 10. 12.

Secondly, Man is reproved by the Fowls, for not obferuing the seasons of
grace, in that the Fowls in their kind observe the seasons of nature, for
their appearing and breeding, etc. Ier. 8. 7.

Thirdly, man is threatened that if he sin against God, that God that gave the
carcases of the Fowls for meat to man, will give the carcases of men for meat
to the Fowls, Deuteronomy. 28. 26.

Thus of the Fowls.

The Meteors in the Air are certain impressions God by his power makes in or
by the Air, the Lord framing wonderful things, thence and there, for the
service of his glory.

The Scripture considers of these Meteors, either as altogether extraordinary
importing their use, but not the causes of them: or else more ordinary.

God has strange things in this Heaven, unknown to us, and of which he gives
no account to us in the book of Nature. Thus we read of fire rained down
from Heaven. Genesis 19. 2. Kings 2. 10. and o^ great stones thrown down from
Heaven, Josh. 10. and also that God opened the door of Heaven, and rained down
Manna, Psalm. 78. 23. and by experience it has bin known that God has rained
down living creatures from Heaven also, as frogs or the like.

The more ordinary Meteors may for order sake be cast into three sorts: some
fiery, some ayrie, some watery.

The fiery Meteors in Nature are many, which are seen in great diversity and
often: as pillars of fire, the fire we call the falling of the Stars, the
fire they call Ignis fatuus, or fools fire, the fire that will hang about men's
garments or the sails of ships, blazing Stars or the Lightning. But the
Scripture does especially single out the Thunder and Lightning, to make
observations about it for our uses.

And so first of Thunder and Lightning both together, the Scripture would have
us take notice.

1. That they are in a special manner of Gods making, though the Philosopher
say much to tell us how they are raised and framed by nature, yet God
challenges a peculiar honor in the making of them, above what we can reach
too: and therefore they are called his Thunder and his Lightning, Psalm. 77. 17.
18. and 104. 6. 7. Job 38. ^5.

2. That they are both Officers unto God, in a special place about him,
serving about the Lord, when there is special occasion to show the terror and
greatness of his Majesty: as when the Law was to be given, and the Lord was
to come down upon Mount Sinay, Exodus 19. 16. and so when the Lord as King would
come down amongst us here in the world, the Thunder and Lightning do not
only give notice of his coming, but as his high Marshalls, they make room
for it, and compel people of all sorts in their places to expect the coming
of the Lord, Psalm 97. 1. 3. 4.

Secondly, each of them are magnified apart: as,

1. The Thunder is called the voice of God, the sound that goes out of his
mouth which God directs under the whole Heaven, as a wise man directs his
speech to the Hearers. It is a roaring voice, called also the voice of his
Excellence, because he speaks* when he speaks by Thunder with special
Majesty: The Lord is said to thunder maruellously with his voice, all this in
Job 37. 2, 3, 4, 5. He speaks in Thunder as the God of glory, Psalm. 29. ^.
This voice of the Lord is powerful, and therefore called the Thunder of his
power, Job 26. 14. Psalm. 29. 4.

2. The Lightnings are called Gods Arrows, 2. Sam. 22. 14. 15. and so they are
wonderful, if we consider, that it is God only that divided a way for the
Lightning, Job 38. 25. and 28. 26. and that God can by these Arrows discomfit
an Army of enemies, Psalm. 144. 6. and that God can shoot so far with them
(viz) from one end of the Heaven to another, Mat. 24. 27. and that God does
make the Lightnings with the rain at the same time, when one would think the
rain should quench the fire of the Lightning, Psalm. 135. 7. and this
observation of the Psalmist, the Prophet Jeremy twice alleges Verbatim as a
matter of wonder, Ier. 10. 13 and 51. 26.

Lastly, it is wonderful, that God should shoot with such strange Arrows as
inlighten the world, Psalm 97. 3. 4. and 77. 17. 18.

What use we should make of the Thunder and Lightning we are likewise taught in
the book of God: for the Thunder being Gods voice, we are enjoined when God
speaks in such Majesty, to hear him attentively, yea, and to speak of his
glory in the Temple, Psalm. 29. 9. Job 37. 2. and what the meaning is of his
voice he has told us in his Word, so that as often as we hear the Thunder,
we should know that God by that mighty voice does tell us:

1. That he is the true God, and there is none so great as he, Ier. 10. ^0. 13.
Psalm. 77. 13. 18. 17.

2. That he reigns, and governs all things, and can do what he lists,
Psalm. 97. 1. 2. 3.

3. That wicked men are sure to be destroyed, and that their strength shall not
prevail, 1. Sam. 2. 10.

4. That the mightiest men on earth must do their Homage to God and now
acknowledge his Glory and Majesty, and worship him with all possible devotion,
Psalm. 29. 1, 2, 3, etc.

5. That the heart of all men should tremble at the terror of his glory, Job
^7. 1.

6. That the godly shall be preserved, and that God will give his people
strength, Psalm. 29. 11.

Thus of the fiery Meteors. The Ayrie Meteors follow: and they are the wind
and the Earthquake.

Concerning the winds, these things are noted as admirable in Scripture.

1. The original of them: No man knows whence they come nor whither they
go, John 3. 7. Yea, God challenges it as his own special glory to create
the winds, and reckons that work with the forming of the Mountains, and the
telling of man what he thinks, Amos 4. 13. but where God puts the winds after
he has created them, we know not, only that he brings them out of his
treasure, Psalm 135. 7.

2. The direction of them in their Motion: no man can hold the wind in his
fistes, nor turn them out of the way to alter their Motion: yet are the very
winds subject unto Gods order: either to be still, Mat. 8. 27. or to go on as
he shall direct both when, and whither, and as he will in all things. It is
admirable that such bustling and unruly creatures, as the winds should be
made to pace orderly: yet it is said, that God weighs even the winds and
before he sends them out, he looks to the ends of the whole earth, and sees
exactly under the whole Heavens to appoint their Motion and their way, Job 28.
25.

3. The use God puts the wind to, sometimes they serve to bring the rain, 1
King. 18. 45. sometimes they serve in steed of posts and messengers: so they
fetched Locusts, Ex. 10. 13. and quails, Numb. 11. 31. sometimes God uses
them to draw his Charriots. The clouds are Gods Chariot, and it is drawn by
wings, not by horses: and the wings are the wind. Thus God rides on the
wings of the wind, 2. Sam. 22. 10. Psalm. 104. 3. sometimes they are set to
drive away the Rain, and to cleanse the clouds, Job 37. 21. Prou. 25. 23.
sometimes he uses them to punish the sins of men, by hurting or destroying
their houses, cattle corn, or the like: yea, sometimes he sends the wind to
fetch away the wicked, and to hurl them out of their place, Job. ^7. 21.

All which should teach us to acknowledge Gods glory in these things, and to
lift up our hearts to the contemplation of Gods wonderful working: especially
we should prepare our hearts to meet God, and not dare to provoke him by our
sins, Amos 4. 12, 13.

Thus of the wind, the Earthquakes follows, which is supposed to be caused by
the Air getting into the hollow places of the earth, and wanting vent, does by
force strive t^ open a passage for it self, which causes the trembling of the
Earth.

The Earthquake is justly to be reckoned amongst the wonderful works of God,
that can by so weak a creature as the Air, move so vast a body as the Earth:
and therefore the Scripture gives the power of shaking the earth unto God.

This Meteor is magnified in Scripture also, for the service it is put to: It
sometimes is used to show the terror of Gods Majesty; sometimes to signify
Gods wrath unto wicked men; sometimes to assure Gods love to his people (as
will appear in the use) and sometimes to foretell the last Judgment.

The consideration of the Earthquake may serve for diverse uses: as,

1 To show Gods power and greatness, and the terror of his Majesty, Exodus 19.
18. so the Earthquake was one of the wonders to show the divinity of Christ at
his passion.

2 To comfort Gods servants, and to let them know that God is highly displeased
when they are wronged: He makes the Earth quake when he is angry for the
wrongs done to his Servants, especially if they make their moan to him by
Prayer, as was showed in the case of David, Psalm. 18. 6, 7. and the Apostles,
Acts 4. 31. and Paul and Silas, Acts 16. 25, 26.

3 To prove how fearful the estate of wicked men is, and how sure it is they
will be consumed out of the earth, and how easy it is for God to be rid of
them, seeing, if he but look on the Earth it trembles, Psalm. 104. 32, etc.
yea, by this work Job proves, no man could ever harden himself against God
and prosper, seeing he shakes the earth out of his place, and the Pillars
thereof tremble, Job 9. 4, 5, 6. and Nahum hence concludes, that no wicked man
can stand before his anger, Nahum. 1. 5, 6.

Sure it is, GOD can never want glory that can make the earth shake if he but
look upon it, and the Hills smoke if he but touch them, Psalm. 104. 31, 32. and
we should sing of his glory all our days.

Lastly, we upon whom the ends of the world are come, when we see the Earth
tremble, should remember the approach of the general judgment, the Lord by
that sign giving warning unto men to awake out of security, and provide for
their accounts, Luke 21. 11. Mat. 24. 7.

Thus of the Ayrie Meteors: The watery Meteors follow, and those are Clouds,
Snow, Mist, Deaw, Frost, Hail, and Rain, and hither I may refer the
Rainebow, and these are most frequently mentioned in Scripture, and though men
for the commonnesse of these things do neglect the study of Gods glory in
them, yet the Lord even from these things does for our use gather many
excellent observations to teach us and to show us his glory.

These things are commended in Scripture:

1 For the wonder of their original: who can tell who is the Father of the
Rain, and who has begotten the drops of the Deaw, out of whose womb came the
Ice, and who has gendered the hoare Frost that comes from Heaven? who can show
the secret of hiding the waters as with a stone, and freezing the face of the
deep: who can lift up his voice to the Clouds, that abundance of waters may
come down? Job 38. 28, 29, 30, 34.

2 For the wonderful working of God in the placing and ordering of them: as
that God should bind up the waters in his thick Cloud, and yet the Cloud not
to be rent under them, Job 26. 8, 9. and that God should shake the Pillars of
Heaven, and yet Heaven falls not, verse 11. that God can fetch up and cause the
vapors to ascend from the very ends of the earth, Psalm. 135. 7. that he
weighs the waters by measure, when he makes a decree for the rain, seeing
to it and preparing it, and searching out all things that concern the falling
of every drop of the rain, so as not any of it falls in vain, or in a wrong
place, Job 28. 25, 26, 27. and 37. 12.

3 For the worth and excellency of these things: called the blessings of
Heaven, and the precious things of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Genesis 49. 25.

4 For the use he puts these things to: for

1 By these, when he pleases he can judge his enemies: either by shutting up
the Heavens that they fall not, or by opening the windows of Heaven, as he
did in the destruction of the old world, Job. 36. 31. he reserues these against
the day of battle, Job 38. 23. Esaias 24. 17, 18. and 37. 13.

2 At the first he made the Clouds to be a garment for the Sea, when it was
first brought out, and a swaddling band for it, Job 38. 8, 9.

3 By the Clouds, as in a Chariot, God rides about this nether world to visit
it, Psalm. 104. 3.

4 He uses the Clouds to hold back the face of his Throne by spreading it
upon it, Job 26. 9.

5 To show his power, he often with his Cloud covers the Light, and
commands it not to shine by the Cloud that comes betwixt, Job 36. 32.

6 God has made himself a Pauillion to sit in, with waters and thick Clouds,
2 Samuel 22. 12.

7 By these God waters our Land as we do our Gardens, and by the virtue of
them, he gives meat in abundance, Job 36. 31. and 37. 11. Psalm. 65. 9, 10,
11, 12.

5 For the interest that God has given us unto these things, and therefore
they are called our Heavens, Deuteronomy. 33. 28. and therefore no man can be poor
that has so great substance.

The use is especially to set us in an everlasting admiration of God, not only
for these things which he has reueiled concerning these things, but even for
the intimation, that there are many things we know not, but are above our
reach: Behold, says he, God is great, and we know him not, if we should but
consider that one thing that seems the least of many, it is too wonderful for
us, even Gods making of the drops of rain so small, and yet so proportional
among themselves, when God causes them to distill upon man, Job 36. 26, 27,
28. We have great cause to stand still and wonder: we know not the wondrous
works of him that is perfect in knowledge. We cannot order our speech in these
things by reason of darkness. If a man speak, he shall be swallowed up with
the greatness, and difficulty, and glory of these things, Job 37. 14, 16, 19,
20.

Touching the Almighty, in these things we cannot find him out, he is
excellent in power and in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice, even by these
things, Job 37. 23. Men should therefore fear him, for as he shows by
reasoning from these things in another place, the only wisdom of a man, were
to fear God, Job 28. 28.

Secondly, we should learn of these things how to serve God, they keep their
seasons, and they return not to Heaven again, but do the work God sent them
for, Esaias 55. 10. Luke 12. 56. Mat. 16. 2, 3.

3 We should be wonderful thankful to God even for these blessings of
Heaven. They were wont in the first ages of the world, to think they had cause
to praise God for the very dew of Heaven, Genesis 25. 28, 39. Deuteronomy. 33. 13, 28.
We are exhorted to sing praise to God, who covers the Heaven with Clouds,
and prepares rain for the Earth, Psalm. 147. 7, 8. Men use to give a great
deal of money to buy a little land, and yet cannot praise him that gives them
what is more worth then that they buy; for it is God that gives the dew, and
the snow, and the rain, and so the Grass and the Corn, without which the
Land were worth nothing.

4 Seeing God has wrought wonderfully in these things, and that they are so
precious for our uses, we must learn (if at any time God restrain these
blessings of Heaven) to seek them by prayer and repentance for our sins,
James 5. 18. 2 Chronicles. 6. 27. 28. and if we would have them continued to us, we
must look to the paying of our Tithes duly, Mal. 3. 10.

5 Wicked men are but in ill taking: for (besides that by these things GOD can
plague them, having reserved them for the day of war as was showed before)
the Lord by these things has left them without excuse, having from them
witnesses to plead for him against the wicked, as is showed Acts 17. 14.

6. We must take heed of doubting Gods providence in sending these blessings
from Heaven: we may read of a man that was trodden to death, for doubting
whether God could furnish man's wants by these things, 2 King. 7. 19, 20.

To conclude, we must make conscience of it to learn these things and what
else God teaches us by them, and the rather for the wonder of Gods printing,
that can make his letters so great, that a man may see and read so far off,
and therefore remember to magnify his work, Job 36. 24, 25.

As for the Rainbow two things only I will note.

1 What we may observe by the sense of seeing: and that is the strange
varieties and perfection of colors, that God by his power gathers in that
manner into the Air, which Air of it self is without any color, raised and
dissolved again after a little time without any remnant of these colors left.

2 What we may read in Scripture of it: and that is both concerning the Author
of it, and the end of it. The Author of it is God, who calls it his Bow; and
the end is by Gods own appointment, to secure and assure man that the world
shall never be destroyed by waters any more; which is the more wonderful,
because the Rainebow in it self is often a fore*runner of Rain, as experience
shows, and by the descending of the two horns of it to the Earth and Seas,
does drink up vapors, and carry them into the Air to breed Rain, Genesis 9.

Hitherto of Heaven, the Earth follows.

Earth.] The term of Earth here comprehends (as I conceive) the dry Land, as
also the waters of the Sea that lie upon the Earth: and therefore I would first
briefly consider of the Sea.

Concerning the Sea, these things in Scripture are taken notice of.

1 What it is: and so Moses describes the Sea to be the gathering together of
the waters into a heap, which before did flow over all the face of the earth:
and this collection of the waters under the Firmament, God himself named the
Sea, Genesis 1. 10.

2 The Original of these waters; and that God claims as a glory to himself,
to have made the Sea as well as other vast Creatures, the Sea is his and he
made it, Psalm. 95. 5. he is the God that made the Sea and the dry Land, Jonah
1. 9. and for the manner of making it, as it had diverse things common with
other creatures, as to be made of nothing, and by the Word of God, and so the
waters in special are said to have the Spirit of God to sit upon them, as the
Hen sits upon the Chickens, to give it form and digestion, Genesis 1. 2.

3 The wonder of Gods power in placing and disposing of the Sea, and that in
many respects: as

1 That he has made these waters to be of such vast greatness, and
unsearchable depth, Job 38. 16. Esaias 40. 12.

2 That he has founded the world upon the Seas, and stablished it upon the
Floods, setting the mighty Frame of the upper world upon the waters and the
earth to hold them up, Psalm. 24. 2.

3 That he has cast all these waters into their several places, where he
keeps them in heaps, as in most convenient Storehouses, Psalm. 33. 7.

4 That he keeps them so strangely from drowning the whole Earth without any
other Bars or Doors then the word of his own Power, saying to it, Hitherto
shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves stand, Job 38.
8, 10, 11. making the very Sands in a plain to stay the raging waves of the
Sea, and to be the bounds thereof, Ierem. 5. 22. giving his decree to the
waters once for all in the beginning, that they should not pass his
Commandment, Prou. 8. 29. and to that end he sets a watch over the Sea, Job
7. 12.

5 That he rules and gouernes the Seas, doing with them whatsoever pleases
him, Psalm. 145. 6. He deuideth the Sea when the waves thereof roar (which he
does by his authority as the Lord of Hosts) Ier. 31. 35. He so rules the
raging of the Sea, that when the waves thereof arise he stilleth them, Psalm.
89. 9. so as in their greatest tumults, if he but speak to them, they are
still presently at his command, Mat. 8. and as Job says, he deuideth the Sea
with his power, and by his understanding he smites through the proud, Job 26.
12. He alone treads upon the waves of the Sea, Job 9. 8.

6 That he has ordered it so, that all Rivers run into the Sea, and yet the
Sea is not full, Eccles. 1. 7.

4. The ends of creating the Sea, which are partly Gods glory, and partly men's
use; and partly to do special service to the Son of man, the Savior of the
world.

The glory of the Lord appears in the Sea in all the former considerations,
and the Sea by roaring praises God, and is in Scripture called upon to praise,
and to show that he reigns, 1 Chronicles. 16. 32.

The Sea also serves for man's use: for men do their business in these great
waters, Psalm 107. 23. when they go down to the Sea in Ships, and the way of
a Ship in the midst of the Sea, is one of the four things which are too
wonderful for us to reach to, Prou. 30, 19. Besides, there are great treasures
and riches in the Sea, which God has given unto man, Psalm. 104. 25. for men
come to have right to the fishes of the Sea by grant from God in the beginning
of the world, Genesis 1. 26. and 9. 2. And besides, the abundance which men gather
out of the Seas that way, they are enriched by the Treasures hid in the sands,
such as are either Pearls or precious stones, or some kinds of creatures,
Deuteronomy. 31. 19. And it is noted as a great judgment, to take away the Fishes of
the Sea from man, Hos. 4. 3. And further, when God is angry with man, he can
call for the waters of the Sea, and power them on the face of the earth, Amos
5. 8.

The special service the Sea does, or is to do to Christ, is by her roaring,
to give warning to the world of his second coming to Judgment, Luke 21.

There are many uses made in Scripture of this Doctrine concerning Gods
workmanship about the Sea: as

1 This mighty creature thus made and ordered by GOD, serves to set out the
great glory of Gods wisdom and power, as the Prophet David with admiration
observes, Psalm. 104. 25. and if the Sea be so great and mighty, how great and
mighty is the Lord, that so easily rules so vast a creature, Psalm. 93. 3, 4.
the very Sea shows that he is GOD alone, Neh 9. 6.

2 The Lord himself notes it with indignation, as a foul offense against him,
that men do not learn for ever to be afraid of God that has set such bounds
to the Sea, that by his own word stays the Sea from ouerwhelming us all, Ier.
5. 22. To see the waves of the Sea tossing themselves, and yet are kept in
within the very sands, that they dare not pass over them, and though they
roar yet cannot prevail to get beyond the bound God has set them, should
make a man's heart tremble at the power of God.

3 We that dwell in the Isles of the Sea, and are compassed round about with
the raging waters should glorify God, for the wonder of his omnipotency in
keeping us from perishing by the waters: we should make his praise glorious by
daily admiration and celebration of his Name, Esaias 24. 15. Yea, if the waters
might have but their first and natural course, all the Inhabitants of the
earth would be drowned, there would be no dry land: and therefore oh that men
would praise God for his goodness, for the wonderful works he does for the
children of men: especially such as go down to the Sea in the Ships, these
see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, and therefore should
in a special manner praise him, Psalm. 107. 21, 23, 24.

4 This mighty Creature shows that wicked men can never prosper, for besides,
that God can fight against many of them by the waters and destroy them, or call
for the waters and ouerflow them, Amos 5. 8. The power of God in ruling the
boisterous waves of the sea, shows that no man can harden himself against God
and prosper: he that tames the sea can subdue them and smite through the
proud, Job 9. 8. and therefore it is a desperate course for men wilfully to
rebel against God, for no man shall be strong by his own might, Psalm. 95. 5.
8.

But manifestly from hence may be gathered, that if God will shut up, or cut
off, or gather together, who can hinder him? he knows vain men, and he sees
wickedness, and will he not consider it? Job 11. 9, 10, 11.

5. These contemplations should in general quicken us to Gods Service, and
provoke us to worship him with all devotion, humility, and holiness, as these
places show, Psalm. 95. 6. and 93. 3, 4, 5. seeing he is so great a King above
all Kings, and so mighty a Commander, we should bow before him with all
Reverence, and offer the Sacrifice of righteousness, Deuteronomy. 33. 19.

6. Diverse Consolations may be gathered from hence.

1. The power of God that can order and still the raging of the Sea, does
assure the godly, when they are most furiously opposed by their adversaries,
that yet God can and will preserve them, in that God is mightier then the Noise
of many waters, then the mighty waves of the Sea: David gathers from hence,
that therefore his testimonies are sure, and all that he has promised
concerning the preservation of his people, shall certainly and easily be
performed, Psalm. 93. 3. 4. 5. and therefore they are happy that put their
trust in him, for he will keep his Mercy and his Truth, Psalm 146. 5. 6.

2. When men are in vproares, and the World full of commotions and wars, the
consideration of Gods power over the raging of the sea, is an encouragement and
comfort unto men that wait upon God, that he can also still the Tumult of the
people: as the Prophet gathers, Psalm. 65. 7.

3. Such men as have callings to do their business in the Sea, may hence
gather comfort for their safety there, for God is the confidence of them that
are a far off in the Sea: as the same Prophet shows, Psalm. 65. 5. We may
trust God for our preservation on the sea as well as on the dry land, seeing
his command is as great in the one as in the other.

Lastly, hence the Apostle Peter gathers an unanswerable confutation of
Atheists that think all things will continue alike, and that there will be no
breaking up of the world for the last judgment, and that things are carried
merely by a natural course: for that the Earth stands out of the waters, and
in the waters, if there were no higher cause then nature, the world would
presently be ouerflowed, if God let go his hold of the waters, as manifestly
appeared in the destruction of the old world, 2. Pet. 3. 5.

Thus of the Waters.

The Earth is considered of in the Scriptures, either in it self, or in the
fruits of it, or in the Inhabitants of it.

The glory of the Lord is exceeding great in respect of the Earth, considered
in it self.

1. That he could make the Earth, Genesis 1. 1. Psalm. 121. 2.

2. That he could make it so: that is,

1. So great and vast a creature, Job 11. 9.

2. That he could make it be, only by his word, 2. Pet. 3. 5. Psalm. 33. 9.

3. That he could make it hang in such a miraculous manner, upon nothing that
is able to bear it up: founding it upon the waters and Air, Job 26. ^. and.
38. 4. 5. 6. Psalm 136. 6.

4. That he has divided it, and set borders throughout the whole Earth,
dividing it for the use of the several Nations that should inhabit it, Psalm.
74. 17.

5. That he has made it so immovable, there being nothing to fasten it,
Psalm 104. 5. and 33. 9. and 119. 90. being of such weight, and having so many
Cities and buildings upon it: and being a creature so round and therefore by
nature moveable.

6. That he has made it a creature that lasts for ever, and outlasts a world
of other creatures, Eccles. 1. 4. Psalm 78. 69.

The Uses are diverse: for,

1. Hence we may gather the marvelous glory of the Lord, in his power,
greatness, wisdom, providence sovereignty, and eternity, Job 12. 8. His
power in being able to make so mighty a creature: he must needs have a mighty
Arm, Psalm. 89. 11. 13. His greatness, in that he is bigger then the Heavens
and the Earth, seeing they are the work of his hands, Job 11. 9. His wisdom,
that he could find out such a secret way of founding so vast a creature, Pro.
3. 19. and 8. His providence is most manifest in that so mighty a creature can
abide; which it could never do, if it were not vpheld by the Word of his
power, 2. Pet. 3. 5. and his sovereignty is matchless, he is a great King
above all Kings: for he alone is the Lord of the whole earth: Never any King
was King of the whole Earth but he, so as all the Earth and the fullness
thereof belongs to him, and he has the highest and absolutest right over all
things in the Earth, Psalm 47. 7. Mich. 4. 13. Zach. 4. vlt. finally, hence is
proved the Eternity of God, he made the Earth, and therefore was before the
foundations of it, and if he could make a creature that lasts so long, how
everlasting is he himself, Psalm. 102. 25. 26.

2. It is not enough to know these things, but we must give God the glory of
them, our hearts should always say with the Psalmist, Blessed be the Lord God
which only does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious name for ever,
and let the whole earth be filled with his glory: Amen, Amen. Psalm. 72. 19.
18. Psalm 47. 7. and the rather, because our vows and thanksgiving are as it
were all the Rent we pay unto the Lord of the whole Earth of whom we hold in
chief, Psalm. 50. 12.

3. I^ should teach godly men contentation in all estates, if God be the King
of the whole Earth, then all his children are the great Princes of the world,
Psalm. 47. 9. and can want nothing that is needful for them, because the Earth
is the Lords and all the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. Zach. 4. 14. which if
it be seriously considered, all men have cause to say, verily there is a reward
for the righteous, Psalm. 58. 12. and if wicked men break their bonds and
break in upon their possessions, they have a comfortable recourse to that God
that set the borders of the Earth, and gave the lot to his people, Psalm. 74.
17. 18. and if the earth can last so long, then the children of his servants
shall much more endure for ever, Psalm 102. 25. 26. 28. and if the Word of the
Lord be so immovable, that by it the earth is vpheld, then will the word of
his promise to his servants be sure to all generations, Psalm. 119. 90. and
therefore of all men (Oh ye Righteous) ye are blessed of the Lord which made
Heaven and Earth, Psalm* 115. 13, 14, 15, 16. and therefore also in all the
occasions of our lives we should remember that our help comes from the Lord
which made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 121. 2. and 134. 3.

4. It should teach us to give God the glory of disposing of the Kingdoms of
the Earth: He is the supreme Lord of the whole Earth, and therefore he may
set up and pull down what Kings and Princes he will: and if he set Sion to
thresh the Nations and to take away their substance, yet it is done by right,
seeing God is the Lord of the Earth, Mich. 4. 13. Psalm. 47. 9.

5. The Kings of the Earth should remember to do their Homage to God, and to
sing of his praises and of the surpassing excellency of his glory, Psalm. 138.
4. Psalm. 72. 11.

6. Woe to wicked men, for if the Earth be his, and they his Subjects, he has
more power to subdue and punish them as rebels then any of the Princes of the
Earth, and therefore can easily consume them out of the earth, Psalm. 104. vlt.
and 58. 12. and if he can make the very earth tremble if he but look upon it,
Psalm. 104. 32. then where shall they appear, and how shall they stand before
his Indignation? Nahum. 1. 5. 6. and if they be borne with for a time, and get
great estates on Earth, yet must they be brought to judgment as usurpers,
because the Earth is the Lords, and they never had a Title from him, for what
they hold, and therefore their Riches are riches of Iniquity.

Lastly, seeing the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, Christians
should take heed of vain scruples about the use of the Creatures: and learn
to know their liberty from God, and so make no question for conscience sake, 1.
Cor. 10. 26.

Thus of the Earth in it self generally considered: It follows to consider of
the things that are in the Earth or belong to it, and so the Scripture commends
to our consideration either the things that are within the Earth, or the things
that are upon the Earth: Things within the Earth are the Mineralls: things upon
the Earth, are the vegetables and living creatures.

About the Mineralls little is spoken in Scripture, and I will instance but in
one place, and that is Job 28. 1. to 12. where is offered to our consideration.

1. The straying veins of the Earth, full of Riches, and wonder: as the vein
for Silver, and the place for gold, and the stones that lie in darkness and
in the shadow of death, and the iron and brass which is molten out of the
Earth, verse 1. 2. 3. and in some places of the Earth, the stones thereof are
the places of Saphires, and it has dust of gold, verse 6.

2. The strange fires that are in the Earth arising from the Sulphur or
Brimston which are discovered if the earth be turned up, verse 5.

3. The vast and strange paths that are in the hollow places of the earth,
which no Foul knows, nor the Vultures eye has ever se^ne, and c, verse 7, 8.

4. The rivers of waters which run within the Earth even through the Rocks,
as if God had cut a way for them, verse 10.

But I come to the things that are upon the earth, and so first to the
vegetables, that is, the the plants that cover the earth: viz. grass, grain,
herbs, and trees, and these I consider altogether, and so God charge us to
take notice of four diverse things about them.

1. Their original, which may be considered as supernatural or natural, or
artificial: God gave them a being above the the course of nature or Art, when
he made them grow out of the earth without seed, Genesis 1. 11. 12. and for a
time after made them flourish, when there was yet no rain to fall on the
earth, and no man to till it, Genesis 2. 5. 6. Their natural original is not
without worthy observation, the Earth being like a Mother to the seed of all
plants, receives it into her womb, and the Sun in the seasons of the year
doing the Office of a Father: The artificial original they have is from man,
whom God has taught the skill and power, by setting, sowing, plowing,
watering, insition and inoculating in due seasons, to make as it were a new and
another Creation, Esaias 28. which comes from the Lord, who is wonderful in
working and excellent in counsel, verse 22. 24. 25. 26. 29.

2. Their variety, who can count those innumerable birthes of the Earth,
delivering her self of the seed she received in the seasons thereof with
strange distinctions, in number, color, taste, smell, greatness, virtue, or
figure, which is the more wonderful because these all come from the same
womb, yea, we may behold grow out of the same clod of earth plants of strange
diversity, some useful, some hurtful, yet enjoy the same earth to conceive
them, and the same Sun to beget them.

3. Their glory, especially in respect of the colors: Solomon in all his glory
was not clothed like one little flower, for liveliness of color, and
inimitable beauty, Matthew 6. 29.

4. Their use: and that in respect of God, and the Earth it self, and the
beasts, and fowls, and man: their use in respect of God is to set out the
glory of his power, skill, wisdom, and goodness, Psalm 104. 24. their use
in respect of the Earth, is to cover her nakedness as with a rich garment of
diverse colors: How horrid would the Earth look, if it were not apparelled,
with grass, herbs, corn, and trees? their use in respect of the Beasts and
Fowls, is both to feed them, and to harbor them: The Birds lodge in the
trees, and the Beasts feed on the grass of the field, Psalm 104. 14. 17. The
tree of the field is called man's life. Deuteronomy. 20. 19.
Their use in respect of man is to serve for his service, food, delight, and
the curing of his wounds and diseases. God made the herb for the service of
man, and brings his food out of the Earth, and bread that strengthens the
heart of man, and wine that makes him glad, and oil to make his face shine,
Psalm. 104. 14. 15. to which add, the herb and plant for the curing of his
wounds and diseases: how has the Lord provided remedies for all the diseases
of man, even out of the Earth, and with what strange varieties, so as there is
scarce any disease a man has, but he has caused to grow out of the Earth,
perhaps within a little space of time, some herb or plant or other that may
ease him or cure him, Genesis 1. ^9.

5. The interest that God has still in these things both in respect of right
and power: of right, and so he calls the corn, wool, and flax, the
Israelites had, His wool, and flax, etc. Hosea 2. 8. 9. and the Trees are
called the Trees of the Lord, Psalm. 104. 16. and so of power, because though he
has set a course in Nature for the growth of these, yet he has not shut out
the free use of his own power, nor is Nature every way able of her self to
produce these things, and therefore God says, he causes the grass to grow
for the cattle, and the herb for the service of man, and it is he that brings
forth bread out of the Earth, etc. Psalm. 104. 14. 15. it is he that renews
the face of the Earth every year, Psalm 104. ^0.

6. The Transitory and fading condition of these things: they are easily cut
down and wither, and their gloss and beauty will decay of it self every
year, Psalm. 37. 2. and 91. 6. Esaias* 40. 6. 1. Pet. 1. 24.

The Uses follow, and are diverse: and so first for instruction, many duties
should be learned hence: as,

1. The acknowledgement of our own vileness and ignorance: God has ouerlaid
our knowledge in the very grass we tread upon: and therefore we must needs be
very simple in heavenly things, that cannot give a reason of the things which
are daily about us in the lowest rank of creatures.

2. We should receive these creatures from God as rich blessings, and use them,
and praise the Lord that gives them to us, especially when we have them in
greater plenty. God made a Law for the Jews, that for seven days after the
harvest, they should rejoice before the Lord and praise him, and keep holy
assemblies, Leuit. 23. 39. 40. and at all times we must sing to the Lord with
Thanksgiving, Psalm. 147. 7, 8, 9, 10. 11. Men must eat and praise the Lord,
Esaias 62. 8, 9.

3. We should learn to live without care for our clothing: if God so clothe
the grass of the field, will he not provide for us? as our Savior urges it,
Mat. 6. 30.

4. If men would thrive and prosper in the possession and use of these fruits
of the Earth, they must be such as God would have them to be: God himself has
set down diverse rules to be observed by such as would prosper in the
fruitfulnes of these things; as,

1. They must keep his Commandments, and obey his word, and not live in sin
without repentance, Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. 4, etc. Deuteronomy. 11. 13, etc.

2. They must pay their Tithes, and honor God with the first fruits of all
their increase, Mal. 3. Pro. 3.

3. They must be diligent in their callings, and not flothfull and careless,
Pro. 21. 25. 26. and 19. 15. and 14. 23. Adam enjoined to labor.

4. Men must by prayer seek a blessing from God in their callings: else in
vain to go to bed late, and rise early, and eat the bread of carfulness,
for it is God only that makes the earth fruitful, Psalm. 127. 3.

5. We must remember the poor, to leave a gleaning after Harvest, and the
Vintage for the poor, and so consequently in all other increase, Deuteronomy. 24. 19,
20, 21.

6. We must take heed of oppression of Tennants, or hard usage of laborers
or servants employed about the fruits of the Earth, Job 31. 38, 39, 40.

7. From the fading condition of these herbs and flowers, we are put in mind
of our mortality, and the transitorinesse and vanity of the glory of the world,
1. Pet. 1. 24.

8. From the manner of the sowing and growing of the corn we are taught to
believe the Resurrection of our bodies, which may rise again in a better shape
as well as the corn that is cast into the earth, and is first putrified before
it grows, 1. Cor. 15. 36. 37. 38.

Thus of the Instructions.

The contemplation of the vegetables may serve for Humiliation also.

1. To all men, when they behold Thorns, bristles, and thisties, and weeds,
for these are a standing Monument of man's sin, and do daily vpbraid him to
his face, being the fruits of malediction: for the Earth is cursed for man's
sake, Genesis 3.

2. To wicked men, and that in diverse respects, for first, even in these things
God can be revenged on them, by restraining the fruits of the earth from them,
Deuteronomy. 11. 15, etc. Hosea 3. 8, Ier. 12. 13. Joel 2. 1. secondly, God has
threatened to make them and their glory like the grass of the field, Psalm. 92.
7 and 37. 2. But these brutish men will not be warned by these Monitors: and
the rather will the Lord be incensed against them if they abuse these creatures
to his dishonor, in surfeiting and drunkenness, or Idolatry, or strange
apparel or the like, Hosea 2. 8. and if they themselves, that look for fruit
from the earth, live unfruitfully: if they cut down unfruitful trees, God
will cut down and root out unfruitful men.

Thus of the Vegetables. The contemplation of the Beasts of the field follows.

And concerning them, we are instructed in many things by sense, and therefore
these things are not taken notice of in Scripture: the Lord intending by his
word to tell us of such things as are above sense, either in the nature of
them, or in the use of them.

The things that are worthy consideration, which sense instructs us in, are
such as these:

1. The great variety that appears in these creatures: The man ifold wisdom
and power of the great Workman appears in the several forms, faces, forces,
and uses, he has declared upon these creatures: who can count the variety of
Gods Workmanship in them? The sorts and numbers of creatures are in respect of
us innumerable.

2. The motion and sense that is in the creatures, which see, hear, smell,
taste, and stir up and down, by force of some power and cause which God has
set in them which we see not: it must needs be strange to see creatures of
such bigness stir themselves with such variety of Motions, and yet nothing
from without to lift them. The skillfullest Artificers in the world, though
they can make strange and curious forms of things, yet they cannot make them
stir, or live, or see, etc. When they made Gods of Pictures, yet they could
not make them move or live, etc.

3 The strange provision God has furnished them withal in respect of
clothing, defense, and food: No beast but he comes into the world clothed,
and has by nature Arms to defend himself; either horns or teeth, or hoofes,
or paws, or the like; and besides, we see that the young ones of every kind
do presently move themselves to their food, and can make some shift for
themselves to live. Man in these things is inferior to the beasts, for he
comes into the world, naked, infirm, crying, and has no use of his limbs to
help himself, all bloody, as if he had newly escaped the hands of Thieves;
and besides, he is bound in swaddling bands, as if he were a Captive.

In the Scriptures these things are charged upon us to take notice of
concerning the beasts.

1 Their Original, which they have from God: for they were made by the Word of
the Lord, as the Heavens and the Earth were: for God commanded the Earth to
bring forth the living creature after his kind, Cattle and creeping things, and
the beast of the Earth after his kind. It was God that made the Beast of the
Earth after his kind, and Cattle after their kind, and every thing that
creeps upon the earth after his kind, Genesis 1. 24, 25.

2 The end of their Creation, which was partly the illustration of the glory of
God, as they are visible looking-glasses, to show the goodness, wisdom and
power of GOD to man, and therefore man is charged to ask the beasts of the
field, and they shall teach him, Job 12. 7, 8. and partly for the use of man,
both for his body and soul: for his body, they were created to serve him for
his clothing, food, and for the dispatch of his labors. And for his soul,
they serve not only to help his knowledge, every beast being a several book
for him to read in, but also to reprove and instruct him, as will appear in
the uses afterward.

3 The providence of God in maintaining them, in which God receives praise in
diverse respects: First, that he respects and cares for all the beasts of the
field, every work of his hand, as he knows them all, so he like a Shepherd,
tends them and prouides for them: these all look up unto thee, Psalm. 104. 27.
Secondly, that he has given them such large room in the Earth. He has made
them free in all Deserts and Wildernesses through the world, allowing them
these places to dwell in and to feed in, Job 39. 5, 6, 7, 8. Thirdly, that he
has ordered it so, as they must depend upon him in a manner immediately: and
therefore is said to feed them with his own hand, Psalm. 104. 28. Which
appears the more, because they neither sow nor reap, nor have any Barnes to
lay up provision before hand, but are provided for as they need: The Lion as
often as he is hungry seeks his prey of God: God hunts his prey for him, Job
38. 39, 40. Fourthly, that God takes notice of the natural necessities of the
beasts, their wants and hunger being as Prayers before him: and therefore they
are said to look up to him, Psalm. 104. 27. to cry to him, Job 38. 41. to seek
their meat of God, Psalm. 104. 21, Fifthly, that he prouides variety of meat for
them according to their kinds, hence he is said to give them their meat, not
meat to them, to note that it is that meat which is is fit for every kind,
Psalm. 104. 27. Sixthly that he gives it them in due season; No Physician
tending his Patient, no Nurse feeding her Infant more carefully then God does
these living Creatures, Psalm. 104. 27. Seventhly, that when there are worlds of
them dissolved into their dust, he sends his Spirit to create a new world of
them, perpetuating their sorts by continual offsprings, Psalm. 104. 30.

4 The subjection of the Beasts unto man, Psalm. 8. 6, 7. which howsoever since
the fall of man diverse sorts of Beasts stand out in defiance to man, yet how
great a work of God it is to make these Beasts that are subject, to be so, may
appear even by these Beasts that will not fear or obey man, for such would
the rest have been, if God had not subdued them unto man. The Lord instanceth
himself in the wild Ass, Job 39. 7. and the Unicorn, verse 9, and c and
besides, if we consider the nature and strength of those Beasts that do yield
to man, it shows a power above man's power to make them so tame. The instance
is given in the horse, Job 39. 19, etc and the Elephant, Job 40. 15, etc.

The Uses follow.

First, the Atheist might see reason to abhor himself, because every creature
proves there is a God. The Beasts of the field may teach him. Yea, the meanest
things, the creeping things of the earth prove there is a God: for who made
Flies, Worms, Lice and other Vermin? He will say, the Sun and putrefaction:
but they live, and move, and have senses, they have eyes feet, wings, did the
Sun and putrefaction make these too? Why art thou silent now, tell, whence
are these? Can the Sun and putrefaction give that which they have not
themselves? The Sun is without life, how can it give life to other things?

Secondly, seeing the Beasts are Gods creatures, we must make conscience of
it, to show mercy even to the beasts we use. A good man is said to be
merciful to his Beast, Deuteronomy. 22. 6. Prou. 12. 10.

Thirdly, there is matter to humble us from the very consideration of the
Beasts: for first, in many things the very beasts excel man, as the Horse and
the Elephant do in strength, Job 39. and 40. and in skill, some of the vilest
of them go beyond man: I will instance only in the Spider, no man can build
so curiously, nor woman weaue so small a thread as the Spider does: and
experience shows, that in senses diverse creatures do excel man. Secondly,
the more sorts of creatures there are, the greater is Gods Army to fight
against us, if we provoke him, and he can do strange things by weak
instruments, he conquered a mighty Prince, even by Frogs, Locusts, and Vermin:
and to show his power, God has given such a dominion and Empire to the very
small Vermin, as Lice, Worms, Gnats, that they ineuitably assault not only
the poor but the rich, yea, the Kings of the earth are subject to their
assaults; which has a secret demonstration in it of Gods power and Justice.

Fourthly, wicked men are bitterly reproved in Scripture by the very
consideration of the Beasts of the Field, and that two ways: either because
they are in some things worse then the beasts, or else because they make
themselves like the beasts. They are worse then the beasts, for not
acknowledging God. The Ass knows his owner, and the Ox his Masters Crib, but
wicked men do not know God who yet provides daily for them, Esaias 1. 3.
Sluggards are likewise shamed by the very Pismire, which works when it has
none to command it to work, and provides in Summer against Winter, Prou. 6.
6, 7, 8. Drunkards and Gluttons shall have the beasts of the field to rise up
in judgment against them, because they, if they come to a River, will drink
no more then may suffice nature. They are likened to beasts in general for
their vncapablenesse, and want of understanding in spiritual things, and for
their ignorance of their own dangers, or carelessness of their own ruin to
come. Thus men are called brutish, Psalm. 49.

And in particular, they are likened to the Horse or Mule for kicking and
wronging such as would dress their sores, Psalm. 32. To Dogs, for flying upon
those that admonish them, and for causeless snarling at the godly that meddle
not with them, Mat. 7. Phil. 3. 2. And to Gotes, for their vnsauorinesse and
wildness, no bounds will hold them. And to Foxes, for their deceit so Herod is
called a Fox. And to Lions and savage beasts for their cruelty, 2 Timothy 2. 4.
^7. Esaias ^9. 15. and for their power to do mischief to the Bulls of Bashan,
Psalm. 18. and to the Spider for hypocrisy and malice, and poysonfull
disposition, and for drawing poison out of every thing they meet withal, Job
8. To the Ostrich for unnaturalness, Lam. 4. 4. And to Swine, for their
prophannesse, wallowing in the mire of filthy corruptions and that daily, Mat.
7. 2 Pet. 2. And to the Aspes, for stopping their ears, that the Word of God
may not charm them.

Lastly, Gods own servants are set to School to learn of the very beasts of
the Field. We must learn of sheep to know the voice of our Shepherd, and to
be sociable among our selves, and to avoid society with the wicked (a sheep
will not sort with a Swine) and to be patient under wrongs (the sheep is
silent under the hands of the Shearer, yea, of the slaughterman) and to be
profitable, as all about the Sheep is for use. We must also learn of the Done
to be harmless, and of the very Serpents to be wise, to keep our ^^ith sure
as they keep their heads. We must learn to affect God and spiritual things,
as the Heart pants after the Rivers of water, Psalm. 42. Yea, there are little
things that read Lectures of great wisdom to us, Prou. 30. 24, etc. the Ants,
the mountain Rats (which were a sort of little creatures usual in the East,
whereas Conies do neither build in the Rocks, nor are so suitable for their
bigness with the other three sorts of creatures) the Locusts and the Spider.
Of the Ant we should learn diligence and providence, in times of plenty to
provide for dearth, especially in spiritual things. Of the Mountain Rats we
should learn upon the experience of our own weakness, to provide by Faith,
so as we may rest in the Rock of Gods Almighty protection. Of the Locusts we
should learn to do our duties though we be not compelled, and to be careful
to keep our fellowship with the Saints. Of the Spider, that works even in
Kings Palaces, we should learn to hold forth the light of the Truth, by either
Doctrine or good example in all places, and not to be daunted for the presence
of any, or the example of the multitude that are otherwise employed.

Hitherto has been entreated of the Creatures of all sorts, some of them
being only spiritual Creatures, as the Angels; some of them only bodily
creatures, as all the rest in Heaven and earth: Now follows, that we consider
of man, who is a creature both spiritual in respect of his soul, and
corporal in respect of the outward matter of which he consists. A creature,
into whom enters the composition of all the world; Nature as it is spiritual
and bodily meeting in man: for man is the Epitomie of all Gods works, and a
pattern of the great Universe: He is the world abridged, or the little world,
into whose being enters the nature of every thing without him, being a creature
partly terrestrial, partly celestial, partly mortal, partly immortal: so as
what God made a part in other creatures, he makes perfect and jointly together
in man: He had made spirits by themselves, and bodies by themselves, and then
he makes a Creature that should consist of spirit and body joined together; and
therefore as we have read in the great Book of nature which is the world, so
now we must learn to read in the little Book of Nature, which is man: else it
will be a shame for us to know other things, and not know our selves: He were a
senseless man, that did know curiously all the rooms in other men's Palaces,
and yet knows not so much as a corner of his own dwelling.

The excellency of Gods workmanship in creating man appears, if we consider
his body apart, or his soul apart, or his body and soul jointly.

About the body of man God has done many things, more then he did to any other
bodily creatures: for

1 Whereas all other bodies were created only by saying, let them be, and they
were so, God did take more special regard of man's body, and therefore does
form it (as it were with his own hands) out of the dust of the earth, Genesis 2.
7.

2 The body of man now since the Creation, is not propagated by the Parents
without the wonderful workmanship of God: and therefore all our bodies are
said to be made and fashioned by God as well as Adams, Job 10. 8. Yea, it was
the Spirit of the strong God that made us, and the breath of the Almighty that
put life into us, Job 33. 4. We are creatures now as well as Adam, Mark 16.
15. and David says, He was fearfully and wonderfully made, it was a
marvelous work, and he was curiously wrought in the womb, Psalm. 139. 14, 15,
16. Yea, he says there, that God did it by the Book, having written it down
from eternity, how all his members should be fashioned. Every part of our
bodies (if we knew the forming of them) would show a special glory of working
in God, our bones would say, Lord who is like to the^? Psalm. 35. 10. And as we
know not what is the way of the Spirit, so we know not how the bones do grow
in the womb of her that is with child: and so we may say of the rest, we know
not the works of God who makes all, Eccles. 11. 5. the hearing ear, and the
seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them, Prou. 20. 12. It was God
only that clothed us with skin, and fenced us with bones and sinews, Job
10. 11. and so it was God only that formed the inward parts of man's body: he
formed the heart, Psalm 33. 15. and the workmanship within man's body was so
great, that he reserues it as a glory only to himself, to know and search the
heart and reins of a man: and this is the more admirable, if we consider, that
no part of the body is superfluous or idle, but every part has his function,
and some excellent work to do, which function it exercises by it self for
the good of the whole body, without meddling with the office of the other
members: which is the more wonderful if we consider the innumerable parts and
parcels of the body of a man. Not the least thread or vein in a man's body but
it does some excellent office, 1 Cor. 12.

3 God made the body of man in beauty and fairness, excelling all other
visible creatures: for both his countenance is lifted up to Heaven, and the
parts of his body are with more comeliness proportioned, and his color is full
of sweetness and loveliness: Thus it was with man in his Creation, and thus
and much better it shall be with his body, when he shall shine as the Stars
in the Firmament.

4 The body of man had at the first no disposition to weariness, or sickness,
or death: which the bodies of all other living Creatures were subject to. This
privilege man's body had not by nature but by the gift of GOD: GOD having
infused into the body a soul, that did her work in the body perfectly, and
allowing him such food as was most effectual for vegetation, and giving man
skill and care to look to himself: and if the body in time would have
declined, God would have prevented that by tranflating man to Heaven, without
sickness and death.

5. Language is an admirable indowment of the body of man only, who is able to
express himself with infinite variety and distinctions of sound whence flows
all conversation, and delightful or profitable society.

But the excellency of Gods power and glory in the Creation of man's soul who
can perfectly recount? God has done wonderfully for man in respect of his
soul above all other visible creatures: for,

1. The soul was breathed into the body of man by God A soul can no more
beget a soul, then an Angel can beget an Angel.
himself, by special inspiration and singular Creation, Genesis 2. and never was
a soul in the body of man, but was made of God by his special power: our
bodies may have earthly fathers, but our spirits have no Father but God, Heb.
12. It is God only that creates and frames the spirit of man within him,
Zachary 12. 1. and so man is the generation of God, Acts 17.

2. The soul is endued with the light of reason, and can discern things by
reasoning and inward discourse, seeing things by a light that is Immateriall,
and with great variety contemplating of things that the senses cannot reach to,
and finding out strange things, even in those things are presented by the
senses which no other creature can do: and this discerning would be in the
mind, if there were no Sun in the firmament: and above all things that the
soul can know, it is most excellent, in that it can know God himself: Man
only of all visible creatures can see God, and his works, and acknowledge his
workmanship which none of the other creatures can do.

3. The soul of man was made in the Image of God: in other things the
footsteps of God do appear, but in man only (in this visible world) did the
similitude of God appear, Genesis 1. 26. Man was not made like the Sun in the
firmament, or like some Angel in Heaven, but like God himself, and so
especially in his soul: for the soul of man is a spirit, as God is himself,
and it is invisible, and immateriall like God: and as in the substance of the
soul, we resemble God, so in certain qualities or virtues printed in the
soul which resemble the Attributes of God, such as are goodness, love
knowledge, mercy, Justice, patience, and the like, Ephesians. 4 Colos. 3. 10. The
nature of no creature being capable of virtue, or the laws of virtuous living,
but only man.

4. The soul is immortal: it is a thing within us, that will never be at an
end, when worlds of other things be dissolved round about it: and this is an
unspeakable indowment, if we could seriously think of it, that God should let
us last as long as himself, and all other living things die and expire, and
come to nothing. A man's soul will be alive after a thousand times ten
thousand years: All the devils in Hell, or Tyrants on earth, cannot kill our
soul.

5. The soul of a man works within strange things even in his very body. It
carries the body about, being a thing without body, it self and gives diverse
gifts to diverse parts of the body; It works sight in the eyes, hearing in the
ears, feeling in all the body, tasting in the Palate, smelling in the
Nostrills, breathing in the Lungs, concoction in the Stomach, operation in the
hands, ambulation in the feet, and motion in the whole body: yea, it so
works by the senses of the body, that it takes in by them all other things to
it self in the species of them.

6. As it is wonderful for the things it works upon the body, so it is
admirable for the work it can do, when the body lies a sleep and stirs
not. The soul then resembles God in the Creation. It creates worlds of shapes
within it self with strange furniture and variety, which inward Creation of
infinite frames of things would be like this world which God made, but that the
soul cannot give them continuance, life, etc. It was a great gift of God to
give the soul power to make these things within.

7. The soul does excel in quickness of motion and working: other creatures
are swift, some in running, some in flying, but what can be among them
comparable to the soul, which can in thought in an instant survey the ends of
the Earth.

In these and many other things, the soul of man does wonderfully excel,
being set in the body of a man, as it were the God of the body, as a little God
in the little world: as JEHOVAH is the great God in the great world

The whole person of man considered as consisting both of soul and body, did
and does enjoy many singular prerogatives above all other creatures in this
visible world: as

1. Man had the honor to be brought into the world, when all other things were
made, and the world furnished ready for his use, Genesis 1.

2. God did man a great honor, in the manner of making him: for he made man
with consultation, but all other things were made by saying the word only, let
them be, Genesis 1.

3. The soul and body of a man is knit together with such a bond, as is beyond
the reach of mortal creatures to express the manner of the Union.

4. Because God conuerseth with man only of all the creatures in the world:
our parents did see God in Paradise, and he reuealeth himself still to the
blessed ones in heaven: Since the fall, this is for the most part lost, save
that with the godly, the Lord conuerseth by many signs of familiarity in the
use of his ordinances.

5. Because God made such provision for man as he did for no other creature:
as in the first Creation, he set man in Eden, the garden of unutterable
pleasure: and when man dies now, if he be redeemed by Christ, he has provided
that heaven of heavens for him.

6. Because God has made man Lord over the other creatures, and bestowed upon
him dominion over the beasts of the field, and fowls of the Air, and fishes
of the sea, yet the vastest creature above, or below, does minister unto man:
and God has planted a natural fear of man in other creatures, Psalm. 8. ^.
Genesis 1. and 9. 2.

7. Because the body and soul of a man is the Temple of the holy Ghost to
dwell in: so it was with the first man, and so it is still in some men even in
this world, 2. Cor. 6. 16. God dwells in man and walks in him.

8. Yea, God has done that honor to the nature of man, that he has not done
to the nature of Angels, and that is, that he has joined it inseparably to his
divine nature, in the person of his Son Christ Jesus: so as man is now as near
to God, as the body is to the soul, Heb. 2. 16.

The consideration of this Glory of God in the Creation of man, may serve for
Instruction, Humiliation, and Consolation.

By way of Instruction, it should teach us many duties: as,

1. We should give glory to God and acknowledge that it is he only that made
us, and not we our selves: our parents are but instruments of the propagation
of our bodies, it is God that is the principal efficient, Psalm. 100. 3.
especially we should with all gladness acknowledge Gods goodness to us, that
made us such creatures, so excellent above other works of his hands, he might
have made us vile Vermin, or poysonfull creatures, Toads and Serpents, Psalm
149. 2.

2. We should learn hence submission to God in all things concerning our life
or death: he has made us, and therefore has absolute power over us as the
work of his hands, to do with us whatsoever pleases him, and to call for the
spirit back again, and leave us to return to our dust at his pleasure, Ier.
45. 4. Psalm. 90 3.

3. Seeing all men are the work of Gods hands, and that our God made them, it
should teach Superiors to show due respect to their Inferiors, in gifts,
estate, age or the like: for he that made the rich, made the poor also: he
that made the Master, made the Servant also: and therefore Inferiors are not
to be despised, Job 31. 13. 15. Pro. 14. 31. All mankind made of one blood,
Acts 17. 26.

4. We should take heed of reasoning against the Justice of God, in disposing
of men to conditions of less honor in this life, or in damning of wicked men
in hell, for they are all the work of his hands, and as the clay to the
Potter, Romans 9. 21, 22, 23.

5. Our Original from the dust of the Earth, should teach us to carry our
selves humbly toward God and men: toward God, when we speak to him, we
should remember we are but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. and when we converse and
discourse with men, we should take heed of pride, and vain glory, and say as
he did in Job, I also am cut out of the clay, Job 33. 6. as also we should
take heed of excessive cares for the clothing and pampering of our bodies of
clay.

6. Especially we should strive to answer the end of our Creation: Man was made
and set in this visible world, that God might have a creature to know him, and
what he had wrought, and to acknowledge him, and serve him, and to resemble
him in all holiness and righteousness: till this be done by man, he does
nothing that answers the end of his being, he dishonors God that made him: And
seeing God made both soul and body, we should serve the Lord in both: 1. Cor.
6 10. We are not at our own disposing, to do what we list, we are his to
command that made us: our very countenances set so as to look upwards, shows
that we should not be like the beasts that see and regard nothing but earthly
things: let us pray God that made us, to direct us, and enlighten us, to do his
work, and glorify him, Psalm. 119. 7^.

Secondly, from the serious meditation of the doctrine of our Creation, we may
find many things for Humiliation unto all men, especially to the wicked. It
may humble all men to consider that they are but men of dust, earthly
creatures, 1. Cor. 15. 47 48. made of mire and clay, Job 13. 12. and that they
are in continual danger of dying: They dwell but in houses of clay, earthly
Tabernacles, Job 4. 19. 2. Cor. 5. 1. it is as easy for God to destroy us as it
is for the Potter to break an earthen vessel: our breath is in our nostrills,
if our mouths and noses be stopped, we fall down as dead carkases: especially
all men have cause to be extremely grieved to think how woefully they are
fallen from the glory in which they were created, whether they look upon their
souls impurities and filthiness, or the bodies deformity and diseases, or the
miseries invade justly their outward condition, with all the fearful losses
spiritual and temporal which have befallen them for their sins: More
especially the wicked have cause of grievous sorrows that remain still in
that woeful estate of degeneration, having God and all creatures against them,
and carrying about bodies and souls so full of sin, and liable to such
fearful danger: Woe to him that strives with his maker* shall the Potsheard
strive with the Potter, and be safe? Esaias 45. 9. and the rather they should be
afflicted, if they consider, no part of their wickedness can be hid from God:
He that made them, knows every part about them, there cannot be a vain
desire, thought, or lust but God sees it, and no darkness can hide from him,
Psalm. 139. 12, 13.

Lastly, there is great consolation in this doctrine of the Creation unto godly
men, that are restored in Christ, to the privileges of their first Creation,
for unto them will God be for the substance of true happiness all that he was
to Adam: their right to Gods favor, and fellowship with God, and dominion over
the creatures is restored, they are again made like to God in Christ Jesus,
Colos. 3. 10. their bodies and souls are the Temples of the holy Ghost. They
need not fear any adversaries, for God keeps all their bones, and the hairs
of their heads are numbered, Psalm. 34. 20. and though they have many frailties
bodily and spiritual, yet God will pity them, he knows the mould they are
made of, and that they are but dust, Psalm. 103. 13. 17. Esaias 64. 12. and seeing
God has made us, he accounts himself bound to help us, and sustain us, and
provide for us, Isay 43. 7. and will not forget us, Esaias 44. 21.

The second Article.
And in Jesus Christ.
1. COR. 3. 11. For other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid,
which is Christ Jesus.
HItherto of the Nature of God, and the works of Creation: Now it follows,
that we consider of the Articles that concern our Redemption by Christ, and so
the works of grace. And so in the Redeemer, Faith looks upon four things:
First, his Titles, Jesus Christ, the only Son of God and our Lord. Secondly,
his Incarnation, wondering at both his Conception and Birth. Thirdly, his
Humiliation for our sins, as he suffered under Pilate, was crucified, etc.
Fourthly, his Exaltation, as he rose from the dead, and ascended in Heaven,
etc.

But before I come to break open these glorious Mysteries, It is convenient to
consider of three things:

1. What need we have of a Redeemer, to be thus incarnate or thus humbled, etc.

2. By what right we can be capable of any interest in a Redeemer.

3. In what manner we must believe these Articles.

For the first, there are two things in the condition of every man by nature,
which may show evidently that he does infinitely need some course to be
taken to free him out of that misery he is in: the one is his sins, the other
is the punishment either is upon him, or he is liable to.

And first for sin, every man:

1. Is guilty of Adams sin, Romans 5. 12.

2. He is possessed by original sin, by which he is two ways vilely
plagued; for he has lost all that righteousness and integrity of nature man
had in the Creation: which he may feel, by his want of seruent love to God,
awful fear of God, confident trust in God, affectionate delight in God,
shining knowledge of God, etc. and so by his strange deficiencies in his
disposition toward his neighbor: and besides, he is poisoned and infected with
corruption in his nature, which is the more grievous because all men are
infected, Romans 5. 12. all are so from the womb, Psalm. 51. and this insection
is in the whole nature of man, which he may feel, by the very disorder of his
natural appetite to food, sleep, procreation, and by the corruption of his
very senses, his eyes ready to wander after vanity, Psalm. 119. if they be not
guarded and watched, Job 31. 1. and so his taste and other senses: and in his
understanding he may feel a strange kind of power of darkness, and disability
to think of any good things, and pronenesse to a world of vanities and evil,
and in his affections he may daily perceive a very vassalage to evil
concupiscence, giving laws of wickedness to his members, Romans 7.

3. He is horribly infected with actual sins. In his mind he may observe
a world of wickedness, swarms of vile thoughts, the frame of his Imaginations
being only evil continually, Genesis 8. His heart is deceitful and wicked above
None good, no not one. Psalm. 14. 2.
all things, Ier. 17* 9. Oh what strong lusts and passions are found in a man's
heart from time to time? how does the devil draw men along secretly, as the
fish is drawn with the bait, and that with strange preuailings: what worlds
of wickedness have passed through the tongues of men? James 3. and in their
works, how fearfully does man sin in all he does: his works are all
abominable, Psalm. 14. for besides that, he corrupts himself in his best
actions, he is guilty of diverse distinct sins, and sometimes these very
gross and abominable: who can stand near it to think of it?

1 How many sins of other men he is guilty of, which he occasioned by his
evil example, evil counsel, or consent, etc.

2 How innumerable his own sins are, of omission and commission, of
ignorance, of knowledge, in his infancy, or riper age, at home or abroad, in
his prosperity or adversity, against God, other men, or himself, Psalm. 40. 2.

Again, a man's estate by nature has wonderful need of mending and
alteration, if we consider the misery to which it is exposed in respect of
punishment, for we have all lost Paradise. 2. And all the creatures about us
are worse then they were at first for our sakes, Romans 8. 20. 3. God is horribly
wroth with all of us, Ioh. 3. 36. 4. The glory of our understandings is lost,
we are very beasts, and have not the understandings of men in us, Prou. 30. 2.
5. The Devil does in a manner what he will with us, Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
6. Our selves are senseless and dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. The life of God is a most
strange thing to us, Ephesians. 4. 18. 7. Armies and changes of sorrows assault us
in our bodies and estates, Deuteronomy. 28. 8. Good things are restrained from us,
even blessings of all sorts, Ierem. 5. 25. 9. And the good things we have, they
do not prosper with us, or they do us hurt, Mal. 2. 2. Ier. 12. 13. 10.
Horrible fears either of death or shame, or judgment of men, or God, do many
times cruelly torment us, Esaias 33. 14 and 65. 13, 14. Heb. 2. 15. Besides, all
that which we are in danger of: for strange punishments may be to the workers
of iniquity in this life, Job 31. 3. and we may dye miserably, and who can
recount the terror of the last Judgment, and the violent fire may devour us
in Hell for ever, Heb. 10 27. Mat. 25. 41. Thus of our need of a Redeemer.

For the second point, man becomes capable of happiness by the Redeemer, by
virtue of a new Covenant which God tenders unto man by the Redeemer. The first
Covenant was a Covenant of works, where perfect happiness was promised to
man, upon condition of perfect obedience to the Law, to be performed by man in
his own person: This condition (man being fallen through his own default) was
impossible to be performed, and so the covenant being broken, all mankind was
undone for ever. Now God is pleased to alter the first agreement, and to offer
new Articles in this Covenant of grace, by which man might recover out of the
aforesaid misery and be saved. Now concerning this new agreement we are to
consider.

1 Who procured it. 2 Upon what terms he obtained it. 3 What he has done to
establish it. 4 What good comes to us by it. 5 What cause we have to be
wonderfully affected and comforted by it.
For the first, this agreement and new Covenant was obtained from God only by
the Mediator, who alone was Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The Son of God,
became a suitor for the sons of men, and obtained of God these new Articles,
with Gods infinite good liking, through his abundant mercy to man, Mat. 3.

For the second, God yields to his motion for a new Covenant upon two
conditions. The one, that he should pay all men's debts, and so make
satisfaction to the Justice of God, Esaias 53. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 6. The other was,
that he should perform such an absolute obedience and righteousness as might
serve to justify the ungodly, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans 5. 18, 19. Ier.
23. 6.

For the third, what Christ has done to establish all this, is reported in
these Articles of the Creed, contained in the middle part of it, describing
both his Incarnation, and Humiliation and Glorification.

For the fourth, the good that we shall have by this new Covenant, is reported
in the last Articles of the Creed, Holiness, Communion of Saints, forgiveness
of sins, resurrection of the body, and everlasting life.

Now we ought greatly to rejoice in this new Covenant.

1 Because it was utterly impossible for us to be any way happy, or escape
eternal damnation, if we had continued still under the old Covenant, Gal. 3.
13.

2 Because this is a grace vouchsafed to the nature of man only: for the Angels
are lost, and for ever forsaken, and have no grace offered to them.

3 Because it is a grace vouchsafed only to certain men, chosen of God out of
the whole heap, and given to Christ, to be delivered and saved by him.

4 Because if a man believe aright in Jesus Christ, he shall be accounted as
righteous, as if he had perfectly fulfilled the whole Law, Romans 10.

5 Because this Covenant is everlasting and unchangeable, there is no
forfeiture, Esaias 54. 10. God has sworn to keep this Covenant for ever, Heb.
6. 18.

6 Because God has bound himself to put his Spirit into us, to make us keep
the Covenant on our parts, Ezech. 36. 27.

Thus then we see how it comes to pass that these Articles are put into our
Creed, which had not been if we could have been saved by the first Covenant,

Now it remains, that in the third place we consider of the manner how we must
believe these Articles concerning Jesus Christ: where by the way we may observe
one point that is not unprofitable; viz. that to believe aright in Christ is
not a work of nature, nor a thing that the natural man in himself is
disposed to: and that may appear diverse ways; for first, those things about
Jesus Christ, are Articles of the Christian Faith, which they had not been, if
they had been such things as the natural man did know, or was disposed to
seek after. 2. The light of Nature has no principles at all concerning
Christ, or that way of redemption by him. 3. Our Savior has made it manifest,
that the world is so far from believing, that it does naturally hate such as
do believe aright. 4. Because there are many things in the Doctrine of our
Redemption which are scandals to hearts of the wicked: Christ is a very Rock
of offense, 1 Pet. 2. 8. We find by experience, that the natural heart of man
is extremely dull, and careless of these Doctrines above all others. 6. This
is the condemnation of the world, that they do not believe in Christ Jesus,
Ioh. 3. 18. Lastly, it is evidently affirmed, that faith in Christ is the gift
of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.

Now this point is fit to be observed, partly to discover the estates of
multitudes of men, that speak fair words of Jesus Christ, when yet by nature
it is certain they love not the Lord Jesus, nor take any sound course to
believe in him; and partly to awaken such as are desirous to get into the
Kingdom of God, that they may not trust to their natural hearts or
disposition, but rather in a godly jealousy of the deceitfulness of their
own hearts, to use all diligence, by resisting the sluggishnesse, and cauils,
and devices of their own hearts, by the power of God in his ordinances, to
strive to make their faith sure, and fully established: and thus much for this
point.

The way how these Articles are to be received, is by believing in Jesus
Christ: for from the first part of the Creed we must borrow these words, I
believe, and apply them to these Articles, thus; I believe in Jesus Christ,
etc. That from the coherence and maine drift of all these Articles, we must in
general take notice of this point: That as we believe in God, so we must
believe in Jesus Christ: mark it, we must not only believe him, or believe
these Articles, but we must believe in him; This is the Commandment of God
himself, that we should do so, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. and thus our Savior himself
requires it, that as we believe in God, so we should believe in him also,
Ioh. 14. 1. Yea, this is the substance of all that work that God requires of a
Christian in the new Testament, this is to work the work of God, even to
believe in him whom he has sent. Ioh. 6. 29. for first, the Father and the
Son are one, and therefore we must honor the Son with the same honor we
give the Father, Ioh. 10. 30 and 5. 23.

Secondly, the foundation of all our happiness since the fall lies upon this,
he is our surety, there being none that would undertake for us but he, and it
is he only that makes both satisfaction and intercession for us, and takes the
charge of us, and therefore we must rely upon him.

Now for the explication of this point, that we may know what this believing in
Christ has in it, I must consider of it two ways: First, by showing what
believing in Christ has not, or what that Faith does reject, as utterly
opposite or repugnant to it: Secondly, what it has in it distinctly both for
the matter of believing, and the manner of believing.

For the first, the right believing in Jesus, does cast out;

1 All respects of false Christ's, Mat. 24.

2 All spirits of error and doctrine contrary to Christ, 1 Ioh. 4. 1, 2. For
his sheep do hear his voice, with knowledge of it from all others, Ioh. 10.

3 The mark, or sign of respect of affection to, or dependence upon
Antichrist that beast, Revel. 15. 2. and all communion with the servants of the
man of sin.

4 All trust upon our own merits, and Justification by the workers of the Law,
Gal. 2. 16.

5 All former evil courses of life: for the Redeemer comes to none but such as
turn from transgression in Jacob, Esaias 59. 20. and therefore repenting is
annexed to believing in the Gospel.

6 The love of, and trust in earthly things: for this faith makes us account
all the glory of the world but as dross and dunge in comparison of Christ and
his righteousness, till we can forsake the world, we never soundly seek
Jesus, Phil. 2. 8.

For the second, believing in Jesus has in it four things.

1 Persuasion or assent to these glorious truths that concern Jesus, and man's
salvation in him, as in particular:

1 That he came forth from GOD, with commission to deal in this work of the
redemption of man, John 16. 30.

2 That he came in the flesh, 1 Ioh. 4. 2. and 5. 1.

3 That he is the very son of God, Mat. 16. 1 Ioh. 5. 5. Ioh. 9. 35, 36, 38.
Act. 8.

4 That he has power enough to help us, Mat. 9. 28.

5 That there is no other name by which we can be saved, Act. 4. 12.

6 That all the promises of God shall be fulfilled in him, this is believing
the Gospel, 1 Ioh. 5. 10. Thus of persuasion.

2 It has in it estimation of Christ, as that that only can be precious for
us, 1 Pet. 2. 7.

3 It has in it a relying upon Christ for our Justification, Phil. 3. 8, 9.
and for our salvation, Acts 4. 12. Ephesians. 2. 8. and for our preservation in the
mean time, living by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. and so there
is a spiritual kind of confidence in the ordinances of Christ as they are his
Commandments, and as he works in them by his power, 1 Ioh. ^. 23.

4 Yet further, to believe in Christ is to have Christ, to receive him into our
souls: thus the phrase of receiving him, of his living in us, of our having of
the Son is used in diverse Scriptures, John 1. 12. Gal. 2. 20. 1 John 5. 12.
and thus for the matter of believing.

Now for the fuller understanding of this Doctrine of believing in Christ, it
is necessary to consider of the manner how we must believe: for

1 We must confess the Lord Jesus with our mouths, we must externally
profes^e the Religion and service, and Faith of Jesus: we must outwardly
testify our Faith, and not deny him before men: this is one thing in the
believing mentioned in the Creed.

2 That outward confession is not enough: we must believe from our hearts and
with our hearts, Romans 10. 10.

3 We must believe in our own particular: I believe, and what we believe we
must apply it to our selves, that Christ was incarnate, suffered and glorified
for me in particular.

4 We must believe in him and love him, though we never yet saw him, 1 Pet. 1.
9.

5 We must resolve to stick to our believing, though we suffer for it, Phil.
1. 28, 29.

6 We must persevere in the Faith, there must be no time, wherein the
Christian may not say, I do believe in Jesus.

7 This Faith must be laid up in a pure conscience: we must ever after we
believe in Christ Jesus, make conscience of all purity, and sincerity of heart
and life, 1 Timothy 3. 9.

Since all our happiness lies in this skill of believing in Jesus, we must
use all means that we may attain to this Use.
faith, that when the Son of man comes he may not find us without faith: Now
that we may attain to this faith, that is able to save us, and by which only
we can have the benefit of this new Covenant, we must conscionably practice
diverse rules, which I will briefly put you in mind of.

1 We must confess our unbelief, and pray God to give us this Faith: for
Faith is the gift of God: It is one step to believing, to see that we do not
believe.

2 Seeing Faith comes by hearing the Word preached, Romans 10. 14. We must attend
upon that ordinance of God, and wait for the coming down of the Holy Ghost.

3 We must strive in hearing with all our might to apply the things we hear,
as they may any way fit our case, for in application is the very door of
Faith, and that work especially by which we receive Christ and the promises of
grace.

4 We must continually study the motives to believing: for there are diverse
things which being seriously thought on, may raise up a wonderful desire of
Faith, and resolution to seek it and strive for it, with which desire, if it
be sincere and constant, Faith usually comes into the soul.

Now there are many things should fire us to this desire of faith in Jesus.

1 That it is the work of God, Ioh. ^. 29 It is that above all things is
required of a Christian: that one thing necessary: the sum and substance of
our work as we are Christians: yea, that very thing that makes us Christians,
for till we believe in Jesus, we may be Christians in show, and in other men's
accounts, but we are not so indeed till we be in Christ, which we cannot be but
by believing.

2 That it is a thing that God above all things desires of us, which may
appear many ways: 1. Because he commands us to believe 1 Ioh. 3. 23. 2.
Because he sends his Ambassadors to us to inuit us; yea, and beseech us in his
name to believe, and to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 3. Because he binds himfelfe
by Covenant to receive us if we believe, Ioh. 3. 16. yea, and confirms his
Covenant not only by seals, but by oath, Heb. 6. 4. Because in the office of
the Covenant God excepts against no man, but he ought to think that all this
grace is offered to him, if he will receive it: and therefore he says,
whosoever believes: and in another place charge his Ambassadors to declare
so much to every creature, Mark 16.

3. It is horrible dangerous for a man to live without this Faith in Jesus: for
without it, it is impossible to please God, Heb 11. 6. and besides such as have
the means, and are thus often called upon, may at length provoke God so far,
as that he will deliver them up to a Spirit of slumber, so as they cannot be
able to believe, but be left to that curse mentioned, John 12. 39. 40. to have
their eyes blinded, and their hearts hardened, that they should not see nor
understand any more: but above all things it should fright men, that God has
resolved they shall be damned that believe not in Jesus, yea, though they be
worlds of men, Mat. 16. Ioh. 3. vlt.

4. If we consider the wonderful benefits we have by believing in Jesus
Christ: for he that believes on him need never be ashamed of his condition,
Romans 10. 11. for,

1. We get presently out of darkness, as soon as we so believe, Christ comes
as a light into our hearts, John 12. 44. 46.

2. Though we may have many troubles in the world, yet in him we shall have
peace, John 16. 33.

3. Woe shall be to them that wrong us and offend us: It were better a
Millstone were hanged about their necks and they cast into the sea, Mat. 18.

4. All our sins are forgiven us as soon as we believe in his name, Acts 10.
48. Romans 3. 25.

5. We thereby become all one with God the Father, and Jesus Christ and the
holy Ghost, we are made one with the Trinity after a heavenly manner, this is a
dreadful Mystery, Ioh. 17. 20. 21. for as Christ is one with the Father, so
are we one with Christ, and so in him with the father, as is explained in the
same Chapter, verse 22, 23.

6. We may get as much of all sorts of blessings, as our Faith can ask in his
Name: for the Father will deny us nothing, John 16. 23. 24. 26. 27. It is the
shame of believers, that they have not tried his promise, they have asked in a
manner nothing of God all this while.

7. Christ will be made marvelous in all them that believe at the day of
Judgment: then shall our Faith be found unto praise, and honor, and glory in
that day of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 2. These. 1. 10. 1. Pet. 1. 7.

8. We shall not perish, but have everlasting life: We shall be as sure of
it, as if we had it already, John 3. 16. 36. and 6. 40. 47. Christ avouches
it with an Asseueration, we shall not miss of it.

Thus much may suffice for this point of believing in Christ: if any be
desirous to know whether they do believe or not, let them seriously examine
themselves by the doctrine of the nature of Faith in Jesus before handled.
Only I thought good to tell certain of you that frequent this assembly, that
you are not believers in Jesus, all your shows notwithstanding: In special, I
mean it of those of you that wilfully persist in your offensive, and strange
apparel, and fashioning your selves after this world: I prove by two Arguments
among many, you are not true believers: first, because you receive honor one
from another, and seek not the honor that comes from God. Your continual
care is to feed your humor of greatness, and to be accepted of the great
ones, and brave ones, and vain ones of the City or Country: Our Savior
himself asks you, how you can believe, yea, he determines it of such, as so
affect the honor of men that they cannot believe in him, Ioh. 5. 44. secondly,
you will be rejected at the day of Judgment as no believers, because our
testimony was not received, ye are wiser then any seven of us, that give you
reasons against your vain attire: you receive the Testimony of vain men
against our doctrine, though you have bin often and generally reproved in our
doctrine, though you have bin often and generally reproved in our public
Ministeries in the presence of God, yet by following your foolish vanities, you
still forsake your own mercy, 2. These. 1. 10.

Now I come to the particular opening of these Articles: where first, we are to
consider of the Titles given to our Savior, which are four, Jesus, Christ,
the Son of God, and our Lord. The first Title is his proper name, the second
and last express his Office, and the third expresses his Nature. The Titles
are both simple and Relative: simple Titles are Jesus and Christ, which show
what he is in himself: the other two are Relative, for in Relation to God, he
is his only begotten Son, and in Relation to us, he is our Lord: but this
division must not be too much pressed, for it is not very exact, though used
by some Divines. That Jesus is his proper name is manifest, but whether Christ
be his Syrname, as some think may justly be doubted, because it seems rather
a Title of Office, as King, Duke, or Earl are amongst men, which are no
Syrnames.

And in Jesus.
COncerning this Title of Jesus, diverse things are to be considered:

1. The Etymology of it, It comes of an Hebrew root, and signifies a Savior,
and is the same name with Ioshuah and Iehoshuah: and it may well be, that he
had an Hebrew name to signify that he was a Savior of the Jews, and he had
a Greek name Christ, to signify the interest the Grecians or Gentiles had in
him.

2. Who gave him this Name: He did not assume it to himself though knowing
the end of his coming, and the fullness of his sufficiency he might have done
it, neither was it put upon him by men, who give names either casually without
respect of signification; or else when they give good significant names, there
is a contradiction between their names and their lives: but an Angel was sent
from Heaven with great solemnity to appoint and impose his Name before he was
borne, Luke 1. 26. and he talks with the Virgin about it: as an evil Angel
talked with the woman about our perdition, so here a good Angel talks with
the Virgin about our Salvation.

3. Why was he called Jesus? Answer, this Name Jesus or a Savior agrees to
m^ntso fitly as to Christ: he only deserves to be so called:

1. Because his work is to save his people, Matthew 1. 21.

2. Because there is no other Savior but he: he alone saves them: there is
no other Name in Heaven and Earth by which we can be saved, Acts 4. 12. Romans 5.
17.

3. Because he saues from sins which no man can do: to deliver from diseases
of the body, Physicians may; or from thraldom and outward servitude, great
Princes, or commanders may; but to save the soul and from sin, none but
Christ can, Mat. 1. 21. And to save from sin is the greater work, because it
cannot be done, unless Gods Justice be satisfied, and man's nature recovered,
and the devils conquered, and the world overcome, etc.

4. Because he can ransom and redeem dead men, Romans 8. 2. 11.

5. Because he saues by such a price; he redeemes, by dying, by shedding his
own blood, who also is more then man: to save us he destroys himself, Gal.
3. 13. Heb. 2. 9, 10. and 13. 12.

6. Because he is a perfect Savior, he will by degrees deliver his people from
the guilt of sin, and the power of it, and the effects of it, so as at the
last they shall be freed from all sin and misery for ever: He makes
Atonement for all sins, 1. John 1. 7. not for one only, and undertakes to
pay all our debts, and to heal all our diseases, and at the last day will free
us from all sorrows, sickness, sin, death, and all misery whatsoever.

7. Because he is an eternal Savior: he does not save such as lived in one
age only, but he saves all that come to him in every Age, Heb. 7. 25. and
13. 8.

8. Because he is a general Savior, not of Jews only, but of Gentiles also,
Romans 3. 25. He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
John 1.

9. Because he does all this work of Salvation by one offering of himself:
he did it at once for all Ages, Heb. 10. 14.

10. Because his Redeemed ones, shall never be in bondage again.

11. Because he gives such preferment to all his Redeemed ones as never
Conqueror did or was able to give. He makes them all Sons of God, Heirs,
coheires with himself, and gives them all eternal life: which will best
appear at the last day, Colos. 3. 3. 4. Romans 5. 17. and 6. 23. Revel. 19. 10.

The Use should be especially for instruction, and so in many things.

1. This should be tidings of great Joy, that there is a Jesus, a Savior, such
a Savior. This word Jesus is a short Gospel, even the substance of all good
news, Acts 8. 35. our hearts should rejoice, and our tongues should be glad,
Acts 2. 26. 22. Yea, our whole lives should be filled with gladness, and
thankfulness that have such a Savior, that saues not from the Turk, but
from the devil, that pacifies not the wrath of a mortal man, but of the
Immortal God, that pays all our debts, that ouercomes all our enemies, that
saues not our bodies only from sickness, but our souls also from sin.

2. We should especially look to it, that we fail not of Salvation by Jesus,
but labor to be such, as he may be Jesus to us, and so three things are
necessary.

1. That we should seek unto him for our ransom, and healing, and Salvation,
and desire to know nothing but the Lord Jesus only, 1. Cor. 2. 2.

2. That we believe in his Name: this is Gods preceptorie Commandment, or we
shall have no part in Jesus, 1. John 3. 23.

3. That if we would have him save us from our sins, that they damn us not,
we must then repent and convert from our sins, if we would have God to bless
us in Jesus, Acts 2. 19. and 13. 23. 24. Gal. 5. 6. Ephesians 4. 21. 2. These.
3. 6. Jude 4.

3. We should show that we are saved by Jesus, by living so as may become
this Doctrine: and so we should show it.

1. By acknowledging his supremacy and sufficiency, against all the Popes,
Papists, and devils in the world: we should magnify his Name above all
Names, Acts 19. 17. 1. Cor. 12. 3.

2. By loving the Lord Jesus above all things: accounting all things but loss
and dung in comparison of the knowledge of him, 1. Pet. 1. 9. Phil. 3. 8.
longing for his appearing, and praying daily that the Lord Jesus would come,
Revel. 22. 1. These. 1. 10.

3. By living to him: spending our days in his service, and as may become the
honor of such a Savior, 1. These. 4. 1. doing all things in his name, Colos.
3. 17. and seeking his glory more then our own things, Phil. 3. 20. we should
set him always before us, Acts 2. 22. 25.

4. By having no confidence in the flesh, but placing all our joy and trust in
Jesus, Phil. 3. 3.

5. By willing suffering any thing for Jesus sake: Yea, our lives should not
be dear to us to confirm the testimony of Jesus, Acts 5. 41. and 20. 24.
and 21. 13. 2. Cor. 4. 11. Reu. 12.

6. By living lovingly, and with unity amongst our selves: Paul beseeches them
by this Name Jesus, that there should be no divisions amongst them, especially
in matters of Religion: for Jesus is a Savior alone, and he cannot be
divided, 1. Cor. 1. 10.

7. By showing all Faith and Hope in the expectation of the Resurrection of our
bodies, and Salvation of our souls.

Finally, this explication of the Name of Jesus may show, diverse sorts of men
know not Jesus: as,

1. The Man of sin that undertakes by his own power, to deliver the people
from their sins, by giving them pardons, or by appointing them intercessors,
or by prescribing them ways of satisfaction for their sins, and all besides
Jesus.

2. All such as do not see themselves to be lost, and so to need a Savior.

3. All such as live in their sins without repentance: for that shows that
Jesus has not saved them from their sins, Jude 4.

4. All that despair under the burden of their sins.

5. All that will not bow at the Name of Jesus. First, that will not by sound
subjection and obedience, yield themselves to be governed by Jesus Christ, and
by his ordinances, Phil. 2. 11. it is not bowing their legs will serve the
turn.

6. All such persons in general as do things contrary to the Name of Jesus,
by opposing that good way of Salvation in Jesus, Acts 26. 9.

Thus of the first Title.

Christ.] His second Title is Christ: Where I consider, first, of the term,
and then of the things signified by the term.

About the term diverse things are to be considered:

1. The signification: Christ is a Greek word, and signifies Anointed, and is
the same in sense with the Hebrew word Messiah, which also signifies Anointed.

2. Why in the New Testament, and so in our Creed, he is called rather Christ
by a Greek term, then Messiah which was the ancient, and Hebrew term? And
that may be to signify the interest of the Gentiles: for as Jesus an Hebrew
name shows the Right of the Jews: so Christ a Greek name shows the Right of
the Gentiles, both meeting in one Mediator between God and all sorts of men.

3. The necessity of taking in this Title into our Creed: for the Jews
willingly acknowledged this Title of Jesus, John 6. 24. but excommunicated out
of their Synagogues any that would openly acknowledge this Title of Christ,
John 9. and therefore it stands us upon to hold fast this Title.

4. It must be noted, that in the fifth Application of this term, it must not
only be annexed to Jesus, Acts 2. 36. Luke 2. 26. 27. but it must be
understood, as if it were read the Christ; the term of Christ as Anointed may
be given to other men, as David was Christ or Anointed, so are Kings Gods
Anointed, but none was the Christ, but Jesus of Nazareth.

Thus of the term Christ: The thing signified is his Anointing, and about the
Anointing of Jesus diverse things are to be considered:

1. Who Anointed him: (viz.) the Spirit of the Lord, or the whole Trinity, Esaias
61. 1.

2. What his Anointing comprehends, (viz) the substance of all that which was
signified by the Oil in the Ceremonial Law, especially the Oil with which
the high Priest was Anointed: for thereby was shadowed,

1. That he was certainly the person was chosen to the Office of a Mediator,
for as the pouring out of the Oil did show which was the Man, that was the
Priest or King: so the Anointing of Jesus did show, that he was the person
chosen for this great work.

2. That he had his ordination to his Office from God: for the Oil in the Law,
was prescribed by God only, no creature did prescribe it, or might make the
like, Exodus 30. 33. 37.

3. That he was qualified with abundance of grace and fitness for his Office:
as that Oil was compounded of diverse spices, Exodus 30. 34. so was Christ
endued with all sorts of gifts needful for a Mediator: He was full of grace
and truth, John 1. 14. and he had of the Oil above his fellows, never any
Anointed with such a measure of graces; God gave not him the Spirit by measure,
John 3. 34. Psalm. 45. 7. Acts 10. 38.

4. That he did execute the Office of Mediator with unspeakable gladness and
willingness. Never man did work so willingly. It was the Oil of gladness
he was Anointed withal, Psalm. 45. 7.

5. That the gifts bestowed upon him, were such as were agreeable to his humane
nature, for the Oil consisted of earthly substance, his humane nature was not
endowed with the essential properties of the Godhead, but with created
qualities.

6. That Jesus should be acceptable to God and man: he was a sweet smelling
savor unto God: and no perfume can smell so sweet in the nostrills of men, as
does Jesus in the hearts of all believers: nothing savors so sweetly.

7. That our persons and works are made acceptable to God by him, As the Oil
did not only wet Aarons head but ran down upon his garments: so Christ is
qualified with those rich graces, not only to make himself acceptable to God,
but all his members smell of his Oil in the sight of God: We are (says the
Apostle) a sweet savor unto God in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 133. 2. Cor. 2. 16. we
have received of his Anointing, 1. John 2. 27.

The third thing is, to which nature this Anointing belongs? For answer it
belongs to the whole Person, and so to both Natures. Christ is Mediator, and so
Anointed in respect of his Person: for, Anointing comprehending especially
ordination to the Office and qualification for it, though in respect of the
latter, the humane Nature was richly adorned as a sumptuous Palace for the
divine nature to dwell in, and the divine Nature could not need any pouring out
of gifts, yet in respect of ordination to the work of Mediator, the divine
Nature is assigned of God and chosen thereunto as well as the humane.

The fourth thing is, to what he was Anointed, or to what Office? I answer, he
was Anointed to be all that which the Ceremonial Anointing did signify. Now
three sorts of men were Anointed, Priests and Kings ordinarily, and the Prophet
Elizeus extraordinarily; which shadowed out, that the Messiah should be both
the Prophet, the Priest, and the King of the Church, and to all these three was
he called: and accordingly qualified with three especial gifts, Wisdom,
Holiness, and Power: Wisdom fits him for his prophetical Office, and
holiness for his Priestly Office, and Power for his regal Office: and so he
answers to three things in our misery: The first is our ignorance, the second
is the corruptions and disorder of our lives, the third is the guiltiness, by
which we are liable to eternal punishment: our ignorance he takes away as a
Prophet, our guiltiness as a Priest, and our corruption and disorder as a King
bringing us into order.

His work then is threefold, to be a Prophet to the Church, a Priest and a
King: his work as Prophet is to teach the Church all needful knowledges: His
work as Priest, is to make satisfaction for the sins of the Elect: His work
as a King is to gather and rule the Church.

First then, he is Anointed a Prophet to the Church, and his work is to teach,
and about his prophesying or teaching we have many things to inquire of: as,

1. What he treats of in his teaching: and so his work is to interpret the Law
of God, as we may see, Mat. 5. and to publish the Gospel, or the new Covenant,
Esaias 61. 1. and to foretell things to come, as we may see, Mat. 24. and in
other places.

2. How he executed his teaching: and that is diverse ways: as, 1. By visions
and dreams, and so he revealed much doctrine in the Old Testament: 2. By
Oracle, answering at the mercy Seat, or by Vrim and Thummim. 3. By Types and
ceremonial shadows. 4. By inspiration qualifying certain choice men to write
the Scriptures. 5. In his own person he came and preached unto men, Heb. 1.
1. 6. By the ministry of his servants, whom he sends to teach the people of
God, whether extraordinarily, as Prophets and Apostles, or ordinarily, as
Pastors and Teachers. Now our Savior is said to prophecy in these men's
ministeries; First, because it is he that ordaines and sends them, and calls
them to the work of teaching, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Secondly, because they receive
from him commandment what to teach, and must teach only what he commands
them, Mat. 28. vlt. Tit. 1. ^. Thirdly, because he qualifies them with gifts,
and makes them able to teach: they have nothing but what they received: and it
is he that speaks in their mouths, they do all they do by the power of
Christ dwelling in them, Eccles. 12. 11. Fourthly because whatsoever comfort
they promise to the godly out of his Word, and whatsoever threatenings they
denounce against the wicked, he will accomplish it, as if it had been uttered
by himself: and therefore is their ministry called Prophesying, because
derived out of the Fountain of Christ's Prophesies.

3. The third thing is, how he is qualified for the execution of his office in
teaching, either in his own Person or by his Messengers? And of that the
Scripture testifies that all treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in him,
Col. 2. 3. Yea, they are in him as the first fountain: for the original of
all knowledge in the mystery of God and godliness is from him, who is the Word
and wisdom of the Father: No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reueile him, Mat. 11. 27. John 1. 18. He only has the
Original words of eternal life, John 6. 68.

The fourth thing is the excellency of his manner of teaching, for,

1 He teaches all the Elect of God: they are all taught of God, Ioh. 6. 45.
Esaias 54. 13. Never any Teacher had so many Scholars.

2 He is a Teacher come from God. He comes from above, and therefore is
above all, he speaks the very words of God: the wisdom he teaches is from
above, all heavenly and spiritual, Ioh. 3. 31, 34.

3 He teaches us the good way, there is no error, no unrighteousness, no
perverseness, we may safely rest upon any thing he teaches, Prou. 8. Psalm.
119. 66.

4 He teaches by efficacy as well as by Doctrine: other men may deliver good
Doctrine, but they cannot make it effectual: but he teaches with power, he
can make the Doctrine work upon the deadest hearts of men: He can make the
dead hear his voice, and live, Ioh. 5. 25. He teaches in wardly as well as
outwardly.

5 He teaches freely. He gives all the Elect their teaching: I have given
them the words thou gave me, says he to his Father, Ioh. 17. 8.

6 He teaches with wonderful compassion: He knows how to have compassion
on the ignorant, and such as are out of the way: He is in his teaching an
everlasting Father, Heb 5. 2. Esaias 19. 6. John 10. 11. Esaias 40. 11.

7 He teaches men from their youth till their old age, which no other teachers
do, Psalm. 71. 17.

8 He teaches his Scholars all things: other Teachers teach them but in some
one or few particular kinds of knowledge; but he instructs them in all things
needful for their happiness: what he knows himself that may be profitable
for them, he teaches it to them, Ioh. 15. 15.

9 He teaches with wonderful evidence and shining glory: his teaching
rauisheth the hearts of men above all things: at his teaching, we all behold
with open face, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

10 He teaches confidently; every word is faithful and true, no Doctrine is
so sure, and all he says is delivered without any doubting, Revel. 3. 14.

The Use of the Doctrine of the Prophecy of Christ may be diverse.

First, seeing Christ is given as the Prophet and only Lawgiuer of the Church,
we may thence be informed of the wickedness, of the presumption of the man of
sin, that brings in a world of traditions to bind men's consciences in them to
worship God: We know no Prophet that has power to teach otherwise then is
written. Let that Son of perdition show us his anointing, if he will have us
believe him, Gal. 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2. Iam. 4. ^.

Secondly, we must hence learn diverse Lessons.

1 To make the more account of prophesying, to esteem the Ministers of the
Gospel the more, because Christ teaches by them, and executes his
prophesying by their ministeries: yea, it should make us love the house of God
the more, and long to be going up to it, and call one upon another, because the
Lord Jesus Christ does teach us there, Esaias 2. 3. 1 These. 5. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
2. Yea, though we did eat the bread of affliction, yet if God restrain not
our teachers we should rejoice in our portion, Esaias 30. 20.

2 We must not esteem of any man above what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. nor call
any man Doctor or Rabbi on earth, because one is our Teacher, even Christ, Mat.
23. 8, 10. We must reckon of our Teachers as the Ambassadors of Christ, but
withal, take heed that we remember to give the chief glory to Christ, for
they have nothing but what they have received from him.

3 And chiefly, we must consecrate our selves to the hearing of Christ, he that
has ears to hear let him hear, Mar. 4. Deuteronomy. 18, 19. God the Father has
from Heaven charged us with this duty as the chief thing, that we should hear
him, Mat. 17. 5. but it is not enough barely to hear him, but we must labor
to be such, as he requires his Scholars should be: for there be diverse
things Christ stands upon in his Scholars. He will not teach them, he does
not account them any part of his charge, unless they be such as he describes,
and requires them to be. Thus then is the question, What does Christ require
in such as he will undertake to teach? Answ. Diverse things: as

1 They must not be conceited of their own wit and learning, and reason, but
must deny themselves, and become fools that they may be wise. He cannot abide
such as are wise in their own conceit, and will teach their Teachers. His
Scholars must be poor in spirit, such as trust to nothing of their own, but
will think and believe only what Christ tells them, Esaias 61. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 8.
Yea, they must be such as will declare their ways to him, that is, such as
will confess how ignorant and foolish they are and hane been, Psalm. 119. 26.

2 They must be such as will attend daily at the School door, at the gates of
wisdom, Prou. 8. 34. They must be constant hearers, not such as will play the
Truants, or come to be taught but now and then, but they must be such as will
be present as often as Christ shall read: not like those that heard him and
marvelled, and went their way and left him, Mat. 22.

3 They must be such as are broken in heart, and wounded in Spirit for their
sins: for he was sent to preach the Gospel to them that are broken in heart:
such as bewail their sins, and know no sorrows greater then for their
sins, these are such as Christ desires to teach, and will powerfully
instruct, Esaias 61. 1. CHRIST sends the rich and such as are hard hearted by
whole skores empty away, he will not teach them, as we see by daily experience
from Sabbath to Sabbath; when multitudes come to Church he does speak to the
hearts but of a very few, the rest he turns away to go as they came.

4 His Scholars must be meek, that is, they must bring him a heart free from
passions and worldly perturbations, and pride; for he says, he will teach the
meek and humble his way: froward, perverse, proud persons get little from
Christ's teaching, Psalm. 25.

5 There must be in his Scholars the contempt of the world soundly formed:
for he will not sow among the Thorns. If men's hearts run after their
covetousness, or pleasures, or reputation with the world, they are not fit for
Christ.

6 His Scholars must receive his Word with an honest and good heart, that is,
with a heart that is free from base wickedness, and filthy lusts, and gross
sins, and does love and admire goodness and holiness for-it self: and it
is a heart that had rather get sound grace then great credit, strives more to
be good, then to seem so, Luke 8. 15. such as will learn the truth as the
truth is in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.

7 He requires of his Scholars that they should receive his Word with full
assurance, and put that difference between his teaching and all others, as
with all confidence to believe and rest upon what he says, Heb. 3. 6. 2 Pet.
1. 19.

8 They must keep his words, and not let them run out, or be taken away by
the Devil, and deuillish distractions: they must be careful to lay them up in
their hearts as in a Treasury, Luke 8. 15.

9 They must hearken to do it, Deuteronomy. 4. 1. He looks that his Scholars should
show their learning by their practice, and hearken to this end to get skill to
do what he teaches them. Yea, they must do according to all that he teaches
them, Mat. 28. vlt. and they must bring forth fruit with patience, they must
not think much to endure, what may befall them from the Devil or the world,
Luke 8. 15.

10 He cannot abide such Scholars as will not increase in learning, but after
they have come to school many years, yet need to be taught their A. B. C. in
religion again, Heb. 5. 12.

11 He requires his Scholars should teach others, that which they have
learned of him themselves: He so prophesies to them that he makes them
Prophets likewise to instruct the ignorant, admonish those that are out of
order, comfort the weak, especially those of them, that have any authority
over others, that is, so many of them, as be Parents or Masters, or Rulers over
others, Psalm. 71. 17. Psalm. 119. 27. 1 These. 5. 15. But withal he charge
them, that they take heed of falling out one with another, or being masterly
and imperious in teaching or judging others, especially in giving laws to
others in things doubtful or indifferent, without the authority and warrant of
Christ, Iam. 4. 11, 12. and 3. 1.

12 He will not have his Scholars learn of any body, but of himself: he
cannot abide they should be carried about with diverse and strange doctrine,
Heb. 13. 9.

Lastly, though he will teach freely, yet he expects from all his Scholars the
freewill offerings of their mouths, that is, praise and thanksgiving,
according as they find their profiting by his teaching, Psalm. 119. 108.

The Papists sin against the Prophecy of Christ many ways, as

1 In that they create such swarms of Mas priests, and several orders of men,
that either cannot or will not teach the Church.

2 In that they restrain knowledge from the people of God, by withholding the
Scriptures and service of God from them in strange languages.

3 In setting up stocks and stones, even graven Images, and tell the people,
that they shall arise and teach them, Hab. 2. 19.

Thus of the Prophetical office of our Savior: His Priesthood follows.

About the Priesthood of Christ we may consider.

1 The Titles or names which are given to him in respect of that office, and so
he is called the Lamb of God, John 1. Our Passe-ouer, 1 Cor. 5. Sin, or an
offering for sin, 2 Cor 5. vlt. Romans 8. 3. An atonement and propitiation,
Romans 3. 25. 1. John 2. 2. An Advocate, 1. Ioh. 2. 2.

2. The places that prove that he is indeed a Priest, Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 5.
10. and Chap. 7.

3. The difference between him and the Priests of the Law: for Christ is a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. 4. they were Priests after
the order of Leui: Their Priesthood was Typical, his was Real, Heb. 10. 1.
Theirs were instituted by the Law of the carnal commandment without an oath,
his was instituted by the law of the spiritual commandment with an oath, Heb.
7. 16. 20. 21. their Priesthood was ordained in the Old Testament, where the
Church was in her nonage in bondage, but his in the time of the New Testament,
when the Church was grown to be of years and free, Heb. 7. 28. There was
difference also in the Person of the Priests: for those Priests were of the
Tribe of Leui, men, infirm, mortal, sinners, that needed sacrifice for
themselves: but Christ was of the Tribe of Judah, infirm only in the days of
his flesh, but without all sin both before and after his death, Heb. 5. 3. 7.
and 7. 14. 28. besides Christ is Mediator of a better Testament then they were,
Heb. 8. 6. and 9. 15. Their Priesthood was to be abrogated, his lasts for
ever, Heb. 8. 13. Their Priesthood passed from Father to Son, but his abides
always in himself, without succession, Hebrews 7. 3. 23. 24. 25. They were
many and of different degrees, he but one, Melchisedech but a Type to which
he is resembled, not a companion equal with him, Hebrews 7. 23. Lastly, they
executed their Priesthood in earth only, he executes his Priesthood in
heaven also, (viz.) by Intercession, Heb. 9. 24.

4. The parts of his Priesthood, are Sacrifice and Intercession, by Sacrifice
he prays for the sins of the Elect, to this end, to reconcile them to God,
and to deliver them from the power of the devil: and this Sacrifice of our
Savior excells all the Ceremonial Sacrifices: for they were but Types, this
was the substance. They prepared the bodies of beasts, or other things, he
prepared his own body, yea, his very soul was made a sacrifice for sin, as
he offered up himself as a Sacrifice: for many sins they needed many
sacrifices, but he by one sacrifice of himself makes Atonement for all the
sins of the Elect: and that Sacrifice but once offered, whereas theirs were
offered successively: and their sacrifices could not cleanse the conscience
from sin properly, nor pacify God as many Scriptures testify, whereas
Christ's Sacrifice of his own body and blood, does fully pacify God, and does
effectually purge the conscience from dead works. Their sacrifices did not
make the worshippers more holy, Heb. 9. 13. 14. With the blood of these
sacrifices, the very high Priest in the greatest solemnity could only enter
within the veil of the Temple, but Christ by his blood opens heaven, and that
not only once a year, but keeps it always open, nor did Christ enter within
the Veil only for himself, but has left the way for us, even a living and
lasting way for us to get to heaven by virtue of his blood, Heb. 10. 19. The
second work of our High Priest, is Intercession, or to offer prayers, and so
he made a threefold Intercession for us. The one a little before his Atachment:
recorded, John 17. The other in the very time of the Sacrifice, while it was
hanged up: of which is mention made, Luke 23. 34. The third, in the heavenly
Sanctuary, as he sits at Gods right hand to make request for us, Heb. 9. 24.

The Use should be first for consolation and that in diverse respects:

1. Because God has given us such an excellent high*Priest.

2. Because by his Priesthood we obtain such excellent benefits as the
Scriptures show, (viz.) from his sacrifice, Reconciliation with God, 1. Pet. 3.
18. Romans 8. 10. The opening of the very Fountain of grace, Zach. 13. 1.
Forgiveness of all our sins, Rom 3. 25. Justification by his righteousness,
Dan. 9 24. The taking away of all malediction and condemnation, and the merit
of eternal life, Heb. 10. 19. and from his intercession, we receive the
obtaining of our prayers and suits at Gods hands, Revel. 8. 3. 4. and the
pouring out upon us the spirit of intercession, teaching us, and helping us to
pray, Zach. 12. 12. Romans 8. 26. and the perfuming of all our works making them
acceptable to God: and the non-suiting of all the Accusations of Satan or evil
men brought against us, Romans 8. 33. John 17. 14. 15.

3. Because he has made us Priests also unto God, by pouring out upon us of
the Oil of his Grace, Revel. 1.

Secondly, the consideration of the Sacrifice and intercession of Christ should
teach us:

1. To take heed that we dishonor not God through unbelief and despair.

2. That we live as may become the glory of him, that has bought us at such a
price, abhorring all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 20.

3. Seeing we are Priests, we must offer those Sacrifices are enjoined us,
which are:

1. The Tears of contrition: or a broken heart, Psalm. 51. 19.

2. Prayers and Thanksgiving unto God, Psalm. 141. 2. Revel. 5. 8. Heb. 13. 15.

3. Alms to the Poor, or Contribution to the distressed, Phil. 4. 18.

4. The giving of our selves to our Teachers, to be wholly ruled by them: our
souls so subjected are the sacrifice, and they offer them up to God when they
pray and give thanks for us, Romans 15. 16.

5. Good works, for these are sacrifices of righteousness; every good work
is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 4. 5.

But especially to give our selves, soul and body to God; to let him do with
us whatsoever he will, is the chief of Sacrifices, even a whole burnt
offering, when we yield to obey God in all things without reserving any thing
to our selves, Romans 12. 1.

Thus of his Anointing to the Priest*hood: His Anointing to the Kingdom
follows: where these things may be distinctly observed:

1. That the Church of God is not without a King, though he be not so visible
to us, as the Kings of the Earth are, Ier. 23. 5. Psalm. 2. 6.

2. That Jesus of Nazareth is that King, Mat, 28. 18. Acts 2. 30. ^3. 36. 1.
Cor. 15. 25.

3. I^ what things it may appear that Christ is a King.

1. He has the ^^^es of a King: Yea, King of Kings, Revel. 19. 16.

2. He lives in the Majesty and Glory of a King, he sits in the Throne of
Glory, Psalm. 45. He has his Court in diverse places of the Earth where he is
pleased to keep house. The Sanctuary is his Court. He is attended on as a
King, he has thousands of Angels that wait about his Throne.

3. He has the power of a King. All Power is given him in Heaven and Earth,
Mat. 28. 18.

4. He gives Laws like a King: He is the only Lawgiuer of the Church, James
4. 12.

5. He Conquers like a King: who can recount the greatness of his conquests in
the conversion of the Gentiles? And so he conquers daily in gathering men by
his Word and Spirit out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of his
grace here.

6. He gouernes like a King, providing for the welfare of the godly in all
Ages, ruling all things by his own power, and making them to work together
for the best to them that love God.

7. He has power of life and death as a King, and is appointed of God, a Judge
both of quick and dead, Act. 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 1. Ier. 23. 5.

Fourthly, the excellency of Christ the King above all other Kings, and so he
excells:

1. In the pre-eminence of his Person: Other Kings are the sons of men, he
is the Son of God: He is better borne then any King. Whether we respect his
Generation as God, or his Incarnation as man, for he was conceived of the holy
Ghost, and so had no sin, and borne of a Virgin, not by the way of
propagation as other Kings are borne. He had neither Father nor Mother, no
Father as man, no Mother as God, Psalm. 2. Luke 1. Heb. 7.

2. In the excellence of his gifts for government. Never King so qualified, he
is fairer then the children of men: and Anointed with the Oil of grace and
gifts above his fellows, Psalm. 45. He is the mighty God, an everlasting
Father, he is wonderful for Wisdom and Counfell, a Prince of Peace, that
knows how to keep the government upon his own shoulders, Esaias 9. 6. and
being now glorified in Heaven, has laid down, all humane infirmities, and is
glorified in his humane Nature with all degrees of heavenly gifts can befall a
created Nature.

3. In the manner of his calling to the Kingdom: He was called and set up
immediately by God himself: All other Kings are Anointed and called by men,
Psalm. 2. 6.

4. In the manner of getting his subjects: other Kings have their Subjects
delivered to them so soon as they are crowned or proclaimed, but Christ gets
all his Subjects by Conquest: every one of them is gathered out of the kingdom
of darkness, by his power in their effectual vocation.

5. In respect of his independencie and allsufficiencie: Other Kings are
maintained by their Subjects, from whom they receive tribute, and Subsedies and
the like: But Christ is no way supported, or maintained by his Subjects, but
does support and maintain them, Esaias 9. 7.

6. In the extent of his kingdom, he is a King universal: He is King of all
the Earth. The greatest King that ever was, was rejected by many Nations, that
never acknowledged his supremacy: there were many parts of this world, which
Alexander and Caesar never saw, much less subdued: Yea, he is a King over such
creatures as never mortal man ruled: for he is Head of principalities and
powers: The Angels worship him, Dan. 7. 14. Phil. 2. 11. Colos 2. 9. Psalm. 2.
8. All other Kings hold of him, as being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
Revel. 19. 16.

7. He excells all other Kings in his Conquests: He has conquered such
enemies, as all the Kings of the Earth could not subdue, he conquered sin and
death, and the devils of Hell: he has spoiled principalities and powers,
Colos. 2. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 51. and accordingly has had such a Triumph, when he
ascended into Heaven, and led captivity captive, as never Conqueror had: for
never Conqueror rid into so glorious a place as Heaven, nor showed such
captives as the devils were, nor performed their victories by their own
power, whereas he conquered alone, there was no Army, nay, no man to help him.

8. He excells them in his house keeping: He entertaines all Nations, Esaias 25.
He keeps thousands of Courts all open at once: And his provisions are far more
precious then the provisions of the Kings of the Earth: He feeds his guests
with the bread of Angels, even with the bread of life, with such food as
whosoever eats of it, shall never hunger more: and he has better attendance,
for he is waited on by thousand thousands of Angels, which are continually
about his Throne.

9. He gouernes by better laws then the kings of Earth do: and his laws are
better in diverse respects: for first, they be all of his own making: they make
their laws by the Assistance of their Counsel or their Parliaments, James 4.
12. secondly, his Laws are written by himself in the hearts of his Subjects,
whereas other Kings can write them no where, but in paper, or parchment, or
stone at the best, Ier. 31. 33. thirdly, his Laws are more perfect, there is
no defect in them, they are able to make all his Subjects absolute to every
good word and work, 1. Tim. 3. 17. 18. Psalm. 19. fourthly, together with his
Laws he gives his spirit to make his subjects able and willing to keep them,
Ezekiel. 36. 27.

10. In the power of his Prerogative: for God has given all things into his
hands: he may dispose of the persons, lives, goods, good names, and
posterities of his Subjects according to his own will, Ioh. 13. 3. which other
kings without horrible tyranny cannot do.

11. In his distributing of Justice: and so both toward his own servants, and
toward the rebellious, and his enemies: Toward his own servants he can
pardon not only the Punishment, but the offense too, and can give such rewards
as earthly kings cannot give. And toward his enemies or the rebellious, he can
inflict punishment upon their hearts and consciences, which other kings cannot
do; and he can and will judge all offenders, not such as offend in capital
crimes only, and judges with more Righteousness then was ever found in any
mortal Tribunal.

12. In the Nature of his kingdom: His Kingdom is not of this world, but
spiritual, as having authority over the spirits of men, which other Princes
have not, and governing by spiritual means, and in spiritual, and eternal
things, the wealth of his Subjects consisting in eternal and spiritual things.

13. He is a King Immortal, he cannot die, he lives ever to provide for the
wealth of his Subjects, and to reward his servants, which is not true of the
best kings on earth, who are all mortal, if they were never so great or
glorious. Of his kingdom there is no end, it is everlasting, 1. Tim. 1. 17.
Luke 1. 33. Dan. 2. 45. and 7. 14.

The Use of this may be:

First, for Consolation, All the children of Sion may rejoice in their king,
Psalm. 149. 2. and that not only if they consider his glory in all the former
praises, but if they consider their own happiness under him; for all the
Subjects of this King may dwell safely, and enjoy a quiet habitation: No
Subjects have so much reason to think themselves safe as his Subjects, Isay
33. 20. 21. 25. Ier. 23. 5. 6. Ezekiel. 34. 25. and besides, they trade for better
wealth under his government then all the Treasures of the world are worth. And
further, there was never any King did love his Subjects so affectionately as
Jesus does his people, Zeph. 3. 17. and in his Kingdom poor men may get
preferment as well as rich men, yea, the highest dignities may be obtained by
them as well as by the greatest, Mat. 5. 3. Add to these that all his Subjects
are Sons, Romans 9. 25. 26. and he makes them all Kings too, they are Royal
all the Nation of them, 1. Pet. 2. 9. they are the Princes of the people, even
all the people of the God of Abraham, Psalm. 47. 9. Revel. 1. 8. 6. Romans 5. 17.

All these things should much check and reprove that coffeehouse is too
often found in some of Gods children, that fret at the wicked, or are impatient
at their own estates; what is there no King in Sion? or is it no privilege to
them that the first Dominion is come unto them, Micah 4. 9.

Secondly, for Instruction, and that both to all Christians in general, and to
the Kings and great men of the Earth in particular:

1. All sorts of true Christians should learn from hence:

1. To pray that God would open their eyes to see the glory of Christ's
Kingdom, as well as we discern the prerogatives and glory of earthly Kings:
and the rather, because Christ does so far exceed them in glory, Ephesians 1.
17. to the end.

2. To ascribe all praise and glory to his Kingdom, to talk of the praise,
and receive of his greatness, Psalm. 47. 6. 7. Revel. 5. 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 145.
10, 11. Mat. 11. 10.

3. To pray that his Kingdom may come more and more: especially now that we
see that the Nations are moved, and he seems to be going about to enlarge his
Dominions, and to pull down the Kingdom of Antichrist.

4. To endeavor to carry themselves as may become their Relation to Christ,
either as his Subjects, or as made Kings by him; as his Subjects they should
consider that it behoues them:

1. To study the Mysteries of his Kingdom, Mat. 13. 11.

2. To send their Lamb to the Ruler of the whole earth, Esaias 16. 1. to do
their Homage, and to acknowledge their King.

3. To bow at the Name of Jesus, Phil. 2. 11. making of legs will not serve
the turn, they must be subject with all fear, and reverence, and submit
themselves to his will.

4. To show themselves sensible of his dishonor, and not be silent or
careless when they hear their King abused.

5. To show all meekness and patience: for their King though he be a great
King, yet is meek and humble, Mat. 21. 5.

6. To observe whatsoever he commands, Mat. 28. vlt. proving themselves to be
his subjects by fearing to displease him in any thing, Hosea 3. 5.

7. To seek to him in all our necessities, seeing he is so highly exalted and
able to help us, and delights to receive petitions from his Subjects. And in
as much as we partake of his holy Oil also, and are by him made Kings unto God,
we should show our selves to the world as spiritual Kings: and that, first,
by subduing our own passions, lusts, inordinate desires, carnal reason,
maintaining continual war against the remainders of corruption in our
natures. He is a King indeed, that can rule over his own perturbations:
secondly, by showing our selves resolute, not to be brought in bondage by the
devil or the world, by the Baits of profit or pleasure, or by the inforcements
of scorn, threatening, or punishment; we should let the world know, they should
as soon conquer the kings of the earth, as win us from our sincerity and
fidelity to Jesus Christ: thirdly, by our conversation in heaven, we should
always order our lives, as if we were presently to be Crowned in Heaven.

Lastly, such as are Kings, Rulers, or Governors over others, should hence
learn with fear and trembling to confess the glory of Christ, and
acknowledge that they have their Scepters, and Authority from Jesus Christ, and
accordingly reckon their kingdoms on earth to be but as places of service, in
which they do the work which Jesus requires of them, Psalm. 2. 11.

JOHN 1. 14. And we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father.
His only Son.]
HItherto of the Titles, Jesus and Christ: now follows the third Title, and so
our Redeemer is called Gods only Son. About which ground of Faith, we have
these things to consider:

1. The Proofs that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: for to believe God has
a Son is not enough, we must believe that Jesus Christ is that Son of God,
Psalm. 2. 7. compared with Heb. 1. 5. Ioh. 10. 36. Mat. 16. 16. Romans 1. 3. John
9. 35.

2. What kind of Son Christ is to God; God has many Sons, some by Grace,
and one by Nature. The sorts of sons which God has by Grace, see in the
explication of the term Father, in the first Article of the Creed. But Christ
is his natural Son, because God the Father did communicate to him his own
nature, so as he is by nature the Son of God: he is the begotten Son of God,
because he received his Fathers Nature by Generation. He is the first begotten
Son of God, so called in Scripture, because he has the right of the
firstborn over his brethren, and was begotten before the world was: he is the
only begotten Son of God, because by Generation God has no other Sons but
he.

3. In what Nature Christ is the only Son of God. It may be conceived, that
he is so in respect of his humane Nature, for no other Sons of God were
conceived of the holy Ghost, or borne of a Virgin, but he only: but we must
understand, that Christ in his Incarnation has the same Nature with us, it
differs only, in the manner of receiving it: Now he is called the only Son,
from the nature which he receives from the Father, and he only, and so he is
the only Son of God, as he is the second Person in the Trinity, and in
respect of the manner of receiving his divine Nature. This is mightily opposed
by the ancient and modern Arians, who strive vehemently to carry it, that he
is called in Scripture the Son of God only as he is man, and that God has
no Son that was before Jesus was borne, or conceived. Now to establish our
Faith against their Heresy, we should often think of these Scriptures, where
mention is made of a Son of God before Jesus was borne, or was greater then
man could be: as John 3. 16. God sent his Son into the world: and God had a
Son, by whom he made the world, Heb. 1. 2. Colos. 1. 16. God had a Son of
whom it was said that he only revealed the Father, Mat. 11. 27. now either he
was, before he was incarnate, or else the Church in the Old Testament, knew not
God the Father: and unto the Son he says, Thy Throne O God is for ever and
ever: then he had a Son was God as well as man, Heb. 1. 8. besides it is
clear, he had many brethren as man, Heb. 2. 12. and therefore as man could not
be the only Son.

4. How he was begotten? To this question a perfect answer cannot be given by
us in this mortality, Pro. 30. 4. It is a Mystery exceeds all mortal capacity.
Yet the Lord is pleased to let fall certain similitudes in Scriptures, that
give us some glimpse of it: as when Christ is called the Wisdom or Word of
his Father, Pro. 8. John. 1. thereby we gather, that as the soul begets
reason, or the word that is afterward to be uttered, beget I say, within it
self without joining with any other creature; so does God as an eternal mind
beget his Son in himself: so when Christ is called the brightness of his
Fathers glory, it imports, that as shining is begotten of the Sun, so is Christ
of the Father, Heb. 1. 3. So when Christ is called the Character or Image of
his Fathers person, is imported, that as the print of the seal is set upon
wax, and does resemble it perfectly, without loosing any part of the seal; so
does God communicate his whole Nature to his Son, without loosing any thing
from himself, Heb. 1. 3. And as the mind of man begets an Image of what it
conceiues, so God that eternal mind, when he conceived of himself, he begat
that Image of himself, which we call the Son of God, perfectly resembling the
Father. See in the Notes upon that word (Father) in the first Article of the
Creed, seven things, wherein this eternal geneneration of Gods Son is unlike
to our generation by earthly parents.

5. Why our Redeemer needed to be the Son of God as well as the Son of Man: It
was requisite he should be the Son of God for diverse reasons: first, because
there must be a proportion between the sin of man, and the punishment due to
his sin, and the satisfaction made to God for the sin and punishment due.
Now man's sin being infinite, as in other respects, so because it was
committed against God, who is infinite, his punishment must be infinite also:
Now no finite creature, can perform an infinite satisfaction in a finite time,
and therefore it was requisite he should be infinite in person that suffered,
which as man he was not: secondly, the benefits necessary for us require that
the Mediator should be God: for to deliver man from spiritual enemies, sin
and Satan, and to restore to man the Image of God lost, to perform by one, a
Righteousness able to justify many, could not be done by any one mere man.
Nor can any one man's righteousness deserve the opening of the Kingdom of
Heaven for many men: thirdly, he that must mediate between God and man, had
need to be God, to treat with God in things that concern him, and man to treat
with man in the things that concern man. And as it was a way most necessary,
so, was it most comely: who fitter to make us sons of God by Adoption, then
he that was the Son of God by Nature: and who fitter to restore the Image of
God in us, then he that was the substantial Image of his Father?

The Uses follow: and so,

First, we should make conscience of it to receive this doctrine with our whole
hearts, with all life of affections: for hereby we shall improve, we are
Christians and not Jews. They could believe Jesus was a man, but could not
endure it, that he should call himself the Son of God, John 10. and the
devil has mightily also labored to make the Divinity of Christ suspected. As
when he came into the world, by making men think of a worldly kingdom, then
stirring up the Priests and Pharisees to seek to kill him as a blasphemer, in
saying he was the Son of God. And in the beginning of the Christian Churches,
he raised up pernicious Heretics to deny his Divinity, and at this day, has
raised many in other countries, that write and teach most dangerously in this
point. And therefore we must hold fast this Truth against all the power of
hell. This confession is the Rock upon which the Christian Church is built,
Mat. 16. 16. 17. If we acknowledge the Son, we have the Father, 1. Ioh. 2. 23.

Secondly, it should wonderfully quicken and establish our Faith in relying
upon him for Salvation, and all happiness, upon him I say, that has
undertaken for us, and is so full of merit and power; his Satisfaction and
Righteousness must needs be perfect and sufficient, that is the Son of God,
Ier. 23. 6. God cannot but be infinitely well pleased in his satisfaction, and
has signified so much, Mat. 3. 17. and therefore we should settle our
consciences in all peace and joy in believing in him. Yea, in all passages of
our lives we should make use of our Faith in the Son of God: whatsoever we
want for soul or body, or the preservation of our lives, we may with much
confidence go to him: for out of his fullness we may receive grace for grace,
Ioh. 1. 14. 18. And seeing God has given us his Son, how shall he not with
him give us all things also, Romans 8. 32. Yea, it should much establish our
Faith against the fear of our falling away before we come to possess
eternal life: for he is stronger then all, and no man, nor devil can take us
out of his hand, and therefore we shall not perish, John 10. 29. 30.

Thirdly, it should much inflame us to the Love of God that has had such mercy
to such miserable creatures as we were, as to send his own Son to redeem us,
Ioh. 3. 16. Oh it should make us to love God above all things, and to esteem
of his love, as better then any thing else in our lives.

Fourthly, God the Father himself from Heaven taught us a maine use of this
point, when he proclaimed him to be his Son, for then he charged us to
hear him. None abler to instruct us, for the Son has his knowledge out of the
bosom of the Father, Mat. 11. 27. and none has better right to rule us,
because he is the firstborn, and therefore ought to rule over his brethren:
It should therefore be our conscionable care all our days to attend to his
voice, and to do whatsoever he commands us, Mat. 17. 5.

Fifthly, we must hence also learn to join Christ with the Father in all
religious service: for when God brought forth his first-begotten Son into the
world, he said, let all the Angels of Heaven worship him, and therefore much
more we must do it, Heb. 1. 6. Ioh. 5. 23.

Again, from hence we may gather the woeful estate of all unbelievers, that
wear out their time and do not lay hold upon the way of Salvation by Jesus
Christ: for this increases their condemnation, because they do not believe
now, that GOD has sent his own Son to be the Savior, John 3. 36.

Finally, two things about the Divinity of our Savior are here employed: first,
that he is God: for if he be the Son of God, then he has the Nature of his
Father, and so is God: which though the Creed do not expressly mention, yet
the Scripture does, acknowledging him for God equal with the Father, Romans 9.
5. 1. John 5. 20. Phil. 2. 6. but because the Creed does not express this, I
forbear the explication of it, resting satisfied to have treated of that which
the Creed mentions. Another thing employed is, that he is a person distinct
from the Father: for if he be the Son of God, then he differs in person from
the Father.

ACTS 2. 36. Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made
Jesus both Christ and Lord.
Our Lord.]
HItherto of the three former Titles: the Last Title of our Savior is that
which is here expressed, (viz.) Our Lord, and concerning this Title diverse things
are to be considered:

1. That it is a thing that God charge upon our Faith to believe distinctly
that Jesus is our Lord. Thus David in spirit called him Lord, and this all the
House of Israel must know, Act. 2. 35. 36. and Luke 2. 11. he is styled Christ
the Lord, and Act. 10. 36. he is proclaimed Lord of all: yea, it is a Title so
proper to Christ, as sometimes he has no other name given him but the Lord,
as 1 Cor. 6. 14. GOD has raised up the Lord, meaning Christ. And 1 Cor. 12. 3.
It is accounted a work of the Holy Ghost in any man to profess this point,
That he believes that Jesus is the Lord.

2 How Jesus comes to be our Lord, by what right and title, and so he is our
Lord by a fiuefold right: First, by the right of Creation, he made us all, and
so he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein: for he has made
them all, Ioh. 1. 2. Col. 1. 16. Secondly, by the right of redemption: we were
all in most miserable bondage to sin, Satan and Gods Justice: Now Jesus Christ
redeemes us with his blood, paying that matchless price for us, and thereby
makes us his own, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Thirdly, by the right of preservation, and
maintenance, he keeps us and maintains us by his power, and all we enjoy we
hold as Tenants under him as our Landlord, from him we have protection wages,
apparel, and diet for both soul and body. Fourthly, by the right of
ordination: God has given him all power and made him Lord, Act. 2. 36. God
has given his Elect unto Christ as their Lord and head, John 17. 6. Ephesians. 1.
22. Fifthly, by particular Covenant he is the Lord of Christians: for both by
our vow in Baptism we bind our selves to his service, and by effectual
vocation we consecrate our selves, and as it were, hire our selves to be
servants to Christ and righteousness, Romans 6.

3 In what Nature he is Lord: I answer, howsoever in respect of Creation he
made us all as God: yet in respect of Redemption he paid the price in his
humane Nature, and in respect of ordination he is made Lord in both natures,
both as God and man: and by Covenant we are bound to the whole person. The
Lordship of Christ is a name of office, and so belongs to both natures.

4 The excellency of his Lordship: and so there is no Lord like to Jesus.

1 Because he has no partners in his dominion: though there be many
administrations, yet there is but one Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 5. and though there be
many Lords, yet to us there is but one Lord, 1 Cor. 8. 6. as there is but one
God, so there is but one Lord, Ephesians. 4. 5. He is the blessed and only
Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15.

2 Because all other Lords are his servants and tenants: he is Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. Revel. 19. Ephesians. 6. 11. Col. 4. 1.

3 In respect of the extent of his dominion: for he is Lord over all, Act. 10.
36. Romans 10. 11.

4 In respect of the continuance of his dominion: he only has immortality:
other Lords dye, 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. his honor and power is everlasting.

5 In respect of the excellence of his glory and Majesty: He dwells in the
light, which no man ever had, or can approach unto: no man ever saw, or can see
such glory in any other, 1 Timothy 6. 16.

6 In respect of his goodness to his servants, Tenants and Vassalls, for he
has abased himself to serve and minister to his servants, Luke 12. 37. He
has bought them at such a price as no other Lord could give, 1 Pet. 1. 18. He
is rich to all his servants that call upon him: he has no servant that gets
not great preferment by him, even his meanest servants as well as his highest
Officers, Romans 10, 11, 12, 13. He has no servant that ever asked him the
Kingdom of Heaven it self, but he gave it him: yea, all that this Lord is,
or has, he bestows it upon his servants freely, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Gal. 2.
20. And besides, his servants never forfeit their estate: He puts out no
Tenant, nor turns away any servant. Nothing can separate between them and
their Lords love, Romans 8. vlt.

The use may be both for information and instruction.

For information, and so it should inform us: First, that he dwells not in
temples made with hands, that is, that we ought to conceit of him to be more
excellent, then that those material buildings should answer to his greatness,
or that he has no houses to put his head in but these Churches: for he is the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and so may dwell where he will, and no earthly
building can set out sufficiently his greatness, Act. 17. 24. Secondly, that
all our obedience to earthly Lords and Masters, and Governors, must be with
due respect of Christ and his authority, we must obey them in the Lord, 1 Cor.
12. 5. that is, so far as they command us nothing that is contrary to Christ's
will. Thirdly, it shows that Christ has power to do what he will with any of
his creatures belonging to men: Thus the owner of the Ass, and the Colt of the
Ass is told, that he must let them go because the Lord has need of them,
Mat. 21. 3.

The Uses for instruction are these, For, if CHRIST be our Lord

1 We should acknowledge him, and confess that Jesus is the Lord, for no man
can make this confession, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. But because
Hypocrites may say so in words, let us labor from our hearts to yield our
selves unto Christ, as to our only Lord, to be ruled and governed by him all
our days, to be wholly at his disposing, even to live to him that dyed for us,
and by the sound Covenant of our hearts to yield our selves as servants to obey
him in all righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. 15. To say Lord, Lord, will not serve
turn, Mat. 7. 21. unless we say it with our hearts, and prove it by our
obedience: which if we do, then it is from the holy Ghost, as the Sanctifier:
whereas the general outward confession is but from the common grace of the
Holy Ghost, which may be found in Hypocrites. Let us then with Thomas from our
hearts say unto Jesus, My Lord, and my God. Yea, let us give our selves to the
Lord, as the Macedonians did, 2 Cor. 8. 5. For why should we any more serve
strange Lords. Have we not reason to confess, that we have served sin, and
Satan, and the world all this while, and it did not profit us? Job 33. 27. What
greater preferment can we have then to serve the Lord of Lords? Did David, a
great King, account it his greatest glory to be the servant of this Lord,
Psalm 36. 1. Was it not his comfort to call him his Lord? Psalm 110. 1. Have
we not tasted how bountiful the Lord is? 1 Pet. 2. 3. Did our hearts ever
feel any thing more sweet then the entertainment he has given in his Word and
Sacraments and Prayer? Have we not bound our selves by solemn Covenant, when
we received the Sacrament? What then should hinder us, but that we should
with all our hearts consecrate the rest of our lives to his service: which if
you mean to do, by the way take notice of these rules.

1 First, that you must with all diligence sudy the Will of your Lord, to know
it, and accordingly must labor that the Word of CHRIST may dwell richly in
you, Col. 3. 16.

2 That you must forthwith, and for ever, separate your selves from all the
servants of strange Lords, and come out from amongst them, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

3 You must resolve to obey your Lord Jesus, in all things without murmuring or
unthankfulness: though you find his work be contrary to your natures,
desires, ease, credit, profit, or liking of carnal friends, as resolved to
take up any Cross may fall upon you for well-doing, Luke 9. 24.

4 That you set down your resolution, to hold out thus to the end, as resolved
to hire your selves to Jesus Christ, not for a day or a year, or a fit, but
for ever: never more to look back to the world or sin, forsaking all your
former evil ways, and taking an eternal leave of your corruptions: which by
the power of Christ your Lord, you may do.

5 That you abound in the work of the Lord, striving to do all the good that
possible you can, knowing that your work is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. 58.

6 That you look to it to avoid carnal and corrupt ends, in doing your
Masters work, look not after the praise of the world, and use not praising of
your selves, but rest fully satisfied with the praise of Christ: for not he
that commends himself, or is commended of the world is approved, but he whom
the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10. vlt.

7 That you meddle with your own business, and make conscience of it to do
that work faithfully which Christ requires of you in your particular places:
as God has distributed to every man, and as the Lord has called every man, so
let him walk: avoiding vain coffeehouse with his calling and condition, 1
Cor. 7. 17. and take heed of judging one another, in doubtful or in different
things: look thou to thine own work, what have thou to do to judge another
man's servant, he stands or falls to his own Master, Romans 14. 4.

Besides, there are other particular uses may be made ^f this part of our
Creed: as first, in as much as the earth is the Lords, and consequently all
creatures are sanctified in him, and by his right, therefore we should not
disquiet our hearts with vain scruples, about the using, or not using of such
creatures as are supposed to have bin abused to Idolatry: for the Idol cannot
so infect any of the creatures, as to destroy Christ's right in them, and
therefore a Christian may use them, when the abuse is removed, without making
any question for conscience sake, 1. Cor. 10. 26.

Secondly, when the chastening hand of Christ our Lord is upon us, either in
our goods, or in our bodies, when he takes away any of these things from us,
we should patiently bear it, for as it was the Lord that gave them to us, so
it is the Lord that takes them from us, and therefore we should part with
them, and bless the Name of the Lord as Job did, Job 1. vlt.

Thirdly, the Apostle writing to the Ephesians, from this point that we have
but one God, and one Lord, does infer, that as we should have but one Faith,
so we should be of one mind and one heart,: we are all servants to one Lord,
and therefore should in all humbleness of mind love one another, and agree
one with another, and bear one with another, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5.

Fourthly, our Savior teaches us himself, from this part of our Creed, this
lesson, therefore not to give ambitious and flattering titles unto men, or to
humor proud persons, that arrogate to themselves glorious Titles, and hunt
after the applause of men: much less should we affect or receive such vain
titles our selves, seeing one is our Master and Lord even Christ, Mat. 23. 7,
8, 9, 10.

Fifthly, such as are Lords, or Masters, or Rulers over others, should carry
themselves humbly and justly, doing that which is just and equal to their
Subjects, Tenants, or Servants, for they have a Lord and Master in Heaven, that
will give to every man according to his works, Colos. 4. 1. Ephesians. 6. 11.

Lastly, since Christ is Lord, yea, Lord of Lords, therefore woe be to his
enemies they shall all be made his footstool, Psalm. 110. 1. and in these
wars against Antichrist, this is the comfort that the Lamb is the Lord of
Lords: and therefore these holy wars shall prosper, and the man of sin shall
be destroyed, Revel. 19.

The third Article.
Which was conceived of the holy Ghost.
LVKE 1. 35. And the Angel answered and said unto her: The holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall over shadow thee: therefore
also that holy thing, which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son
of God.
HItherto of the Titles of the Redeemer. His Incarnation follows, wherein
Faith beholds and wonders at two things, first, his Conception by the holy
Ghost, and secondly, his Birth of a Virgin. But before I open these two points,
it is needful to consider of his Incarnation in the general, and so:

1. What the Incarnation of Christ is. 2. The proofs that he was Incarnate. 3.
Who was Incarnate. 4. What was assumed in his Incarnation. 5. The time when he
was Incarnate. 6. Why he was Incarnate. 7. How he was Incarnate. 8. The effects
or consequents of his Incarnation.
1. The Incarnation of Christ, is a part of his abasement, whereby the Son of
God, after a most perfect manner, assumed the Nature of man into personal
union with his divine Nature. I call it a part of his abasement, because it was
a great Humiliation for God to become man, and so it may be reckoned with his
Passion following, save that in the same nature of Man he was afterward
exalted.

2. Now that God became man, or Christ the Son of God was likewise true man,
is proved by these and other express Scriptures, 1. Tim. 3. 16. Ioh. 1. 14.
Romans 1. 3. 4. Romans 9. 5. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Phil. 2. 6, 7.

3. If we ask who took the Nature of man, we must answer as it is in the
Creed, the Son of God, he that was Gods natural Son, and very God
himself, the second Person in Trinity, as also the former proofs show. It was
this Son by whom man was created at first, Colos. 1. 16. and therefore was the
fittest to restore unto man what he had lost, by making him again. And it was
most comely, that he that was the natural Son of God, by being made the
Son of man should make us sons of God, and give us the right of Adopted
sons, Ioh. 1. 12. and the second person in the Trinity alone is called the
Image of the Father, Colos. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. and therefore is most fit to
restore in us the Image of God which we had lost, and defaced by our sins.

Quest. But how can one person in the Trinity be Incarnate and not the other
two, seeing the divine nature is in each Quest.
person and cannot be divided?

Answ. Though the divine nature cannot be divided, yet it is after one manner
in the Father, and after another manner in Answ.
the Son, and so in the holy Ghost: for the divine nature is in the Father
(...), unbegotten, It is in the Son (...), communicated by generation, It is
in the holy Ghost (...) proceeding: Now the humane nature is assumed by the
divine, considered only as it is in the Son, and in the manner as the son
enioyes it. God the Father that eternal mind begets the Word, or perfect
Image of himself, which is the second person: Now to that Image of the Fathers
person is the nature of man united.

It is true, that the Incarnation being a work ad Extra, is common to all
three Persons in the Trinity: for about it all three work, and yet the Son
only did assume our Nature, though the Father also did work it by the holy
Ghost: Divines use to express it thus: three Virgins in one common work make
a garment which one of them only wears: so here the three persons make the
humane nature, which only the second Person puts on or assumes when it was
made.

The fourth thing is, what was assumed: and so in general, the matter assumed
was the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of Abraham, the seed of
David, the flesh of the Virgin Mary. In particular he took,

1. A true humane body, not the show of a body, not any divine or Celestial
body, but a true humane body, the very flesh, which the body of man consists of.

2. A true humane soul, as well as body. Mat. 26. 38. Mark 14. 34. Luke 23. 46.

3. The natural proprieties of a humane soul and body, for he was made like
unto us in all things, Heb. 2. 12. and 4. 18. By proprieties, I mean such
proprieties as agree to the humane nature now, or by Gods decree shall be
fastened upon the humane nature: as his body on earth was heavy, and needed
meat, and drink, and sleep, but now in Heaven is spiritual, shines as the
Sun, and needs no food.

4. The infirmities belonging unto our nature, both in soul and body: that
this may be rightly understood we must distinguish: as first, about the
infirmities bodily, some arise from an outward cause, some an inward: Those
that arise from outward causes, Christ bare only so many of them, as by the
counsel of God, or in respect of his Office, was needful for him to bear.
Such were the calamities and sorsorrowes inflicted upon him by others, and
borne by him as our High Priest. These that arise from an inward cause, do
either universally follow the whole nature of man, since it was fallen, as to
be subject to heat, cold, wearines, pain, or the like, or else are personal,
and arise not from the common sin of man, nor fall upon all men at all times,
but are found only in some men, such as are some kind of diseases: the former
sort Christ bare, not the latter. Now the infirmities of the soul are likewise
of two sorts, some vicious and detestable, as sins: others unblameable,
deserving rather pity then punishment, as to be ignorant of some things,
fear, sadness, anger, and the like: the former sort were not in Christ, Luke
1. 35. Heb. 4. 15. Ioh. 8. 46. The latter were, Luke 2. 52. Mark 13. 32. Mat
26. 37. John 11. 33. And those affections in Christ differed much from ours:
for his were easily ruled by right reason, but not so ours: his were carried
only to good objects, ours often to evil: Christ was troubled in his
affections, and so are we, but with great difference: His affections were
without sin: As a glass that is clean, and has clean water in it, if it be
shaked and tossed, yet there is no filth in the water: but if the glass be
foul, and mud be settled at the bottom of the water, if it be shaked, the
water is all foul: so is the difference between the trouble of Christ's
affections and ours.

The fifth point is, the time when the Son of God was Incarnate, and that was
not as soon as man was fallen, but long after, it being deferred by the Wisdom
of God of purpose, that man being left to himself might both feel his
disease, and see need to call for the remedy, and exercise his Faith in the
expectation of it, and that it might appear that all mankind was
unrecoverably fallen into mischief of themselves. And at that time was this
wonderful work done, when most fitly an example of the Justice of God toward
the Jews, and his mercy toward the Gentiles, might be showed: for at that
time, when the Word was made flesh, was the sin of the Jews almost full, and
among the Gentiles, in that ripe Age of the world were innumerable Elect ones
ready for the spiritual harvest, Matthew 9. 37. Luke 10. 2. John 4. 35. Gal. 4.
4.

The sixth point is, the Reasons why it was necessary he should be Incarnate:
and these are diverse: first, the Justice of God required, that satisfaction
should be made in the same nature that offended: secondly, for satisfaction,
the maledictions and curses of the Law, and in particular, death must be
inflicted upon him that will be our surety: Now as God he was impassible and
immortal, he could not suffer nor die: thirdly, he took not the Nature of
Angels but of man, that so he might be a merciful High Priest, and fit to
deal with man and for man, as concerned not only our necessities, but our
infirmities too, Heb. 2. 17. 18.

The seventh point is, how he was Incarnate, or the manner of the Incarnation,
how the Word was made flesh; This is a great Mystery, and cannot fully be
expressed or comprehended, especially by us in this estate of Mortality: yet
diverse things may be uttered: as,

1. He did not assume the nature of man, as it is extra subiectum, or a thing
that is conceived by the mind, or as it is common in the souls and bodies of
all men, but as the nature of a man is in one subject, in vno indiuiduo.

2. The nature of man as it was in the womb of the Virgin, was in the very
moment of the Conception joined to the Nature of God in personal union, so as
soul and body in Christ did not make a person, as it does in other men, but
did and do subsist in the person of the Son of God, being carried and vpheld
by the divine nature of Christ, so as both his natures make but one person in
him: and this may be gathered out of these places, Luke 1. 36. Esaias 7. 14.

3. We may approach to a better understanding of this union, if we consider it
by way of negation, how it differs from other unions: The word and the flesh
are made one, not in Essence, as the Persons in Trinity are one, nor in nature
as soul and body make a third nature, nor is this union carnal, as man and
wife are one: nor spiritual or mystical as God and the faithful are one, or
as Christ and the Church are one, but personal, the two natures being one in
person: Nor is the flesh in the Word, by simple inhabitation, as the sails are
in the ship; nor by affection, as two friends are one; nor in respect of joint
worship, as if only the humane nature had the honor to be worshipped with the
divine; nor in respect of Harmony or consent, as if only the divine and
humane will of Christ did agree; nor in respect of Title only, as if the flesh
of Christ had no more but the honor to be called by the same Title his
Divinity is, as the Son of God, or Christ, or the like; nor by mingling the
humane nature with the divine, to make a certain third thing: but the humane
nature is fastened to the divine nature in the unity of person, after an
inconceivable manner, so as the divine nature is not changed, nor either
nature altered, nor separated by distance one from another.

The eight point is, the effects of this personal union of the divine and
humane nature in this work of Incarnation. The effects I mean in Christ, not
in us. Now many things flow from this union: as,

1. The communication of proprieties; and that is, the attributing of such
things as are proper to either nature, unto the person of Christ, because that
these natures do subsist in that person: so as that is truly said of Christ,
which yet is to be understood with a respect to that nature unto which that
property does belong. Thus the Son of Man is said to have power to forgive
sins on earth, which is the propriety of the divine nature, Mat. 9. 6. and to
be called the Son of the most High, Luke 1. 32. Thus the Son of Man is
said to ascend where he was before: Now he was not in heaven in his humane
nature before, Ioh. 6. 62. and so he says, he was before Abraham was, Ioh. 8.
58. and his blood is called the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. The like speeches
are found in other Scriptures, as, Colos. 1. 17. Heb. 1. 2, etc.

2. The pouring out of gifts upon the humane nature, which were as great as
could be received by a created nature: and these were given both to the body
and soul of Christ. His body obtained the highest degree of perfection could
be fall a body: which glory (for our salvation) was withheld from his body
during his abode on earth, in respect of his office, and so his body was
subject to infirmities, passions of diverse sorts, and death, and burial: but
that work being finished which he undertook for us in his body, it now
shines in Heaven in greater glory then any bodily creatures do or shall
attain unto. Upon the soul of Christ by virtue of this union with the divine
Nature, were powered out gifts above the glory of the gifts which are in men or
Angels: and to make this a little better to appear, I will instance in his
knowledge and in his Charity.

There were diverse kinds of knowledge in Christ. He had an eternal and
uncreated knowledge and wisdom, which did belong only unto his divine Nature:
but it is the created knowledge belongs to this place: and that understanding
and knowledge, is either from experience, or from revelation, or from vision.

1 There was in our Savior an experimental knowledge, by which our Savior
knew all things could be known by the light of Nature: and though he had not
expeperience of all things, yet by reasoning from the like, or the contrary, or
from the causes or effects, he perceived things he had not experience of. As
by the infirmities he felt, and by the things he suffered, he knows all the
things we suffer in the full nature of them, Heb. 2. 18. and 4. 15. and in this
kind of wisdom it is that he was said to grow up in, or profit and increase
in, and in this kind of wisdom he was able to discern more then any man in
the world.

2 There was in our Savior a knowledge infused, which they call the knowledge
of Revelation, by which heavenly things are understood by a light they call the
light of grace. And by this knowledge our Savior did discern in his soul
spiritual things more exactly then ever man or Angel did: of this is spoken,
Esaias 11. 12.

3 The third kind of knowledge in Christ, is the knowledge by vision, which is
called the knowledge of the blessed in Heaven, by which God is seen face to
face, and in this Christ excells all men and Angels: for it is he that brings
all just men to this happiness of seeing God in Heaven, Heb. 2. 10. And
besides this personal vision, his soul is nearer unto God then men or Angels
can be: and therefore sees GOD more clearly then they can do: As a man that
has a good sight does see a thing that is hard by him more exactly then
another man that is farther off from it. Yea, this knowledge in the soul of
Christ does not fully comprehend God, for that which is infinite cannot be
comprehended by that which is finite: he sees God whole, that is, all that i^
in God, but not wholly, that is, not by an absolute comprehension of it. ^^det
Deum (...).


And in as much as all judgment is committed unto Christ, as the Son of man,
it is most probable, that as man he does see the thoughts of all men that are
to be judged by him as man, though not by any natural efficacy in his
understanding as man, yet by a supernatural infusion of light from his divine
nature, Ioh. 5. 27.

Thus of the gift of knowledge: Charity and love was powered out upon the soul
of CHRIST, above all the measures of Charity in men or Angels, John 13. 1.
Romans 5. 6, 7.

Thus of the gifts were powered out upon the humane nature of Christ: Yet by the
way it is not amiss to note, that certain gifts were not powered out upon
CHRIST, or not till his glorification: as faith and hope were not in CHRIST at
all: for in as much as the object of faith is things not seen, faith it self
could not be in CHRIST, who did enjoy the vision Heb. 11. 1. 1. Cor. 13. 10.
of GOD by virtue of the personal union, with the divine nature, even from the
beginning of his Incarnation, by that kind of knowledge which I called before
his knowledge of vision, or the knowledge of the blessed: yet to want faith did
not argue imperfection in CHRIST, but rather removed imperfection: as he that
wants Spectacles, when he needs them not, is no whit inferior to him that
uses Spectacles, because of the weakness of his sight. The like is to be
said of hope, for as Faith beholds things that are not seen, so hope looks to
things which are not yet had or possessed, Romans 8. 24. and the chief object of
both is the chief good, which is GOD: now CHRIST enjoyed GOD, yea, even in the
very instant of his death: but if we look to secondary objects, and by hope
understand an expectation of some kind of help promised by GOD, then such a
kind of hope may be granted to have been in Christ, Psalm 31. Now there were
certain gifts which our Savior had not till he went to Heaven, as
impassibility and immortality; on Earth he might and did suffer, and dye, but
now in Heaven he can neither suffer nor dye any more, Romans 6. 10. Thus of
the second effect of the personal union in the Incarnation.

The third effect belongs to both natures, and is the grace of office: for from
this union arises a fit Mediator and head of the Church, for in both natures
considered as united is Christ our Mediator: so as all things belonging to our
reconciliation and salvation, were done by Christ in both natures: yet were not
the Actions of the divine and humane nature so confounded, but that each nature
did that which belonged to that nature only: to speak distinctly, in every
thing done for our salvation, we must consider; First, the Worker, and that is
the Person of Christ, or Christ considered in his Person. Secondly, the things
by which he works, and that is his Natures, Divine and Humane. Thirdly, the
working it self, and that follows that Nature that does work. Fourthly, the
work or the thing outwardly done, which they call in another language (...).
Now this outward work was done by the diverse workings of each Nature,
concurring to dispatch the work: as to sacrifice for man's sin is one work,
yet to this work concur the workings of both Natures: the Humane Nature is
offered as the gift, and the Divine Nature does enable and sanctify the gift,
etc. As in Surgery, when a limb of a man is to be cut off, and burnt, or
seared up all at once, this is done by a Sword or other Instrument made red
hot: yet there we see in that fired sword, that it is still but one sword, and
yet there is two Natures in it, fire and iron, and these two Natures have
different forces, the one to cut and the other to burn, and there is two
workings diverse, the iron cuts, and the fire or heat burns, and yet the
outward work is but one work done at once, which is the searing of the Member
by cutting.

The last effect of this uniting of the divine nature to the humane is the
grace of honor and worship given to the humane nature: for the humane nature,
that in it self were not to be worshipped, being a creature, does partake of
the honor to receive divine worship, in as much as worship is directed to that
person that is both God and man. Thus of the last point in the explication,
which is the effects of the personal union in the work of the Incarnation.

The Uses follow, and are for information, and instruction, and consolation.

From the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation, we may be informed of diverse
things: as

1 Concerning the wonder of the person of our Savior: for here mortality and
immortality meet together in the same person: It is truly affirmed, that he is
created and uncreated; without beginning, and yet did begin in time; a Jew
according to the flesh, and yet GOD blessed over all for ever: GOD before all
ages, and yet man living amongst us; God before the flesh, God in flesh, and
God with flesh. By his Miracles showing his Divinity, and by his Sufferings
showing his Humanity. Having one generation without beginning, and another
generation without example. In the one he makes man, and in the other he
delivers man. The one was before man, and the other above man. Gods Son
becomes man's Son, and yet not changed from what he was, but assuming what he
was not. The taking of our low estate did not diminish the Majesty of his high
estate, for he so took what was ours, as he lost not what was his own,
joining both natures in such a bond, as neither Majesty consumed the inferior,
nor assumption diminished the superior in man changing the condition of other
men, and yet in himself remaining unchangeable. The manner of this union in
the Incarnation being a mystery to be believed, not discussed. That the Word
was made flesh I know, but how he was made so I know not: nor do any creature
know. The mystery hid from ages was reueiled in this last age, reueiled, I say,
that there was such a thing done, but not reueiled how it was done.

2 Concerning the glory of God shining in this work, and that especially in
two things. The one is in the way of communicating of himself to the creature.
The other is in contriuing the form of our redemption.

For the first, God being the chief good, it seemed good to him to communicate
himself to the creature, and that he has done three ways: First, by
communicating nature to the creature, that highest being, granting nature and
being with Nature, with great diversities of proprieties in that being. 2. By
communicating grace to the creature, which is the prerogative of certain
creatures that by Gods gift having powered out upon them a similitude and
likeness of God himself, whether on Earth or in Heaven. Now the third way is
above the former to be adored and admired for ever, and that is a way by which
God does not give any created gifts either of nature or grace, but he that is
the Creator and Lord of glory, does give himself to the creature, to make one
person with the creature. The first way God is communicated to all creatures,
the second way to the reasonable creature, the third way to Christ man. And yet
observe and wonder, for God in Christ has communicated himself to all
creatures; for in as much as the nature of man comprehends in an Epitome, or by
way of repetition, the substance of all that is in all other creatures, and
therefore is called a little world: when God assumes the Nature of man into
personal union with himself, he does after a sort exalt every creature, and
reduce it to himself.

Now for the other point, the glory of God in contriuing a way for the
salvation of mankind lost, does greatly appear in this work of the
Incarnation: for the debt of the first man was so great that none ought to pay
it but man, and none could pay it but God: and therefore God assumes man into
the unity of his person, that so man that in nature ought to pay, and could
not, in person might make full discharge. Again, all mankind it lies under
sin: the Justice of God will have all damned, the Mercy of God will have all
saved; now the wisdom of God moderateth between his Justice and Mercy, and by
this way satisfies both: His Justice is pleased, in giving a surety: so as the
offense being infinite in respect of the object, which is God, it was exhausted
by an infinite power in respect of the subject or the surety satisfying.

Secondly, the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation, should work in us by way of
Instruction: and so it should teach us in some things that respect Christ, and
in some things that respect Christians. In respect of Christ it should inflame
in us a vehement desire to be made like unto his nature: If he come so near
to us to take our nature, we should desire to approach to him to take his
nature: If he were made like unto us in infirmities, we should strive to be
made like unto him in grace and holiness: shall he descend to us, and shall
not we ascend to him? If he abase himself to t^ke the proprieties of our
Nature, how should we strive to be exalted, in taking to us the virtues of his
nature: and for our respect to other Christians, the Apostle from this Doctrine
tells the Philippians, in what things they should be like-minded to Christ: They
should learn of him, to be humble, and to show their love to their brethren,
though it were to deny themselves, and their own profit, or seeking the good
of others, and not their own good: which you may read there urged at large,
Phil 2. 6, 7.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of the Incarnation might be very comfortable to all the
godly: and so in diverse respects. First, in that he did take our Nature into
union with his divine Nature, we should joy in it: for is it not an admirable
privilege, that the nature of man is taken into such a society with the holy
Trinity, being a part of Christ, who is the second person in Trinity: who can
sufficiently admire the honor done to our nature, that it should now be one
with the blessed Trinity? Secondly, if we consider what he assumed. He took
my whole Nature, that I might be wholly saved, he left nothing of man which he
took not to himself. Thirdly, to comfort us in all infirmities and
distresses, he made himself like unto us: He was poor with Lazarus, wept
with Mary, thirsted with the woman of Samaria, was an hungry in the
wilderness, to satisfy for our eating in the Garden, he was in bonds with
Paul, he was tempted that he might succor us that are tempted; in all things
he became like to us, that we might not sink under the burden of our
infirmities or sufferings. Fourthly, it must it needs be a great deal of
comfort to us, to have such assurance given us of his love to us, that for our
sakes would join his Majesty to our vileness, his power to our weakness, his
immortality to our mortality, that being in the for me of God would for us
vouchsafe to be in the for me of a servant. Fifthly, it comforts us, in that it
may wonderfully settle our faith in believing in him: we may safely rest upon
him that wants not power to save us, seeing he is God, nor will to save us,
seeing he is one of us, a true man, that has had experience of our miseries.
Sixthly, it should greatly encourage our hearts in all our suits to God: seeing
our own flesh and blood sits at the right hand of God, what can we ask the
Father in his Name that will be denied? He that was made like to us in
suffering, will never be strange to us in praying. He that became our brother
by Incarnation, will not show himself a stranger in the business of
Intercession. Lastly, in the hope of our glorification in Heaven we receive
hence great comfort: for therefore: did the Son of God become the Son of
man on earth, that the Sons of men might become the Sons of God in Heaven.

Lastly, this Doctrine also is not without terror to wicked men that will not
receive him, whom GOD has sent amongst them: that God which has been so
wonderful in sending his Son to live amongst us in our nature, if we will
not believe in him, and strive to be like to him, will make himself wonderful
in our destruction. This will be the condemnation of the world, that so great a
light came into the world, and the world received it not.

Hitherto of the Incarnation in general. Now we come to consider of the parts
of his Incarnation, viz. his conception by the Holy Ghost, and his birth of the
Virgin Mary.

One thing is common to both these parts, (viz.) the anunciation of them by an
Angel: God sent an Angel from Heaven to signify both these wonders in the
Incarnation of our Savior: and the Ministry of an Angel is used in the
beginning of our redemption, by the Incarnation of our Savior, partly because
as in our perdition an evil angel came to the woman in the Serpent, so would
God have a good Angel come to the woman to treat with her about our
Redemption: and partly because good Angels were in some respects witnesses in
the work of our Redemption: for thereby the places amongst the Angels made
void by the fall of devils, are by the Redeemer to be supplied by holy men, and
withal the Angels receiving their confirmation in goodness from Christ, are
now actually to subject themselves together with Elect men under that one Head,
Christ Jesus.

Now concerning the Conception, which is the first part of Incarnation, these
things are to be considered. 1. The proofs that there was such a conception.
2. Who was so conceived. 3. Of whom he was so conceived. 4. What was done by
the Holy Ghost in this conception. 5. How it was done. 6. When it was done. 7.
The effects of this conception in respect of us. 8. Why it was necessary he
should be thus conceived 9. Where the Body of CHRIST was when it was thus
conceived. 10. A question about the Virgin Mary: and lastly, the Uses of all.

For the first, that our Savior was conceived of the Holy Ghost, is proved by
this Text, Luke 1. 35. as also Mat. 1. 18, 20. and Romans 1. 3, 4.

For the second, if we respect the matter conceived, then Christ man was
conceived; but if we respect the person conceived, the second Person in the
Trinity was conceived in the womb of the Virgin, for so it is said in this
Text, that it was the Son of the most High: and the Prophet Esaias says, it was
Emmanuel, God with us: for though the Virgin did not give the divine Nature to
Christ: yet the person that receives the humane Nature in her womb was the
Son of God.

Ob. Then it seems the whole divine Essence was conceived, for the whole
divine Essence was in the second Person in the Trinity.
Answ. This Incarnation was not according to his Essence, but according to his
person: the person only assumed our nature in this Conception, Luke 1. 31. 32.
35. Romans 9. 5. 1. Tim. 3. 16. and therefore to speak properly, we may not say
that in this conception the humane nature began to be (for that has no
subsistence in it self) but the Person began to be then in the humane nature:
Tylen.

For the third, he was conceived of the holy Ghost as the former proofs show:
He was not conceived as other men be, by propagation or by generation in the
conjunction of man and woman, but without man by the working of the holy Ghost.

Ob. If he were conceived of the holy Ghost, then the holy Ghost Object.
was his Father: and the rather, because in the Original the proposition
imports, that this Conception was not only by him, but of him.
Answ. The holy Ghost did work this Conception not materially, Answ.
but effectually, by causing it to be, not by giving matter out of himself to
the Nature of Christ. As Damascen said, the holy Ghost begets not
spermatically but operatiuely. And Bernard says, that Christ was conceived not
of the substance, but of the power, not by any generation, but by the
appointment and benediction of the holy Ghost: Romans 11. vlt. all things are
said to be of God: Now it were senseless therefore to conclude, that God is
the Father of all things: for though he made all things, yet he did not make
them out of his own substance: for he is Father that makes a thing to be out of
his own substance: so the holy Ghost did not make the humane Nature of Christ.

For the fourth, there were two things done by the holy Ghost in this
conception: the first was the production of the humane Nature, the other was
the uniting of it to the second Person in the Trinity: The first of these is
most properly the work of the holy Ghost, the second, but in some respects, for
the second Person in Trinity did assume the matter so prepared, and wrought by
the holy Ghost.

The humane nature produced was both the body and soul of our Savior; now in
the production of the body of Christ there are two things to be considered:
first, the preparation of the matter of his body: secondly, the sanctification
of it. The matter of the body of Christ prepared in the conception, was the
very substance of the flesh of the Virgin, that is the seed or purest blood of
the Virgin separated by the holy Ghost, and carried to the place of conception,
and therefore is Christ called the fruit of her womb, Luke 1. 42 The
sanctification of this matter contains in it two things: first, the washing of
that substance from the stain of sin with which it was infected by nature, so
as now it should never more have any spot or stain of sin in it, and the
stopping of the imputation of Adams sin: secondly the infusion of all
pureness and holiness, which belongs unto the soul as well as the body, in
that very moment it was joined to the body: Now that Christ was conceived
without sin, of that there was no sin in that flesh when it became the flesh
of Christ, is manifest by these Scriptures: he was made like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15. and Romans 8. 3. he was said to be made
only in the similitude of sinful flesh. Against this diverse things are
objected: as,

Ob. 1. That the Scripture says, that Christ was made sin 1. Object.
for us.
Answ. He was made sin for us, as he was made a Sacrifice for sin: so the
sin offerings in the Old Testament were called Answ.
sin. Again, he was made sin for us by imputation, because our sins were
charged upon him, but he had no sin in his Nature, 1. Pet. 2. 21.

Ob. 2. Whosoever were in Adam, sinned in Adam, Rom 5. 12. 2. Object.
But Christ was in Adam as appears by the Genealogy which is drawn up even
to Adam, Luke 3.
Answ. It is not true, that all that were in Adam sinned in him: Answ.
for they only sinned that were in him, not only in respect of the substance
of the flesh, but in respect of the carnal manner by which ordinarily man is
begotten by man, but Christ was in Adam in respect of the substance of his
flesh, but not in respect of the manner of propagation by him, because he was
conceived without the seed of man, and therefore sinned not in Adam: or thus:
Original sin is derived unto Adams Posterity by propagation only, now Christ
to prevent that, came into the world by this wonderful conception by the holy
Ghost. Paul says, not of one man, but by one man sin entered into the world:
Christ is only from Adam, other men are from him in respect of substance, and
by him in respect of propagation.

Ob. 3. But the flesh of the Virgin Mary was sinful, and therefore 3. Object.
his flesh must needs be so.
Answ. That flesh of hers was first sanctified, made clean by the Answ.
holy Ghost, before it was the flesh of Christ.

Ob. 4. If it be granted, corruption of nature was not in Christ, yet there is
another part of Original sin, and that is guiltiness 4. Object.
of Adams sin in Paradise, for all his posterity being in him, sinned in him
as Leui paid Tithes in Abraham: and therefore that flesh of Christ sinned in
Adam, and was guilty of Adams particular offense, though it never was
propagated; for propagation caries down only corruption of nature, or an
evil disposition to sin after conception.

Answ. If Adams offense be imputed to none but to such as come of him by
propagation, as the Apostle imports, Romans 5. 12. Answ.
then this scruple is so avoided: secondly, does not the sanctification of that
flesh in the womb of the Virgin, cleanse it from Adams actual offense, as well
as from evil disposition: thirdly, what inconvenience will follow, if we grant
that Adams sin was imputed to Christ? so as we understand it in respect of the
Malediction: for Christ was a surety for all sins, Adams sin, and all the sin
of his posterity.

Ob. 5. Upon whomsoever death came, he sinned, but death 5. Object.
came upon Christ, therefore it seems he sinned.
Answ. It is true, that whomsoever death by his own power Answ.
does prevail against, that party surely sinned: because death is the wages of
sin: But death did not exercise any power over Christ: for he was not
compelled to die, but laid down his own life voluntarily, John 10. 17. 18.
besides, death befell him not as a sinner, but as a surety for sin, and so
though death came upon him for sin, yet it was not for his sin, but for
other men's.

The Papists to avoid sin in the flesh of Christ, say that the Virgin Mary
was conceived without sin, and so it came to pass, that Christ was without
sin: But this is a senseless do^age: for first, where do they prove it by
Scripture that she was without sin? Secondly, if she were conceived without
sin, then her parents were so too, and if her parents, then theirs, and so
into an infinite: thirdly, then what needed Christ this conception by the holy
Ghost.

Thus of the producing of the body of Christ: His soul was produced as the
souls of other men are, that is, It was immediately created by the holy Ghost,
and infused into his body: only there is difference amongst divines about the
time of the infusing of the soul of Christ: for in the ordinary course,
Nature proceeds in this manner: first, there is the mass of blood or seed
received in the womb, but there is no parts of a body framed at the first:
after a certain number of weeks, nature forms that substance into the parts
of the body distinctly, but yet it is without life: then is the soul infused,
when the body is organicall, and so it is quickened and a true man, it is not
before a man, but Embryo as they call it: Now the question is, how Christ could
receive that imperfect Embryo or the flesh at the first conception, seeing it
was not a perfect humane Nature? To this some answer, that our Savior did not
follow the ordinary course of taking flesh, as other men do, but in the very
instant of the conception, his body was made organical, and had perfect
members, and the soul infused at that instant also: and their reason is this,
because the Son of God did not become a person to any thing but the Manhood
of Christ: Now the Manhood must needs have a reasonable soul and body formed,
and organicall: else we must say, that something did subsist in the Person of
his divine Nature that was not man, as Embryo or the lump unformed, and not
animated was.

Besides, when God made a man by the power of the holy Ghost, without the seed
of man, he made him perfect at one instant, and every way formed in all parts:
as when he made Adam and Eve, they were in an instant made perfect in soul and
body.

Other Divines conceive that this opinion cannot be true, because Christ was
made in all things like unto us, sin only excepted, now there could be no
sin in that ordinary course of Nature, if original sin be removed as it
was in Christ. Now in the course of Nature: first, that which is material is
formed, as it were the house of the soul, and then the soul is infused, not
only as the guest of it, but as the form and life of it: and so it must be in
Christ. Now for the first reason they answer, that the Hypostatical union in
the person of Christ, was so made above nature, as withal, Christ assumed that
which belonged to the nature of man according to the course of Nature: and so
first the seed, and then the body formed, and the soul infused according to
nature into that body so as that flesh before the coming in of the soul did
subsist in the Word, as it did after the soul was infused: for the Word took
our Nature, which is not hindered by the absence or presence of the soul: as
when Christ was dead, his soul was in his Fathers hands, and his flesh was
shut up in the grave, and was not quickened then by the soul, yet the flesh of
Christ without the soul and life did subsist in the word, as well as it did
before or after: The other reason is of no force, for God did not make our
first Parents so out of necessity, but out of the good pleasure of his will,
not binding himself to that frame of working for all times afterward.

And thus of the production of the humane nature: The assumption of that Nature
into personal union with the word follows: and the sum of that which we
are to believe concerning this Mystery is, that the whole nature of man in that
particular subject soul and body, with all mere natural faculties, and
parts, yea, and infirmities, was taken into an unspeakable and eternal
personal union with the divine nature of Christ: There was nothing which was
ours (sin excepted) which was not by the holy Ghost united to the word: for
as Christ had all that God the Father had praeter ignascentiam, save that he
was not unbegotten: so he had all that Adam had, sola except a peccantia, save
that he was without sin, as a Father said: only for the manner of this
assuming of our nature divines conceive, that the word was joined to the soul
immediately, and to the body mediately, that is, by means of the soul.

And thus of the fourth point: The fifth is, The manner of the conception, how
the holy Ghost did it: and that in respect of the perfect understanding is
simply above the reach of any creature, especially any mortal creature: if it
be true of our conception in the womb, that we are fearfully and wonderfully
made, as is said, Psalm. 139. 13. then it must needs be much more true of
Christ's conception and forming: but a certain glimpse of it is given us by two
forms of speech used in this Text, Luke 1. 35.

The first is: the holy Ghost shall come upon thee: the other is the power of
the most high shall ouershadow thee: by the first form of speech is noted the
wonder of the work, that it was not done, by any natural means, but
extraordinarily above the course of nature, by the holy Ghost, and that it was
done after a most pure and divine manner: about which a Father says, Oh most
pure conjunction without filth, where speech is the husband, and ear is the
wife, meaning that she conceived upon the speech and hearing of the promise,
as soon as she had given her matrimonial consent as it were: the ouershadowing
by the power of the most High imports, that is was not done spermatically, but
operatiuely, and that the holy Ghost did this by a special power of working,
never any such thing having bin done before: as also it imports that the work
was most secret and mystical, so as the Virgin being covered as with a cloud,
could not her self tell how it was done: and that though God did work this
with a special excellency of glory, yet his Majesty should not overcome her,
but it should be as it were clouded: and lastly, that that holy thing which was
to be conceived in her, and borne by her, should be protected and kept safe, as
the greatest treasure God had care of, or did give unto men.

The sixth thing is, why it was necessary Christ should be so conceived after
such a wonderful manner, and with so much holiness and sanctification: I answer
for two evident Reasons: for first, if his body had not bin most pure, it had
not bin fit to be joined in personal union with the Word. And secondly, if he
had bin conceived in sin, as other men are, he could not have bin a Savior
to us, because then he would have needed a Savior for himself.

The seventh thing is the time when the Virgin conceived, and that was
immediately upon the speech of the Angel and her own consent to it: which was
the twenty five of March, the day which is called the Annuntiation of the
Virgin Mary: and one may wonder why that day should not rather be called the
day of the conception of Christ, then of the Annuntiation of the Virgin.

The eighth point is, the effects of this conception in respect of us, and so
the first effect is the hiding of the impurity of our conception from the sight
of God, and satisfying Gods Justice for our original sin: for the holiness
of Christ's conception, is the first and chief part of the righteousness
imputed to us: All his righteousness is ours, and so the holiness of his
conception, in which he was qualified with all the habits of virtue or piety,
might constitute perfect holiness of nature: All his righteous actions which
he did in obedience to the law flow from these habits of virtue infused in his
conception, and therefore I call it the first and chief part of the
righteousness imputed to us, as that which covers the unrighteousness of our
natures, yea, after a sort it pacifies, and satisfied for our offense, and so
begins his passive obedience to God: as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. 5, etc.
wherefore when he entered into the world he said, sacrifice and burnt offerings
thou would not, but a body thou had prepared me, etc.

The second effect, is our spiritual life and conception: for therefore was he
conceived by the holy Ghost, and quickened in the womb of the Virgin, that from
his life, the power of our spiritual forming and regeneration might proceed,
as from him that took life himself amongst us that he might become Lord of
life, and the true original of spiritual and eternal life of God: for the
saine spirit that formed Christ in the womb, does beget us again that we
might live with him, Ioh. 1. 12, 13.

The ninth thing is that question, whether it may be safely said, that Mary was
the Mother of God (...): I answer, if we understand it so grossly, as to
think she was the Mother of the Godhead of Christ, it were not only
erroneous but blasphemous: and yet it is true, that she was the Mother of God,
because she was not only Mother of him that was God as well as Man, but also
God was incarnate in her womb, God did not take flesh in heaven, or in any
other place, but in her womb only.

Lastly, it is not unprofitable to consider, how the being of the body of
Christ, differs from other respects of the being of the same body. The body of
Christ is in Heaven Locally, it is in the Word substantially, it is in the
Sacrament mystically, It is in the hearts of every believer spiritually, and
was in the womb of the Virgin by a natural and circumscriptible manner of
presence.

The uses follow: and so,

1 They are confuted that say, He took not his Body of the Virgin, but brought
it from Heaven. They object, that in John 3. 13. it is said, that Christ
descended from Heaven, and that verse 23. and 31. He said, he was from above,
and that 1 Cor. 15. 47. He is said to be the Lord from Heaven. Answ. None of
these places say, That he brought his body from Heaven. The words are true of
the person of Christ, that he descended from Heaven when he abased himself to
take upon him the form of a servant: and if they were true of his humane
nature, yet could signify no more but that he was conceived after a heavenly
manner, and not by carnal generation, by the working of the Holy Ghost who
came down from Heaven upon the Virgin. If they reply it must needs be true,
that he descended in the same nature he ascended, as the Apostle says, Ephesians.
4. 9, 10. Answ. The Apostle only shows that he was abased, to show himself
in the form of a servant, and to suffer extreme things, and therefore was
exalted to be Lord of al. And besides, these heretics they are hence
confuted, that said Christ had not a true body, but only a body in appearance.
These object that Christ appeared in the old Testament in a fantastical body,
and not in a body indeed. Answ. That is false too: for it was a true
substantial body he assumed and created for the time: but were that granted,
yet the body he showed in the New Testament, has abundant testimony thas it
was a true natural body, Ioh. 1. 14. 1. Ioh. 1. 1. 2. Again, they say out of
the Philip. 2. 7. and Romans 8.3. and Dan. 7. 13. that he was only in the
likeness of a man. I answer, these places are not all of one sense: for in
Daniel he was said to be like the Son of Man, because he was not yet incarnate:
and Romans 8. He is not said to be in the likeness of flesh, but of sinful
flesh, being reckoned amongst sinners, and being made a sacrifice for sin:
and in the Philippians, he does not show what the substance of his Nature was,
but what his abasement was, that he did not only take our Nature, but made
himself in that nature like to the most abject of men, even to the poorest
servant, when he was heir of all things, and so this likeness of his is
expounded, Heb. 2. 14. 17, and 4. 15.

Secondly, hence we may inform our selves of the wonder of this Creation of
God: here is the beginning of a new Creation: here is a Son that had no
Mother as he was God, and no Father as he was Man. If it be objected, that he
is called the Son of Man, and so had an earthly Father: I answer, that he is
called the Son of Man, because he took our nature of the substance of the
Virgin, I mean it of her flesh: and if it be on the contrary objected, that he
is in this Text called the Son of the most High, and so had God or the holy
Ghost to be his Father: I answer, he is called the Son of the most High as
the second person in Trinity, which Title of Son is given to the Nature he
received from the Virgin because it had no substance but in the person of him
that was the natural Son of God.

There are other uses for instruction: for,

1. The ouershadowing shows that we must not curiously pry into the glorious
manner of his conception: we must believe it was so, but not search how it was
so.

2. The knowledge of this Article, may prepare us to believe the next, (viz.)
that Christ was borne of a Virgin: for seeing he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, it cannot be hard that he should be borne of a Virgin, for he that
wrought this conception is he that works all things, and nothing is
impossible to him.

There is also comfort in this Doctrine.

1 In particular, to women that conceive and bear children, especially if they
be true Christians. The very remembrance of this, that the Savior of the world
was conceived and borne of a woman, should sweeten their fears and sorrows,
about or after their conceptions, or in the birth.

2 In general, it may comfort all the godly, to see in this conception a
medicine for their original sin, and all the evils that cleave to their
Nature: for as it was showed before, to this end he was conceived without
sin, and sanctified in his Nature, that thereby he might justify us before
God from the evils cleave to our natures.

And thus of the first part of his Incarnation, viz. his conception of the holy
Ghost, his birth of the Virgin Mary follows: In which words of the Creed, the
thing affirmed is the birth of Christ, the person by whom it is, is described
by her condition, she was a Virgin, and by her name she was Mary, and her name
is added to bring to our remembrance the Genealogy of Christ; who took flesh
of her that was of the seed of David in a right Lineage, that thereby the
promises made to the Fathers might be accomplished.

Now concerning the Birth of Christ, we must know that he is said to be borne
three ways: Of his Father, and of his Mother, and in the mind of Man; of his
Father he is borne eternally, of his Mother temporally, in the mind of man
spiritually: In Christ there are three things which have Relation to his
Nativity, Deity, Flesh, and Spirit: of his Father, he is borne God, of his
Mother, Flesh, and in the mind of Man, Spirit, so as this latter way be
understood Metaphorically: of his Father he was borne ever, of his Mother he
is borne once, and in the mind of Man he is borne often. According to divine
Nativity he has a Father without a Mother: according to humane Nativity he
has a Mother without a Father: and according to his spiritual Nativity he
has both Father and Mother, according to that saying of his, he that does my
Fathers will, is my Father and my Mother.

In the birth of Christ God was manifested in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
manifested I say three ways: as he was before three ways hid; first, from out
of the bosom of his Father in whom he was covered: secondly, from under the
shadows of the Law in which he was prefigured: thirdly, from the womb of his
Mother in which he was formed.

The effects of the Nativity of Christ were diverse: for first, in respect of
God himself, the effect was his glory, Luke 2. 14. The glory I say of his
truth, wisdom, goodness, and Justice: secondly, in respect of godly men, the
effect is, their Salvation, because he was borne to be a Propher, Priest, and
King, even to effect all things that might tend to their Salvation, Acts 4. 12.
and in particular, peace was a special effect of his Manifestation in the
flesh, Luke 2. 14. Peace I say above us with God, Peace within, with our own
consciences, and peace about us with men and neighbors, and peace below us in
respect of Satan and Hell, because we are delivered from their power and
fury. What shall I say, he was borne into natural life, that we might be
borne again into eternal life: thirdly, in respect of the wicked, the effect
of his Birth was their Judgment: for he was borne for the falling of many in
Israel, Luke 2. 34. and this is the condemnation of the world, that light is
come into the world, and the world comprehended it not, Ioh. 1. and that God
should send his own Son to be the light, and yet men loved darkness more
then light, Ioh. 3. 19.

The place where our Savior was borne was Bethlehem, which howsoever it fell
out by accident to be there in respect of the mother, which did not by any
purpose of her own choose that place, yet indeed it was the place forespoken
of by the Prophet, Mich. 5. 2. and was appointed of purpose by the Counsel and
providence of God, that even hence the godly might be warned of the fulfilling
of the promise made to David the Bethlemite, Luke 2. 4.

The time when he was borne, was the time agreeing with the prophetical
Oracles, called the fullness of time, Gal 4. 4. The time when the Scepter was
departed from Judah, an Idumaean now sitting at the Stern, Genesis 49. 10. A time
when the Jewish Church and Commonwealth was brought so low, as there was no
help to be expected but from Heaven.

The entertainment he had at the time of his birth was very poor and mean,
he was borne of a poor Mother, and he was borne so poor, that he might make
us rich, 2 Cor. 8. and that he might thereby trample under his feet as vile
that vain pride of wordly men, that so much brag of their worldly glory, and
nobility of their birth. And when he might not have a place in the Inn, he
was not ashamed to lie in a Manger, that by choosing the weak things of this
world, he might confound the mighty, and might prepare a place for us, and many
Mansions in his Fathers house.

In the manifestation of the Nativity of Christ God showed marvelous wisdom,
who to show himself to be no respecter of persons, and that he brought this
light into the world for all sorts of men: He showed it both to the Shepherds
and to the wise men, the one Israelites, the other Gentiles, the one poor and
simple, the other rich and wise, the one near, the other far of, both sorts
to be joined upon the same corner stone. The same light appeared to Anna, a
woman, as well as to Simeon, that just man, that it might be evident, that in
him that was then borne there was neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, Jew
nor Gentle, Male nor Female, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11.

Thus of his birth in general, his birth of a Virgin follows. Now that he was
born of a Virgin is evidently proved, not only by the History of the Gospel,
but by the Prophecy of God himself in Paradise, when he said, The seed of
the woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. And by the prophecy of
Jacob the Patriarch, Genesis 49. 10. Where Christ is named Shiloh, that is, the
Son of his Secundines, not the Son of his loins; now the Secundines belong
to the Nature of the woman, not to the man: and by the Prophecy of Esaias, who
said, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, Esaias 7. 14. And it was prefigured by the
stone cut out of the Mountain without any hands, Dan. 2. And it was published
by the Angel Gabriel, Luke 1. 31. The reasons why he was borne of a woman
without a man have been showed before. It is a work most wonderful: He is
borne in the arms of a woman, that himself bears up the whole world in the
hand of his power.

Men has been produced four ways: First, without either man or woman, as
Adam was. 2. Without woman, as Eve was. 3. Without man, as Christ was. 4. With
man and woman, as all other men were.

Christ was to the Virgin a Son and her first borne. He was called her first
borne, not because she had any sons afterward, but because he was borne
first, though he were her only Son. Christ's brethren were his Kinsmen; nor
does the term first borne import any following, for the first borne in Law
were so called before they knew whether they should have a second child; and
it is a godly profession of Divines in all ages, that she was a Virgin before
birth, and in the birth, and after the birth: though this latter be no Article
of faith or principle of Religion.

The Bread of Life was borne in the house of bread, and the most fruit-bearing
Nativity was performed in Bethlehem, Ephratah, (.i.) In a most fruitful place,
and he was borne in a strange place, as he might bring us banished men into our
true Country.

To conclude, the Birth of Christ was both ordinary and wonderful: It was
ordinary, that he was carried in the womb of his Mother the ordinary time, and
was brought forth at the ordinary time: but it was wonderful both in respect
of the signs that fell out about the time of it, and most of all, that his
Mother was a Virgin. The signs were very miraculous, as the rising of the Star
in the East, the Angelical Music in the Air, and the great Light, and the
publication of it by Angels. Yea, the signs were very strange among the
Gentiles: for a public voice was heard, the great God is now about to be
borne. At Rome was the likeness of a woman carrying a child in her arms
seen about the Sun. And when Augustus asked Sibilla about a Comet was then
seen: she answered, This Child is greater then thou, adore thou him: many
such strange things are observed by Writers.

The end of the third Article.
The fourth Article of the Creed.
ESAIAS 53. 4. First part of the Verse. He suffered under Pontius Pilate.
HItherto of the Title and Incarnation of our Redeemer: his Humiliation
follows, in the next Articles: where the Creed proceeds in this order. First
his abasement is set down in the sum or general consideration of it, in
these words, He suffered under Pontius Pilate. Then is mentioned diverse of the
chief parts of his sufferings, viz. He was crucified, dead, and buried, and
descended into Hell. In the sum of all, he shows what befell him, and when:
what befell him, and so he suffered, meaning that he was put to endure misery:
and when he suffered, and that was under* Pontius Pilate: and that time is
especially mentioned for two Reasons: 1. Because the chiefest parts of his
sufferings then fell out. 2. Because thereby the Christian Churches have
occasion to observe the fulfilling of the old Prophecies at the time of Christ's
coming, and suffering in the flesh: for Jacob said, that Shiloh must come when
the Scepter was departed from Judah, Genesis 49. And the Prophet Esaias said, that
the bud or branch should arise and grow, when the tree of Iesse and his house
was so wasted, as nothing was left but the bare stock or root, Esaias 11. 1.
This was now fulfilled, for Pontius Pilate was Governor of Judah under the
Roman Emperor, and none of the Tribe or Stock of David bare any office of
government in that State: God is true in his words, and when the Church seems
to be most afflicted and forlorn, God can make salvation to appear: and
therefore in the most desperate afflictions we should learn to trust upon
God, who will not forsake his people for ever: and yet another thing may be
noted too, and that is, that when God did send his Son to deliver his people,
it was not to deliver them from temporal distress, but to bring them
spiritual and eternal salvation, and yet they had no cause to complain. So
it may be with us: it is enough in desperate distresses, if God will do good
to our souls, though he do not for the time release or free our bodies. Thus
of that circumstance of the time, only for the titles here given to this Ruler,
know that Pilate was his proper name, and Pontius he is called of the place
where he was borne, which was Pontia, an Island that lay near to Italy: This
man was Governor after Valerius Cratus, and come into his place about eight
years before Christ died upon the Cross. And for the reason why the time is
described by the time of this government, we must know that the Romans did use
to keep the reckoning of times by the times of their Governors: as by Consuls
in Rome, so by Proconsuls or Deputies in the Countries subject to them: as we
reckon by the reigns of our Kings. See Luke 3. 1.

And thus of the order and sense of this part of the Creed. One thing may be
noted, from the coherence of these Articles with those that follow. For we may
observe, that Christ was first humbled, and then exalted: God first made him
suffer grievous things in this life, and then gave him a Name above all names
in heaven. For as it is registered in the Creed, so is it reported in the
Scripture, and so was it foretold, and it was convenient it should be so, 1
Pet. 1. 11. Luke 24. 26. and this is profitable for us to know, for it should
persuade us to patience and hope in all our sufferings. We should be willing to
suffer as well as Christ, for we were predestined to be made like unto Christ
in this very thing, Romans 8. 29. and Christ did suffer to leave us an ensample,
that we should walk in his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 20. And the more patient should we
be, seeing he suffered far more extreme things than we can do: and in all
our sufferings we should have hope, because we have a promise, that if we
suffer with him, we shall reign with him also, 2 Timothy 2. 12. and then what
comparison can there be between our light afflictions on earth, and that
eternal glory in heaven, Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17. And if we be not afflicted
with him, what are we but bastards and not sons; for if God spared not his
natural Son, how can he spare us that are but adopted sons?

And thus of the Coherence.

Yet before I come to the explication of the Doctrine of the Passion, a
question may be moved concerning something that is wanting in the words of the
Creed, and that is about the active obedience of Christ: for here is mention
only made of his Passion: now did Christ do nothing worthy our faith but
only suffer? Or if he did, why does not the Creed take notice of it? For
answer hereunto, we must know, that besides the suffering of the punishment of
our sins threatened by the Law, our Savior did also absolutely fulfill the
whole Law of God, by an exact and universal obedience: which was necessary for
him to do for diverse reasons. For first his holiness of Nature and life made
his sufferings the more acceptable and meritorious, the lamb is not a meet
sacrifice if it be not unspotted, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. nor the Priest fit to
offer, if he be not holy and separate from sinners. Secondly, he thereby leaves
us a pattern that we should follow his virtue, and strive to learn of him to
obey the Law. Thirdly and chiefly, that he might bring in a righteousness that
was able to justify us, that had no righteousness of out own: for by the
obedience of that one Man many are justified, Romans 5. 19. and he was the end of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

Now this point must not be wanting to our Creed, because it is the chief
comfort of our lives against the sense of our own unrighteousness, and
defects of Holiness: It is the joy of our Hearts, that we may ever say of
Jesus, he is the Lord our righteousness, and that he is made unto us of God,
righteousness, Ier. 23. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 5. 19. And
therefore this great and free gift of God, we must not only believe, but
acknowledge and profess. Again, we should always be stirred up from the
meditation of the singular holiness of heart and life which was in Christ, to
strive to be holy, as he is holy: for though a perfect obedience be not
required of us in the new Gouenant, yet this righteousness of Christ is
bestowed upon those men only, that walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8. 3, 4.

Now for the reasons why this Article of Christ's active obedience was not
mentioned in the Creed, I cannot well tell what they were, unless it were for
breuities sake, or because it is implied in his passive obedience: for it is
true that we must not divide his active and passive obedience the one from the
other, because as they meet both in one Savior, so they are both jointly
imputed to us, to make up that one work of our Justification.

It remains now that I enter upon the explication of the sufferings of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and so there be Six things of great weight and
profit to be distinctly considered of: 1. Who suffered. 2. From whom he
suffered. 3. For whom he suffered. 4. Why it was needful he should suffer. 5.
What he suffered. 6. How he suffered.


For the first, he that suffered is described in the words next before in the
Creed, it was Jesus Christ, the only Son of Godour Lord, who was so
wonderfully conceived and borne. For the understanding whereof, we must
conceive that the Passion of Christ belongs to his Person, and so is attributed
in respect of the Person to both Natures, for though in his divine Nature he
cannot suffer, because he is Immutable, nor can die, because he is Immortal,
and therefore properly suffers but in his humane Nature; yet in respect of the
Person suffering, his sufferings belong even to the divine Nature: for if the
flesh be the flesh of the Word, then must also the sufferings of the flesh, be
the sufferings of the Word also: for neither was the Word disioyned from the
flesh, nor the flesh severed from the Word. Nor was there any hurt done to the
Nature that is inviolable, by that which was to be suffered in the Nature
passible. If the Sun shine upon a piece of timber, though an axe cut the
timber, yet the Sun remains impassible; so is it when the Divinity is
joined to the suffering flesh of Christ: yet I say in respect of the personal
union, the suffering is also attributed to the divine Nature. Thus the
Scripture says, God redeemed the Church with his blood, Act. 20. 28. and the
Lord of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 8. So then, the sum of all is, that
the Son of God did suffer, in that Nature he could suffer in: and this point
may serve for very many uses. As,

1. We may stand still, and with amazement gaze and wonder at the glory of this
Mystery imported in this first point. What is this, the eyes of our faith
behold? was it ever thus seen before? The Maker of man is made Man, and while
he rules the Stars, he suckes the breasts: He that is Bread, hungereth; He
that is the eternal Fountain, is athirst: He that is the Way, is weary; He
that is the Truth, is obscured by false witnesses: He that is the Judge of
quick and dead, is judged by a mortal Judge: He that is Righteousness
himself, is condemned by the unrighteous: He that is the God of all Order, is
beaten with rods: He that is the Power of God, is made weak: He that is
Salvation, is wounded: and He that is Life, dies.

2. By the Evidence of this Truth, the Christian Church draw out those
Heretics were called Patripassiani, that held that God the Father suffered,
and that the terms of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, did note but one Person
only. Which gross Heresy as it is confuted by the Doctrine of the Trinity
before, so by this Doctrine contained in this branch of this Article.

3. We may hence gather how hateful sin is, that can make God suffer, that
can abase so fearfully (as you shall hear afterward) the very Son of God,
who yet did no sin, but was only a surety (as is to be showed) yea it makes
him suffer from his own natural Father: so vile a thing is sin, and so just
is God. What can be more senseless than the heart of man, that from hence does
not clearly see the ugly and monstrous nature of sin, and the most
unavoidable justice of God, in punishing sin? Does Christ suffer, and from
his own Father, and is it possible any of us should be so bewitched as to go
on in sin, and yet think there is such mercy in God as to spare him, though
he forsake not his evil ways?

4. Is Gods Son thus abased for us, and do not we pity him? Are not our
stony hearts melted with compassion toward him? Oh why do we not more mourn
for him suffering, than we would for our own and only sons? This we should
do, and must never have the praise of good Nature, till we can be more
affected with his abasement, that was so high and excellent in his own Person.

5. Our faith should be wonderfully from hence strengthened, considering the
unspeakable sufficiency of the sufferings of Christ for our sins; for if the
Son of God redeemed us, and satisfied for us, and suffered for us, then we
must needs be fully ransomed: and though our sins be many, yet the blood of
Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses us from all our sins, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
Note that he says the blood of the Son of God, for that makes his blood a
perfect and sufficient price of Redemption.

6. If the Son of God suffered, then it should be a shame for the sons of men
to be unwilling to suffer, or to be impatient in their afflictions, Heb. 12. 3.
especially such as are in mean condition in this world, should from hence be
resolved without murmuring to bear hard usage, as is urged in the case of
servants, 1 Pet. 2. 18. 19. Thus of the first Point.

For the second Point, viz. from whom he suffered: We must know, that if we let
pass the higher causes of his Passion, and look upon the creatures only, he
suffered from all sorts of Enemies. The Devils and the High Priests, the
Pharisees and the People, Judas and Pilate, Herod and the Soldiers, Jews and
Gentiles, his own Contrymen and strangers, all oppose him, and from all he
suffered, as the History of the Gospel more at large shows. Which point is
worthy our observation for diverse uses. First, we may hence take occasion to
wonder at Gods skill and wisdom in ordering businesses. What a confused heap
is here of vile Instruments, and yet what a glorious work does God do,
without disorder, nothing being done but according to his Determinate Council?
Act. 2. 23. Secondly, we may see how easily all sorts of men are drawn to
practice against holiness and sincere religion: what doctrine was ever more
powerful than the doctrine of Christ, and what man ever lived so harmelessely,
so profitably? and yet how quickly is all the world raised up against Christ,
and true Religion taught and professed by him: What power has the Devil in the
hearts of all sorts of men? Who though he never require any work but what is
base and dangerous, yet quickly gets Instruments to effect any thing he
requires. Oh how is miserable man sunk deep into rebellion, that since the
fall of our first Parents, had rather follow the Serpent, than the Savior of
the world: who would ever care for the opinions or examples of any sort of
worldly men? Thirdly, we see here a naughty nature will infect any Calling,
the Priesthood will not continue always good, nor Magistracy, nor the retired
life of the vulgar: sin infects any calling.

For the third Point, for whom he suffered, that is answered in diverse
Scriptures; he suffered not for himself, but for us, 1 Pet. 2. 19. Now that
this may be distinctly understood, it must be considered both Negatiuely, and
Affirmatively: Negatiuely, and so he did not suffer for all the men and women
in the world universally, as the Arminians and Lutherans affirm: and that we
may gather by many sentences of Scripture; as Matthew. 26. 28. He says his blood
was shed for many, which imports it was not shed for all: And Matthew. 7. 23.
Christ says to somemen, I know you not, which imports strongly that he did not
suffer for them: and Ioh. 17. our Savior still limits his petitions in his
pleading, viz. for such as God the Father had given him, and said he prayed not
for the world: and John 13. 1. it is said he loved his own which were in the
world, and therefore all were not his own: and John 10. 15. He laid down his
life for his Sheep, and therefore not for Goats and Swine: and Ephesians. 5. 25.
He gave himself for the Church, not for all the world: and Revel. 14. 3, 4.
they that are bought out of the earth, are distinguished from other men, to
show all are not redeemed: and Heb. 9. 15, 16. The benefit of his Mediation and
Bloud-shedding is extended only to such as are called. Thus of the proof of
the Negative.

Now for the affirmative, it is most clear in Scripture, that Christ suffered
for believers, and for all of them, not only for us, but for all of us, Romans 8.
32. not only for Jews, but for all the world, that is, for the Gentiles of all
Nations, 1 John 2. 1. His-righteousnesse extends unto all, and upon all that
believe, Romans 3. 22.

The Use may be first for the confutation of the opinion of those that hold
that Christ suffered and died for all men in the world universally; we grant
his sufferings were sufficient to redeem all the world, but not efficient: and
that their opinion is very grossly erroneous, appears by the former places of
Scripture, and many more might be alleged.

Secondly, seeing Christ did not suffer for all men universally, we should
look to it, that we be such as may have comfort that he died for us. Now if we
would know who they are in all the world that have their part and portion in
the redemption made in the sufferings of the Son of God, we must understand
that they are such as are described in the signs that follow. First, they are
believers: such as with the eye of faith can look upon, and must to the
promise of God made concerning salvation by Christ, Ioh. 3 16. as is there
showed by the type of the brazen Serpent in the coherence. Secondly, they are
such as turn from transgression in Iaoob, Esaias 59. 20. Thirdly, they are such,
as will hear the voice of Christ, and be ruled by him, they are his sheep,
John 10. 15. Fourthly, they are such as are made like to Christ in sufferings,
they bear his image in suffering affliction, and yet for all their crosses
they love God, Romans 8. 28, 29. 1 Per. 4. 1. Fifthly, they are such as do
consecrate their lives and services to Christ, they live to him, that died for
them, 2 Cor. 5. 15.

Thirdly, did Christ suffer for us? what pattern was there ever of such leave?
Consider what we were in our selves by nature: First, we were unjust, 1 Pet. 3.
18. the Just here suffers for the unjust: one will scarce die for a righteous
man, but who ever was willing to die for the unrighteous, Romans 5. 7, 8.
Naboath, Zacharias the son of Iehoiada and John Baptist were just men, and
yet none would die for them, and yet perhaps for some righteous man, one durst
die, as it may be Jonathan durst have died for David, but yet this is without
president, which here Christ does, he suffers for the unrighteous. Secondly, we
were not only unjust, but his enemies also, Romans 5. 10. yea we were such as
never sought to him for redemption, as the Scriptures and experience show.

What hearts have we that cannot be more affected with this wonderful love of
Christ! Behold here is Piety scourged for the impious man's sake: Wisdom is
derided for the fools sake: Truth is denied for the liars sake: Justice is
condemned for the vniusts sake: Mercy is afflicted for the cruel man's sake:
Life dies for the dead man's sake, as said an ancient Father. What a suffering
is this, when the Just suffers for the unjust, and with the unjust, and upon
unjust causes, and under unjust Judges, and by unjust punishments.

Fourthly, has Christ suffered for us? why then from his example we should
learn to be willing and ready to suffer one for another, 1 John 3. 16.

Fifthly, we should comfort our hearts with this Doctrine; seeing Christ did
not suffer for himself, but for us, we should apply his sufferings to our
selves, and plead them before God against our sins, and the temptations of the
Devil: and seeing he has paid so dear a price to reconcile us to God, we
should make no question of it, but that he will now save us being reconciled,
and finish his own work, Romans 5. 10.

Lastly, seeing the Son of God is the Passover, yea our Passover, and
Sacrifice for us, we should therefore purge out the old Leaven, that we may be
a new lump, and should therefore keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither
with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth; if Christ suffered for us, then our life should be a
continual feast; yea in as much as he was offered up as an immaculate Lamb,
and is tendered to us as the food of our souls in the Word and Sacraments,
therefore we should spend our life as if it were a continual Passover: and so
we must put away leaven, even the old leaven of such corruptions as we lived
in, and in particular, the leaven of malice, and keep this feast in the
unleavened bread of sound sincerity of life and truth in all holiness without
hypocrisy. Thus of the third point.

The fourth point is, why it was needful that Jesus Christ the Son of God
should suffer? and for answer thereunto we must know that he did not suffer
casually, but by divine providence, so as nothing befell him in the least
thing, which was not seen to be necessary for our redemption: that God that
does all things by measure in afflicting his servants, does much more exactly
look to the pouring out and filling of the cup he did give his own Son, so
as not a drop could light into it, without especial reason and sound
consideration. Now there be many impulsive causes, or reasons given in
Scripture why Christ must suffer: as

1. That so the Scriptures might be fulfilled, that foretold his sufferings,
Luke 24. 26, 27. and therefore it is usual in the history of the Gospel, when
the particular sufferings of Christ are mentioned, to say, it was that such and
such a Scripture might be fulfilled. Let wicked men mark this point; God is so
just of his wotd, that he will not spare his own Son, but executes every
Judgment and misery, which in his word he foretold he should suffer, nor he
did not release him from the least circumstance of any part of his Passion, as
the dividing of his garments, and casting Lots for his vesture etc. and
therefore how can it be possible, that they that are so hateful to God, should
escape any of those woes and curses denounced in Scripture? Let Swearers,
Drunkards, Adulterers, Liars, Hypocrites, and the like, be afraid of this.

2. That so he might leave us an ensample that we might walk in his steps. The
perfect practice of Patience was clean worn out of the world, so as a man
could not see by any bodies practice, how he should carry himself in
affliction. If we look upon Job himself, that was one of the best patterns
amongst men, yet we read of strange impatience in Job, he was not dumb, but
opened his mouth to speak strange and unsavory things. Now that this hard
lesson might be learned, our Savior himself undertakes to act it before our
eyes, that we might see it done to the life, and so be made more willing, and
more able to learn to suffer. They are deceived that think, that if godly
persons suffer, it is for their faults, for if Christ himself come into the
world, he shall suffer from the world: and true Christians are too
faint-hearted, that seeing the Prince and Captain of their salvation
consecrate through afflictions, cannot yet be excited with magnanimity and
solid patience to endure the hardship of godliness, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

3. That so he might deliver us from the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, John
1. 17. Act. 11. and 15. Gal. 3. 13, 14.

4. That so he might become a merciful High Priest, and might know how to have
compassion on our infirmities, and might attain to a very feeling of our
distresses, and so be more fit to succor us, Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 4. 15. which
should afford unto us strong consolation in all grieuances of life: it is a
glory we give to Christ, when we by faith in our particular trials do rest
upon this goodness, and fellow-feeling in our blessed Savior. These causes
are less principal, but the principal reasons follow, and so

5. He was to suffer, that so he might reconcile us to God, or bring us again
to God, as the Apostles phrase is, 1 Pet. 3. 18. which he did effect, when in
his sufferings he was made an expiation, atonement, and propitiation for our
sins: as our surety he was to make payment and satisfaction to God, by
suffering that malediction which we should have borne, God condemning our sins
in his flesh, Esaias 53. 5. Ro^. 4. 25. and 3. 25. and 8* 3. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. This
end of his suffering appears in this, that scarce any mystery was more
frequently shadowed out in the Old Testamen; for every day the sacrifices did
as it were force it into the minds of men; and this was it the Prophets so
longed to see, 1 Pet. 1. 11.

6. He was to suffer, that so he might heal our diseases, and kill and
mortify the vile humors and spiritual leprosies had infected our souls and
lives, which his Passion does partly by way of argument, as the meditation of
his suffering does give unto the godly cause to hate sin, and with sorrow to
put it away; and partly and chiefly by a special virtue (as a divine plaster)
is derived unto our souls secretly by the ordinances of Christ, as by the word
of the Cross, which is the preaching of the Gospel, and by both the
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, Ro^. 6. Mat. 26. ^ Cor. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
24. Ioh. 17. 17, 19 which virtue is derived unto us by these means by the Holy
Ghost, which he obtained of the Father for this end, Gal. 3* 13, 14.

7. He was to suffer, that he might purchase thereby eternal life for us, who
were not only cast out of Paradise, but shut out of Heaven, and could never
enter within the veil, had we not been sprinkled with his blood, John 3. 14.
Heb. 10. 19. John 6. 51. and 12. 32, 33. Heb. 2. 10.

Ob. But how can the sufferings of one man be a sufficient satisfaction for the
sins of so many men?
Sol. Though the man Christ suffered, yet being also God, the dignity of his
person was such, as it was of more price and value for him to suffer, than if
all the men and Angels in the world had suffered the same things: and so we
answer that objection also, that his sufferings were but for a time, and his
death but temporary, and therefore how could, that be equivalent to damnation
eternal, which all men deserved and were guilty: I say, it is answered by
this, that it is more for Christ to suffer a temporary death, than for all men
to suffer eternal damnation.

Ob. 2. How can it stand with Gods justice to punish the most righteous man
that ever was, and that for sinners sake, seeing Tyrants will not do so?
Answ. Christ is not to be considered as a private person, but as a public
surety for the Elect, and so it is just to require their debts at his hand that
becomes surety for them.

The consideration of these principal ends of Christ's sufferings may serve for
great use. For first we may hence see clearly, how wicked the doctrine of the
Church of Rome is, that tells us of satisfactions for men's sins to be made by
the works partly of themselves, and partly of Saints departed: when the
Scripture acknowledges no other propitiation than the passion of Christ, nor
can there be need of any other, seeing it is the passion of him that is God.
Secondly, hence we may be confirmed against the scandal of the Cross of
Christ: though Jews and Gentiles declaime against Christ for that very cause,
because he was so vile and contemptible in the eyes of the world, yet we see
there was great reason for it, he should be so abased, for else our sins had
not been satisfied for, nor heaven purchased. Thirdly, hence we may see the
difference between Christ's sufferings and the sufferings of the Martyrs: For
first, the sufferings of the Martyrs were not punishments for sins, but only
trials or chastisements; whereas Christ's sufferings were maledictions and
punishments laid upon him for our sins. Again, the sufferings of the Martyrs
were not meritorious, they deserved nothing for others, because they are
considered but as private men; but Christ's sufferings were meritorious, because
he undertook them as our surety, and was sustained under them by the
immediate assistance of the Divine Nature, in respect of which they were the
sufferings of God. Fourthly, hence we may take occasion to be grieved at heart
for our sins; for our sins were the cause of the sufferings of Christ, and
brought upon him all the miseries he endured: when we see Christ crucified, we
see him who was so pierced for our sins. Fifthly, seeing we are bought with
such a price, as the sufferings and bloud-shedding of Jesus Christ, we should
therefore not be the servants of men; seeing Christ paid so dear for us, we
should be ashamed to apply our selves to the humors, and lusts, and vanities
of the men of this world, as if we were still their servants. He knows not
Christ, or the price of his redemption, that for base and corrupt respects will
leave the sincerity of Christ's service to humor or please men, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Sixthly, seeing Christ laid down this price to redeem and save his people
from their sins, we should go away resolved to sin no more, and to walk
worthy of so great redemption. Shall we again crucify the Son of God, by
returning with the dog to our vomit, or the swine to the wallowing in the
mire? Seventhly, how should we admire the love of Christ to us, that has
washed us from our sins by his own blood! Oh glorious medicine! Oh how
unspeakable was that love! What tongue can utter it? What heart can conceive of
it? Revel. 1. 5.

But the especial use is for consolation: for these ends of Christ's sufferings
do manifestly import the fruits and benefit of his suffering to us, which is
so great, as we should ever exult and glory in the Cross of Christ above
althings, and desire no better a way of living, than to live by the faith of
the Son of God that gave himself for us, Galat. 2. 20. and 6. 14. For since
Christ did suffer for those reasons before specified, it will manifestly from
thence follow;

1. That the handwriting that was against us is cancelled, our bond which we
forfeited cannot now be sued against us, Col. 2. 15.

2. That God is pacified and well pleased with us, Mat. 17. 5. 1 Ioh. 2. 12.

3. That death and damnation is now swallowed up into victory, that we need not
live in such fear of them, To. 8. 1. 1* Cor. 15. Heb. 2. 14, 15.

4. That the devil, being but Gods Sergeant or Iaylor, has now no power over
us, Heb. 2. 14.

5. That we are absolved and discharged from the guilt of all our sins, and
may by faith lay hold upon all the promises of grace and pardon in the
Scripture.

6. That sin shall have no more dominion over us; for the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all our sins, as well in respect of virtue, as in
respect of merit; and against the power of it, as well as against the guilt of
it, Romans 6.

7. That we shall be sure of heaven when we die.

And in general, the passion and bloud-shedding of Christ does ratify and
assure to us all the good things of the new Covenant or Testament, Heb. 9. 16.
etc. and for matters may be needful for us in this life, how can we doubt? for
if God have given us his Son, how shall he not with him give us all things,
Romans 8. 32. Thus of the fourth point.

The fifth point is, what he suffered for us: and this will be large in the
explication of it: For though his sufferings under Pontius Pilate be mentioned,
and his suffering of what fell out at the end of his life be called the Passion
(by an excellency) yet in as much as Christ suffered nothing casually, or for
himself, but for us, therefore we must reckon all the parts of his sufferings
as parts of his Passion for us; and so removing the Synecdoche which is in the
words of the Creed, and considering at large of Christ's sufferings even those
parts which are not men^ioned in the Creed, as well as those that are, the
whole Systeme or Method of the doctrine of Christ's Passion may be disposed as
follows.

The Passion of Christ is both Privative and Positive.

His Privative Passion did consist in this, that he wanted that glory, joy and
felicity, which he might and ought to have had, if he had not voluntarily for
the redemption of man deprived himself of such glory and felicity: and this
kind of Passion did extend it self to both Natures. For first his Divine
Nature suffered as it were an eclipse of glory all the time of our Saviors
dwelling on earth; it was hidden as it were behind the veil: for if his
Divinity had shone out in the brightness of the glory of it, when he came to
dwell amongst us, (John ^^. 14.) it would have been as wonderful on earth
amongst men, as it was and is in heaven amongst Angels. And besides, though the
glory of Christ's Divinity be so infinite, as nothing can be added to it, or
taken from it in it self, yet is it said to be glorified or obscured according
to the conceptions of it in the minds of men, and so he suffered a privation of
glory, or rather a defect of it, in that light came into the world, and the
darkness of men's hearts was such as they did not comp^ehend it. Yea it was a
great Passion, that the Divinity of Christ should be so slowly and by so few
acknowledged all the days of Christ's being in the flesh on earth. And as for
his humane Nature, there was due to it all abundance of glory, and happiness,
and joyful life, in as much as he was a just man, and did perfectly fulfill
the whole Law of God; for he that does that should live, the meaning is, he
should live a most pleasant and happy life for ever. But this glory also for
our sakes he was contented to want for a time to his very humane Nature. Of
this kind of Passion is spoken, Ioh. 17. 5. Phil. 27. and this privation of
glory he suffered, that we might be brought to perfect glory in heaven; and
that we may see how hateful the clouds of our sins were, that could darken
and hide from shining the beams of such glory; and to teach us to be content
though our lives be also hid with Christ, as his was when he lived in this
world, expecting the revealing of our glory, when he appears in glory, Col. 3.
3, 4.

Thus of his privative Passion. His Passion considered positiuely, comprehends
both the evil was imputed to him, and the evil was inflicted upon him.

His suffering by way of Imputation was very grievous: for the Lord Jesus
standing before the Justice of God as our Surety, all our sins were charged
upon him, as if he had committed them himself: and this was a most fearful
kind of Passion, which the Scripture takes express notice of. Saint Paul
says, he that knew no sin was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and the
Apostle Peter says, he bare our sins in his own body on the trce, 1 Pet.
2. 24. and this is a consideration of great necessity and use: for hereby the
hearts of the godly may be wonderfully settled in consolation, so as to live out
of the fear of Gods wrath for our sins. All our sins are charged already
upon Christ, and therefore God in justice cannot charge them upon us: and it is
an increase of comfort, to know that therefore our sins were imputed to him,
that his righteousness might be imputed to us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. And withal we
should hence learn, seeing all our sins are taken off our shoulders, and
laid upon him, therefore to spend our days in righteousness and holiness of
life, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And thus also of his imputative Passion.

Concerning the Evil he endured for us, which was inflicted upon him: it is
true that the Scripture does most frequently mention his death and
bloud-shedding, but yet that must be understood Synecdochically, for into the
Doctrine of the Passion ought to be taken all the things he suffered from his
Conception to his Resurrection: and that for these two Reasons: First, It is
most manifest he suffered nothing for himself, but for us: and if all he
suffered were for us, then all his sufferings must be reckoned, as concurring
to the price of our Redemption. Secondly, He was to suffer the Curses and
malediction of the Law, which was due to us for our sins. Now by our breach
of the Law, we deserved not only death, but a miserable life also: and though
it is true, that such punishments as are inflicted upon men, considered in
their particular persons, and not common to the Nature of man, he was not bound
to suffer, as he was not bound to suffer the pains of the stone, or gout, or
other like diseases, which are not the maledictions which belong to the whole
Nature of Man, but special judgments God inflicts upon some men: yet the
common Miseries of man's life, which may stand with the Liberty and freedom of
the execution of his office in the chief sorts of them he did sustain, and to
increase the merit of his Passion, in some things he extends his sufferings
further, as will appear afterward.

Now the contemplation of the Miseries our blessed Savior suffered, which were
positiuely inflicted upon him, may be divided into these parts: viz.

1. The Humiliation of his Incarnation. 2. His abasement from his Birth to his
Baptism. 3. His sufferings from his Baptism to his last Supper. 4. His
Araignment. 5. The miseries he endured after his araignment, which are
comprehended in the words of the Creed, Crucified, dead, etc.
First for the Humility of his Incarnation. He did not only take the Nature of
Man, but he took upon him the form of a servant, and was borne in a most
mean and contemptible condition, of a poor Mother, not allowed the common
entertainment of an lnne, but thrust out to be borne in a stable amongst the
beasts, and laid in a very manger, not looked after or regarded, either by his
own or by strangers, Phil. 2. Luke 2. And thus he was abased for diverse
reasons: For first hereby the second Adam paies for the extreme arr^gancie of
the first Adam: The second Adam is thrust down below the ordinary condition of
a man, because the first Adam affected a condition above the Angels, even to be
like to God himself. Secondly, he thus hides the glory of his eternal
Nativity in a mean and temporary birth, that he might purchase for us an
heavenly and eternal birth: Our Lord takes upon him the form of a servant,
that we might enjoy the states of sons. Thirdly, he refuses the glory of
greatness and pomp of entertainment at his birth, to reach the great ones of
the world, not to be proud of their births in Nature, but to seek after the
heavenly new birth, as the only true glory: And the poor of the world may be
comforted against the meannesse of their provisions for themselves and their
children, by remembering that the Savior of the world had not so good
entertainment as usually the poorest of their children have.

For the second (to wit) his Abasement from his Birth to his Baptism, two
things are to be reckoned as parts of his Passion, namely his exile, and his
contemptible condition. A little after the birth of our Savior, we read that
Joseph and Mary were forced to fly out of Jury into Egypt: and in this
suffering he bears the similitude of the first Adam: As the first Adam shortly
after he was created in Paradise, was banished out from thence: So Christ the
second Adam shortly after he was borne in Iudaea, is driven out to go into
Egypt. And this also he suffered, that the prophecy might be fulfilled, that
said long before, Out of Egypt have I called my Son, Hosea 11. And this part
of his suffering had also comfort in it, for he therefore lost his liberty in
his own Country, that he might purchase for us the right and liberty of our
heavenly Country: and that such godly men as suffer banishment, might comfort
themselves in his example.

Now for the other Branch, we may observe that for thirty years, which was the
greatest part of our Saviors life on earth, he lived in a most obscure
condition, reckoned even in Israel, but as the Carpenters son, and made
subject to the authority of that poor man Joseph: In all which time no man
regarded him, or once acknowledged his glory, either as the Son of God, or
King of the Jews, or Savior of the world: and in this time was the old
prophecy fulfilled, He was as a Root growing up out of a dry ground, he has
no form or comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we
should desire him: he is despised and rejected of men, and we hide our faces
from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not, Esaias 53. 2, 3. And hence
godly men may learn to be patient, and contented, though the world know them
not, and acknowledge not their glory of the sons of God, though he live many
a day, month, and year, without being desired, or esteemed in the world. It
was thus with the Natural Son, and therefore the Adopted sons should not
think it strange, 1 John 3. 1, 2* If our life be hid, so was Christ's also,
Coloss. 3. 3. And this Example of Christ should greatly check the unquietness
of the minds of many, that cannot abide to be neglected, and so violably hunt
after acceptance and fame in the world. And thus much for his sufferings from
his Birth to his Baptism, in all which time our Savior carried himself but
as a private man, and spent his time in performing a most exact obedience to
the Law of God, and the commandment of Joseph his reputed father.

His public sufferings began from his Baptism, when he was about thirty
years of age; and the first Division of them I make to be from his Baptism to
his last Supper: and about these first observe the circumstance of the time: We
know that Christ as the Lord our righteousness was to do two things for us:
(viz.) to perform a most absolute obedience to the Law, and to suffer the
malediction of the Law for our sins. Now as he began the public profession
of his obedience to the Law at his Circumcision, so he began the public
enduring of the malediction of the Law at his Baptism: or thus, The obedience
to Moses Law he begins at his Circumcision, his open obedience to that singular
Law given him by his Father about redeeming the Church by his Passion, he
begins to execute from the time of his Baptism.

Now the things that he suffered in this part of his life were these:

1. Temptation: As soon as he was baptized, and had solemnly undertaken in
public the Redemption of the Church, the Devil set upon him with diverse
hellish and furious assaults, as you may read, Matthew. 4. And unto this
conflict does our Savior voluntarily offer himself, being led to the combat
by the Spirit, and begins to wrestle with the Prince of all adversary power,
enduring with great patience, and resisting and vanquishing with great skill
his fiery and blasphemous Darts. And in the Desert by single combat, as in an
open field, before God and Angels was this battle fought. And in the Desert
does our Savior suffer this conflict with the Devil for diverse reasons.
First, that he might redeem us, that with our first Parents did wander up and
down in the vast desert of this world, being banished from Paradise, and might
by subduing the Devil, the Lion of the wilderness, the god of this world,
leave us a secure habitation all the days of our pilgrimage, and purchase our
return to a better Paradise, Secondly, He was tempted of the Devil, that he
might feel what we suffered when we are tempted, and might be able to
succor them that are tempted, Hebr. 2. 17, 18. and 4. 15. Thirdly, That he
might show us a way how to resist the Devil, and to wrestle with
Principalities and Powers, that we may overcome them. For hence we may learn
many things: for first here we may know our Adversary, and what Enemy we
shall have, if we give our names to Christ, and bind ourselves by the
Sacraments to enter into a course of holy obedience to God. The Devil ^s well
as the world will oppose us. Secondly, we may gather from hence that no true
Christian may promise himself freedom to be spared from this war, nor ought
to desire to be discharged from this Trial, seeing the Son of God was not
free from it. Thirdly, we should hence learn, that a godly Christian, who is
Gods Champion, is not brought to the combat of temptations at the mere lust,
or when the Devil out of his malice will, but he is solemnly led to the fight
by Gods Spirit, who will stand by him, and give issue, and make a way to escape
the danger: they shall have no more laid upon them than they are able to bear.
Fourthly, from the practice of our great Commander, we see with what weapons
we must resist: we must get store of the written word of God into our hearts,
and with the force of Gods sacred and true words, we must beat back and
vanquish the blasphemies and prouocations of the Devil. Christ beats the
Devil by quoting the Scripture; which word of God is called the Sword of the
Spirit. Finally, hence our souls may draw everlasting comfort, and courage
against all temptations, by faith and confidence in Christ, who has not only
overcome the Devil, but did it in our steads, and that he might merit our
victory, and has promised to help us with his power, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.

2. Extreme poverty of Estate: The second thing he suffered in this part of his
life, was grievous poverty and want of the ordinary comforts and possessions
of life, so as he complains, The birds of the air have nests, and the foxes
have holes, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head, Matthew. 8. 20.
And we read that when he was to ride in triumph, as it were, into Jerusalem,
as the King of Sion, (Zach. 9. 9.) he was feign to ride of a borrowed Ass, and
the foale of an Ass, Matthew. 21. Now this meannesse of Estate he endured for
these reasons. First, He became poor, as the Apostle said, that he might make
us rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. He wanted earthly things, that he might enrich us with
heavenly things. Secondly, our King comes to us thus meek and lowly, hiding
his Majesty, and applying himself to the mean cond^^^on of his servants,
that he might entice us to seek more heartily those great things of our
salvation from him, Zach. 9. 9. And from hence we may learn diverse things.
First, we should know and acknowledge this grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
bless his blessed poverty, that has opened a way for such riches for our
souls, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Secondly, such as are rich should learn not to contemn
poor Christians for their poverty, seeing Christ himself was poor; and
withal they should imitate Christ, even to make themselves poor (as it were)
through their abundant liberality to the distressed Saints, as Paul urges it 2
Cor. 8. 9. And further, they should not place their felicity in the possession
of worldly things, seeing the Heir of all things, and the fountain of all
happiness, did by willing poverty so trample upon the glory of the riches of
the world. Thirdly, such as would follow Christ in this world, must hence
learn not to seek great things from his service in earthly things: for so our
Savior urges this point, as you may read Matthew. 8. 19, 20. Lastly, poor
Christians may wonderfully rejoice, and serve God in their mean places with
much gladness of heart, seeing the Savior of the world was as poor as they,
and lived in as much want of all things as they do.

3. Infirmities of all sorts, especially bodily weaknesses, as famine, and
thirst, and weariness, and tears, and the like, reported in the story of the
Gospel: as also infirmities of the mind, as anger, sadness, trouble of
heart, and the like: and these he suffered for diverse reasons also. First, that
in all things he might be made like unto us, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15.
Secondly, that he might assure us that he knows how to have compassion of our
infirmities. Thirdly, Christ was made weak for us, that we might be strong in
his might, and might each of us say with Paul, I can do all things by Jesus
Christ that strengthens me. Lastly, it is a shame for us to be impatient when
we suffer these things, seeing the Prince of our salvation has abased himself
to suffer such things in his own person.

4. Ignominy and extreme disgrace. And his sufferings that belong to this head
were of diverse kinds: As first, vile estimation and neglect, as to be reckoned
but as a Carpenter, or the son of a Carpenter, Mark. 6. 3. and to be regatded
of none of the Rulers, and great men, John 7. 48, 49. Secondly, the express
denial of his chief glories. Thus the Jews denied his Divinity, as is
recorded in diverse places of the Gospel. They likewise would never acknowledge
the glory of his birth of a Virgin, but still reckoned him for Joseph's son.
Nor would they receive him as their Savior and King, Ioh. 1. 10. and his
Miracles they said he wrought by the Devil. Thirdly, unjust accusations and
vile reproaches: and thus he is charged with all sorts of vices, against God,
and the Magistrates, and against his own Soul. Against God he is charged with
blasphemy, and seducing the people, and to be a Samaritane: Against the
Magistrate he is charged with treason and sedition: and against his own Soul*
he is charged with gluttony, and working with a Familiar, and madness, and to
be a friend of Publicans and sinners: and these Indignities were the more
grievous, because he suffered them from the Priests and Scribes and Pharisees,
as well as from the people, they being men that profess learning and religion:
and because he suffered them also from his own, even those amongst whom he
was borne and bred: and because also these things wrought such an impression in
the hearts of the people, that they not only disliked him, but were scandalized
and offended in him, Mark. 6. 3. and some of his Disciples fell away from him,
John 6. All this shame and reproach he bare for diverse reasons: First, he
thereby suffers the imputation of our sins; being our surety he endures it to
be charged with all sorts of crimes, because though he were innocent, yet we
were guilty: and that may be the reason, why he says so little to excuse
himself against these aspersions. Secondly, that thereby he might deliver us
from that eternal shame was due to us, and merit for us eternal honor, and
glory, and praise, Ioh. 19. 2. Thirdly, that therein he might give an
unanswerable proose of that natural hatred of goodness that is in the men of
this world, of what degree soever. Fourthly, that he might leave us an example
of patience under the like sufferings, and that we might prepare and look for
the trials of reproach for well-doing, and not think it strange to be reckoned
for evil doers, and to lie buried under the disgrace of foul aspersions,
Matthew. 10. 24. Heb. 12. 3, 4.

5. Many dangers of the loss of his life. The Nazarens would have cast him
down headlong from the brow of a Hill, Luke 4. 29. The Jews took up stones
to kill him, John 8. 59. The Pharisees and Herodians took counsel how to
destroy him, Mark. 3. 6, 7. Diverse consultations of this kind we read of, as
John 7. 1. and 11. 53. And these dangers he suffered as the fruits of our sin:
they are never safe that live in sin. And also he endured these dangers, that
he might redeem our lives, and save us from danger of eternal destruction.
And further, that he might teach us how to carry our selves in time of danger,
viz. to rest upon God without fear, as knowing that our times are in Gods
hand, as Christ did when he sent that message to Herod, Go tell that fox, I
work to day and to morrow, etc. and yet withal to use all lawful ways of
prevention or escape from danger, as we read our Savior often did, John 7. 1.
and 11. 53, 54. And further, that we might rest upon this experience of his
power; He that was able to preserve himself from such desperate dangers, is
able and will keep us in all our ways. Finally, it should teach us patience
under losses, crosses and dangers, seeing, as the Apostle says, We have not
resisted unto blood, Heb. 12. 4. our dangers are not so great as his: and
therefore it is a shame for us to faint or be discouraged.

Thus of his sufferings from his Baptism till about the time of his last
Supper. His Arraignment follows.

Under his Arraignment I comprehend those dreadful things he suffered, which
contain the first part of his extreme Passion: And here we are to consider,
first, what went before his Arraignment; and then the things he suffered in the
Arraignment it self.

Before his Arraignment fell out three things.

1. The consultation of his Adversaries. 2. The treason of Judas. 3. His
apprehension.
But before I open these points, two things in general that concern his last
Passion are to be considered, (viz.) the place where he suffered, and the time
when.

The place where he suffered was Jerusalem: which was ordered so of purpose in
the providence of God for three reasons. First, that so the types of the Old
Testament might be fulfilled: for there it was that Abraham would have
sacrificed his son Isaac as a type of Christ. Secondly, that so our Saviors
own prophecies concerning the place of his Passion might be fulfilled: for he
had foretold his Disciples that it must be at Jerusalem, Matthew. 20 17, 18, 19.
Luke 13. 31, etc. Thirdly and chiefly, that by his Death and Passion, he might
obtain for us the vision of eternal Peace, which the word Jerusalem signifies.

The time when he suffered was at the Passover: At which time was the greatest
assembly and concourse of people of all sorts, and from all parts of the world.
He being our surety, pays our debt publicly before thousands of witnesses;
and withal thereby signifies, that he is the true Paschall Lamb, which was
offered up for people of all Nations: and the better to confirm our Faith, and
affect us, chooses to be killed about the same time the Paschall Lamb was
eaten: And it might signify, that God that would send the Destroyer against
the world, would yet passover the Elect that are sprinkled with the blood of
his Son: and that Christ Jesus will guide us out of the Egypt of this world
into the heavenly Canaan; and at the time of the Passover does the Lamb of
God pass out of this world. Thus of the place and time.

The first thing we are to consider of that fell out before his Arraignment, is
the consultation of his Adversaries, which is recorded, Matthew. 26. 3, 4. where
observe, first what they did, viz. they call a Counsel, they do not go about
the work without advice. They gather a great assembly together to consult of
the business. They unite their forces against Christ, to let us know, that the
authority of Councels is not infallible: There have been Councels against
Christ as well as for Christ: and to teach Christian Rulers in Church and
Commonwealth, to lay their heads and hearts together, how they may destroy
Antichrist. It is much to be lamented, that Christians can no better agree
together against Antichrist: It is easier to get a Council against Christ,
than against Antichrist. Secondly, note where they assemble, viz. in the Hall
of Caiaphas, who was the man, that before in another Council, had given his
sentence for the killing of Christ, and was the first that delivered his
opinion expressly for the death of Christ, Ioh. 11. Thirdly, consider who were
of this wicked Council, viz. the chief Priests and Scribes, and Elders of the
people: even the nearer men come to God by place and office, the more
desperately vile they are when they once fall to opposing the truth: Christ had
no enemies more malicious than the Priests and Scribes, and therefore it is not
safe to rest upon men in the businesses of salvation: Things are not therefore
to be believed or done, because they are graced with the authority of great men
in Church or Commonwealth. And it is not unprofitable to note the causes of
these men's proceedings against Christ. First, they envied his glory and respect
among the people, which had so much eclipsed their glory: then this Envy begat
the darkness of affected Ignorance, so as neither Scripture, nor his teaching,
nor the often foyles he had given them, nor his Miracles could convince them:
Then their affected Ignorance begat hatted and loathing of the Truth: and that
hatred of the Truth, made them fall into this mad and unappeasable Rage and
Malice against Christ, which appears by the last thing I note in their
consultation, which was the end why they assembled, viz. to take him by
subtletie and to kill him. Note here that Malice in the enemies of Religion is
very cruel: Nothing but his blood will satisfy them, and they make no
conscience to use ill means to take him, they profess to desire to take him
by subtlety. There is a world of wickedness committed by such as sit in seats
of Justice and Judgment: and the Judge of the world will have it brought to
light, it shall be known many times to their eternal shame amongst men. I
may add one thing more about this consultation, and that is about the time of
it: Now when they should have been preparing themselves for the Passover,
they are met here in a Council to take Arms against the true Paschall Lamb:
and had it not been for fear of the tumulting of the people, they would have
as securely sought his destruction at that time as any other.

Quest. But where was our Savior now?

Answ. He was at Bethany, and got himself of purpose out of the way, that they
might have full scope to meet and consult about his death, as knowing that his
hour was come, and thereby declaring that he did willingly lay down his life
for us. Thus of the consultation of his Adversaries.

Concerning the Treason of Judas, diverse things are worthy the noting, as

1. The parts of it: and so his treason consisted of two deuillish practices:
The first was his compact with the Priests about betraying Christ; of which
read Mat. 26. 14. etc. The second was the villainous execution of the Treason,
according to that agreement: of which read Matthew. 26. 47. etc. where you shall
find that he betrayed him with a kiss.

2. The quality of the Traitor: He was a Minister, a chosen Disciple of
Christ, yea preferred to the highest Calling in the Church, viz. to be an
Apostle, one of the Twelve that was called out of the rest of the Disciples,
and made one of Christ's own family, and amongst the Twelve of some special
reckoning, for he was, as it were, the Steward, and bare the Bag.

3. The cause of the Treason, or what moved Judas to this deuillish practice,
and that was his covetousness, which is expressly noted by the Evangelist S.
John, Chap. 12. 6. And his covetousness was the more vile, and may be
aggrauated against him diverse ways. As first, because he was an Apostle:
Covetousness is more hateful in a Minister than in any other. Secondly,
Because he would sell his Lord and Master at so mean a price; that he should
offer to sell the Lord of all things, as if he had been a vile bond-slaue, and
that he should reckon him to be made for his own private gain, that did
vouchsafe to become a common price for the redeeming of all men, was a grievous
offense: but that he should sell him for so mean a price, as thirty pieces
of Silver, was extremely base: Nay it was the more excessiuely vile, that he
uses Christ worse than a Clown would do his hog; for if a country clown
were to sell his hog, he would not leave the price to the discretion of the
buyers, as Judas did.

4. The Patience of Christ toward the Traitor, using so many ways to warn
him, and reclaim him: For first, after the Treason began, our Savior
vouchsafes to wash the very feer of the Traitor, those feet that were ready to
shed innocent blood, Ioh. 13. 2, 5. Secondly, He thence takes occasion to say,
Ye are clean, but not all, Ioh. 13. 10, 11. Thirdly, He comes nearer, and: by
a prophecy tells them, that one of them that did eat bread with him should
file up his heel against him, verse. 18. Fourthly-Heyet more plainly says, One
of you shall betray me, not naming him, Ioh. 13. 21. Fifthly, To awaken him,
sie^hreatens him, Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed, etc.
Mut. 26. 24. Sixthly, When all this would not melt the heart of Judas, he falls
into a grievous Agony for very compassion, and vexation at the sin of Judas,
so as be was troubled in Spirit, as Saint John shows, Chap. 13. 21. Seventhly,
Though he knew him to be a cursed Enemy and a Wolf, that waited to prey upon
him, (though now in a sheep skin) yet he gives him a Sop: He gave us a
pattern, how to practice that saying, If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he
thirst give him drink.

5. Why was it necessary Christ should be betrayed by Judas? Answ. He suffered
this betraying: First, that the Scripture might be fulfilled that had fore told
this Treason, Ioh. 13. 18. Secondly, in abiding this Treason, he paid for our
perfidiousnesse and ingratitude in Adam; our perfidiousnesse in betraying the
Truth to the Devil; and our ingratitude, that had received of God so many
benefits by Creation, and yet so evil rewarded him: and he was betrayed with
a kiss, that he might satisfy for us, that in Adam had admitted the flattery
of the Serpent, when he told us we should be like God; yea that had as it
were flattered the Serpent, obeying him rather than God.

6. What end this Traitor had: viz. He died miserably, lived to see Christ
suffer so much, as filled his conscience with cruel torments, and afterward
hanged himself, so desperately, that he burst afunder in the midst, and all
his bowels gushed out, as you may read in the Gospel, and the Acts, Matthew.
27. 3, 4, 5. Act. 1. 18.

Out of all this diverse uses may be made: As,

1. For Information, and so two things may benoted: First, that Ministers if
they be corrupt, and lie in the practice of any gross sin, prove very devils
incarnate; Judas for this cause is called a Devil, John 6. 70. Nothing is more
loathsome to God than a wicked Minister; and no men prove more vile, and
impudent, and fenselesse than they, if they make not conscience of their ways.
If Salt be unsavory, where with shall it be salted? Seldom doeiwe read or
hear of the conversion of these men. Again, if God forsake a man in his just
judgment, we see how impossible it is for a man to get out of the snare of
sin. Judas, after Covetousness had infected him, was still an Apostle, had
excellent gifts of preaching and working miracles, enjoyed the benefit of the
daily doctrine and holy example of our Savior, saw his Miracles, was
enterrained into his familiar acquaintance, and had manifest warning given,
Ioh. 6. 70. And now at the time of his Treason frequent admonitions, as was
showed before, and yet so corrupt was his nature, and so had the Devil
bewitched him, that he gives not over till he had fully finished his wicked
device. Yea let all men take heed how they trust upon vain euasions, or
pretended proiects, to avoid the hurts and mischief may follow upon their
wicked actions. It is probably gathered by some Divines, that Judas though he
meant to betray Christ, yet he meant not to have him killed, but thought he
might get the money of the Priests, and yet Christ when he came to the pinch
would escape from their hands, as he had often done. And this may beegathered
two ways: For first, when he comes to Christ, and gives the sign to the Jews
by kissing him, he so speaks to Christ, as he seems to will him to shift for
himself; when he said, Master save thy self, or hail Master. And secondly,
the Evangelist observes, that when Judas saw that Christ was condemned, he was
horribly troubled, and falls into despair: which imports that he thought he
should never have been condemned. But all this forecast notwithstanding, by
betraying him, he became guilty of Innocent blood, which he saw when it was
too late. Yea yet further, all men may take warning too from Judas, to look to
the beginnings of discontent. The Devil can work strange mischiefs out of
small beginnings: for though Judas was covetous, yet what made him fall upon
this practice of betraying Christ at this time? The Text notes that he was
discontent about the loss of the ointment, and grew sullen and displeased,
that the woman was justified in her course, and his reproof not allowed. Now
upon this discontent, it is said the Devil entered into him. Let men receive
information from thence, and take heed of anger, and grudge, and discontent,
for by giving place to these things, they may let in the very devil into their
hearts, who may lead them to desperate and vile conclusions and practices: as
we read the like in Joseph's brethren, Saul, Achitophel, and diverse others,
Math. 26. 14. Ioh. 12. 4. Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. Again, we may from hence note,
that a man may be a monstrous vile creature, and yet live amongst good company,
and speak Christ fair, and profess to be his Disciple, and salute him with a
kiss, and yet be a notable enemy to Christ. Many Christians amongst us draw
near to Christ with their lips, when their hearts are far from him.
Notorious wicked livers are yet so impudent, as to come and sit down with
Christ, and eat at his table, and dip their hands with him in the same platter:
but let them not deceive themselves, their place shall not privilege them, nor
their hypocrisy cover them; Christ knows them to be Iudasses, and will make
them known in due time.

2. For instruction: and so all men from hence should learn to beware of
couerousnesse; if they do not; that which undid Judas will undo them. Now
that men may both discern what covetousness is, and what reason they have to
avoid it, I will briefly define covetousness. Covetousness is a spiritual
disease in the heart of man, arising from Nature, corrupted and ensnared by
Satan and the world, inclining the soul to an immoderate (yet vain) care
after earthly things, for his own private good, to the singular detriment of
the soul. I call covetousness a disease, because it has such a privation, as
has not only want of virtue and happiness, but a disposition to evil and
painful disquietnesse: and so Solomon calls it an evil sickness. I say it is
a spiritual disease, to awaken covetous persons, for that imports it is hard
to be cured: no medicine but the blood of Christ can heal it; and it is the
worse, because it is not felt of the most, but hated only in the name of it.
The subject of the disease is the heart of man, there is the seat of it, and
therefore Saint Mark adds covetousness to those vices Saint Matthew had said
did defile a man, Mark. 7. 22. Matthew. 15. The internal efficient cause of this
sin is Nature corrupted: it had need to be looked to, because it is a disease
the Nature of man is apt to be infected withal. Yet I say Nature corrupted,
for Nature it self is content with a little. The outward causes are the devil
and the world: A covetous heart is never without the devil in it, or not for
any long time; and therefore the text notes, that upon the stirring or fits of
this disease in Judas, the devil entered into him. The world also by variety
of baits and objects excites this disease. The form of this sin lies in the
inclination of the soul to an immoderate and confident care of earthly things.
I make earthly things the object, because it were a great virtue to covet
spiritual things, 1 Cor. 14. I say immoderate, because honest labor and
desire after necessary things is not condemned: and care is immoderate, when it
has any of these signs following, all which are evident signs of
covetousness.

1. When a man's affections are so set upon earthly things, that he is in love
with them, and places his felicity in them: and therefore covetousness is
called the love of money, by a Periphrasis, 1 Timothy 6. 10.

2 A second sign of couerousnesse or immoderate care, is, when the mind is so
taken up about earthly things, that it can not attend to Gods word or his
ordinances, Psalm. 119. 36. Matthew. 13. Ezech. 33. 31. and therefore the
covetous cannot brook Gods Sabbath, and desires greatly to have it over, Amos
8.

3. A third sign is, when men will use ill means to compass gain, as when
men will use lying, flattery, oppression, usury, false weights and measures,
or any other ways of fraud and cruelty, Pro. 28. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.

4. Fourthly, when men give sparingly, or grudgingly, or slackly to charitable
uses.

I add, that this care is vain, and that in diverse respects: For first, he
that loves filuer shall not be satisfied with silver; and besides, after all
his travel, his earthly riches will perish while he looks on; or if they do
continue, he must not continue with them: for as he came forth of his mothers
belly so shall he return, naked, to go as he came: he shall carry away
nothing of all his labor; in all points as he came so shall he go, and then
what profit has he that has traveled for the wind? I say inclining the
soul, to take in the lowest degree of covetousness: for some have their
hearts and eyes, and hands, and tongues, all exercised in it, 2 P^^. 2. 14. Now
others are only secretly drawn with it, and infected with the daily
inclinations to it. I add, for his own private good, to note the end of
covetousness: for if he sought these things only for Gods glory, or the good
of the Church, it were to be allowed. The last thing in the definition, is, to
the singular detriment of the soul; for many are the vile effects of
covetousness: First, it infatuates a man, and makes him without understanding,
Esaias 56. 11. Prou. 28. 16. Secondly, it leaves a man in continual danger to
err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Thirdly, it is the root of all evil, it
draws a man to many a sin, as we see here in Judas; and seldom is
covetousness mentioned in the Scripture, but some vile sin or other is
joined with it. Fourthly, it angreth and vexes God exceedingly, especially
when men are exercised in it, Esaias 57. 17. Ezech. 22. 13. Ier. 6. 13. besides
temporal judgments, it causes the damnation of the soul in hell, Ephesians. 5.
5, 6. and therefore it should not be so much as named amongst Christians,
Ephesians. 5. 3. And as covetousness ought to be avoided by all men, so especially
by Ministers: Covetousness in them is very abominable and pernicious; the
Prophet calls such Ministers greedy dogs, Esaias 56. 11.

Again, this lamentable example of Judas should make men abhor the sin of
betraying Christ. Many men detest the fact of Judas, and yet commit it or the
like themselves: for Christ is betrayed many ways, as when his truth and
honor is denied before men, and men dare not show their faith or purity
before others: so also when men profess true religion, and yet deny the power
of it, and live wickedly, and cause the adversaries of Christ to blaspheme:
this is to deliver Christ to be accused, arraigned, and condemned of evil
Judges. Again, when for reward a man will betray the truth by bearing false
witness; for to betray the truth, is to betray God who is Truth: and so when
men violate brotherly love, they betray God who is Love. Ministers also betray
Christ (with Judas) when they betray the flocks of Christ, and following their
own ambition or gain, leave their flocks to the Wolf to be daily devoured,
and besides staruing them for want of fodder, or wholesome food. And such
Iudasses are they that will sell Religion and their own souls to get
vnlawsull gain, by lying, and swearing, and false commodities and weights,
etc. or will break Gods Sabbaths to follow their gain: yea in some respects
they are worse than Judas, for he was never a Traitor but once, and then it was
to get thirty pieces of silver; but a great number of men amongst us will sell
Christ and their own souls for one piece of silver, and do make a practice
of it, they do it daily. Again, let all men take heed of gross sins, or
any extraordinary causes of corruption, for strange punishments will follow
such workers of iniquity. The fearful judgment of God upon this poor
creature, may affright the Sodomites and Effeminate, the cursed Swearers and
Blasphemers, the damned Drunkards and Atheists, the hellish Traitors and
Heretics of our time.

Further, we see that all godly Christians in this world had need to look
well to themselves: this world is full of treachery, and falsehood, and
dissimulation: We see Christ's family was not without a Judas in it; and there
are few sorts of men, or private families of any note, but there is one Judas
or other there. It is and will be still true, A man's enemies are they of his
own house: Sometimes the very wife that lies in a man's bosom proves false
and treacherous, sometimes to a man's state, sometimes to a man's reputation, and
often times to his soul and Religion, Mich. 7. 5, 6, 7. The usual complements
of the world prove but as Judas his kiss.

Lastly, such as suffer for the ingratitude or perfidiousnesse of others,
should comfort themselves in this part of the Passion of Christ: they may the
more patiently abide it, seeing Christ himself was so used, and by such a one
as Judas was.

Thus of the Treason of Judas. The apprehension of our Savior follows: and
there we are to consider two things; First, What Christ did: Then, What was
done to him.

For the first, the Evangelists with great care record what our Savior did now
that the time was come that he must be apprehended and brought to his last
Passion: and so they show how he prepared himself for these sufferings,
immediately before he was to be apprehended: and so they report five things
that he did.

1. He made a Feast to his Disciples: he chose to suffer at the time of the
great Passover, that thereby he might confirm the hearts of the Disciples,
and show how little he feared death, and how willing he was to obey the
Commandment of his Father, by being obedient to the death.

2. He made his will and last Testament, and therein he appoints a solemn
assembly to be yearly and often in the year observed in commemoration of his
Passion, by all that love him to the worlds end: and further grants a general
pardon of all sins, to all that shall worthily partake of that solemnity at
all times till his coming again: and besides, bequeathes unto godly
Christians all the merits and benefits of his Passion, and all the good things
contained in Gods Covenant made with the Church in Christ, and all this is
comprehended in the institution of his last Supper.

3. He took his leave of his D^sciples, and made an admirable speech to them,
recorded in the 13. 14. 15. and 16. Chapters of John: which speech may be all
referred to three heads, Prediction, Exhortation, and Promise: By way of
Prediction we shall find in that speech, that he tells them before hand of the
things he shall suffer, and the glory he shall have after his sufferings, and
withal the glorious provision he will make for them in heaven after his
Ascension, and comfort them against his departure from them. Secondly, by
way of Exhortation he earnestly persuades them by these his last words, to
look to their carriage in the world after he was gone, in these points
especially; namely, that they show forth the continual proof of their
unfeigned and fervent love one to another, and that they arm themselves with
all patience, to suffer all the indignities and troubles should befall them
from the Devil, and the world: and chiefly that they abide in him, as the
branch does in the Vine, bearing good fruits to the glory and honor of his
Name. Thirdly, By way of promise, he labors to fill them with comfort, by
assuring to them three singular favors: First, that he would send them the
Holy Ghost to be their Comforter all their days. Secondly, that they shall at
all times have audience in heaven for all suits whatsoever, if they be made in
his Name. And thirdly, that what troubles soever they shall have in the world,
yet in him they shall have peace. Neither did he intend this speech only for
his Disciples, but for all the godly in all ages that should mourn for his
absence.

The fourth thing our Savior did for preparing him for his Passion, was the
choice of the place where he would begin his Passion: and therein two things
are worthy to be considered: viz. The kind of place he chooses, and his great
willingness to suffer for us. The place he chose was a Garden: and that he did
of purpose, for as the first sin was committed in a Garden, so he is pleased to
offer himself to suffer the first part of his great Passion in a Garden. Thus
is our blessed Savior pleased by his obedience in a Garden, to make
satisfaction of the sin of Rebellion committed by our first Parents in
Paradise: The next is the demonstration of our Saviors willingness to suffer
for us, which he shows plainly in choosing the place: for first it would be
hard for the Priests to apprehend him in the City, because of the people,
therefore he gets out of the City to a place that was near. Again, the
Evangelists note that he went to a place he was accustomed to go to, that so
it might not be difficult to find him, Luke 22. 39. And to make it out of all
doubt, S. John says, That Judas that betrayed him knew the place. And it is
profitable for us to know that our Savior did suffer willingly, because that
adds to the price of his satisfaction; for unless his Passion had been
voluntary, there had not been a just satisfaction for our sins to Gods
Justice: And besides, that circumstance should the more stir up our hearts to
admire the greatness of his love to us. And finally, it is a most lively
president to teach us with all willingness to take up our cross and follow
him, that has so willingly suffered such grievous things for us.

The fifth thing our Savior did in his preparation, was the offering up of
prayer to God before he entered upon his Passion. Now the prayers Christ made,
were partly for the Church, and partly for himself: The prayer for the Church,
which he made immediately before his apprehension, is at large recorded in the
17. of John, which prayer he made as the High Priest; whose office was
twofold, to make intercession for the people, and to make satisfaction and
atonement for their sins. And though the intercession of Christ be chiefly
performed in heaven as he sits at the right hand of God, yet that we might
know what he says for us in heaven, he conceiues that most sacred frame of
Intercession, which is there recorded for our everlasting consolation. Now
concerning that prayer of our Savior, many things may be observed.

1. For whom he prays and makes intercession; and so he expressly says, That
he did not pray for the world, but for the Elect, verse. 9.

2. Why he made that prayer on earth, and did not reserve it till he came to
heaven? And to that he answers himself, verse. 13. that he spoke those
things on earth, that his joy might be fulfilled in us, for it must needs be
an unspeakable comfort to us to know what Christ prays for in heaven to
obtain for us.

3. What things he assumes, as taken for granted, before he puts up his
petitions to God: and so he reckons up before God diverse admirable privileges
which belong to the godly, which God did never deny, but always granted to
belong to them: and these were,

1. That God had given Christ full power to bestow eternal life upon the
godly, verse. 2.

2. That the godly were Gods own people, and that he had bestowed them all
upon Christ to redeem them, and provide for them, verse. 6, 10.

3. That Christ is glorified in them, verse. 10. meaning that God had given him
leave to make himself glorious by advancing them, and that he did account
himself to have no glory on earth, but what he had in and from them.

4. That he did sanctify himself for them, verse. 19. that is, that God was to
account all his merits to belong to them, and that all he endured when he was
set apart as a Sacrifice, was for their sakes.

5. That all he was to pray for, did belong to all believers as well as to the
Apostles, even to all that did or should believe to the worlds end, verse. 20.

6. That by the Gospel Christ was to make all the godly feel, that God loved
them, as well as he loved him, verse 26.

4. What he did beg of his Father for us: and so we shall find that he has
fitted his suits to our desires. For look what in this world the godly most
desire to be freed from or to have, that he has asked, namely,

1. That God would undertake to keep us so as we might not any of us be lost,
verse 11, 12.

2. That God would preserve and keep us from evil, both the evil of sin,
and the evil of danger that might oppress us, verse 15.

3. That God would sanctify us by the power of his word, and so furnish us
with all gifts needful to a holy life, verse 17.

4. That we may be admitted into fellowship and indissoluable union with the
blessed Trinity, and amongst our selves, that in a sort we might be joined
to God as Christ was, verse 21.

5. That God would so perfect this holy union in them, that he might make the
very world to know that God loved them, as well as he loved Christ, verse 23.

6. That God would in his due time bring them all to him in heaven, that they
may for ever behold his glory there, verse 24.

These are marvelous things, and should wonderfully affect us and comfort us.

5. By what arguments our Savior urges these pe^itions: for his very reasons
do show what care he had of us, and how he pities us, and that he stands upon
our right. And so we shall find that he used four Reasons why God should
grant all he asked for them. The first was because we are Gods: thine they are,
verse. 9, 10. and therefore God should defend us in that we are his own, and
belong to his charge and care. The second was, because the world hates us,
verse. 14. we are likely to be so ill used in the world, that God must needs
look to us, to protect, and provide for us. The third was because our Savior
himself should be now no more in this world to look to us in his own person,
and therefore he prays God to look to us, verse. 11. The last was because he
had sanctified himself for our sakes, and therefore pleads his own merits for
us, verse. 19.

Lastly, it is profitable for us to mark the intimation our Savior gives all
along his prayer, by which he lets fall a description of what we must be if we
would have our part in his Intercession. For in the 20. verse we may see it
plain, we must be believers, and verses 6, 7, 8. with 26. We may see further
that we must be such as will receive the words which God gave to Christ to
deliver to us, and by them will know Gods name, and such as will keep the word
as the greatest treasure in the world. They that hear not Christ's preaching on
Earth, shall not have benefit by Christ's praying in Heaven. Nor will hearing
serve turn, but there must be knowledge and believing, and keeping of the word
as a treasure, and for practice.

Thus of the prayers our Savior made for the Church.

The prayers he made for himself, concern either his Glory in Heaven, or his
Passion on Earth. His prayer for his Glory in Heaven is recorded, John 17. v.
1. to 6. and in that prayer our Savior first lays down the substance of his
request, verse. 1. Secondly, he urges it with arguments, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Thirdly, he explaines his meaning for the manner how he would have his
petitions granted. The substance of his suit is, that God would glorify his
Son. The Reasons are: First, because God is his Father and he his Son,
verse. 1. Secondly, because if God glorify him, he will glorify God again,
verse 1. Thirdly, because God had given him power before to bestow glory upon
others, and therefore much more he should have it himself, verse 2, 3.
Fourthly, because he had glorified God on earth, and should within a little
time finish all his hard task, verse 4. Now the manner how he would be
glorified, was, by receiving the same glory again, which he had with the
Father before the world was; which referred to his humane Nature, must be
understood of his exaltation above all things that are made in heaven or earth,
and so to be worshipped with the divine Nature. And as it is referred to the
divine Nature, it must be understood of manifestation to the world, that as
always he as second Person had glory equal with the Father, so that God would
let it be known to be so through the world, which was accomplished after his
resurrection, when the Divinity of Christ was published to all Nations.

Thus of his prayer for his Glorification. The prayer that concerns his
Passion was made in the Garden a little before his enemies came to apprehend
him. And concerning that prayer diverse things may be observed.

1. The company was with him, or near to him at the time of his prayer, and so
the Text notes that he singled out of all the Disciples three of them whom he
loved most, viz. Peter, and John, and James. Now this company he took for two
Reasons: First, that they might be witnesses of this part of his Passion.
Secondly, he chose them to be by him, as such as to whom he could more freely
discover himself: and in this our Savior did express that which is settled in
the natures almost of all men, and so of all godly men, in the businesses of
religion. There be some persons before whom a man would more willingly pray or
preach or do any duty; and yet others have no just cause to take exceptions
as if they were neglected, or it was partiality, for we see here Christ
himself did single out these men, and leave the rest of the Disciples further
off, Matthew. 26. 36, 37. and withal from hence we may learn that the very
presence of such as we love, does us good when we are in distress, though they
should say nothing to us; as here our Savior gives these Disciples a great
charge to tarry by him, and yet they say not a word to him, no not when he
makes his moan, that his heart was heavy to the very death: yea it seems our
Savior was not willing to be without them, though they slept by him, and
seemed to take little notice of his distress. Further, these three were they
that had seen his Transfiguration on the Mount, and therefore are now the
fittest to behold this great abasement, without wavering in the faith of his
Divinity, because they had seen him glorious, whom now they are to behold so
infirm.

2. The gesture he used in prayer, viz. He felt on his face and prayed. Even
the more grievous the distress was upon him, the more humbly did he demean
himself toward God: When his heart was so heavy, nothing but praying to God
would help him; for he had made his moan to the Disciples, and that eased him
not. Nor does he rest in that, simply to pray, but his Agony being great, he
applies himself to that gesture might best fit the greatness of his
distress, to teach us what we should do, when our hearts are heavy, and how
we should strive to enlarge our affections, and suit our whole behavior in
Gods presence according to his hand upon us, or the great need we have of his
help.

3. What befell him when he went to pray, viz. a most grievous Agony in soul,
which with such speed increased upon him, that he cried out to his Disciples,
that his soul was every way compassed about with sorrow even unto the death,
and he sweat in that Anguish very blood, as is noted by the Evangelist, and he
was maruellously amazed and afraid. Now if any ask, what made our Savior
Matthew. 26. 38.
fall into this perplexity? I answer, that we must not think, that it was
the fear of bodily death that thus affrighted our Savior, seeing we know that
the Martyrs that were infirm men, did yet embrace death without these Agonies:
though by the way we must remember, that it is a thousand times more easy to
suffer the death of a Martyr, than for Christ to suffer bare death of any
kind, because Martyrs in death are freed from the guilt of all their sins,
whereas Christ in death, as our surety, stands charged with sin: but it was
not the fear of death thus troubled our Savior; he had many other more
dreadful things to think of: As first, the tyranny of Sin, Death, and
Satan, that had prevailed over mankind. Secondly, the great ingratitude of
the greatest part of mankind, who would not regard redemption though made in
his blood. Thirdly, the dispersion of his Disciples, and the scandal that even
they would take at his death. Fourthly, the ruin would come upon the Jewish
Nation by making themselves guilty of his blood. Fifthly and especially, the
sense of the most horrible wrath of God against the sins of the world, which
he must endure, and did begin to feel, for our sakes, as being our surety. It
was not death then simply that he feared, but death joined with that pouring
out of the dreadful wrath of God upon his soul: this bred that incredible and
deadly sadness, and pain, and inward fear in our Savior.

Now this mournful consideration of his grievous fear and agony, may serve
unto us for great consolation, and that in diverse respects: For first herein we
may see his love to us, that can be content to take upon him our infirmities,
even those that are most troublesome, such as this dreadful fear and
perplexity was: he was here truly transfigured: for as on the Mount by
transfiguration he showed what glory he should have in heaven, so in the
Garden, by this transfiguration he shows what weakness cleaues to his members
on earth: only we must still remember, that he took upon him only unblameable
infirmities; for in this he sinned not. If any ask how could such unspeakable
fear and sadness be without sin, seeing the affections were so violently
moved and troubled? I answer, that the perturbation that was in our Saviors
heart, was like to clean water in a clean glass; if it be shaked never so
violently, yet it is clean still, because there is no mud in the bottom. But
on the other side, if clean water be put into a clean glass, and mud withal
be settled in the bottom, then the least stirring that is makes it foul: and
so it is with us, there is sin in almost all perturbations that arise in our
hearts, because every shaking of our hearts stirs up some corruption that is in
our nature; but it was not so with Christ. Again, fearful Christians may
take some comfort from hence, to see that their Savior was afraid as well as
they. His Agony may comfort them against their pusillanimitie; and further
such as find strange accidents in prayer, and are suddenly oppressed with
fears and doubts or terrors, may profitably remember what befell their Savior
when he went to pray. Lastly, such as are afflicted in conscience under the
sense of Gods wrath, may wonderfully from hence be relieved: First, by
considering that Christ himself did feel the same, or much greater sorrows
than they do, and therefore does pity them, and will suocour them. Secondly,
by considering that Christ has borne in his own soul the brunt of Gods
displeasure for sin, and therefore they should not be so dismayed, but behold
his soul as made a sacrifice for their sins. And thus of his Agony. There
was yet another great discouragement befell him in his prayer, and that was the
marvelous senslesnesse, and drowsinesse, and want of compassion in his
Disciples, who were so far from comforting him, or mourning with him, that
they could not watch with him one hour: That Peter that a little before said,
If all men were offended in him, yet he would never be offended, yea he was
ready to die for him, yet now he does not resist his very sleep, but neglects
his Savior in his greatest distress. And from this observation we may gather
diverse Uses. For hereby it is manifest, that the whole burden of satisfaction
lies upon Christ only: Here is no body to help him to pay one farthing, nor
so much as pity him, or encourage him: when our ransom is in paying, the
great Apostles are a sleeping. Besides, men in misery must learn to trust upon
God only, for there are none so near or dear to us, but in times of distress
may come far short of that compassion or succor which we may expect from
them: and if any such thing befall us in our pains or other miseries, we must
labor to comfort our selves with this example of the like case of our Savior.
Moreover, men that are given to bodily sleepiness in time of Gods service
should be warned from hence: Even such a bodily infirmity, if it be nourished,
may bring us into fearful temptations, and makes us guilty of grievous
offense against God and Christ; as is imported by our Saviors mild reproof
of the sleepie Disciples, Matthew. 26.

4. The form of prayer he used, and that was, Abba father, let this cup pass
from me if it be possible; yet not my will but thy will be done, Mark. 14. 36.
In which form we may note three things: First, the Titles he gives to God.
Secondly, the substance of his suit to God. And thirdly, the clauses limiting
his petition.

1. The Titles are recorded by Saint Mark: and we shall find them given to
God in three places of the new Testament: viz. in this prayer of Christ's, and
Romans 8. 15. and Galat. 4. 7. The term Abba, is an Hebrew or Syriacke word:
and the other word Pater, is both a Greek and Latin word: Now in that Christ
calling upon his Father gives him his title in diverse languages, it is thought,
that thereby Christ would intimate that he was the God of both Jews and
Gentiles, and in as much as the time drew on in which the partition wall was to
be broken down, and God was to be believed on, and called upon by both sorts
of people, Christ himself first begins to treat with God in both languages.
And it may well be, that being now in infinite torment he would intimate by
these terms, that he suffered them both for Jews and Gentiles.

2. As for the substance of the petition, a great doubt may arise in a man's
mind how this could be in Christ without sin, or contradiction to himself.
He that had foretold his death, and professed so often to be willing to die,
and was sent into the world for this purpose, and if he died not all the Elect
were undone: how can it be that now he prays that if it be possible he may
not die? I answer this objection two ways: first, that he does not expressly
pray against his death, but his words may be understood as well (as I conceive)
of the Agony he was in, in his soul: and so what inconvenience can follow, if
we grant that he desired of God that it might pass from him, or be quickly
removed, if it were possible and might stand with Gods will: there was no
necessity that his Agony should abide still upon him. Secondly, if it be
understood of his death, yet all that might be without sin, because they are
the words of Christ, now astonished and amazed, his understanding and memory by
the violence of the pain being interrupted in their working for a short time.
As a Clock may be perfect, and yet stand by reason of some outward cause, as a
man's hand, or the weather, or the like: so the frame of our Saviors affections
and desires was most perfect, though by the violence of the hand of God upon
him for a time, his nature remembered only the preservation of her self. From
this frailty of our Savior showed in the matter of his petition, weak
Christians may gather much comfort, and persuasion, that their weakness and
frailties in prayer shall be passed by of God and Christ.

3. The clauses limiting his petition are two. Frst, if it be possible*
Secondly, not my will but thy will be done: which as they showed the holiness
of Christ, in desiring to avoid the requesting of absurd and contrary things,
and to submit himself and his desires to Gods will notwithstanding the torment
he was in: so it is a notable example to teach us what to do in all distresses,
yea the bitterest crosses can befall us, even to strive vehemently to bear
Gods sharpest strokes, with all humble submission to his good will and
pleasure.

Thus of the fourth point in his prayer.

The fifth point, is the issue and event of his prayer, and that is reported
partly by the Evangelist, and partly by the Apostle to the Hebrews. The
Evangelist says that an Angel came from heaven and comforted him in his
Agony, Luke 22. 43. which may teach us to know, that when God will not
presently deliver us from the cross, yet he is able to comfort us under the
cross: and if ordinary means fail, he can supplywith extraordinary: If men
on earth will not pity us, he can send his Angels from heaven to relieve us.
The Apostle to the Hebrews further tells us, even that this prayer was heard of
God as he reports, Heb. 5. 7. Now from hence arises another great scruple, and
that is how it can be said this prayer was heard, seeing he was not delivered,
but did suffer death. I answer, if you understand his prayer only of the speedy
taking off of Gods hand, then there is no difficulty or doubt: and if it be
understood of death, we must fly to a distinction, which is thus: God hears
prayer two ways, the one when he directly grants what we expressly ask, the
other when he gives us so much of our suit as is good for us, and what he
denies, recompenceth in some other thing which is answerable thereunto, and
more profitable for us. So he dealt with Christ here, though he did not free
him from death, yet he did free him from the hurt of death, so as he was able
to bear it, and was delivered from it in due time, which was all that which
the nature of Christ in distress in effect sought, viz. the preservation of it
self: and this may be very useful for us to observe: God may seem to deny
us many things, which yet he grants, and our weakest prayers may get us some
blessing, though we feel it not for the present: and if God change with us,
and give us that which is better for us than that which we ask, he does us no
wrong. In hearing prayer God considers not so much the pleasing of our wills,
as the furthering of our Salvation. And therefore we must take heed we grow
not froward, or discouraged, and judge that God hears us not, because he lets
us pray often, and yet according to the letter of our prayer we see not that we
are heard: let this example of Christ that prayed thrice, and the like of Paul
praying thrice against the temptation of the Devil, stay our heart, and teach
us as to get skill and resolution to pray, so to seek the skill of Gods
different manner of hearing of prayer. Thus of what Christ did: now follows to
consider what was done to him, and that both by the Jews, and by his own
Disciples.

Concerning the behavior of the Jews in the apprehension of Christ, I observe
two things: First, how they came to Christ, and met him. Secondly, how they
laid hands upon him, and bound him and led him away.

About their coming to Christ, three things would be noted: 1. Who came: 2.
How they came furnished: 3. What communication passed between Christ and them,
when they were come.

For the first: The persons that came to Christ, were the Jews and Judas,
soldiers and feruants, all sent from the High Priests and Pharisees, and
Elders of the people, Matt. 26. 47. John 18. 3. And they were a great multitude
of them. So natural is the hatred that the men of the world bear to Christ,
that it is easy to get men enough to bear arms against Christ, or to do hurt
to Religion, or religious persons: but we see in our times what a wonderful
hard thing it is to get men or money to do any service against Antichrist.

For the second: Judas and the Jews came thus furnished; They first get a band
of men, (which being not in the power of the Priests) they must needs have
them, as borrowed from Pilate: And with this Band they send their own
officers, and all were furnished with weapons, swords, and staves: and the Text
notes that they were a great multitude of them. Now what was all this to do?
It was to take Christ, Christ I say, that was known to be so peaceable a Man,
and so quiet, as no man came near him for meekness and lowliness; and
besides, he was usually in the Temple, and so easy to be taken at any time, or
in any place, if they will needs lay violent hands upon him. But observe two
memorable things: First, the effect of an ill conscience, in Judas and the
Priests: they knowing the cause to be so naught, suffer such a conflict with an
army of fears in their own hearts, that fearing lest both God and men should
be against them, they raise an army of men, for the effecting of their wicked
purpose: Oh the force of conscience! What a fearful baseness is it to be
wicked, or to set upon wicked purposes? It is a very troublesome and chargeable
thing, to be engaged for the effecting of mischievous devices. Secondly, note
how just God is: these sinful men have drawn their swords and bent their
bows against the Just one: How deservedly therefore afterward did God make
the sword enter into their own breasts. These men that entertain but one Band
of Romans against their Lord and King, even Christ, shall afterward receive
into their own bowels and bosoms the swords of the whole army of the Romans,
to revenge their rebellion, not against them, but against Christ.

Now for the communication that passed between Christ and the Jews, the
story of it is recorded, Ioh. 18. 4, 5, 6. And in the whole story I note three
things: First, how willing Christ was to be apprehended. Secondly, how
miraculously he showed his divine power upon his enemies. Thirdly, how
carefully he prouides for his Disciples.

His willingness to suffer, appears by those words, that affirm that he
knowing all things should come to him, went forth, and as it were offered
himself, by asking, Whom seek ye, and by answering that it was He, when they
name him. Even the more he feared in the Garden at prayer, the more he strives
to show vndauntednesse now; yea to show how great difference there is between
affliction of spirit, and outward distresses: when the fit of the distress of
his Soul under Gods wrath for our sin, is for a while intermitted, he goes
out to seek his Adversaries, that sought him, as being most willing to take up
a cross, he accounted so easy in comparison of what he had felt.

The demonstration of his divine power upon his enemies he thus showed. When he
had answered that he was that Jesus of Nazareth, whom they sought, then all
went backward and fell to the ground, such amazement fell upon the hearts of
the stoutest of them. They sought the Man Jesus, but that God whose Name was I
am, out of the temple of his body gives that answer, I am he, with such
impressions of his Divinity as strikes them to the ground like dead men. And
this he did for diverse reasons: First, to preserve the undoubted testimony of
his Divinity. He that was shortly to be sacrificed as a Lamb, now wars like
a Lion for a season, that at least the Christian world might know, that it was
God that did suffer for our sins, Act. 20. 28. Secondly, hereby his enemies
are convicted, and left without excuse, that will lay hands on him injuriously,
that had first laid hands on them so justly, and made them know how able he
was to bind them over to eternal perdition. Oh how incorrigible is the heart
of a wicked man! Here may a man behold men smitten to the ground by the hand of
God, and yet see them rise up again as desperately bent as before: Yea, here
stood with these men, and among them fell, Judas, the Apostle, the servant of
Christ, and yet rises again still a Devil, a Traitor, and a Standard Bearer
of the Jews malice, who having the Devil in his breast, does most impudently
give the sign of peace with his mouth. Thirdly, hereby he gives evident
demonstration to all the world, of the terror of his voice against wicked men
at the last day. He that can fright them thus, when he is about to die, being
yet in the form of a servant on earth; how will he be found then, when he
comes in his Kingdom to judge them from heaven, and shall show himself in the
form of God, as well as Man? What tongue of man can express the terror of
that voice, at that day, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. And impenitent men may guess at this, by the power they
have felt in the voice of Christ in the preaching of the Gospel. Another
demonstration of his divine power may it be reckoned, that such as knew him
should look upon him, and not know him, when he asked them, Whom seek ye;
they do not answer, thee, but Jesus of Nazareth, yet Judas was amongst them.

Thirdly, his care of the safety of his Disciples he showed two ways: First,
by going out alone to meet his Adversaries, lest in the tumult his Disciples
should be seized upon. Secondly, by speaking to the armed men to take him, and
let them depart without in^ury. Now the reason why he was so careful of them,
was (as the Evangelist notes) that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which
he spoke in his prayer to his Father, Of those which thou have given me, I have
not lost one: And lost they had been (in our sense) if they had not been
preserved to do the work they were elected to, (viz.) to be witnesses of
Christ's Death and Resurrection throughout the world; which work might have
been hindered by their apprehension. Again, note how our Savior carries
himself toward them: He speaks to them as their Lord and King, and
therefore says, Let these depart, which are words of authority, commanding
them to let the Apostles go; which thing is the more clear, because they did
let them go accordingly.

And thus of their coming to Christ: The taking of him, and binding of him,
and leading him away follows, the story of it we find in all the Evangelists.
Now the reasons why he suffered these things are to be considered. He that
gives liberty to Captives, was taken himself, that he might deliver us from
captivity under Satan, by whom we were detained, and that his captivity might
comfort the Martyrs that suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, and might sanctify
their restraints, and so he was bound, that we might be freeed from the bonds
of our sins, and of the Devil, and evil examples and customs of the world in
which we were fettered, and that he might comfort such as are in bonds for
righteousness sake. He was uncivilly led out of the Garden, that so he might
lead us into the heavenly Paradise, out of which we were cast.

Thus of what the Jews did to him. What was done by his Disciples is briefly
noted, and that was, that they all forsook him and fled: so as he was forsaken
on all hands. And he suffered this desertion for diverse reasons. First, that so
no jot of our redemption, no not the least parcel of it, might be ascribed to
any other than to one Jesus alone. Secondly, that hereby he might satisfy Gods
justice for us, that had forsaken God, and fell away from him by our sins.
Thirdly, that this example might somewhat ease and comfort such as are left and
forsaken by their friends, in their distress. Fourthly, the Scripture was
herein fulfilled, Smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered: and
Christ's words came to pass, All of you this night shall be offended in me.

I omit here the resistance made by the Disciples, especially by Peter, and the
discourse and behavior of our Savior upon it, because that was no part of
Christ's Passion, though it were something that fell out in the story.

Hitherto of Christ's Apprehension, and so of the things that went before his
Arraignment.

The things he suffered at his Arraignment follow: and these may be referred to
two heads. The one is the things he suffered (when he was brought bound before
the Judges or Rulers) in the night, when things were carried tumultuously and
without any order. The other contains the things he suffered when they would
proceed iudicially with him, and that was in the day time.

In the night he suffered three things. First, he was carried up and down
bound from one High Priest to another. Secondly, he was three times denied by
Peter his own servant and Disciple. Thirdly, he was ill entreated by the men
that kept him bound. And that these things fell all out before the solemn
Council of the High Priests, and in the night, appears by Saint Lukes
narration of it, Chap. 22. though the other Evangelists observe not the order
so precisely.

For the first: The Captain of the band, and the Soldiers and Officers of the
Jews, carried Christ first to Annas that was father in law to Caiaphas, and
then to Caiaphas afterward, John 18. In which dealing two things may be noted.
First, the glory these wretched men take in showing their Prisoner one to
another: How glad they are to see Jesus bound, and to know but that their
devices prosper so far; now was the time that the world rejoiced, and the
Disciples wept, John 16. 20. Secondly, it seems Caiaphas plays the
Politician, for since the time he had been author of that counsel, that one
must die for the people, all the work is directed to him. If great men once
become authors of mischief and ill counsel, they know not how far they may
be lead on in wickedness: but Caiaphas perceiving the work must light upon
him, subtly gives order (as is likely) that he should first be carried to
Annas, that so he might either decline the envy of the people, or have him
partner in it.

For the second: The story of Peter's denial is at large set down by the
Evangelists, and therein three things are noted; the occasions of his fall, the
manner of it, and the event. The occasions are observed by the Evangelists to
be four: or, by four steps and degrees he is brought into the snare of this
temptation. For first he followed Christ afar off, Matthew. 26. 58. That he
followed him, it was his affection and devotion; but that he followed him
afar off, it was his fear: and in this fear is laid the first ground of his
fall. To expose himself to danger, when he felt his heart afraid of it,
especially when there was no necessary cause to venture himself upon it, was a
strong occasion to the temptation. Secondly, a Disciple that was known to the
High Priests, and ^ent in with Jesus into the Palace, spoke to him that kept
the door, and so got Peter in, John 18. 15, 16. and this was a second step to
his temptation. The courtesy of his friend proves a snare to him, and the
rather because he went in out of curiosity, and not out of any settled reason
or cause to glorify God: for Saint Matthew says he went in but to see the
end, that is, to observe what would become of Christ, Matthew. 26. 58. Thirdly,
he sat and warmed himself by the High Priests fire, with the servants of the
High Priests, John 18. 18. He that was for a long time accustomed to the holy
conversation of Christ, and his fellow Disciples, where he was accustomed to
goodness in words and deeds, now comes into the company of the ungodly without
calling, whose tongues were bent to mischief, and their throat an open
sepulcher, and here as a man coming suddenly into a new world, receives strong
impressions of evil, his fearful heart being not able to cast up the poison
he received from their Society: and this was the third degree or step to his
fall. Fourthly, he was examined and accused to be one of Christ's followers, and
so charged in that part in which he was weakest: For first, a Damsel that
kept the door, asked him whether he was not one of them, Ioh. 18. 19. and then
the servants by the fireside charge him again, verse. 25. gathering belike
from his behavior that he was not one of their side, in that he did not join
with them to discourse against Christ, and therefore it was likely that he was
Christ's Disciple, and they told him his speech bewrayed him, he spoke like a
Galilaean. Then in the third place, a kinsman to Malchus, whose ear he cut
off, charged him that he saw him in the Garden, Ioh. 18. 26. The Devil that
desired greatly to sift him, and to increase his misery, plies him with
objections, and all suddenly till his sin was brought to the height. Thus of
the occasions of his fall. The manner of it follows: and so the Evangelists
show, that first he denied Christ, saying that he knew him not. Then he denied
him again with an oath: Then thirdly, he began to curse and swear, saying, he
knew not the man: Oh Peter know not thou the man, that before had
confessed him to be God? The event was his Repentance; and there is observed
the means of it, and the manner of it. The means less principal, was the
crowing of the Cock, according to the prophecy of his Savior. The principal
was, that Christ looked back upon him, and then Peter remembered Christ's words,
which presently brake his heart, Luk^ 22. 61. The manner of his repentance was,
that he went out of that wicked place, and wept bitterly. He forsakes the
needless society of the wicked, and with much sorrow bewailes his great sin.
Thus of the Story.

Now the reason why our Savior suffered this kind of affliction, to be denied
thus of his own servant, was, that so he might satisfy Gods justice for us,
that had denied God in Paradise: because we had denied God, he was content to
be denied by his own servant.

There may be many uses made of this lamentable Story of Peter's fall: 1. For
first, we may all be warned by his fall, to take heed of the occasions that led
him into this sin; and so especially to take heed of security and trust in
our own strength. This is the man that a little before said he would not deny
him, though he should die with him. Let him that stands take heed lest he
fall: No man is strong by his own might, and therefore let us work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, and know that we are kept only by Gods
power and true faith in him. Again, we see how pernicious a thing it is to
fall suddenly into carnal company, without a Calling: It is hard to touch
Pitch, and not be defiled, especially in evil times when men are heated with
malice, we should altogether avoid their presence, if it be possible: The High
Priests fire undid Peter.

2 Wicked men must take heed of abusing such examples as this, by gathering
from thence any liberty to sin: think not to sin securely, because Peter
sinned so grievously: Remember two things, if thou take liberty to sin,
because Peter so sinned. First, that Peter's sin brought bitter grief to his
heart: He went out and wept bitterly, says the Text: If thou would as well
consider the sorrows Gods servants brought upon themselves for their sins,
as the greatness of their offense, thou would find small provocation from
such woeful presidents. Again, it is true that Peter sinned and yet was saved,
and yet it is as true that Judas sinned and was damned, and yet was an Apostle
of Christ as well as Peter.

3. We may hence learn what is necessary to true repentance, viz. First, to
get out from the society of wicked men: a man cannot repent, and yet remain
still by the Highpriests fire. Secondly, to bewail our sins by true godly
sorrow in secret: without mourning for sin, there can be no true repentance for
sin; and therefore the afflicting of our soul for our sins is peremptorily
required, Joel 2. 12. Iam. 4. And the sacrifices of God are a broken and
contrite heart, Psalm. 51.

4. Here are diverse things worthy the marking about the means of a man's
conversion: For first hence we may learn, that the Doctrine a man hears,
though it do not presently work upon him, yet the remembrance of it in
aftertimes may be very powerful to turn a man's heart to God: as here Peter
is turned by remembering what Jesus said unto him, though when he said it, Peter
made no good use of it. Again, we may gather hence, that God can awaken the
conscience of a man by strange operations, by very simple and unlikely means;
as here the conscience of Peter is excited by the crowing of a Cock; but
especially the heart of Peter is dissolved, and grownd almost to powder, with
the very looks of Christ: Jesus looked back upon him, and he went out and
wept bitterly.

5. Here is also matter of Consolation: for penitent sinners may bence gather,
that great offenses may be forgiven, if they be truly humbled: If we weep for
our sins as Peter did, we may be received to favor as Peter was. Besides,
our Savior that foretold his fall, annexeth two admirable consolations: First,
that he prays for the godly that their faith should not fail, though they
fall grievously. Secondly, that how far soever the Devil preuailes, yet all
his temptations shall be but like a winnowing: God can tell how to draw light
out of darkness, and to waste the maine heap of corruption, even from his
working upon men's hearts through the sight of their falls into some particular
corruptions, Luke 22. 31, 32.

Lastly, the example of the falls of godly men should teach us to use all
means to strengthen one another, that we may be vpheld from falling;
especially such as have fallen, and are recovered, should strive by all means
to warn others, and to help by all ways they can to preserve others, When
thou art converted strengthen thy brethren, said our Savior to Peter, Luke 22.
32.

Thus he was denied by Peter.

3. He was ill entreated by them that kept him bound: for as Saint Luke shows
chapter 22. they mocked him and smote him, and when they had blindfolded him,
they stroke him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophecy unto us, who it
is that smote thee. And many other things blasphemously spoke they against him.
Here we may behold a lamentable spectacle, of that disorder into which wretched
men fall, when they give the reins to their wicked malice, and think they may
do it without punishment. What woeful indignities are these, these base Jews
offer to our blessed Savior? They blindfold and buffet that face, which their
godly Forefathers and Prophets so longed to behold, even that face that was
fairer than the children of men. And what was of more authority than the
sacred Prophesying of Jesus, who spoke as never man spoke, and confirmed it by
miracles, and yet see how this base vulgar scorns his Prophesying? They that
before persecuted the Prophets of the Lord, now blaspheme and deride the Lord
of the Prophets. Thus it is still with us in places where the wicked multitude
dare oppose the Messengers of Christ, with opinion they may do it without
punishment. When Magistrates are wicked and haters of goodness, these things
fall out amongst the multitude. There are two signs of a child of God: The
personal love of the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 8. and the high estimation of the
word of Christ. Now on the contrary, there cannot be more palpable signs of a
wicked or reprobate heart, than to loath Christ, and despise Prophesying.
Again, note another madness and folly in these beasts: They think they can
hoodwinke Christ: What, can their base covering hide the eyes of the Son of
God, that had so often made them know that he could see into their very hearts?
Will God be blindfolded? Thus foolish are wicked men: and this mad folly is not
out of the hearts of such men amongst us, that think they have the skill still
to hoodwinke God, that he should not see their hypocrisy, and know their
secret corruptions. But some one may say, it was wonder Christ would endure
such mean usage: I answer, we must look higher than the wickedness of these
men: Christ as our surety suffers all this, that he might make expiation for
our sins, that had lost the face or image of God, and that he might deliver
us from those contumelies might justly follow us for our sins: and withal
might leave us an example of patience, if we suffer mean usage from the men of
this world: and the rather because we see in the Text, what interpretation was
made of this dealing of theirs, it is reckoned as blasphemy against God.

And thus of the things done in the Night tumultuously: Now follows the things
he suffered in the Day, when they proceed to Judgment; for in the morning
early they bring forth Jesus to be indicted, and hear Judgment, and that both
in the Ecclesiastical and in the Civil Court. But before I open the
particulars, our hearts should make a stand, and think of the general, with
amazement at the work was done that day. There was never such a dreadful
sight to be seen, in any age of the world: for on that day, the Son of God,
the King of Heaven and Earth, stood at the bar of mortal creatures, was
indicted and condemned of sinful men, and had many grievous things laid to his
charge. Oh, in what Labyrinths are our dead hearts sleeping, that so prodigious
a thing as this cannot waken us to unspeakable sense and wonder! But let us
consider the reasons of his Passion in this kind in general.

1. Our Savior would not die in a tumult or secretly, but came solemnly to
his trial in both Courts, that so his innocence might be fully cleared, and
the wicked envy and malice of the High Priests and the Jews might be made
manifest.

2. He stood there as surety for us, that were obnox ous to the sentence of the
eternal Judge, and had deserved by our sins to be indicted and condemned to
eternal perdition.

3. He was indicted and condemned on earth* that he might free us from the fury
of Gods judgment, that we might never appear before Gods Tribunal to be
arraigned for our sins, but only to hear judgment for our absolution, and
entrance into the possession of that everlasting kingdom.

And therefore the Use of this should be for singular comfort to the godly,
even to all that believe in Jesus. He was arraigned before the Priests, and
Pilate, that they might not be arraigned before God. He was pursued in every
Court, that no Court of Justice might lay hold on them. He was accused before
an earthly Judge, that they might be freed by the heavenly Judge. He was
condemned on earth, that we might be absolved in heaven. And withal here is
terrible discomfort to the wicked, that will not repent of their sins and
believe in Jesus. They may guess what shall become of them: if Christ endured
to be arraigned on earth, and to be so used at man's Tribunal, how shall they
escape the terror of their arraignment at the dreadful day of Judgment? He
that has been abased to these indignities, will pay them home with just
vengeance, when ^hey shall fall into his hands at the last day: and i^ God
spared not his own Son, but arraigned him for our sins, how shall he spare
them?

Thus in general. Now in particular in the arraignment of Christ we are to
consider: First, his accusation: Secondly, his condemnation or sentence. In his
accusation there was a double proceeding: For first he was brought into the
Ecclesiastical Court, before Caiaph as the High Priest, in a great Council or
Synedrion at Jerusalem; and then after he was brought before the Political
Tribunal of Pilate the Roman Governor.

First of the arraignment of our Savior in the Ecclesiastical Court: The
Story of the Evangelist shows with what corruption and injustice he was used
in their Consistory: For first the Judges themselves, before they hear the
cause, take counsel how to put him to death, intending by all their courses to
devise all the ways they could to get color of matter against him, to
complain to the Civil Magistrate that he might put him to death. Secondly,
it is expressly said, that they sought false witness against him: and this was
a gross injustice to suborne false witnesses. Thirdly, in the very Court
before the face of the High Priest, Christ is smitten on the face with a rod by
a base slave that was servant or officer to the High Priest, John 18. 22.
Fourthly, he was accused of double blasphemy, the one against the Temple, and
the other against God. Against the Temple, because he should threaten to
destroy it, and pull it down, and set it up again by his own power, within
three days. Against God, because he said he was Christ the Son of God. And
this is the sum of the proceedings in that Court. Now out of the whole Story
many things may be noted which may serve for good use, as

First, we may see hence, that Christ and true Christians may be persecuted and
monstrously abused in Spiritual Courts as well as Temporal. Christ never had
worser enemies, nor more corrupt and malicious than Churchmen. In his own
person none hated him more deadly than the Priests and great spiritual
Counselors of the State Ecclesiasticke. And in times after of all the great
ones that opposed Christ and his Kingdom, none deserved the name of that
Antichrist more than the Bishops of Rome. And certainly if he suffer such
wrongs in their Courts, if they repent not, and reform, he will judge them in
his Court one day to their eternal confusion. Again, it is most clear from
hence, that the restimonie of Councels, or the outward glory of learned men
professing a religion, are not infallible marks of the Truth. Here is a great
Council, and here sit the great Rabbis in their Pontificalibus, when Christ
stands amongst them in the condition of a poor prisoner. Now what could the
Papists say in Queen Mary's times to the Protestant prisoners, that might not
be said by these Jews against true Religion? Again, we may observe out of
this Story, what horrible injury may be done to a man in reporting his
words, though the most of the words be reported that were spoken, and how a
man's meaning may be vilely perverted by a little change of the words: Christ
had said, Destroy this Temple, and I will build it up again in three days: he
meant his body by the Temple, and his Resurrection should be the building up of
it again. Now the false witnesses urge this sentence contrary to his sense,
and in stead of the word Destroy ye, they report it thus, I will destroy: and
so out of all frame that accusation, that he would pull down the Temple. Let
all men take heed what they hear, and what they report: especially in hearing
doctrine let them take heed that by their fault they do not make their
Teachers sin in the word as the Prophets phrase was, that is, that they do
not by mistaking make such report of their Teachers doctrine, as may bring them
into danger, when they meant or said no such thing. And yet moreover we may
note one thing more for information, and that may be gathered from the
behavior of the High Priests feruant, in striking Christ so proudly and
unjustly, without any bidding or warrant; and the rather, if we mark how the
night before Jesus was used by these Seruing-men and officers, and so
afterward: That I would observe, is, That it often falls out that servants are
like their Masters. If the Judges of Courts be not lovers of goodness, and
good men, but rather such as seek all occasions against them, and disgrace and
discountenance them, it is ordinarily seen, that their servants and officers,
their Sergeants and Apparitors, and such like, carry themselves with vile
injustice and scorn toward the godly. What vermin in the world can be more
odious than the servants and officers of great men, or Judges, or Bishops, or
such as have Authority in Ecclesiastical or Temporal things, when the Masters
prove to be men of corrupt minds, and not lovers of goodness and justice. And
so it is in all States, even in the family. How often do the sins of Masters
and parents break out in their children and servants? Certainly the complaint
of ill servants would be in the greatest part of it, taken away, if Masters
were better themselves.

And thus for information. Now besides here may be diverse things learned for
our instruction, from the behavior of our Savior at this time, from the
things he said or did. Yea there is one thing to be learned from these wicked
Rulers, though they did sinfully: We read here of them, that they rise early
in the morning and getto the Court, and dispatch the business quickly: Now if
to do mischief, their feet make such haste to shed blood; surely good Judges
should learn expedition from them, so it be in good causes: Judges of Courts
should provide, if it be possible, to cut off these miserable delays in suits:
and when they fully understand the cause, dispatch the Justice of it quickly.

Now from the behavior of our Savior we may learn diverse things.

1. Whereas he was examined both of his doctrine and his Disciples, he answers
to the point of his doctrine, but says nothing of his Disciples, and yet he
might have answered that one of them betrayed him, and another denied him, and
the rest ran away from him: To teach us that no extremity befalling our
selves, should make us discover the weaknesses of others to the Enemies of
Religion, when it may any way do hurt to the honor of the profession of
Religion. And again, we may learn to be patient under the aspersion of
Schism, and not to be unquiet at it. Our Savior was examined about his
Disciples, upon pretense that he had made a Schism in the Church, by admitting
so many followers, and such concourse of people to hear him, with intimation
that he might intend sedition in the State: Now to all this he gives no answer,
but rests satisfied, as knowing that the consciences of his adversaries were
persuaded otherwise of him.

2. When he answers about his doctrine, it is in general, and sparingly, to
teach us wisdom in evil times, and to learn how to bridle our tongues, when
we speak before men in authority, especially if they be enemies to Religion.

3. From his answer about his doctrine, the Hearers of godly Teachers may
learn one profitable lesson, namely, to mark the doctrine of their Teachers,
and to grow so cunning in it, that they may be able to defend their Teachers
and the Truth. Christ referred himself to his Hearers, John 18. 19, 20.

4. What admirable patience was that in Jesus Christ, when he was smitten by
the High Priests servant, to speak to him so coolely, saying, If I have evil
spoken, bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, why smitest
thou me? John 18. 23. He deals like a wise and patient Physician: if he have a
patient that is mad, he does not rage if his mad patient should strike at
him, but rather quietly will strive to pacify the fury of the mad man, or
else bind him: So does our sweet Physician of our souls: they are spiritually
mad, that will strike Jesus their spiritual Physician, or offer indignities
to such as come in his name. Let us all learn patience of our blessed Savior.

5. We should from the consideration of all this unjust proceeding with our
Savior, be stirred up from our hearts to praise God for the public peace we
enjoy in preaching and hearing the Gospel: We little know what we should
suffer, if we should fall into the hands of unreasonable men, whether in the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Courts: but if at any time, without our fault, we
should have experience of corruption, and envious and malicious proceedings
against us for our consciences sake, we should comfort our selves by the
remembrance of these things that befell our blessed Savior.

Before I leave this part of his Passion, one question may be asked, and that
is, why our Savior held his peace when the false witnesses gave evidence
against him; yea he held his peace, though the High Priest urged him to speak
to the accusation of the witnesses: Now for answer to this question we may
conceive that our Savior was silent for these Reasons.

1. Because he knew that he came thither to suffer, not to defend himself, as
being sent thither to suffer by God himself.

2. Because he knew he should be condemned, though he did clear himself of
their accusation.

3. That by his patience and silence, he might intimate the vanity of their
accusation, and the falsenesse of it.

4. That the Scripture might be fulfilled, that said, He was as asheepe dumb
before his shearer, Esaias 53. 7.

5. That so he might pay for our shiftings and excuses.

6. That he might thereby acknowledge our sin-guiltinesse: as surety he stood
there for men that were justly accused of God; and therefore as one confessing
a fault, he forbears to defend or excuse himself.

7. That he might by his example teach us to be silent in evil times, when
truth will not take place.

Thus of the Arraignment of our Savior in the Ecclesiastical Court. Now
follows the things he suffered in the Civil Court before Pontius Pilate: And
here first in general we may consider the reasons why Christ would be judged
in the Political Court of Justice: and he did it,

1. That his innocence might be made more public; which fell out, as appears
by the story, in many things.

2. That so he might be sente^ced to die by the ordinary Judge: for the Jews
had not power to put any man to death.

3. That so it might appear that the Gentiles had interest in his death as
well as the Jews; and therefore the Gentiles lay their hands upon the head of
this Sacrifice.

4. That the cruelty and unequal dealing of the Chief Priests and their
counsel might be more manifest, when it should appear that the Political
Judge shall use Christ with more respect, than they did. And thus it often
comes to pass still in the case of his Ministers and servants.

Quest. But why must he be judged by Pilate, a Gentile, a Deputy of the Roman
Caesar?
Answ. Even that was not without special cause: For first, Christ seems to
say himself that God had given that power to Pilate to put Christ to death,
Ioh. 19. 10, 11. Secondly, it has been noted before, that by this
circumstance it appeared that the Scepter was now departed from Judah, and
therefore Jesus was that Shiloh that should come. And here by the way they of
the Church of Rome might learn that Churchmen must abide the judgment of Lay
Judges; yea, though they be of a false religion. Christ yielded himself to be
judged by Pilate; and therefore it is a trick of Antichrist to refuse it.

Now in the Arraignment of our Savior before Pilate, we are to consider two
things.

1. His Accusation. 2. The proceedings of the Judge.
About his Accusation three things may be noted.

1. By whom he was accused viz. By the Chief Priests, and Elders, and Scribes,
and Pharisees. They that were erewhile his Judges, are now become his accusers:
Saint Matthew notes they did it of envy, Matthew. 27. 18. Surely envy is very
cruel and very base. It is a cruel thing to pursue a man to the death, for no
other cause, but because he is better beloved of God or man than themselves.
And it was most base for these great men to turn accusers at the Bar of the
Civil Judge, and to do it in their own persons.

2. Where he was accused: viz. at the door of the Common Hall, John 18. 28.
These wretched men that made no conscience of pursuing an innocent man to the
death, yet are very strict about Ceremonies. They would not enter into the
Common Hall lest they should be defiled, and so be made unfit to celebrate the
Passover. And why would the Hall defile them, but because it was the seat of a
Gentile? Oh vile hypocrisy! will the house defile them, and yet the presence
of the man do them no hurt? It is a most hateful thing to be an Hypocrite, and
an Hypocrite he is that strains at a Gnat and swallows a Cammell; that is
precise and superstitious about small matters, and yet makes not Conscience of
gross sins.

3. What they charged upon him. They charged upon him three things: First,
seducing of the people, as one that had peruerted^ their Nation, and stirred up
the people throughout all Judea, beginning from Galile to Jerusalem, Luke 23.
2. 5. Secondly, sedition, as one that deceived and forbade the paying of
tribute to Caesar, Luke 23. 2. Thirdly, high treason against Caesar, in saying
he was a King, Luke. 23. 2. Ioh. 19. 12. The first of these was vain, and the
two last false. For the extraordinary moving of the people is not in it self a
fault, unless they be moved without cause, or by ill means, or to ill ends.
The other two are false: for he paid tribute himself, though as a Prince of
the blood he was free, Matthew. 17. 27. And when the people would have made him
King he refused it, Ioh. 6. 15. Hence we see that even Christ himself has
been liable to the same accusations and slanders are cast upon his poor
servants: which should the more comfort the godly when they are slandered and
charged with Innovation, Schism, Sedition, or to be enemies to Princes, or the
like. But especially hence should the godly take comfort in the hope of the
forgiveness of all their sins against God, how great soever: for to this end
was Christ charged with these great offenses unjustly, that he might make
atonement for our sins that were guilty, even of high treason against God.

Thus of his Accusation. The proceeding of the Judge follows, where we may
note two things: First, how Pilate exammed Christ. Secondly, what means he
used to deliver Christ.

For the first, when the Jews had thus accused our Savior, Pilate went in to
Christ, and examined him only upon the three points, whether he were a King.
The first, as a business concerned their own Law, he would not meddle with.
And the second either he believed not, or accounted it to be comprehended in
the third. Now to this question of P^late our Savior gives an answer: wherein
we should take notice of sour things, which he thought good to testify and
avouch at his Arraignment as truths most needful, and not to be denied or
controuled at any time: First, that he was a King. Secondly, that his Kingdom
was not of this world, Thirdly, that the end of his coming was to bear
witness of the Truth. Fourthly, that his subjects were such as were of the
Truth, and did hear his voice, Ioh. 18. 36, 37. These parts of the confession
of Jesus, should not pass without lively use in our hearts. For first, if
Jesus be King, why are we discontented with our estates, why live we not out of
fear and care? Is there not a King in Sion, Mich. 4. 9. and the rather,
because our King is a King universal, and all power is given unto him in
heaven and earth: and besides, he is a King immortal, and of his kingdom
there is no end: and therefore we should seek to him in all our necessities,
who is so able to help, and trust in him. And for the second, if his kingdom
be not of this world, we should not expect to have the glory of our Religion
to be liable to outward observations, but rather pray that God would open our
eyes to see wherein the true glory of Christ's kingdom lies, Ephesians. 1. 19. And
withal it should teach us to employ our selves about spiritual things, and
not about earthly; for the wealth of his kingdom lies not in earthly things,
our trading must be about heavenly commodities, Coloss. 3. 1, 2. And further,
seeing his kingdom is over the spirits of men, we should labor to get
spirits without guile, and to serve him in spirit and truth. And poor men
should not be discontent with their estates: His kingdom is not of this world,
he never promised great things in earthly matters to his followers; they
should rather rejoice that they are exalted to get the preferments of his
kingdom in spiritual things.

Now for the third point, if the end of Christ's coming were to bear witness
of the Truth, we may gather diverse things from thence: As first, it may inform
us of the entertainment Truth finds in the world: It is more villanously
neglected, and opposed, and wronged, when the Son of God must come from
heaven to give evidence in the behalf of truth. It imports the truth is more
often questioned than error and wickedness. Again, it may intimate, that
Truth is great and will prevail: God will send from heaven to help it, rather
than it shall be suppressed, though it be oppressed. And besides, we may gather
hence, that the preaching and publishing of divine Truths is a most excellent
work, in that the chief office of the Son of God was to bear witness of the
Truth: and so it should teach us to receive the word of truth with all
reverence, and gladness, and good conscience: as accounting truth to be the
most precious treasure God sends to men. And from the practice of Christ both
Ministers and People should learn with all wisdom and constancy to stand for
the truth, though it were to death, and never to be ashamed to witness to the
truth, by holding out the light of the profession of it, and showing our sound
obedience, and subjection to it, howsoever it be taken in the world.

As for the last point, our Savior gives an excellent mark to know his
subjects by: They are of the Truth and hear his voice: They are of the Truth,
not only as they take part with Truth to defend it, but as men that were borne
and bred by the power of truth: they were regenerated and sanctified by the
force of the sound of Truth: and accordingly the chief comfort and treasure of
their lives they account to be the hearing of the voice of Christ: Hearing of
Sermons is the Character of a true Christian. But it is not all hearing, but a
hearing of such Sermond as have the voice and power of Christ in them: and such
a hearing as places such felicity in the voice of Christ, as they could be
content (as it were) to do nothing else but hear Christ still: and such a
hearing too, as will give glory to Christ's voice in the hardest times, when it
is most scorned and opposed in the world: and especially it is such a hearing
as contains obeying and willingness to be ruled by the voice of Christ. And
this was the answer which our Savior made to the Governors question: but
Saint Matthew notes that when the chief Priests accused him, he answered
nothing, and though Pilate said unto him, Hear thou not, how many things
they witness against thee? yet he answered not, in so much that Pilate
marvelled greatly, Matthew. 27. 12, 13, 14.

He thus constantly forbear and refused to answer,

1. Because he needed not any apology, being known to be innocent, and thus
it became the Christ, the Lords anointed King, to carry himself: Kings need
not seek protection or defense for themselves by words against the false
accusations of their subjects.

2. Hereby he shows his magnanimity in contemning death: If he had answered,
he might seem to do it, to prevent the sentence of death: He that seeks not
life, fears not death. He that saues all men, betrays his own safety, that
he might purchase our salvation.

3. By his Silence he satisfies Gods justice for the sins of our words.

4. He is silent on earth, that he might merit to speak for us in heaven, by
making intercession freely for us at the right hand of God: and that we might
have free access to God for our prayers, in pleading for our lives through his
merit.

5. He has thereby left us an example, to teach us to bear false accusations
patiently; and imports that our innocence shall not need defense, when wicked
men are unreasonable: He may well be silent that needs not defense. Let them be
eager to make Apologies that fear to be found guilty: the cause is the
better, that is not defended, and yet is proved.

6. Hereby he proves himself to be the Messiah promised, because he was as a
sheep dumb before his Shearers, according to the prophecy, Esaias 53. 7.

And as he was silent in these accusations that touched his life, so afterward
when they accused him for making himself the Son of God, Ioh. 19. 7. he
would give no answer to Pilate, that being much afraid, asked him whence he
was, verse. 8, 9. both because Pilate was incapable of the doctrine of the
Trinity, and because there was no time to reveal his Deity, but rather to
suffer and die according to his Humanity.

Thus of our Saviors examination: Now follow the courses the Judge took to
avoid putting of him to death, and so to save his life; and so in the story we
shall find, that Pilate used four policies to save Christ, or at least to put
off the business from himself.

The first was, that he persuades the Jews to take him themselves, and judge
him by their own law, Ioh. 18. 31. but this policy succeeds not, and that for
two Reasons: First, the Jews plead they had not power to put any man to death,
because the Romans had taken that jurisdiction into their own hands. In which
answer of theirs, we see their horrible wickedness and impudency that
profess to have resolved upon his death, and to tell the Judge so, before the
cause be opened: and yet the providence of God was in this thing. God had sent
him to die for the people, and by the people his death is called for with
importunity. Secondly, the Text says, That this was done that the saying of
Jesus might be fulfilled, signifying what death he should die: for he had said
that he should be delivered up into the hands of the Gentiles to be crucified,
and therefore this policy must be disappointed: whence we may note, that the
Counsel and word of God concerning the sufferings of his people cannot be
altered. It shall not be with us according to the will of men, but Gods
Counsel shall stand, which should make us with the more patience to bear what
may befall us, seeing if God do it, it will be good for us, and no adversaries
can have their wills of us further than their plots and practices do serve to
accomplish Gods secret will.

The second policy used by Pilate was, that he took occasion from the report
that Christ was a Galilean, to send him to Herod to be tried before him, Luke
23. 6, 7, etc. This Herod was he that cut off John Baptists head, and was
called (to distinguish him from other Herod's) Herod Antipas. Pilate though he
dealt herein politickly, yet he deals unjustly, for he ought to have defended
the innocence of our Savior, and delivered him from the hands of his violent
and unreasonable adversaries, and not send him to another.

In the Story of Christ's appearing before Herod, observe:

1. The disposition of Herod, and how he stood affected toward our Savior:
the Text says, He was glad of his coming, and had long desired to see him,
and hoped to see him work some miracle before him, Luke 23. 8. There is a great
difference between godly men and wicked men, though they both meet in this,
that they desire Christ, or to see Christ. A wicked man desires more the
miracles of Christ than his word: A godly man especially desires to hear the
voice of Christ. My sheep hear my voice, says our Savior. Herod had been
so searched by the ministry of John, that he durst not adventure to hear any
effectual ministry afterward: He has no desire to have Christ to instruct
him in the great mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, or to show him how he
might save his soul. To desire Christ for carnal ends, as pleasure, glory,
profit, or the like, is but an unregenerate humor. To desire Christ for his
own sake, or for his word sake, or for the holiness we desire to get from
him, is proper only to the godly.

2. The behavior of our Savior, who would not yield to work any miracle
before Herod, because he knew Herod would abuse the power of God, to make sport
of such great works to feed his own vanity: and besides our Savior
constantly applies himself to the business he came about. He knew then, that
was not a time of exercising his power, but of suffering. Secondly, though
Herod questioned with him in many words, yet he answered him nothing, Which he
did first to abate the pride and vanity of Herod, thereby intimating how little
he esteemed his worldly greatness, and how much he contemned his leuitie and
vanity of mind. Secondly, he would not cast Pearl before Swine: He knew he
should do no good by talking to him, that was a man given to so much
viciousness of life and voluptuousness. Thirdly, because he knew that he must
receive his sentence not from Herod a Jew, but from Pilate a Roman and
Gen^^ie, and be condemned and put to death after the Roman manner, viz. by
crucifying.

3. The things our Savior suffered: and so first from the Jews, then from
Herod. The Jews, viz. the chief Priests and Scribes, stood and vehemently
accused him; which our Savior endured, and came to pass by Gods providence,
that so thereby the innocence of Christ might be the more manifest, which was
easily discerned by Herod. observing the violent and tumultuous proceedings of
the Priests: and it may be gathered from Pilats speech, that Herod did find no
fault in him, Luke 23. 15. From Herod our Savior suffered two things: First, he
was extremely mocked by Herod and his men of war: and then he was sent back
to Pilate arraied in a gorgeous robe. For the first, we see how great men that
are given to pleasure and worldly pomp, entertain Christ and religion. It is
no strange thing that religion should be scorned by voluptuous worldlings, or
people given to vanity. It is enough for the servant to be as his Lord is: If
we be set at naught, and reproched, and scorned by the world, we should not
think any great matter was befallen us, for thus was Christ himself used, and
that in the open Court of a great King publicly.

Again, we should know that Christ did therefore endure to be thus vilified by
Herod and his men of war, that he might make us precious before God and his
heavenly Army of Saints and Angels. And whereas Herod sends him back clothed
in a white or gorgeous robe, though Herod intended nothing but matter of
scorn, yet Divines conceive, that God did thereby acknowledge him to be that
lamb without spot that should take away the sins of the world, and to be
indeed the true King of Heaven. That which men did in jest, God did in earnest.
Herod clothes him with a robe like a King, as one that foolishly had affected
the kingdom. But God by permitting the Royal robe, does acknowledge his just
claim to be King of Sion.

4. The event of this business, was the reconciliation of Herod and Pilate,
who were made friends the same day, Luke 23. 12. which shows the temper of the
men of this world, who though they cannot agree among themselves, yet rather
than Christ shall not be persecuted, they will become friends: Wicked men are
easily agreed, when there is a common opposition to be made against religion:
Ephraim is against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and yet both will
agree to be against Judah. Yet observe here, the vanity of all friendship
amongst Politicians. Herod is greatly pleased, that Pilate will acknowledge so
much right to him as to send his prisoner to him, only because he was a
Galilaean. Now Herod was mistaken, for though that were Pilates pretense, yet
he intended another thing, which was to derive the hatred of so foul a
business upon Herod, as Caiaphas had served Annas before. And thus of Pilates
second Policy.

The third Policy which Pilate used to acquit Christ, was to make a motion to
the people to have Christ given to them, in honor of their great Feast. About
which observe

1. The occasion of this practice, and that was a custom which the Jews had,
to have a prisoner delivered at the Feast of the Passover, by the Governor,
which they would. Now this custom was either an ancient custom of the Jews,
who to signify their deliverance out of Egypt, had devised this custom at the
Passover to let a prisoner go free: Or else it was some grant which the
Romans had made unto the Jews, after they had reduced the Country into the
form of a Province.

2. The manner of Pilates dealing to accomplish his will in this motion: and so
he matcheth Christ with one Barrabas that was a murderer and a notorious
malefactor, and then gives them power to choose their prisoner, so as they choose
one of the two, supposing that the horrible offense of Barrabas would for the
very show of it, hinder them from choosing him.

3. The choice the Jews made: and so by the persuasion of the Priests, the
multitude chooses Barrabas and rejects Jesus. The author of life is by the
Jews rejected, and a murderer chosen: The innocent must die, and the guilty
live: He that thought it no robbery ^o be equal with God, has a Thief and a
Robber preferred before him. Now does he pay for our sin, that preferred the
Devil that murderer, before God the author of life. In these Jews we see the
nature of carnal persons: They make more account of gross offenders, than
they do of godly Christians. They choose the Barrabasses of the world
(Drunkards, Papists, Whoremongers, Swearers, Murderers,) to be the companions
of their lives, but altogether shun and avoid the company of Gods servants. But
the godly that are so vilified, should comfort themselves by this example of
our Saviors suffering herein. Christ was not so well accounted of as Barrabas,
and yet endured it: but what cause have those Christians to be so unquiet, when
others are preferred before them, that are indeed more wise, learned, godly and
humble than they?

4. When none of these courses will serve turn, then Pilate yet tries one more
to see whether he can appease the cruel malice of the Jews. The way he used
was this. He took Jesus into the common Hall, and caused him there to be
extremely scourged and vilified by the soldiers, John 19. 1, 2, 3. thinking
that when the Jews saw him so hardly used, and abased, and that he being a
Jew, should be so dealt withal by Gentiles, they would have relented, and so
have been satisfied with that punishment was now inflicted upon him. Observe
the implacable malice of men, that hate sincerity and true religion, nothing
but blood will satisfy their thirst of revenge: And withal observe the
foolish reasoning of Pilate; I find no fault in this man, I will therefore
chastise him, and let him go: Most senslesly spoken: Shall he be chastised,
and yet be innocent? Luke 23. 14, 15, 16. But we must look higher, if we
would find out the true cause of the scourging of Jesus.

1. He was scourged, that he might redeem us from those spiritual and
eternal scourges were due unto us for our sins. Amongst the Romans, fugitive
servants were brought back to their Masters, and beaten with rods. We have all
been fugitive servants, and run away from God our Masters works: Jesus now
bears our stripes, and gives his own hands that give liberty, to be bound,
and his own body to be beaten, that he might derive our stripes upon himself.

2. That he might sanctify those bodily scourges which befall us, such as are
diseases of any sort. For diseases are called scourges, Matthew. 5. 29.

3. That by the virtue of his stripes, our souls might be healed of our
sins, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and the sores that arise from the buffets of Satan's
temptations.

4. That we might learn in patience from his example: If we be scourged
unjustly either with the scourge of the tongue, or of the hand: and in
particular, servants that are beaten by froward Masters unjustly, are exhorted
to patience by the force of this ensample, 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21.

Hitherto of the accusation of our Savior, and the proceedings of the Judge in
his trial: his condemnation follows: and there four things may be noted.

1. How our Savior was pronounced innocent before sentence. 2. Why Pilate
would not deliver him knowing him to be innocent. 3. The Sentence it self. 4.
The consequents of the Sentence.
For the first, our Savior was declared to be innocent: first by Pilates wife,
and then by Pilate himself.

Concerning Pilates wife it is observed, Matthew. 27. 19. That when Pilate was
now set on the Judgment seat, she sent to him, saying, Have thou nothing to
do with that just man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him. Where we may note diverse things.

1. The great glory of Gods power in giving testimony to the innocence of his
children: When Jews and Gentiles have banded themselves against Christ, and
when his own Disciples are now fled, and dare not speak for him, yea when all
that profess religion were swallowed up with amazement, God herein raises up
a woman, a stranger, a Pagan, to force a way for his testimony even at this
great Assizes.

2. Note that God keeps this testimony till the very last moment, for the
Judge is now set to give Judgment: to show us that God can send comfort and
succor to his servants, though he withhold it till almost all hope be gone.

3. Gods message must be delivered though never so many objections lie against
it. She might have thought how unfit it was for her to meddle being a woman,
and a stranger, and her own husband being Judge, but yet she will send the
message.

4. The Divinity of Christ shows it self maruellously in this thing, while
Pilate is ready to condemn him, he miraculously conuerts his wife. His
Godhead breaks through the veil: and their opinion that think this woman was
truly converted, is charitable, and not improbable. For what was in the
confession of the Centurion, or the Thief upon the Cross, that is not in the
confession of this woman? She confesses him, when all the world refuses him:
yea she urges her Husband to save him, when it might prove his utter
overthrow, considering the tumult of the Jews, and the displeasure Caesar
might take, seeing Christ was charged with Treason against Caesar: and besides
so peremptorily to acknowledge his goodness, at such a time, when it was so
generally questioned, imported a mind much affected to Jesus. Howsoever we may
learn of this great woman to stand for the truth, how evil soever the times
be, or what danger soever it may bring upon us. Yea note that Jesus can do
great things in Prison as well as at Liberty: No outward abasements or
restraints can hinder Gods counsel, or the success of religion, or Gods work
for the souls of his people.

5. Concerning Dreams, we must understand that they are of four sorts;
Natural, Moral, Divine, or Diabolical. Natural dreams arise from the
constitution of the body, according to the complexion or present estate of the
body, either as diseased, or well. Moral dreams arise from the studies and
employments that we are extraordinarily affected withal in the day time.
Divine dreams arise either from the working of some Angel, or by some other
way unknown to us, and are used by God either to show his power, or foretell
things to come, or unknown, or as an extraordinary entertainment he would give
unto his servants. Diabolical dreams are villainous conceptions wrought in the
minds of men in their sleeps, either to torment them, or to seduce them, or to
tempt them to some monstrous evil. The question is what kind of dream
Pilates wives dream was? There is no color of reason to think it was
Natural. Some Divines think that it was Diabolical, and give this reason,
that the Devil some way now perceiving that the death of Christ would be the
life of the world, he seeks to hinder it by this dream. But if that were so,
why had not Pilate the dream? or why did not the Devil use the Jews that
were his own instruments? and therefore it is more than likely that the dream
was from God. Quest. But may we now give heed to dreams? Answ. By dreams we
may guess at the state of our bodies sometimes. And by dreams we may guess
at the corruption of our natures, and find what sins we are secretly prone
to. Yea no doubt, but we may have Diabolical dreams, which we may discern
by the same signs we know the temptations of the Devil from corruption of
nature. As when we are tempted to things contrary to our natures, and
prodigiously vile; or when we feel that our nature does abhor the motion,
and give no consent to it. Nor do I doubt but God may treat with his people
also by dreams: and we should be thankful for holy dreams, wherein God gives
us special comforts, or does in any special manner fire our hearts to the
love of goodness. Only we must receive no opinions by dreams which are not
agreeable to the word, nor must we trust upon Predictions of things to come,
only when they are come to pass, glory should be given to God, with a
resolution still to depend upon the Law and the Testimonies only, as the
direction of our lives.

6. We should all fear the great power and wrath of God: we should be afraid
to displease him: for he can find strange ways to make us suffer: If all the
world were at firm peace with us, and all the Devils in Hell would be quiet,
yet God can fight against our spirits with a very Army he can raise in our
very dreams: Little do we know how suddenly, and how easily, and yet how
fearfully God can seize upon us either body or soul.

7. Note that she says I have suffered many things, and yet it was Pilate
that offended: whence we may gather, that ill husbands may make all that
belongs unto them suffer for their faults. They may be as a common plague to
all that is about them, or comes of them: They sin, and their wives may
suffer many things for their sakes, so may their children and their posterity.

Lastly, observe that she dreams in the day time. It seems she was no early
riser, but guilty of that fault which is still too common amongst great
persons, yea amongst them that are much inferior to her, to lie long in bed:
whereas the good woman described in the Proverbs, chap. 31. is commended for
Rising while it was yet night.

Thus of the declaration of our Saviors innocence by Pilates wife.

By Pilate himself he was declared to be innocent, partly in words, and partly
in action: In words, Pilate came forth publicly three times, and professed
that he found no fault in him, after he had heard out their accusations, and
examined him, Luke 23. 14, 22. Whence we may gather, that wieked men in the
Visible Church may be as vile, yea more vile than those that are not in the
Church at all. The Jews accuse him, when a Gentile absolues him. They wilfully
pursue Christ to death, when the Pagan for a good while strives as hard to save
him. Pilate was afraid when his very accusers had charged him that he said that
he was the Son of God, and yet these cursed Jews are not afraid, though they
had seen many signs that proved he was the Son of God. And therefore it shall
be easier for Pagans and Papists in the day of Judgment, than for these wicked
men in the Church, as our Savior said of the Cities of Galilea, Mat. 11. 20.
to 25.

In Action, Pilate pronounces our Savior innocent, by using solemnly the
Ceremony of washing his hands, and expounds his meaning, thereby to signify,
that he was innocent, and did not consent to our Saviors death. It seems that
he had borrowed this Ceremony from the Jews, who had an ancient use of it in
some cases, as appears Deuteronomy. 21. 6. and did thereby think the more to affect
them with remorse, see Psalm. 26. 6. Though this Ceremony were not necessary,
yet Judges and public Officers of State should have clean hands, hands (I
say) clean from bribes and corruption, and hearts fearing God, and hating
covetousness: and so all solemn service in Piety, as well as Justice,
requires the washing of the hands in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6. for if the Civil
seat of Justice must not be compassed but with integrity of heart and life,
much less should we dare to compass Gods Altar, unless we have washed our
hands in true innocence. But further observe what poor shifts a troubled and
ill conscience flies to. What will it justify Pilate, that he washes his
hands, and yet by and by do that which himself condemns? The baseness of
his mind cannot be scoured off, with the water on his fingers. An ill
conscience is often attended with a senseless mind. To conclude, Note one
fearful thing that fell out upon this Action: Pilate said, I am innocent from
the blood of this man: Immediately the mad Jews shout it out, that for his
blood, let it light upon them and their children, Matthew. 27. 25. How suddenly
did the Judge of the world take up this Imprecation; He ratified it in heaven:
This direful curse fell upon them, and yet lies upon them to this day, as a
standing monument to warn all cursing Caitifes, such as wish death and
damnation or desperate diseases to themselves or others, God may say Amen
before they be aware.

Thus of the declaration of our Saviors Innocence.

The second thing about his condemnation, is the cause, why Pilate would not
deliver him, knowing him to be innocent: and so two causes are assigned; the
first was his willingness to content the people, Mark 15. 15. And Luke says,
the instancie and clamor of the Commons and the chief Priests prevailed, Luke
23. 23. And a second cause is assigned by Saint John, Chap. 19. 13. And that
was the fear of Caesar, for they had charged him, that if he did not condemn
Jesus, he was not Caesar's friend; and when he heard this saying, he sat down
in the Judgment seat to give sentence. Which shows us, that it sometimes
comes to pass, that Christ and the sincerity of Religion may suffer very
unjustly, either to satisfy the stubborn humors of wicked people, or upon
pretense that Christ and true Christians are enemies to Princes. Many things
are done in Caesar's name, and upon pretense of Caesar's right, which yet Caesar
knows not of, or if he did, ought not to favor such proceedings. We see that
of old these two things have been great motives to injustice.

The third thing was the manner of the Judgment: and so Saint John reports
that Pilate brought forth Jesus, and sat down in the Judgment seat, and
after some reproachful speeches to the people about Jesus as their King, and
after their last tumultuous cry to have him crucified, he delivered him to be
crucified. Oh what heart can by faith see Jesus come out upon the Pauement, and
so patiently set himself before the Tribunal of Pilate, and not be dissolved
into tears, to see our sweet Savior after so many indignities, to stand
amongst such vile people to receive judgment of death, that was the blessed
Author of life! But in this sentence of condemnation lies one chief
consolation: for in that hour, and in that sentence did God our heavenly Judge
give sentence upon our sins in him our Surety, and condemned sin in his
flesh, that had no sin; and therefore our faith should gather hence assurance
of eternal comfort, seeing he was condemned, that we might be saved: and in
this sentence upon him, God has fully satisfied his justice, so as we need not
fear the day of Judgment, for Jesus has been already judged for our sins,
Romans 8. 3. and a part of the judgment it is to be reckoned, that he found no
mercy in the Jews, when Pilate said, Behold the Man, but rather with greater
rage they called for the sentence to have him crucified: and withal that he
was rejected of the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders of the people. He
found no mercy in the Jews, that he might thereby procure for us the eternal
Mercy of his Father: He found no mercy with Men, that we might obtain mercy
with God. And he was rejected of the chief Priests, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, that had said, That the stone that the builders refused should be
made the head of the corner, Psalm. 118. 22. And that he might thereby satisfy
for us that had refused God, and would not have him reign over us, but yielded
our selves to the Devil to rule us.

The fourth thing in the Story is the consequent of the Judgment, or what
followed immediately upon the sentence, and that was most vile usage by the
Soldiers of the Governor: for they took him into the common Hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band, and they stripped him, and put on a Scarlet
Robe, and a Crown of Thorns upon his head, and a Reed in his righthand, and
bowed the knee, and mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews, and spit
vp-vpon him, and smote him on the head with the Reed; and after they had mocked
him, they took off the Scarlet Robe, and put his own raiment on him, Matthew.
27. 27. to 32. Now whereas Saint John, Chap. 19. 1, 2, 3. mentions that
diverse of these things were done before the sentence, to move the people to
pity, we may suppose that they were twice done, once by Pilates commandment
before sentence, and then by the profane rage and storm of the Soldiers
after sentence: howsoever, to us it is sufficient to know they were done, and
why he endured such things we should chiefly inquire.

Now out of this part of the Story some things may be learned in general, and
somethings from the signification of some special things here mentioned.

In general we must inquire after the Reason of two things.

1. Why he is here showed in the habit of a King, and scorned by the
representation of the ornaments and reverence of a King. He is crowned, and
clothed with a Robe, and a Reed put into his hand like a Scepter, and saluted
as a King, all in scorn. Consider first, that God did by his special
providence acknowledge the regal dignity of his Son, even in the midst of
his greatest abasement: that which Pilate and the Soldiers did in scorn, God
did in earnest; for all these things are ensigns of his Kingdom. Secondly,
hence we may gather how senselesly and scornefully the men of this world do
judge of the Kingdom and glory of Jesus Christ. It is so far removed out of
their sense and judgment, that they account it but foolishness and scorn,
yea as lies, being only capable of that glory can run into their senses.
Especially it is impossible for the men of this world to see the glory of
Christ's Kingdom in the days of tribulation and affliction. And therefore
Christians should be content with the excellency of their estate, though the
world will not acknowledge their glory as the sons of God. Thirdly, herein he
pays for our affectation of Gods own Kingdom, when in Paradise our hearts
would not be content unless they were gods, or like the Almighty in Majesty.
Fourthly, hereby he merited for us an eternal kingdom, and made us Princes
and Kings before God, Revel. 1. 6.

2. Why did he suffer these strange indignities, as to be stripped of his
clothes, spit upon, and beaten on the head, and all so publicly? Answ. First,
that hereby he might bear that ignominy and shameful disgrace, and loathing,
which was due unto us for our sins: he herein carries our filth, and suffers
that abomination was due to us, and so satisfies for the many and base injuries
which we have done to God, and to his holy Name. Secondly, that he might here
leave us an ensample to learn of him, and so might be armed and fenced against
all the scorns and base vsages we may find in the world, especially when
wicked men do therefore deal shamefully with us, because abhor it, that we
should profess the hope and expectation of a kingdom from God in heaven. We
should never account any indignity strange, that have had a Savior that
suffered so unspeakable mean and base usage.

Thus in general: Now almost every one of these particular things done to
Jesus, have their special use and signification: These things were done in a
Mystery: as

1. He is stripped of his clothes, that thereby he might expiate our fall in
Adam, that by sinning lost our garments of original Righteousness.

2. They put upon him a Scarlet Robe, that thereby it might appear that he was
that excellent Warrior, so lively foretold and described, Esaias 63. 1, to 7.

3. He was crowned with Thorns, that thereby he might merit for us a crown
of glory in heaven; and that he might take upon him our cares, and bear that
malediction which God had laid upon us in our bodily labors, and that he might
thereby signify that he should make unto himself a royal and divine people,
that should compass about when he spoke in the name of the Lord. For out of
men that were like Briers and Thorns, for injustice and hurtfulnesse, does he
gather a People, which in the public assemblies do compass him about, in the
honor of his Name, and public profession of his Truth, as the King and Lord
of heaven and earth.

4. He had a Reed in his hand as a Scepter, to signify that it was he that
should break the old Serpents head: for they write that a Reed is mortiferous
to Serpents: and therefore now that he was in the Chase of the old Dragon, he
takes a Reed into his hand, that we might be delivered from the power of that
Serpent.

5. That face of his, that was to be reverenced of Angels, was dishonored with
the loath some spittle of these base wretches, that thereby he might cleanse
the face of our souls (once made in the likeness of God) from the filth and
loathsome foulness that temptations and sins had left upon them.

6. They took off his purple garment, whereby was signified that his kingdom
of grace should be laid down, and put off.

7. His own garments were put upon him again, to signify that as he clothed
his own body, so should we be clothed with his own garments of
Righteousness, and life, and immortality.

Crucified.
1 COR. 2. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.
HItherto of the Arraignment of Christ. The parts of his Passion after his
Arraignment follow in the Creed: and so his crucifying is the first to be
considered of. And about the crucifying of our Savior six things are memorable
in the story.

1. The place where he was crucified. 2. What fell out in the way, and before
he was crucified. 3. The causes why he was crucified. 4. The manner how he was
crucified. 5. The things that befell him on the Cross. 6. The glorious
testimony was given concerning him, when he was on the Cross.
First, for the place where he was crucified, and that in general was without
the City, and in particular it was called Golgatha. Now he suffered without
the City of Jerusalem for four reasons. First, that thereby he might fulfill
that which was foresignified by the figures of the old Law. For the bodies of
those beasts, upon which the sins of the people were put, (whose blood was
offered by the High Priest in the holy place) as things accursed, were burnt
without the camp of the people of Israel, Leuit. 1. 11, 12. and 6. 30. and 16.
27. Heb. 13. 11, 12. So Christ as the Sacrifice that bare the curse due to the
sins of the people, as unworthy the society of men, was led to be crucified
without Jerusalem. Secondly, that thereby he might teach us to take notice of
it, that we have here no abiding City, and must not look for any long
peaceable entertainment in the world, but must seek an abiding City in the
world to come, Heb. 13. 14. Thirdly, that thereby we might be armed and
resolved to go to him without the camp, bearing his reproach, not caring what
indignities we find from the world, so we may meet with Jesus, Heb. 13. 13.
Fourthly, he was cast out of the earthly Jerusalem, that he might bring us into
the heavenly Jerusalem. The particular place was called Golgotha, (that is to
say,) a place of a Skull. Why this place was called Golgotha is not with one
consent affirmed. Many of the Fathers say it was called the place of the Skull,
because Adam was buried there, and his Skull was found there. Some have said it
was called so of a little Hill that was in the place, of the likeness of a
man's Skull. But the most likely opinion is, that it was so called, because it
was a place full of Skuls of dead men that had been executed there: and so it
must needs be a place, whither only notorious offenders were brought, and
besides a place of pollution, by reason of the touch of dead bodies. Now our
Savior suffered in this place, First, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled,
that said, he should be despised and rejected of men, Esaias 53. 3. Secondly,
that so for our exceeding consolation, he might cure the barrenness of our
justification and salvation in the very place of condemned men, whom Justice
had sentenced to die: and that he might deliver us from the place of eternal
Judgment, where we should have all lain as so many dead men's skuls, and bring
us to a place of eternal joy. Thirdly, he is defiled with the dead, that we
might be delivered from the filthiness that is in the world, and be presented
pure before God, being washed in his blood.

For the second point, that is, the things that fell out before his crucifying,
we have three things noted in the story. The first is about his carrying of
his Cross. The second is about his speech to the women that met him on the
way. The third is about a potion they gave him, when he was come to the place
where he must suffer.

About the carriage of his Cross, it is noted in the story, both that they
made him carry his own Cross, and that when by reason of his former Agony in
the Garden, and ill usage by Pilate and the soldiers, he was not able to carry
it any further, they compelled one Simon of Cyrene to carry it to the place of
execution.

Our Savior carried his Cross for diverse reasons. First, that thereby he
might fulfill the figures of the Old Testament: for Isaac who was a type of
Christ, carried the wood for the Sacrifice, when Abraham would offer him up to
God, Genesis 22. 6. Secondly, that thereby he might signify that he had taken
upon him the malediction of the Law due to us, and carried it upon his own
shoulders.

About Simons carrying of the Cross diverse things are thought to be signified
in the story. First, that when godly men faint under the burden of their
crosses, God will send some help; he will provide one Simon of Cyrene or other
to help us. Secondly, that there is a spiritual fellowship and consociation
between Christ and the Saints in suffering: The Martyrs carried Christ's
cross; their afflictions are Christ's afflictions, as Paul said of his
sufferings, Coloss. 1. 24. Thirdly, this Simon was a Cyrenian, a stranger to
Christ, and not a Jew, and is now made to bear his Cross, and in bearing it,
is first discovered to be a disciple of Christ; which might signify two
things: The one that the Gentiles should have their part in Christ crucified:
and the other that men are strangers to Christ, till they suffer for him: if
we be at peace in the world, and are not put to bear Christ's cross, we are
still strangers to Christ. Some conceive that the interest of the Gentiles in
the Cross of Christ was intimated by that that the Evangelist says, Simon
came from the country Evilla s^^a, now Pagos was the Greek term for a village,
whence came up the term of Pagans, which now noted the Gentiles.

Concerning our Saviors speech to certain women that met him by the way, the
Evangelist Saint Luke, chap. 23. 27. to 32. notes both the occasion of it, and
the matter of it. The occasion was, that as he went to execution, a great
company of people followed him, and women also which bewailed and lamented him.
Now it is noted of our Savior, that passing over the forlorn multitude, as
men that were senseless, and not yet ripe for repentance for their late
horrible crime in crying to have him crucified, he turns his speech to the
mournful women: and in that speech, First, he compassionately seeks to
restrain their lamentation for him. Secondly, he foretells the horrible misery
shall fall upon that City, which he describes both by intimation, when he
bids them weep for themselves and their children, and by way of aggrauation
expresses the horror of the destruction shall fall upon the Jews, by telling
how they shall be affected in that day, wishing they never had had posterity,
v. 29. and that they might speedily die before they felt it, v. 30. Thirdly, he
gives a reason of it by an argument taken from the less to the greater: If God
suffer men to show such severity upon Christ that flourished in grace and good
works like a green tree, how can they escape Gods terrible vengeance that
have been void of all goodness and good works, like a dry tree fit for
nothing but the fire? And out of all this I will observe a few instructions.

1. We may see what power tears have over Christ. He that for no words or
terrors would speak to Pilate, Herod, or the Jews, now of himself with great
compassion answers the tears of these women. God is much moved with the tears
of tenderhearted persons. He must needs speak to a melting heart. Howsoever
these women were wrought upon we know not, but sure it is that God can deny
nothing to a broken and contrite heart. The tears of such persons are strong
arguments with God. The like to this we read of Christ, John 11. 33.

2. The unjust death of godly persons has more comfort in it, than the life of
wicked men. They must not weep for Christ dying that have great cause to weep
for the Jews living.

3. Public miseries upon the Church and State where we live are to bewailed.
And out of verse 29. and 30. we may observe these things.

1. That strange punishments shall be to the workers of iniquity: Notorious
offenders shall be followed with notable judgments. Though God may spare for a
time, yet there days are coming upon them, Eccles. 8. 12. Job 31. 3.

2. Wicked men are monstrous impatient when God visits them for their sins.
They bless the barren and wish to die. Judgments when they come from God have
such a face of terror, and a guilty conscience is so outrageous, and besides
when outward things are taken from the wicked, they are utterly undone in their
own sense: and if they be no better able to bear temporal judgments, what
will they do when they come to suffer eternal torments? And here is implied,
that a Christian that can stand in the evil day undaunted, is an excellent
creature, one of a thousand: if godliness did never appear to be of great
worth, yet in the evil day it is most remarkable, for that it works upon godly
persons.

3. To say, It is good to be barren, or to be dead, only for temporal crosses,
is the saying not of God, nor any godly, but of wicked men only.

4. Wicked men never begin to talk of their misery till it be upon them.

And out of verse 31. we may ^ote

1. That Christ and so godly Christians are like a green tree, they always
flourish whether they be in prosperity or adversity, they are good, and they
do good.

2. That wicked men are like a dry tree: and so to have a heart void of gifts,
and the affections of godliness, and a conversation void of good works, is a
sign of a wicked man.

3. That if judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked and
sinners appear? If profitable Christians suffer from men, how shall
unprofitable people escape suffering from God? 1 Pet. 4. 17.

Thus of his speech to the women. The third thing that befell our Savior
before his crucifying, was a Potion which they gave him when he was come to the
place of execution. Concerning which Saint Mark says, They gave him wine
mingled with mirrhe, Mark. 15. 23. Saint Matthew says, They gave him vinegar
mingled with gall, chap. 27. 34. As for the reason of this fact, it is
generally received amongst Divines, that either the Judges appointed, or that
the women of Jerusalem out of pity to the malefactors, going to execution,
prepared a Potion of strong wine the better to comfort them against death, or
to inebriate their senses, so as they should not feel the pains of
crucifying. And it is guessed that this was a custom even in Solomon's time,
because of that sentence he uses, Prou. 31. 6. Give strong drink to him that
is ready to perish, and wine to him that is of a heavy heart. If the Potion
were given only to cheer their hearts, it was a work of mercy, at least in
their intendment, but if it were to make them drunk, it was horrible cruelty
to the souls of the poor creatures, that should be better prepared for death.
Now for reconciling of the difference between the Evangelists, (to omit many
opinions) I think their judgment is the most probable, that say that the
women of Jerusalem gave him wine mingled with mirrhe, but the Soldiers and the
Jews out of very spite and cruelty changed it into vinegar mingled with gall.
Now it is said of the first Potion, he received it not, and of the latter when
he had tasted he would not drink of it. By all which was signified,

1. That Christ has paid for our vicious pleasures, by tasting of the cup of
gall.

2. That true solace and comfort is not to be found or sought from the earth,
or the men of this world, who in stead of sweet encouragements, usually do of
purpose give unto Gods servants drink of gall and vinegar, that is, proffer
them all occasions of vexation and discontent.

And for further use let us consider, that it was our sins that were this
gall and vinegar to Christ. If we blame the Jews for giving him such a Potion,
let us judge our selves for our sins, for it was we that gave him this gall to
drink, Deuteronomy. 32. 22, 23.

Now for the third question in the division: Christ was crucified for these
Reasons or Uses. First, that thereby it might appear that he was the true
Messiah and Savior promised to the Fathers, as he himself says, John 8. 28.
Secondly, that thereby he might derive the malediction of the Law upon himself
which was due to us, and that we might possess and inherit the blessing, Gal.
3. 13, 14. Thirdly, that by a virtue flowing from his crucifying, the
viciousnes of our corrupt natures might be abolished, that we might not
afterward serve sin, Romans 6. 6. Fourthly, that our debts being there paid,
the handwriting that was against us might be cancelled, so as our sins
should be no more remembered of God, Col. 2. 14. But the special thing to be
considered in Christ's crucifying is to look upon it as a sacrifice offered up
to God for the sins of the elect, in which an atonement and expiation is made
for our sins. About this Sacrifice diverse things are to be inquired into: As
first, who is the Priest? And that is Christ, considered in both Natures, as is
proved in many chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews. And he is indeed the
only Priest of the New Testament, considered really, for he came in stead of
all the Leuiticall Priests, and his Priesthood is everlasting, Heb. 7. 24.
because it does not pass from man to man by succession, as the Leuiticall High
Priesthood did. Secondly, what is the Sacrifice? and that is Christ as he is
man, or the manhood of Christ: so we are said to be sanctified by the offering
up of the body of Jesus, Heb. 10. 10. and this Sacrifice of his was not an
Eucharisticall, but an whole burnt offering, or a propitiatory Sacrifice, such
a Sacrifice as was seized upon by the fire of Gods wrath and all burnt to
ashes. Thirdly, what was the Altar? And that was the Godhead of Christ, not the
Cross properly, because the Altar sanctifies the gift, Matthew. 23. 19. and
that which sanctified the Humanity, that it might be a meritorious Sacrifice,
was the Divine Nature upon which it was laid and presented to God. Fourthly,
how often this Sacrifice was offered? viz. but once only, as is proved, Heb.
10. 14. and 9. 28. 25. Fifthly, the excellency of this Sacrifice, which
appears by the fruit of it, and by the continuance of it: The fruit of it was
both the bearing of our sins, Heb. 9. 28. and the taking away of our sins
from before Gods sight, Heb. 9. 26. so as he made thereby a perfect atonement
and propitiation for our sins, God smelling a savor of rest, and his
sacrifice being a sweet smelling savor unto God, so as he is well pleased,
Genesis 8. 21. Ephesians. 5. 2. And besides, by this Sacrifice we are consecrated as a
holy and peculiar people to God, as the Priests were consecrated in the Law,
Heb. 10. 14. Thus of the fruit of it. The continuance of the Atonement and
fruit of this Sacrifice is for ever, it was not such as needed to be renewed,
Heb. 10. 14. for he is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.
Sixthly, what is required of us, that we may have benefit of his Sacrifice and
crucifying for us? And so three things chiefly are required: First, that we be
crucified with him, not only in sorrow for his sufferings, Zach. 12. 12. but in
bewailing our sins, and crossing the corrupt disposition of our Natures, and
forsaking the vain pleasures and glories of this world, Romans 6. 6. Gal. 6. 14.
Secondly, that we look upon Christ by faith, as the Sacrifice offered for us,
or the brazen Serpent lifted up upon the Cross for us, Ioh. 3. 14. Thirdly,
we must be sanctified as a people willing to consecrate themselves to God as a
living sacrifice, soul and body for his service, Heb. 10. 14. Romans 12. 1.

The fourth point is the manner how he was crucified, and so six things are
distinctly to be noted.

1. That he put off his garments, and suffered naked. 2. That he was lifted up
upon the Cross. 3. That he was fastened to the Cross, and fastened with
nails driven into his hands and feer. 4. That he hanged with his arms spread
abroad. 5. That he was crucified in the midst of two Thieves. 6. That he
suffered the effusion of his precious blood on the Cross.
For the first, our Savior being to be crucified, put off his garments for
diverse reasons.

1. That he might thereby show that he was ready for death, and did willingly
embrace it.

2. That he might satisfy for the sin of our first Parents, that made
themselves naked, by losing the garment of innocence, in which they were
created; and so make expiation for their abominable nakedness.

3. That he might vn^loath us of sin and mortality, of which the garments
given to our first Parents were a Monument: for when they had sinned, God made
them garments of the skins of dead beasts, and put them upon them as
memorials of mortality inflicted for their sin.

4. He vnapparrelled his body amongst men, that our souls might be clothed
with his Righteousness before God.

5. That as the first Adam entered into the earthly Paradise naked; so the
second Adam might enter into the heavenly Paradise also naked in body, but
graced and apparelled with glory and innocence and immortality, and that we
might likewise so enter into heaven.

6. That we might be comforted in the example of his Passion, if at any time we
be unclothed of earthly things, and suffer the spoil of our goods by the
hands of unreasonable men.

7. That he might teach us, that he that prepares for heaven, as a man that
has vanquished the world, and the Prince thereof, must not seek earthly
things, but rather forsake them as hindrances to his passage: The world must
be crucified to him, and he to the world.

For the Second, he was fastened to the Tree.

1. That as by the Tree death entered into the world, so upon the Tree it might
be conquered, and driven out of the world, and life and immortality brought
back again.

2. That the old shadows might be fulfilled, Isaac was laid upon the wood for
sacrifice: and the brazen Serpent was fastened to the tree, and so the
sacrifices were laid upon the wood.

3. He was fastened with nails for four reasons: The one that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled that said of him, They have dug into my hands and my
feet, Psalm. 22. 17. The other that he might thereby declare, that the
handwriting that was against us, was cancelled, and therefore he nailed it on
high on the Cross, that it might appear to be of no force, and so that we
might be delivered from the Ordinances of Moses, which were but as so many
confessions or Bills of our hands against us. Thirdly, that by his wounds, we
might be cured of the spiritual wounds, with which the old Serpent had wounded
our Natures, John 3. 14. Fourthly, that when we are wounded by the enemies of
the Truth, we might bear them as the marks of the Lord Jesus in our bodies,
Gal. 6. 17.

For the Third point, he was lifted up on high on the Cross for three
reasons. First, that thereby he might fulfill the figure of the old Law, for
the sacrifices were lifted up upon the Altar, and there sacrificed, And as
Moses lifted up the brazen Serpent, so must the Son of Man be lift up, John
3. 14. Secondly, that he might thereby carry on high in his body our sins,
and so take them away, and make it manifest he was sacrificed for us, 1 Pet. 2.
14. Ioh. 1. 29. Hebr. 9. 26. 28. Thirdly, that being lifted up into the Air,
he might subdue and triumph over the spirits that rule in the Air, that is,
the Devil, Coloss. 2. 15.

For the fourth point, he was crucified with his hands spread abroad: First,
that he might draw all men unto him, and unite both Jews and Gentiles among
themselves. This day of his crucifying was the day which the Prophet Zachary
spoke of, Chap. 3. 9, 10. in which he should remove and take up the sins of
the world, and make peace amongst men, so as men should call one another by the
preaching of the Gospel into the communion of the Church, which he resembles
to a Vine and Fig Tree: see also Ioh. 12. 32. Ephesians. 2. 16. Secondly, that
thereby he might signify his great love to us, ready to embrace us, and take
us into his arms, and bestow upon us the benefits of his Passion, and that his
torments made him the more to long after us.

For the fifth point, our Savior shed his blood on the cross for diverse
reasons: First, that he might fulfill the figures of the old Law; for the blood
of the sacrifices shadowed out the effusion of Christ's blood. Secondly, that
thereby he might make expiation for our sins, and reconcile us to God, and so
make peace between God and us, pacifying his displeasure, Heb. 9. 28. Romans 3.
25. Coloss. 1. 20. and so get forgiveness of all our sins for us; for
without effusion of blood there could be no remission, Heb. 9. 18, etc. Matthew.
26. 28. Thirdly, that his blood might be a fountain and lauer, in which our
souls might be washed and purged from all our sins, Zach. 13. 1. 1 Cor. 6.
11. Revel. 1. 5. and 7. 14. Heb. 9. 14. and 20. 22. Fourthly, that the
partition wall might be broken down, and Jews and Gentiles be made one,
Ephesians. 2. 12, etc. Fifthly, that we might be delivered from the Ceremonial Law
of Moses, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Sixthly, that his blood might be our drink to
eternal life, Ioh. 6. 55, 56. Seventhly, that his blood might be an universal
medicine for all the infirmities and languishings of our souls, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
Lastly, that thereby he might open heaven for us, and obtain an eternal
Redemption for us. Hebr. 9. 12. and 10. 19, 20.

For the sixth point, he was crucified in the midst of two thieves, for diverse
reasons: First, that the Scripture might be fulfilled that said, He was
reckoned among the wicked in his death, Esaias 5. 3. 12. Secondly, that he might
sanctify the death of malefactors, that turn to God by repentance, that they
might know that their kind of death shall be no hinderance to their Salvation.
Thirdly, that he might thereby show, that the fruit of his death should be
divided amongst sinners, and that he came to die for them, Mat. 9. 13.
Fourthly, that thereby he might show that he should be the Judge of the quick
and dead, of good and bad, having the good on his right hand, and the bad on
his left.

Thus of the fourth thing in the History of his crucifying.

The fifth point, is the things he suffered, while he hanged on the Cross: and
those were, 1. The division of his garments. 2. Derision from the High Priests
and people. 3. Grievous torment both of soul and body. 4. Thirst of body.


Concerning the division of his garments, the Evangelists say that the
Soldiers divided them into four parts, to each one a part; and for his Coat
without seame, for it they cast Lots who should have it: and all this was done.

1. That the Scriptures might be fulfilled that had foretold of so much, as
Psalm. 22. 1^.

2. That thereby might be signified, that the goods of Christ and his grace
should be divided even amongst his enemies, and that he would enrich them that
were sometimes enemies to him: which we read was fulfilled in the Story of the
Acts of the Apostles, and is still found to be true by experience.

3. The division of his garments into four parts, signified that the grace of
Christ should be carried into all the four parts of the world, and divided
amongst the Elect, whose sins crucified Jesus.

4. The not dividing of his Coat without seame, imported some Mystery, as that
the whole righteousness of Christ is given to the godly without parting of it.

5. The casting of lots for it whose it should be, showed that m^^ do not
attain the righteousness and merits of Christ, by ^^eir own deserts,
industry, or skill, but by lot, that is, ^^ the immediate gift of God. Our
portion amongst the S^ints in light is by lot, Coloss. 1. 12.

Concerning the derision he suffered, it is observed by the Evangelist Saint
Matthew, Chap. 27. 39, etc. that they that went by wagged their heads at him,
vpbraiding him with the destruction of the Temple; and the chief Priests, and
Scribes, and Elders derided him many ways, and tempted him, mocking at his
Miracles and trust in God: and the Thieves also that were crucified with him,
vpbraided him; also the standers by mocked him about the very prayers he
offered up to God, perverting his words wilfully, as if he called to some
creature to help him: so that he was here on all hands despised as a worm and
no man; and all this he suffered.

1. That from those often extreme contempts powered out upon Christ at other
times and now, we might be thoroughly made to know how hateful our sins are
to God, especially the sins by which we and our first Parents have despised
or slighted God, and dishonored him, and caused others to blaspheme his Name,
in that God does so revenge our Transgressions upon his Son.

2. That we being delivered from that eternal scorn and contempt which was
due to us, might in this life enjoy the comfort of a good name, and in the life
to come eternal glory before God and his Angels: Christ's ignominy did merit
and procure our honor.

3. That by his example we might be comforted, and by his silence and patience
learn to despise the shame and scorns of sinful men, and not render reuiling
for reuiling, Heb. 12. 3.

It may perhaps run in men's minds to wish that our Savior would have done
as they said, seeing they promise to believe in him, if he could save himself
from the Cross. But let men consider: first, that our Redemption had been
hindered, if he had not died on the Cross, and besides being brought to that
hour, as our surety, he could not come down till he had satisfied Gods
justice: and further, he had denied to work Miracles in his life time, when
they and Herod defired him to do it, because they were an adulterous
generation, and cast off of God, who was now loath to have them convert, Esaias 6.
10. Neither would they have repented though they had had their desire; and if
Miracles would have satisfied them, he had done store of them in his life time,
and in that kind, he had saved himself from the hands of a multitude that
intended to kill him, as when they took up stones in the Temple to stone him;
and it was more that he did, to rise from the dead, then to come down from the
Cross; and yet they did not believe him. Again, in these reproaches we may
observe, that wicked men do hate godly men, for the very goodness that is in
them, and the true glory God has stamped upon them, and the good they do: They
do not vpbraid Christ for any evil, no not for the evils they accused him of
before, for they themselves knew he was innocent, but for the good he had
done in saving others, and for his trust in God, and for his prayers to God.

Further, we may gather from hence, that all persecutors are Atheists, though
they profess Religion: for these men, though learned and great men, yet
blaspheme God, and deride him, as if he had not power to save him.

Moreover, we may observe how malice and wickedness had besotted the Priests
and Scribes. They allege a place in the Psalms, viz. He trusted in God, let
him save him now, if he will have him; which words were there uttered in the
name of the wicked enemies of God: and yet these men so skillful in the Old
Testament, have not the brains to discern that by their own mouths they
have condemned themselves. Thus does God in his justice infatuate wicked men,
so that their own mouths do betray them.

Lastly, see how desperately wickedness is set in the hearts of men: the poor
Thieves now ready to dye for their offenses, yet have no love of Jesus or the
truth in him, but join with the Jews in reuiling Christ. It seems both the
Thieves reviled Christ when they first came up upon the Cross, which
increases the wonder of the conversion of one of them.

The third thing he suffered was grievous torments both of soul and body: And
first for the torments of his body, they must needs be great, both in respect
of what went before, and what he then felt. Before he had been grievously
pained in that Agony in the Garden, when he sweat blood: and afterward was
tied and bound and carried away bound; and was buffeted and beaten with rods,
and with extreme contumely kept waking all night, and then cruelly whipped,
crowned with thorns, and beaten with a Reed, and made to carry his Cross on
his shoulders: and after all this to be so tortured with nails in his hands
and feet, it must needs import a most grievous torment he felt: so as of him
may be said what David uttered, My heart melted like wax, my tongue cleaued to
the roof of my mouth, and thou have placed me in the dust of death, Psalm. 22.
15, 16. and this exceeding weakness and torment of body he suffered.

1. That thereby he might satisfy for us that had so often despised the power
of God, and his threatenings against our sins, and in general to pay for all
the sins we had committed in the body.

2. That thereby he might free us free us from eternal torments in our bodies,
and that he might make us strong in his might, so as to say, The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? and through Christ I can do
all things.

3. That hereby he might sanctify the pains we feel in our bodies, either
from diseases, or from the hands of violent men or persecutors, and to teach us
with patience to bear our pains, by faith looking upon the torments such a
Savior endured for us: and when we feel our bodies weakened by diseases, we
should by faith remember, that our Savior was beyond all comparison made more
weak in body for our sins.

That he suffered most grievous distress and anguish in his soul appears by
that lamentable voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? By which
words it appears, that he was not only tormented in conscience under our
sins and Gods wrath, but that he was also forsaken of God: and forsaken he
was in two respects. First, that God lest him in most unutterable distress,
and did for the time defer his deliverance. Secondly, that God withdrew from
his Humane Nature the consolation might support him, suffering him to endure
those torments we should have endured for ever.

Ob. How could God forsake him, seeing the Divine Nature was vntted to the
Humane inseparably?
Sol. The Divine Nature of the Son did not forsake the Nature assumed, but
secretly sustained it; but yet so as the glory of that union was hidden for the
present. Nor does the Humanity of Christ complain, that the second Person in
the Trinity had forsaken him, but that God the Father did forsake him.

Ob. God loved his Son with an eternal love, how could he then be so wroth
with him?
Sol. God loved Christ with an eternal love, and yet as he was our surety he
powered out upon him the vials of his wrath deserved by our sins.

The Use of these grievous torments in soul, and Gods forsaking of him may be
diverse.

1. It may confute their opinion, that say he suffered not in soul at all,
when the Scripture says, His soul was made an offering for sin: and these
words cannot without great injury to Christ be thought to be uttered by Christ
in respect of his bodily torments: then not only the Martyrs, but the Thieves
on the Cross should bear their pain and death more patiently than he.

2. It may make us all afraid of sin, when we seriously think on it, how wroth
God is with his own Son, to pursue him so that was but a surety, to make him
utter this pitiful complaint. Can men ever think that God can endure sin
in them, that in the spirit, hear Christ making this moan? Now was the time
that the whole Sacrifice was on fire, and burning in the flame of Gods wrath.

3. It may greatly comfort Gods servants when they are in great distress,
Christ was forsaken of God for a time, that they might not be forsaken for
ever: and therefore we should take heed of doubting of Gods care for us, Esaias
40. 28 and 49. 15. and resolve upon it, that though he leave us for a time, yet
he will receive us with everlasting mercy, Esaias 54. 7, 8, 10. Yea and withal
it may be some comfort to weak Christians, that do too much fear lest God
will leave them, to think that this fear was in Christ.

4. We may hence gather what is the woeful case of all impenitent sinners: if
it were such a grief to Christ to be forsaken for a time, what is their case
that shall be forsaken for ever? If God thus torment his own Son, that never
knew sin, how can he spare them that have been transgressors from the womb?

5. We should hence learn to pity poor Christians that are afflicted in
conscience: no torments of the body are like the trouble of the conscience,
which our Savior shows here in his own case. And withal we may hence learn
to judge charitably of such as say they are damned or forsaken of God, for we
see it may be found in Gods dear children: though it be true that in some men
these words are the fruits of hellish despair.

Lastly, note in the words of Christ, that he expresses his faith in the
midst of his conflict: My God, my God, are words of hope, as why have thou
forsaken me, are words of fear. Whence we should learn to esteem assurance,
and to make use of it, as the only thing will be left to us to hold by, if
great extremities come upon us. To know that God is our God, if the chief
support of our spiritual life.

The last thing which he suffered while he was alive on the Cross, was the
Thirst, of which he said, I thirst, Ioh. 19. and this thirst of body he
suffered: First, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, that said, In my thirst
they gave me vinegar to drink, Psalm. 69. 22. Secondly, that thereby he might
merit the satisfying of our spiritual thirsts, and the desires of our hearts.

In his thirst they gave him vinegar to drink, that thereby the same Scripture
might be fulfilled, which was mentioned before, Ioh. 19. 28. Secondly, that
thereby he might expiate for the tasting of the Juice of the forbidden fruit,
and for all our sinful pleasures. Thirdly, that we might be warned, not to
look for better intertainment from the world, but to be served with sharp and
bitter potions; for we must drink of his cup, Matthew. 20. 23.

Thus of the things our Savior suffered while he hanged alive upon the Cross.
The glorious Testimonies given to Christ on the Cross while he was yet alive
follow: and they were four.

The first was, in the Superscription was written over his head. The second
was, in the darkness was over the Earth. The third was, in the wonderful
conversion of one of the Thieves. The fourth was, in the rending of the veil
of the Temple.
For the first, Pilate caused a Superscription to be written over his head, in
Latin, Greek and Hebrew, in these words, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the
Jews: or rather, as the original sounds, Jesus that Nazarene that King of the
Jews, Ioh. 19. 19. This Superscription (it is likely) was written in a Table
and hanged over our Saviors head; for it is not probable that so many words,
in so many Languages in great Characters, that might be read of them that
passed by, could be graven upon the head of the Cross. As for Pilates meaning
herein, some Writers think that it was the custom for the ludges to set over
the heads of them that died, the cause of their death. Yet we read not of any
such custom in Scripture, nor of any Title set over the heads of the two
Thieves: It is very probable that Pilate meant in this Title both to vp-braid
the Jews, and withal to save himself from blame with Caesar, and to show how
careful he had been of Caesar's right. But God intended by a special
providence herein, to give testimony to his Son: which we may gather two
ways: First, by the consent of the Evangelists, who all make mention of this
Title, which must needs import that they saw some mystery in i^. Secondly, by
the very words, for (besides that, they contain a most exact description of
the substance of our faith in Jesus) they are not the words of the Jews
accusation upon which he was condemned, but an express affirmation of his
glory: which is the more plain, because when the Priests (gowled by the Title)
would have it mended thus, He said he was King of the Jews, yet Pilate would
not alter it, his hand being stayed by the power of God. This Title then was
given from God from above, and is of Gods own devising, and she was us, for
the confirmation of our faith, what God himself acknowledges, and what he
would have us make use of in the meditation of the Passion of Christ. Many
things may be hence noted.

1. That God acknowledges his Name upon the Cross to be Jesus, that is, a
Savior of his people from their sins. This name was given him, by an Angel
before he was horn, with this signification, yea with an acknowledgement of
his Divinity, that he was Emmanuel, God with us, Matthew. 1. 22, 23. And now on
the Cross did he fulfill what was signified, and God does acknowledge that in
that hour, he had made an Atonement and saved us from our sins: so that we
have Gods own hand to acquit us, if we believe in Jesus.

2. That God acknowledges him to be that Nazarene: which title imports his
condition, and may be diversely interpreted. As that Jesus was the more dear to
God, even in that wherein he was most despised of men: It was one of the ways
by which the Jews derided Christ, to call him a Galilean or a Nazarene; as
intending thereby to prove he could not be a fit man to save Israel, in that
he was not a Bethlehemite, and of the house of David: But this reproach God
puts into the crown of Jesus, to signify, That he can love and honor such as
men reproach and deride. It was a Nickname given to true Christians as well as
to Christ, to be called Galileans by the Jews. Besides, he was that Nazarite,
in as much as he was separate to God, and had all those perfections of
holiness, of which the Nazarites in the Law were types. But chiefly I think
by this Title is signified, that Christ was that Branch foretold by the
Prophets, His name was the Branch: which term in the Hebrew is Netzar, Isai.
11. 1. And God would by this Addition tell the Christian Church that he can
raise the Kingdom of his Son out of the dust, and from small beginnings can
erect a mighty frame of Sovereignty and power to his Son Jesus: and withal
to comfort us in our abasements: that God that can lay the foundation of
Christ's Kingdom, in such extreme abasements of Christ, can glorify his power
and grace to his people, even in rescuing them from their lowest extremities.

3. That God acknowledges Jesus not only to be a King, but that King by an
excellency, that the Prophecies had made such honorable mention of, and that
excelled all the Kings of the earth. God now gives him a Name above every Name
that is named, Phil. 2. 11. The name of a King is greatest on earth, and
amongst Kings, Jesus is that King that excells them all; and that in diverse
respects, as that in the pre-eminence of his Person, and in the excellency of
his gifts for government, and in respect of his independencie, and in the
extent of his Kingdom, he being a King universal, and other Kings being but
his subjects, and in the Laws by which he gouernes, and in the power of his
prerogative, and in distributing of Justice, and in the nature of his kingdom,
and in the continuance of his kingdom, as has been showed in the former
Article of the Creed, upon the word Christ.

Quest. But why would God have the Christian Churches to know that Jesus is a
King, and such a King, and why does he tell it them now when Jesus is in so
ignominious a condition?

Ans. 1. That they might know that his kingdom comes not by observation, and
that neither his right nor his power is lost by any outward abasements: He can
triumph upon the Cross, and can come forth of so low a condition, to conquer
as a mighty King: and withal, that they might know for ever, that tribulations
shall not hinder the kingdom of Christ, and that he can bring strange things to
pass, when all humane helps do fail.

2. That they might know that he was able to save them by application, as he
now did by merit: He did like a great King pay the Ransom for all the Elect on
the Cross: as he is called of God a King, to let us know that he can deliver
us in the day of our salvation, by making his sufferings effectual for all the
work of our redemption; and can grant us better privileges than any of the
Kings of the earth: See the first use of the word Christ before.

3. That notice might hereby be given to the Christian world, that the
redemption made in the blood of Jesus must give no liberty to sin: for he was a
King, and would look for service and subjection, and that we should do all
that to him, which subjects owe to their Sovereigns, as to study the
mysteries, and bow at the Name of Jesus, and stand for his honor, and observe
whatsoever he commands, fearing to displease him in any thing, yielding
themselves to be governed by his ordinances.

4. That Christians might be encouraged to seek to Jesus in all time of
distress, seeing he is so great a King, and has had such experience of
sorrows himself.

Fourthly, it is to be noted, that God acknowledges Jesus to be the King of
the Jews: which imports the great glory of Christ's power and sovereignty,
that can raise up a Kingdom to himself, even among the very Jews that
crucified him: which was shortly after made manifest, when so many thousands of
the Jews were converted to the faith of Christ: of the Jews I say, not those
Jews that said they were Jews, and were not, but were the Synagogue of Satan,
but of the spiritual Jews, Rev. 3.

Fifthly, this Title was written in three Languages, and that was to signify
that every tongue should confess the glory of Jesus, Phil. 3. 11. so as the
Gospel should be carried into all Nations, It is likely Pilate did it, that so
the people of all Nations that were at the Passover might understand the
Title: but God did it to show that the Gospel should be carried into the whole
world. These three languages were the most known of all the rest. The Latin
because of the Roman Empire, and the Greek by reason of the studies of
Philosophy, and the Hebrew for the antiquity of it, and being the language of
the Jews. But why in three languages? but to show us that God would have his
service, and his will made known in the mother tongue of their Nation: and
withal to signify that neither the superstition of the Jews, nor the wisdom
of the Grecians, neither power of the Romans, should hinder the conquest of
Jesus in his kingdom.

Lastly, Pilate though moved to it, would not alter a letter of the Title.
Which should teach us, that no adversary power in the world can hinder the
kingdom, or salvation by Jesus: and that God will not suffer us to lose a jot
of our right in Christ: and withal such Christians as can suffer Papists, or
Sectaries, or Arminians, to alter the records of their faith, and put out and
deface one Article after another, these Christians are not true Christians, and
in some respect worse to Jesus than this Heathen man was.

Thus of the first testimony given to our Savior upon the Cross.

The second testimony was given by the darkness that fell out from the sixth
hour to the ninth. About this darkness two things are to be inquired after:
First, the manner of it, and then what it might signify.

For the manner of it: It was without question miraculous: for first it falling
out at the time of the Passover, which was the fifteenth day of the Moon, the
Moon was then at the full, whereas the Sun is never eclipsed in the course
of Nature but in the new Moon: and besides Saint Luke seems to import that
there was a darkness brought upon the whole earth, besides the darkning of the
Sun, Luke 23. 44, 45. And whereas Saint Luke says, it was over all the
earth, Interpreters are divided in opinion about the meaning of all the earth.
Some think it was but over all the land, viz. of Judea: other think it was
over all the world. About this latter opinion, something seems to make for it,
and something makes against it: for it seems to be the testimony of Dionisius
the Areopagite, who is said to see it in Egypt; and of the Philosopher at
Athens, that seeing it should say, Now either the world is perishing, or the
God of Nature suffers: and of Orosius, that said it was at Rome, and joined
with great trembling of the Earth; and of Eusebius, who says it was in
Bithinia. Against it seems to be manifest reason: for with the Antipodes it
was at that hour midnight: and it could not be at the sixth hour in all
places. It is very likely it was chiefly in Judea, but yet so as in the
neighboring Countries it might be observed, and a part of the darkness might
extend thither.

Now for the second point, many things may be hereby signified, as

1. It might signify that the Sun of Righteousness did now set: That the
true light and life of the world was now a dying.

2. It might signify the horrible blindness of the Jews, and foretell the
spiritual darkness should be confirmed upon them, that as heretofore the
Egyptians had darkness, and in the Land of Goshen was light, and by that
darkness was signified the imminent destruction of the Egyptians, and by that
light the liberty and salvation of the Israelites: so now the Jews should be
left in horrible darkness and desolation, and the light of the Gospel should
shine in other Nations to bring salvation to them.

3. It might import the detestation of that fact. The great light of the world
withdrawes his beams, as abhorring to see so dreadful a spectacle, as the
Son of God crucified, or to vouchsafe light to so mischievous creatures as
the Jews about such a work, and at that very time railing and blaspheming.

4. It might signify the unspeakable vileness of our sins, seeing that at
the time they were opened, and by imputation laid upon our surety, the very
frame of Nature is turned vpside down: and it was usual in Scripture, by the
threatening of the darkning of the Sun, to set out the wrath of God against
the sin of man, Ier. 15. 9. Ezech. 32. 7, 8. Joel 2. 10. 30. 31. A^^s 8. 9.

5. It did most evidently signify the Divinity of Christ: this and all other
miracles which fell out at that time, were therefore wrought that it might
appear he was more than man that suffered: If he had died without miracles,
he might have been thought to be but a mere man; and that our faith might be
strengthened by the greatness of the wonders, that otherwise might be weakened
by the ignominy of his suffering so vile a death as to be hanged on a Tree.

6. Was it not to teach us compassion? Is Nature troubled at this sight, and
does the Sun mourn, and cover it self with blackness as with a garment?
and cannot our hard hearts be melted to mourn for him, who was pained for our
sins?

Thus of the second Testimony. The third Testimony was the conversion of one
of the Thieves upon the Cross: and his conversion did notably serve to
demonstrate the glory of Christ, both in respect of his Divinity that could
convert a soul without means: he must needs be more than man that can
immediately make the heart of man new: as also in respect of the virtue of his
Passion and Death, which so lively shows it self upon the soul of the
Thief, in killing his corrupt humors, and kindling in him the life of true
grace: and both the more wonderful in respect of the circumstance of the time,
that it was when Christ was on the Cross, derided of men, and plagued of God,
and forsaken of his own, etc.

Now in particular concerning this conversion, I would make use of three
things: By considering first who was converted. 2. When he was converted. 3.
How he showed the truth of his conversion.

For the first: The person converted was one of the two Thieves: whence we may
gather, That notorious malefactors may repent and be saved: for God is abundant
in mercy, and the blood of Christ is of unspeakable value: which as it should
teach us to admire Gods goodness, so it should keep us from despairing of
any, though their course be never so vile, so long as God continues the day of
his grace, and prolongs his patience toward them.

For the second: He was converted at his last end, even when he was ready to
die upon the Cross. I suppose diverse that hear but this point named, will
hence gather that men may repent them at their latter end, even at the last
gasp. It is true that a man may be saved that repents not before his end: This
Thief was saved; and they that went into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour:
and God has promised to receive the sinner in what day soever he shall return
and repent, Mat. 20. Ezekiel. 18. But yet lest men should abuse this example to
confirm themselves in that most dangerous procrastination, consider with me
four things.

1. That we here read of one that repented at his latter end, that no man
might despair; and yet but one, that no man might presume.

2. That the conversion of this Thief was an immediate work of the divine
power of Christ, and so a dreadful miracle: and though this one man was saved
so extraordinarily without means, yet that does not prove that God will do so
to other men: if Christ do convert thee at thy latter end, he does as great a
work, as to raise the dead, or darken the Sun, and cleave the rocks, or the
like. And what warrant have thou that thou shall be saved by miracle?

3. That men have as much reason to be afraid they shall not repent, because
the other Thief did not repent at his latter end, as to think they shall,
because this Thief did repent.

4. That it is said by them that went into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour,
that therefore they went not in sooner, because no man hired them, Matthew. 20.
which was like to be the case of this Thief. He never was called before, he
had not had the means of conversion: but this can be no ground for such as
have had the means from the third, or sixth, or ninth hour, and will not be
hired, nor persuaded to enter into the Vineyard, but put all off till the
eleventh hour. Indeed if men had never had the means till their old age, or
sickness, they might have the better assurance that God would show mercy, but
this is not the case of most of our people.

5. That the repentance of this Thief had a great deal of business in it,
more than saying three words at his latter end; as will appear by opening the
third point, and that is how he showed the truth of his conversion.

So that for the third point, we may observe in the story of his conversion,
Luke 23. that he showed three excellent fruits of his conversion. The one was
reproof of sin in his fellow: The other was his confession that he made both
concerning himself and Christ: The third was his petition or prayer to Christ
for mercy.

For the first, Saint Luke says, verse. 40. that when the other malefactor
railed on Christ, he answered and rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God,
seeing that thou art in the same condemnation? Out of which words I observe
diverse things.

1. That a true convert cannot abide sin, or that God should be dishonored by
those that they converse withal: He that repents of his own sin may
discern it by his true dislike of sin in others. They are far from true
repentance, that can live in places where God is daily dishonored, and yet
have not their hearts vexed, or their tongues loosed to reprove sin.

2. That he that will reprove sin in others, must be sure they have moving
and effectual arguments. They must have skill to admonish. We see here what a
stirring argument the converted Thief brings. Yea it is true, that if the
hatred of sin be sincere in us, it will furnish us with solid arguments to
furnish reproof.

3. That the want of the fear of God is the cause of all disorder: as it was
of this man's railing, so it is of drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, stealing,
lying, usury, and the like; if men had the fear of God before their eyes they
would not do so.

4. That such as do abuse Christ by scoffing or railing, have great cause to be
afraid of God, and what he will do to them, though they escape punishment
amongst men. Such sins as men will not punish God will, especially these
sins of scorning, or reproching Christ, and true Christians, and the
ordinances of Christ.

5. That a true convert does love Christ better than his old acquaintance: as
here the Thief speaks against his old comrade and companion, and for Christ,
though he had never seen him before.

6. That such as will scoff and rail at the truth, have no fear of God in
them.

7. That for a man not to repent when the judgment of God is upon him, is a
sign of a careless and graceless heart. It is a wickedness or stubbornness
to be wondered at, that a man being under the execution of condemnation, as a
malefactor, should yet be void of the fear of God: see Ier. 5. 3, 4. He that
will not think of paying his debts, when the Arrest is served upon him, has
no mind to pay it at all. And the child that relenteth not when he is under
the rod, is in a manner past grace. So is it with men, that have hearts like
Adamants when Gods special hand is upon them. Do not thou fear God? As if
he would say, though others were careless, yet it is an infinite shame for
thee, that art in the same condemnation, not to fear God.

Now for his confession that he made, it stands of two parts: In the one he
does penitently accuse himself, and his fellow, as suffering justly, and
receiving the due reward of their deeds: and in the other he does excuse
Christ, and avouch that he has done nothing amiss, or that is absurd, or out
of place, as the original word does import, (...).

In the first part of his Confession, I observe these things.

1. That without confession of sin, ^here can be no true repentance, Prou.
28. 13. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.

2. That a true Convert does from his heart acknowledge that he has deserved
all the miseries are inflicted upon him from God or man: and does patiently
submit himself to bear them, Dan. 9. 7, 8. without stomach, or malice, or
desire of revenge upon such as are instruments of his punishment.

3. That he that reproues sin in others in sincerity of heart, does
acknowledge sin in himself, if he be guilty of the same, or the like
offense: The repenting Thief makes this confession in his own name, as well
as in the name of the railing Thief.

In the second part of his Confession, I observe;

1. It is a sign of true grace, to have from the heart an honorable opinion
of Gods servants, though they be extremely disgraced, and slandered, and
reviled; as in the Thief here, to believe Christ did nothing amiss, though
almost all the world accused him, and put him to death as a malefactor.

2. That in Religion it is not enough to be free from gross sins, but we
must be free from the sins of indiscretion and rashness: Nor is it enough to
do good duties, but we must do all things wisely, and in their place: so the
word in the original imports.

About his prayer we are to observe, both what he said, and what our Savior
answered. His words were these, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom, verse. 42. In which words of his prayer, I note, the wonder of his
faith, the truth of his devotion, and the humility of his Petition. His faith
was to be wondered at, both for the things believed, and the circumstances of
believing. For the things believed, he here says four great things of
Christ: First, that he was Lord and King. Secondly, that his Kingdom was
spiritual, and not of this world. Thirdly, that in that very abasement he was
possessed of a Kingdom; he says not, When thou shall come to reign, but,
when thou come reigning. Fourthly, that he had power to let in all penitent
sinners into that Kingdom. The circumstances make it more wonderful; that he
should confess all this, and yet have no Preacher to instruct him, and Christ
himself so much abased, and being a man that had not seen his former
Miracles, that he should say thus, at this time, when the cuting of the sick
was ceased, and the giving sight to the blind, and the raising of the dead;
and that he should thus acknowledge these glories in Christ, when the great
Rabbis, the Priests and Scribes blasphemed him, and could not acknowledge him
for the Messiah. The truth of his devotion appears in this, that he asks not
temporal but eternal life: He is more careful to pray for the salvation of
his soul, than for the deliverance of his body. The humility of his petition
appears in this, that he asks not for a great place in heaven, or to sit at
his right hand, or his left (as the sons of Zebedee did) nor to be preferred
before others, nor at all to prescribe unto Christ, but only desires to be
remembered of him, for any place in heaven.

We must all learn of him, and that diverse points out of his prayer. The one
is, to fly to Christ only, and to rely upon him alone for salvation. Another
is, to deal particularly for ourselves, and every one to say as he did, Lord
remember me. Thirdly, he may teach all the Christians in the world how to
exercise their faith; even to believe though it be against all sense, and above
reason; for this Thief believes these great things of Christ, when there was
no outward appearance of any of them, but rather of the contrary. It is the
greatest praise of our faith, to believe when we have no sense or feeling.

And the practice of the Thief in this point, does greatly condemn a number
of Christians now adays. The Thief worships him, and honors him, believes
and repents, when Christ was on the Cross in extreme ignominy: What shall
become of them then that will not worship him, now, especially such as
blaspheme him, and dishonor him, now that he sits at the right hand of God?

Here is consolation also: for if this be all the suit to Christ, that he would
remember us when he comes into his kingdom, this we may be sure of if we be
truly godly: for he has now an infinite memory: and he loves us with an
unspeakable love, and he must needs remember us, for it is his office to be our
Remembrancer before God: and he being our High Priest, has all our names
written on his Brestplate, so as he cannot choose but be still looking upon us:
besides, he has bought us at such a price, that he has good cause to
remember us; and therefore howsoever it goes with us here, and though all the
world forgets us, yet we may be sure that Jesus Christ remembers us in heaven:
and if we would have our faith confirmed in this point, we were best to do as
the Thief does, viz. put him in mind of us in particular, and pray him to
remember us; and withal, it will much help, if we remember him here on earth,
to confess him before men, and to stand for his honor and glory; desiring to
know and remember nothing more than Jesus Christ: setting our affections on
things above, where he sits at the right hand of God.

But on the other side, if men be workers of iniquity, and will not repent,
and be such as love not the Lord Jesus, and can spend days, weeks, months and
years without Christ in the world, he will not remember them: He cannot think
of them in heaven, if they forget him on earth: Yea if they had been
acquainted with Christ on earth, and eaten and drunken with him, and been of
in his company, as Matthew. 7. 22. yea if they had died with him at the same
time, and the same kind of death (which was the case of the other Thief) when
Christ shall come from heaven again, he will let them understand, that he did
not remember any such thing, he knew them not, all such naked relations vanish
out of his mind; if they had repented of their sins, he would never have
forgotten them. The answer of our Savior is, Verily I say unto thee, this day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: In which answer we may observe diverse
things concerning prayer, as also diverse things concerning heaven.

1. That the prayer of penitent sinners gets great suits: here is a Kingdom
given for asking.

2. That poor men may speed in great suits, as well as great men: A poor
Thief here speeds as well as if he had been a Patriarch or a King. What
could Abraham or David have had more than is granted to this Thief?

3. That poor sinners obtain speedy Audiences, they are not put to long suits
when they seek the greatest things; This day thou shall be with me. If we
speed not presently with God, it is long of our selves, or God delays for some
respect of us, Esaias 65. 24. Dan. 9. 21, 23.

4. That Christ stands not upon the length, or eloquence of our prayers, he
will hear a short prayer as well as a long: he loves a plain heart; if we
speak the words of our hearts, and ask according to Gods will, in the name of
Christ, we shall speed.

Now concerning heaven, it is described by the term of Paradise. The Scripture
makes mention of a twofold Paradise; The Terrestrial, where the first Adam
was placed, and the Celestial, into which the second Adam was now about to
enter. And that by Paradise is meant the Heaven of the blessed, or rather the
blessedness of glorified souls, is plain, because it is the kingdom
mentioned by the Thief; and Saint Paul shows, that when he was caught up into
Paradise, he was in the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12. But here are two questions.

Quest. 1. How could the Thief understand what our Savior meant by Paradise,
seeing no place of the old Testament did speak of heaven by that name of
Paradise?
Answ. The earthly Paradise was a Type and shadow of the heavenly, or of the
glory of heaven: and it seems that by Tradition that was so commonly known
among the Jews, that our Savior is assured he shall be understood in the
Term.

Quest. 2. But why does our Savior call heaven Paradise, at this time? why
Paradise, and why at this time?
Ans. He calls heaven Paradise, because it was that which was shadowed out by
the earthly Paradise. In the earthly Paradise was a Tree of life in the midst
thereof: and in the heavenly Paradise, is Jesus Christ the true Tree of life,
by whose virtue and grace we shall live for ever. The great pleasures in that
first Garden, the Trees of all sorts, did shadow out the unspeakable variety of
heavenly delights in the kingdom of Christ: In the earthly Paradise was a
River that divided it self into four heads, and so run even without the
Garden: What is this River, but the abundance of holiness flowing from the
Holy Ghost, for the qualification of the Elect gathered from all the four
parts of the world, the streams of which Ocean run in the hearts of the
godly in this life, even on the outside of Paradise? And at this time did our
Savior fitly use this Metaphor: for thereby he signified, that though this
world were but a place of banishment, yet in death Gods banished should
return: After all the labors, and trauells, and sorrows they have felt in
this cursed world, they should in death come to a place of pleasure and
eternal rest: and that as by the first Adams means, all were cast ou^ of the
first Paradise; so Christ was the second Adam, that having at that time
satisfied Gods wrath for the sin of the first Adam, would let all the godly
into the celestial Paradise, and that he had now driven away the Angel with
the flaming sword, and so the passage into Paradise was open: Yea fitly does
Christ talk of Paradise now, because now was the very time in which the second
Creation was beginning to be wrought; and therefore he would signify that the
new world had a Paradise prepared, as well as the old world had at first.

In this answer of Christ diverse errors are confuted, as

1. Theirs that said, that the souls of men after death did either sleep or
perish.

2. Theirs that dream, that men's souls must go into Purgatory: for this
These had been a great offender, and had not performed the satisfactions they
talk of, and yet went to heaven presently.

3. Theirs also, that say the souls of the faithful before Christ's Ascension
were not in heaven, but in Limbo.

4. Theirs that say, the soul of Christ went down into hell locally after his
death: Paradise is not Hell, and into Paradise he went.

5. Theirs that say, that outward Baptism with water is precisely necessary to
salvation: whereas this Thief was not baptized, and yet saved.

6. Theirs, that think heaven is had for men's merits, even for the deserts of
their good works: that is false: for as Adam was placed in Paradise by Gods
free gift and Creation, so are all the godly placed in heaven, and therefore
does Christ liken it to Paradise: Eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23.

Thus of the Conversion of the Thief.

The fourth testimony given to Christ on the Cross before he died, was the
miraculous rending of the Veil of the Temple from the top to the bottom: and
that this fell out before the death of Christ, appears by Saint Luke, Chap.
23. 45.

The Temple had three rooms in it: the one more inward (as it were our
Chancell) and into that room came only the High Priest once a year, and was
called Sanctum Sanctorum, The Holy of Holies, and in that room was the Arc,
and the Mercy Seat: The next to that was the Holy place (as it were the body of
our Church) and into this place came the Priests only to offer sacrifice; for
there was the Altar for burnt offering, and the Altar of Incense, and the Table
of the Shewbread. Now without this was a third room whither the People came
to worship, and was called the Court, and Solomon's Porch: It is resembled by
our Church porch; but it was a very great room, able to receive a multitude of
people: Now the Veil was that parted the Holy of Holies from the Holy place,
and was made of Blew, and Purple, and Skarlet, and fine twined linen of
cunning work, hanged upon four pillars of Shittim wood ouer-layed with gold.

The most holy place was a type of Heaven, and the holy place a type of the
Church Militant on Earth, as it consists only of Gods elect, as a Nation of
Priests offering holy sacrifices to God. The outward Court was a type of the
visible Church, as it confists both of good and bad, professing the true
worship of God.

The rending of the Veil signified diverse things.

1. That God did abhor and despise the Temple of the Jews, and was departed
from them, with indignation, and had rejected that Nation, for their rejecting
of Christ his Son, and that he did dissolve all their privileges and stain
their glory. If the Jews will forsake God, he will forsake them: and so will
he deal with all Nations, where he has dwelt, if they despise his word, and
Gospel, and will not walk worthy of his mercies showed to them.

2. That there was now an end of ceremonial worship: the rending of the Veil
was the seal of the words of Christ, saying, It is finished. Now that Christ
had fulfilled all was shadowed by these ceremonies by the tearing of the Veil,
he signified, that there was now no further use of those rites.

3. That now we have access freely to go to the Mercy-seat, even to the
Throne of Grace, with our suits and requests in the name of Christ, John 1. 51.
Ephesians. 2. 18. Heb. 4* 16.

4. That whereas heaven was shut for our sins, now it is opened by Christ,
and we may enter in, as the Apostle expressly shows, Heb. 10. 19, 20. The
passage into heaven is now set open. Only we should look to our assurance and
sound sanctification as follows, verse. 22.

Dead.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 9, 10. 9. For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

10. Which died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together
with him.


HItherto of the crucifying of Christ: His death follows. And concerning his
death, I shall first consider of the Proposition, Reasons, and Use in general,
and then consider of diverse particular things that concern the explication of
the doctrine and story of his death.

That Christ died is abundantly testified by the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 3.

Now the reasons why it was necessary that Christ should die are these:

1. To satisfy the justice of God for our sins. The wages of sin is death,
Romans 6. 23. Christ therefore taking upon him the similitude of sinful flesh as
our surety, God condemned sin in his flesh by inflicting death upon him, and
so satisfied his justice. Object. But can the death of one man satisfy so as
to be accepted for the death of many men? Sol. The death of one bare or mere
man cannot, bot the death of him that is the Son of God, both God and man, is
of infinite price, and so an infinite satisfaction, Act. 20. 28.

2. In respect of the truth of God: God had said, The day thou eatest thereof
dying thou shale die, Genesis 2. 17. which presently fell upon Adam in respect of
spiritual death, and in time invaded his body, and seized upon the bodies of
his posterity. Now Christ coming in the first Adams stead, must suffer what
God had threatened, and bear that punishment he had appointed.

3. For the fulfilling of the types and prophecies of Scripture, the Sacrifices
were slain: and Esaias had said, He must be as a sheep led to the slaughter,
Esaias 53. 7. and Christ himself had foretold his own death and burial diverse
times.

4. For the ratifying of the New Testament, and the confirming of his last
Will, wherein he grants by virtue of the new covenant with God, all those
Legacies, that comprehend the spiritual and eternal felicity of the Church.
This will is not of force without the death of the Testator, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17.

5. That he might abolish the power and kingdom of death, and so deliver us
from eternal death, and from the authority of the Devil, who had power to
inflict death upon us, Ro^. 6. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Heb. 2. 14. Ob. But seeing
eternal death was due to us for our sins, how could Christ deliver us from it,
seeing he suffered not eternal death? Or how did he suffer al was due to our
sins, seeing he suffered not eternal death? Answ. Death in it self is the
wages of sin, and grows eternal only, because men or devils that suffer it
cannot overcome it, and perform sufficient satisfaction in a shorter time. Now
Christ in a short time makes sufficient payment to Gods justice, and ouercomes
death for us, and that by reason of the worthiness of his person. It is more
for Christ to die one hour, than for all the world to be dead for ever. For it
is in this, as it is in a prison into which many debtors are cast: It is an
everlasting prison to such as cannot pay their debts: but it is but a
temporary prison, to such as either by themselves, or any other, make full
payment of what is owing.

6. That by his death he might make a medicine to kill sin in us, which might
so eat down the power of sin that it should no more reign in us, and so by
degrees abolish sin. He died, that we might die to sin by the virtue of his
death, Romans 6.

7. That thereby he might buy life for the world: He gave his flesh for the
life of the world, even to purchase eternal life for the elect world, Ioh. 6.
51.

8. That many sons might be borne to God. Christ was like seed falling from
heaven to the earth, and there dying, it quickened and brought forth many sons
to God, Esaias 53. 10. Ioh. 12. 24. yea the doctrine of Christ dead for our sins
is still like to divine seed falling into our hearts, which conuerts men and
turns them to God.

Thus of the Reasons.

Now what use may we make of the consideration of the death of Christ? Many
things we may learn from hence.

1. It should teach us to be steadfast in the faith, and to believe and trust
upon Gods mercies: for Christ died for our sins, and therefore we are
certainly reconciled unto God, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Romans 5. 10. And God does assure us
of so much in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Matthew. 26.

2. We should never be afraid of Death and Hell, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9, 10. Christ by
dying for us has devoured and even swallowed up Death and Hell, so as they
shall never hurt us. As the fire consumes the stubble, so by wonderful Art
Christ by dying has consumed all the forces and power of Death, and the sting
of it, 1 Cor. 15. 54. Heb. 2. 15. 14. Death as a curse was laid upon Christ,
that our death might be blessed to us.

3. It should maruellously inflame our hearts with the admiration of the love
of Christ to us, 1 Ioh. 3. 16.

4. Henceforth we that live should not live to our selves, but to him that died
for us, and carry our selves as men that are dead to the world, and the sinful
pleasures and lusts thereof, and show the proof of the virtue of Christ's death
in us by the mortification of our sins, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Romans 6. 2. 6.

5. It should breed in us a holy resolution to suffer any thing for his sake,
even to forsake Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Husband, yea and Life it self
for his sake and the Gospels, John 12. 24, 25, 26. yea it should make us
willing to lay down our lives one for another, if our life may do service to
the Church of God and our brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 16.

6 Seeing Christ in death falls to the ground like a dead carkas, we should be
like spiritual Eagles, to fly to it wheresoever we find it, whether in the
Word or Sacraments, and our souls should feed heartily (but spiritually) upon
it, Matthew. 24. And seeing God in his ordinances presents us still with the dead
body of his Son, it should be a means to draw all men to it, and to gather
into one all the children of God that were scattered abroad, John 11. 52. and
12. 32, 33.

7. The meditation of the death of Christ should make us in all estates to live
at rest, and in a holy security, as knowing that Christ died for us, that
whether we wake or sleep, we might live together with him, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. If
we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord; Whether we
live or die we are the Lords, Romans 14. 7, 8.

Thus of the general proposition concerning the death of Christ, and the
Reasons and Uses of it. In the Explication these things are to be confidered:

1. Who died. 2. Who were the special witnesses of his death. 3. How he died.
4. For whom he died. 5. When he died. 6. The consequents of his death.
For the first, if we ask who died, the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. 34. answers, It
is Christ which is dead. Which is to be observed, the better to stir up our
hearts to consider, both the wonder of it, and the reason of it. That any other
man should die, is no wonder, because all other men were sinful and mortal,
but here Jesus Christ the Righteous, who only has immortality, dies: and
withal, it leads us to think of the reason of it, for he did not die, nay he
could not die, if he had been considered as a private person, because he
deserved not death in his own person, but he died as our surety, and as a
public undertaker for us all, he died in our room.

But yet we are further to inquire into this question, and to consider whether
this death belong to the person of Christ, or only to his Natures, or to each
of them, he being God and man in one person: And in this we must take heed what
our hearts answer: for though it be true that Christ died in respect of the
flesh, so as it was only the flesh that suffered death, in respect of the
Nature that died, yet his death belonged to the Word, in respect of the Person:
for the Word, the Lord of life and glory, suffered and died, not in respect of
his Divinity, which is immutable, and altogether impassible, but in respect of
his Humanity, or in his flesh, God did not die with the flesh, but in the
flesh, and he died in his flesh, that is, in that flesh which was united to the
divine Nature. If the flesh of Christ were the flesh of the Son of God, then
his dying in the flesh, does belong to him as the Son of God. Thus his blood
is said to be the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. and this we must needs believe,
for else his death, as a bare man, could not have been of sufficient merit for
all our sins.

There is yet one thing more to be thought on about this Question, and that is,
that the Humanity, that is, the soul and flesh of Christ did in death, and
after death remain in the Person of the Son of God firmly united: Though
the Soul was disunited from the Body, yet neither Body nor Soul were
dis-vnited from the Person of the Son of God. The parts of the Humane Nature
were divided in death one from another, so as one was on earth, and the other
in heaven, but yet both of them remained and subsisted in the Divine Nature;
else if in death there had been a new manner of subsisting, Christ had had two
Persons as well as two Natures, which is Heresy to believe.

Thus of the first Question.

For the second, we shall find in the Story of the Evangelists, that the
chief Witnesses of Christ's death were women, that followed Christ from Galile,
and ministered to him, by name Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James, and
Ioses, and Salome, and the mother of Z^bedees children: These a far off
beheld what was done. Of all the Apostles and seventy Disciples here is not
one, but only John the Evangelist, who was by the Cross with the Virgin Mary.

Thus will God exercise the faith of his servants, the Church must receive the
report of the things that concern the death of Christ from women, as the
chief Witnesses: and hereby did Christ honor the piety of these women that
followed him to the death, when the Disciples fled and left him; which is an
everlasting honor to their sex, and shows that God can make women glorious
confessors of the Truth, even at such times as men hide their heads for fear.
What a shame is this for the Apostles to be absent from a spectacle, upon which
the salvation of the whole world does depend? Besides, hence we may gather,
that Christ can preserve unto himself some number that profess his Truth, and
can arm them against the fear of danger, even in the most desperate
persecutions: Yea some such as will neither fly nor hide themselves.

Now for the third Question, there are many things to be noted in the manner
how Christ died: for

1. He died truly: It was not a putatiue death, but a true death. He died in
deed, and not in show, or appearance only.

2. He died a grievous death: for he died a painful death, and he died a
violent death, and he died a cursed death. There were certain in ancient times
that held that Christ received many wounds, was smitten, whipped, nailed, and
shed his blood, and died, his Soul going out of his Body; but yet never indeed
felt any pain. He had, they said, a body that could suffer, but not a Nature
that could grieve, or feel pain. But that he did feel pain, is not Vid.
Amand. Polan. de morte Christi.
only manifest by his own words, but is expressly affirmed by the Prophet Esaias,
Chap. 53. He suffered also a violent death, he did not die a natural death:
and it must needs be so, because Christ had nothing in him to cause him to die;
and besides, he thereby answers to the Types in the Sacrifices of the old
Testament, which were not only beasts dead, but beasts slain. Thirdly, he
suffered a cursed death: for such was the death of the Cross, and God had
before pronounced it a cursed way of dying, Galat. 3. 13. All which, as it
shows the grieuousnesse of our sins by nature, so does it import the
greatness of our blessedness by grace: for therefore did Christ die a cursed
death, that we might live a blessed life, as the Apostle shows, Gal. 3. 13,
14. Yea, and besides, hereby the Curse is removed from our death, so as it is a
blessed thing for a Christian man to die, and go out of the world when God
calls for him.

3. He died willingly, not by compulsion, he laid down his life, for no man
could take it from him, Ioh. 10. 18. and that may appear by the Story, for
Christ cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. Now men that lie a
dying, languish, and their voice fails them, or at least grows weak: Again,
it is said Christ laid his head aside, and then gave up the ghost; whereas
other men first give up the ghost, and then their heads fall aside: and
further, to show that he died when he listed, he was found dead sooner than
other men that died on the Cross, which Pilate himself wondered at. Now this
is for our great comfort that he died so willingly, for it both adds to the
sufficiency of the propitiation in his death, and shows us the greatness of
his tender love to us, and withal it should fire us to a holy resolution, with
all willingness to do any thing he would have us, or suffer any thing for his
sake.

4. He died most religiously, and his piety in his death is commended for his
obedience to his Father, and for his care for his Mother, and for his love to
his enemies, and for his devotion in respect of himself. His obedience to God
his Father in his death is commended, Phil. 2. 9. because he did not only
obey all the Moral Law, that all men were bound to, but obeyed the singular
commandment given by his Father, even that of dying for the people, which as
Man he was not bound to, but as a Mediator. Which should teach us abnegation of
our selves: whatsoever it is God commands us, we should be willing to do, how
hard soever Gods work seems to be. This care for his Mother is recorded by
Saint John, Chap. 19. 25, 26. when he saw his Mother standing by, with the
beloved Disciple, he said, Woman behold thy Son, and unto him, Behold thy
Mother. Thus is Christ a most perfect Pattern of righteousness in both
Tables: for as he had before showed his godliness in the first Table, so does
he here show his natural affection and tender care of his Mother in the second
Table. Now was the time come when Simeons prophecy was accomplished upon his
poor Mother, now did the sword of bitter sorrows pierce through her righteous
soul, while she beholds that doleful spectacle of her matchless Child
suffering death upon the Tree, Luke 2. 35. And therefore now to comfort her,
does he commit her to John his beloved Disciple, with charge that he should
look to her after his death: taking this care for his Mother of whom he was
made man, and commending her to his Disciple with such humane affection, he
shows himself to be that high Teacher sent of God. The Tree to which the
members of Christ dying were fastened, was a chair of a spiritual master
teaching, for hereby he teaches children how they should honor their parents,
and continue a reverent love to them, even to their last gasp: and hereby he
teaches hearers how to perform gratefulness to their Teachers, not only by
releeuing their Teachers while they live, but by helping their parents or
children when they are dead. He calls her Woman, not out of contempt, but to
tell her and all men, that he that then was a dying, was more than the Son of
Mary. Yea, and thereby the comforts her, for he intimated, that being more than
Man, he was able to overcome death, and could not be van quished by his
enemies. His love to his enemies he shows, by praying for them, when they most
outragiously and blasphemously persecuted him to the death: He said, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do. The cry of their blasphemies and
his innocent blood went up to heaven against them, but Jesus makes haste to
send up the cry of his prayers for them, that they perish not for ever: and
therefore the first words he speaks on the Cross, is the words of his
intercession, Luke 23. 34. which should be an admirable pattern to teach us to
go, and do likewise. Never was there a greater man on earth, nor did ever man
suffer such wrongs, and yet you see how he is affected: He that bids us pray
for our enemies, does it himself, in a harder case than ever can be ours. If
we will be true disciples, we must show it by forgiving men their trespasses,
and by praying for them: especially when we are about to die; if we would ever
have God forgive us, we must forgive men their trespasses against us. This
prayer of Christ was heard, as appears by the conversion of many of those
enemies of his after his death: Yet observe, he prays not for such as sinned
of malicious wickedness, but for such as sinned out of ignorant zeal, or
general profaneness of Nature: many of the people were carried with blind
zeal, and many of the Gentiles were ignorant of the true story of the life,
and cause of Christ for which he suffered, those were curable, and for those he
prays. And this may be a comfort to us, he that can observe this difference in
his persecuting adversaries, will much more show it, in considering the
frailties and ignorances of his own servants that desire to please him, though
they fail of that they desire to do, through strength of temptation or other
weakness and ignorance. Again note, it is not enough for the party
offending, that the party offended do forgive, but God also must be sought
unto for forgiveness. Lastly, our Savior shows his religiousnesse in his
manner of dying, by his devout care for his own soul showed in his prayer,
when he said, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46. when he
had be queathed all other things, as Peace to his Disciples, his body to the
Jews, his garments to his Tormentors, Paradise to the Thief, pardon to the
penitent, and his Mother to his Friend; now only remained his Soul, and that
he commends to God. Even Jesus can carry nothing with him out of the world, but
his Soul, and therefore he prouides for that. Which should teach us what we
should do; our greatest care should be that our souls may be safe when we
die: and that they may be so, we see here two things must be done while we
live: First, we must get assurance that God is our Father, and we are his
children, and then when we come to dye we must commit our souls by faithful
and hearty prayers into his hands; and for fear of the worse, we should
begin betimes to prepare for death, and by daily prayer to put our souls into
Gods hands. Observe that these words were first used by the Prophet David,
Psalm. 31. 5. who committed his soul to God, being horribly persecuted by Saul,
and in great danger, and having no friend to trust to. Now our Savior being in
like, but greater distress, does make choice of David's words to express his
prayer in, which should teach us to acquaint our selves with the Scriptures,
especially of this kind: for as it will be accepted if our prayers be made
according to Gods will, so is it a special advantage and help to our faith
and prayers, to fashion them to the very paternes in Gods Book; and to say, as
the godly have said to God in the like case. Finally, this practice of our
Savior may be a great comfort to us, and that two ways: for first we may
gather from his example, that if once we have committed our souls to God he
will keep them safe, as Paul said, 2 Timothy 12. And secondly, it will be
comfortable for us in death or danger to fly to Jesus Christ, to beseech him
to help our souls with his Father, who cannot forget that once himself on
earth made the same moan to his Father, that we do now to him. Thus Stephen
does, Act. 7.

The fourth question is, for whom Christ died? and the Answer is given
distinctly in many places of Scripture: First, he died for men, not for other
creatures, Heb. 2. 14. 18. Though the effect of his death reach to other
creatures, as to the Angels, Phil. 2. 10, 11. and to the creatures that
suffered vanity for man's sin, Romans 8. 19, 20, 22. Secondly, he died not for
his friends, but such as in the state of nature were his enemies, and sinners,
not just men, Romans 5. 8, 10. Thirdly, he died not for Jews only, but for the
Gentiles also, 1 Ioh. 2. 2. Fourthly, he died not for goats, but for his
sheep, Ioh. 10. 11, 15. not for the world, but for the Church, Ioh. 17. 9.
Ephesians. 5. 25. even for such as should believe in his name, Ioh. 3. 16. Fifthly,
he died not for some believers, but for all believers, Romans 8. 32. and so not
for learned men or great men, but for all men of all sorts that believe, 1 Timothy
2. 6. Sixthly, he died not for those that did believe his words, but for all
that should believe the words of his servants afterward to the end of the
world, Ioh. 17. 21. And so he died for us many hundred years before we were
borne. Seventhly, not for all believers in general only, but for every
particular by name, Ioh. 10. 3. 14, 15.

And the knowledge hereof should serve for diverse Uses. For first it should be
very comfortable for all sorts of Christians to think that Christ died for
them, and did think of them in particular, and by name. Secondly, it should
much affect us with admiration of the greatness of his love, that would die
for such vile wretches as we were by nature, wicked, and enemies to him, as the
Apostle urges it, Romans 5. 6. to 10. And thirdly, in special it should much
encourage such as are burdened with the greatness of their sins, to know
that he well understood it, that he was to die for the ungodly. Fourthly, it
should teach Christians to restrain censure and judging of them that are
without. The virtue of Christ's death may reach to many more than we know, and
to such as for the present are vile enemies to the Christian name. Fifthly, we
should all labor to be such as Christ has described to have actually a part
in his death. And so Saint Paul tells us, we must be such as see and acknowledge
how vile and wicked we are by nature, whatsoever gifts or privileges we have,
and how civil soever we have lived in comparison of others, Romans 5. 6, etc.
and our Savior tells us, we must be believers, and sheep such as will hear
and be ruled by his voice: and 2 Cor. 5. 15. the Apostle says, We must be such
as will live to him that died for us: and Saint John says, Revel. 14. 3, 4. we
must not be defiled with women, that is, with Idolatry or spiritual whoredom,
that is, with any beloved sin, and must follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he
goes. Finally, if Christ died for us, it must needs be an excellent estate he
brings us to: we are redeemed out of the earth: we are first fruits to God, and
the Lamb, Revel. 14. 4. he accounts of us as a peculiar people, and as his
only treasure in the world, Tit. 2. 14.

The fifth question is, when Christ died? And that is answered either by the
season of his death, or by the Chronology of it. For the season, S. Paul
says, he died in the due time, Romans 5. 6. Christ himself says, it was when
he had finished the performance of what was shadowed in the types and
ceremonies of the Old Testament; when all things were accomplished he gave up
the ghost, Ioh. 19. 28, 30. The Author to the Hebrews says, it was once in
the end of the world, Heb. 9. 26, 27, 28. The Angel told Daniel, that the
Messiah should be cut off after 62. weeks (in prophetical account) from the
time of his prayer, Dan. 9. 26. Saint Peter said, it was at the time that God
had appointed in his eternal counsel and foreknowledge, Act. 2. 23. yea he
died precisely at the very hour God had set, so as he could not be killed
either before or after, Ioh. 7. 30. and 13. 1. and that hour was the ninth
hour of the day, even at the time when the Evening Sacrifice was offered up,
Matthew. 27. 46. 50.

For the Chronology, Scaliger says he died in the year of the world 3982.
and the common opinion is that he died in the 34. year of his own age, and
on the Friday (as we term the fifth day of our week) which that year was the
15. day of their Month Nisan, or as others think, the 14. day, which that
year answered to the seventh day of our April.

Quest. If Christ were slain toward the end of the world, how can it be said,
that he was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world? Revel. 13. ^8.
Answ. Both are true in diverse respects. For in respect of the Story of his
death he died at the time before specified, but for many other respects it may
be truly said he was slain from the beginning of the world, as

1. In respect of Gods counsel and foreknowledge: He was dead in Gods counsel
from everlasting.

2. In respect of the promise of his death given in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15.

3. In respect of the efficacy of his death: for the justice of God was
satisfied with that promise of his death, knowing it should as certainly be, as
if it had been then fulfilled. Neither was the effect here before the cause:
for if a Surety compound with the Creditor, the Debtor is delivered out of
prison, though the payment be made long after, at the time the Surety and the
Creditor agree upon: so it was here.

4. In respect of the Sacrifices, which shadowed out his death, which were
slain from the beginning of the world. Christ was slain typically in those
Sacrifices, Adam or Abel offered to God.

5. In respect of his servants that were martyred. So Christ was slain when
Abel was slain.

6. In respect of the faith of the godly: for it is the property of faith to
make things to come to be present, as giving a substance or person to things
hoped for, and a present demonstrarion of things which yet are not seen, Heb.
11. 1.

7. In respect of sin, which was the cause of his death, which was committed
by the Elect, and was the cause of his death. Their sin was his death, when
they began to sin, death was in the pot for Christ, and so their sin was
remitted them, only for the respect of that satisfaction was to be made in the
sacrifice of Christ, Romans 3. 21. to 27.

The Use we may make of the time of Christ's death, may be

1. To leave the times and seasons to God, and not to exact an account of him
why he does not do the things concern the Church in the time we desire or
look after. Though the death of Christ was deferred almost 4000. years, yet
we see God says it was the due time; though perhaps a full demonstration of
the reason of it do not appear to us. God is so wise and good, as we must
believe that is the best time for every work which he chooses: and therefore
we should give God the glory of the time of every work of his whether
concerning the Church in general, or our selves in particular: as believing
that God has done in the very day, that which was fittest for the day: and so
also in the things we desire, either of deliverance or blessings, we should
wait till the time appointed come, and believe that all shall be done, when it
is most seasonable.

2. We should hence be much established about the time of our own death; God
has set the hour, and till that hour come, no disease, nor enemies shall
ever be able to take away our life, and therefore we should follow our work
with diligence and a holy security, and leave it to God to take us from our
work, when he sees it to be the fittest time.

Thus of the time when he died.

The consequences of his death follow: and they must be considered negatiuely,
or affirmatively.

Negatiuely: It is observed by the Evangelists, That not a bone of Christ was
broken: which is worthy to be noted: First, because the Jews had made a
request to Pilate, that the legs of those which were crucified might be broken
to hasten their death, that they might not hang on their Crosses on the day of
the great Sabbath, John 19. 31, 32. But notwithstanding they were prevented,
for Christ was dead before they came back, to show that he died when himself
would, and not when they would, and to let them have cause to guess thereby
that he was more than a bare man. Secondly, because of the excellent
signification of this thing: for it is said, the Scripture had said, that not a
bone of him should be broken, John 19. 36. Now the Scripture had only said so
of the Paschall Lamb, that not a bone thereof should be broken, Exodus 12. 46.
which manifestly shows that Christ was the true Passover, the true Paschall
Lamb which was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 6. and withal it signifies that
the mystical body of Christ shall be preserved. The Church may have many
enemies, but yet a bone thereof shall not be broken. The flesh of the Church
may be wounded, but not a bone of the Church shall be broken.

Affirmatively, the consequents of his death, bot the piercing of his side with
a Spear, and the testimony given of his glory in his death.

The side of Christ after he was dead was pierced with a Spear by one of the
Soldiers, and forthwith came out water and blood, John 19. 34. and this was a
business of so high a nature, that the Evangelist says thus upon it, He that
saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he knows that he says true,
that he might believe.

Now the side of Christ was pierced, First, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, which said, They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, Ioh.
19. 37. Zach. 12. 10. Secondly, that great mystery of the original of the
Church is here imported: As Eve was formed out of the side of Adam when he was
asleep, so the Church was to be formed out of that which flowed from the side
of Christ when he was dead. God opened the side of Adam when he would make the
woman; and so God opened the side of Christ the second Adam, when he was to
make the Christian Church. Now that place of the Prophet shows what use we
should make of this part of the Passion of Christ, namely, to take occasion
from thence to bewail our sins, that were the cause of his death, and to
acknowledge that we were the men that are spiritually guilty of that cruelty
showed unto Christ. And because our hearts by nature are barren and unapt to
this godly sorrow, we must pray God to power out upon us of his Spirit, as it
is a Spirit of compassion to melt our hearts, and a Spirit of deprecation, to
make us able by prayer to sue for pardon of our sins, and to beseech God to
accept of the propitiation made in Christ's blood, that so his wrath may not
fall upon us for our sins.

Now the water and blood that came out of the side of Christ, was both
miraculous (as is thought) and wonderfully mystical. That it was miraculous is
gathered from that extraordinary notice S. John takes of it, John 19. 34. and 1
John 5. 6. wherein the miracle should lie is not easy to tell. There is a skin
that incloseth the heart, called Pericardium, which holds water in it, that
cools the heart of man, which is so essential to life, that if it be
consumed it is impossible the creature should live. Now I take it that the
wonder lies in this, that whereas in death (especially such a painful death
as Christ's was) that water is consumed and dried up with the extreme heat of
the heart striving for life, yet in Christ who died not only willingly, but
also before the time he needed to die with the pain, the water was still in
that bag or skin, and therefore when the spear pierced the heart both water
and blood came forth.

Now for the Reasons why this fell out, diverse are assigned.

For first hereby the truth of Christ's death is infallibly proved: For no
creature can live, if the heart and that Pericardium be pierced. And it
concerns our salvation that Christ should die indeed, and not in appearance.

Secondly, the chief thing intended by this suffering, was the discovery of a
dreadful mystery concerning the virtue of the death of Christ: for this is he
that came by water and blood even Jesus Christ, that brings with him for our
saluauation, both the water of Sanctification to wash us from the stain of our
sins, and the blood of expiation to make full atonement before God for the
guilt of our sins: Not by water only, but by blood also. Moses when he
delivered the people of Israel in that bodily deliverance, came by water, when
he went through the Red Sea; but he brought no blood for atonement. John Baptist
when he brought tidings of Spiritual deliverance, he came by water, washing
men to signify repentance: but there was no blood that he could exhibit, and
his water was but Symbolicall, and significatiue. But Christ came by water and
blood, which he not only powered out on the Cross, but has left in the
hearts of all believers as witnesses, not only to him, but to them also, 1 Ioh.
5. 7, 8. For as there be Three in heaven that bear witness of Christ, and the
happiness of Christians in him, viz. the Father, who testified by voice from
heaven, Mat. 3. and the Word, who testified both by doctrine and miracles; and
the Holy Ghost, who testified as at other times, so on the day of Pentecost,
Act. 2. So there be Three on earth that testify, viz. the Spirit of Adoption,
that witnesses to our spirits, and the water of Mortification, which washes
away and destroys the stain and power of sin, and the blood of
Justification; for a believer relying upon the blood of Christ, as the
pacification for his sins, is effectually delivered from the guilt of them.
Now there would be no water to wash him from his sins, nor blood to make
atonement, if Christ had not shed both water and blood upon the Cross. Now all
this is testified by the Spirit also in the Gospel, and by water in Baptism,
and by blood in the Lords Supper: and these also receive all their life and
force from the water and blood that came out of the side of Christ on the
Cross. Now the use that we should make of this dreadful Mystery, should be to
fly unto this part of the Passion of Christ, for our comfort, against the
power and guilt of our sins, as believing that out of the side of Christ at
this time, did run that Fountain that was opened unto the house of David, and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 12. 1.
Though our sins were never so many and loathsome, yet in this Fountain they
may be clean washed away: but then withal we must strive to get this
Fountain within us, (this miraculous Fountain, I say, that runs water and
blood) and to show that we have indeed a part in the death of Christ, by the
sound fruits of mortification, and by the solid tran quilitie of our
conscience, believing the expiation made in the blood of Christ for us, as
verily as if that blood had been really sprinkled upon our hearts.

Some Divines do observe another mystery in this water and blood running out
of the side of Christ; for they observe, that as out of the side of the first
Adam came the woman that deceived all the world; so out of the side of Christ
came redemption and oblation from that deceiving.

Thus of the piercing of Christ's side after his death.

The testimony given of his glory in his death, was partly divine and partly
humane.

The divine testimonies were three, the Earthquake, the rending of the Rocks,
and the opening of the Graves, Matthew. 27. 51, 52.

The trembling of the earth may signify diverse things, as First, the immediate
presence of the Divine Nature: for as the earth trembled when Christ came to
give the Law on Sinai, Psalm. 67. 8, 9. and as both heaven and earth shall melt,
and be in a manner consumed when Christ comes to Judgment, 2 Pet. 3. 10. So
now that Christ is making atonement for the sins of the Elect, and going out
of the world, he makes the earth do him homage, and acknowledge his Divinity
at that time, when he seemed so despised amongst men.

Secondly, the horrible indignity of the fact of the Jews in killing Christ:
the senseless creatures tremble, when the Lord of life dies, and the Creator
is slain by the creature; which also vpbraids the stupiditie of men, that
cannot be moved with such an object, especially the horrible wickedness of the
chief Priests and Rulers, and people of the Jews, that are not stirred with
remorse for so grievous a sin.

Thirdly, this shaking of the earth is thought to signify and foretell the
shaking of the world, by the Gospel afterward, so as all the world should be
moved at the sound of the voice of Christ in the Gospel, Heb. 12. 26, 27.

The rending of the Rocks

1. Did vpbraid the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, that were worse
than the very Rocks: The Rocks cleave at the death of Christ, and yet their
hearts are unmoved.

2. It might signify the same with the Earthquake, viz. that the virtue of
Christ's death carried by the Gospel into the world, would be of force to
tear and rent the hearts of wicked men, though they were as hard as Rocks.

The opening of the graves signified, that Christ's death had vanquished Death,
and that it should not have power to hold the body of the Saints in the grave
long; and withal, it told the Jews aforehand, that it would be in vain for
them to roll great stones upon Christ's grave, for he would rise again, do
they what they could. It is said that the dead bodies arose after the
Resurrection of Christ, which has made some Divines think, that the graves
were not opened till after the Resurrection, though Saint Matthew reckons this
thing together with the rest of the Miracles that concerned Christ's death.

Thus of the Testimony Divine.

The Humane Testimony, was the Testimony of the Roman Centurion, and the
Soldiers with him, who feared and glorified God, and said, Of a truth this was
the Son of God: and the multitude that came to the execution, beholding the
things that were done, smote their breasts and returned, Matthew. 27. 54. Mark.
15. 19. Luke 23. 47, 48. And this Testimony shows,

1. The marvelous senselessness of the Priests and learned men, and great men
of the Jews: that these men that were Pagans, and these poor Plebeians,
should be so affected with fear and wonder, and give such an honorable
testimony to the innocence and Divinity of Christ, when these great Pillars of
the Church are so obstinately auerse, and hostily minded, it shows that they
were prodigiously sinful and hard hearted; and withal it shows what a plague
a hard heart is, whereso ever it is found, though in learned or great men.
Though God shake the earth, tear the Rocks, open the graves, and though he
make strangers to confess his glory, yet they are the same men still.

2. That it is easy with Christ to defend his own credit and cause even in
the hardest times: though Judas betray him, Peter deny him, and the rest of the
Disciples fly from him, yet he can make a Centurion, a Soldier, a Pagan, to
do the work his Disciples should have done. He can glorify himself by the
mouth of Babes and Sucklings, if need be, Psalm. 8. 2.

Buried.
ACT. 13. 29. And when they had fulfilled all things that were written of him,
they took him down from the tree, and put him in a sepulcher.
THat Christ was buried, is manifest by the Story of the Evangelists, and is a
part of the Creed, not doubted of by any amongst us. Concerning his burial I
propound these things to be considered.

1. The reasons why it was needful Christ should be buried. 2. The place where
he was buried. 3. The persons by whom he was buried. 4. The manner how he was
buried. 5. The time how long he continued in the grave.
Our Saviors body was buried for these Reasons.

1. That the Scripture might be fulfilled that had prophesied of it: see Esaias
53. 9.

2. That it might appear he was truly dead.

3. That he might pursue and overcome death in his own cell or den.

4. That he might bury our sins with him; and for ever hide them from the
sight of God.

5. That we being made partakers of the fruit of his burial, might be buried
with him in respect of our sins. The immersion in the water of Baptism is a
sign of this spiritual burial with Christ, Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12.

6. That he might sanctify our burial to us, and so expel from us that
horror and fear we might conceive about our lying in the grave, and so
confirm us in the hope of our Resurrection.

7. That we might learn from thence to give honor to the body of Christians,
in providing honest and decent burial for them, such as might answer the hope
we have of our Resurrection. Men's bodies shall rise, and to signify so much,
we should lay them in the grave as in a safe place to keep them till the
Resurrection.

For the place where he was buried, that may be diversely answered.

1. He was buried in a noted place near to Jerusalem: and that for two causes:
The one, that so all occasion of doubting of his death, or truth of his
burial, and so of his resurrection might be removed. The other, that by the
rest of Christ in the grave, the vision of rest and peace (which the name
Jerusalem signified) might be known to be procured by Christ: Rest I say
spiritual and eternal.

2. He was buried in a Garden: thereby having relation to the first Adam: for
as our unrest began at the sin of the first Adam, so here in a Garden does
the second Adam come to rest, and so begins our spiritual rest. And withal to
give us hope, that as from the sin of the first Adam we were cast out of the
garden of pleasure, so by the suffering of the second Adam, who lay buried in a
Garden, we might have a happy return to the heavenly Paradise. And as Christ
was carried from the Cross to the garden of rest, so shall we be taken from
the calamities of life, into heavenly rest.

3. He was buried in a Sepulcher hewed out of a rock, that so his enemies
might have no occasion to cavil, and say his Disciples stole him away by
secret holes, or passages under ground: and withal to signify what the state
of our natural hearts is, when Christ comes spiritually to rest in our souls,
he must hew him a place out of the rocks, if he get room in our hearts.

4. He was buried in a Sepulcher that was new, that thereby might be signified,
that the condition of death was by the merit of Christ made new, and was
altogether different from that which it was wont to be: and withal to tell us,
that Christ will rest in the heart of no man unless it be new.

5. He was buried in a Sepulcher in which never man was laid, lest his
adversaries should cavil, and say it was some other that was risen, or that he
rose from the dead by virtue of touching some other corpse: see 2 King. 13. 21.

6. He was buried in another man's Sepulcher, to signify that he died and was
buried not for himself, but for other men: and that he might show that graves
properly belong to us which have sinned, to warn us of our mortality. Joseph
caused his sepulcher to be made in his garden of pleasure, that he might be
thereby put in mind of his mortality in the midst of the delights of this
life.

The persons by whom Christ was buried, are diversely described; as by their
names, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus; and by their worldly estate, they
were Senators and rich men; and by their profession or religion, they were
disciples, just men, such as waited for the kingdom of God: but yet all was
done secretly for fear of the Jews, and by the authority they had to do it,
viz. the consent of Pilate, Matthew. 27. 57. Mark. 15. 45. Ioh. 19. 38, 39.

For the first of these it is to be observed, that God has given these men an
honorable name in the Story of the Gospel, so as what they have done shall
always be remembered where the Gospel is preached: and this honorable mention
they attained not, till this service done to the dead body of Christ. Whereby
God would teach us, that such as honor Christ God will honor: and the best
way to get into the Catalogue of Gods Worthies, is to employ our selves in
well-doing, and in the service of Jesus Christ, and then we can do no good
work, to Christ dead or living, in himself or his members, but it shall be
had in honor, yea it may be in everlasting remembrance.

For the second, Christ was buried by rich men, First that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, that said, He exposed his grave to the wicked, and to the rich
man in his death: To the wicked, because he could not be buried without Pilates
consent; and to the rich man, because he was buried by Joseph of Arimatheas
means. Thus he was said to be buried and raised up according to the
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 4. Secondly, he gave his dead body to rich men, to
signify, that amongst rich men he had his elect, and that the virtue of his
death should reach even to them: for though it be impossible in respect of
men, that a rich man should be saved, yet it is not so unto Christ, who can
effect wonderful things, and so can by the virtue of his death so untwist the
gable of a rich man's heart, as to make it in true humility like a thread to
go through the eye of a needle, Matthew. 19. 24. Iam. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 26. And
hence rich men should learn of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, that they
ought to profess their love of Christ and sincere Religion, not only when
Christ is adorned with miracles and worldly applause, but even when he falls
into the hands of wicked men, and is buried in ignominy, they must not fear
danger or reproach. They must honor Christ not only in the peaceable times of
the Church, but in troubled times: Even when Christ in his members is betrayed,
persecuted, oppressed, forsaken of his own, condemned either in spiritual
Courts or political, pursued by wars or any other vexations. And the poor
servants of God that suffer for the testimony of Jesus, may hence take
comfort, God that stirred up rich men to do this honor to the body of Jesus,
will not forsake the afflicted members of Jesus; he can stir up men to
provide for them, and honor them (even greatmen when it pleases him) both in
their life time, and at their death, and after their death also.

Now for the third point, they were disciples of Christ, but yet it was
secretly for fear of the Jews. Whence we may observe the great wonder of Gods
power in these men. When Christ was in prosperity, they were afraid to be
seen to follow him, or to profess respect to him: Now that Christ is in
extreme disgrace, and the enemies of Christ fleshed in cruelty and malice, now
these fearful men prove valiant, and whatsoever comes of it, Christ shall be
honored, even, the dead body of Christ shall not be forsaken by them, Which
is the more wonderful, because the best disciples of Christ were so overcome
with fear, that they had all forsaken Christ. Which may serve for great use to
all of us. They that stand should take heed lest they fall. Those that now go
for strong Christians, if evil days come, may prove faint-hearted, and by
their fearfulness dishonor the Religion they profess. And on the other
side, weak Christians should not be dismayed, God is able to make them to
stand, Romans 14. 4. Such as in days of prosperity were afraid of the reproach
of men, may prove so full of courage in the evil day, as not to fear though
the foundations of the earth be moved.

Further, we may hence gather a distinction of true Christians. Some are so and
seem so, they make a profession before men. Some are so but seem not so, as
here these Counselors were just men and disciples, and waited for the kingdom
of God, and yet they were not taken for disciples, nor known to be so
commonly: which should restrain censure in rash Christians; some of those
persons they despise as profane, may be true Christians in Gods sight. But yet
lest wicked men should be hence emboldned, observe that how weak or fearful
soever these men were, yet they would not consent to the death of Christ:
Though the weak Christians I speak of do not so much for the truth, as
others do, and they should, yet they will do nothing against the truth, 2
Cor. 13. 8. and therefore such persons as not only make no profession, but
withal do scoff at and oppose sincerity in others, cannot be reckoned in
the catalogue of true Christians.

Pilates consent was had for the burial of Christ,

1. That there might be no doubt made of his death and burial, seeing so great
a person is made privy to the ordering of it.

2. That we might know that the hearts of the greatest men are in Gods hands,
and he can turn them which way he will, even to execute his counsel, when
they think nothing of it. He can make the very enemies of the Church become
friendly and loving when please him.

And further, in that Joseph does not take the dead body down, and bury it
without leave of the Magistrate, it serves to teach men, that they should do
all things with due respect, not only of the warrant of the action, but of all
circumstances belonging to it: especially great respect should be had to
authority, that by rash zeal the power of Magistrates be not provoked against
us.

Thus of the third point.

The manner of the burial contains diverse things: First, they did it hastily
toward the evening, because of the preparation of the Iowes for the Sabbath,
Ioh. 19. vlt. Secondly, they did it openly. Thirdly, they did it with great
cost, for Joseph brought fine linen to wrap it in, and Nicodemus brought a
mixture of Mirrhe and Aloes to the quantity of about an hundred pound weight,
Ioh. 19. 39. Mark. 15. 46. but it was done without washing or embalming.
Lastly, it is noted it was done after the manner of the Jews burial.

For the first, in that Joseph makes such haste, in respect of the Sabbath
approaching, it shows that all men that have work to do toward the end of
the week, should order the matter so, as they take up not any part of the
Lords day, but use the more haste and providence to have all dispatched that
they may wholly attend unto Gods work in that time which he has consecrated
to himself. And by the way here seems to be an intimation, that burials are
not so convenient to be performed upon the Sabbath day, unless it be in some
case of necessity, when the body will not keep till after the Lords day, and
cannot be prepared for burial before it begin.

For the second, Christ was buried openly, that so there might be no color of
obiecting, that there was any fraud used about his burial, and besides to
testify that the fruit of his death and burial did belong to all men: and
withal it shows the courage and strength of faith in these disciples, that
are now no more afraid of men and their terrors, but give glory to God in their
hearts, and will suffer what can come of it.

For the third point, diverse things may be noted.

1. From the cost they are at, we may observe that men that will follow Christ
and be true disciples, must not think much to be not only at labor, but at
cost also in what may be requisite for the service of Christ living or dead. If
rich men must be at cost with the dead body of Christ, then must they also do
to the living members of Christ. And further hence it is manifest, that it is
not unlawful to be at cost about the funerals of the dead Saints: God makes
great account of the dead bodies of his people, that have been the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, and therefore it is no sin according to men's estate to be at
such cost as is requisite to comely and decent burial according to their
condition; though vain ostentation or idle ceremonies are not to be justified.

2. In that he was wrapped in pure linen, and with such costly spices: it was

1. To proclaim the innocence of Christ, and to take away the ignominy of
the Cross: and therefore they would not suffer his body to lie amongst the
carcasses of thieves and malefactors: They tell the world hereby that Christ
was no such man.

2. To signify that the memorial of the just is blessed after they are dead.
Therefore they used things of such sweet smell in burying the dead, that they
might thereby signify how sweet the memory of the departed Saints is. They
are amiable even when they are dead.

3. It might in special signify, that from Christ dead and buried should
arise a most sweet savor in the he^rts of men brought unto them by the
efficacy of the Gospel, causing Christ to dye and be buried in their souls.

4. This cost about the bodies of the dead was used to signify their assured
hope of resurrection, and therefore they bestow that cost, as knowing that it
is bestowed upon bodies that shall live again.

Yet for all this cost Christ's body was not embalmed, which in respect of them
came to pass by reason of the shortness of the time, the Sabbath was so
near: and therefore the women came the third day to anoint him after the
Sabbath was over, but he was rifen. But in respect of God, this embalming was
not performed, that thereby might be signified, that Christ's body needed no
embalming, because it could see no corruption in the grave, Psalm. 16. 10. and
that this incorruption might not be imputed to skill, or medicines of men, but
only to the divine power: and withal to signify that by Christ we should be
freed from that corruption which the sin of the first Adam brought upon us
all.

Lastly, in that it is said, that Christ was buried after the manner of the
Jews burying, it shows plainly, that respect is to be had to the customs of
any country or place where we live, and that Gods servants have been careful
to observe them, and not willing to give offense by crossing such customs.
This is true of all customs that are not sinful, and against the word of God;
though they be such vsages as are not commanded in Scripture: for this manner
of burial was no where commanded in Gods word, and yet the custom preuailes,
and good men observe it.

Now in this place I may add further two adjuncts of the burial of Christ.
The first was the rolling of a great stone upon the mouth of the Sepulcher;
which was not done so much out of any fashion, as first that the body of
Christ might not be exposed to any indignities or vile vsages by the enemies:
and further, that thereby the glory of the power of Christ might the more
appear, that could rise though a great stone were rolled upon the mouth of the
Sepulcher. The second adiunct, was the presence of certain women, that were
witnesses of the burial, when the Apostles were fled. Which also was done the
better to show the glory of Christ, and his power and triumph, that could make
such weak ones strong, and brave the enemies of man's salvation, by setting
weak women in the forefront of the battle, that hold out the confession of
Christ, and give not back for all the fury of the adversaries. And thus of
the manner of his burial.

Now for the last point, our Savior continued in the grave till the third day:
for he was buried the evening before the Jewish Sabbath, and lay in the grave
all the Sabbath day, and rose about the beginning of the first day of the
week, Matthew. 28. 1. and a little after his burial, his adversaries desired of
Pilate, that the Sepulcher might be watched, lest his Disciples should steal
him away by night. Pilate grants them the Band of Soldiers, who were appointed
for the guard of the Temple; and these they set to watch the Sepulcher, and
besides sealed the mouth of the Sepulcher: now in all that time the body of
Christ did suffer no putrefaction or corruption. Now of all this, four
questions may be demanded.

Quest. 1. Why did our Savior continue in the grave three days?
Answ. That the type of Jonas might be fulfilled: As Jonas was three days and
three nights in the Whales belly, so must Christ be three days in the belly of
the earth, Matthew. 12. 40.

Quest. 2. Why did he rest in the grave on the Sabbath day?
Answ. 1. Because as God when he had finished the works of the Creation,
especially the making of man, rested the seventh day: So Christ having finished
our Redemption on the Cross, rested the seventh day in the grave.

Answ. 2. That this resting of his on the Sabbath might be a pledge of our
spiritual and eternal rest from sin and labor.

Quest. 3. Why was the Sepulcher so fenced and sealed?
Answ. That so the glory of Christ's resutrection might the better appear, in
that all their power and care could not hinder it: and besides God hereby
catches them in the works of their own hands, for by these means their own
Soldiers are made witnesses against themselves of the truth of the
resurrection of Christ.

Quest. 4. But what was the reason that the body of Christ did not putrify?
Answ. Christ was without sin, and so his body could not corrupt, and as for
our sins he had made expiation for them on the Cross: besides this was so,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, that said, Thou will not suffer thy holy
one to see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. Thirdly, our Savior foretold us thereby
that one day our bodies should be as his was, viz. after the resurrection they
should be incorruptible for ever.

The Uses of the whole doctrine of the burial of Christ, may be

1. For consolation: for by the casting of the body of Christ into the grave,
we know that Gods anger is pacified, and our sins are expiated: for as the
tempest was laid and stilled, when Jonas was cast out of the ship into the
Sea; so when Christ was cast from among the living into the grave among the
dead, all the tempests of Gods wrath conceived against us were quieted, and
fully stilled, and pacified. Besides, Christ's burial may greatly comfort us
against our burial: His body has sanctified and perfumed our graves.

2. For instruction: and so the special Use should be, to teach us to strive
to be buried with Christ in respect of our sins, Col. 2. 12. Romans 6. 4. and
this we may the rather hope to attain, because there is a virtue flowing from
the burial of Christ able to produce this spiritual burial of sin in us.
Now there be four things in which our sins should be like a dead body in the
grave. First, dead bodies are for ever removed out of the society of men: so
should our sins be abandoned from us. Secondly, dead bodies in the grave use
to spend and confume away by little and little: so should our sins. Thirdly,
dead bodies use to grow loathsome more and more: so should our sins.
Fourthly, dead bodies wax out of memory, and are quite forgotten: so should
our sins in respect of any delight we should take in remembering them.

He descended into Hell.
COncerning this Article of Christ's descension into Hell, I propound three
things to be considered of.

1. The Original of it. 2. The Authority of it. 3. The sense and meaning of
it, with the Use.
For the first, these words, He descended into Hell, were not in the most
ancient Creeds. Learned men give instance both in the Creeds that have them not
in, as also of most ancient Expositors that undertook to expound the Apostles
Creed, and yet makes no mention of this Article at all. Amandus Polanus says
they are not in the Nicene Creed, nor in the Creed of the Council at Sardis,
nor in the Creed of the first Council at Constantinople, nor in the first
Toletan Council, nor in the Creed of the Council of Ephesus, nor in the
Creeds of the sixth and the eleventh Toletan Counsels, nor in the Creeds of the
Councels of Worms and Franckford, nor in diverse other Creeds. And besides, it
is observed, that neither Clement the first, nor Iernaeus, nor Tertullian, nor
Iustine Martyr, nor Origin, nor Augustine, though they expound the Creed, yet
make any mention of this Article: and Ruffinus that does receive the words, yet
says that they are not in the Creed of the Roman Church, nor amongst the
Churches of the East.

For the second, though these words have not been found to be acknowledged in
the first Churches, yet because for many ages they have been received with an
universal consent of all Christian Churches, and are acknowledged by many of
the ancient Fathers, and Councels, and are received by the Church of England,
and by all sorts of Divines in our Church, therefore it were great impudency
for any man to reject these words, or question their authority, either for the
truth or use of them: only for the interpretation of the words, the learned
know that the Divines of no one age since they came into the Creed, did fully
agree about the proper meaning of them: and as I conceive, the Church of
England has never made any interpretation of them, in any National Synod, or
Convocation, that might declare which sense our Church has taken to. And
therefore men must be advised, and take heed of rash censuring of the opinions
of Divines In this point, the Author being dead, I thought not fit to alter any
thing: he delivers herein but his private opinion. What is the judgment of
the Church of England, touching the meaning of this Article, thou may see in
Nowels Catechism set out by public authority, to which I refer thee.
in our Church, that deliver their consciences in this Article, though there
be difference about the sense amongst them: and weak Christians must know,
that it is possible for a Christian to be saved that believes the word of God,
and the rest of the Articles of the Creed, though he never come to know
infallibly what is the proper sense of this Article.

Now for the sense of the words of this Article; if the opinions of Divines be
gathered together, some of them will be found apparently false, some of them
verisimilies, things that be like Truth, some of them are manifestly true: And
lastly, there is a sense is not only a truth, but the proper truth of this
place, if we could find it out.

Now for an introduction, it will not be unprofitable to take notice of the
diverse acceptations of the Original words rendered here Hell* The Hebrew word
is Sheol, and the Greek word Hades. Now the Kings Translators of the Bible,
do not render the words all alike in every place As for the word Hades, in the
new Testament they translate it the most places Hell: Yet in one place I find
it translated the Grave, viz. 1. Cor. 15. 55. So for the word Sheol in the old
Testament, usually they translate it Hell. Yet in diverse places they call it
the Pit, as Job 17. 16. and likewise in sundry places they call it the Grave,
and it cannot well be otherwise rendered, as Genesis 42. 38. and 37. 35. 1 King.
2. 6. Psalm. 49 15. and 6. 5. Esaias 38. 18.

Now Christ may be said to descend into Hell, either in respect of the
wholeman, or in respect of the body only, or in respect of the soul only.

In respect of the whole Man, it is true that he descended into Hell in four
Respects.

1. In respect of Incarnation: when our Savior descended from heaven to take
our Nature, in a large sense he may be said then to descend into Hades. For the
ancient Grecians, whence the word Hades comes, understood by Hades the Earth;
and many of the ancient Fathers, call the earth Infernum, or Hell: for they
make a distinction of Hell, and say, One is superior, and that is the Earth;
and another is inferior, and that is the Hell of the damned. Nor did Christ
descend only to be upon earth, but to assume Earth, when he took our nature,
and that too considered as the earth was under malediction for the first Adams
sin, and expressed in that sentence, Thou art earth, and to earth thou shall
return: and that other, The earth is cursed for thy sake, thorns and briers
shall it bring forth. And that he descended both in respect of his body and
soul, and of both of them together: In respect of his body, as Adam, made of
the earth; so was Christ borne of a Virgin, who had her original from the
earth: and the earth is usually said to be the common mother of us all: and his
soul descended into this earth, when it was united to his most sacred body: In
both soul and body in his Incarnation he descended into the earth, even the
earth as it was accursed, both in respect of infirmity, and in respect of
mortality. The infirmities of our Nature which he took, both in soul and in
body, what were they but so many thorns and briers to afflict, and seratch,
and pain his most blessed Nature? I mean by his infirmities, such as were
without sin, such as came from sin, but did not tend to sin: such were in
his soul, sorrow and fear, and in his body, thirst, hunger, poverty. And
besides our Infirmities, he took our Nature as it was Mortal, and so
descended into that Infernum, the Fathers call Infernum mortalitatis: for
though he died not so soon as he was borne, yet he lived always under the
sentence of death. A prisoner in the Goal when he is condemned, all the time
he lives is reckoned but as a dead man. So was Christ. Now the Scripture seems
clearly to acknowledge the descension of Christ into the earth of mortality
and infirmity, as when he descended to take upon him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2. 7. So it is by some Interpreters conceived to be meant, Romans 10. 7.
and Ephesians. 4. 9. though it is not doubted but these places have a further
meaning. Thus of the first sense, as Hades signifies the earth: and the rather
because some Divines make it a rule, that Christ is never said to descend any
whither, but into Hell or Hades.

2. Christ may be said to descend into Hades, when by death he went among the
dead, both in his body and soul. He descended when he went down among the
dead: And thus he descended not only into the Infernum mortalitatis, but into
the Infernum mortis also. Thus according to the Psalm he was free among the
dead: and this was the greater abasement, because he was detained so long
among the dead, kept down as a Prisoner in the grave, in respect of his body:
He descended then, when he suffered the state of the dead both in body and
soul. I say his abasement was very great in this condition, because both his
friends thought all was lost in him, Luke 24. 21. Mark 16. 10. and his enemies
insulted over him as conquered, and called him Deceiuer, Matthew. 27. 62, etc.
Luke 23. 43. See what God says, Dan. 9. 26. And death held him down as his
prisoner, Romans 6. 9. So as it was with him, as Job 17. 12, 13. But yet it is
true he was glorious in this estate, both in that his soul was in Paradise,
and his body inioyed incorruption. But yet all this was secret, and not known
to men; therefore some Divines call this a kind of middle state, between
humiliation and exaltation, because it was partly glorious, and partly
ignomious. And his detention in the grave answer^ fitly to the order of the
Articles. For as Resurrection answers to his death and crucifying, so A
scension answers to his going into the grave; and Session In this sense Master
Perkins takes the Article.
at the right hand of God, answers to his continuance in the grave.

3. Christ may be said to descend into Hell in respect of efficacy: because
though neither soul nor body went into the Hell of the damned locally, yet the
virtue of what he suffered in soul and body penetrated into Hell it self:
This was an operative descension: The merit and virtue of his Passion descended
even amongst the damned Angels, to spoil them of their power, and confirm
them in the horror of their estates, and to signify the deliverance of the
Elect out of their hands.

4. These words, He descended into Hell, may be taken as an effectual Epitome
and repetition of all his Passion described before, with a general intimation
of the vnexpressablenesse of the things he suffered for our sins: as if they
that inserted the words into the Creed, would say, he suffered all things that
might concern our Redemption, which were so many and so grievous, as the heart
of man is not able to reckon them, or to find the bottom of them; for when he
came to suffer for us, he desended into a very Abissus, or bottomless pit of
misery, not to be sounded by any mortal heart. This sense is taken too by
some Divines, as the most proper sense of the words in this place. And for mine
own part, (with submission to information of better judgments) if one
particular sense must be taken to, I best like this.

Thus of his descension in respect of the whole Man.

In respect of his body our Savior descended into Hades, or Sheol, when he
descended into the grave; and so it is the same in sense with his burial: and
this interpretation is not to be slighted, for first I have quoted many places
of Scripture before, where the Translators themselves render the words by the
term of the grave. So Jacob descended into Hell, when he went down into the
grave, Genesis 42. 38. And besides, Athanasius in his Creed, (which is one of the
most ancient that have this Article in) leaves out Buried, and puts in, He
descended into Hell, as if he signified thereby, that he took that to be the
meaning of the Article. And Ruffinus says in his Exposition of the Creed, that
the sense of these words seems to be the same with the other word Buried.

Thirdly, in respect of his soul, our Savior may be said to descend into Hell
in two senses: First, in that he abased himself so far, as to let his soul
to be in that condition which our souls are in between the time of our death
and our resurrection, which was a great abasement, though the soul suffered no
pain: for his very soul herein endures the common condition of all men's
souls in death, though the soul die not in respect of the substance, yet in a
general sense every change from that being we have for the present, is a
kind of death, because it makes a not being of that which was before, or makes
something not to be, which had a being before: What is mutabilitie but a kind
of death, which while it changes any thing into another fashion, that cease
to be what it was, and begins to be what it was not. Thus in the soul of
Christ, there was not only a change, but a privation of what he had before: for
first the Body was taken from the soul, and a divorce made between that couple
that had lived so lovingly together: See 2 Cor. 5. 2. Secondly, the (...) part
of the soul was abolished, seeing, hearing, brea^^^ng, speaking, and the like,
all ceast in Christ, all the vessels or instruments of the senses being taken
away from the soul. Thirdly, all outward operations did cease, in which the
soul was wont to work, and now could work no longer: This is to be
understood of doing work in the visible and corporeal world. Fourthly, there
is in the souls even of the godly, and so in Christ, a most earnest longing
(yet without pain or sorrow) for the consummation of felicity to be enjoyed
with the body resumed. The soul departed is joined to the body still, though
not in life and sense, yet in natural affection, so as it enioyes no
happiness which it does not wish to the body. The souls of the righteous cry
under the Altar; for though they rest, says one, a labor, yet they do not
rest a clamore: and though they have nothing that molest them, yet they have
not yet what would more delight them, viz. their bodies.

Thus of the first sense.

Secondly, Christ in soul descended into Hell, when as our furetie he
submitted himself to bear those Or equivalent to them.
hellish so^rowes, which we were bound by our sins to luffer for ever: His
descension is his proiection of himself into the sea of Gods wrath conceived
for our sins, and his ingression into most unspeakable straits and torments
in his soul, which we should else have suffered for ever in Hell. This way of
Christ descending into Hell is expressly uttered in the person of David, as the
type of Christ, Psalm. 86. 13. and 116. 3. and 69. 3. Thus the Prophet Esaias
says, His soul was made an offering, Esaias 53. 10. And this I take it David
means, when he said of Christ, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, Psalm.
16. Acts 2. And thus Christ descended into hell when he was alive, not when he
was dead. Thus his soul was in Hell, when in the Garden he did sweat blood,
and on the Cross, when he cried out so lamentably, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me, Matthew. 26, 38. And according to this sense is the Article
fitly placed in the Creed: for having reckoned before what he suffered in
body, in this Article is expressed what he suffered in soul: and in the
sixteenth Psalm it seems he first reckons what he suffered in soul, and
his delivery from it, when he said, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, and
then speaks of the privilege of his body in the grave, as a thing which
followed the suffering and deliverance of his soul out of Hell.

The use of this Article may be,

1. To inform us again of the hatefulness of sin, that has thus abased
the Son of God: and withal to show us how great that surpassing love of
Christ to us was, that could be content for our sakes, to be thus abased.

2. To instruct us especially in two things, Humility and Patience. This is a
matchless pattern for us to learn by: how should our hearts fall low, and
descend in us, when we hear how many ways Christ has descended and abased
himself for us? this should destroy our pride, and those high thoughts in us,
that hinder true lowliness of heart, Phil. 2. Matthew. 11. 29. And for Patience,
what can we suffer that is comparable to the descension of Christ into Hell in
all those senses? Such unworthy creatures are we, as whatsoever God do with
us, we cannot descend lower than we are, or deserve to be: and if God have
delivered our Savior from this bottomless sea of misery, into which he
descended for our sakes, why should we doubt through unbelief or despair?
This should teach us to trust upon God, and wait for deliverance from
whatsoever distress we do, or can fall into.

3. To comfort us: for his Descension is our Ascension. He descended into Hell,
that we might ascend into heaven. He has endured unspeakable sorrows on
earth, that we might enjoy rivers of pleasure in heaven.

The fifth Article.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 8. The third day he rose again from the Dead.
HItherto of the Articles of the Creed, that describe the abasement and
humiliation of of Christ the Mediator on earth. Now it follows to consider of
the Articles that concern the exaltation of Christ, as he is the Mediator
made glorious: and so three things are entertained into the Christian faith, as
the three parts or degrees of the glorification of Christ, viz. his
Resurrection, Ascension, and Session at the right hand of God. But before I
handle these in particular, I must consider of his exaltation in general.

Concerning the exaltation of Christ in general, two things are to be
considered: both what in Christ was exalted, and what good it is to us that he
was so exalted.

For the first of these: The person of Christ was exalted, and that in respect
of both Natures: The Divine Nature was exalted but in some respect, the Humane
Nature was exalted simply: The Divine Nature being immutable, could receive no
increase of glory or essence in it self, but yet was exalted in respect of the
manifestation of the glory and Majesty, which in the estate of humiliation was
hidden, as it were, under a veil, Romans 1. 4. so that Christ was exalted in
respect of Manifestation only, as he was God. The Humane nature was exalted
absolutely and simply, and that two ways, namely by the deposition or laying
down of Infirmities, and by glorification or susception of most excelling
gifts. In the estate of exaltation Christ put off the infirmities of our
nature, which he assumed in his Incarnation, such as were hunger, thirst,
weariness in the body, and negative ignorance, and fear and sorrow in his
soul. The gifts he received were both in body and soul: his body being
rescued from corruption, and death, and all misery, becomes incorruptible,
immortal, impatible, and was made to shine with all purity, strength, agility,
and brightness, as became the body of God, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. His soul
received all knowledge could befall a nature, even the knowledge perfect of all
things that are, and all virtues and gifts in their highest degree that can be
in a glorified creature, above all blessed Angels and men. Yet by the way we
must know that Christ did receive such glory as did not destroy the humane
nature. Christ laid down all infirmities of the flesh, but not the flesh it
self; for now he is glorified, he has the same flesh he had when he was
borne and crucified: He was not emptied of the substance of his humanity, but
in it glorified, not deified: for, How can a finite thing equal that which is
infinite? And how can we say we believe in Christ God and Man, if he be no
more a man? Wherefore we must constantly hold the difference between the
Majesty uncreated, and the Majesty created, which is in Christ; the one
belongs to the Divine nature, the other to the humane.

The good that comes to us by his exaltation is threefold; the first is, the
confirmation of our faith and hope: for his exaltation shows plainly, that he
has fully satisfied for our sins, and conquered all our enemies, Sin, the
Law, Death, the Devil, the Grave, and Hell, and that he has purchased Gods
favor, and all that concerns our eternal salvation, 1 Pet. 1. The second is,
the perpetuation of his office, both as the Prophet and Apostle of our
confession, Psalm. 22. 23. Ioh. 17. vlt. as our Priest to make intercession for
us, Psalm. 110. 4. Romans 8. 33. and as our eternal King, Psalm. 45. 4. 5. and 89.
36. Dan. 7. 27. Luke 1. 33. Romans 14. 9. and in all these by his glorification
he has procured a larger donation and effusion of the Holy Ghost, which makes
the times under Christ more happy than those before, Ioh. 7. 39. In all his
gifts he gives now as he that is exalted above every name that is named in
heaven and earth. The third is, our own exaltation; he was therefore exalted,
that he might exalt us to the glory of heaven, Ephesians. 2. 6. 7.

The consideration of the exaltation of Christ, may serve greatly for our
comfort, for besides the former benefits, it may raise up in us an assurance of
hope of preferment by him, seeing our Brother is so highly preferred: and
withal, it may greatly encourage us in all our suits to God, seeing we have
Christ with him, that is so high in his favor: and further, in all the straits
and distresses of the Church here on earth, this may joy our hearts, that
Christ is so highly preferred, that he is able to preserve and deliver the
Church when pleases him. But yet we must remember two things if we would have
benefit by Christ's exaltation; the one is, that we be true Christians, for
else his preferment will not reach to us; only such as are bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh, have part in his glory, and such are none but true
believers. The other is, that if we will reign with Christ, we must suffer
with him: we see here how it was with him, first he was abased, and then
exalted; so it must be with us, Luke 24. 26. Heb. 2. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 12.

Thus of his exaltation in general. The first degree of his exaltation was his
Resurrection from the dead.

Concerning the Resurrection of Christ, diverse things are to be considered of;

1. That he did rise from the dead. 2. What of him did rise. 3. When he rose.
4. How he rose. 5. Why he rose from the dead. 6. His Apparitions after his
Resurrection. 7. What good comes to us by his Resurrection.
That Christ did rise from the dead, we believe against all Jews, Turks, and
profane Mockers, and are enduced so to do by testimony both divine and
humane. The divine testimonies are three: first, the Spirit of God, which
testifiech two ways; first, by the Apostles and Evangelists, in the
Evangelical Story, which we ought to believe if the Apostles had never been
eyewitnesses: for if the witness of men be received, the witness of God is
greater. Secondly, in the heart of every believer that relyes upon the Gospel,
Ioh. 15. 26. The second testimony is the witness of Angels, who were sent from
heaven of purpose to signify so much, Luke 24. 5. as by Angels the conception
and birth of Christ was testified from heaven, so was his resurrection. The
third was the Apparition of Christ, showing himself many times alive from the
dead. The Humane testimonies were three; first was the testimony of Mary
Magdalen, and the other women that came to anoint the body of Jesus, Ioh. 20.
1. as a woman was the first that brought from the Devil the tidings of sin
unto the first Adam, so a woman is the first that from the good Angels brings
the tidings of the Resurrection of the second Adam, by whom we are justified
from our sins. The second was, the testimony of the Apostles, and fifty
Disciples, and S. Paul, who all saw Christ after he was risen, 1 Cor. 15. 6.
The third was, the testimonies of the Soldiers that watched the Sepulcher:
wherein observe the great providence of God, that makes the high Priests
against their wills from these men to know, that Christ was risen from the dead,
who were set of purpose to hinder the report of the Resurrection, by watching
the Sepulcher lest his Disciples should steal away his body by night.

The second point is quickly opened: If any ask, What of Christ did rise? The
answer is, That the body of Christ only did rise: his Deity could not, and the
sold did not.

For the time of the Resurrection, Christ did rise the third day, after the end
of the Sabbath, on the first day of the week, about Sun rising: and
concerning this answer diverse things are to be considered of; First, it was
necessary Christ should not rise from the dead sooner or later, than the third
day from his death and burial; for so it was foretold, Hos. 6. 2. He shall
restore us to life after two days, (viz. the Messiah shall do it) and the
third day he shall raise us up, (viz. in his own person, which was a pledge
of our Resurrection) and we shall live in his sight. It is thought S. Paul had
respect unto this place, when he said, He rose again the third day according
to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 4. and besides this was prefigured by the type
Jonas the Prophet, as our Savior himself showed in his life time, Mat. 12.
40. Thirdly, he could have risen as soon as he was buried, but he would not,
lest the truth of his death should have been questioned; and beyond the third
day he would not tarry, lest the faith of his Disciples should fail, and lest
any should have cause to think that he brought not the same body was dead, but
some other.

Further observe, that as Christ died the same day Adam was created, so he
lived again the same day the world began to be; the same day God made heaven
and earth, the same day he filled the earth with the grace, and heaven with the
joy of the Resurrection of Christ: and therefore this day was called the Lords
day, Rev. 1. 10.

Thirdly, he rose at the rising of the Sun, to show that he was the true
Sun of righteousness, that was now rising to enlighten the new and Christian
world, after the long night of darkness and legal shadows, and that he had
brought life and immortality to light, 2* Tim. 1. 10.

For the fourth point (to wit) how Christ rose, diverse things are to be
answered: first, that he rose by his own power, He raised himself up from the
dead, Ioh. 2. 19. and 10. 18. and 5. 25. for though other Scriptures attribute
resurrection to God the Father and the Holy Ghost, yet that hinders not the
truth of this assertion; for in the works ad extra, all the Trinity work, but
yet in their order; God the Father, by the Son, through the Holy Ghost, raised
the dead body of Christ. Secondly, he rose by a way that never man rose, and
not as other men have risen, or shall rise, by a way peculiar to himself, viz.
as the Lord of Life, as the first borne of the Dead, as the first fruits of
them that sleep, Rev. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 20. 23. not as a private person, but as
a public person, as our head and surety. He saw no corruption in the Grave, as
other dead bodies do; and he rose to immortal life, never to dye again,
whereas Lazarus, and others that were raised, were raised but to a mortal
life, they were to dye again, he was the first tha^ ever rose to eternal
life. Thirdly, he rose in the same body that was dead and buried, Luke 24. 39.
which was necessary for our comfort, in the discharge of our debt, that the
same body that was imprisoned, came out of prison, and does the better assure
the hope of the resurrection of our bodies. Fourthly, he rose inuitis
custodibus, whether the Keepers of the Sepulcher would or not, and smote them
with great amazement, to show how easy it is for him to triumph over his
enemies, when they seem to be surest of victory. He that could conquer them
when they had nothing in appearance to oppose them but a dead body, can as
easily defeat all his enemies, that only differ from his people only in
greatness of earthly power: If the Church were as the dead body of Christ, yet
it may rise again notwithstanding all their armed Troops. Fistly, he rose
with an earthquake, that thereby he might signify, First, that the earth did
him homage, and as it were swear fealty to him as her Lord and Proprietary.
Secondly, that as the earth trembled at his death, so now as it were is exalted
for joy that she was to render him alive from the dead. Thirdly, that Christ
would shake the world, and the heart of man by his Gospel, Heb. 12. Fourthly,
that Christ by his power can and will make the earth give up her dead at the
last day. Lastly, the Angels ministered unto him by rolling away the stone, etc.
to signify, that not only he was Lord of Angels, but that God was satisfied;
as Judges that send some officer to fetch the prisoner out of prison and
release him.

Fifthly, but why was it necessary that Christ should rise again?

Ans. First, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, that had foretold it,
Psalm. 16. 10. Ioh. 20. 9. Mat. 26. 54. Secondly, if the Scripture had not
foretold, yet such was the dignity of his person that he must needs rise, for
it was impossible for him to be holden down of Death, Act. 2. 24. for, first
he was the only Son of God, and the Father loves his Son, and cannot suffer
him to be overcome of death. Besides, he was God himself, the Author and
Prince of life, and therefore it had been absurd for him to abide in death,
that gives all others life. Thirdly, he was a just man, and innocent, and had
fully satisfied for our sins, and therefore God could not keep him in prison
for nothing: and where sin is not, there death cannot reign. Thus of the
second reason. Thirdly, such was the office of him that rose again, that he
could not abide in death; as was showed before, he must declare Gods name to
his brethren, he must make intercession, he must reign as a King
everlasting, all which he could not do if he abide in death. Fourthly, because
there was a Decree for his resurrection in Gods eternal Council, Psalm. 2. 7.
commpared with Act. 13. 32. 33. Fifthly, that the types and shadows of it might
be fulfilled. Jonas was a type of the Resurrection, Mat. 12. 39. So was Adam,
waking out of the sleep into which he was cast when the Woman was made out of
his side (...) was Samson, that brake asunder the bars and gates, and was
delivered: so was David that was so often oppressed, and yet exalted to the
kingdom, Psalm. 86. 13.

Concerning the Apparitions of Christ after his resurrection, the Scripture
records that our Savior was on earth forty days, and in that time appeared to
many at several times, showing himself alive from the dead, and giving order
concerning his Kingdom: as he was forty days in giving the Law to Moses on
the Mount, so was he forty days in giving order about the new Law to the
Apostles, and he that began to consecrate himself to the office appointed him
by his Father in fasting forty days, does now take forty days, both to lay
down that office, and to consecrate the Ministry of his Disciples. Now
concerning these Apparitions diverse things are to be considered; 1. The Reasons
why he appeared. 2. The Persons to whom he appeared.


For the first, our Savior stayed a while upon earth, and appeared at several
times for these Reasons;

1. That he might confirm the infallible truth of his Resurrection, that the
Christian world might be fully assured of it, that God had raised him from the
dead, Act. 10. 40, 41. and that he was raised in the same body that was
crucified and buried for our sins.

2. That he might give order to his Disciples concerning all things that
concerned his Kingdom over Jews and Gentiles, and might appoint all the
alterations were to be made in the manner of governing the Christian world,
Act. 1. 3. and thus he instituted the several orders of Ministers under the
Gospel, granting full Commission to the Apostles, Act. 28. 18. Ephesians. 4. 11. and
so we have reason to believe, that the translation of the day for the Christian
Sabbath, was by appointment from him, while he was on earth, with other things
which the Apostles ordered afterward.

3. That he might give gifts unto the men that were to begin the work of
erecting the Christian world, Ioh. 20. 21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 4. promising to give
the holy Ghost more fully, Act. 1. 4.

The persons to whom he appeared are to be considered negatiuely, and
affirmatively.

1. Negatiuely, he appeared not to the world, not to all the people, not to the
chief Priests and Rulers of the people, Act. 10. 41. that thereby he might
show, First, that his Kingdom was not of this world, Job. 18. 36. Secondly,
that he did not need the help and patronage of the greatness of this world in
businesses of his Kingdom. Thirdly, that his Kingdom comes not by external
observation, and is not objected to the eyes of the body, but to the eyes of
the mind and faith, Luke 17. 20, 21. Ioh. 20. 29. Fourthly, that the contempt
of the means in the ordinances of Christ, shall be scourged with a privation
of all fellowship with Christ in his glory: The chief Priests and Rulers, and
other despisers of the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ in his abasement, are
now judged and plagued with this fearful preterition, that Christ will not
vouch safe them so much favor as to let them see him in his glory any more,
till they see him as their Judge, as he threatened before he died, Matt. 26. 64.
Ioh. 14. 19.

2. He appeared (in the affirmative) unto his own, even to witnesses God had
chosen of purpose, Act. 10. 41. And it is a charitable tradition of some of the
Ancients, that all those that saw Christ after his resurrection were godly
persons indeed, as well as disciples in outward profession: and thus he
appeared the very day of his resurrection five several times.

1. To Marie Magdalen alone, out of whom he had cast seven devils, Mark. 16.
9. Ioh. 20. to show that he was a redeemer of that sex as well as of men: and
that he came to save sinners, and deliver them from the tyranny of the devil,
and to remove all suspicion of fraud or violence, that it might not be thought
that he was lifted out of the grave by the power of men. In this apparition our
Savior would not let Marie touch him, but uses these words, Touch me not, for
I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to ^ay brethren, etc. And this is
the more strange, because he offers himself to Thomas to touch him, Ioh. 20.
17. 27. For answer of this doubt, I conceive our Savior did not simply forbid
her to touch him, but in respect of the haste of the message to the disciples:
he would have her leave that ceremony, and speedily go to tell his brethren.
Yea he rather incourageth her to it at another time, for in saying, I am not
yet ascended, he seems to mean, that she might have time enough to
entertain his bodily presence, he should not yet go away from them: but yet
withal he intimates that after his ascension she might embrace him without
stint or restraint, after that way of touching of him which was more profitable
for her than this way was, viz. she might doc it by faith in a spiritual
manner.

2. To the same Mary, and the other Mary, as they returned from the Sepulcher,
Matthew. 28. 9.

3. To the two disciples going to Emnus. In this apparition are diverse
questions. As first, who these disciples should be: To which it is answered by
many of the Ancients, that they were of the seventy disciples: and some think
that Cl^ophas was an inhabitant at Emaus, and that the other disciple should be
Saint Luke himself, because he does not name who it was, as Saint John does
often forbear the naming of himself in his Story: but all this is
coniecturall, and does not much concern us to know who they were. Secondly, a
question is moved about the body of Christ, what should be the reason that the
disciples did not know him, when he went and talked with them by the way: and
the rather, because it is said, that Mary Magdalen did not know that it was
Jesus: was it because the glorified body of Christ was now become invisible,
such as mortal eyes could not know? For answer hereunto: some think that
Christ did appear in another shape and metamorphosed himself: but this answer
cannot be sound: for to what end were his apparitions, but to show that he was
truly risen from the dead, in the same body that died? and besides it is a
dream to think that the same body cannot suffer a Metamorphosis, and still
remain the same true body it was. Secondly, some think it came from the habit
and kind of raiment he appeared in, as here he showed himself in the habit of
a Traveler, and to Mary in the habit of the Gardener: but yet this answer does
not suffice. Thirdly therefore, from the Text it self we must look for the
reason, and so it is said, that their eyes were held that they could not know
him. The cause was in the power of Christ, working upon their sight, and not in
the shape of the body of Christ: but yet if we observe that it is not said so
of Marie, and that Christ scarce ever appeared to the Apostles, no not after
they believed that he was risen, but in part or in some degree for a time, they
doubted and did not know him, therefore I conceive, that the cause may be
safely assigned to the quality of his body now glorified: for though the
beams of his perfect glory were restrained for the forty days, yet he carried
about a true glorified body, which is so much altered in quality (though the
substance be the same) as it is called a spiritual body, and therefore no
wonder though it were not so easily known. And the like may be said, about his
vanishing out of their sight: for though it be true, that thereby cannot be
meant the annihilating of the substance of his body, but the withdrawing of it
from them, for he was not vanished out of sight, (but out of their sight:) yet
the manner how he became so soon invisible to them, may arise from something
in the quality of a glorified body, that it is endued with such agilitie, as
it can remove it self in an instant out of sight.

The fourth Apparition was to Simon Peter alone, Luke 24. 34. Note that the
words uttered in that verse were spoken by the Apostles and those that were
with them, not by the Disciples that came from Emaus.

The last Apparition was to the Apostles and others at Jerusalem in the absence
of Thomas, Ioh. 20. 19, etc. The doubt is here, how Christ could get in, the
doors being shut? Some think he might by his power cause the doors to give
way to him as their Creator, and suddenly shut again: or else that he that
could thicken the water to make it carry him when he walked on the Sea, could
rarisie and make thin and soft the substance of the door to let him go through
it: but what need these guesses? That he went in the doors being shut we
believe; how he went in we know not: nor will this help the Papists in their
business of Transubstantiation; for that he went through the doors is no more
said in the Text, than that the doors gave place. Besides, if their opinion
were true, that his body could penetrate through a door, to what end did he
appear to his Disciples? Or how can he confute their opinion that he was not
a spirit? Further, if it were granted, yet they could only prove that two
bodies might be in one place, but not that one body could be in many places, at
one time. In this Apparition there are some other things to be noted: As first,
about the time of it, it is said it was the same day at evening, out of which I
gather that the evening did belong to that day now spent, which proves that the
day was reckoned from morning to morning, and so must we reckon our Sabbath.
Secondly, in this Apparition the words of our Savior to the Disciples are to
be noted. And his words are words of salutation, and words of commission. In
the salutation, he wishes, or rather commands peace to come upon them: they
should have much trouble in the world, but in Christ they should have peace.
And withal they might thence gather, that as any men do more further and
dispatch the work of Christ, so they shall more abound in inward peace, and
quiet of heart and conscience, and if we have peace within, we should not
greatly care what troubles or difficulties we meet withal without. The words
of commission, declare both the authority of their office in preaching to
Jews and Gentiles, and the confirmation of the success of their ministry,
both by sign, and by promise. The dignity of their office is great, for as
God sent Christ, so Christ sends them on embassage to the world: They do no
other work, than what God laid upon his own Son: The sign that should
confirm them, was that Christ breathed on them, and said, Receive the Holy
Ghost. And this might confirm them two ways, viz. both in respect of
themselves, and in respect of their hearers: In respect of themselves, they
need not fear the difficulty of the work, for their sufficiency should be
from the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of Christ should qualify them and inspire them
to do all that was required of them: In respect of their hearers, they must
take comfort, for that God that made a creation of life in man by breathing
upon him, could and would breath spiritual life into the dead world by their
preaching. The promise annexed to their commission is, that whose soever sins
according to the tenor of the covenant of grace in the Gospel they should
publicly or privately remit, their pardon should be ratified in heaven: and
contrariwise, whosoever should for their impenitencie and contumacie be by them
bound over to the Judgment of Christ according to the tenor of the covenant of
works, and according to the malediction pronounced against all such as despise
the Gospel, Christ would ratify their act, in the day of death and judgment,
and for the present account of them as persons rejected of God.

Thus of the five Apparitions, on the day of the resurrection. In the rest of
the 40. days we read of six other Apparitions.

The first was the eighth day after the resurrection to the Apostles, Thomas
being present, Ioh. 20. 24, etc. Where I note only two things: the occasion of
this Apparition, and the manner of it. The occasion of it was the unbelief of
Thomas, which was very grievous, as containing in it many faults, viz.
forgetfulness of the doctrine of Christ, that had foretold his resurrection;
and wilful blindness, for though he be told by them as had seen the Lord,
that Christ was risen, yet he professes he will not believe: and withal an
insolent limiting of God, that unless he may see and feel the print of the
nails and spear, he protests he will not believe. Which as it shows what
wickedness may lodge in the hearts of good men, so it exalts the praise of
the compassion and patience of Christ, that will show mercy in curing such
Christians. But yet observe the justice of Christ upon such wayward Christians:
First, he is kept a long time, viz. eight days without comfort; and besides,
he loses that glorious doctrine was delivered in the former Apparitions to the
rest of the Apostles.

In the manner of the Apparition, observe both the circumstances and the words
of Christ. The circumstances are reported, verse. 26. and are the same with the
former Apparition, of purpose to help the faith of Thomas, when he should see
it done as the Apostles had before told him. The words of our Savior are
directed either by way of salutation to all the Disciples, or by special
appellation to Thomas: in the salutation he wishes them peace as he did
before, to show them that in this world, in doing their work, it was enough
for them if they could possess a heart and conscience within that was at
peace, though in all outward things they find trouble. In the words to Thomas,
I observe what our Savior said, and the effect in Thomas and our Saviors
reply. In his first words, to show that he knew all things, and heard every
word Thomas had said in his absence, he calls to him to do according to the
words of his own wilful limitation, but withal gives him a lash for his
unbelief, verse. 27. It is the portion of wayward Christians, even when God
does most comfort them, to meet with secret ierks from God, and withal they
may see, that though men would forget their wilfulness, yet Christ remembers
it. And as appears by the reply afterward, when they reform and do their
best, yet their comfort is mixed with their dispraise. The effect in Thomas was
an excellent confession, excelling the most confessions had been made before,
expressing more than was in question, and much tenderness of heart, both in
believing in Christ, and resolving to be ruled by him, when he said with such
words, My Lord and my God. Which shows how Christ can glorify his power in
making weak Christians sometimes to express more life of faith and knowledge
than stronger Christians. In the reply our Savior commends that faith most,
that rests least upon sense and feeling.

The second Apparition was to seven of the Disciples as they went to fishing,
Ioh. 21. 1, etc. Where the things I would observe either concern the time of
this Apparition, or the persons to whom, or are taken from the substance of the
Story it self. About the time I may take occasion to clear a doubt, which is
this: The Disciples were commanded immediately after the resurrection, by a
message sent them by the women from Christ, that they should meet him on a
Mountain in Galile, Matthew. 28. 10. 16. Now it appears by the time of this and
the former Apparition, that they tarry many days in Jerusalem. The answer is,
that they were bound to tarry in Jerusalem eight days because of the
Passover, and it seems they were now going into that place in Galile.

Now for the persons to whom he appears, they were seven of them of different
conditions; Peter and Thomas had fallen shamefully; Nathaniel was no Apostle,
but yet a man without guile; the sons of Zebedee had believed after they had
seen the Lord, two other Disciples are not named, and toward all these in a
different respect is the love of Christ showed: Christ will manifest himself
not only to constant Christians, but to such as have fallen and repented; nor
only to Apostles, but to private Christians; not only to known and eminent
Disciples, but to such as we know not.

Now for the substance of the Story: the things I shall observe for the letter
of it, either concern the estate of godly men in outward things, or the
demonstration of the Divinity of Christ. About the estate of godly men, I note
three things. First, that such as are dear unto God, and sometimes of great
place in the Church, may before a time exposed to great wants in outward things.
As here the Apostles that were called to be conquerors and commanders of the
world, are feign to go a fishing to get them meat to sustain their lives.
Secondly, that men may take great pains in a lawful calling, and yet many
times get little or nothing: as here they are a fishing all night, and can
catch nothing. Thirdly, that great wants and disappointments in the ordinary
means of life, do sometimes forerume extraordinary supplies from God. They
that can catch no fish in the Sea, find fish broyling on the Land. The
Divinity of Christ was demonstrated three ways, by all which they might
plainly see, he had lost none of his power by death. First, that by his
direction they catch a great draught of fish, that could themselves catch
nothing. Secondly, that the net was not broken, though it dragged great fishes
to the number of an hundred fifty and three. The third was, that on the shore
was miraculously provided a fire with fish broyling on it.

Thus of the literal sense of the Story. It is very probable, that our
Savior, that took occasion when he first called his Disciples from their
fishing to instruct them about their office in being fishers of men, did
likewise intend by this manifestation of himself to them now they were fishing
again, to give them first instructions, from what fell out then, concerning
their mystical fishing, which they were to go about within a little time
after: and so the comparison holds in many things. The Disciples are the
Ministers of the Gospel, the ship is the Church, the world is the Sea, the
fishes are the people of the world where the Gospel is, the casting of the Net
is the preaching of the Gospel, the shore is heaven, or that estate into which
we are brought by the power of the word in outward profession. Now about this
fishing we may be instructed in many things from this Story, as

1. That the proper end of the labors of Ministers is to catch souls.

2. That there is difference of gifts and qualities in Ministers, as there was
in these Disciples went a fishing.

3. That the best place to fish in is the Sea, and not small Rivers or Brooks.
The places to catch souls are those where there is the greatest multitude of
people.

4. That in the spiritual fishing we fish in the dark, as they did in the
night: we cannot see where our nets fall, or what hearts of our hearers our
words fall upon.

5. That godly Ministers may take great pains, and yet catch nothing: as they
fished all night and caught nothing.

6. That Christ is present with his servants in the work, or when they have
not success, though they discern him not.

7. That it is the special providence of Christ if any souls be caught, and
comes by his direction.

8. That many of Gods dear servants may take great pains, and yet scarce get
meat to keep them. Children have ye any meat?

9. That after long fruitlesnesse, Christ may bless the ministry of his
servants to effectual conversion of souls; but then usually they must turn
to the other side of the ship, get them to other people.

10. That sometimes God does show his power in giving great success to the
ministry of his servants, even when it is not looked for: but it is very
rare, as was the great draught of fishes.

11. That a powerful and succesfull ministry, is one of the most effectual
means to manifest and discover Christ and his presence on earth.

12. That godly Ministers that seek Christ in their preaching, may differ much
in zeal, and yet all meet in the end with Christ upon the shore. Peter leaps
into the Sea, which seemed a kind of unwarranted singularity of Peter, and
yet he did not ill; the other Disciples came slowly in a Boat to shore, and yet
are not blamed for want of love to Christ.

13. That it is great deal of business to get even godly people to heaven: as
here the Disciples have a great toil in it, to drag the fishes after they have
caught them, to bring them to shore.

14. That the best fishing is to fish for great fish. For though it be a
blessed thing when the poor receive the Gospel, yet if we could catch the
great ones of the world, they would bring much more glory to God.

15. That in places where many are caught by the preaching of the Gospel, it
is a wonder, if the net be not broken, that is, if division and some rent in
unity follow not. It is the great power of Christ if it be otherwise: but yet
note, it is not humble Christians (the small fishes) but either great men, or
such as are grown big with conceit of their gifts, that break the net. Yea
note, that men may continue long in profession, and yet break the net in the
end, as great fishes do that fall a bounsing when they come near the shore.
In general, here is intimated, that great concourse of hearers indangers the
preaching: the net pays for it, the fish escape: but yet we see Christ can
prevent all this when please him.

16. The end of all this fishing is a sweet dinner with the Lord Jesus in
heaven, which sweet fellowship with Christ is beyond all similitude, and
therefore the Evangelist does not strive to set out the dinner in many words.

The third Apparition was to the eleven Disciples on a Mountain in Galilee,
concerning which both S. Matthew, chap. 28. 16, etc. and S. Mark, chap. 16.
14, etc. make report. Concerning which Apparition (if both the Evangelists be
compared together) we may observe

1. The place where Christ appoints his Disciples to meet him, viz. a
Mountain, as a place near to heaven, and further from worldly distractions,
and where he might more freely discourse with them.

2. The condition of the Disciples, when Christ comes to them, he finds them
(as S. Mark says) sitting together, and it is likely they sat so expecting
the coming of Christ to them, being wearied with travel to the place: herein
the Disciples are a fit resemblance of the condition of our assemblies: what
are we all when we meet in the house of God, but poor disciples that sit here
to watch when Jesus will appear amongst us? we are desolate creatures cast out
of the world, that have no happiness but in the presence of Christ with us.

3. The effect of the Apparition in the Disciples, viz. some believed and
worshipped him, but some doubted, Mat. 28. 17. The right faith in Christ and
knowledge of him, does breed adoration and the worship of Christ. And herein
the inward manifestation of Christ to the hearts of true Christians, differs
from illusions in Hypocrites, that in true revelations of the presence of
Christ, the effect is a greater care of the worship of Christ, and practice of
all holy duties, whereas illusions make men more proud, and careless of holy
duties. But how is it to be understood that some doubted? Interpreters are
divided in opinion: Some say that they that doubted were other Disciples, that
had never seen Christ, not the Eleven, that had so often seen him. Some
answer, that this doubting is to be referred to some other time, not to this
Apprition, S. Matthew for brevity sake giving a touch of what fell out in all
the Apparitions: And so some doubted, must be expounded, Some had doubted, as
Thomas for one. But I think their opinion is the most probable that hold that
none of the Disciples here doubted whether Christ were risen, but that at the
first they did not know, whether he that appeared were Christ or not: which was
no new weakness in them, for when he stood on the shore at the sea of
Tiberias, it was a good while before any of them knew him.

4. The words our Savior spoke to them: and those if the Evangelists be
compared, are

1. Words of vpbraiding or reprehension: He vpbraided them for their
unbelief, Mark. 16. 14. and for their hardness of heart, in not believing
them that had seen him after his Resurrection; which he does most wisely and
seasonably: First, it would do them good to be humbled, before they received
so glorious a commission; they might know it was not for any merit in them,
that they were so advanced. Secondly, it might warn them to take heed of that
sin of unbelief, not only as that which was most hateful to Christ, but as
that they would be often tempted to, when they went about their work, by
reason of the oppositions and troubles would befall them. Thirdly, most fitly
does he now tell them of their unbelief, that they might be the more
compassionate and patient when they were to deal with the Nations about their
unbelief; and not think it much if their report were at first rejected, seeing
they themselves had been so slow of heart to believe what was written. In
general, we may see here what comes of perverseness in any infirmity: We may
perhaps hear Christ vpbraiding us, at such times when we look for nothing but
comfort: and therefore let all men and women be warned to take heed of this
sin of way wardnesse, and vnteachablenesse, we may hear of it when we think
Christ has forgiven and forgotten it.

2. Words of declaration: All power is given me both in heaven and earth. About
these words we may enquire, both about the sense of them, and about the end or
use of them: For the sense, had not he all power before and from eternity as
God? Or if it be meant of a power communicated to the Humane Nature, how is it
that he had it not from his Incarnation? The answer is, that he speaks of a
power he had, both as God and man, and such a power as he had not before,
because this is the power he obtaines as Redeemer of the world, and the price
was not laid down actually, till he had given himself as a Sacrifice for
sin, and had humbled himself to the death, even the death of the Cross. Now
he had purchased the inheritance of the Nations, now he might lawfully send
them to take possession for him; and if he were resisted, he might win his
own by a spiritual conquest: of this power is spoken, Psalm. 2. 8. and 110. 1.
Esaias 49. 6, 8, 9. Dan. 7. 13, 14. Phil. 2. 9, 10. Now for the end or use of
this declaration of Christ's patent or power, it might serve for perpetual use
both to the Apostles, and all Teachers of the Gospel, and to their hearers
too. To the Apostles this declaration was necessary, because of the greatness
of the things they were charged to proclaim to the world: for he had need to
have a name above every name, that should in his name offer and give eternal
life to the world, and should challenge all the world to come under, and do
homage to him, and should send such a message in his doctrine, as should subdue
every high thing, and should lay all mankind, as it were, at his foot. And
though the conquest of the Nations might seem an impossible work, yet they
need not doubt to go about it, seeing they are sent from him that has all
power. And the like comfort may all faithful Ministers gather from hence
against all the difficulties of their work; they serve him that has all
power. And so in general this is a doctrine of admirable comfort to all true
Christians of any degree, that will be persuaded to serve the Lord Jesus; they
cannot serve a better Master. No master has such power to prefer them: He
has all power on earth, but if he did it not here, yet he has all power in
heaven, they shall be sure of preferment in another world.

3. Words of commandment, and so, his charge concerns either the doctrine
they should teach, or the sign by which they should confirm it, viz.
Baptism. As for their doctrine, Saint Matthew says, Go teach all Nations;
Saint Mark says, Go preach the Gospel to every creature. The observations
are diverse, that if many times God did not send the Gospel to us, we should
perish, before we would go and seek it. Secondly, that preaching is the
ordinary means to conquer the world to God. Thirdly, that all Nations need to
be taught, and every creature of every Nation. They that think they can find
the way to heaven without teaching, are certainly in the direct way to hell.
Fourthly, that the principal work for the highest Ministers in the Church to
do, is to preach the Gospel. Fifthly, that the doctrine of our Reco^ciliation
with God in Jesus Christ, is the principal doctrine to be taught or learned.
Sixthly, that grace and mercy in Jesus Christ from God, is offered to every
creature upon condition of faith and repentance: None is excepted. Thus of
their doctrine. The sign by which they should confirm their doctrine, was
Baptism, which was added as Gods broad seal to assure us the good things
promised in the Gospel, and in particular, if they did believe, as certainly
as the water did wash away the filth of the body, so should the blood of Christ
wash away the sins of their souls. About the form of Baptism the Trinity
must be expressly mentioned, it must be done in the name of the Trinity, both
in respect of Authority, to signify that they were authorized to baptize by
all the Trinity, and in respect of Confession, that no salvation could be had
without the belief of the Trinity, and especially in respect of fellowship
with the Trinity, as a fruit of faith and Baptism, for they had power to
signify to true Christians, that in Baptism they were married to the
Trinity, and received into an everlasting fellowship with the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. As the wife at her marriage receives the name of her husband; so all
Christian souls are transferred from the names of their own natural
condition, to a glorious fruition of the name of God; and therefore in the
Original the Preposition, rendered, in, has the force of into, as well as in.
Baptize them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

4. Words of consolation: and so he comforts them by two arguments, the one
taken from the success of their doctrine, and the other from his own
perpetual presence with them. The argument from the success of their doctrine
is recorded by Saint Mark, and that is twofold; the one ordinary, the other
extraordinary. The ordinary success is either in the good, or in the bad. In
the good, so many as will believe, and are baptized, and will observe all that
Christ commands them (which is to be supplied out of Saint Matthew) they shall
be as certainly saved in heaven, as they are taught on earth. And contrariwise,
such as will not believe, and receive their doctrine, Christ will revenge it
upon them, with the damnation of their souls, nor shall their Baptism help
them, if they will not believe and obey, Mark. 16. 16. The extraordinary
success should be in the signs should follow such as believe, which are
reckoned, Mar. 16. 17, 18. and these are attributed to all believers, though
they were to be done but by some only, because the end of those miracles was to
glorify the doctrine believed on by all. Nor did these signs last unto all
times, but only in the first times of the Church, for the more effectual
confirmation of that doctrine which could not be demonstrated by natural
arguments. Nor did every believer, that showed some of them, show all of them;
some spoke with new tongues, that yet could not heal the sick, for there were
diversities of gifts and operations, and yet all from one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4,
5. The second argument of consolation, is taken from his perpetual presence
with them, to the end of the world: which must be understood of his spiritual
presence, and must be extended to all the godly, especially Ministers, seeing
the Apostles could not live themselves to the end of the world.

Thus of the third Apparition after the day of the Resurrection. We read of
the appearing of our Savior at three other times besides these, as to more
than five hundred brethren together, 1 Cor. 15. 6. and to James the Apostle
alone, 1 Cor. 15. 6. And then lastly upon the day of his Ascension he appeared
to the Apostles on Mount Oliuet, not far from Bethania, Act. 1. 12. Of these
three I have nothing to say, for concerning two of them, we read nothing in
Scripture but the bare mention of them; and for the last, it belongs to the
Article of his Ascension. And thus of the Apparitions of Christ after his
Resurrection.

The last part of my Division, that concerns the Resurrection, is about the
fruit of the Resurrection, or the good that comes to us by our Saviors rising
from the dead: and so

1. The Resurrection of our Savior serves exceedingly to confirm our faith,
and to assure us that he was the Son of God, Romans 1. 4. and the promised
Messiah, that could thus miraculously raise himself from the dead, Ioh. 10.
17, 18. and 2. 19. to 23. Matthew. 12. 39, 40.

2. The Resurrection of Christ assures us of our Justification from our sins,
Romans 4. 25. The Father by delivering Christ to death, did actually condemn our
sins in his flesh as our surety, Romans 8. 3. So by letting him out of the
prison of the grave in his Resurrection, he did actually absolve, and acquit
him from the obligation in which he was bound, and so in discharging him, does
acknowledge payment and satisfaction, and so we are discharged too: If he had
not risen, we had been still in our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18. Romans 8. 34.
Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.

3. The Resurrection of Christ is the cause of a twofold resurrection in us.
The first Resurrection is of the soul from the death of sin, to the life of
grace, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. Col. 2. 12, 13. Romans 6. 4, 5. and this flows from his
Resurrection. The second is of the body out of the grave, which is to be
accomplished at the last Judgment: of which the Resurrection of Christ is both
the cause and the pledge, 1 Cor 15. 20, 21, 22. Romans 8. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. And
a taste of this Christ gave in the resurrection of diverse Saints, that appeared
to many in Jerusalem immediately upon his Resurrection, Matthew. 27. 52, 53.

4. The Resurrection of Christ begets in us a lively hope of a most glorious
inheritance in heaven: As the Apostle shows, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. and Romans 5. 10.
where we shall for ever triumph with him in the victory over Death, and the
Grave, and Hell, Hosea 13. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 54, etc.

5. It warrants and effects our pers^uerance in life, for he rose to life to
die no more, neither in himself, nor in the spiritual life of his members, as
the Apostle reasons, Romans 6. 9, 10.

Now the reason of all this is, because Christ sustained our person, and rose
again, as well as died, in our stead: He died and rose again as a public
person, and a root of a new mankind: and besides the same Spirit that raised
Jesus Christ from the dead, is in us, to work all those things intended by his
Resurrection, Romans 8. 11.

The use of this Article may be diverse.

1. By way of Information, and so it proves the Divinity of Use.
Christ: the Apostle says he was mightily declared to be the Son of God, by
the Resurrection from the dead. He that could overcome so great Enemies, as
Sin, Death, the Grave, and Hell; and had power of himself to take up his life,
must needs be God: and so Saint Paul applies the words of the second Psalm,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, to the Resurrection of
Christ, which is true in respect of the manifestation of his Divinity, Romans 1.
4. Act. 13. 33.

2. By way of Instruction: and so first Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 8. charge us in
a special manner to remember this Article, and to lay fast hold upon it: for
Jews and Pagans can believe that Jesus died, but a Christian must go further,
to believe that he was raised from the dead. Secondly, we should learn from
Christ's Resurrection, to rise to newness of life. A Christian should be
ashamed to lie dead in the graves of sin, when his Savior is risen from the
dead: Nay if we be ingrafted into Christ aright, we are risen with him, and
are alive from the dead, and show it by a spiritual liveliness, in all parts
of a renewed conversation: and therefore if thou would have comfort that
thou art a true Christian, thou must show it by living in a new conversation,
and by awaking from spiritual slumbring and security, and standing up from
the dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. If there be life in the Head, there is life in all the
true members, Romans 6. 4, 5. And if thou have no part in this first
Resurrection, thou art in danger to be swallowed up of the second death, Reu.
20. 6. and therefore we must all with Saint Paul seek the virtue of the
Resurrection of Christ, Phil. 3. 8, 9. And to this end we must daily present
our selves, with honest and good hearts, before the voice of Christ in the
Gospel, which is able to raise up the dead hearts of men, Ioh. 5. 25. and
withal pray to God by his power, to pluck up our hearts out of the graves of
sin, that we may live the life of grace in his sight. Thirdly, Saint Paul
urges another vs^, Col. 3. 1. If we be risen with Christ, then we must set our
affections on things that are above, and not on things here below, and have our
conversation so lifted up from the respect of earthly things, as Christ had in
the forty days he was on earth.

3. By way of consolation, and so it is comfortable four ways.

1. Against desperate afflictions: if we be brought as low as Christ was by the
hand of God, or malice of men, yet we should hope in God, who is able to raise
us up from most deadly crosses. Thus the Prophet Esaias tells the people their
dead men shall live, Esaias 26. 19.

2. Against the combat with Gods wrath for our sins. We may safely fly to
the Resurrecton of Christ, to assure our Justification: he died and was buried
for our sins, and therefore rising from the dead, it must needs be for our
Justification, Romans 4. 25. Seeing in his Resurrection he comes our of Prison,
and so declares that he has discharged all our debt, and this a good
conscience may plead to save it self against the seas of Gods wrath, if they
were like the waters of the Deluge, as Saint Peter shows, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

3. In the point of our Sanctification, against our sins, and the power and
filth of them; for if lesus be alive, he received this life as our head, and
for us: as the head is the fountain of Senses whence they are derived to all
the parts of the body, so is Christ our Head the Fountain of spiritual life
and senses, whence comes life and sense to every member: If Christ rose the
third day, then after two days also we shall be revived, Hos. 6. 1, 2. And we
are ingrafted into the similitude of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 4. Nor should
weak Christians be discouraged, that find not a like degree or measure of
life, as other Christians have from Christ: for all the members have not a like
measure of sense from the head, and Christ does conueigh the influence of his
grace by degrees; as he that went into the water that ran out of the Temple,
first was in to the Ankles, then to the knees, then to the loins, then it grew
so deep, as it could not be sounded to the bottom: so is it with the water of
life in true Christians, Ezech. 47. 3, 4, 5. Some Christians are like Ezechiels
bones, when they first had life, there appears nothing in them but skin and
bone; but the Lord can cause the wind so to blow, that they shall be filled up,
and made complete men in Christ, Ezech. 37. 4, 7, 8.

4. In the case of the resurrection of our bodies, as has bin showed before:
for by the sound belief of this Article, we infallibly gather, that our own
mortal bodies shall be raised up at the last day, as is evidently affirmed,
Romans 8. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

The sixth Article.
LVKE 24. 51. He ascended into heaven, etc.
HItherto of the Resurrection from the dead. The second degree of his
exaltation was his Ascension into heaven. Concerning which, before I divide the
matter to be handled, I must speak somewhat of the sense of the words. To
Ascend in this Article does not signify a change from one condition to
another, or a disparition, or vanishing out of fight; nor is it uttered
figuratively by an Anthropopathie, as it is sometimes ascribed to God, as Genesis
17. 22. Psalm. 47. 6. but it signifies properly, a Motion from one place to
another, and from a lower place to a higher, and so from earth to heaven, which
the diverse terms used in Scripture manifestly show. He was received up, says
S. Mark, Chapter 16. 19. He was parted from them and carried up, says S. Luke, Chapter
24. 51. He was taken up from them, Act. 1. 9. And the Apostles looked
steadfastly as he went up, Act. 1. 10. and the place is mentioned expressly,
(viz.) into heaven. So that the sense of the Article is as it sounds
literally, He went up from earth to heaven. Now concerning this degree of his
Exaltation I would consider of these things:

1. Who ascended. 2. How he ascended. 3. When he ascended. 4. From what place
he ascended. 5. Whither he ascended. 6. The witnesses of his Ascension. 7. The
ends of his Ascension: and then the uses of all.
For the first; If we ask who ascended? The Creed answers, Jesus Christ, the
only Son of God, that was borne of a Virgin, etc. so that Ascension is
attributed to the whole person, Christ, God and Man ascended: he that descended
first, is he that now ascends, Ephesians. 4. 9. Christ God ascended, but it was in
respect of his humane nature. The Word that was with God, and was God, was
always in heaven; but yet the Word made flesh was not always in heaven: now
the Word ascended, as it was made flesh, that is, as it presented his humane
nature, taken up locally from earth to heaven, before his Father and the
Angels. So then the answer is, That Christ, the Son of God, ascended in his
flesh, not in his Divinity which fills all places, and so cannot ascend.

For the second question, diverse things are to be answered, viz. that he
ascended, first by his own power, even by the power of his divine nature,
carrying up his body into heaven, and opening heaven to bring in his Humanity,
as also by a virtue in his glorified body, which was able to move upward, as
well as downward. Secondly, that being about to leave his Disciples, in a
solemn manner he lift up his hands and blessed them. To bless, is sometimes
to wish a blessing, as when Parents bless their Children. Sometimes it is to
pronounce a blessing, as when the Priests blessed the people, Numb. 6. 22. or
Melchisedech blessed Abraham, Genesis 14. 19. sometime it is to foretell a
blessing, as when Isaac blessed his two sons: sometimes it is to confer a
blessing, and so only God blesses us, and his Son Christ. God blesses us in
bestowing all spiritual blessings in heavenly things: Ephesians. 1. 3. And so when
we read that Christ blessed them, lifting up his hands, we must think of him
as that blessed seed, the fountain of blessings to all Nations, in whom only
all blessedness was to be had, that had now satisfied Gods Justice, and
removed the curse, and therefore had power to estate blessing upon his
Disciples, and all true Christians for ever. This blessing was the fruit of his
Passion and Resurrection, and belongs to all the godly to the worlds end, and
therefore he leaves his blessing on earth, being now to ascend to heaven. Unto
this blessed Father and Savior should we daily fly, and seek his blessing,
which is able to do us more good than all the blessings of men or Angels.
Thirdly, that he ascended visibly in the sight of his Disciples, Act. 1. 9.
and therefore he did not vanish and become invisible in himself, as the
Vbiquitaries dream. Fourthly, he made use of the service of a cloud, which
received him as he departed, and carried him up as it were a Chariot, and at
length hid him from the eyes of his Disciples: and thus he did, to prove, that
it was he of whom it had been long before said, He makes his Clouds his
Chariot, Psalm. 104. 3. and withal to restrain curiosity, he does as it were
draw a curtain between his body and their eyes, and between this mystery and
our minds, that we should rest satisfied in believing that he did ascend, and
not busy our heads about unprofitable and curious questions, in things not
revealed. And further, it may be thereby was shadowed out the manner of our
meeting with our Savior at the last day, that as a cloud took him away, so in
the clouds should we meet him again, 1 These. 4. 17. Thus of the second point.

The third question is, When he ascended? and to that the answer is short,
viz. forty days after his resurrection: why he stayed forty days before he
ascended, was showed before, viz. that he might instruct his Disciples about
his Kingdom; and withal, to show that the doctrine of the Gospel was not
inferior to the doctrine of the Law, which Moses was in receiving from the
mouth of God forty days in the Mount: and as he was forty days in the
wilderness meditating of his work, before he began to preach, so is he forty
days in preparing his Disciples, before he send them forth about that great
Work of the conversion of the Nations.

The fourth question is, From what place he ascended, and that is noted by the
Evangelist S. Luke Chap. 24. 50* Act. 1. 12. viz. that he went up into heaven
from off some part of the mount of Olives, that was near the Town of
Bethania. Now it is coniectured by Divines, that he chose this place of
purpose; First, that in the same place he might show the proof of his Divinity
and Glory, in which before he had showed the extreme proof of his frailty and
infirmity, when in that place he sweat blood, struggling under the brunt of
Gods fierce wrath; and in that place he began the declaration of his greatest
glory, where not long before he had begun to feel and suffer his greatest
ignominy and pain. Secondly, this mountainish place served somewhat to awake
the affections of the godly, to teach them to get as high as they can above the
world and worldly occasions, hasting after their blessed Savior that is gone
up to heaven before them. Thirdly, Bethania signifies the house of affliction;
and so by his ascending to the glory of heaven from that place, he might leave
us an assurance, that a passage may be had yea unto all the godly shall be
prepared to attain unto the joys of heaven, even through many tribulations:
we may ascend out of the house of sorrow, bed of sickness, vale of tears, the
land of captivity, unto heaven, as well as from Jerusalem a place of peace:
Yea, such afflicted ones may much comfort themselves in the hope that Christ
will take them to heaven, out of these places of sorrow, in his due time.

The fifth question is, Whither he ascended? and the answer to that is in the
Creed, and the Scriptures before quoted, into Heaven; and Christ himself
says, He went to his Father in heaven, Ioh. 14. 12. and 20. 16. Heb. 9. 20.
Now this heaven does not signify God himself, or a heavenly conversation, or
heavenly glory, but by heaven is meant that place of eternal blessedness,
which is without the corruptible world, which is above all these moveable and
worldly heavens, and to us now living on earth is invisible. It is that place
that Christ calls, The house of his heavenly Father, in which are many
Mansions, Ioh. 14. 12. and Solomon calls the place of Gods habitation, the
heavens, Chron. 6. ^1. and the habitation of his holiness in heaven, 1 King.
8. 31. Christ therefore is now in that highest heaven, which must contain him
til the times of the restoring of all things. It is objected, that Christ
ascended above all heavens, Ephesians. 4. Answer. It is true, above all these visible
heavens, above the Air and the celestial Orbs, in which are the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and so went into that heaven called the third heaven, which
is the seat of the blessed. It is further objected, if Christ ascended above
all those worldly heavens, then his body is in no place, because Aristotle
proves in his first book of heaven, that above all heavens is no place.
Answer. It is false that above all heavens is no place, for though there be
not such a place as Aristotle describes Physically, yet there is a place: for
where there is a body, there must needs be a space in which that body is
contained, according to that known saying, Take away spaces from bodies and
they will be no where, and if no where, then they are not. This space the
Scripture calls a place. But against Aristotle we oppose the express authority
of Christ himself, who affirms, there are places in heaven, Ioh. 14. 2, 3.
Now God would have us to know whither Christ ascended for three Reasons: First,
that we might be certain he remained still a true man, even in his glory in
heaven. Secondly, that we might know whither to convert our thoughts and
desires, and where our hearts might find Christ: as Paul says, If ye be
risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God, Col. 3. 1. we cannot find Christ on earth, we must look
him in heaven. Thirdly, that we might know where we shall dwell and reign
when we dye, Ioh. 14. 2. and 17. 24. Now in heaven Christ ascended to his
Father, as he says, Ioh. 14. 12. and 20. 17. not that he could not find his
Father any where but in heaven, for he is every where; but because God the
Father does in a singular manner manifest his glory and love in the heaven of
the blessed, and in that heaven does collect his f^mily and household that shall
for ever abide with him: And for this cause does our Savior teach us to pray,
Our Father which art in heaven, not which art every where, though that be true,
that we might thereby be admonished, that we do not belong to the society of
this world, but unto that society that is in heaven, that is, to that family of
adoption which is the house of our Father in heaven, of which family and
society Christ is the head.

Sixthly, the witnesses were first Angels, Act. 1. and that for diverse reasons,
for it was very fit to make use of their testimony, now that he was to show the
greatest work of his divine Majesty, seeing he had used them and their
testimony and service at his Conception, Nativity, Tentation, Death, and
Resurrection: and beside, their testimony is used to appease the grief of the
Disciples, for their separation from so meek and loving a Lord and Master: And
further, to reach them, that though he be absent in body, yet would protect his
by his Spirit, and by the ministry of his Angels.

The other sort of witnesses were the Disciples themselves. This Article
containing one great part of the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. it
pleased our Savior to give them first teachers of it, assurance of it by the
testimony of their senses, that with the more liberty and power, they might
urge faith in their hearers, seeing they brought them what they had not only
heard, but seen and felt, 1 Ioh. 1. 2. If any ask, Why our Savior would not
ascend in the sight of the whole Nation of the Jews, as well as in the sight
of the Disciples? I answer, they were not worthy so much as once to see the
Lord in his glory, that had made no use of his doctrine and miracles, when he
was amongst them in his estate of abasement: And besides, here by all the world
is warned to take notice of it, that the ordinary means to breed faith, and
save their souls, is the hearing of the Word, and therefore does our Savior
of purpose withhold from men other ways of information.

The end of his Ascension were diverse.

1. To fulfill the Type. The high Priest once a year was to go into the most
holy place. The most holy place was a type of heaven, and the high Priest of
Christ, and his going into the most holy place shadowed out Christ's Ascension
and going into heaven, Heb. 7. 26. and 6. 20. and 8. 4.

2. To show, that all things were fulfilled and accomplished by him, which were
written of him, and that he had perfectly performed all that concord, our
reconciliation, and the victory over our enemies, and therefore his Ascension
was a most glorious manifestation of his triumph, and spiritual and heavenly
glory, after his most absolute victory and conquest.

3. That having overcome death, he might now enter upon that glory which was
prepared for him before the foundation of the world, Ioh. 17. 5. for then was
the singular glory of Christ made manifest, when as Homo-deus, or God-man, he
entered into heaven, which was a sight the Angels had never seen before:
whither may belong that of the Psalm, Psalm. 24. 7. Open ye Princes your gates
that the King of glory may enter in.

4. That he might lead Captivity captive, and before God and Angels exercise a
perfect triumph over the spirits in the Air that had assaulted him, and whom
he had spoiled, and now made to attend the Chariot of his triumph.

5. That thereby he might show, that Angels and powers in heaven were also
subject to him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

6. That in heaven he might make intercession for us with the Father, Heb. 9.
24. 1 Ioh. 2. 1. Romans 8. 34. which was shadowed out in the Law. The high Priest
went into the holy place alone, and carried upon his shoulders and breast the
names of the Tribes in precious stones, but the people stood a great way off,
shut out in the utter court of the Temple, making their prayers there, which
were carried in by the high Priest sprinkled with blood. So it is with us, we
are here in this world a great way off, shut out of heaven, here we make our
moan and prayers, with hearts lift up to that heavenly Sanctuary: and there
does Jesus carry our names on his breast and shoulders, and presents himself
for us sprinkled with his own blood, to cover and make propitiation for our
sins and imperfections.

7. That he might open heaven for us, and make a way into the most holy place
for us, which sin had shut up, Heb. 10. 19. 20. Ezech. 44. 1, 2, 3. and so he
says he ascended that he might prepare a place for us, Ioh. 14. 2. 3. and 20.
20. 17. for by lifting up our flesh into heaven, thereby as by a certain pledge
(he being our head, and we his members) we might have assurance to ascend
thither also in due time, Ephesians. 2. 6.

8. That from thence he might send the holy Ghost the Comforter, as a most
divine token of his love to his Spouse the Church, and by him might fill us
with unutterable assistance, and qualify us with diverse gifts, Ioh. 16. 7.
Psalm. 68. 19. Ephesians. 4. 10, 11.

9. That our affections might not be misplaced on earth, or on his bodily
presence, but might be drawn up to heaven, and the minding of heavenly things,
Col. 3. 1.

The Uses follow, and are,

1 For information, and so we should strive to be affected with the great glory
of Christ's triumph, in ascending from earth to that glorious heaven in so
glorious a manner. But perhaps some one will say, Elias ascended up to heaven
before, and therefore it seems this ascension of our Savior was no singular
thing. Answ. There was great difference between the Ascension of Elias, and
this of our Savior; for, first he ascended by virtue of the merit of Christ,
which had couenanted with God to make satisfaction, and so did open heaven from
the beginning of the world. But Christ ascended without the help of the merits
of any other. Secondly, Elias went to heaven, having not first tasted of death,
but Christ died and was buried, and rose again before his Ascension. Thirdly,
Elias ascended by the help of Angels, being not able to ascend by his own
power, but Christ ascended by his own power. Fourthly, Elias ascended into
heaven but as a Citizen of heaven, but Christ as Lord of heaven, having a name
above every name. Fifthly, Elias went into heaven only for himself, Christ
opened heaven for us also.

2 For consolation: and so this Article ought to be a fountain of great
consolation to us, if we consider especially the fruit and profit comes to us
by it: which may be partly gathered by that which has been declared before:
for first we get heaven open for us by it: since the sin of the first Adam
heaven was shut against us, which was shadowed out by the Angel with a flaming
Sword, stopping the way into Paradise, which was a type of heaven. The first
Adam shut heaven, and the second opened it: opened it I say for us; for Christ
entered into heaven in our person, to take possession for us, so as we do
actually possess heaven, in that our flesh is there, and our head is there:
God has made us to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 6. for as
he left us the earnest of his Spirit, so he took from us the earnest of the
flesh, and carried it into heaven, as a pawn to assure that the whole should be
brought after him. So that his ascension into heaven works our ascension into
heaven, and so a threefold ascension: For first, heaven is opened for a
spiritual ascension of our minds, while our bodies are on earth, our hearts
taking unspeakable comfort by faith, in our union with Christ, and so with God;
whereas otherwise without Christ, our very thoughts are shut out of heaven, our
hearts having no cause of comfort, but rather of sorrow to think of our loss
of Gods favor, and so glorious a place. Secondly, heaven is opened for our
souls to enter in when we dye, our souls being to be carried by the Angels
into heaven, that before in Adam kept us out of heaven. Thirdly, heaven is
opened for both soul and body at the last day, 1 These. 4. 14. 17. Ioh. 17. 24.
Thus of the first benefit. Another benefit comes to us by the ascension of
Christ, and that is, the leading of our enemies captive, for his triumph over
them when he led captivity captive, Psalm. 89. 19. extends to us.

That we may understand this the better, we must know that Christ's victory
over his enemies had five degrees: First, it is the ordination of it, and so he
conquered from eternity. Secondly, the prediction of it, and so his conquest
was a foot in all the ages of the old Testament, and began at the promise in
Paradise after the fall, and was plainly renewed in that place of the Psalms
quoted before. Thirdly, the operation of it in his own person, and so he
conquered on the Cross, and triumphed in his Ascension. Fourthly, the
application of it, and so he conquereth, and has in all ages conquered in his
Members, making them able to overcome Sin, and Satan, and the World: but
this is but in part, and in the beginnings of it. Fifthly, the consummation and
full accomplishment of the victory, and so the Devils, and the Grave, and
Death, and Sin, and the World, shall be for ever vanquished at the last day,
when Christ shall appear in glory, and we be made like unto him, in an
everlasting freedom from all misery. The third benefit is the daily help we
have from the intercession of Christ in heaven, that perfectly remembers us,
and appears before God for us, to make our persons, and prayers, and works
still accepted before God, as has been showed before. The last benefit is the
sending of the holy Ghost, to be with the Church to the end of the world, in a
special manner to qualify us with all needful gifts, and to be our
Comforter, as has likewise been showed before.

Thirdly, this Article serves for confuration of diverse sorts of men: as,

1. Of those that say the very body of Christ is present to the bodies of men
in the Sacrament of the Supper: whereas the Article is plain, he is in body
ascended into heaven.

2. Of the Papists about merit of works. They say Christ merited our
Justification, but we must merit our place in heaven. Whereas our Savior
says, He went to heaven to provide and prepare a place for us.

3. Of such as say, they must give way to an insufficient ministry, because
able men cannot be had: Whereas Christ ascended to give gifts unto men, and
therefore if all lawful means were used, able men would be found by his
blessing.

4. Of such as think because they were not brought up to learning, or have
lived long in ignorance, therefore knowledge must not be required of them, nor
can they attain to it: whereas if they had honest hearts, and would
conscionably use the means, they might be led into all truth, by the
Comforter which Christ has sent.

5. Of such as say they may live in some sins, and they can never be seduced
in this life, which is a varne excuse for their negligence, and wilful
indulgence over their corruptions, for Christ ascended to lead captivity
captive.

6. Of all worldlings that profess they are Christ's, and yet mind nothing but
earthly things, whereas if they were true Christians, their hearts would have
ascended with Christ, by seeking those things that are above, Col. 3. 1.

A fourth sort of uses are for instruction: and so,

1. This Article should make us willing to dye, seeing it is the highest point
of our preferment to ascend to heaven; and seeing to dye is but to ascend to
heaven and go to our Father, and that Christ ascended to take possession for
us.

2. It should teach us not to mourn immoderately for the loss of our dearest
friends, seeing they are ascended to heaven, and we can never lose so much as
the Disciples did, when such a Master and Savior was parted from them, and
went to heaven.

3. It should stir us up to all possible care of an holy and contented life:
it should seem to us a monstrous base thing to serve sin, or the devil, or
the world, that are such shameful captives: to be a slave to a slave is a
matchless baseness: and yet this is the condition of the most, and which
makes it more woeful, man likes it, and desires to continue so still.

Lastly, it should work upon us a strong impression of desire to carry our
selves as strangers here and pilgrims, and to have our conversation in heaven,
where Christ is, and ^^om whence we look for him to come and unite us to
himself, when he shall change us, and make us like himself in glory.

Hitherto of the Ascension of Christ. The third degree of his exaltation is,
his Session at the right hand of God.

The first words of this Article are ambiguous, because they are not taken in
their proper sense: for properly, God has no right hand, as being a Spirit,
and Christ may not be thought to use no other gesture in heaven but sitting,
and therefore we must enquire of the Scripture for the sense, as it is
figurative; and so first what sitting may signify; then what the right hand of
God signifies: and then what it is to sit at the right hand of God.

For the first: Sitting, in a figurative sense in Scripture is used two ways;
First, to note habitation, abiding, or resting: as when the Apostles were
willed to sit in that City till they were endued with power from on high, Luke
24. 49 Secondly, to note Sovereignty and Iudiciarie power, and when Solomon is
said to sit upon the Throne of his Father, 1 King 1. 30. so Prou. 20. 8. Isa.
16. 5.

The right hand of God, when it is spoken of about earthly things, notes his
power and help: as Psalm. 44. 3. and when it is spoken of as in heaven, it
notes supreme glory, and Majesty, and authority. Now to be at the right hand,
when it is spoken of men, it signifies to help, as Psalm. 142. 5. Sometimes God
is said to be at man's right hand, and then it notes protection and help, as
Psalm. 16. 8. Sometimes the Church is said to be at the right hand of Christ, as
Psalm. 45. 10. Sometimes Christ is said to be at the right hand of God, of which
this Article makes mention. But by the way we must note, that this gesture is
not attributed to Christ, as a perpetual gesture. Sometimes he is said to be
at the right hand of God, as Romans 8. 34. Sometimes to stand at the right hand
of God, as Act. 7. 55. But usually the Scripture mentions his sitting at the
right hand of God, as that gesture which does most fitly shadow out the
eternal rest and felicity of Christ, together with his Imperial and Judicial
power.

Now for the sense of the Article all together, I conceive, that by the words
of this Article, eight things are meant, as,

1. That Christ, after all his labors and sorrows, after his Cross and
death, does rest in heaven in unspeakable joy, and felicity, and blessedness.

2. That he has obtained dignity, and power, above all men and Angels, as
when Solomon set his mother at his right hand, it was to signify, that she was
to be esteemed of above all his subjects. Thus Christ has a name given him
above every name which is named in heaven and earth, Heb. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 21.

3. That he is partner with his Father in his Kingdom: and therefore hence it
is, that in stead of, He shall sit at Gods right hand, mentioned, Psalm. 110. 1.
Saint Paul quoting the place, says, He shall reign: teaching us, that, to
sit at Gods right hand, is to reign in Gods Kingdom.

4. That his authority reaches unto all things in heaven and earth, and
therefore he is said to sit at the right hand of God; of God, I say, whose
dominion is an universal dominion: This our Savior says of himself, Matthew.
28. 18.

5. That the Father does not cease to rule, but does administer his Kingdom by
his Son. Therefore in Psalm. 110. v. 1. the Father takes upon him to subdue
the enemies of Christ. The Father and Son reign together, but yet so, as the
Father commits the rule and execution of all things to the Son under him, as
kings that admit their Sons to be partners with them in their Empire, and
commit the trust of all to them.

6. That this kingdom of Christ shall be delivered up unto the Father again,
1 Cor. 15. 25. For the work of Christ in this Kingdom, is by means to gather
and save the Church, and to subdue and overthrow the enemies of the Church; now
when there shall be no more enemies, and the Church is perfectly gathered, and
glorified, then this Kingdom shall cease. But that men may not mistake, the
natural kingdom of Christ, which he has as God equal with the Father, that
shall never cease; and the supreme glory that he has in eminence over man and
Angels, that shall not cease; for so he is a King immortal, and of this
kingdom there is no end: but after the day of judgment he shall reign no
more; that is, First, not in the midst of his enemies as he does now, Psalm.
110. 2. Secondly, not by means, or by the Word and Sacraments, as he does now,
but immediately.

7. That he undertakes fully to accomplish and perform unto all the Elect, all
that goodness and riches of grace and glory, which God as a Father has
decreed or promised to his Church; and therefore he sits at the right hand of
God as a Father.

8. That he is furnished with all power to execute all that concerns, either
the subduing of the enemies of the Church, or the salvation of the Elect; and
therefore he is said in the Creed, to sit at the right hand of God, as he is
Almighty, and in Scripture, to sit at the right hand of the power of God, Luke
22. 69.

There are other things might be mentioned about the explication of this
Article, but they are either curious, or else so difficult and perplexed, and
intricate in sense, that they will not well agree with popular teaching, and
therefore I leave them and come to the use of this Article.

This Article may serve both for instruction and for consolation. For
instruction, and so it should teach us;

1. Never to be ashamed of the Gospel, and the profession of the service of
Christ in this world, seeing whatsoever worldly men think, yet true Christians
know, that they serve him that sits at Gods right hand, and has all power in
heaven and earth, and is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19.

2. To be willing to let him rule over us, and with all reverence and
conscience to submit our selves to his laws, and to acknowledge his power and
soueraignety, Every knee should bow at the name of Jesus, Phil. 2. 11. 10.

3. To carry our selves as the members of so great a King, as has achieved so
many conquests over so great enemies. We should strive to over come too, even
the world, and sin, and Satan, and then he promises us, that we shall fit on
his throne also, Revel. 3. 21.

4. All our mind should be on heavenly things, as the Apostle shows, Col. 3.
1.

5. In all things to live by Faith, and in nothing to be careful, and in all
estates to be content, since by Christ we may be able to do all things: and
he is able to help us, and will not forsake us.

For consolation, this Article serves many ways.

1. In the case of trouble of conscience for our sins and infirmities, for
hence we know that we have an Advocate with the Father, and he sits at Gods
right hand to make request for us, 1 Ioh. 2. 1.

2. In the case of fear of perseverance: for Christ sits at the right hand of
God the Father Almighty, and therefore none can take his sheep out of his
hand, Ioh. 10. 29.

3. In the case of defects and disability in gifts: for from this Article S.
Paul gathers, that Christ will fill all in all things in all the members of the
Church, Ephesians. 1. 21. etc.

4. In the case of fear of accusation by men or devils: Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Does not Christ sit at the right hand of
God, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 34.

5. In the case of difficulty in the success of the Ministry of the Word,
Christ has the Key of David, he sits on the Throne of David: He will open
and no man shall shut, and he will shut and no man shall open, Rev. 3. 7.

6. In the case of outward wants on earth, or ill entertainment in the world:
we serve him that has all power to prefer us, and we have his promise that
we shall partake of his own glory, and therefore we need not be careful, but
rather magnify his mercy and love to us, in admitting us to his service upon
what terms soever it be in this world.

7. In the case of public dangers and distresses upon the Churches of Christ,
and the seeming prosperity of his enemies, for from this Article we may gather,
and must believe, that all the enemies of Christ and his Church shall come to
confusion, and that the Church shall be delivered, as these and many other
Scriptures show, Ephesians. 1. 20. etc. Psalm. 110. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27. Dan.
2. 44. and 7. 14.

The seventh Article.
From thence he shall come to judge both quick and dead.
ACTS. 10. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify,
that it is he that is ordained of God a judge of quick and dead.
HItherto of the three degrees of the exaltation of Christ: Some have thought
that this Article contains a fourth degree of his glory: but I am rather of
their minds that take it to be a declaration of the former, especially of his
Session at the right hand of God, as showing one point of his greatness above
men and Angels, that he is appointed Judge of all the world, and so of all men
and Angels. Some divide these four Articles thus: One tells of what he did on
earth, viz. Rose from the dead. The second tells how he went from the earth:
the third tells of his estate in heaven: and the fourth of his return to the
earth again.

There is great need of teaching and explicating of this Article, both because
it is a thing so much urged in so many places both of the old and new
Testament, and because it was made one of the most fundamental principles of
the Apostles Catechism, Heb. 6. 2. Act. 10. 42. and especially because it is a
doctrine of all others most effectual to awaken the carnal and secure hearts
of men, Act. 24. 26. and if it may be to bring them to repentance, Act. 17. 31.
and the more proper for us upon who^ the ends of the world are come, not only
because it is now at hand, but because men are in so high a degree forgetful of
it, yea because there are so many scoffers against it, according as S. Peter
foretold, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Concerning this judgment I intend to show by way of
explication,

1. What kind of judgment it will be. 2. Who shall be the Judge. 3. Whence he
shall come to judge. 4. When the day of judgment shall be. 5. Where the place
will be. 6. Who shall be judged. 7. The signs of this Judgment. 8. The form
or manner how it shall be performed.
For the first, what kind of Judgment this shall be, may appear by the
properties of it: and the properties are seven.

First, it is certain: It is such a Judgment as will certainly come upon men.
There must needs be a Judgment in the end of the world; First, because so many
Scriptures have foretold it, it has been proclaimed and men warned and
summoned from the beginning of the world. Henoch gave notice of it, Jude 15. so
did Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. and David, Psalm. 50. and Solomon, Eccles. 11. 9 and
Daniel, chapter 7. 13. and Joel, chapter 3. and Malachi, chapter 4. so did Christ himself,
Matt. 24. and Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1. and Peter, 2 Pet. 3. and John, Reu. 20. and
Jude, v. 6. here is a cloud of witnesses. Secondly, because we see that in this
world full Judgment is not executed, and therefore it stands up o^ Gods
justice that there should be a general Judgment; for in this world many times
godly men be in great affliction, as Lazarus; and wicked men be in great
prosperity, as Dives. Now if God be just, he will render to every man according
to his works, which because it is not done in this world, it remains that we
are yet to expect such a judgment as will give every man his due: If judgment
begin at Gods house in this world, then certainly will God find a time to
avenge himself on Satan's family. Thirdly, there must needs be a judgment in
the end of the world for the declaration of Gods justice, which is now in many
things hid, Romans 2. 5. Many things we see not the reason of, and many things
are hid in darkness, which then shall be brought to light: Men's hearts now
boil against many things they hear in Gods word, or observe in Gods works,
now the Lord will overcome in judgment, Psalm. 50. And therefore he has
appointed a time, wherein he will clear himself before all men and Angels.
Fourthly, Gods works of judgment done already show, that he conceiues such an
infinite wrath against sin, as he must needs find a time to be revenged on the
sins of all men. Such as are the drowning of the old world, the burning of
Sodom the destruction of Jerusalem, the tormenting of mankind with a world of
diseases and miseries, the sweeping away of many thousands together by
Pestilence or sword, the irreuocable sentence of death upon all men, shows that
God will take an account of men's ways, and will not put up the transgressions
of his Laws. Besides, every man's conscience naturally fears a supreme Judge;
and therefore since there shall be a judgment, men should live so, as to
provide, that it may go well with them in that day.

2. It is immediate, God himself shall judge. There is a judgment in this
world, which is called Gods judgment, but that is a mediate judgment, when
God judges by man, as Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Psalm. 72. 1. Psalm. 50.

3. It is the last judgment: men have received their doomes, sometimes from
men, sometimes from God, either judging them by his word, or afflicting them by
his particular judgments: but these are all the first things, but this is the
last judgment, after which there shall be no more trial, or sentence, or
execution; and therefore the more terrible for wicked men because there can be
no reuersing of this sentence, as in this life upon repentance there may be of
other judgments, Ier. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. And for this sentence there will be no
appeal.

4. It is a general and universal judgment, 2 Cor. 5. 10. all must appear
both quick and dead, as will be more distinctly showed afterward. God has
his particular judgment upon man in this world, both in life, judging both the
righteous and the wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 12. and in death, when he passes
a particular sentence upon every man: but this is judgment of all men together.

5. It is an open and manifest judgment, where all things shall be brought to
light, even the secret and hidden things of all men, even the hidden things of
darkness. God has his secret judgments upon wicked men in this world, when
he consumes them like a moth, Esaias 51. 8. and plagues them in their souls or
bodies, or states, in the things the world observes not. But at this day of
judgment all shall be done and opened before all men and Angels. Which serves
for exceeding terror to impenitent sinners. Is it such a shame to do penance
before one particular congregation for one fault, when the punishment is
inflicted for their amendment, and it may be men will pray for them and forgive
them? What will the horror be then, when they must be shamed before all men and
Angels for all their sins, and this judgment must be for their confusion, and
no eye shall pity them. And so it serves for the singular comfort of the godly:
if it be a comfort to be praised, and cleared of aspersions before a great
assembly on earth, as say it were at the meeting of Parliament, and done by the
mouth of a King, with the applause of all the hearers: What shall their
everlasting comfort be, when at that day by the voice of Christ himself, they
shall be praised for all the good they have done, and cleared from all
aspersions, censures, suspicions and wrong judgments on earth, before all the
world of men and Angels?

6. It will be a sudden judgment: Christ will come upon the world like a
thief in the night, that does not use to knock at the door and give men
warning: He will come as the snare does upon the bird, Luke 21. 35. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
2, 3. Which serves to show the woeful estate of wicked men that live in
security, for while they say, Peace, peace, sudden destruction comes upon
them, either by particular or general judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. and it should
serve to warn wicked men, to take heed of those sins which do especially
harden the hearts of men, and breed security, and indisposition in them. Our
Savior himself instanceth in surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of life,
Luke 21. 34. and it should teach all men to watch and daily to pray to God for
mercy and grace that they may be always ready, as our Savior urges in the
same place, Luke 21. 34.

7. It will be a righteous Judgment, Romans 2. 5. Reu. 19. 11. Psalm. 9. 9. for
God will judge according to his own righteousness which is infinitely
perfect, Psalm. 7. 9. and it will be true judgment without error or mistaking,
either by evidence, or the law, or the sentence, Revel. 15. 5. and 19. 11. He
will not respect any men's persons, 1 Pet. 1. 17. nor will he judge according to
the outward appearance and colors of things, Esaias 11. 3. and it must be
righteous, because it shall be according to men's ways and works, Ezech. 18.
30. Romans 2. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and he cannot be corrupted with bribes, for
riches will not avail in the day of wrath, Job 36. Nor will he regard the
false testimony of the world, either for the wicked, or against the godly: for
though it be true, that Christ says, As I hear I judge, Ioh. 5. 30. yet that
is meant of what he hears from his Father, and his book of prescience and
remembrance, and not of what he hears from the world: and no multitude nor
power can be able to daunt this Judge, for he is a Lord of hoasts, Ier. 11. 20.
and will judge by his strength, Psalm. 54. 1. and therefore woe to the Hypocrite
that makes a shift to escape the judgment of man by his deceitful colors; and
woe to the mighty men, that now break the net and escape, and no man dares
control them: and woe to all those foolish men, that believe not Gods justice,
because they like it not, or seems to be against their reason; at that day God
will overcome, even in the things he is now judged Psalm. 51. 6. Romans 3. 4. and
woe to all them that have pronounced wrong judgment on earth, their sentence
shall not stand, but themselves shall come to judgment for their ill judgment
on earth, Eccles. 3. 17. and in general, if God will judge in righteousness,
then no wicked man shall ever be able to stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. 5.

8. It will be an eternal judgment, for so it is called, Heb. 6. 2. not
because the Judge shall sit for ever in examining of causes and sentencing of
men, but because the effect of this judgment shall be for ever: Look what
happiness is by sentence of the Judge appointed for the godly, that shall last
for ever; and so what misery the wicked are adjudged to, shall last for ever.
Which should serve greatly for reproof of the carelessness of most men, that
so think of a present estate in this little space of time on earth, that they
forget to take order for eternity: and most woeful is the case of the wicked,
that so esteem the pleasures of sin here which are but for a season, that
they care not to plunge themselves into estate of torment which shall never
have end.

Ob. But how can this be just, that they should be punished for ever, that have
sinned but a little time?
Sol. Diverse things may be answered to this: 1. That no Judge limiteth his
torments to the time of the doing of the fact or crime: he measures his
punishment by the greatness of the offense, not by the length of time. As in
the case of treason, murder, whoredom, etc. which may be done in an instant or
short time, and yet the punishment be for a long time: as men punish by death,
which is a removing of the malefactor from the society of men for ever; and
shall not God have the like allowance for his proceedings? Secondly, we must
consider of the greatness of sin by the person against whom it is committed; men
sin against God who is infinite, and therefore must suffer punishment that is
infinite in continuance. Thirdly, if two men bargain together, one sells,
another buyeth, the buyer will have his bargain for ever, though the contract
be made in a quarter of an hour: now, sinning is a selling of men's souls and
bodies to the devil for a short pleasure, and therefore why should it not be
just that the devil should have them for ever?

Hitherto of the Answer to the first Question.

The second question is, who shall be the Judge? The answer is to that, that
Christ shall be Judge, even the same person that is Mediator, and of whom all
the former Articles of the Creed affirmed, which is apparent by these and other
Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 22. 27. Act. 10. 42. and 17. 31. Not that the Father and
Holy Ghost is removed from this Judgment, for the authority of judging
belongs to the whole Trinity, but because the Son shall appear in the
Humane Nature, and speak and pronounce sentence: but when he speaks, God
speaks, and when he judges God shall judge, not only because he is God, but
because the Father shall speak and judge by him: so that the Judgment belongs
to him in respect of the visible proceeding in Judgment, and the promulgation,
and the execution of the sentence, Dan. 7. 9. 13. and the like may be said of
his judging as Man, not that he is not Judge in his Divine Nature, but because
that which shall be seen and heard in the Judgment shall proceed from his
Humane Nature. And whereas the Saints and Apostles are said to judge the world,
Luke 22. 30. 1 Cor. 6. it must be understood thus: That they judge as members
unto that head who is Judge. Secondly, as the Judgment shall be performed
before Christ, and the company of the Elect, Joel 3. 2. Thirdly, as they shall
be Assessors, and give consent to the Judgment, being advanced to the honor
to sit as Justices of the Peace on the Bench by the Judge. Fourthly, the
Apostles shall judge, because their doctrine which they have preached shall be
confirmed and avouched by the sentence of the Judge. So the word that men hear
now shall judge them at the last day, John 5. Fifthly, the godly shall judge
the wicked, because the example of their faith and repentance shall be alleged
as a furtherance of the condemnation of the wicked. Thus the Queen of the
South, and the Ninevites shall rise up in Judgment and condemn that
generation Christ speaks of, Luke 11. 31. So that the point is clear, that
Christ shall be Judge. The Use is first for great comfort to the godly to free
them from the terror of that day, they need not be afraid of the Judge, nor
any hard sentence he will pronounce upon them, seeing the Judge is their own
brother, yea their own flesh as their head, it was he that was judged for them
on earth, and redeemed them with his own blood, he that has continually made
intercession for them in heaven, that they might be delivered from the wrath of
God. Yea he has promised them that they shall speed well in that day, Hebr. 2.
11. Ephesians. 5. 30. Ioh. 3. 36. and 5. 24. Secondly, it is a terrible doctrine for
all wicked men; because this is a Judge that cannot be corrupted, but will
judge in righteousness, as there is none higher than he to make appeal to,
and because also he is (...), one that knows the heart; and finally, because
it is he whom they have rejected and would not let him rule over them, but have
many ways vilified him, and rebelled against him and his ordinances, and
persecuted him in his members, Revel. 1. 7, 8.

The third question is, whence Christ shall come, when he comes to Judgment?
And that is briefly expressed in the words of the Article. He shall come from
thence, that is, from Heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God. The
reason why he comes out of Heaven to execute Judgment, is because Heaven is so
pure a place, as it is not fit for impure men and devils so much as to make
their appearance there. And this point is not without Use: For first hereby we
may clearly be confirmed in the truth of Christ's humanity, against the
Vbiquitaries, that say his body is every where, seeing he comes in his body
out of Heaven at the last day. And besides, it may teach us to send our hearts
to Heaven to meet Christ, and till he come from thence to look for him, Phil.
3. 20.

The fourth question is about the time when the day of Judgment shall be? Now
about the answer to this question, there have been many opinions, and the most
of them strange and false.

1. Some have thought it should never be: and such were those mockers mentioned
2 Pet. 3. whose argument to prove their damned opinion was twofold. First, that
the first Fathers in the first ages of the world were dead many ages since, and
if there should have been a Judgment, it is likely it would have been before
this time. Secondly, that all men see by experience that all things continued
without alteration since the Creation, and therefore why should men fear any
alteration for the time to come? To all this the Apostle answers, first
concerning the persons of these mockers, that they are men that follow their
lusts, verse. 3. or that they are willingly ignorant, v. 5. and then concerning
their reasons he says against them three things; The one, that this world was
made at the beginning by God, both the upper and nether world: and therefore it
may have an end, v. 5. The other, that it is false that there have been no
alterations, for the whole nether world was drowned by water, which may assure
men that God hates sin, and will generally judge men for it, verse. 6. The
third is, that the continuance of the world for so many ages ought to be no
argument to prove that it is unalterable: for a thousand years with God are
but as one day: it is a small time that the world has lasted in comparison of
Gods eternity: and besides, God has urgent reason for his so long patience in
deferring the last judgment, verse. 8, 9.

2. Some others in the Apostles time taught that the resurrection, and so by
consequent the day of Judgment was past already: of this mind was Himenaeus
and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. It is probable, that they held there was no other
resurrection than that which is of the soul spiritually rising out of sin,
nor any other Judgment than that which men pass through in repentance.

3. A third sort of men that did hold a true resurrection of the body, and a
general Judgment of all the world, did affirm before the Apostles were yet
dead, that the Judgment would come upon the world within a short time after,
even in the age of them that then lived, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3. Now these false
teachers are both described and confuted by the Apostle: described both by the
effect of their corrupt doctrine, viz. that it would draw men away from their
minds both for the present, by making them less careful of their callings,
and for the time to come, when they should see that that day did not come as
was foretold, they might then grow either impatient under their cross, or else
to fall away from religion, believing nothing, because that they have believed
in this point did not come to pass: and described they were, by the manner of
confirming their doctrine: For they pretended first the Spirit, that they had
revelations from the Spirit within. Secondly, the word, that is either some
special arguments of their own, or some words which the Apostles had uttered.
Thirdly, Epistles, either wresting the words of the Epistles of the Apostles,
as that 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. or else counterfeiting Epistles, and saying they were
written by the Apostles. The Apostle confutes them by showing that the kingdom
of Antichrist must come before the day of Judgment.

The fourth sort of men are such as assign the time of the coming of Christ
to be further off from the age of the Apostles, and offend in extreme
curiosity, in assigning the year or age when it should be, and so men's wits
have been ill employed in all ages. Saint Augustiae tells that in his time
diverse computations were made of the end of the world, and Christ's coming.
Some said it would be 400. years after his Ascension, some 500. years, some
1000. years: in our age since the Gospel was restored, many men have labored
mightily to assign either the year, or at least the age when these things
should be. As those that assigned the year 1587. which experience has proved
false. It had been much to have been wished that diverse Writers upon the
Revelation, which are held in good fame in the Church, had forborne that
curiosity of computation, in reckoning so strictly by years, for it does much
hurt in the minds of weak Christians, when either experience or reason beats
them from those grounds, which they have sucked in from such writings. There is
a tradition that sticks in the minds of many, pretended to come from one Elias
(not Elias the Thisbite) that the world should last 6000. years: 2000. before
the Law, 2000. under the Law, and 2000. after the Law, and then the end shall
be, only for the elects fake those days should be shortened. Now this is a
manifest dotage: for it was more than 2000. years before the Law, and less
than 2000. years under the Law, as the Learned know. How then shall we believe
this tradition to be true for the time to come, that is proved false for the
time past? And as for the shortning of the time for the elect, that is spoken
by our Savior about the destruction of Jerusalem, not about the end of the
world.

To let go then all these false opinions, the judgment of such as speak
according to the Scriptures contains three assertions:

1. That God has precisely set and appointed the time and day when he will
judge the world by Christ: this appears by Scripture, Act. 17. 31. Heb. 9. 27.
and God will have this known, both for the consolation of his servants, that
they may have hope in their afflictions, and to leave the wicked without
excuse, that being warned will not repent, and to drive out of the godly
security, that so they may keep themselves in the good way, and walk in the
fear of God, watching and providing for that day.

2. That this Judgment day shall be in the end of the world, and not before:
and therefore it is said in Scripture, it shall be at the last day. Quest. But
why does God put off the general Judgment so long, and not call men to an
account til after some thousands of years after some of them died? Answ.
First, God has unsearchable respects of his own glory, in dispatching by his
providence the great business that concerns the rising or alteration of things
in the state of mankind: As in disposing of the Monarchies of the world, the
kingdom of Antichrist raised, and ruined, the reiection and recalling of the
Jews, and such like, which will not be effected till the day which he has
appointed for the coming of Christ. Secondly, it is put off so long, that the
elect may be all gathered, it being Gods pleasure to gather them by ordinary
means, so as the Just have a time to be borne, live, hear the word, fulfill
their measure of work, etc. Thirdly, it is put off for the more effectual
trial of the faith and patience of Gods elect, and exercise of their hope and
prayer. Fourthly, that he might by the confession of all men be justified in
this that he has allowed unto the world space and time enough to repent in,
Romans 2. 4. and 9. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 9. and therefore if wicked men do not repent,
they may be left without excuse, and the rather seeing he can no way be charged
to proceed in judgment against them rashly, or with more respect of his own
Justice, seeing before he passes the final sentence he stays so exceeding
long. Fifthly, as he glorifies his mercy in saving the elect, and his justice
in damning the wicked: so does he by his exceeding long stay glorify his
patience and clemency.

3. That the precise day, month or year, when this Judgment shall be, is
known to no man or Angel, Mark. 13. 32. Act. 1. 7. Quest. But seeing God will
have us certain that there is a time for Judgment, why will he have us
uncertain when it shall be? Answ. That thereby he may teach us at all times to
watch and strive to be prepared: He will not let us know what day it shall be,
that we may be every day prepared. And besides, he thereby the better
exercises our faith and patience, and making us lay hold on his promises
without limiting him to times and seasons. And therefore we should make this
use of it, and restrain our curiofitie, and never search or inquire after
that, which God will not have us to know, but look to our task, for it is our
duty to think it near at hand, and therefore to get oil into our lamps to
be ready when the Bridegroom shall come, and to stand always upon our watch,
like the wise Master of the house, that keeps all things carefully, because he
knows not when the thief may assault his house, Mark. 13. 32, to the end.
Matthew. 24. 42, 43. and 25. 3, 4. If Christians were taught to say, it was the
last time when S. John wrote to them, how much more cause have we to think
we live in the last time, upon whom the ends of the world are more apparently
come? Another question is moved about those words, Mark. 13. 32. How it was
true that the Son of Man himself did not know the day and hour of his own
last coming? Diverse answers have been given to this question. As first, he
did not know it, that is, he did not know it so as to make us know it: or it
was no part of that knowledge which as the Prophet of the Church he was bound
to make known to us: as in that speech, The Lord your God proves you, that he
may know, that is, that he may make you know, etc. and when we say, O Lord
arise, we mean, make us arise; and such like phrases are used in Scripture: or
their answer is, that as our Savior assumed diverse infirmities of ours, yet
without sin, so did he assume ignorance; Ignorance I say of some things,
that were not necessary for him as man to know, which belongs only to the
estate of Humiliation, for now he is glorified, and has laid down all
infirmities, he now in heaven as man knows both the day and hour. Thirdly, it
may be answered, that as Man he could not know it, without revelation from his
Divinity: and therefore if the Son of Man did then know it, it was not a
knowledge that belonged to his Humane Nature in it self, but he had that
knowledge given him from his Divine Nature.

Thus of the time.

For the place where the Judgment shall be, we have nothing in particular
certain of the Scriptures: Some men have thought that it should be held in the
valley of Iehoshaphat, which was a place near to Jerusalem: and to that
purpose they allege the words of the Prophet Joel, Chap. 3. 2. But this
opinion is rash and presumptuous: because that place seems to speak in
particular of such Nations as afflicted the people of Israel, and the valley of
Ichoshaphat seems to be named but by way of allusion: yet notwithstanding, that
the Judge should sit in judgment in some place about Jerusalem, is not
altogether improbable, because it increases the terror of the judgment, and
augments thoglory of Christ, to sit there as a Judge, where himself was
judged. But in this no man can conclude peremptorily to make a resolute opinion
of it, because we have not sufficient warrant for it out of the Word. In the
general it is clear by Scripture, that it shall be in some part of this
nether world, either on the earth or near unto it; because, as was showed
before, no unclean things, such as devils and wicked men, may enter into
heaven: and besides, it increases the terror and justice of the Judgment, to
keep the Assizes where men have offended, and to sentence them to punishment
in the place where they have done their offenses: as for great crimes, Judges
are wont to appoint the place of punishment to be where the fact was committed.
It is very probable, that the Judge will sit in the clouds of the Air near
the earth, whither the Elect shall be caught up to meet the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
17. that so the devils may be conquered and sentenced in the very place where
they have all this while ruled as princes, Ephesians. 2. 2. I say only it is
probable, because it cannot be necessarily concluded out of the places are
alleged, viz. Matthew. 24. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

The sixth question is, who shall be judged? And to this I answer out of
Scripture by beginning at the remotest things, and coming nearer and nearer
till it reach to each of us: and so I say,

1. That this Judgment shall reach even to the unreasonable creatures: for the
Apostle says, that the heavens and the earth, and the things in them, are
reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and the perdition of wicked
men, 2 Pet. 3. 7. And it is likely the Apostle has this meaning, Romans 8. 19.
to 23. And so partly God will be revenged on the old heavens and earth for the
vanity cast upon them by wicked men, and as they were the dwelling place of
the wicked: and partly, as God in justice will restore to every creature, in
the sort of the creature, whatsoever they lost by the sin of Adam, and his
posterity.

2. Evil spirits shall then be judged, even the Devil and all his Angels,
which are now bound in the chains of darkness till the judgment of that day,
Jude 6. 1 Cor. 6. 3. There shall be opened that great secret of the nature, and
manner, and time of their first sinning against God, and all the horrible
murders they have committed and attempted upon the souls of all sorts of men.

3. All mankind must their appear before his Tribunal: for God will judge the
people, Psalm. 7. 9. The ends of the earth, 1 Samuel 2. 10. The earth, 1 Chronicles.
16. 38. All Nations, Joel 3. 12. The round world, Psalm. 9. 9. Both quick and
dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1. By the quick is meant such as shall be found alive at his
coming, 1 Cor. 15. 51. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. And by the dead, such as have died
since the beginning of the world to that day, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Reu. 20. 12, 13.
so as no man or woman shall escape, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Jude 15. Against this may be
objected, that all the world stands either of believers or unbelievers, and
neither of those must come to judgment, and therefore none at all are to be
judged: the believer has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment,
Ioh. 5. 24. and 3. 18. and the unbeliever is condemned already, and therefore
needs no further judgment. To this I answer, that the believer shall not
come into judgment, that is, into the judgment of condemnation; he shall come
to receive judgment of eternal absolution from all his sins and miseries.
And the wicked are condemned already: First, in the counsel of God, as he
appointed them to condemnation for their sins. Secondly, in the word of God,
which tells him plainly of his estate and eternal misery, because he does not
repent and believe. Thirdly, in his own conscience, which is as a thousand
witnesses, and does judge him in himself as a forerunner of the last
judgment: all this hinders not, but that he must appear openly at the bar
of Christ, to have his sins publicly known, and sentence past upon him for
all his sins: so that it remains clear, that all men since the beginning of
the world must come to judgment. Yet that it may work the more effectually
upon men's conscience, it will be profitable to take notice of such particular
offenders, as God has in plain terms telled them beforehand, that he will
judge them at that day: and so he will judge

1. Pag^ns, that have sinned without the Law, they shall be judged also without
the Law written, by the Law of Nature, Romans 2.

2. Jews and all others that receive the Law written, but deny Christ, they
shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2.

3. Antichrist the Man of Sin shall be judged, and destroyed by the brightness
of Christ's coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

4. All that worship that Beast, and receive his mark (his mark is the
Characteristicall doctrines of errors and lies) they shall be cast into that
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Reu. 19. 20. and 14. 9, 10.

5. All false Teachers that bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

6. All Apostataes that sin willingly after they have received the Truth,
Heb. 10. 26.

7. All that trouble and disquiet the godly with their malicious oppositious, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7.

8. All Goats, that is, all unruly Christians that will not be directed by the
word of God, but wilfully persist in the known breach of Gods Commandments,
Matthew. 25.

9. All Hypocrites, that now go hoodded and masked, Luke 12. 1, 2. Psalm. 50.
17.

10. All Railers, that now by scoffing and slander vilify the godly, and the
good way of godliness, Psalm. 50. 19. Jude 15.

11. All Censorious and masterlike Christians, that judge other men for that
they are guilty of themselves, Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. Iam. 3. 1.

12. All Merciless and covetous rich men, Matt. 25. 41, 42. Iam. 2. 13. and 5.
1, to 6.

13. All Whore-mongers and Adulterers, Heb. 13. 4.

14. All Drunkards and Epicures, Luke 21. 34.

15. All deceitful persons with their scant measures and false weights, Mich.
6. 10, 11.

16. All Liars, and all that love lies, Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15.

17. All ignorant persons that know not God, and all that disobey the Gospel,
2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

18. All Swearers, for God has vowed he will not hold them guiltless,
Commandment 3.

19. All gross offenders, not mentioned before, as Murderers, Idolators,
Sorcerers, Usurers, and such like, Reu. 21. ^8. and 22. 15.

20. All civil honest men that rest only in being free from outward gross
crimes: these shall come to judgment for their want of the power of Religion,
Matthew. 5. 19. and for all their idle words, Matthew. 12. and for all their evil
thoughts, for God will try the heart and reins.

Lastly, all the godly must come to judgment too, but not to the judgment of
condemnation, as was showed before: we must all appear, we as well as other
men, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

This point should greatly terrify all impenitent sinners, seeing no man can
escape the judgment of God: multitude will not help them, nor can there be
any help from worldly means: God has his book in which are written the names
of all to whom he gave life, and therefore none shall be forgotten: and
therefore this should be a warning to enforce every man to repent in time, lest
God surprise him at unawares and carry him away in an hour he thinks not of;
and then as Death leaves him, Judgment will find him. And besides, this very
point should greatly stir up the desire of all that love the appearing of
Christ, to wait for, and long for this great Assise. Men generally long to be
at such Assizes, where many persons are to be tried, and where they shall have
great causes examined and judged, especially if there be any great man to be
arraigned. How them should we desire that day, when all men shall be judged,
and the causes of so many great men of the earth shall then be openly heard?
etc.

Thus of the Sixth point.

The Seventh Question concerns the signs of the coming of Christ, and these
are of two sorts; for they are either signs that go before, and prognosticate
and foretell of his coming, or else are such as are joined with the instant of
his coming: Before I reckon the Signs that go before, I must give the Reader
warning of certain events that are by some Divines reckoned for signs, which
(I take under correction of the better learned) to be no signs at all of the
last Judgment: it is easy for us when we take things upon trust, sometimes to
mistake.

As first, some make the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations to be a sign,
and such a one as is yet to be performed: whereas it is clear by that of the
Apostle, Col. 1. 6. that that promise was accomplished in the Apostles days.
For all Nations in that text, Matthew. 24. 14. stand opposed to the country of
the Jews, that whereas in former times and then, the Gospel was only
preached to Jews, the time should come, and that shortly, that it should be
preached all the world over, that is, in many other Countries. There is no
necessity to understand it so, that every particular Nation in the world should
have the Gospel preached to them; or if it were, it must not be meant of any
one time, but successively at one time or other. Again, some make the security
of the world, which our Savior likens to the security of the old world, Matthew.
24. to be a sign; whereas that is spoken of by way of complaint of the
carelessness of men that would not awaken, no not when his coming was near at
hand: for otherways the world is always secure, and wicked men are always so
minded: and therefore it cannot be a sign that has no distinction in it.

Again, some make that a sign, that when Christ comes, he shall not find
faith upon earth, Luke 18. which place is not meant of his second coming, but
of his coming to avenge the quarrel of his Elect that suffer in all ages: And
the want of faith he complains of, is not to be understood simply, but in that
respect which he intends in the Parable before: and so his meaning is, that
th^^e are few of the very elect themselves that have so much faith, as to
persist in prayer, and to resolve to overcome God by importunity, and not to be
discouraged, though God seem not to hear their prayers, and put off a great
while before he deliver them.

Again, some make the persecutions mentioned, Mat. 24. 9. and the wars and
other plagues mentioned, verse. 6. and the decay of love in many, verse. 12. and
the rising of false Prophets and false Christ's, verse. 24. to be all several
signs: whereas these were accomplished before or about the time of the final
destruction of Jerusalem, as is plain in the text: for he speaks not of the
signs of his coming till the 29 verse. and besides, it is said they shall be
accomplished before that generation pass, verse. 34.

The signs which do properly prognosticate and give warning to the world of
the coming of Christ, are so described in Scripture, as they serve
successively one after another, to give warning in every age of the Church: and
therefore the signs began to discover themselves in the very age of the
Apostles, and so downwards, and will so be ordered, as every age yet to come
shall have their special warnings to provide for that day: and so I take the
proper signs to be in number eight.

The first is the signs of certain Antichrists, that is, special false and
heretical teachers, professing the Christian religion, which should teach
doctrine that deprived the souls of men, of the benefit of redemption by
Christ: and these Antichrists were but forerunners of the great Antichrist.
This Saint John makes a sign, and this sign was accomplished, or began to be
so, while yet S. John was alive, 1 Ioh. 2. 18.

The second sign is given by S. Paul, 2 These. 2. 3, 4. and that is a general
Apostasy of men in the visible Church, from the soundness of religion: and
this was accomplished under Arrius, and the many ages of the Papacy.

The third sign is the revealing and discovering of Antichrist, and the making
of it known who was that great Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 4. and this was done by
Gods two witnesses, that is, by a few choice Instruments that God raised up in
the very times of this Apostasy, to preach and teach, that the Pope was
Antichrist, and this was done in several ages of that Apostasy.

The fourth sign is the preaching again of the everlasting Gospel, and the
public profession of reformed religion, Rev. 14. 6. 7. and 15. 1, 2, 3. and
this began in the age next before us that now live, in the ministry of Luther,
Zwinglius, and diverse other.

The fifth sign is the fall of Babylon, not only in respect of the consumption
of the body of it, which has been a doing by the word of Gods servants now
this 100. years, but also in respect of the destruction of the seat of that
Whore of Babylon (the Pope) and the dissoluing of his visible government, 2
These. 2. Rev. 18. and 14. 8. This (in the latter part of it) is yet to come,
and will be accomplished at a time appointed, in the day that is called, The
day of the great Battle of the Lord God Almighty; when by the sword of Princes
he shall destroy that City of Rome, which has been the very Throne of the
Beast, and of the Whore, Rev. 16. 14. 16. and 17. 17.

The sixth sign, is a fearful corruption of manners in the men of the world,
foretold, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. This I reckon as a sign, because I see all sorts
of Writers have a great mind to it: but I take it to be so, not because the
sins there mentioned shall be then found in the world, for they have been
always in the world, but in a threefold respect: First, because all those
sorts of sin shall reign at once in the world. Secondly, because men shall
grow in a high degree abominable in sinning, so as to ouer-passe the formet
times in the unheard excess in sinning. Thirdly, because the corruptions of
manners shall be found in all estates and degrees of men, and this sign I
think belongs to this age: I suppose there was never any age wherein men were
grown generally so monstrous, drunkenness, whordome, swearing, falsehood, and
deceit, besides the sins mentioned in the Apostles catalogue: and these
things do so provoke the Judge, and dare him to his face, that sure his coming
cannot be long deferred, but he will hasten the rest of the signs, to be
revenged of so wicked a world.

The seventh sign is yet to come, and that is the calling of the Nation of the
Jews, which, that it shall be, is plain by the Prophecy of S. Paul, Romans 11.
but how this shall be performed, and when, I suppose it cannot be determined
by Scripture.

The last sign I take it, will be but a very little time before his coming,
and that will be some fearful alterations in the powers of heaven, and in the
air, and in the earth, and seas: but what these will be it is hard to
conjecture, and the rather, because S. John tells of the noise of seven
Thunders that were uttered before the end of the world; but he was forbidden to
utter them, but to let them be sealed up, and kept unknown from the world,
yea, and from the Church too, Rev. 10. 5. Matthew. 24. 29, 30. It is very
probable that this sign will be accomplished in the very letter, as it is
recorded by the Evangelist.

Thus of the signs going before our Saviors coming to judgment: The signs
joined with his setting out to come to judgment are these; the first is, a
special sign of the Son of man, which shall be in heaven, and visible to
all men on earth: but what this sign shall be, is unknown, and I am
unwilling to trouble the Reader with rehearsing the several conjectures of
Interpreters, seeing they are without warrant from the Word. The second sign
is, the wailing and lamentation of all Nations, when they behold Christ coming
in the clouds of heaven, Matthew. 24. 30. Some Divines make the firing of the
World to be a sign belonging to Christ's coming forth to judgment: but that
cannot be so, because it is not probable, that devils and wicked men shall be
in the new earth, or the new heavens, for there must dwell nothing but
righteousness; and therefore this firing of the world, is to be reckoned as a
consequent of the Judgment.

Thus of the Signs.

The last point to be opened is the form and manner of the last Judgment, and
here four things are orderly to be inquired into:

1. The manner of the preparation to the Judgment. 2. The manner of the trial
of the causes to be tried there. 3. The manner of the sentence upon all sorts
of men. 4. The execution of the sentence.
The preparation to the Judgment, concerns either the Judge, or them that are
to be judged.

The Preparation, as it respects the Judge, has in it four things:

1. The Commission or singular power given to Christ for the execution of this
judgment upon all the world, Ioh. 5. 22. This Commission was granted him in his
first coming, and shall now be manifested to all men and Angels, before he
enter upon the Judgment, as we see is done by earthly Judges.

2. The clothing of the Humane nature with unsearchable glory and majesty,
above the glory of all men and Angels, which glory our Savior calls, The glory
of his Father, when he said, He should come in the glory of his Father, Matthew.
16. 27.

3. The attendance of thousand thousands of Angels that shall show themselves
in the perfection of their glory, waiting upon him, Jude 15. Dan. 7. 10. 2
These. 1. 7. Matthew. 25. 31.

4. The erecting of a most glorious Throne, wherein he will sit as Judge, which
he calls, The Throne of his glory, Matthew. 25. 31. which is resembled by the
glory of earthly Princes, which sit in Thrones of Estate, when they would show
their Majesty to their people. Which Throne will be the more glorious, because
before the erecting of it, all earthly Thrones shall be cast down, Dan. 7. 9.
We must not be curious to enquire, what this Throne shall be made of, Daniel
says, It is like a fiery flame, Dun. 7. 9.

Thus of the preparation of the Judge.

The preparation in respect of the Judged, has likewise four things, viz.

1. The Citation of the world to come to judgment: and the world is three ways
summoned to come to judgment; First, by the ministry of the Fathers and
Prophets in the old T^stament, that from the beginning of the world cited men
to appear before the judgment Seat of God; Henoch began before the Flood, Jude
15. and others followed in every age, as has been showed before. Secondly, by
the ministry of Christ himself, and the Apostles, and the ordinary ministry
of the Preachers of the Gospel, in all the ages under the Gospel, till the
end of the World. Now the last summons is this, which shall be given at that
instant when Christ is come in the clouds of heaven, and set in his Throne, and
this shall be performed by a shout from heaven, and by the sound of the last
Trumpet: This cry or summons is called, The voice of Christ, Ioh. 5. 28. 1
These. 4. 16. and yet it seem sit shall be performed by the ministry of
Angels, Matthew. 24. 31. He that imployes the ministry of men to call the World
to repentance in this life, will use the ministry of Angels to bring those men
to judgment, especially such as have not repented of their evil ways.

2. The Resurtection of the dead, under which I comprehend the change of the
living: for upon this voice all dead men shall receive their souls into their
own bodies, and be quickened, and rise out of the Graves, or other places of
the earth, or waters wherein they have lain, Rev. 20. 13. and those that shall
be then alive shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the sound of the last Trumpe: and this change shall be in stead of death, and
a kind of resurrection: they shall be changed, not in the substance, but in
the qualities of their bodies, corruption putting on incorruption, and
mortality putting on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53.

3. The collection of all the world of men, and evil Angels: for the Angels of
Christ shall gather together into one place from all the four winds of heaven,
even from all the parts of the world, all them that were raised or changed,
even all both elect and reprobate, Matthew. 24. 31. and 25. 32.

4. The separation of the good from the bad, which shall be performed by Christ
himself, which knows the hearts of all men before the trial, even then when
they are brought in by the Angels, and before he proceed to the trial of all
men's causes, Matthew. 25. 32. Where by the way diverse things may be noted: as
first, that wicked men to their terror shall then have that done by Christ,
which now in their malice and iolity they so much strive to do themselves. Now
they shun the godly, and think the Towns the worse to live in where they
are settled, especially if they be any number of them: at that day as their
grievous punishment they shall have the godly taken from them, never more to
live amongst them. Secondly, we gather hence, that there shall never be a
perfect separation, no not in the best Churches on earth, of the good from the
bad; only at the day of Judgment it shall be perfectly made: This is showed
by the Parables of the Tares and good corn, and of the Draw-net that catches
both bad and good fish. Thirdly, note the titles given to both sorts of people;
Christ calls the good Sheep, and the bad Goats, to give men before hand an
intimation of their estates, if they will try themselves, by these similitudes
they may know now how it shall go with them then. Goats are known to be
creatures, that though they be turned into the same pasture with sheep, yet
will not be kept within any bounds, but are unruly; and besides are creatures
of very ill smell: these resemble all such ungodly men, as living within the
compass of the visible Church, and enjoying the means of salvation with the
godly prove unruly and rebellious, and will not be kept within the compass of
the rules and directions given by the word of God, nor follow the example of
the godly, but in many things against their knowledge sin wilfully and
presumptuously: and they also shadow out that prophannesse, by which ungodly
men discover themselves by their words and deeds in every place they come in,
so as they leave an ill sent behind them, the very place is the worse for
them. Now Sheep resemble true Christians: and so true Christians are like
sheep in four things; First, in teachablenes: Christ's sheep hear his voice
and follow him, Ioh. 10. A sudden whistle startles sheep, so as they come in,
and are driven whither the Shepherd will, whereas Goats and Swine will not be
driven without much toil and labor. Secondly, in sociablenesse: sheep will
sort with sheep, and not with swine, and will not easily live, but in the
company of sheep: so is it with the godly, their life is uncomfortable, if
either they be forced to dwell where the wicked are, or where they may not
enjoy the society of the godly. Thirdly, in profitablenesse: a sheep is
profitable in all things about him: and therein resembles the good works of
all the godly, in whom every thing is profitable, their prayers, their
practice, their examples, their works of mercy, their piety; yea, their very
afflictions are profitable, not only to themselves, but to others also.
Fourthly, in their patience: they are quiet in adversity, like a sheep, dumb
before the shearer, so are godly men when they fall into the hands of
unreasonable men that afflict them, persecute them, and oppress and defraud
them. Now by these things must men try themselves. Thus of the preparation to
the Iudggment.

The manner of the trial follows, where three things must be inquired into; 1.
About what the trial shall be. 2. By what law men shall receive their trial.
3. By what evidence they shall be tried.


For the first, it is clear by Scripture, that the trial shall be about the
works of all men. They shall be examined about their works, and the proceeding
shall be according to their works, as these and other Scriptures show, 2 Cor.
5. 10. Romans 2. 6. If any say, that then it seems faith shall not be enquired
after: I answer, that it shall, as is plain, 1 Pet. 1. 7. for by their works
their faith shall be proved to the world; and faith it self is one of the
highest works of a true Christian, Ioh. 6. 29. If any say further, that hereby
is imported, that the godly shall then be justified by their works, and be
saved for their works sake: I answer, that they shall be judged then according
to their works, not for their works; God of his free grace will give reward
according to their works, but not for their works, nor will their works then
justify them, otherwise then as they declare them to be justified by Christ,
and truly righteous in themselves. It may be further objected, that this may
discourage poor Christains, and all such as have not power to do good works:
I answer, that it is an error to think, that there are no good works but
giving of alms: There are good works in the obedience of every one of Gods
commandments. Works of piety, and the works of our particular callings, are
good works, as well as works of mercy: and the works of spiritual mercy a
poor man may do as well as a rich man.

About the trial of wicked men also diverse things may be objected: As first,
they shall be judged for original sin, being borne children of wrath, Ephesians.
2. 3, and yet that is no work: I answer, that original sin is a work as it
was wrought by Adam, and imputed to them, and as it is the cause and root of
their actual sins: secondly, it may be said that they may be punished for
other men's works, and so be judged for more works than their own works. To
this I answer, that the punishment of their Parents sins may reach to their
children, Commandment 2. but that is to be understood of temporal punishments
in this world, and not of the sentence at that day: only children may then be
judged for their Parents sins, and others for other men's sins, but that is only
as other men's evil works become theirs, either by consent, or partaking, or
imitation, Matthew. 23. 35. There is another case that concerns both good and
bad in that day, and that is the case of Infants either elect or reprobate, how
shall they be judged that have done neither good nor evil in actual works,
dying before they come to years of discretion. To this I answer, that the
proceedings of God about Infants, is not clearly revealed unto us in this
world, and therefore we must leave that as a secret till that day. In Infants
reprobated, Adams work is imputed, and the vile corruption of their natures
makes them children of wrath: In elect children, both the work of their
Parents faith is imputed unto them, and besides the Spirit of Christ supplies
outward works, by inward sanctification, after a way we cannot express. Thus
of the first point.

The second is, by what Law men shall be judged at that day? And to that I
answer out of Scripture, that all such to whom the Gospel has come, they
shall be judged by the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. which is thus to be understood,
that godly men shall be tried by the Gospel, so as their faith, and
repentance, and new obedience, being avouched, they shall receive the benefit
of trial, not by the rigor of the Law, but by the promises of the Gospel: and
wicked men shall be tried by the Gospel, only as their unbelief shall be an
aggrauation against them, that having so many ways broken the Law, would not
fly to Christ, nor seek atonement in him: so as properly the godly are tried
by the Gospel. Now all the wicked men in the world are chiefly tried by the
Law, and so either by the Law of Nature, even by the principles infused into
every man's mind by Nature, as the Pagans and all that know not the Scripture:
or else by the Law of Scripture, that is, by the Law or Covenant of works
recorded in Scripture: see Romans 2. 12.

The third thing is, by what Evidence men's causes shall be tried, and how the
sins of the wicked shall be proved against them? And for answer hereunto, we
read Reu. 20. 12. that when the dead both great and small shall stand before
the Lord, there shall be certain Books opened, out of which shall be taken
manifest evidence in all the Trials. Now what books these shall be, other
Scriptures tell us: and so we read of five books that are likely then to be
opened.

The first is the book of Nature, and so the creatures abused by men shall be
for evidence against men: as unto the Idolatrous Jews, the very horns of
their Altars shall testify against them, Ier. 17. 1. their sin is graven,
and as it were written upon the creatures they have abused.

The second book is the book of Scripture: for all those places of Scripture
have been in this world rightly propounded and urged against them, shall then
serve for undeniable evidence: The word which they have heard shall judge them
at the last day, says our Savior, Ioh. 12. 48.

The third book is the book of Conscience: Every man's conscience shall then
be wonderfully dilated, and made able to remember all their sins afresh, and
so shall be as a thousand witnesses. Though the consciences of most men are now
asleep, yet Christ will make them awake at that day, and give in full and
perfect evidence. That work of accusing which the conscience does in some men
imperfectly in this life, it shall do perfectly at that day: and so for
excusing in the godly.

The fourth book is the book of Gods remembrance mentioned in the case of the
godly, Mal. 3. 16. and intimated in the case of the wicked, Ier. 17. 1. in
which book are written all the things that men have done in their bodies,
whether good or evil.

Now besides these books, we read in that place of the Revelations, of a book
of Life, that is, of such a book as contains the names of all that God has
appointed unto salvation by Jesus Christ, and by that book the Judge will see
upon whom to pass the sentence of Absolution, and so by consequent, on whom to
pass the sentence of condemnation, Revel. 20. 12. with Phil. 4. 3.

Now besides these books, we read of a book of providence, that contains a
Record of all the persons to whom God gave natural life, and form, of which
David makes mention, Psalm. 136. 16. and this book may be of use to show who
must be called to Judgment.

And yet further we may gather out of other Scriptures, that if there be need
God can produce other Evidence: As first the Heavens and the Earth will declare
Gods righteousness, at least by way of aggrauation, either in respect of the
benefits they have brought forth unto man to allure him to goodness, and the
judgments have been upon them to terrify him, Psalm. 50. 6. The very vanity
which the creatures have been subject to, will testify against man in that
day: The heaven, says Zophar, shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall
rise up against him, Job 20. 27. And hence it was that God called the heaven
and the earth to witness between him and the people at sundry times in the
Old Testament. Secondly, the examples of the faith, and piety, patience, and
mercy in godly men that have lived amongst the wicked, will be evidence against
them: as the example of Noah will condemn the old world, Heb. 11. 7. so the
example of the Queen of the South, and the Ninevites, will rise up in
Judgment against the Jews, Matthew. 12. 41, 42. Lastly, the Spirit of God,
which has rebuked the world of sin, will be able to convince all the ungodly
openly of all their wickedness at that day.

Thus of the manner of the Trial. The manner of the Sentence follows.

The manner of the Sentence we cannot in this world know, save that our Savior
himself has given a little taste of it, by making a brief description of it
in Matthew. 25. the latter part of the chapter: and this glimpse of that glory of
his proceedings there he gives, that both the godly might be established in
consolation, and the wicked left without excuse having so fair warning.

The sentence stands of two parts, the one concerns the godly, and that is a
sentence of absolution, as Divines call it, or rather a sentence of
glorification: and the other concerns the wicked, and that is a sentence of
condemnation. Our Savior will begin with the sentence of absolution, to show
thereby his readiness to mercy, and long-suffering, and that he is not carried
with unjust fury against those on his left hand, and that thereby also he may
make the elect capable of the dignity of being Assessours with him in the
Judgment upon the wicked.

The sentence that concerns the godly may be considered of according to the
four parts of it. The first is the calling of the elect to glory, verse. 34.
The second is the reason given for this calling, verse. 35, 36. The third is the
answer Christ shall receive from the elect, v. 37, 38, 39. The fourth is the
replication of our Savior to their answer, v. 40.

For the first, in general we may note, That if Christ call us to grace and
good works in this life, he will call us to glory in another world: All that
are effectually called, and set about Gods work in this world, shall have a
most joyful call to the possession of an eternal kingdom at the last day.
Which should much encourage the godly, against all the hardship of godliness
in this life.

There are many things may be briefly noted from the particular words by which
this glorious calling is expressed.

1. In that the Judge is suddenly by change of style called a King, it might
have some use for the present respect of the Disciples, that dreamed of an
earthly kingdom in this world: and besides, a general respect unto the godly
of all ages to inform them, that though Christ entertain his servants in this
world but in mean conditions many times, and that thereby his glory seems much
abased amongst men, yet at that day, he will speak and do for them like a
King, yea a King alone, when all other Kings shall lay their Crowns at his
feet.

2. In that he says, Come ye, it notes how glad Christ will be of them at
that day, as of such as have been long from him. No father can be so glad to
see his children that have been long absent, as Christ will be to see his
members: while he yet sits upon the Throne of Judgment, he cannot choose but
show his affection.

3. In that he says, Ye blessed of my Father, he shows them the fountain of
all their preferment to be Gods free love and grace to them, and not their
deserts. And withal teaches us to be confident in it, that no people are so
blessed and happy as such as be true Christians: They are the blessed of God;
even such as God blesses as a father: If Isreal's blessing could make Jacob
happy, much more Gods blessings upon those he acknowledges for his children.
It matters not though the world hate us, and curse us; if God will love us and
bless us, it is enough.

4. In that he says; Inherit the kingdom, it imports that we shall never have
full possession of perfect glory till the day of Judgment. We are heirs now,
but we are as it were under age. And besides, merit of works is here again
confuted: for if we hold heaven by inheritance, then not by merit: a man's child
claims not his land by desert but by descent. And further, in that he calls
their glory a kingdom, it gives us a glimpse of the surpassing advancement of
every true Christian at that day. This world has no higher estates to shadow
it out by, but a kingdom, which is the highest greatness on earth, and
therefore we should be greatly comforted against the miseries we suffer in the
days of our banishment, and pilgrimage here below.

5. In that he says, Prepared, we may gather from that word, the great care of
our heavenly Father, that prouides estates for all his children long before
they be ready to possess it, which should be some instruction to earthly
Parents to show care for their children in providing, if it may be, for them
before hand.

6. In that he says, for you, it manifestly shows that God did particularly
choose certain men, and not all men, as heirs of his kingdom.

7. In that he says, from the foundation of the world, we may again note that
Heaven is not had by our merits, because it was prepared before we had done
either good or evil. Observe also, that our Savior making mention of the
beginning of the world, expresses it by mentioning the foundation of the
world, great was the surpassing glory of Gods power and wisdom in making the
world, and likewise beyond all apprehension, great was his power in hanging
this mighty frame of all things without any thing to hold it up, save his own
secret power and decree, and will it should be so. Or may not the foundation of
the world be referred to the mind of God in eternity? Though this world were
framed and reared in the beginning of time, yet may we not say, that it was
founded in the mind of God from all eternity?

The consideration of all these things in the calling to glory, should greatly
abase us for our want of affection, and admiration, and strong consolation in
the hope of all this glory, and if it be possible, it should pluck up our
hearts to a fervent love and longing for, and hasting to the appearing of
Christ Jesus; our hearts, I say, upon whom the ends of the world are come, when
the day of the Lord is so near at hand. And withal it should work in us a
perfect patience in bearing the afflictions of this life, these light
afflictions, I say light, in comparison of that eternal weight of glory.

Thus of their calling to glory: The Reason follows, verse. 35. 36. And it is
taken from their works of mercy, as they are signs of their faith in Christ,
and as marks of their Adoption, not as causes of their glory: and yet if it
were granted they were causes of glory, yet it will not follow they are
meritorious causes: There are many sorts of efficient causes, besides causes
meritorious: if any ask why their works of piety are not mentioned, or works
of righteousness as well as mercy: I answer; that mercy is not absolutely
better than piety, but only in a sort, viz. in respect of men, and as mercy
does justify our piety to be right. Now out of all the words I observe

1. That good works are necessary to salvation, as causes without which no
salvation will be had.

2. That works of mercy are very acceptable to God, Acts 10. 4. Phil. 4. 18.

3. That the best charity is to relieve godly Christians, Gal. 6. 10.

From the answer of the godly, we may gather something of defect, and something
of praise. The defect seems to be, that they do not sufficiently inform
themselves of the dearness of relation between them and Christ, and the
great account that Christ makes of their works. As we must not be just
overmuch, to think better of our selves than there is cause, so we must not be
wicked overmuch, in denying Gods grace, or attributing more sin to our
selves than is true. Their great praise imported in these words is, that they
forget the good they have done, being more prone to see and acknowledge their
unworthiness, whereas wicked men can remember the good they have done, but
forget their sins.

From the Reply of Christ we may observe, the near conjunction between Christ
and Christians: He reckons of them as of himself, and is affected with all
that befalls them, as if it did befall himself: He is not ashamed to call them
brethren; yea he reckons poor Christians as a part of himself, though they be
despised in the world, yet he loves them, as he loves himself, they are
precious in his eyes: calling them brethren, he vouchsafes them incredible
honor, which should greatly stir us up to charity; and if at any time we are
dull, set Christ before our eyes, and think what a Sacrilege it is to deny
relief to Christ.

Thus of the sentence of absolution: which being ended, he will proceed to the
sentence of condemnation. He is not so merciful as to forget to be just. It
is in vain to plead the mercy of God and Christ, to prove the salvation of the
wicked, for he is just as well as merciful, and that they shall know fully at
his coming. In the sentence of condemnation observe four things: First, the
reprobation of the wicked, verse. 41. Secondly, the cause of this reprobation,
verse. 42, 43. Thirdly, the Apology of the wicked for themselves, verse. 44.
Fourthly, the answer to their Apology, verse. 45.

In the Reprobation of the wicked I note diverse things, as

1. In that speaking of the Judge his title of King is left out, which was
mentioned, verse. 34, 40. I gather that wicked men, even at the Tribunal, when
they shall see Christ in his greatest glory, yet they cannot truly love him, or
^steeme of his glory: The natural hatred of Christ will continue upon them
even at that day.

2. In that he says, Depart ye from me, it shows that it is a grievous
misery to be thrust out from Christ: it were an everlasting fearful
punishment, if wicked men did suffer no more, but the absence of Christ for
ever; to live without that Sun of Righteousness, is worse than to live
without the shining of the Sun in the firmament: and herein note the justice
of Christ, in that wicked men could not abide the company of Christ, and true
Christians in this world, they shall now be paid in the same kind, they shall
never more enjoy the presence of Christ or any one true Christian. Woe to
Hypocrites at that day, though now they seem to be joined to Christ, yet let
them think what it will be, when they shall be made to depart.

3. In that he calls them Cursed, it shows that every wicked man is a cursed
creature; and withal, that to be under Gods curse is the quintessence of
misery. And therefore godly men have little cause to envy the prosperity of
any wicked man, nor wicked man to be so drunken with the estimation of the
fading glory of earthly possessions.

4. In that he says, Into everlasting fire, it notes the unspeakable horror of
the pain of wicked men in Hell. If a man knew he must lie in a burning fire
but one day, oh how would he be dismayed? Oh what senselessness has bewitched
ungodly men, that are not frighted with everlasting burnings? They are
wonderfully blinded, that strive to believe, that there is only Poena Damni,
not Poena Sensus, in Hell: That there is no pain in Hell, but only loss of
good things, as the presence of God and Christ, etc.

5. In that he says, Prepared for the Devil and his Angels, we observe,

1. That God never purposed to show mercy to the Devils.

2. That there is one Devil is chief, and has power over the rest.

3. That from the beginning God intended to show mercy unto mankind, though
not unto devils.

4. That the eternal companions of wicked men shall be devils: such as love
wicked company in this life, may here see what companions they shall have in
Hell.

From the description of the cause of the Reprobation, we may note,

1. That it is not enough to refrain from evil, but we must do good. Not
bearing of fruit will be a cause of cutting down the Tree.

2. All Religion is pretended in vain, by such as are able, and do not show
mercy to the poor. It is a sin that Christ shall find only in the wicked.

From the Apology of the wicked, we learn

1. That men may be very innocent in some things in their own sight, and yet
be very guilty in the sight of God. They did think verily they never saw
Christ naked, etc. and yet in his members they did.

2. That it is the property of the wicked to remember the good they do, and
forget the evil: they can remember their prophesying, working of miracles, and
eating and drinking with Christ, Matthew. 7. 22. but forget all their sins of
unmercifulness, and the like: No ma ruell if they justify themselves before
men, that shall dare to do it before Christ himself.

From the answer to the Apology, we learn plainly, that all the injuries done
to the godly, yea even to the poorest and meanest of them, Christ reckons as
done to himself, and will accordingly punish them at the day of Judgment; yea
not only injuries, but the neglect of honoring, and succouring and relieuing
of them.

Hitherto of the manner of the Sentence. The execution follows.

Unto the execution of the Sentence four things belong.

1. The delivery of Possession of eternal glory to the godly. 2. The detrusion
of the wicked into Hell. 3. The creation of the new Heavens and new Earth. 4.
The delivering up of the Kingdom of Christ into the hands of God the Father.
For the first, after the sentence ended, the Elect shall be all taken up to
heaven with Christ, there to reign with him in eternal bliss: where they
shall presently be possessed of four incomparable benefits: The first is the
immediate vision of God, so as never man saw him in this world. If to live in
the presence of great Princes on earth be such a preferment, what is it to live
in Gods presence for ever? and if to see the Monarchs of the earth in their
glory so much affect men, what is that eternal sight, when men that once were
but dust and clay, are now admitted to behold that infinite perfection, and
fountain of all goodness? In God we shall behold most perfectly all those
things that can be of power to stir admiration, all those beauties and
praises, that the nature of man can delight in. The second is the perfection of
their own natures both in soul and body: Then shall their countenances shine
like the Sun in the firmament; then shall their very bodies be like spirits,
able to pass whither they will in a moment: then shall they possess health,
without all infirmity, or power to feel pain, or defect, nor sorrow,
sickness, or weakness shall any more assail them: but greater things than
those shall be bestowed upon their souls; for then shall their knowledge be
made perfect: Here we know but in part, there we shall know as we are known:
there we shall enjoy an everlasting day: It is dark night with us in this
world, in comparison of that celestial light of knowledge: Here we are
groaping in the dark to find out some parts of truth, but there God who is
whole truth it self, shall fill our minds with the shining beams of his
light. Then shall all the faculties of the soul be made perfectly glorious, in
all righteousness and true holiness, all impotencies being removed, God
himself being all in all in the Elect for ever. The third is the acquaintance
and most glorious society with all the Angels of Heaven, and all just men, of
all ages and degrees: which fellowship shall be made perfectly comfortable, all
things that may offend being removed from them, both in their natures and
works: The heart of man cannot imagine any true praise of friendship, that can
be there wanting to any of that society. The fourth is the actual donation of
power over all things, even the kingdom of the whole world: God will then
suffer them to enjoy what their hearts can wish in heaven or earth: they
receive then as their own, all that ever God made. Now from the possession of
all these arises joy unspeakable, and delight above imagination, not only the
heart of man, but all his senses being taken up with perpetual admiration, and
refreshing, being as it were continually in^^riated with those rivers of
pleasures that are at the right hand of God.

The second part of the Execution, contains the thrusting of all the wicked,
with the Devil and his Angels into Hell: where all the damned must suffer
first abiection from the face of God, and deprivation of the very sight of all
that might comfort in heaven or earth. Secondly, the gnawing of conscience upon
the eternal remembrance of all their sins. Thirdly, unutterable torments in
fire unquenchable. Fourthly, the horrid presence of the Devil and his Angels,
all which are made more grievous, by the impossibility to find either ease or
end. The life they loath they must live, and the death they desire they shall
never find. Oh that men could be warned in time, to provide that they never
come into that place. That message Dives would have sent to his brethren, is
brought unto men now by the Gospel, and therefore let them awake to live
righteously, that they perish not in this great damnation, where shall be the
Chaos of darkness, the horror of tribulation, the fear of confusion, the
grief of fearful visions, the voice of men lamenting, the biting of worms
gnawing, cold intolerable, fire unquenchable, stinch intolerable, darkness
palpable, and an absolute despair of all that is good.

The third thing is the creation of new heavens and new earth, according to
these Scriptures, Esaias 65. 17. and 66. 22. Reu. 21. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Now about
this Creation we are to consider of two things:

1. The firing of the world. 2. The liberty of the creatures.
For the first of these it is manifest, that the world, that it may be made
new, shall be cast into the fire, as into a furnace: The heavens and the earth
are reserved unto fire, the heavens shall perish, and shall all wax old as a
garment, and as a vesture God shall fold them up, and they shall be changed;
the heavens being on fire shall pass away, and be dissolved with a noise, and
the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works thereof shall
be burnt up, Psalm. 102. 27, 28. 2. Pet. 3. 5, 7, 10, 11, 12. The substance of
the heavens and the earth shall not be annihilated, but the qualities only
shall be altered, that is, bettered: The figure of this world shall pass away,
not the nature, 1 Cor. 7. 31.

For the second of these, all things shall be so made new, as all creatures
that were brought into bondage shall then be set at liberty, and receive
restitution, as is manifest, Acts 3. 21. Romans 8. 23. That this point may be the
more clearly understood, I must consider of two things. First, how the
creatures are in bondage now, and then how they shall be at liberty then. The
creatures be now in bondage many ways: First, as any of them are corruptible,
so in bondage to corruption. Secondly, as they are subject to mutations, and
confusions, as in the case of the Air and Seas. Thirdly, as they are forced to
serve the turns of wicked men, and their uses. Fourthly, as they are teachers
of the world, and men will not learn: the creatures are Gods great book, and
it is a bondage to teach and lose their labor. Fifthly, as any of them are
either the instrument, or the subject of man's punishment. Sixthly, as since the
fall they have lost their vigorous instincts, as they are dulled and
distempered in them.

Now for the second point, they shall then be freed from all that vanity, or
pain, or misery, or mutabilitie fell upon them since the fall of man; and
withal they shall be restored into a glorious estate, when the Elect are
glorified: and so they partake of the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
But this restitution shall not be made to each particular creature that has
been, but to each sort of creatures shall be then found alive at the last day:
But what shall be their glory, or how long they shall continue, cannot be
determined without curiosity and rashness.

The fourth effect or consequent of the Judgment, is the delivering of the
kingdom of Christ into the hands of God the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. which is to
be understood, not of the glorious estate of Christ, but of his temporal
government over the world and the Church, as he ruled by means in this world:
for this kingdom ends, when he has fully subdued the devils and death, and
wicked men, and has fully delivered the Elect from all sin and misery. Then
there shall be no need to govern men by Magistrates, or Preachers, or
Sacraments, or discipline, or of any of the helps of natural or spiritual
life.

Thus of the explication of this Article.

The use that may be made of this Article in general follows, and so first it
may extremely affright all men that lies in their sins without repentance, for
there are many things in this doctrine terrible, as

1. That God has set them a day, wherein he will certainly bring them to
account.

2. That this day is most certain, and God will not alter his mind, Act. 17.
31. Heb. 9. 27.

3. That this day will be a day of wrath to them, and not of mercy: The date of
mercy unto impenitent sinners will then be out, Romans 2. 5.

4. That all his sins shall then be discovered, even all his secret sins, and
none can be forgotten, in as much as the evidence shall be given out of so
many books, where all things are written, as it were, with a pen of iron, and
the point of a Diamond, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Revel. 20. Ier. 17. 1.

5. That even the longer he lives, the more he heaps up wrath against that
day, Romans 2. 5.

6. That no means will then be available to deliver them. Riches will not
help them, Job 36. 18, 19. nor multitude cannot shelter them, Jude 15.

7. That though thou have excelled in many gifts, and done much good in the
world, yet if thou die in sin without repentance, thou shall not escape Gods
vengeance, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

8. That it is but a little while thither, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Iam. 5. 8. The signs
of Christ's coming are the most of them run out; and we see that diverse of the
last signs run together, as if the Lord made haste to make an end of all
things: and if general judgment were yet further off, yet death is at hand,
which gives a particular judgment upon thee.

9. That when he does come it will be so suddenly, as thou shall not have time
to make thy self ready, or to mend thy course, Matthew. 25. 6, 10, 11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3. Matthew. 24. 39.

10. That God will be Judge himself.

11. That it will be a final sentence, there can be no reuocation or appeal.

12. That Gods proceedings in his justice will be then all cleared, they shall
have nothing to object; and his justice will the more appear both by the
equity of his dealing: They have had their days of sinning, and therefore
reason he should have his day of Judging: and by the consideration of his
patience, that has deferred this last judgment for such a wonderful while:
and besides, God will then discover a world of offenses in every wicked man,
that are not now known to others: and finally, God will then open the secrets
of his counsel, and bring forth exquisite reasons for his decrees, and
providence, and judgment, which are now like a great deep to us.

Lastly, it must needs be most terrible to them, if their hearts can apprehend
now the horror of their summons by the sound of the last Trumpe, and their
public shame before all the world, and especially their eternal separation
from God and all good things, and that infinite torment they must for ever be
in with the Devil and his angels.

But yet unto them this doctrine has another use, that is, more comfortable,
and that is, that God yet gives them warning to repent, and if the Terror of
this day, can now make them to repent, their souls shall be saved in that day,
Act. 17. 31. else they are most woefully undone for ever.

And on the other side it may be a doctrine of wonderf u confort to all the
godly: and the rather if they consider,

1. That they have judged themselves already, and therefore have Gods promise
they shall not be condemned at that day, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32.

2. That God has judged them already: they have endured their pain already in
this world: God will account the afflictions of this life sufficient unto them,
1 Pet. 4 17.

3. That they are already perfectly justified, and absolved from all their
sins, Romans 3. 24, 25. and 8. 33.

4. That they have Christ to be their Judge: for there are many comforts in
that point. They need not be afraid of his sentence, because he has been
their advocate all this while, and has pleaded for them at the bar of
Justice, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. and he is their brother, their husband, their head,
and all things else in relation, which imports dearness. Read but the Book
of Canticles, and consider whether he that gives such wonderful, loving, and
familiar terms of affection to his Church, can ever be brought to pronounce a
terrible sentence upon her? And besides, has he not in Scripture left many
promises that assure us of our happiness at that day? And further, who can
read the story of the Passion of Christ, and think that he will ever speak
terrible things to them, for whom he suffered so grievous things on earth. Was
he not himself judged for them on earth, that they might be absolved from
heaven? Lastly, he has left us the seal of the Spirit of promise, even his
own Spirit in our hearts, as an earnest of our most glorious and final
Redemption at that day; and besides that privy seal of his Spirit, how often
has he set to his broad seal in the Sacraments from time to time? And
therefore they may be all assured, that there Christ will be made marvelous in
that day in all them that believe, to their everlasting honor, and praise, and
glory.

Thirdly, the doctrine of the last Judgment, should serve also for
instruction, and so

1. It should strike a constant fear of God into our hearts, and of his
dreadful justice, and majesty, Revel. 14. 7.

2. It should make us very patient under any wrongs, or oppressions of the
wicked men of the world, especially when men suffer trouble for Christ's sake
and the Gospels; for we shall be sure to see a perfect recompense upon our
adversaries at that day, if they repent not, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5, 6, 7. Iam. 5. 6, 7.
Phil. 4. 5.

3. It should teach every Christian to be temperate, and reserved in the case
of censure, and judging of others, 1 Cor. 4. 5. and 5. 12. Romans 14. 10, 11, 12.

But especially it should maruellously fire the hearts of Gods children, to all
possible care and conscience to express all manner of holiness, and good
works, in all parts of their conversation, and to avoid all things that may
offend, Tit. 2. 12, 13. 2 Pet. 3. 11, 14. 1 Cor. 15. 5, 8.

The eighth Article.
I believe in the Holy Ghost.
1 JOHN 5. 7. For there are three, which bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one.
HItherto of the Articles of the Creed that concern the Father and the Son:
Now follows the Article that concerns the third Person in the Trinity in
those words, I believe in the Holy Ghost.

Ghost is an old English word, and signifies Spirit: and this Title of the
Holy Spirit is given to the third Person in Trinity, in a special manner: The
word Spirit by way of cause, and the word Holy, by way of effect.

He is a spirit not only in nature (so the Father and Son are a Spirit) but
because he proceeds from the Father and the Son by way of spiration or
breathing: on the other side, he is called holy, not only in respect of Nature
(for so Father and some are holy) but by effect, because he makes the Church
holy.

Now to believe in the holy Ghost, is not only to believe that there is a holy
Ghost, but to rely upon him for sanctification, and salvation, and all
happiness: to believe the holy Ghost to say true when he speaks, or to
believe what is written of him, will not serve turn, unless we believe in
him.

The reason why there is but one Article about the Holy Ghost is, because the
doctrine concerning him, has not been so much opposed, as the doctrine
concerning Christ, or the Father: unless we take in the Articles that follow,
and place them under this head of the Holy Ghost, which may be done thus; The
third part of the Creed concerns the Holy Ghost, and his special operation,
which is sanctification: which is declared partly by the object, which is the
Church, and partly by the effect, which is communion of Saints: which communion
is enjoyed in three things, viz. Forgiveness of sins, Resurrection of the
body, and life everlasting.

Before I come to open the full meaning of the words of this Article, I observe
from the general consideration of them, with the coherence, these things,

1. That the Holy Ghost is God as well as the Father and the Son, because we
must believe in him, as well as in the Father and the Son, which is plainly
proved by the Scriptures, 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3. Esaias 6. 7. with Act. 28. 25. Act. 5.
3, 4. 1 Cor. 3. 16. hence is the Holy Ghost reckoned with the Father and the
Son, Matthew. 28. 29.

2. That he proceeds from the Father and the Son, which the Creed intimates
in placing this Article last, and is plain by these Scriptures, where he is
called, The Spirit of the Father, Luke 4. 18. Esa. 61. 1. Ioh. 14. 16. 26. and
15. 26. and of the Son, Ioh. 16. 7. 14. and 20. 22. Romans 8. 9. Gal. 6. 4.

3. That he is a distinct person from the Father and the Son, which is manifest
in Scripture, Matthew. 3. 17. Matthew. 28. 19.

4. That he is equal to the Father and the Son, and therefore we must
believe in him as well as in the Father and Son: This appears also in this,
That divine worship is due to him, as well as the Father or the Son, Matthew.
28. 19. 1 Cor. 619, 20. 2 Cor. 13. 13. as also by this, that the sin against
the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, Mat. 12. 31.

The substance of the meaning of the Article is, That every Christian in
particular does profess to believe in, and put his trust upon the holy Ghost,
as the Author and worker of his happiness and salvation.

Now that the reason of this Article may appear, it will be profitable for us
to consider, what the Holy Ghost is in his own nature, and what he is in
effect or operation, upon which we may ground our faith and trust in him.

There are diverse things in the nature of the Holy Ghost, that should move us
to believe in him and rest upon him: as first, That he is eternal, and was
before the world was, Genesis 1. 2. and therefore cannot alter his disposition.
Secondly, that he is immense, and euery-where present, Psalm. 139. 7. Ioh. 14.
16. Romans 8. 9. and therefore he is ready to help. Thirdly, that he is
omniscient, Act. 1. 16. and 10. 19. and 20. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Heb. 9. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. and therefore he knows what we want, and what is
needful for us. Fourthly, that he is omnipotent, Esa. 11. 2. Mich. 3. 8. Pro.
1. 7. and 7. 8. Romans 15. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 4. and therefore is able to deliver us
and make us happy.

Thus of what the Holy Ghost is in his nature; what he is by effect or
opperation follows: and so we are to consider of the benefits which the holy
Spirit works, all which serve to prove, that we may and ought to put our
trust upon him. Now these benefits are either common or proper. The common
benefits are such as belong either to all creatures, or to all men: The proper
benefits belong only to the godly and elect.

The operation of the holy Spirit common to all creatures is the making of them
at the first, and the special preparing and quickening of the first matter,
that it might produce the several forms of things. Thus the Holy Ghost is
likened to a Foul that sits upon her eggs till the young ones be hatched,
Genesis 1. 2. So did the Holy Ghost sit upon the first Chaos, till it was made apt
for the several forms of all things. And it was the Spirit of the Lord that
garnished the heavens, Job 26. 13. and so it is the work of the holy Ghost to
give life to all the creatures still in their several kinds, for the
preservation of the sorts of things. Thus God sends his Spirit still, and
they are created, Psalm. 104. 30.

The operation of the Holy Ghost, common to all men are of diverse sorts, as

1. The special forming and in-liuing of every particular man that comes into
the world: Thus Job says, The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of
the Almighty has given me life, Job 33. 4. Psalm. 139. 14, 15.

2. The invention of the mysteries of skill for the managing of particular
sciences, and trades, and callings amongst men. There is in all trades and
professions of men such things of skill, as are above the reach of the nature
of man since the fall, and are discovered only by the holy Ghost Thus the
wisdom and skill Bezaliel and Aholiab had for building was from the Holy
Ghost, Exodus 31. 3. so G^deons skill in matters of war, Judge. 6. 34. and that
these things must needs come from above, appears by this, that nature in any
one man can hardly reach to make him capable of any more trades or callings
then one, though he be helped with instruction.

3. The inspiration of certain men to conceive and write the book of God, for
the instruction of all men in the visible Church. This sacred frame of holy
words, came not by the wit or skill of men, but by the immediate divine
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Pet. 1. vlt. This I reckon among
the benefits common, for though the men inspired were all holy men, yet the
matter inspired serves for use to wicked men as well as godly: for, though the
Scriptures be available only to the salvation of the Elect, yet it serves for
so much information of the wicked, as may leave them without excuse, and it
serves to terrific them for their sins.

4. The qualifying of the Ministers, that are appointed for public teaching:
for this skill is above nature, and from the holy Ghost. And Gods Spirit in the
Teachers is given sometimes unto the use of wicked men as well as godly, Neh. 9.
20. Act. 20. 20. and so the gift of teaching may be bestowed upon wicked men,
so as they may be like the Carpenters that built Noah's Arc, and yet be
drowned themselves, such was Judas.

5. The gifts of prophesying and working of miracles, these are all from the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 9, 10, 11. and yet these gifts may be found in wicked
men, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

6. The high gifts of illumination in divine things, in the understanding of
the doctrines of faith, that are above nature: for all men by nature have a
veil over their understandings, 2 Cor. 3. 15. Esa. 25. 8. now if this veil be
in any part pulled off, it is by the holy Ghost, for he is the only
spiritual anointing and eye-salue, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. Rev. 3. 18. Now this gift of
enlightening, and tasting of the good word of God, and the discerning of the
heavenly things in respect of the theory of it, may be found in wicked men, but
not with application and practice, Heb. 6. 4, 5. Thus wicked men may receive so
much grace, as to hear and receive the word of God with joy, so as to have a
taste of the very powers of the world to come, Luke 8. 13. but this taste is
without digestion, they are not soundly humbled for their sins, nor is it
sufficient to take them off from the love of this present world, nor will they
yield themselves to be ruled in all things by the word they rejoice in: nor do
they apply the promises to themselves, so as to believe Gods favor, and their
own salvation in the world to come.

7. The gifts of restraining grace: this is a great gift; by which a man is
made to forbear many vile actions, contrary to the bent of his own nature,
and to act diverse things wholly above his own disposition, so as he is as if
he were another man: as Saul was when the spirit of God fell upon him: and so
many men even among the heathen, had an expression on of valor, wisdom,
chastity, justice, etc. and this was from the holy Ghost for the good of humane
societies. Thus God kept Abimelech from Abraham's wife, Genesis 20. 6. Thus Haman
can refrain his rage against Mordecai, Hest. 5. 10. If this gift were not,
wicked men would be as the wild beasts of the desert. And yet it is one thing
to restrain a man's corruptions, and another thing to mortify them.

Thus of the operations of the holy Ghost that are common both to good and bad:
but the surpassing glory of his working, is in the benefits proper to the Elect
only, and so his works may be considered, either in general, or in particular.

The general works are;

1. The conception and qualification of the humane nature of our Savior, by
which he was made fit for that great work of the redemption of all the Elect,
Math. 1. 18. Esaias 61. 1. and 42. 1. and thus he received the Spirit without
measure, Ioh. 3. 34.

2. His habitation in the godly, their hearts being the temple of the holy
Ghost, so as he dwells in them after a wonderful manner, Romans 8. 11. Ephesians. 2.
22. 2 Cor. 6.

3. The regeneration of all the Elect in their seasons, Ioh. 3. 3. 5. 1 These.
2. 13. Tit. 3. 5. Thus they are washed, sanctified, and justified, 1 Cor. 6.
11. and in respect of new graces, the godly are the Epistle of Christ, every
grace being as a word or letter, graven upon their hearts by the holy Ghost, 2
Cor. 3. 3.

4. The uniting of all the godly, into one mystical body, being himself the
bond of that union in Jesus Christ: of which most glorious work the Scriptures
speak evidently, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.

5. The quickening and raising up of our bodies at the last day, Romans 8. 10.

The particular works or things he works in the godly are such as these
marvelous things: as,

1. Liberty: Liberty I say chiefly from the power of sin: making a godly man
able to subdue such corruptions as nostrength of nature, or natural arguments
or means could ever master: This is far above restraining grace: Where the
Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. and, The law of the Spirit of
life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me (says S. Paul) from the law of
sin and of death, Romans 8. 2. and this the Spirit does, first, by working a
spiritual circumcision upon the heart, causing a man to employ himself in the
duties of mortification, till he give deadly wounds to his beloved sins, and
at length cast them away like a loathsome foreskin, Romans 2. 29. making a man to
accuse and condemn himself, and pray against the deeds of the flesh, till
he get some victory over his corruptions, Romans 8. 13. and in this work the
holy Ghost discouers himself as a Spirit of judgment, and a Spirit of burning,
as the Prophet Esaias calls him, Esa. 4. 4. Secondly, by lusting against the
flesh, that is, stirring up consent, and earnest desires and groans to be rid
of the burden of corruption, Gal. 5. 17. Thirdly, by causing a man to hear a
word behind him, when he is about to go out of the way, either on the right
hand and on the left, Esaias 30. that is, by daily good motions, and inward
checks of conscience, which tend to diswade a man from yielding to any thing he
knows to be a sin. Fourthly, by baptizing the penitent sinner with the
baptism of fire, Matthew. 3. 11. which is, when the holy Ghost falls upon his
heart, and so inflames his affections, that he is full of indignation, and a
desire of holy revenge against his corruptions, and an unspeakable zeal after
righteousness and Gods glory.

2. The infusing of divine gifts, qualifying the godly with such abilities as
are altogether above nature, such as are Faith, Love, Hope, and the gift of
Prayer; no man can believe things above reason, and without means, unless he
have the spirit of faith, Romans 4. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 13. Heb. 11. 1. The love of
God is likewise shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5. and it
is the Spirit that makes a man hope and wait for the righteousness to be
revealed in another world, Gal. 5. 5. and therefore is the Spirit called the
Spirit of prayer, or supplication, Zach. 12. 11. because it is he only that
qualifies a man with such a language, as to be able to speak to God with
judgment, affections, and confidence, Romans 8. 15. Yea besides these, he
bestows such gifts upon the godly, in respect of which they are said to
partake of the divine nature, as they are made like unto God, 2 Pet. 1. 4. as
when the Spirit makes a man resemble God, in his contentment, in his love, in
his knowledge or wisdom, and in mercy, and a pure and sound mind, and
patience, and goodness, and such like: First it is a wonderful work to make
the heart of man immovable, like God, delighted and pleased, and at rest in
himself without coffeehouse at his condition; and this peace and joy the
Holy Ghost is the author of, Romans 15. 13. and 14. 17. Secondly, the Holy Ghost
makes a man to resemble God in his love to the godly, above all the people of
the world; and is therefore called the Spirit of love, Romans 15. 30. 2 Timothy 1.
7. Thirdly, to let go all the other gifts of the Spirit, which are mentioned
in that catalogue, Gal. 5. 22.) I will only instance further in that grace of
knowledge; it is a wonderful work to make a man understand supernatural
things, the mysteries of Gods kingdom, which are known only to God himself,
for the natural man perceives them not, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 13. 10. Matthew. 13. 11.
as to know how God stands affected to us; yea to know the height, length,
breadth, and depth of Gods love to us, Ephesians. 3. 19, 20. yea to know those sacred
truths, so as to be transformed by them, and changed into the likeness of the
things taught us, from one glorious grace to another, 2 Cor. 3. vlt. Now this
knowledge or wisdom from above the Spirit works in us, both by curing and
making sound our minds, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and by leading us into all truth, and
bringing to remembrance the things which we have heard, Ioh. 14. 26.

The third work of the Holy Ghost in the elect, is the fanctification of their
works, or the sanctifying of them unto obedience, 1 Pet. 1, 2. 2* These. 2. 13.
and this the Spirit does by quickening them, and stirring them up to good works,
both by inward motions, and by the ministry of the word made effectually.
Thus the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth, Ephesians. 5. 9. and It is the Spirit only that quickens, Ioh. 6. 63. and
further he does it by purifying the soul from such dross as might hinder
obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 22. such as pride, hypocrisy, and worldly lusts; and by
helping our infirmities, when we know not what to do as we ought, Romans 8. 26.
and by putting life into v in the manner of well-ding, Romans 8. 10. and besides,
by causing us to keep Gods statutes and to do them, Ezech. 36. 27. as it were
working our works for us, setting us to work, and directing all the work of
our hands: and finally, by sanctifying the offering up both of our selves and
of our service unto God, as the Altar sanctifies the gift, Romans 15. 16. and by
opening of an access unto God in all our service, Ephesians. 2. 18.

The fourth work of the Holy Ghost in the elect is Consolation: for he is
given unto them of Christ as an unspeakable Comforter all their days, Ioh. 14.
16. such a Comforter as the world never had, nor can receive, as Christ says
in that place: and this joy in the Holy Ghost, is a prime part of the kingdom
of God, Romans 14. 17. and thus he comfort them with joys unspeakable and
glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 9. and this makes the godly to walk on in the fear of God
with great encouragement, Act. 9. 31. and as he is a Comforter to them in all
estates, so especially in the days of affliction and distress, he rests upon
them as a Spirit of glory, giving them such tastes of the joys of heaven, as
makes them contemn all earthly things, 1 Pet. 4. 14. and this joy they find,
not only by an habitual gladness of heart at all times, but especially in the
word, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. and in Prayer and Sacraments and fellowship with the godly.

The fifth work of the Holy Ghost in the godly, is strength for perseverance:
and so it is his office to see to it, that grace go not out, which in many
Christians is but like a bruised reed, or smoking flax, and thus he abides in
them for ever, Ioh. 14. 16. to strengthen their inward man, Ephesians. 3. 19. and
this he performs both by nourishing the seeds of all grace in them, Esaias 44.
3. and by supplying their wants, Phil. 1. 19. and by a powerful assistance in
all times of trial and temptation, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. and by establishing their
faith that they may hold out to the end, which he does both by bearing witness
unto their spirits still that they are the children of God, Romans 8. 15. and by
being Gods privy seal to all his promises, and an earnest or pledge of the
glory to come, Ephesians. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5.

The Uses of this Article follow, and

First, diverse sorts of men may hence be warned to look to themselves in many
things, which perhaps they little think of; men must take heed of sinning
against the Holy Ghost, seeing he is God, and so wonderful in nature and works.

Now the sins against the Holy Ghost, are either pardonable or unpardonable:
There is one sin against the Holy Ghost cannot be forgiven. The first sort
are grievous, but yet may be repented of, and forgiven; and thus men sin
against the Holy Ghost

1. When they live without the Holy Ghost, as all wicked men do that are not
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Jude 19.

2. When men acknowledge not the glory of the Holy Ghost, in ascribing to him
the praise of all those skils or abilities they have in any estate of life.

3. When men order their affairs without seeking counsel or direction from
the Holy Ghost, by such means as he has appointed, Esaias 30. 1.

4. When men will not give ear or regard when the Holy Ghost speaks unto them
in the ministry of his servants, Neh. 9. 20. 30.

5. When men despise the counsel which the Holy Ghost gives in the word, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8.

6. When men are so far from regarding the word, that they do purposely
confirm their hearts, and strive to be insensible, like an Adamant, lest they
should hear the word God sends in his spirit by his Prophets, Zach. 7. 12.

7. When men openly rebel against the doctrine of Gods word, and set
themselves to vex the Spirit of God in their Teachers, Esaias 63. 10. Such were
they of whom S. Stephen said, Ye resist the Holy Ghost always, Act. 7. 51.

8. When men tempt the Holy Ghost: and that is when they will do such things
as they know are evil, and put it to the trial, whether they shall be
punished or discovered. Thus Ananias tempted the Holy Ghost that was in Peter,
by lying and dissembling, Act. 5. 3. 5.

9. By receiving the grace of the Spirit in vain: and this is a sin in such
as have been enlightened, and have had some common graces, yet fall away, and
all comes to nothing, in that no sound reformation follows.

10. By quenching the Spirit: and this may be committed by two sorts of men.
First, by wicked men that have temporary gifts of the Spirit, with some
special tastes of remorse, or joy, or of the powers of the life to come, and
then fall away, and having begun in the Spirit will end in the flesh, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 19. Gal. 3. 3. Secondly, godly men may for a time quench the Spirit, when
after calling they fall into gross sins, which will cause the Spirit to
cease working sensibly, and put out the joy and life they find in Gods service
and presence. There is another way of quenching the Spirit, and that is when
the people carry themselves so, as they discourage the spirit of their
Teachers, and make them less willing, or able to preach in their wonted power
and vigor.

Lastly, when men grieve the Spirit of God, by whom they are sealed to the day
of their redemption: and this is a sin the children of God are to be warned of,
and this they may commit if they wilfully persist in any known sin, either
secretly, or in domestical carriage, or in their conversation abroad, Ephesians. 4.
30.

Thus of the sins against the Holy Ghost, that may be forgiven if men repent
and believe in Christ: There is one sin against the Holy Ghost, that can
never be pardoned, Matthew. 12. 31. Hebr. 6. 4, 5. and 10. 26. 29. To find out
the exact nature of this sin is very hard, but upon the evidence of those
three places of Scripture, I undertake to define it thus.

The sin against the Holy Ghost that is unpardonable, is a sin after
illumination, and sanctification, by which a man does wilfully and wholly fall
away, contemning the Gospel, and does despite the works of the power and
grace of the Holy Ghost, without remorse to the death.

1. When I say the sin unpardonable, I exclude all the sins against the Holy
Ghost named before.

2. When I say a sin after illumination and sanctification, I exclude all the
sins of such people as never had the powerful means of salvation, or never so
as to work a manifest change in them. The person that commits this sin, must
be such a one as was before enlightened, Hebr. 6. and sanctified, Heb. 10. 29.
that is such a one as did attain to diverse gifts which he had not before,
which were wrought in him by the Holy Ghost, and had a taste of the doctrine he
heard, and of the powers of the life to come: but yet he was not sanctified
with any saving grace, or repentance from all sin, or effectual relying upon
Jesus Christ for his own salvation. He had tastes of many things, but did not
soundly digest any thing.

3. When I say, he does wilfully and wholly fall away, I mean diverse things.
First, that this sin cannot be committed by such as continue in the same manner
they were in relation to Religion, it must have apostacy in it. Secondly, it
must be a wilful apostacy, which is when a man falls into sin not only
against his knowledge, but without any temptation, Heb. 10. 26. and this
excludes the sins of David and Peter. Thirdly, I say, it must be a total
apostacy, not a falling into some one or two gross evils, but a falling away
from respect of all parts of truth, that should master his nature or works,
though he show not all this openly; but in heart he is an Apostata from all
grace. He does as it were depose, or abrogate all the Law, Heb. 10. 28.

4. When I say contemning the Gospel, I mean two things. The one, that he
does loath that way of salvation by Christ; and the other, that he does
extremely scorn the means of publishing the Gospel, that is effectual to
work sanctification in men, and that means which had before power to work
change in the party himself: both these I take it are imported, Heb. 10. 29.
He may brook the general use of exercises of Religion still, as the Pharisees
did, but not that means that has power and life in it.

5. I add the word despite from Heb. 10. 29. to include the sins of
persecuting and blaspheming, and both out of desperate malice, without any
color of cause, or measure of dislike. This person is always a known
adversary, and withal does reproach godly persons, and godliness, but it is
of wilful malice, which excludes persecuting or blaspheming that is done of
ignorance: as in Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

6. When I add the works of the Holy Ghost, I difference this sin from the
blasphemy that is against the nature or person of the Holy Ghost; for so it is
no greater sin than to blaspheme the nature or person of the Father or Son:
but it is the special operation of the Holy Ghost, that is the object of this
sin; by which God comes more near unto man, than he is in nature or person.

7. I add, works of power or grace: because as usually this sin is committed
by despighting the work of grace in other true Christians; so sometimes also
it is committed by despighting the works of power, as the miracles wrought by
Christ were reproched by the Pharisees, Matthew. 12.

8. I add, without remorse, because I think that he that commits this sin is
so far from being capable of true repentance, that it is impossible he should
get but that remorse or repentance he had when he was first enlightened: So I
take that place Heb. 6. and so I think such as have any remorse or despair
arising from the sense of the greatness of their sins, cannot be guilty of
this sin:

9. I add, to the death, only to note, that this is that sin, which the
Apostle calls the sin unto death in a special sense Final impenitencie in
any sin is unto death, but then it has not the description going before: Nor
do I mean that it cannot be known till death, but that it will last unto
death, without returning from it.

Now this sin is said to be unpardonable, not because it is greater than Gods
mercy or Christ's merits, but because God has resolved to show his justice upon
this sin without mercy: and because in that way of saving of men which God has
now resolved upon, all means of salustion are disappointed to the uttermost,
else if they could repent, God could forgive: and this justice of God may not
seem strange, since he declares himself willing to forgive all sins, and does
except but this one.

Now the explication of this sin should serve for a warning to such heareres as
have had remorses and illumination, and find themselves in many things
changed; I say, they should be warned to look to themselves, since this sin
can be found in no other persons: and to this end they should take counsel in
two things.

1. Now that they are near the kingdom of God by these effects of the Holy
Ghost in them, they should be careful to go on, and never rest till they
attain to sound conversion and true saving grace; and that they will do, if
they humble themselves before God for every known sin, especially those sins
that have been most loved of them, or most rooted in nature: and secondly, if
they will be at the pains to use all good means to get the particular
assurance of Gods love to them, for these two things were never found in any of
those that so fall away.

2. My next counsel is, that they take heed of those special sins that were
in such as at length grew faulty in this unpardonable sin; that when they
feel any of them in themselves, they make haste to get out, lest they prove
forerunners of the sin against the Holy Ghost, such as were in the Pharisees
and others; these or the like, the forsaking of that means by which that
inlightning was wrought, as the Pharisees did the ministry of John Baptist.
Secondly, the constant affectation of the praise of men, more ^^an the praise
of God. Thirdly, habitual alienation of (...) heart from God and goodness.
Fourthly, wilful evil practices without temptations. Fifthly, constant envy
at the gifts and praises of the godly. Sixthly, wilful misinterpretation of
all that godly men do, even their best works; especially if they be gone so
far as to feel themselves to be tempted to fall into a course of open
opposing and persecuting of good men and good causes, if it be possible let
them break off, and by speedy repentance prevent the horrible mischiefs they
may fall into, lest from these oppositions, and the custom in them, they fall
into malice, and despighting of the work of grace.

Thus of the Use of Admonition. The Uses for Instruction follow, and so the
consideration of this Article, should teach all that have care of their own
soul,

1. To examine themselves whether they have the Holy Ghost or not, 2 Cor. 13.
5. Romans 8. 9. Now the Holy Ghost does discover himself to be in the heart of a
man by these signs, all or some of them. As first, by the combat it raises in
the heart against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17. if there be an internal worker within
us, that does constantly oppose and strive against the secret corruption that
is in our nature, without doubt it is the Holy Ghost. Secondly, by the taste
and savor it breeds in us about spiritual things: for if the Holy Ghost be in
a man, his taste for earthly things is marred, and he has a sensible taste of
the things of the Spirit, accounting nothing more sauourie than holy things;
such as are the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, godly society, and such like, Romans 8.
5. Thirdly, by the victory over the power of sin: If the Holy Ghost be in us,
though we may have sin, yet we are freed from the law of sin; our corruptions
do not rule and reign as they were wont to do, Romans 8. 2. The body is dead
in respect of sin, Romans 8. 10. The Holy Ghost does daily set us a work in
killing of sin, one after another as they arise, Romans 8. 13. and this is done
by the duties of mortification; thus we are washed in the tears of repentance
by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 11. and this sign is the more clear, when it
reaches not only to the deeds of the body, but to the sins of the heart. It
is an infallible sign of the Holy Ghost, if a man have felt the circumcision
of the heart, that is, if he have voluntarily implied himself, in the painful
resisting and cutting off, of secret evil in the mind and affections, Romans 2.
29. Fourthly, by that transformation is wrought in the hearing of the word, 2
Cor. 3. vlt. when a man does not only hear with admiration, but finds
himself persuaded, and presently changed unto that grace and holiness is
taught him by the word, when he is sent home another man. Fifthly, by the love
of God in affliction. It is a special work of the sanctifying Spirit of God,
when a man can love God, and show it by the fruits of it, even then when Gods
hand is upon him, especially when crosses do beset him, and compass him
about: for that is a work altogether above nature. This love to God in
adversity he shows, by mourning for his spiritual absence, by esteeming any
token of his love and favor above all things in life, by delighting himself
in Gods house and presence, by refusing sin, for the respect he bears to God,
though it might bring him never so much pleasure or profit, by his vexation for
any dishonor done to God, by his longing after Gods presence in glory, and by
his constant care to keep Gods commandments. Sixthly, by the gift of prayer:
when a Christian is able in secret, with affection, and persuasion of God as
his best refuge in heaven or earth, to make his daily recourse to God upon all
occasions, Romans 8. 15.

Thus of the first Use.

2. Such as find they have the Holy Ghost should be instructed to carry
themselves as becomes so great an honor done them, and show it especially
three ways. First, by striving to have and keep their souls and bodies
clean from sin, and to make the rooms of their heart as holy as they can
for the entertainment of such a divine guest as the Holy Ghost. What a
business would there be about cleansing and trimming of our houses, if some
great person were to come thither? Secondly, we should show that we believe
those things taught us concerning the Holy Ghost, by seeking to him upon all
occasions, when we find any need in any thing that belongs to any of those
works of the Holy Ghost. But especially we should strive not only to get those
great works of the holy Ghost wrought in our hearts, but also we should
endeavor to show the power of the working of the holy Ghost in us, by those
outward fruits of the holy Ghost: more espicially those nine fruits mentioned,
Gal. 5. 22. it would make a Christian appear to be more excellent than any
man, if he can soundly act those virtues there mentioned, which he may do by
the holy Ghost that is in him. And it were very profitable if men would strive
to act them, and to lay this pattern still before them.

Now the things he should express are;

1. Love: that is, a loving behavior toward the godly, yea, toward all men:
such a behavior as is without hatred, emulations, enuyings, censuring, and the
like works of the flesh.

2. Joy: that is, such a behavior as expresses contentment, and
comfortablenesse, both in our spiritual estate in relation to God, and in our
outward condition in the world.

3. Peace: that is, such a behavior as is quiet from meddling with other men's
business, and is free from discord and contention, or sedition, or heresies,
the works of the flesh mentioned before.

4. Long suffering: that is, such a behavior as can bear with the infirmites
of those with whom he conuerseth, and that is not easily provoked by slight
injuries, but passes by, or pardons many a wrong.

5. Gentleness: which is, when a man is easy to be spoken to in any
business, without sowrenesse, or pride, or frowardness, and does treat with
others in a quiet and humble manner.

6. Goodness: that is, such a behavior as is full of good fruits of mercy,
when a Christian does strive to become as helpful and as profitable as
possible he may to all sorts of people where he lives.

7. Faith: that is, fidelity, when a man is just in his words and promises,
that he may be trusted as safely as if men had his bonds or obligations; and
withal, does detest lying and deceit, and all courses of fraud and guile.

8. Meekness: which consists in the suppressing of anger, and inward
perturbations which arise from frowardness, and coffeehouse: when a man can
show himself to be able to bear crosses or prouocations, without passion or
worldly distempers.

9. Temperance: which restraines our cares and proiects, and excess in minding
or seeking the honors, riches, or pleasures of life, and makes use soberly of
diet, apparel, recreations, and the things we do possess.

Thus of the second use.

Thirdly, all men should hence learn to make very high account of all true
Christians, and to have them in very high honor, because they have the holy
Ghost, and upon them he has wrought all those wonderful works spoken of
before. They should be used as the Princes of God in all places where they
come. Pharaoh, when he would prefer Joseph, could say, Where could we find
such a man, in whom is the Spirit of the high God, Genesis 41. 38.

Thus of the uses for instruction.

Lastly, this Article should be very comfortable to the godly, and that in many
respects; as first, that God should be pleased to deal so wonderful
gratioufly with them, as to vouchsafe to put his Spirit into them. Secondly,
they may thence gather, that God that has given them his Spirit, will bless
them in many other things besides. If Obed Edoms house was blessed because the
Arc was there, how much more reason have we to hope that God will bless us,
now his Spirit abides with us. Thirdly, it should be a great comfort to a
Christian, against all his fears and doubts, arising from his ignorance or
insufficiency, or infirmities: for by the holy Ghost that is given to him, he
may hence gather, he may do all things in time which God would have him to do.

Lastly, this Article must needs be comfortable, when God has promised to give
the Christian the holy Ghost to be his comforter, and to abide with him for
ever.

The ninth Article.
The holy Catholic Church.
HItherto of the Articles of the Creed that concern God, even all the three
persons in the Trinity. Now follows the second part of the Creed, which
comprehends the Articles that concern the Church of God. Amongst all things
that are in the world, faith admires only God and the Church. The Church (I
say) as next to God in glory and true honor. Now the Articles concerning the
Church, concern either the properties or the privileges of the Church. The
properties of the Church are two, viz. that she is holy, and Catholic: the
privileges of the Church are such ^s she enioyes in this life, or such as she
shall have in another world. The privileges of the Church in this life are
two, Communion of Saints, and Forgiveness of sins: And in the world to come,
two more, viz. Resurrection of the flesh, and Everlasting life.

First of the properties of the Church.

But before I come to consider of the particulars mentioned, I must first
explicate the Doctrine to be believed concerning the Church in general, and
so I would show, 1. What the Church is. 2. The original of the Church. 3. The
estate of the Church. 4. The marks and notes by which the true Church may be
discerned.


And then the general uses of all.

When I enquire what the Church is, I mean, the true Church, for the false
Church is no Church properly, as an ill Gramarian is no Gramarian properly.

Now to find out what the Church is, we must first consider of the acceptance
of the word, and then of the definition of the thing it self.

The word Ecclesia was a word in use among the Athenians, and came of the word
(...), and signified an assembly of Citizens, that were called out from the
multitude a^ it were by name, or in their ranks by the voice of the public
Crier, to hear some speech or sentence of the Senate and was thence borrowed
by the Apostles for their purposes, by way of similitude: The Church or
assembly of Gods people, being a company that came together, not by chance, or
without order, but by the voice of Gods Ministers, as it were Criers, called
out of the Kingdom of Satan, to hear the doctrine of the Gospel revealed
from heaven. The common people in common speech, call the places set apart for
the exercises of Religion, Churches. But so it is not taken here. In Scripture
the word has diverse acceptations, for sometimes it signified, the assembly of
the men of the world for their own businesses; and so that tumultuous Assembly
of the Ephesians was called a Church, Act. 20. 17. Sometime it signified the
Assembly of the enemies of Gods people, Psalm. 26. 5. this was the malignant
Church. Sometimes it signified the meeting of a few Christians in a family, for
religious private duties, so there were Churches in godly men's houses, Romans 16.
5. Sometimes it signified a company of men in one City or Province, that did
outwardly profess the true religion, 1 Cor. 11. 18. 22. and so usually in the
writings of Divines, the company throughout the world so professing, is called
the visible Church: and in this sense there may be hypocrites and scandalous
Christians in the Church as well as godly men, as the Parable of the Tares and
the Draw-net show. But so it is not taken in the Creed, for besides that this
Church is holy, as these wicked are not, and enjoys remission of sins which
they do not, besides this, I say, we are said in the Creed to believe this
Church to be, which argues, that in it self it is invisible and known to God,
and cannot be discerned by outward senses in the essential things of it.
Sometimes by the Church is meant the public Officers in the Church, that have
power of government and censure, as Matthew. 18. 17. but in the strictest sense,
by the Church in the new Testament is signified the number of Gods Elect only,
considered as they are effectually called by the Gospel, and do cleave unto
Christ their head by a true and lively faith.

Thus of the Etimologie of the word. The definition of the Church follows.

The Church here meant in the Creed, is a company of men dwelling every where,
effectually called, ordinarily by the voice of Gods Criers, from the misery and
profaneness of the world, to the supernatural dignity of Gods children, being
united unto Christ as their head by Faith, and among then selves by love as
fellow members.

In these words the general nature of the Church is to be considered, and
then the special difference of the Church from all other companies or
professions, or assemblies of men.

The general nature is expressed in these words. A company of men dwelling
every where: where diverse things are to be noted.

1. That it is a company, not one man.

2. That it is of men as the material cause, not of other creatures, for none
but reasonable creatures are capable of Gods Image, and so none but they can
make a Church: and among reasonable creatures, I exclude Angels, though they
had a kind of calling to that excellent estate they are in, yet the Scripture
speaks so sparingly of it, that we cannot tell how to define it, and therefore
I meddle not with it: and besides, the Church is here considered as it is
purchased by the blood of Christ, which Angels were not, neither are they tied
to the ministry of the Word, as the Church in her calling is.

3. I add, dwelling every where, to note that I define the Church, that is
Catholic, as the Creed calls it: which terms in the most evident sense agree
to the Church now under the Gospel, since the partition wall between Jews and
Gentiles was broken down: and yet in some sense it may agree to the Church
from the beginining: for even in the time of the Jewish Church, the Nations
were not simply barred from fellowship with the Jews; and therefore we read of
three sorts of people that belonged to the Jewish Church, to wit, the Jews
themselves and Proselites, that is Gentiles that professed the Jewish religion,
and were circumcised, and withal religious or devout men, that were Gentiles
converted to the Jewish religion, but were not circumcised, such as were
Cornelius, and diverse others.

The special nature of the Church, in which it differs from all other
companies of men, is expressed in the other words of the definition, and so they
show us three things;

1. The efficient cause of the Church, viz. her calling by the voice of Gods
Crier.

2. The terms from which, and to which she is called: in the middle words of
the definition.

3. The fo^me of the Church, which consists in her union with Christ, and
communion with her self among the members of that company: For the first, when
I say, she is called ordinarily by the voice of Gods Cryers, I intimate diverse
things thereby:

1. That the Preachers of the Gospel are as public Criers to call men, to
hear what God has to say to them, like those Cryers in Athens, of whom I
spoke before, Matthew. 3. Esaias 48. 1.

2. That I consider not of the Church as she is elect of God, till she be
called, because many of the Elect for a great part of their lives may lie
scattered about, and hidden in the heaps of the men of this world.

3. That the preaching of the Gospel is the means to make men actually of the
Church, and members of Christ, and so to have right to salvation: The Gospel
is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 16. and 10. 14.

4. I add, effectually called, to exclude Hypocrites and carnal men that
enjoy the means, but obey it not, and to include the work of the Holy Ghost,
making the hearts of the Elect to answer to Gods call, and obey his voice: for
by the Spirit God speaks also internally to their hearts.

5. I add, the Word ordinarily, to show that though God is pleased to bind
men to the use of the means, yet he himself is not tied, but can work
without the means: and so it may give us occasion to inform our selves in
diverse cases: as first, in the case of such, as live in places where the means
is not, nor can be had. It is possible that God extraordinarily may work
conversion in some men in such places; which was the case of Cornelius living
in Caesarea, Act. 10. Secondly, in the case of Infants, who do belong to the
Church by virtue of Gods Covenant, though they live not to receive conversion
by the preaching of the Gospel; for Christ says of Infants, Theirs is the
kingdom of God. Thirdly, in the case of such as live in Paganish and
idolatrous places, as in the times of the darkness of Popery, or in the case,
where men are by violence carried away and brought up in idolatrous places; God
may have a remnant amongst them, that belong to his election, and are in time
truly called; as in the days of Elias, in the kingdom of the ten Tribes under
the reign of Ahab. Fourthly, in the case of such as are borne deaf, or become
so before they are capable of receiving the Gospel, they being borne of godly
parents, may belong to the Church as Infants do: I say, God that knows his
own from eternity, may even amongst them, by the supply of the Spirit, make
members of the Church. Besides, seeing the Holy Ghost does not need special
instruments to work withal; sometimes he may work that by the eyes of the
deaf, which he does by the ears of others; for by their eyes he may power in
an eternal light into their minds. Lastly, the case of such as are destitute
of understanding by nature, or disease, is very hard, because they want reason,
and so are incapable of faith: and if we say, that the Holy Ghost may infuse an
inward light, then it is clear they cease to be fools or madmen: In this
case therefore we must religiously and charitably suspend, and leave Gods work
to himself.

The terms from which, and to which, the Church is called, follow in these
words, from the profaneness of the world, to enjoy the supernatural dignity
of the children of God. The term from which, Terminus a quo, is from the
profaneness of the world; in which words, three things may be noted. First,
that the true members of the Church were in their estate of Nature as profane
as the people of the world, living in sin, and being the children of wrath as
well as others: which show the exceeding riches of Gods grace, and Christ's love
to them, that could respect them, being so vile and sinful. Secondly, that our
first parents before the fall, could not properly be said to be the Church;
because they neither were called from an estate of corruption, nor did they
then need Christ, nor had that faith in Christ, being perfect by creation, and
so not wanting a Savior; whereas the Church is properly the Spouse of Christ.
Thirdly, by these words all men in visible Churches may try themselves, for
only they that are converted from profaneness are true members of the Church;
and so Hypocrites are excluded, and open profane persons, and such as are only
changed in their opinions, and not in their practice, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Terminus ad
quem, or the term to which they are called, is to the supernatural dignity of
the sons of God, which words express the grace of Adoption, which comprehends
the substance of all that felicity we have from God in Christ after calling,
Ephesians. 1. 4. but of the privileges of the Church afterward.

The last words of the definition describes the form of the Church, the
essential inward form, which is that union with Christ by faith: they are
really members of the Church, that are united to Christ, as their head by
faith: without this faith it is impossible to please God; and faith comprehends
all that, which essentially God requires of us to justification and adoption,
Ioh. 3. 16. I add their union one with another by love, because brotherly love
is an inseparable fruit of faith, for faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and is
such a Characteristicall sign of a true member of the Church, that the Apostle
says, thereby we know we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. and the same Apostle seems to make Love a kind of
form of the true Christian, Ephesians. 1. 4.

Thus of the definition of the Church.

The original of the Church follows next to be considered, and so I consider
of the Church, as she is the Church, not as these men were in their estate of
Nature, for so her father was an Amorite, and her mother an Hittite, in as much
as she was sinfully borne, she was basely borne: but that company that I call
the Church, were not the Church, when they were in that estate of Nature. The
Church then as she is the Spouse of Christ, has many things in her original
that are very glorious, and much to be admired: And that if we consider her
original, in respect of decree, and in respect of her birth, and in respect of
her preservation: First, her Original in respect of decree is wonderful,
because she is upon record from everlasting, the names of all the members of
the Church are particularly written in the book of life. God made an act for
her being and advancement, before she was, he provided for her from
everlasting, and chose her in his everlasting grace and love; and this is her
original before time. In time she was in such bondage and misery, that she
must of necessity be redeemed and purchased out of that vile condition: and
this purchase is the more wonderful, if we consider either the person by whom,
or the price by which. The Person that redeemed her, was no less than the Son
of God; and the price he paid, was his own blood, Acts 20. 28. Her original
in respect of her Birth, is also very strange and wonderful: For first, she is
borne of God, not of the bloods of men, nor of the will of man, but as of God
by regeneration, fearfully and wonderfully made. The world never heard of two
stranger things, than the generation of Christ, and the regeneration of the
Church; of Christ, as the Son of God; of the Church, as it were the daughter of
God. Secondly, she is borne of immortal seed, she is so endued with life,
that she can never die, but live as long as God himself, 1 Pet. 1. 24. And
that seed is the word of God preached to her, which makes her all new, God
having chosen a company of men of purpose, and separated them by a holy calling
to this Ministration, even to sow this seed of immortality and eternal life
in men's minds. Thirdly, in her birth, by the mighty working of the Holy
Ghost, she is qualified with supernatural gifts, such as no other of the
children of men can attain unto; such as are faith, and all the gifts of
holiness and saving grace. Fourthly, the original of her preservation also is
as wonderful: for her preservation, she has from Christ her head, that does
that for the Church which any natural head can do for the body: This company
of men can no more subsist without a head, than the natural or political body
can. It was a law of the Creator, that all bodies should live by their heads,
in respect of government, nourishment, and dependence: Now the Church has
great cause to rejoice in her Head: because, first, he is a perpetual Head
that lives in all ages to govern and nourish the Church, spiritual life being
kept afoot in every age from the beginning of the world till now: If the Church
had a new Head in every age, then must she die as often as her Head dies, and
be made alive as often as she has a new Head: Her Head therefore is always
one and the same.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Index, of the most material points that are handled in the
explanation of the CREED.
GEntle Reader, whereas this Index does point to the several Folio's, wherein
upon perusal thou shall find some errors, (viz.) from Folio 64. to 101. Let
me entreat thee to correct with thy pen what has bin mistaken at the Press;
so thou shall make this Index more useful unto thee.

A.
A Bba Father: why Christ gives this Title to God. page. 344 Absence of Christ,
a fearful punishment. page. 527 Sentence of Absolution at the last day. page.
523 Man infected with Actual sins. page. 204 Christ in Adam: how. page. 262
Adversaries of Christ consult. page. 326 Our Affections must be set upon things
above. page. 476 Affections in Christ differ from ours. page. 250 Gods mercy
appears in Afflictions in four things. page. 67 God moderates our Afflictions
four ways. page. 82 Agony of Christ: what caused it. page. 241 It is
comfortable in diverse respects. page. 342 God Almighty in ten respects. page.
1^8 Why Almighty attributed to the Father only. page. 139 Almightines of God
comfortable. page. 143 Christ Amazeth the Jews with the impression of his
divinity for three reasons. page. 348 Angels witnesses of Christ's Ascension.
page. 483 Creating of Angels a glorious work. page. 156 Their Titles. Ibid.
Their Substance. page. 157 Their Place. Ibid. Their Number. Ibid. Their manner
of being and working. Ibid. Their knowledge and power. page. 158 Their
Language. Ibid. 4. Questions about Angels answered. page. 159 Angels serve for
many uses. Ibid. A good Angel to every elect: probable. Ibid. No divine
worship due to Angels. page. 160 Gods Anger pacified. page. 443 Justice of Gods
Anger showed toward the godly two ways. page. 81 Anointing of Christ. page.
219 What was shadowed out by it. Ibid. To what Office he was Anointed. page.
220 Christ Anointed to be a Prophet. page. 221 Strange Apparel. page. 213
Apparition of Christ. He appeared forty days after his Resurrection. page. 458
Why he Appeared. page. 459 To whom he appeared. Ibid. He Appeared not to the
chief Priests and people: why. page. 459 He Appeared to his own. page. 460 He
Appeared the day of his Resurrection five times. Ibid. He Appeared to the two
Disciples at Emaus: who they were. page. 461 They know him not, why. page. 461
How Christ vanished out of their sight. page. 462 He Appeared to the Disciples,
the doors being shut: how. page. 463 His Apparition to Thomas. page. 464 He
Appeared to seven of the Disciples who were a fishing. page. 465 His Apparition
to 11. Disciples. p. page. 468 Some of them doubted: how. page. 469
Christ Apprehended: why. page. 350 Christ's Arraignement in the Ecclesiastical
court. page. 350. 358 Arminians confuted. page. 307. 308 Ascension of Christ.
How he is said to Ascend. page. 478 Christ God and man Ascended, how. page. 479
How he Ascended. Ibid. He Ascended visibly. page. 480 He Ascended in a cloud:
why. Ibid. He Ascended forty days after his Resurrection: why no sooner. page.
480 He Ascended from the Mount of Olives: why. page. 481 He Ascended into
Heaven. Ibid. He Ascended above all heavens: how. page. 482 We must know that
Christ Ascended for three reasons. page. 482 He Ascended for diverse euds. page.
483 Difference between the Ascension of Elias and of our Savior. page. 485
Profit that comes to us by Christ's Ascension. Ibid. Christ's Ascension procures
for us a threefold Ascension. Ibid. Christ Ascending leads our enemies captive.
Ibid.
Christ's Assumption of the humane nature. page. 265 Gods Attributes how
co^municable. page. 96 Of Gods three Incommunicable Attributes. page. 97
B.
FAll of Babylon. page. 514 Baptism, Gods broad seal. page. 472 Baptism in
the name of the Trinity. Ibid. Baptism helps not unbelievers. page. 473 How
Baptized in S. Ambrose time. page. 14 Form of Answering at Baptism in the
Primitive Church. page. 17 Baptism not precisely necessary to Salvation. page.
413 Barrabas is chosen: Jesus rejected. page. 371 Beasts subject to man. page.
191 Three things obseruable in Beasts. page. 189 The Scripture teaches us
four things concerning Beasts. page. 190 Gods providence for Beasts, appears
in seven respects. page. 191 Consideration of Beasts must humble us in diverse
things. page. 192 Wicked men likened to Beasts. page. 193 Gods servants must
learn of Beasts page. 194 Beast hurt without the Camp, fore signified Isra^l.
page. 382 How Christ is Begotten. page. 237 How the Father did Beget the Son,
showed by way of negation in seven things. page. 129 Gods Begetting of Christ
informs us of two things. page. 130 A threefold manner of Being of things
page. 120 A two fold Beginning. page. 103 I Believe, the Christians answer all
his life. page. 17 Truly to Believe the Articles, has in it six things. page.
18 Believe above reason. page. 409 Believe in Christ. page. 209 Right Believing
in Christ casts out six things. page. 309 It has in it four things Ibid.
Belief of our salvation in Christ, has in it six things. Ibid. How we must
Believe in Christ. page. 210 Four Rules for the attaining this right Belief.
page. 211 Four motives to this duty. Ibid. Eight benefits that come to us by
Believing in Christ. page. 212 What it is to believe in God. page. 113 Three
sorts of men do not Believe in God. page. 114 Ten things in the manner of
Believing these Articles. page. 19 Christian simplicity in Believing must have
two things in it. page. 21 Questions about Believing answered page. 38 Christ
Betrayed many ways. page. 333 Christ abased at his Birth for three Reasons.
^18 Bishops of Rome oppose Christ's Kingdom. page. 358 What it is to Bless.
page. 479 Christ's Blood shed upon the Cross for seven reasons. page. 391 Body
of man excells all other Bodily creatures in five things. page. 195 Gods
Workmanship to make a Body. Ibid. Christ's Body needs no embalming. page. 441
Why it did not putrify. page. 442 Five Books opened at the last day. page. 521
Not a Bone of Christ broken. page. 428 Creatures in Bondage, how. page. 531
Christ's Burial. He was Buried for seven reasons. page. 434 Place where he was
Buried. page. 435 Christ Buried: by whom. page. 436 By rich men: why. Ibid.
Manner of Christ's Burial. page. 439 He was wrapped in fine linen. page. 440

C.
TWo signs of a Child of God. page. 356 Christ, the signification of it.
page. 218 Christ does two things for us. page. 320 Christ carried from Annas to
Caiphas page. 351 The indignities the Jews offer to Christ. page. 355 Christ
indicted and condemned for three reasons. page. 357 Christ charged with three
things. page. 364 Christ falsely accused. Ibid. Christ a King. page. 365 Christ
stripped of his clothes, why. page. 381 Christ slain from the beginning in
seven respects. page. 426 Christ a sweet Savior. page. 440 Christ suffered
strange indignities and scorns for two reasons. page. 380 Christ lifted up
upon the Cross for three reasons. page. 391 Why Christ did not save himself
from the Cross. page. 394 Christ first humbled, then exalted. page. 302 Christ
did absolutely fulfill the whole Law for three reasons. page. 103 Christ's
conception declared by an Angel, why. page. 259 Christ conceived of the holy
Ghost. page. 260 An Objection answered. Ibid. Two things done by the holy Ghost
in this conception. page. 261 Christ conceived without sin. page. 262 Diverse
Objections answered. Ibid. How Nature proceeds in the conception. page. 263 The
manner of Christ's conception. page. 265 Why Christ was so conceived. page. 266
When the Virgin conceived. Ibid. Effects of Christ's conception. Ibid. Christ's
conception a medicine against original sin. page. 269 Christ Crucified. The
place where he was Crucified. page. 382 Crucified without Jerusalem for four
reasons. page. 382 Christ Carried his Cross for two reasons. page. 384 Christ
Crucified for four reasons page. 387 Christ Crucified becomes a sacrifice.
page. 388 Christ crucified with his hands spread abroad for two reasons. page.
391 Christ lifted up upon the Cross for three reasons. Ibid. Christ crucified
in the midst of thieves for four reasons. page. 392
Christ took a true body. page. 267 Christ's call at the last day. page. 533
Difference of being in Christ. page. 267 Christians like Ezekiels bones. page.
477 Christians resemble sheep in four things. page. 518 Distinction of true
Christians, page. 438 Conjunction between Christ and Christians. page. 526
Christians highly to be esteemed. page. 553 Church. The original of the
Church. page. 429. 561 Church diversely taken in scripture. page. 556 Definition
of it. page. 557 The general nature of it. Ibid. How the Church from the
beginning is called Catholic. page. 558 From what the Church is called. page.
560 To what it is called. page. 561 Members of the Church written in the Book
of life. page. 562 Church borne of God. Ibid. Christ the Head of the Church.
Ibid.
Churchmen most malicious against Christ. page. 358 Computation of the Romans.
page. 440 God communicates himself unto the creature three ways. page. 257
Christ condemned that we might be saved. page. 378 A true Convert cannot abide
sin. page. 406 A true Convert loves Christ better then his old acquaintance.
page. 407 Evil Conscience what it does. page. 347, 377 Cost in Christ's service.
page. 439 Covetousness the cause of Judas sin aggrauated. page. 328 Beware
of Covetousness. page. 331 Covetousness defined. Ibid. Covetous heart not
without the Devil in it. Ibid. Covetousness, four signs of it. page. 332
Covetous care vain in diverse respects. Ibid. Covetousness 4. vile effects of
it. page. 333 Counsel of God cannot be altered. page. 368 Testimony of
Counsels no infallible marks of truth. page. 359 Counsels against Christ as
well as for him. page. 226 Sentence of condemnation at the last day. page. 527
Creation. Creation a work of the whole trinity. page. 145 How all-things were
created. page. 169 Created in six days, why. page. 146 Creation the end of it
Gods glory. page. 147 Gods power manifested in the Creation Ibid. Gods
goodness appears in the Creation. page. 148 Gods wisdom appears in the
Creation. Ib. A curious question about the Creation answered. Ibid. Creation
teaches eight things. page. 149. Give God the glory of our Creation, page.
200. We should answer the end of our Creation. page. 201 Doctrine of the
Creation terrible to wicked men. page. 150 Comfortable to the godly, page.
150,202 Creation of new Heavens. page. 531
Creatures set at liberty at the last day. page. 532 Creatures how they
discern things. page. 59 How God knows them. page. 60 Creed. The Analysis of
the whole Creed. page. 16 What the Creed is. page. 3 Why the Creed is called a
pattern. page. 5 Creed called a little Bible. Ibid. What respect we should
have to this Creed. page. 6 Twelve reasons for it. Ibid. Doctrine of the Creed
Catholic. page. 7 No Science has such a subject as the Creed. page. 6 Creed,
food for all sorts of Christians. page. 9 Creed, the character of the Church.
Ib. Creed, a touchstone to try all religions by. Ibid. How called the Apostles
Creed. page. 11 Creed not collected by the Apostles. Ib. Gathered out of
Apostoticall writings. page. 12 Creed came not in all at once. page. 13 When it
was finished page. 14 Why called the Apostles Creed. Ibid. Diverse Creeds. Ibid.
The Word of God not handled in the Creed, why* page. 41 Christ's active
obedience not mentioned in the Creed, why. page. 303
Customs of the Country to be observed. page. 441 A fearful example for
such as curse. page. 377
D.
DAmned in hell suffer 4. things. page. 530 Dangers of life sustained by Christ
for diverse ends. ^24 Darkness upon the whole earth, how. page. 403 What this
did signify. Ibid. Death of the godly more comfortable then the life of the
wicked. page. 385 Death of Christ. page. 415, 418 eight reasons of it. page.
416 Christ by his Death did abolish the power of death. Ibid. How Christ frees
us from eternal Death seeing he suffered it not. page. 416 Christ's Death
teaches us seven things. page. 417 Whether Christ Dyed in his humanity or
divinity page. 419 The manner how Christ Dyed. page. 420 Death of Christ
painful. Ibid. For whom he Dyed. page. 4^4 When he Dyed. page. 426 The Dead
Body of Christ not forsaken. page. 437 Death not to be feared. page. 417 Christ
Derided for three reasons. page. 393 How God departs from men. page. 99 Christ's
Descension our ascension. page. 431 Devil works strange mischiefs from small
beginnings. page. 330 Devils companions of wicked men. page. 528 Devil policy
to make men suspect Christ's Divinity. page. 238 Devils cannot take us out of
Christ's hand. page. 239 Disciples Fishers of men. page. 466 Disciples
drowsiness. page. 343 Christ preserues his Disciples safe from the Soldiers.
page. 349 Dives message is sent to us. page. 531 What Doctrine is unwholesome.
page. 4 True Doctrine unwholesome, how. Ibid. Dreams offoure sorts. page. 374
Dream of Pilats Wife. page. 375 Dreams how we may give heed to them. Ibid.
E.
AS Eagles we must fly to the dead Carcass. page. 418 Earth trembles at
Christ's death, to signify three things. page. 432 Earth, six things admirable
in the making thereof. page. 182 Seven uses from hence. page. 183 In the Earth
four things admirable. Earthquakes how they come. page. 173 Ecclesiastical
courts corruption, and injustice in them. page. 358 Elect, Gods goodness to
them in four things. page. 68 Enemies, Christ prays for them. page. 422
Essence of God. page. 110 Diverse Essences. Ibid. Eternal, how so called. page.
101 Eternity described by Boethius. Ibid. Eternity of God described and
explaned. page. 102 Difference between eternity and time. page. 102 Eternity of
God proved by Scripture. page. 103 Doctrine of Gods Eternity should teach us
six things. Ibid. Comfortable in five respects. page. 104 Evidence against
wicked men at the last day. page. 522 Exaltation of Christ. page. 452 His
divine nature how Exalted. page. 452 His humane nature how Exalted. page. 453
The benefit that comes to us by Christ's Exaltation. Ibid.
F.
FAith diversely taken. page. 18 Profession of Faith has in it two things.
Ibid. Implicit Faith, a policy of Antichrist page. 19 That we may not be
deceived about a temporary Faith, we must look to three things. page. 22
Effects of Faith differ in the true believer and wicked man, how. Ibid. Paucity
of such as have true Faith appears in six things. page. 24 How far a
temporary Faith goes, and wherein it is sufficient. page. 25 Trial of a
temporary Faith by diverse questions. Ibid. Try whether we be in the Faith or
no. page. 27. Nine things repugnant to Faith. Ib. Some things like Faith which
are not. page. 28 Faith: 5. kinds of it. page. 29 5. Signs of an effectual
Faith. page. 30 10. Effects of Faith. Ibid. Assurance of Faith comfortable.
page. 32 Extraordinary effects of Faith. page. 33 Faith procures admirable
things for our selves. Ibid. For others. page. 34 Faith is our life in diverse
respects, Ibid. A christians Faith opposed in many things. Ibid. Godly men
offend about Faith in eight things. page. 35 Three means to breed Faith. page.
36 Lets of Faith. page. 37 They that have Faith must look to two things. Ibid.
Faith wrought by degrees. page. 39 Four things considered about a weak Faith.
Ibid. Signs of a weak Faith. page. 39 Signs of a true, though weak Faith,
page. 40 Comforts against weakness of Faith, Ibid. Labor for growth in Faith.
Ibid. Ground of Faith the Word of God. page. 41 Concerning this ground we must
resolve of five things. Ibid. Faith of the godly shall never fail. page. 355 A
right Faith in Christ breeds adoration and worship of Christ. page. 469 Faith
and hope not in Christ. page. 254 Faithful rest upon God three ways page. 114
Father. How attributed to God. page. 128 God a Father six ways. Ibid. God the
Father of Christ proved and opened. page. 129 This teaches us three things.
page. 131 It is comfortable in eight particulars, page. 132 God our Father
four ways. page. 133 He is our Father by way of resemblance. page. 133 Faith
looks upon God as Father in Christ. page. 134 Six signs of these who have God
to their Father. Ibid. God is our Father, this teaches us twelve things. page.
135 Acknowledge God as a Father. page. 134 Go unto him in all wants. page. 135
This is comfortable in diverse things. page. 136 God more then an ordinary
Father. page. 137
Want of Fear of God the cause of all disorder 407 Christ laid down
infirmities of the Flesh, but not the Flesh it self. page. 453 Fishing of the
Disciples teach us diverse things. page. 467 Wicked men Foolish. page. 356
Christ Forsaken in two respects. page. 396 Two objections answered. Ibid.
Forsaken by all for sour reasons. page. 350 Fiuerules to be observed in if we
would prosper in the Fruitfulness of these outward things. page. 188 Cost in
Funerals of Saints not unlawful. page. 440 Fowl^s of the air. page. 168 Gods
care for them in Five things. Ibid. What uses they serve for. Ibid. They teach
us three things. page. 169
G.
CHrist chose the Garden to begin his Passion in of purpose. page. 336 He was
buried in a Garden, why. page. 435 He put off his Garments before his
sufferings for seven reasons. page. 389 God. Doctrine concerning God to be
known for five reasons. page. 42 True knowledge of God hindered in six things.
page. 44 We are unable to conceive of God for nine reasons. page. 46 God makes
himself known seven ways. page. 47 God is known diverse ways by several
things. page. 49 God known to man four ways Ibid He is described. Ibid.
Seven rules for the attaining to the knowledge of God. page. 51 Three things to
be avoided in inquirong after the nature of God. page. 53 Many things spoken
of God by way of likeness. page. 55 Gods properties of two ranks. Ibid. Four
things in Gods Nature matchless. Ibid. Life of God admirable in three respects
Ibid. This teaches us eight things. page. 56 Knowledge of God to be admired
in eight respects. page. 57 God the Fountain of all wisdom. page. 58 Gods
knowledge infinite. Ibid. And most perfect, as appears in four things. page.
59 God knows all things at one view. page. 60 Consideration of Gods knowledge
is useful. page. 61 It teaches us diverse things. page. 62 It is comfortable
to the godly. page. 63 God is good in himself two ways page. 63 Gods
goodness showed to man five ways. page. 64 GOD united to man four ways.
Ibid. God delights in his people. page. 65 He procures all good for them. Ibid.
Gods love: five properties of it. Ibid. Gods m^rcy: six praises of it. 66
Effects of his mercy. Ibid. God visits from on high three ways. Ibid. Gods
graciousnesse. page. 67 Gods bounty showed to all though in a different manner.
page. 68 Gods bounty in offering the means of grace which are three. page. 69
Gods patience admirable in four respects. Ibid. Gods patience in great
prouocations. Ibid. Aggrauations of Gods prouocations from the person
provoking. page. 70 God provoked by great evils. Ibid. Manner of Gods
exercising his patience. Ibid. Ends of Gods patience. page. 71 Causes of Gods
patience. Ibid. Knowledge of Gods goodness informs us of four things. Ibid.
No goodness comparable to Gods for five reasons. page. 72 Gods goodness
should compel us to seven duties. Ibid. Gods goodness praised four ways.
page. 73 Gods goodness set out in five things. page. 36 Gods goodness must
force us unto Repentance diverse ways. Ibid. Gods goodness must make us love
him. page. 74 Esteem of Gods love. Ibid. Strive to imitate Gods goodness.
page. 75 Gods goodness comfortable against our sins. Ibid. And in case of
affliction 4. ways. page. 76 It may humble 4. sorts of men. Ibid. God is truth
in himself three ways. page. 77 God is true toward the creatures in his
works. Ibid. And in his words four ways. Ib. Gods truth manifested in two
things. page. 78 Gods truth teaches us seven duties. Ibid. It comforts the
godly. page. 79 It informs us of 3. things. page. 80 Gods righteousness
magnified 6. ways. Ibid. Justice of Gods grace showed in seven things. page.
82 Gods Justice to the godly teaches them three things. Ibid. God is just to
the wicked in two things. page. 83 God most terrible to the wicked, proved by
six arguments. page. 84 Examples of Gods Justice. Ibid. Gods Justice
unavoidable. page. 85, 86. Objections of the wicked against Gods Justice
answered. page. 86 Gods Justice must humble wicked men. page. 88 Yet they must
not despair. Ibid. Nothing will quench Gods wrath but the Blood of Christ.
Ibid. Gods Justice upon wicked men teaches the godly four things. page. 89
Gods glory. Ibid. Gods happiness to be adored for three reasons. page. 90 Gods
glory excels the glory of Kings in four things page. 92 Excellency of Gods
praise set out four ways. Ibid. Gods glory excels in respect of obedience
three ways. page. 92 Man gives glory to God three ways. page. 93 We give
glory to God in our hearts six ways. Ibid. In our words five waits. Ibid. In
our works five ways. page. 94 Five rules for the attaining to the knowledge
of Gods glory. page. 95 Gods glory comfortable in diverse things. page. 96 Gods
infinite greatness what it is. page. 97 What it comprehends. Ibid. Perfection
of Gods nature. Ibid. This serves for diverse uses. Ibid. Gods Omni-presence.
page. 98 Objections against it answered. page. 99 How God returns to the
godly. Ibid. Gods Omni-presence serves for diverse uses. page. 99 Gods
immutability. page. 105 How God is immutable. Ibid. In what respects he is
immutable. Ibid. Objections against Gods immutability answered. page. 106 Gods
immutabilty may serve to humble men. page. 108 It teaches three things. page.
109 It is comfortable in four respects. Ibid. God is a Spirit, it teaches
five things. page. 110 God is one. Ibid. How he is one. page. 111 Six uses of
Gods unity. page. 112 Gods promises must be relied upon for six reasons. page.
113 What things God cannot do. page. 140 Gods omnipotency teaches us ten
duties. page. 140 God rested upon in all dangers. page. 141 We sin against
Gods power six ways. page. 142
Mystery of godliness. page. 483 Six privileges of the godly. page. 337
Golgotha, why so called. page. 683 Christ suffered here for three reasons.
Ibid. Ghost, what it signifies. page. 536 A full possession of glory at the
last day. page. 524 A sign of grace to think honorably of Gods Servants.
page. 408 Graves open. page. 432 Christ in the Grave till the third day. page.
441 Why three days. page. 442
H.
Our Hearts must be cleansed. page. 551 Hades, what it signifies. page. 446
Wicked hate the godly for their goodness. page. 394 Hear Christ. page. 224,
239 Heaven not had for merits. page. 413, 525 Elect in Heaven possessed of
four incomparable benefits. page. 529 Our conversation must be in Heaven.
page. 488 What is meant by Heaven. page. 151 It consists of two parts. Ibid. Of
that Heaven where God is. The names given unto it. page. 152 Substance of it.
Ibid. Glory of Heaven admirable. page. 153 Three questions about this Heaven
answered. page. 154 Consideration of this Heaven should work in us three
things. page. 155 Manifest our desire after Heaven by seven things. Ibid.
Second Heaven, called the Firmament. God the maker of them. page. 165 His
praise magnified for this in five things. Ibid. Strange constitution and nature
of those Heavens. Ibid. End why they were made. page. 166 Hosts that people the
Heavens praised for four things. Ibid. This teaches us 4. things. Ibid It is
comfortable in diverse respects. page. 167
Christ's soul went not locally to Hell. page. 413 Descension into Hell. page.
444 These words not in the most ancient Creeds. Ibid. Yet have been received
for many ages. Ibid. Diverse acceptions of the word Hell in the Original. page.
445 How Christ may be said to descend into Hell. Ibid. He may be said to
descend in respect of the whole man in four respects. page. 445 Christ
descention an Epitome of all his ^assion. page. 448 Christ in his body
descended into Hell or the grave. Ibid. He bore hellish sorrows. page. 449
Christ would not work miracles before Herod, why. page. 366 Herod clothes
Christ in a white Robe: what it signifies. page. 370 Heretics called Patri
Passiani. page. 305 Disciples receive the Holy Ghost. page. 463 What it is to
believe in the Holy Ghost. page. 537 Holy Ghost is God. Ibid. Holy Ghost: his
nature. page. 538 Operations of the Holy Ghost. Ibid. 7. Operations common to
all men. page. 539 Operations of the Holy Ghost in the Elect. page. 541
Infusion of divine gifts, a work of the Holy Ghost. page. 542 Holy Ghost makes
a man resemble God. page. 543 Holy Ghost our Comforter. page. 544 Men sin
against the Holy Ghost diverse ways. page. 545 The sin against the Holy Ghost
described. page. 546 How it is unpardonable. page. 547 Forerunners of this
sin. page. 549 Signs of the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost. page. 550 Fruits
of the Holy Ghost. page. 552 Inhabitation of the Holy Ghost comfortable. page.
553 Care of a Holy life. page. 488 Christ's Humanity glorified, not deified.
page. 463 An ill Husband may make others suffer for their faults. page. 376 It
is hateful to be an Hypocrite. page. 365
I.
I Dols are false Gods. page. 165 Christ suffered at Jerusalem. page. 325 He
was buried near to Jerusalem for two causes. page. 435 Jesus, whence this word
comes. page. 214 Why Christ was called Jesus. page. 215 The word Jesus is a
short Gospel. page. 216 That Jesus may be our Savior, we must do three
things. Ibid. The saved by Jesus, must show it in seven things, page. 217
Diverse men know not Jesus. Ibid. Calling of the Jews. page. 414 Christ
suffered Ignominy and disgrace in three things. page. 323 He bore this for
four reasons. Ibid. Ignorance no plea. page. 488 Immutability of God: See God.
Gift of Illumination. page. 540 Humility of Christ's Incarnation. page. 318 He
sustained Infirmities of all sorts for four reasons. page. 322 Christ's
Innocence. page. 37^. 440 God can give testimony to the Innocence of his.
page. 373 Insufficient Ministers page. 487 Christ's Intercession shadowed out in
the Law. page. 484 Incarnation of Christ. page. 248 How one Person is
Incarnate, and not the other. Ibid What Christ assumed in his Incarnation.
page. 249 When he was Incarnate. page. 250 Why Christ was Incarnate. page. 251
Gods glory shines in Christ's Incarnation. page. 257 Christ makes a threefold
Intercession for us. page. 248 His Incarnation teaches us diverse things. page.
258 It is comfortable to the godly* Ibid. Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation
terrible. page. 259 Christ like us in all Infirmities. page. 258 Day of
Judgment shall be in the end of the w^rld. page. 505 Why it is deferred so
long. Ibid. The precise time of this Judgment unknown, and why. page. 506
Christ did not know the day and hour of it, how it is meant. page. 507 Place
where the Judgment shall be. Ibid. Who shall be Judged. page. 508 Signs of
Christ's coming to Judgment. page. 513 Events no signs. page. 112 Corruption
of manners, a sign of Christ's coming to Judgment, how page. 514 Preparation
of the Judge to Judgment, has in it four things. page. 416 Preparation of
the Persons' Judged, has in it four things. Ibid. The world summoned to
Judgment. Ibid. Wicked men shall be Judged according to their works. page.
519 Diverse objections answered. Ibid. Infants how Judged. page. 520 By what
lawmen shall be Judged. ^^0 Doctrine of the last Judgment, terrible to the
wicked. page. 532 Comfortable to the godly. page. 534 Judas his treason, six
things obseruable in it. page. 327 Why it was necessary that Judas should
betray Christ. page. 329 Judas sin Informs us of diverse things. Ibid. Judas
meant not to have Christ killed, probable. page. 330 Good Judges must learn
expedition. page. 360 Christ Judged in a polyticall court, for four reasons.
page. 362 Churchmen must abide the Judgment of lay Judges. page. 363 Why
Christ Judged by Pilate. page. 362 Judges no accusers. page. 363 Judges must
have clean hands. page. 377 Needful to understand Christ's coming to
Judgment. page. 496 Seven properties of this Judgment. Ib. Particular
Judgment. page. 498 Last Judgment manifest. Ibid. It is sudden. Ibid. Christ's
Judgment a righteous Judgment. page. 499 It is an eternal Judgment, how.
page. 500 Christ shall be the Judge. page. 501 This is comfortable to the
godly. Ibid. Terrible unto the wicked. page. 502 How Saints and Apostles Judge
the world. page. 501 Whence Christ shall come to Judgment. page. 502 When the
day of Judgment shall be, diverse opinions. Ibid. Memorial of the Just
blessed. page. 440 Justice of God: See God.
K.
Kingdom of Christ. page. 229 Kingdom of Christ not of this world. page. 365
Christ clothed in habit of a King in way of scorn. page. 379 Christ's Kingdom
scorned. page. 380 Jesus that King by an excellency. page. 400 Kingdom of
Christ delivered to God. page. 532. 490 That Christ is a King, appears by
seven things. page. 229 Christ excells all other Kings in thirteen things.
page. 230 Laws of Christ's Kingdom. page. 232 Christ our King what we learn
from hence. page. 234 Diverse kinds of Knowledge in Christ. page. 253 Knowledge
of God: See God.
L.
PVrge out the old Leaven. page. 310 Christ's Legacy. page. 422 Lightnings Gods
arrows. page. 171 Live not to our selves. page. 417 Jews cast Lots upon
Christ's garments for five reasons. page. 393 Believe that Jesus is our Lord.
page. 240 Christ is our Lord by a fiuefold right. page. 241 Excellency of
Christ's Lordship* in six respects. page. 241 This teaches us diverse things.
page. 243 Seven Rules for the serving of this Lord. page. 244 Diverse uses of
this point. page. 245 A threefold act in Love. page. 64
M.
OBey Magistrates in the Lord. page. 243 Malice in the wicked, cruel. page.
327, 372 Man the Epitome of all Gods works. page. 194 Man miserable in respect
of the evil of punishment diverse ways. page. 205 Christ the Son of Man. page.
268 Man has eight prerogatives above the creatures. page. 199 Notorious
Malefactors may repent and be saved. page. 405 Christ appeared to Mary
Magdalene. page. 460 Christ Manifested three ways. page. 270 Whether Mary may
be called the Mother of Christ. page. 267 Matter of Christ's Body. page. 261 The
sanctification of that Matter. Ibid. God not tied to the use of Means, in what
cases. page. 559 Religion is vain without Mercy. page. 528 How Mercy better
then piety. page. 526 Ministers corrupt. page. 329 How Ministers betray Christ.
page. 333 Qualifying of Ministers. page. 539 Public Miseries to be bewailed.
page. 385 Christ's care for his Mother. page. 421 He calls her woman. Ibid.
Mortality and Immortality in the same person. page. 256 Merit of works
confuted. page. 487 Meteors in the air. page. 169 Fiery Meteors. page. 170
Watery Meteors. page. 174 What use God puts them to. Ibid.
N.
Christ's Nativity. HE was Borne three ways. page. 269 Bethlem the place of his
Nativity. page. 270 Time of his Nativity. Ibid. Christ borne poor, why. page.
271 Borne of a Virgin, why. Ibid. Christ a first borne, how. page. 272 Signs
about the time of his Nativity. page. 272 Three things have relation to Christ's
Nativity. page. 269 Diverse effects of Christ's Nativity. page. 271
Son of God took the Nature of Man. page. 248 He took it into union with his
divine Nature. page. 258 Man's estate by Nature has need of mending. page. 205
No work of Nature to believe in Christ. page. 207 Christ fastened to the Cross
with Nails for four reasons. page. 390 To destroy Niniuey, a conditional
will in God. page. 108
O.
Christ's Obedi n^e to his Father in death. page. 421 Avoid Occasions that leads
to sin page. 353 Christ's threefold Office. page. 226 Original sin. page.
204 A threefold Opposition. page. 120
P.
PApists sin against Christ's prophecy. page. 226 A twofold Paradise. page. 411
Paradise a Type of the glory of heaven page. 412 Our life a continual
Passover. page. 310 Christ the true Passover. page. 428 Why Christ suffered
at the Passover. page. 325 How Passion is in God. page. 107 Passions of two
sorts. Ibid. Christ's primitive Passion. page. 315 Extended to both Natures.
Ibid. Christ prepared himself for his Passion in five things. page. 3^5
Christ's speech before his Passion. Ibid. Patience of God: See God. The Patience
of Christ toward Judas. page. 328 Learn Patience. page. 450. 461 Perseverance
a work of the spirit page. 544. 492 How Perturbations are in Christ. page. 342
Peter's d^niall. page. 351 Four degrees of his fall. page. 351. 352 Manner of
his fall. page. 353 Peter's fall teaches us diverse things. page. 353 His
example no warrant to sin. page. 354 Persecutors are Atheists. page. 394 The
wonder of Christ's Person. page. 256 A Person, what it is. page. 118 Fourethings
common to each Person in the Trinity. Ibid. Each Person is the true God, as
appe^res in three things. Ibid. Three Persons are one in another. page. 119
Persons in the Trinity differ from the Essence, how to be understood page. 112
Persons differ one from another four ways. page. 121 Priority of Persons, how
to be understood. Ibid. Persons differs in operations, how to be understood.
page. 122 A Person in Trinity differs from a Person among men. page. 424
Christ's Piety manifested in his death, page. 421 Pilate uses Christ with more
respect then the Priests. page. 362 Pilate examines Christ page. 364 Pilate
uses four policies to save Christ. page. 368 Pilate in sending Christ to
Herod dealt politickly though unjustly. Ibid. Pilates wife declares Christ's
Innocence. page. 373 Christ conuerts Pilates wife, whilst he is ready to
condemn him. page. 374 That she was truly converted, is probable. Ibid.
Pilate declares Christ's Innocence by washing of his hands. page. 376 Whence
that ceremony was brought. page. 377 Two causes why Pilate would not deliver
Jesus. Ibid. Which are strong motives to injustice. page. 378 When Pilate
condemned Christ, God condemned sin. Ibid. Pilate consents to Christ's
burial, for two reasons. page. 438 Poor men may speed in great suites, page.
411 Poor men may not repine at their distresses. page. 164 Potion given to
Christ, and why, and what it was. page. 387 Two things signified by it. Ibid.
Christ endured poverty for diverse reasons. page. 321 This teaches us 4.
things. Ibid. All Power was given to Christ at his resurrection, how to be
understood. page. 470 Christ's Power declared to the Apostles for diverse ends.
page. 471 Christ's Prayer. Six things obseruable in it. page. 337 He Prays for
six things for us. page. 338 He urges his Petitions with four reasons. Ibid.
Christ's Prayer for himself. page. 338 He chooses three of his Disciples to be
with him, for two reasons page. 340 Christ's Prayer for himself without sin,
how. page. 344 Christ's Prayer was heard, yet he not delivered. page. 346
Preachers Public cryers. page. 559 Two ways of Preaching. page. 1 Priests
and Scribes most malicious against Christ. page. 326 The causes of it. Ibid.
Highpriests Office twofold. page. 337 Christ's Priest of the New Testament.
page. 388 Christ's Priesthood. page. 227 Difference between the Priest of the
Law and Christ. Ibid Parts of Christ's Priesthood. Ibid. Christ's Priesthood
comfortable in diverse respects. page. 228 Benefits we obtain by Christ's
Priesthood. Ibid. The Priests more senseless then Pagans. page. 433 A Prisoner
delivered at the Passover, the occasion of it. page. 371 Preferment by Christ.
page. 454 Man produced four ways. page. 272 Production of Christ's body. page.
261 Christ Prophecies in the Ministry of his servants. page. 221 Esteem of
Prophesying. page. 223 Communication of Proprieties. page. 252 Strange
Punishments to workers of iniquity. page. 385 No Purgatory for souls. page.
412
R.
Two things noted bout the Rainebow. page. 177 What need we have of a
Redeemer. page. 204 Our Redeemer must be the Son of God for diverse Reasons.
page. 237 Redemption gives no liberty to sin. page. 401 Christ had a Reed put
into his hand, why? page. 381 Religion has small intertainment amongst
voluptuous great ones. page. 370 Wicked men are easily agreed when there is
opposition against Religion. page. 370 Heads of Religion handled two ways.
page. 2 Christ Remembers us in heaven. page. 410 He Remembers those only in
heaven, that remember him upon earth. Ibid. A sign of a graceless heart, not
to Repent when we are under the Rod. page. 407 Christ's Resurrection proved.
page. 455 When Christ Rose again. page. 455 Why not till the third day. page.
456 Christ Rose again the same day the world was created. Ibid. He Rose again
with an earthquake to signify four things. page. 457 He Rose again for five
reasons. Ibid. Christ's Resurrection assures us of our Justification. page. 474
Five fruits of Christ's Resurrection. page. 473 A twofold Resurrection in us.
page. 474 Christ's Resurrection warrants our perseverance. page. 474 Christ's
Resurrection, a proof of his divinity. page. 475 Rise to newness of life.
Ibid Christ's Resurrection comfortable in four respects. page. 476 What is
necessary to true Repentance. page. 354 Reprobation of the wicked at the last
day. page. 527 Restraining grace. page. 540 Rich men must honor Christ. page.
437 Right hand of God, how taken. page. 489 Rocks rend. page. 432 Amongst the
Romans fugitive servants were beaten with Rods. Gods Justice in sending the
Romans to destroy the Jews.
S.
CHrist Rested in the grave on the Sabbath day, why. page. 442 Sabbath reckoned
from morning to morning. page. 463 Incroach not upon the Sabbath day. page. 439
Burials not so convenient on the Sabbath day. Ibid. Christ's Sacrifice a
propitiatory Sacrifice. page. 388 Fruit of this Sacrifice. Ibid. This Sacrifice
continues for ever. page. 386 That we may receive benefit by this Sacrifice,
we must do three things. Ibid. Christ's Sacrifice excells cerimoniall
Sacrifices. page. 227 What Sacrifices we must offer up. page. 229 Rest upon
Christ alone for Salvation. page. 409 In things done for our Salvation,
consider four things. page. 255 Gods glory in contriuing away for our
Salvation. page. 257 Sanctification, a work of the Spirit. page. 543 How it is
wrought. page. 544 No Satisfaction but Christ's. page. 313 Burden of
Satisfaction only upon him page. 343 Christ a Savior. page. 215. 399 What
Christ requires in his Scholars. page. 224 Christ scourged for four reasons.
page. 372 Sea. What it is. page. 178 Original of it. Ibid. Wonder of Gods
power in placing the Sea. page. 178 What use it serves for. page. 179 Gods
workmanship about the Sea teaches us diverse things. page. 180 It is
comfortable in three respects. page. 181
Prophets and Apostls course in their Sermons. page. 2 Servant like their
masters true in courts. page. 359 A stone rolled to the Mouth of Christ's
Sepulcher, why. page. 44 Christ's goodness to his Servants. page. 242 Christ's
Side peirced for two reasons. page. 429 Water and blood comes forth of his
Side, which is miraculous. page. 429 And Mystical. page. 430 Out of his Side
came a Fountain for sin. page. 431 Christ was silent being accused for seven
reasons. page. 362 Christ Silent before Herod, why. page. 369 Simon carried
Christ's Cross, it signifies diverse things. page. 384 Sins must be like a dead
body in four things. page. 443 Sin punished with eternal punishments why.
page. 500 Sins remitted and retained: how. page. 463 Sitting, what it
signifies. page. 489 Christ's Sessio at the right hand of God is comfortable in
seven respects. page. 492 Christ's Soul how produced. page. 263 Excellency of
man's Soul above other creatures appears in seven things page. 197 Soul of
man made in the Image of God. page. 197 Soul immortal. page. 198 What the
Soul works in the body Ibid. Soul resembles God in the Creation. Ibid.
Condition of our Souls in death. page. 449 Soul of Christ in his death
endured a privation of what it had before. Ibid Souls of the righteous cry
under the Alter. Ibid. Our greatest care must be for our souls. page. 422
Christ the Son of God. page. 335 God has many Sons. page. 336 Where the
Spirit is there is liberty. page. 541 Spirit quenched by two sorts of men.
page. 546 Happiness of Christ's subjects. page. 233 Christ's subjects must do
seven things. page. 234 Sufferings of Christ. Suffering attributed to the
divine nature in respect of personal union. page. 305 Christ's Sufferings full
of wonder and amazement. Ibid. They teach us six things. Ibid. He suffered not
for all, proved against the Arminians. page. 307 He Suffered from all sorts of
enemies. Ibid. To teach us three things. Ibid. Who have part in Christ's
Sufferings. page. 308 Christ's Sufferings a matchless pattern of his love.
page. 309 Just Suffers for the unjust. Ibid. Seven reasons why he suffered.
page. 310 Scriptures fulfilled in his Sufferings. Ibid. His sufferings teach us
patience. page. 311 Two objections against his Sufferings answered. page. 312
Difference between Christ's Sufferings and Martyrs. page. 313 End of Christ's
Sufferings teach us diverse things. Ibid. Benefit of his Sufferings appears in
seven things. page. 314 He suffered by way of Imputation. page. 316 He
Suffered from his conception to his resurrection. page. 317 What he Suffered
from his Baptism to his last Supper. page. 320 Where he Suffered. page. 325
When he Suffered. Ibid. He Suffered Voluntarily. page. 326, 348, 421 He
Suffered mean usage, why. page. 356 Christ suffers two things from Herod,
page. 370 Christ's Sufferings should make us afraid of sin. page. 397
We should Suffer any thing for Christ's sake. page. 417 Superscription over
Christ's Head. page. 399 Pilates meaning in it. Ibid. God by this gives
testimony to his Son. Ibid. Superscription written in three Languages. page.
402 Deriuation of Symbolum, with signification thereof.
T.
ALL men need be Taught. page. 471 Tears have power over Christ. page. 385
Christ Teaches diverse ways. page. 221 Excellency of Christ's manner of
Teaching. page. 222 Christ Tempted for diverse reasons. page. 320 Christ's
Temptation teaches us five things. page. 321 Christ dwells not in Temples made
with hands. page. 243 Thief converted. page. 404 Abuse not his example to
procrastination. page. 405 Three fruits of his conversion. page. 406 Thiefes
confession. page. 408 Thiefes prayer has in it three things obseruable. page.
409 Christ's answer to the Thief. page. 411 How the Thief understood what was
meant by Paradise. Ibid. Profitable to teach the people the whole body of
Theology. page. 2 Thomas his unbelief. page. 464 Thomas his confession. page.
465 Christ crowned with Thorns. page. 381 Thankfulness to God for the
blessings of Heaven. page. 176 Thunder and lightning. page. 170 Times and
seasons left to God. page. 427 Worldfull of Treachery. page. 334 Christ's
apparition to his Disciples, the doors being shut, no proof for
Transubstantiation. page. 462 Truth of God: See God. Christ bears witness to
the Truth. page. 365 Truth will prevail. Ibid. Constancy for the Truth. page.
366 Christ's subjects are of the Truth. Ibid. Christ fastened to a Tree for
three reasons. page. 390 Doctrine of the Trinity. page. 115 Proofs of the
Trinity. page. 116 In handling the Trinity we must be wise to sobriety. page.
117 Trinity, Essence, Persons, all brought in in the Primitive Church. page.
123 Eleven objections against the Trinity answered. page. 124 Doctrine of the
Trinity useful. page. 126 We must speak of the Trinity in unity. page. 127
Unsound speeches of the Trinity. Ibid. What Heretics have assaulted it. Ib.
V.
Original of vegetable creatures. page. 185 Their variety and use. page. 186
Veil of the Temple rent. page. 413 What it was. Ibid. What it signified. page.
414 Vbiquitaries confuted. page. 502 They gave Christ Vinegar to drink for
three reasons. page. 398 Virgin Mary not conceived without sin. page. 265
Virgin ouer-shadowed. page. 265 Christ took his Body of a Virgin. page. 267
Woeful estate of unbelievers. page. 35, 240. Christ vpbraided his Disciples for
unbelief, why. page. 470 Unity of God: See God.
W.
GOds dearest servants exposed to outward Wants. page. 466 Great Wants
fore-runne extraordinary supplies. Ibid. Christ speaks to Women page. 285
Comfort for Women in Childbearing. page. 269 Women chief witnesses of Christ's
death. page. 419 What wholesome words are. page. 3 Wicked men incorrigible.
page. 348 Wicked desire Christ's miracles, not his Word. page. 369 Wicked men of
more account then godly. page. 371 Wicked men within the Church may be as vile
as they are without. page. 376 Wicked men are impatient under Gods hand. page.
386 Wicked men are like a dry Tree. Ibid. Wicked men in a woeful case. page.
397 Wicked men how condemned already. page. 509 Wicked men are Goats. page. 418
Wicked men are cursed creatures. page. 527 Wicked men forget their sins. page.
528 Wicked men taste the Word of God without digestion. page. 540 Difference
between godly and wicked men in their desire after Christ. page. 369 Great
World a little Garden. page. 161 It is like a Book. Ibid. Like a fair House.
Ibid. Five things wonderful in the making of the world. page. 162 Works of
God of two sorts. page. 144 External Works of four sorts. page. 145 When the
world was made. page. 148 Give God the Glory of his Works. page. 149 Meditate
on Gods Works, not delight in idle shows. Ibid. World fiered at the last day,
how. page. 531 Word does not ever presently work. page. 354 God Works
sometimes by unlikely means. Ibid. How the Word was made flesh. page. 251
Union of the Word and flesh differ from other unions* Ibid. Gods Wisdom
moderates between his Justice and mercy. ^8 Three bear Witness of Christ in
Heaven, three on earth. page. 430
LONDON, Printed by G. M. for R. R. P. Stephens and C. Meredith, and are to be
sold at their shop at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1626.


