To the right worshipful Master Richard Martin, Warden of the Queens
Majesty's Mints, and Alderman of the City of London, Grace and peace from God
the Father, through Christ Jesus our Lord.
I Have sent unto you, right worshipful, and dearly beloved in the Lord,
according to your earnest request, and my promise, the sum and effect of my
Sermon preached at Paul's Cross: desiring you to receive it, as a most
certain token of my unfeigned love toward you in Christ. For although it come
from an old friend and brother in the Lord: yet I send it unto your worship
for a New years gift, to testify a new increase of my Christian love toward
you, and so many as shall read it, with purpose to live according to the rule
of sound doctrine and godliness: And concerning you, of whose integrity I have
good experience, I persuade my self that our most merciful Father, by this
means will work in your heart, the plentiful increase of the gifts and
inward graces of that new man, which is framed according to the Image of his
dearly beloved son Christ Jesus. For as you have been most earnest to have
in vvriting this doctrine: so I doubt not, but you will be most diligent in
the practice thereof: for which cause I commit it into your hands, to use to
Gods glory, the profit of his children, and to your own comfort. Grace,
peace, and love with faith, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ be with you now and ever. Amen.

From Cambridge, by your most loving friend, and brother in the Lord, Laurence
Chaderton.

To the Christian Reader.
AS much reading is a wearines to ye flesh, so there is neither end nor profit,
in making many books. True wisdom escheweth both: but the folly of our time
never cease to write, nether can be satisfied with reading the new and
variable inue^tions of men. A fault amongst wise Philosophers much misliked,
how much more ought it to be condemned and eschewed of al learned Christians?
But vain glory, and desire of popular fame in the writers, and desire of
filthy lucre in the Printers, have stuffed our English studies with many
superfluous and unnecessary books to the great hurt of many good wits, and to
the hinderance of constant judgment in the sou^dnes of Christian doctrine. A
matter most necessary to be reformed by such as have received authority to this
end, that neither our Church, nor common weal should be hurt, but rather
bettered by the writings of men. For my part, I wish with all my heart, that we
had fewer books, and greater skill in the old and new Testament of Christ,
wherein are bequeathed unto us most heavenly and precious Jewels, and legacies
of the immortal inheritance: to which most sure word and Testament, if we take
heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, we shall be directed aright in
the strait way that leads to immortality and happiness. Now touching this my
Sermon, if I did think (dear Christian Reader) that it would quench in the
mind of any, the desire of hearing the Gospel preached, and not rather inflame
their heart, both to hearing and faithful working, I would rather have buried
it in perpetual silence, then committed it to writing. But being fully
persuaded, that by this means ye Lord God in mercy will bring into the minds
of those that heard me, a fruitful remembrance of his mighty working by the
power of his spirit, at that present, to their singular comfort: I have in some
part satisfied the earnest, and importunat suit of many dear Christians and
brethren, who did both by letters and word of mouth, after a sort compel me to
write it. The sum and effect of al I have set down, not in the same words I
spoke (for the Lord knows I never writ it and therefore could not) but in
other, so plainly as I could for the capacity and understanding of al. I have
added those things, whereof then I could not, partly for lack of time, partly
for other necessary occasions, entreat. And albeit mine own inabilitie in this
kind of writing, wherein I am altogether a stranger, and the fear of the
severe censure of the learned eloquent divines, did greatly dissuade me: yet my
earnest desire both to leave behind me some small testimony of my says,
conscience, and religion: and also to have my judgment touching faith and
works approved of ye English church, did as it were violently carry me to this
dutiful work of love. Now my hearty desire is, that this my labor may be
acceptably received, and lovingly expounded of all, and my prayer unto God is
and shall be, that every one of us, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, may be enabled by his spirit, to hold fast the sound doctrine of pure
religion, in life and in death, and with all joy of the holy Ghost sincerely to
practice the same, to the glory of Christ, and the edificatio^ of his Church.
But let no man think, that ye reading of this can be half so effectual and
profitable to him, as the hearing was, or might be. For it wa^teth the zeal of
the speaker, the attention of the hearer, the promise of God to the ordinary
preaching of his word, the mighty and inward working of his holy spirit, and
many other things which the Lord works most mercifully by ye preaching of his
glorious Gospel, which are not to be hoped for by reading the written Sermons
of his ministers. Nevertheless I trust that he will bless the reading hereof,
to the praise of his own name, and the comfort of his Church. To him therefore
by Christ be al praise and honor in the Church for ever. Amen.

Matthewe vij. 21 Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does my Fathers will which is in heaven.

22 Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy Name
prophesied, and by thy Name cast out devils, and by thy Name done many great
works?

23 And then will I profess to them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity.


THese three short verses are a principal part of that heavenly sermon, The
su^me and meaning of this text.
which our savior Christ preached in the mount unto his own disciples and the
people. The sum and meaning hereof is, a dreadful declaration of the final
destruction, and eternal condemnation of all counterfeit and hypocritical
professors of Gods true Religion. For although in the former verses Christ did
particularly describe unto his auditorie false and dissembling prophets by
their fruits, to the end they might better know them: Luke. 13.25 26 27.
yet in this 21. verse he ascends from that particular to a general
description of all false and feigned professors of the truth, of what calling
and function soever they be of in the Church or common wealth, as appears
most plainly both by the similitudes generally used in ye 17.18. and 19. verses
going before: and also by these words, Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Nevertheless ye principal
meaning and drift of Christ is, to terrify the false prophets and preachers
of the word with this fearful threatening of the second death: as the words of
the 22. verse do necessarily prove and confirm. Many will say unto me,
Lord, Lord, have we not by thy Name prophesied etc. which none could truly
allege for themselves, but such only as had been preachers of ye word and
workers of miracles. A gift in yt time almost peculiar to ye Apostles and
ministers of Christ, for ye confirmation of the certeinty and truth of their
doctrine.

The order or disposition of the iii. verses.
This dreadful declaration of the just condemnation of al hypocrites and fained
professors of the true Gospel, contains two general and principal parts. The
first is a division of all such as profess the truth into two sorts, fully
and plainly expressed in the 21. verse. the second is a meeting with an
objection containing both a kind of defense, whereby the preachers of the
word, and workers of miracles, by reason of their great knowledge and rare
gifts, might seem as to clear and defend them selves: so to avoid and
escape the just sentence of eternal curse and malediction, set down in the
22. verse, Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, etc. And also a most
wise and perfect, though very fearful, answer of Christ there unto in the
23. verse. And then will I confess to them etc. wherein notwithstanding these
glorious works alleged in ye former verse for their defense, he shows that
because he never acknowledged them by reason of their hyprocrisie, and because
in doing such works they brought forth iniquity: therefore he must necessarily
forbid them his presence, wherein only is all joy and felicitye, as
contrarily to be secluded from his presence is all sorrow and extreme misery.

Thus we see both the sum and true meaning, and also the plain and natural
disposition of this part of Christ's sermon contained in these three verses.
Whereof I purpose to speak particularly, not in the excellency of words, or
in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence and
demonstration of the truth.

There are two sorts of professors of true religion.
Not every one etc. Here our Savior Christ divides all the worshippers of God,
and the professors of his Gospel into two sorts: for the first sentence of
this verse is equivalent, or al one in sense with this particular saying, Some
men saying unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. wherein as he notes the first sort of professors: so he describes
them by their external confessing of Christ to be their Lord and Master, and
also by their end.

The second sort he notes in the latter, and also describes them by their
fruits and end, in these words, But he that does my Fathers will which is in
heaven, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: which end although it be not
expressed, yet it is necessarily to be supplied out of ye former part.
Therefore ye true meaning of these words is this. Of the external professors of
Christ, some do only profess in outward show: and some others do both
outwardly profess, and also do the Fathers will which is in heaven: so that
the author of this division is our Savior himself, and therefore it is in no
wise to be doubted of. Yet because the common and usual conversation of
Christians is so corrupt, that it evidently declares them to be contented and
satisfied with an outward serving of God, void of inward synceritie and true
belief: it shall be requisite and needful, in few words to show out of the
word, the certain truth of these two sorts of men. In the first age of the
world, when there were but four persons which served the true God, the
Creator of heaven and earth, the holy Ghost teaches, that Habel and Cain,
albeit they both did externally profess their religion, by offering of the
first fruits of sheep, and of the ground: yet Cain his profession was only
in outward show, because his outward sacrifice, Genesis 4.5.
being void of faith, was not regarded of God. But Habels profession was both
in outward show, and also in doing the will of God. for the spirit of God
commending him, testifies that by faith he offered a sacrifice of greater
price then Cain, Heb. 11.4.
and by that faith obtained witness of God that he was righteous: Genesis 4.4.
for which cause it is said, The Lord had respect to him and to his offering.
In the families of Abraham and Isaac, being then only the visible Church,
Ismael, Isaac, Iaakob and Esau, received Circumcision the external sign of
their profession: by reason whereof every of them were accounted true
worshippers of the God of Abraham: yet Isaac and Iaakob only were doers of the
will of God, Heb. 11.20 21. and 12.16.17.
as the Spirit of God testifies in the eleueth and 12. to the Hebrews.

In the 50 psalm the Lord him self expostulateth, and with great authority
reasons with the first sort of professors, saying, Psalm. 50.16
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth, 17
seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? But
unto the other sort he speaks thus in the same psalm, 23
He that offreth praise, shall glorify me, and to him that disposes his way
aright, I will show the salvation of God. wherein he forbids and condemns
the outward profession of his word and ordinances, being separated from the
right disposition of the heart and life: but being joined together, he
promises thereunto eternal salvation. A place therefore most fit to warrant and
confirm these two sorts of professors of Gods word.

The Prophet Esaias does not only describe these sorts of professors in plain
words: but also threatens against the former sort, a wonderful judgment of
God, saying, Esa. 29.13.
Because this people come near me with their mouth, and honor me with their
lips, but have removed their heart from me, and their fear toward me was
taught by the precept of men: 14
therefore behold, I will again do a marvelous work in this people, even a
marvelous work, and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. 15
Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord: for their
works are in darkness, and they say, Who sees us? and who knovveth us? In
which words it appears, both that there be in the visible Church of God,
as well hypocritical seruers of God, whose wicked works, though in respect of
God they be done in the light, yet in respect of men they are in darkness:
as also true and sincere worshippers, which with mouth, lips and heart, do
honor and fear the Lord according to his precepts. It were to long, and in
deed needelesse in so plain a matter, to cite and allege the witnesses of
all the Prophets, who as they had great experience of both these kinds of men,
in all estates and degrees of callings: as of Princes, Priests and people: so
they did with great authority and boldness discover their several and
particular sins, and threaten against them present destruction, and the
fearful Judgments of God: as may appear to every one that shall read with
diligence and judgment their prophecies. Wherefore, briefly to conclude this
point of doctrine, the three parables of our Savior Christ in the history of
the Gospel, of the field, floor, and net, written for a plain declaration
hereof, shall fully satisfy and content every one, that believes him to be
the only teacher of all truth and righteousness. Field. Matthew. 13.24, 25.
etc.
For even as in the field there grows up not only sound corn, but also
tares, cockell, and darnell: in the floor there is not only pure wheat,
Floor. Mat. 3.12. Luke. 3.17.
but also chafe: in the net not only good things, but bad, as filth and
such like: Net. Mat. 13.47
so in the militant and visible Church, the field, floor and net of the
Lord, there are not only sincere and faithful, but also hypocritical and
faithless worshippers of God, not only upright and constant doers of the
word, but also vain and Idle talkers of the same: finally not only such as
with good consciences, pure hearts, and faith unfeigned do serve the LORD and
his Church, but such also as be reprobate to every good work, whose end is to
be cast eternally from the presence of God, and to be burned as chafe in the
fearful furnace of Gods wrath and everlasting indignation. Seeing therefore
that the example of Habel and Cain in the beginning of the World, of Ismael
and Isaac, Iaakob and Esau, in the families of Abraham, and of Isaac, seeing
God him self in the 50 Psalm, and in the nine and twentieth of Esaias, seeing
also all the Prophets in their prophecies, and our Savior Christ the doctor of
all truth, both in the three former parables, as also in this present place
does declare, teach, and confirm the truth of these two sorts of
professors: who is so blind that he can not see this? who so faythlesse that
will not believe it? who so impudent that will not confess it? Finally, who
can be so injurious to his own salvation, that having so many witnesses, and
such daily and continual experience of this truth, will not give his goods,
body, life, and all, that he may be accounted of the LORD in the dreadful day
of Judgment, a doer and worker of his will? The use of this certain doctrine
serves to move all true Christians, to take greater pains and care to frame
their hearts and works according to the will of GOD, then only to have an
outward show and appearaunce of godliness: as also to fear and terrify the
hearts of all true professors, from forsaking the true Church of God for the
impiety and ungodliness of some: knowing that for the trial of Gods elect,
heresies and vices must continue in the Church, till Christ at his coming
abolish them with the breath of his mouth, and crush all the wicked in pieces
with ye iron rod and scepter of his kingdom: And so deliver the whole
government of all things into the hand of God his father, that he may be al in
all, to the praise of his power and glory, and the everlasting comfort of all
his adopted children. Now that we may the better see and know, of which sort
of professors every one of us is: let us hear and learn how our Savior
Christ does describe the former sort, and what is the end of this profession.

He says, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter etc. in
which words he teaches, Who be ye false professors of true religion, what is
their end.
that all the religion of this kind of worshippers and callers upon God,
consists only in the outward profession of himself, and of God his Father:
for here to call Christ, Lord, Lord, is nothing else but in word, and outward
show to profess Christ the son of God to be their Lord and master, God
himself to be their Father, the holy Ghost proceeding from them both to be
their sanctifier, and themselves to be the servants of these three diverse and
heavenly persons. Wherefore this first sort are such professors, as have only a
show of true religion and godliness, being void of all faithful obedience to
God. The which kind of profession, though it seem good and glorious in the
sight of men: yet the Lord which only looks into the hearts of all, by his
Minister and Prophet Jeremy calls it the words of lies, Ierem. 7.3.
saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, Amend your ways,
and your works, and I will let you dvvell in this place. 4
Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord: this is the Temple of the Lord. Wherein the Lord, as we see, opposes
the reformation of their ways and works, to the outward profession of his
service done in the Temple: which, being separated from the other, he esteems
no better then the words of lies. And in deed it is no better: for whereas
this outward profession shows, and after a sort speaks unto others, that
we are the true servants of God, when as we have but a bare and idol
resemblance of them, it makes and speaks a manifest and loud lie: and
therefore is justly called of GOD the words of lies. The blessed Apostle Paul,
in the second Chapter to the Romans, speaks most plainly against this
kind of profession. His words be these: Romans 2.28.
He is not a Jew which is one outvvarde, neither is that Circumcision which
is outvvarde in the flesh: 29
but he is a Jew which is one within, and the Circumcision is of the
heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God. In which words the nature and properties of these woorshippers evidently
aypeare: for the Apostle affirms such kind of woorship to be only
outward, separated from the inward Circumcision of the heart, and the
sincerity of the work. Likewise the Apostle James condemns the knowledge
and outward profession of ye truth, Iam. 2 17.24.26.
in the dispersed Jews to who^ he writ, because they could not justify the
sincerity thereof, both by Faith, and by their works, as every true Christian
ought and can do, calling very aptly and fitly this kind of profession void
of works, a dead faith.

John also in his first Epistle 2. Chap. calls these seruers of God liers, in
these words, 1. John. 2 4
He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him. And our Savior Christ himself, as it is in the
Gospel of Luke, does most plainly and briefly set forth unto us the whole
nature and qualities of these men: which may be a most fit interpretation of
this place. For with great authority and power he asks a reason, why any
can be moved to separate the outward worship, from the spiritual service of the
heart, and sincerity in the work, Luke. 6.46
saying, Why call ye me, Master, Master, and do not the things that I speak?
Wherein as he shows that nothing in all the world, ought to move us to
profess our selves to be his servants, except we do and fulfill the things
which he commands: so he condemns every kind of profession which is void
of this faithful obedience. Thus we see what the first sort of woorshippers
be: even such as in word confess, and by hearing the Gospel preached,
receiving the Sacraments, and calling upon God, profess themselves to be his
servants: notwithstanding they securely pretermit the doing of Gods will, and
therefore shall justly be secluded from the kingdom of heaven. For these men,
though they cry in the Church never so loud, Lord, Lord, they shall never
be heard: though they in word most gloriously do confess Christ to be their
Savior, yet in the day of judgment he will not confess them: though they
say they know him in this life, yet then he will profess that he never knew
them: though they seem unto men most diligent woorkers of righteousness and
piety, yet he then judging, not according to the outward appearance, but the
sincere purity of the heart, will say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity: Finally, though they seem to live and to be the children of light,
yet they are dead and are the sons of darkness, and therefore shall not, as it
is affirmed here in this place, The end of false worshippers.
enter into the kingdom of heaven, which is the second thing whereby they are
described. Behold therefore, all ye hypocritical callers upon the Name of
God, your end, your portion, and the lot of your inheritance, which you have,
by the hardness of your hollow hearts which can not repent, treasured up unto
your selves against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God, who will reward every man according to his works. For you
shall not only be cast out of the kingdom of heaven, from the glorious
presence of the king of all glory: but you shall drink, as a just recompense
for your iniquity, the bitter cup of Gods eternal wrath and indignation in
the kingdom of darkness, and in the fearful presence of Satan and all the
cursed enemies of Gods grace. Repent therefore, and turn unto the Lord,
circumcise the foreskinnes of your hearts, and bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life: and think not that because you are, by the judgment of
men, counted Christians, or because you are partakers of the word and
Sacraments of Christ, and of Christian prayers and thanksgiving, you shall
therefore in the general judgment of all flesh, stand in the assembly of
the righteous: for even now also is the axe put to the root of the tree, so
that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and
cast into the fire. For there is no respect of persons with God: but as many as
have sinned and transgressed the law of nature, which was by the finger of God
written in two Tables, and committed to Moses, shall be judged by ye same. But
that the knowledge of this first sort of professors, and of their miserable
end, may be more effectual, and profitable to work in us, a perfect hatred of
their corrupt life, and a godly fear of their dreadful death: I will briefly
set down some particular notes whereby they may be ye better known, and al
other may more truly examine their own hearts, and so clearly see, whether they
be of yt number or no.

First he that says only unto Christ, Notes to discern between the false
and true woorshippers. 2. Cor. 13.5
Lord, Lord, and does not the will of God, he has in his heart (if he do
judge himself aright according to ye Apostles precept) a far greater care and
desire to be accounted a good christian amongst men, then in deed and truth
to be so in the sight of God. Therefore our Savior Christ forbids us, as in
giving of alms and praying: so in all other works to be like unto these
hypocrites, Matthew. 6.1.2.3.4 5.
whom he affirms to have this great love and desire, to appear righteous in
the sight of men. Woe be to you Scribes, Matthew. 23.27.
and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are like to whited tombs which appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
filthiness: 28.
so are ye also, for outward ye appear righteous unto men, but within ye are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Philip. 2.1^.
as the Spirit of truth commands in the Epistle to the Philippians, the
second Chapter, and the twelfth verse. For he strives not against his own
corruption, to suppress all rebellious affections and lusts, which strive
against the law of God, neither to obtain those graces and gifts of
regeneration, which he sees wanting in himself, nor forgets, with blessed
Paul, that which is behind, nor yet indeuoureth him self to that which is
before, Philip. 3.13.14.
following hard toward the mark for the price of the hye calling of God in
Christ Jesus: and therefore manifestly bewrays his secure and careless
conscience. Acts 11.23
earnestly exhorted al, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord. A true note to discern between him that fears God, and him that does
not. great want of heavenly wisdom, and great abundance of carnal folly: so
he can never say with inward and sensible feeling of the law of the members,
and of the Spirit, as the Apostle Paul says, Romans 7.24.
O vvretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Then I my self in my mind serve
the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin. A peculiar work of Gods
Spirit in all his elect: which none of the children of this world ever tasted
of to their comfort, neither can do. But mercy is with thee, Psalm. 130.4.
that thou may be feared. And also in the 2. Epistle to the Corinth. the 5.
chap. the 14. verse. 2. Co. 5.14.
For the love of Christ constrayneth us, because we thus judge, that if one be
dead for all, then were all dead. 15.
And he dyed for all, that they which live, should not he^ceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again. Wherefore as the
doer of Gods will does abstain from evil, because it is contrary unto the will
of God, and does good, because he is constrained with the love of him, which
is only good: so the hypocrite contrarily abstaineth from evil, for fear of
punishment, and does the thing which seems good, not constrained with the
love of God, but moved of his own will by desire of praise, or hope of
reward. their brethren: Let us not only detest and abhor it, with all our
hearts and souls, but also examine every one his own estate and condition,
that we may see whether we do truly stand in the grace of God or no. For
assuredly, if the outward works of our Christian calling be done in this
sort and manner, they neither are, nor can be unto us the pledges and seals of
our salvation: but rather the subtle sleyghts of Satan, and the deceites of
sin, whereby these two myghtie enemies of our redemption bewitche us, and
deprive our hearts of the sure hope of our promised inheritance and salvation.
Let him therefore that stands, both take heed least he fall, and labor also
to become not only a continual eschewer of these evils, but a new creature,
framed according to the image of Christ. But alas I fear me, if all English
Protestants would confess freely to Gods glory, and their own shame, the
whole corruption of al their thoughts in this behalf, we should see such a
huge mass and lump of hypocrisy, as no man is able to conceive in heart,
much less utter in word. For then no doubt a great number would say, All my
religion is mere dissimulation, all my glorious profession of the Gospel is
nothing, but a vain show of Christianity, yea my whole life, tried and wayed
in the balance of Gods law, is lighter then vanity it self. And I would to
God that we were all come to this humble and godly acknowledging, as of all
other our sins, so especially of this secure and careless hypocrisy:
wherein almost all professors are so drowned, that except the most merciful
God by his mighty and strong hand, do raise them up by faith and repentance,
they shall perish everlastingly without any hope of redemption. Now therefore,
dear brethren, for the love of God, let us not put our trust and confidence in
these and such like lying words, as to say, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord, and to call Christ, Lord, Lord, Master, Master, or to say, I am
baptized, I know the truth, I profess the Gospel, and such like: because
except we can justify this outward profession of our faith to be sincere, and
pure by the integrity of our works, our savior Christ tells us here, that
we shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven. Thus much for the former sort
of professors, their manner of conversation, and their final destruction,
contained in these words: Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Now follows the second sort, in these words, But he that does the will
of my heavenly Father which is in heaven. Who be true professors of Christian
religion.
Wherein Christ describes the lawful heirs of his Fathers kingdom, by their
fruits, all which fruits be comprised in this one sentence, Which do my
Fathers will. Gods will is done after two sorts.
Wherefore we must learn and know, that the doing of the Fathers will is of two
sorts. Mark. 1.11
that in him he is well pleased. be justified in the sight of God) but the
sincere and faithful observation of those things, which are agreeable unto the
will of God: ye obseruers whereof shall enter into ye kingdom of heaven. which
words, though they be not plainly expressed, yet they are necessarily to be
supplied, as is before declared.

Now considering that the doing of the Fathers will declares who shall be
saved, let us hear what the doing of the Fathers will is. Two things required
to the doing of Gods will.
The knowledge hereof arises of two things, which are necessarily required to
the acceptable working of the same: that is to say, the works of the law or
actions themselves, and the manner of doing. the whole want of either of which
is a manifest token either of infidelity, or hypocrisy. For the first, that
works are necessarily required to the acco^plishment of the Fathers will, the
scriptures in many, yea almost infinite places do teach: a few whereof, to
avoid tediousnes in so plain a matter, I have chosen for ye confirmation of
this doctrine. In the 5. of Deuteronomy. ye meek and faithful servant of God, Moses,
commands all Israel, not only to learn and know ye ordinances and laws of
god: but also carefully to observe them, saying, Hear O Israel the ordinances
and the laws which I propounde to you this day, Deute. 5.1.
that ye may learn them, and take heed to observe them. Again in the 10. of
Deuter. he has written to the same effect these words: Deu. 10.12
And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, etc.
Wherein by the way is to be noted, that the Lord God requires not only the
works themselves consisting in his ways, fear, love, and service: but also
the right manner of doing, in these words, with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul. Joshua, as he succeeded Moses in the government of Israel: so also did he
in the acknowledging and publishing unto them this doctrine, as appears in
the 22. chap. of his book, saying, Ioshu. 22.5
But take diligent heed, to do the commandment and law, which Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded you: that is, that ye love the Lord your God, and
walk in all his ways, and keep his commandments, and cleave unto him, and
serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul. Wherein the same
doctrine concerning both the work, and the manner of doing, almost in the same
words is plainly confirmed. John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ preached
the same, saying, Matthew. 3.8.
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy the amendment of life. James the Apostle
of Christ utterly condemns all profession of faith, as vain and
unprofitable, if it want works, when as he says, What avails it, Iam. ^.14.
my brethren, though a man say he has faith, when he has no works? can the
faith save him? as if he should say in plain words, Faith outwardly
professed, without good works, can be no pledge or testimony at all of our
salvation. Peter in his 1. Epistle teaches, that because Christ has suffered
for us in the flesh, therefore we should suffer after a sort in our flesh, by
dying unto sin, and living to God, so long as we remain in the flesh. For he
says, speaking of the regenerate, 1. Pet. 4.2.
that he henceforvvarde should live (as much time as remains in the flesh) not
after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. John also in his first
Epistle, denies us to have any fellowship with God, or any benefit of the
blood of Christ, if we walk in darkness, and not in the light of truth and
godliness. For he says, 1. John. 1.6
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and
do not truly: 7
But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have mutual fellowship
with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Paul in
the six and twentieth of the Acts professes before king Agrippa, that he
taught this doctrine touching the necessity of works, both to Jew, and
Gentile, saying, Acts. 26.19 20.
Wherefore, king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision, but
showed first to them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the
coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn
to God, and do works worthy amendment of life. Moreover, the Spirit of God
witnesses in the twelfth to the Hebrews, that without works no man shall see
GOD, saying, Heb. 12.14
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without the which no man shall see
the Lord: an especial place to prove the necessity of works. Lastly our
Savior Christ in the five and twentieth of Matthew, teaching that in the day
of judgment all flesh shall be tried, and judged according to the works of love
and mercy, done in this life toward him in his members, confirms and
establishes in his own person, and word, the infallible truth of this
doctrine: in whom, as in all other points of religion, so especially in this,
we ought fully and perfectly to rest. For there it is briefly concluded,
Matthew. 25. from the verse 34. to 46.
that they which gave unto his members meat, drink, lodging, clothing, and
visited the sick and imprisoned, shall be pronounced righteous and go into life
eternal. But the unmerciful, being void of these works, shall be pronounced
cursed, and go into everlasting fire, and pain.

Seeing then we have so many heavenly witnesses of this truth, and that all
the Prophets in their prophecies, do most earnestly and zealously call the
people of GOD to the obedience of his law, and most pitifully complain of the
want thereof, threatening both temporal and eternal punishments against
disobedient malefactors: we may safely conclude and determine, that the works
of the first and second table, are necessarily required to the doing of the
Fathers will. Now then if it be truly preached, that without works there is
neither doing of the will of God, neither entrance into the kingdom of heaven,
O Lord, what shall we think of ye licentious life of our English Protestants,
or what shall become of this barren, and fruitless profession of the glorious
Gospel of Christ? for a man may travail almost from the one end of the land
to the other, before he can find one man like unto just Job, Job. 1.1.
that feared God and eschewed evil, or one woman like unto Dorcas, Acts. 9.36.
full of good works and alms. As therefore our savior Christ, the Prophets,
and the Apostles had most just cause to complain in their times of the want of
works, and to be grieved with the sins of the people: so we in this last age
have no less cause to complain, neither less occasion of sorrow. For to come
unto particulars, what estate, calling, or degree is there, which does not
content it self only with saying, Lord, Lord, being notwithstanding so
barren in the bringing forth of good works? And first concerning the state
Ecclesiastical, and us that be ministers, and preachers of the word, whom
this place principally does concern: where are the lips of those ministers
which do preserve knowledge, or those messengers of God, at whose mouths his
poor people should seek his law? Nay rather, where be not whole swarms of
idle, ignorant, and ungodly Curates and Readers, who neither can, nor will, go
before the dear flock of Christ in soundnes of doctrine, and integrity of
life? The cause of which enormitie resting principally in the persons them
selves, and then in those which sent them, and now suffer them in the Church:
I charge in the Lord the one, that they, seriously waying the worthiness of the
Lords embassage, for the which they are most unworthy, would voluntarily
forgo that calling, wherein they can not do the Fathers will, and betake them
to some other, which they may in a good conscience, without offense, in some
godly and profitable measure discharge. The other I counsel and beseech, as a
brother in the Lord, that they would more diligently look unto their
ministry committed unto them, lest not only this grievous offense, but also
all other their sins against God, and their brethren, be laid unto their
charge, when the hearts of all men shall be made open and manifest before the
Lord of life. And to proceed to the learned governors of the Church, is
there no tything of Mynt, Anyse, and Cummin, and pretermitting waightier
matters of the law, as Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity? Do they feed the
flock of God willingly, and carefully, as being examples unto it, and not for
filthy lucresake, as being lords over Gods heritage? if these things be so,
how can they think they are doers of the Fathers will? What shall I say of
our domme dogs, non residents, and all those that serve mortal and sinful
men, with symonie, flattering words, and servile obedience, not lawfully to
obtain one room in the vineyard of the Lord, but two, three, four, or more
places (which is unlawful:) the which though they miscall preferments, yet in
deed they be so weighty charges, that the wysest and strongest of all, is
altogether insufficient for an acceptable discharge thereof. As concerning
discipline practiced in our Church by Chancelors, Co^missaries and Officials,
because every one, (seeing all things for the most part begun, continued, and
ended for money in those courts) does justly complain: as I pray unto God
daily for the reformation hereof, so I doubt not but the Lord in due and
convenient time, for the great love he bears toward his Church, will stir
up, and arm with power, wisdom and zeal, as well those Magistrates, which he
in mercy has alredie given us, as all those also, with whom in time to come,
he shall vouchsafe to bless us, to refourme these and all other the blemishes
of his Church, according to his word. These things being thus considered, how
just cause have we to say with S. Paul, (whose time in comparison of ours, was
most free from corruption) All men seek their own, Phil. 2.21.
and not that which is Jesus Christ's. The Lord for his mercy sake grant us
true repentance. Thus much for the Ecclesiastical estate.

And as for the conversation of all other people in the land, of what
condition so ever: I know not what to say, or how to speak, where to
begin, or how to make an end. I could wish with all my heart, that in
stead of reproouing all the sins in this land, and City, my head contained
a flood of water, that I might power out plentiful rivers of tears, for all
our damnable iniquities. For doubtless the saying of the Prophet Oseas is
verified in this our age, by our ungodly life and conversation. Oseas. 4.1
There is (says he) no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of GOD in the land.
By swearing, 2.
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they break out, and blood
touches blood. Our lives do testify this to our faces: every man does see
it, and acknowledge it in his heart. We and the Catholics (for so they love
to be called) do most justly complain of it: we with sorrow and grief of
heart, desiring the speedy reformation hereof: they with gladness of mind,
rejoicing to have so good an occasion to discredit the truth of our religion.
And surely to speak the truth, it is our shameless conversation that
terrifieth both the ignorant and wavering Catholics, and the simpler sort of
the common people, being ready to embrace any religion (as appears by these
which have received, and embraced the erroneous doctrine of H. N. and his
family, falsely termed the family of love) from the true profession of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Nay, they not only forsake us: but they rejoice and
triumph over us in the matter of works. For the Papists, they always cast
in our teeth the great and famous hospitality of their nobility, and clergy,
the buylding of Abbeys, Monasteries, and Nunneries, Cathedral churches,
colleges, with many other outward works: which in deed are such as do stop
our mouths, and put us protestants to silence. But to let them pass, with
these great and costly works wherein we must confess they do exceed us: and
to come to our selves, and such works as are required of every one in his
several calling: Where be those parents, and masters, which do teach in
their families unto their children and servants, the law and fear of God,
walking them selves in the myddest of their houses in vpryghtnesse of heart?
Where be those governors that defend the fatherless, and widow, that
receive no brybe to corrupt Justice, that prolong not sentence for lucre sake,
that respect no persons in judgment, that are ready also without regard of
fear or favor of men, to cut of the workers of iniquity from the City of
the Lord, and to establyshe the seat of the faithful? And to be short,
where is that Protestant that feeds the hungry, clotheth the naked, visits
the prisoner and him that is sick, that lodges the harbourlesse, without
ceasing or being weary of well doing? I speak not this to justify the
Papists, or to condemn all Protestants, but to show how rare the works
of mercy are, amongst those that seem to put all their joy and felicity in
the mercies of God revealed in Christ. For I am not ignorant of diverse, who as
they have received grace and mercy to believe, and hope: so they are full of
the fruits of love and charity, according to the measure of the Grace
received. The least whereof I dare be bold to prefer before all the works
that ever have been done with an opinion to merit, deserve, or with desire of
praise of the posterity. As for H. N. and his family, because they condemn
all works of men which are not perfect, and void of sin, which only are to
be found in Christ our ryghteousnes, wisdom, and sanctification: I leave
them to the just judgment of God, who shall reward them according to their
deserts. For it grieueth me to consider how ignorant they are of this doctrine,
concerning the goodness and necessity of works. Well, howsoever men do please
and flatter themselves with a general knowledge of the truth, with a light
and unsettled opinion of salvation, with an external show of Christian religion,
as sure as the Lord lives, if they can not by their works justify this
knowledge, faith, and profession, they shall never do the Fathers will, nor
enter into the kingdom of heaven. For though they be in ye church, yet are they
not of it, though they seem heirs of life, yet they are inheriters of death.
Be not deceived, dear brethren, for this is a true saying, and by all means to
be received: He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption: but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting. Now then, seeing the very floods of hypocrysie have overflowed al
estates, and degrees: are a number of Protestants any better then clouds
without water, carried about with every blast of error and ungodliness, then
corrupt trees without fruit, then spots and blots in the Christian assemblies
of their brethren, yea then raging waves of the sea, foming out their own
shame and confusion? Therefore I beseech you all, in the name of Christ, for
the mercies of God, to cast of these damnable clokes of religion, and vanishing
shadows of true belief, embracing and practicing all the works of sound
doctrine, and true godliness. I have stood the longer in this treaty, to
prove the necessity of works, because our Gospel, which we have received
of Christ and his Apostles, is falsely charged (as you do see) to be a
doctrine of liberty, and licenciousnesse of life: as also for that the most
part of Protestants are altogether secure, and careless, touching the
obedience of faith, rather presuming in the pride of their hearts of the
mercies of God for their salvation, then by humble and trembling hearts to
work, ratify, and confirm unto their own consciences the certainty of
their election. Works are necessary for many causes.
Therefore to stop the slanderous mouth of the adversary, and to terrify
the secure and presumptuous professor: we conclude that works are necessarily
required, not only for doing of the Fathers will: but also for the declaration
of our faith, for the confirmation of our hope, for the separating of us from
all infidels and hypocrites, for the example of those which are without, and
within the Church, for the relieuing and succouring of all, especially of those
which are of the houshoulde of faith, for to justify our religion to be pure
and undefiled before God the Father, for to testify our obedience and
thankfulness to God the author thereof, finally to praise and magnify the
great power, Justice, and mercy of God the Father, his Son, and the holy
Ghost, one God, and three persons in the whole and perfect work of our
redemption.

Hitherto of the necessity of works: now follows the manner of doing, which
is no less necessary to the fulfylling of Gods will, then works themselves,
because it is the cause why all our works are acceptable to God. For albeit we
do continually call upon God with our lips, and hear his word with our
outward ears, and bring forth all other apparent works of godliness and
ryghteousnes: yet if we pray not in spirit, hear not with understanding, and
believe, and work by love according to God his will: we do not the Fathers
will, but our own, we walk not according to the Spirit, but according to the
flesh, and therefore must reap of the flesh corruption. What is the right
manner of doing the Fathers will.
But let us see what this right manner of doing is, whereof our savior Christ
speaks in this place, whence it is, whereof it is made, and to what end it
must be directed: the knowledge of which causes will breed in us a perfect
knowledge of this vpryght manner of working, whether it be inward in mind, or
outward in manners. There is but one only author and gyuer hereof, even the
Spirit of God, and Christ, from whom proceed and come all good counselles,
pure desires, and godly purposes. For although it be left in our power (in
as much as the Lord has made us reasonable creatures, in some sort to
resemble his Image) to will this or that thing, to reason upon this or that
question, to think upon this or that matter, to speak this or that sentence,
and to do this or that work: yet to will, to reason, to think, to speak,
and to do all these, so as our merciful God requires of his children, and so
as they may be acceptablie received in Christ, (as sincere obedience unto God)
it proceeds not from flesh and blood, neither from the will of man, John.
1.13.
neither from any other creature in heaven or in earth: but only from the
most comfortable Spirit of our regeneration, whose peculiar office is, to
begin, continue, and finishe in us his holy vessels, this gracious manner
of doing: the which our heavenly Father, in the multitude of his mercies, has
vouchsafed us, and his Son our only savior, by his death and resurrection,
has most perfectly deserved, and purchased for us. So the blessed Apostle
Paul teaches, in the second to the Philippians, who after he had charged them
to work their salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
adds immediately in the verse following, 13.
For it is God that works in you both the will and deed, even of his good
pleasure. Which is a most strong and forcible reason to stryke into their
hearts, a reverent fear and trembling under the myghtie hand of God: because
that although they had power to will, and work: yet the changing of our will,
and drawing it unto good, the power to do that which is unfeignedly good, and
acceptable in the sight of God, do proceed only from the spirit of
regeneration. Romans 8.26.27.
Again the same Apostle, in the eight to the Romans witnesses, that we know
not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit helps our infirmity, and
makes request for us with syghes that cannot be expressed, according to the
will of God. Wherein as he remooueth from us this point of wisdom, to know
both what to pray, and how, or after what manner: so contrarily he ascribes
it unto the spirit of Adoption, the only worker thereof. For it is he that
moves and stirs up in our hearts sighs unspeakable, and not only
helps our infirmities, but also teaches us to pray in such manner, that our
work and prayer may be according to ye will of God. So it is in all other works
which are acceptable unto God: for those only are his children, which are in ye
manner of doing and working the will of God, led and guided by his spirit.
Wherefore it is said, that we have not received the spirit of bondage, to live
and work in a slavish and servile fear: but the spirit of Adoption, which
seals and printeth in our hearts a full assurance of faith and hope, whereby
at all times, and in all extremities we may boldly cry, Abba, Father. So that
it is manifest and plain hereby, that all those works are carnal, earthly and
d^uelish, which are done after any other manner, then this: and contrarily that
those only be good works, which are done after this heavenly manner, which Gods
spirit does teach by the word: who therefore is called the spirit of truth,
and sanctification, because he only leads us into all truth and holiness.
Many mo places might here be alleged for ye proof of this doctrine: but
because the matter is plain, and cannot be gainsaid with any soundnes of
reason, I will omit them: only aduertising the Reader of the difference
between us and the Catholics, in the doctrine of freewill. We teach and
believe, that although we have a natural ability and power to will, desire,
speak, and work: yet the whole manner of using these gifts, according to the
will of God, proceeds only from the holy Ghost, as we have taught. They
hold and teach the contrary: if not, let them declare plainly wherein they
differ from us, or else join with us, at the least in the unity of this
doctrine, which ascribes the whole glory of our new birth to God alone.

Thus then we know ye author of this worthy manner of doing: now let us further
consider whereof it arises, and wherein it does consist, 1. Ioh. 3.18 19
yt we may stand steadfast and immovable in ye hope of our inheritance, both in
regard of our works, and also in respect of the manner of doing. It is certain
that it arises of diverse and manifold graces of the holy Spirit, which are
proper and peculiar to his vessels, neither can be at any time in ye wicked and
reprobate, what pretense soever they make of religion and godliness. But the
time will not suffer me to speak of all. I will briefly speak of the chiefest
and most principal gifts, whereunto also all the other almost may be referred. 1
Faith.
The first and chiefest of all, is true faith rooted and established in our
hearts: that is, a constant trust in God, whereby, as he has promised unto us
in Christ all good things, and is able and faithful to perform: so we are
assuredly persuaded, that he will in due and convenient time accomplish his
promise particularly unto every one of us, to his glory and our salvation. For
Peter teaching, as it is in the 15. of the Acts, how the unclean Gentiles
became clean, and what was the first gift, whereby the holy Ghost purified
their filthy hearts, to make them all one body with the Jews without
difference, names expressly this gift of faith in these words: And GOD which
knovveth the hearts, Act. 15.8.
bare them witness, in giving unto the^ the holy Ghost, eue^ as he did unto
us: 9.
and he put no difference between us and them, after that by faith he had
purified their hearts. For the spirit of God by faith, as by a most fit
instrument, does cleanse and purge away all filthy and corrupt manner of serving
of God, and works sanctification of life, so that the increase of faith is
the increase of holiness. For til we be fully persuaded that God by his holy
spirit, and faith has united, and incorporated us into the body of Christ, to
live and be conformed according to his Image, and that we and all our works
are accepted through him: we can never think, will, speak, or do any good
thing with pure hearts. Therefore this faith, without which it is impossible
to please God, sealed in our hearts by the finger of God, and offering up all
our works, not in our persons, but in the person of Christ, in whom they must
needs be acceptably received, is the first and chiefest gift of regeneration,
out of the which arises, though not a perfect kind of obedience, and service
of God, (for we believe but in part) yet such a kind as pleases God in
Christ, profits his Church, and causes us to feel that peace and quietness
of conscience, which passes all wisdom and understanding. And therefore this
faith above all things chiefly is to be begged at the hands of our merciful
father, that we may attain unto this right manner of doing his will: and also
the voice of Christ's Gospel, sounding by his ministers in the Church, by
which means only ordinarily it is obtained, is most diligently to be received
and heard.

The second gracious gift of the holy Spirit, though it be a fruit of the
former, 2 Hope.
as the other which follow are: yet it has a several use. I mean a steadfast
and joyful hope, for the full and perfect fruition of eternal life. For as
faith does apprehend, apply, and as it were by a hand reach unto every man
particularly, the promises of God concerning eternal life in Christ, and also
Christ himself, in whom all those promises are Yea and Amen fully and
perfectly accomplished: so hope uses, enjoys, and after a sort, even in this
life possesses, all those things which are promised of God, and apprehended
by faith, yea even eternal life it self. In consideration whereof, the
Apostle affirms that we are saved by hope, that is to say, by the benefit
of hope we enjoy and possess already our salvation, though as yet absent. So
that he which looks upon present things that are seen, to have salvation in
them, he renounceth hope, which gift only in the elect is the faithful keeper,
and possessor of our salvation purchased by Christ. For it is called by the
Spirit of God, in the 6. to the Heb. the ancre of the soul, in these words:
Which we have, Heb. 6.19.
(meaning hope) as an ancre of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and it
enters into that which is within the veil, whither the forerunner is for us
entered in, 20
even Jesus that is made an hye Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. For as the whole use of the Ancre is, to hold fast the ship in
one sure and certain place, (notwithstanding all tempests and waves beating
against it) because it enters into the very depth and bottom of the sea,
there taking fast hold: even so the principal use of hope is to enter into the
heaven of heavens, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and to hold
fast our souls there with him, notwithstanding all the waves and tempests of
Satan, sin, and condemnation do beat daily and continually against them. As
therefore faith is necessary to lead unto Christ: so hope is also necessary to
keep us always with him. In regard whereof, we are by the holy Ghost
earnestly exhorted, in the Christian race which is set before us, as to run
with patience, so especially to look to Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12.1.2
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the
shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Whereby it appears,
that this hope does most lively set before our consciences, the presence of God
and Christ, with the fruition of the kingdom of glory: and so works in us
an unspeakable joy and patience in all adversities. Whereof none of ye
reprobate, or malignant church has ever tasted to their salvation, nether
shall do: but the children of God do not only taste hereof, but also lead the
whole course of their life in this hope, as in the presence of Christ and God:
for which cause they are said to walk with God. Genesis 5.22.


The third gift is a sincere love of God and man, 3 Love.
a most certain and infallible note of a true Christian, and more profitable
to our brethren and the Church of God, then either of the former: as the
Apostle teaches in the first to the Corinthians 13. saying, 1. Cor. 13.13
And now abides faith, hope, love, even these three: but the chiefest of
these is love. The reason is, because faith does apprehende those things we
have not, hope does retain and enjoy them: but love does draw out of us the
daily exercise and wise employing of the talents received, to the benefit of
the Church. So that for apprehending benefits that are absent, faith is the
chiefest, for the joyful retayning of them, hope is the chiefest, but for the
use and employing of them to the edification of others, love is the chiefest,
and therefore in this respect justly and truly preferred of the Apostle, if we
attribute to every one their proper uses and effects. If then we purpose to
observe a right manner of fulfilling the Fathers will, we must embrace this grace
also, and gift of ye holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 16.14.
that al our works may savor and be done in love. Under love I comprehend
zeal, a most excellent gift given unto the Saints of God: for to this end
Christ has given himself, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquities, and purge us to be a peculiar
people to himself, zealous of good works. So we see that the Lord has given
us his Son, that we should love him which loved us first, that we should
serve him diligently and zealously all the days of our life: For as that
service of men which is done by constraint, carelessely, and negligently, is
justly hated and rejected: so the Lord hates and rejects all service of
man, which proceeds not from this cheerful love, and earnest zeal of his
glory. Let us then adioyne unto the two former, this excellent gift of love,
which, as it expels careless security, cold affection in the service of
GOD, hatred, strife, contempt in duties due to men (whereof arises a feigned
and corrupt manner of service:) so it causes and increases the pure and
undefiled manner of doing the Fathers will, wherefore it is recorded that they
that dwell in love, do dwell in God, and God in them, 1. Ioh. 4.16
because he is love.

The fourth gift is a reverent fear of God: 4 Fear.
a principal and a singular point of wisdom, most fit and convenient for his
children to have and practice toward their heavenly Father, in all their
counsels and works. For such is the pride of our nature, the dulnes of our
hearts, and the lack of wisdom, that we should behave our selves
presumpteously, securely, and rashly before the presence of our heavenly
Father: were it not for this reverent fear and trembling we have received at
his hand, for the obteining of a more pure and sincere manner in his service and
worship. Neither must we think, as some have falsely imagined, and to the
great hurt of the Church taught, yt this fear in us proceeds from any
diffidence, or distrust in the acco^plishment of Gods merciful promises toward
us: but rather from a most vehement sorrow, and inward feeling bred in our
hearts, by the earnest consideration of ye heavy burden of all our sins,
and the deep serious waying of the everlasting wrath of GOD, most justly
deserved. So the blessed Apostle teaches in the second to the Corinthians, 2.
Cor. 7.11
saying, Behold, this thing that ye have been godly sorry, what great care it
has wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation,
yea what fear, yea how great desire, yea what zeal, yea what punishment?
In which words we see how the spirit of god makes that godly sorrow (which the
Corinthia^s showed for their great contempt of Christian discipline in the
matter of excommunication) to be the mother and author of this reverent fear,
which we owe unto God alone, in that he is our master: for he says, If I be
your master, where is my fear? Neither is this fear given unto us to be any
occasion of distrust, or despair, for that is peculiar to the servile and
slavish fear of those, which are mere servants and no children: But
contrarily to make us wise, provident, careful, and circumspect in all the
actions of our life, lest we either by an evil work, or corrupt manner of
doing, justly procure against us, and kindle the wrath of so merciful a
Father. Also it stirs up our hearts to most zealous and effectual prayers,
as we see in the example of Christ himself, Heb. 5.7.
who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying, and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard in that which he feared. What cries, tears, prayers, and
supplications the Apostle means, the history of Christ his passion and
sufferings does plainly express, so as it is needless to stand thereupon. Only
this is to be noted, that seeing this fear was in Christ who was free from all
sin, it ought not to be thought to be any sinful infirmity, but rather a
singular mean to help and keep us within the bonds, and listes of Christian
obedience. Therefore we are commanded of the Spirit of God, after this sort to
serve and please our heavenly Father: as in very many other places of the
scripture, so in the 12. to the Hebr. especially, in these words: Heb. 12.28
Wherefore seeing we receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have
grace, whereby we may so serve God, that we may please him with reverence and
fear. The reason is added, For even our God is a consuming fire. 29
Likewise S. Peter, in the first Chapter of his 1. Epistle, gives ye same
precept of fear to be observed in the whole course and race of our life, 1.
Pet. 1.17
saying, And if ye call him Father which without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work: pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.
In which two places, not only fear is commanded: but two most effectual
reasons are rendered thereof. First, we must reverence, tremble, and fear God,
because he is a consuming fire, ready to burn up and consume all false
worshippers, and hypocritical professors of his fear. Secondarily, because he
will judge every man without regard of person, according to his works. We
must therefore fear him, lest our works be found such as cannot abide the
fiery trial of the Spirit of truth and sincerity, and the righteous
judgment of the law of liberty: For certainly there shall be judgment
merciless to him, that in a reverent fear of God shows no mercy. And
therefore to make an end of this most necessary point of doctrine, we must
with both hands, yea with all our hearts embrace the fear of the Lord,
without the which no man can please and serve God aright. And the rather for
that the wisest amongst men, Solomon, ascribes unto those that fear the Lord
blessedness, and to them that do not, hardness of heart. his words be these:
Prou. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into evil. If then we be desirous to worship our God aright according to
his will, we must have our hearts kept in awe by this most worthy and
excellent gift of fear, that we may avoid hardness of heart, presumption of
mind, security of conscience, and all other negligent carelesnes, which as
they be contrary to this heavenly grace of the holy spirit of God, so they
breed and cause a most corrupt and abominable manner in serving of God.

5 Watchfulnes.
The fifth and last gift is a continual and careful watchfulnes against all the
enemies of the former graces commended unto us, not only for the retaining and
keeping of them: but for ye daily growing and increasing in the same, unto ye
measure of the age of the fulness of Christ, that at his coming we being found
waking and watching with the wise virgins, and not stumbring and sleeping with
ye foolish ones, may be joyfully received into the bridegromes chamber, to
reign with him in glory for ever. For seeing we have so many, so mighty and
malicious enemies, which most subtly go about to root out of our hearts all the foresaid graces, and to fill us full of all iniquity: we are necessarily in
all sobriety of perseuera^ce, with al manner of prayer and supplication, to watch
diligently in faith, in hope, in love, in fear, that we may stand fast and
continue unto the end, in doing and acco^plishing our Fathers will, in despite
of all the adversaries of Gods grace, and our salvation. This is Paul's counsel,
or rather the commandment of the holy Ghost, who having commended unto the
Ephesians the shield of faith, and the helmet of hope, as principal parts of
Christian armor, adioyneth thereunto this profitable commandment concerning
watchfulnes, saying, Ephesians. 6.18.
Watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplications for all Saints. The
same precept of watching is in diverse other places of Paul his epistles, namely
in the first to the Corinthians 16. where he says, Watch, stand fast in the
faith, etc. 1. Cor. 16.13.
And in the first to the Thessal. 5. chap. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
Therefore let us not sleep as do other, but let us vvatch and be sober.
wherein we may observe by the way, that this watchfulnes is only in the
children of light and salvation, not in the children of darkness and
destruction: whose property is carelessely to sleep, when they should be
most diligently and watchefullye occupied in bringing forth the works of
Christian obedience. Likewise our Savior Christ, being very well acquaynted
with our infirmities, and knowing the drowsiness of our nature, straightly
charge his disciples and all other to watch, rendering a most effectual
reason thereof in these words, Mar. 13.35
Watch therefore, (for ye know not when the master of the house will come, at
even, or at midnight, at the cock crow, or in the dawning) lest he coming
sodeinly should find you sleeping: 36
37
and these things which I say unto you, I say unto all men, Watch. Not only
this general commandment of Christ: but also the sharp reproof of his
disciples for the lack hereof, and the double repeticion of the same precept
in the same place, proves the necessity of this gift in these words, Ma.
26.38.
Tarry ye here and watch with me: after coming to them again, and finding
them a sleep, he said unto Peter, 40
What? could ye not watch with me one hour? watch, and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation: the spirit in deed is ready, 41
but the flesh is weak. Considering then the weakness and drowsinesse of our
nature, which appeared in the most excellent of the Apostles in that most
dangerous time, and the reproof of the Apostles: we are not only in judgment
to hold the necessity of this watchefulnes, but in every thing we take in
hand to put it in bre and practice. For it is that gift of the holy Ghost,
which makes Gods children careful, and studious, not only to do the Fathers
will, (for that may be after some sort in the reprobate and castawayes) but to
do it with that assurance of faith, with that steadfastness of hope, with that
zeal of his glory, that love of our brethren, that reverent fear of his
Majesty, which is commanded to us in the word, and also which is most
convenient and proportionable to such spiritual graces of knowledge, as we
have received: of which things carnal professors have little or no care at al.
And therefore although they may do ye works which God has decreed to be done,
for good and necessary purposes, yet being void of this right manner of doing,
they can never do the will of the Father, so, as he has commanded.

Thus we see the whole matter, The end, Gods glory.
wherein this true manner of serving God consists: now we are to speak
briefly of the end whereunto it is directed. This end is the glory and
honor of God, which of al men, at all times, and in all actions is to be
propounded to themselves, as the chief and principal mark of man's life. For
albeit we may regard in many things our own selves, and the commodity of our
brethren: yet so far forth we must do this, as they are referred and applied
to the glory and honor of God, which ought to be more dear and precious unto
us, then our own salvation. For so it was unto Moses, who, rather then the
Lords mercy should not be magnified in pardoning the sins of the people
(which he was persuaded was the only means of glorifying God) spoke in this
manner unto him, Exo. 32.32.
saying, Therefore now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear:
but if thou will not, I pray thee, raze me out of the Book which thou have
written. So likewise Paul, in the nynthe to the Romans says, Romans 9.3.
I would wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren that are
my kinsemen according to the flesh, 4.
which are the Israelites etc. meaning, that such was his affection toward
them, that if it were the Lords will to glorify himself by their salvation,
rather then it should not come to pass: he wissheth himself to be eternally
separated from Christ, and so consequentlye to receive his portion with all the
damned souls in the dungeon of darckenesse. These two examples of the dear
servants and beloved children of God, declare and teach us, not only that we
must set before our eyes in all our actions, the glory of God, but also
prefer the same before all the pleasures of sin, yea before our own life
and salvation: wisshing rather to die, and forsake willingly all the
transitory pleasures of this miserable life, yea to be eternally condemned,
then that the Lord should be dishonored by our life and salvation. For as the
glory of God infinitely surmounteth the body, the soul, the honor, and all
that belongs unto man: so it ought to be in greater price and estimation with
us, and must continually be preferred above all things, and never be brought
into the balance of comparison with them. The want of which zeal toward the
glory of God in all our doings, and the preferring of earthly things before
heavenly, temporal before spiritual, as it breeds, and nourishes a
corrupt manner of profession: so it defiles all our counselles and works, and
carries us headlong to the love of the world, which is contrary to the pure,
vehement, and everlasting love of God. Wherefore as all the former gifts and
graces are necessary to this right manner of spiritual service: so also is
this end, of all things most necessarily to be respected of al true Christians,
according to the examples of Moses and Paul, that whatsoever we do, 1. Cor.
10.51.
we may do it (as we are commanded) to the glory of God. These things being
most truly taught, not by the vanity and weakness of man's reason, neither by
the uncertain and mutable opinions of men, but by ye most faithful and sure
word of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, we are in no wise to waver or doubt
of the truth hereof, but to receive them, as they be in deed, the words of
God, with full purpose of heart to live accordingly. So doing we shall not
only know what it is to do the Fathers will, but also have experience
thereof, in our own selves: a thing of all other, as most rare in the world,
so most chiefly to be desired. Let us then hear in a word or two, for our
further instruction, and for the clear understanding of this place, what it is
to do the fathers will. What it is to do the Fathers will.
To do the Fathers will, is in faith, hope, love, and fear, with all manner of
careful watching, and perseverance, to work those things which be commanded
in the Law and word, that GOD thereby may be glorified: for to do the thing
commanded, and fail in the manner of doing, is an half and maimed, yea rather
no service of God at all: to fail in both is Atheism, to fail in the work,
and yet to boast of the affection of the mind, and to be persuaded to have the
right manner of doing, is carnal liberty and licentious presumption.
Contrarily to have and delight in both is sound godliness, pure and undefiled
Religion, even before God the Father. Matt. 6.10.
And therefore our savior Christ in the sixte of Matthewe, giving unto his
Disciples a right and a lawful form of praying, commands them, and in their
persons all the faithful, to desire God to give them grace, not only to do
the things commanded, but also to observe this right manner of doing in this
peticion, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: meaning by doing of
the Fathers will, the things he has commanded being agreeable to his will, and
by saying, In earth as it is in heaven, the right manner of doing: whereby
appears the necessity of both these points, whereof we have spoken. For he
says not, Let that be done in earth, which is in heaven, or let those things
be done in earth which God has decreed: but, Let them be done so, and in such
manner, as they be in heaven: that is to say, purely, readily, willingly,
zealously, reverently, and continually, to the glory of God, and the comfort
of his people. For the will of GOD at all times, in heaven and in earth, yea
and in hell also is always done and fully accomplished, neither can there come
any thing to pass, but that only which the Lord has decreed. In
consideration whereof our Savior charge us in the petition, as we have
heard, both to do the Fathers will, which is necessary, and also to do it
so, as it is done in heaven: the which only makes our ministry and service
acceptable unto him.

Now that we see the truth and necessity of this doctrine concerning the
doing of Gods will: let us more particularly apply it unto our selves, that we
may the better know whether we be the doers of the word, and not only
hearers, which can have no hope and assurance of salvation. And to let pass
all those that swerve from the sound doctrine of truth, and godliness, as
Atheistes and infidels, which have neither works, nor any grace of
regeneration, and Jews which are void of true faith in the crucified Messiah,
let us examine by the rule of this truth, all those that seem to embrace
Christ Jesus and his true Religion, as Libertines, Catholics, and carnal
Protestants. The Libertine and carnal Protestant are by it most justly
condemned, because they have no works at all, neither any soundness of faith
or Religion: but only a false persuasion, and vain shadow of both, as the
Apostle James teaches in the whole treaty of his Epistle. The Catholics,
though they have many outward and glorious works to allege for them selves,
yet they fail altogether in the manner of doing: for not only their judgment
by false doctrine is corrupted, The last Tridentine Council, the sixth Session
and 14. Canon. Trid. the last, the 25. Session, and first decree. Trid. the
last, Session 14. Cap. ^.
in that they teach that works in part do justify, that they are accepted
the better for the virtue and intercession of Saints departed, that the
sacrifice of Christ his oblation only washes away sins committed before
Baptism: Lastly that a temporal punishment here and in Purgatory, can
satisfy and sufficiently recompense that transgression, whereby the perfect
Law and infinite Justice of God is broken: but also they fail in all those
points, which we have taught to appertain to the right manner of doing the
Fathers will. Triden. the last, Session 6. Canon 15. and 16.
Touching faith, they teach and believe that it is a point of humility,
contrary to presumption, to waver and doubt of our salvation. And therefore
calling upon God in this manner, they shall never receive any thing at his hand.
Touching a steadfast hope, which only looks unto Jesus Christ the Author and
finisher of our salvation, and that glory which he has purchased for us in
the presence of his Father, they can never have it: both because their faith is
wavering, from whence this hope must proceed, and also because they hold and
teach, that there be other places then heaven for the souls of men to rest in
after this life. Touching love and charity, which principallye respect the
salvation and profit of our brethren: do they not most uncharitably, and
flatly against the edification of the Church of GOD, (which in all public
actions under pain of damnation must be regarded) teach and believe, that
ignorance of Gods religion is the mother of devotion? do they not read the
word, pray, and give thanks in a strange language, and unknown tongue? do
they give (which is not theirs to give) absolution from sins of mere love,
and not for money? Finally, do they vex, grieve, torment, persecute, and
burn the bodies of Gods Saints, after two or three light conferences, and
disordered examinations, because they love their bodies, and the salvation of
their souls? No verily, these things rather do manifestly declare, not only
that they are destitute of charity toward men: but also of pure love toward
God. For he that says he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar:
for how can he that loves not his brother, whom he has seen, love GOD whom
he has not seen? As for the true fear of God, how can it be in them,
seeing that they hold that Gods eternal wrath against our sins, either
past, or to come, can justly and sufficiently be appeased by tryfling pardons,
and bulls given of mortal men? and to be short, considering that they teach
that all sins following baptism must be purged, not by the blood of Christ,
but be counteruailed, and so removed by good works, as they falselye term
them, or pardons and absolutions of sinful men, Trident. the last. Session 25.
in the decree concerning purgatory.
or equal punishment here in earth or in purgatory? the LORD forgive them,
they know not where. Lastly, for careful watchefulnesse to retain all the
foresaid graces, how can it be in them, seeing they are void and destitute
of these gracious gifts of GOD? If therefore they have any (as in deed they
have much) it is not, neither can be for these things: but to maintain and
increase their usurped power and authority of both the swords. And therefore
knowing every man to be by the instinct of nature given to acknowledge GOD,
and with some kind of watchefulnesse to serve him, they have out of the follye
and vanitye of their own brains, drawn out a kind of service, which
stands only in outward ceremonies, and bodily exercises, wherein they have
been, and are very watchefull: as in saying certain number of masses, prayers,
diriges, and such like, in doing of penance, going on pilgrimage, using of
holy water and holy bread, offeringes, carnal fastinges, crossinges,
anointinges, with infinite more of the same sort. All which inventions of men
are directly contrary to that worship, which our Savior Christ witnesses to
consist in Spirit and truth, and therefore justly condemned. For if bodily
exercises which may be well used, are neither profitable of them selves,
neither any part of the worship of God: do we not iustlye abhor and
detest the traditions which are after the commandments and doctrines of men?
And now as it is certain, that they fail in these things, so also in the
end, whereby all our actions must be measured and esteemed. For in that they
ascribe righteousness in part to their works which they have done, Romans
3.27. Ephesians. 2.8.9.
they may with as good reason challenge a part of the glory of their
redemption: whereby the Lord of necessity must be robbed of his honor, to
whom belongs all glory and dominion. Thus much I have spoken only of
skilful, malicious, and obstinate Papists, not of the poor ignorant ones,
which neither have known the truth, neither have their conscience set and
fixed in heresy. Albeit I dare affirm that neither these, neither any other
obstinate and wilful heretic, or ignorant person, does or can do the
Fathers will: Because as heresy is strong to condemn: so ignorance is blind,
and causes us to fall into the pit of comdemnation.

Seeing therefore that this doctrine of our Savior Christ condemns
Atheists, Infidels, Jews, Libertines, Papists, and al other sects of
heretics, ignorant persons, and every one that is not of the true Church of
God, we had need with all care and study to try and examine the very bottom
of our hearts, and rippe up all the inward and secret corners of our
consciences, least we also be justly reproved and condemned by the same. For
assuredly we must all in the day of judgment be tried, and made known to the
world by the practice of this doctrine, to the glory of God, and the comfort
of our own hearts, whether we have truly tasted of the gift of God in
Christ, or no? but if we do content our selves with the shadows of inward
godliness, as with the outward use of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord,
with lip service, and such external kind of profession, denying the power
thereof in our hearts, and works: we deceive our own hearts, we deprive
our souls of the joyful fruition of Gods presence, and walk, as fast as can
be, toward the place of darkness and endelesse destruction. For this is the
doctrine of the Son of God, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
heavenly Father, which is in heaven. Go to then, you carnal and worldely
Protestants, that say, Lord, Lord, God be praised, and God be thanked for
all his gifts etc. I demand this of you in the person of Christ, whose
servant I am though most unworthy, show me this your faith, and professed
religion by your works, and justify it before me and the Church of God. For
was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered Isaac his
son upon the altar? Was not Rahab the harlot justified through works, when
she had received the messengers, and sent them out another way? Know therefore
for a certeintie, all you that profess the fear of God, that faith professed
without works is dead: Yea as the body without breath: so faith without
works is clean dead, and therefore but a shadow of the true faith which
woorketh by love. But ye will say, We know and believe that Christ is the
Son of God. What then? the devils believe also, tremble, yea and confess,
Acts. 19.15.
JESUS we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? Yea, but we by
Baptism, and the Sacrament of thanksgiving, are become the professors of
Christ. Was not Judas a professor also, yea a preacher and a worker of
miracles? But we are no enemies and persecutors of Christ, as he was. No more
were those dispersed Christians to whom James writ, nay they suffered many
troubles for the outward profession of the truth: whom notwithstanding he
condemns for want of works.

These things therefore are but clokes of hypocrisy, and words of lies,
whereby Satan carries away many from the ways of godliness and life, into
the paths of wickedness and destruction. It is not then the outward show of
Christianitye, in countenance, word, and work, that avails any thing, 2.
Cor. 5.17
but only a new creature in Christ. In consideration whereof, I heartily
desire and beseech you all, from the highest unto the lowest, both to fly
this damnable corruption of worldly and carnal men, and to give all diligence
to keep and observe this heavenly manner of doing the Fathers will. Take unto
you above all things faith, join unto faith, hope, unto hope, love and
brotherly kindness, unto brotherly kindness, reverent fear of the Majesty
of GOD, unto a reverent fear, a continual and ^^cefull watchfulness in all
good works. For if these be amongst you, and abound more and more according
to the measure of the gift of Christ: they will make you that ye neither shall
be idle, nor unfruitful in the profession of Christ and his Gospel. But he
that has not these things, what face and countenance so ever he carries of
religion, wisdom, learning, and virtue, he is blind, and can not see far
into the mystery of godliness, or else has through ingratitude altogether
forgotten, that he was purged from his old sins.

Seeing then by this means, not only an entering shall be ministered unto you,
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior JESUS Christ: but also
your effectual calling, and eternal election shall be fully ratified unto
your own hearts and consciences, so as you may know perfectly that nothing
can separate you from the love of GOD: if there be any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowshippe of the Spirit, if any compassion
and mercy, think on those things which you have now heard, fulfill these
things, and you shall never fall, but the God of peace shall be always with you,
neither shall the comforter ever depart from you. But peradventure some will
say, O Lord, who is able for these things? In deed in respect of man it is
impossible, but with God as all other things, so this is possible, and has
been by his power wrought in man. For does not the holy Ghost witness of David,
1. Sam. 13.14. 2. King. 18.3.
that he was a man according to Gods own heart? of Hezechia, that he did
uprightly in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father had
done? of Iosia, 2. King. 23.25.
that he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might, according to all the law of Moses? of Zachary and
Elizabeth his wife, Luke. 1.6.
that they were just before God, and walked in all the ordinances of the Lord
without reproof? of Nathanael, John. 1.47.
that he was an Israelite in deed, in whom was no guile? Mat. 8.10.
of the Centurion, that there was not the like faith in Israel? of Anna, Luke
2.37.
that she living a widdowe four score and four years, went not out of the
Temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night and day? finally of all the
primitive Church both men and women, immediately after the ascension of Christ,
yt they continued with one accord in ye Apostles doctrine, Act. 2.46.
and fellowship, in breaking of bread, in prayers and supplications, eating
their meat together with gladness and singlenes of heart, praising God, yea yt
the multitude of them yt believed were of one heart, and of one soul, neither
any of them said yt any of yt which he possessed was his own: but they had all
things common? Wherefore seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, of kings, of Prophets, of Jews, of Gentiles, of men, of women,
which have served the Lord in this right manner of doing: let us also cast away
every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on: let us
run with joy and patience in this straight race which is set before us,
without wearines and fainting. For doubtless ye want of those things, joined
with the practice of the contrary vices, are the causes of all the punishments
of God, that are or have been in the world. For whence comes war, famine,
pestilence, translation of Monarchies and Kingdoms, overthrows of families,
Towns, Cities, and whole Countries: but from this, that we do not the will of
our heavenly father, as it is done in heaven? For want whereof, we that live
now in this peaceable land flowing with milk and honey, and in the light of
the Gospel shining unto us, for the space of twenty golden years, are of all
other most inexcusable. For who can tell and repeat the warnings, whereby God
in mercy has called us to repentance, and reformation of our lives? But who
has shed forth as yet the Christian tears of repentance? Not four years
ago, ye Lord did as it were with his own hand set a star in the heavens,
whereof the wisest Astronomer that lives, can give no reason. Since that, we
have been admonished by a great and strange Comete in the air, by earthquakes,
inundations of waters, all which signs and foreru^ners of Gods wrath are
returned to him again, as being unable to mollify our stony hearts, that we
might turn unto the Lord. Only his glorious Gospel abides with us: but alas
it grieueth me to consider how little place it finds in our hearts: how
carelessly received, and how generally by ye life and conversation of
Christians, it is defamed and discredited: so that I greatly fear that within
short time, it also will depart from us, and by the commandment of God go
unto a people, which shall (as the Thessalonians did) receive it, not as the
word of men, but as it is in deed the word of God. Well in the mean time,
for the better avoiding and turning away ye judgments of God which hang over
our heads, namely this present plague, whereby the Lord in mercy has visited
this City: I am to request in the Lords behalf the right honorable, the Lord
Mayor of this City, and the reverend Father the Bishop, that they would join
together in gathering together ye people, and calling a solemn assembly,
Joel. 2.16.17.
and sanctifiyng a general and public fast, according to the commandment
of God, and the necessity of this present time. This duty and christian
exercise is the rather to be done, least our English Church for want thereof,
may through ignorance judge it either altogether unnecessary, or not much
material. But if this cannot be obtained to be done in a public and solemn
manner, with all zeal and feruentnes in prayer and hearing the word of God
(which I most heartily wish and desire) then I do admonish every one
privately, both to use this, and all other good means to turn from us, and
this City, all those punishments which our sins have most righteously
deserved. For it is not the clean keeping, and sweeping of our houses and
streets, that can drive away this fearful messenger of Gods wrath, (albeit
as I approve these lawful ordinary means: so I mislike the desperate
tempting of God which I hear to be in some) but the purging and sweeping of
our consciences from all the stinking filthe and dross of sin, delivers
from the fear and peril of all evil, and makes us pure and holy vessels,
meet for the holy Spirit of God to dwell in. If you will employ all your
labors, studies, and cares hereunto, and offer up this sacrifice of praying,
fasting, preaching, and thanks giving, even from the morning unto the evening,
according to the example and godly practices of our fathers which have gone
before us: who knows, dear brethren, if the Lord will return and repent
and leave a blessing behind him, even the precious treasure of his glorious
Gospel which now we have, and the benefit of health which as yet we want? But if
this exhortation and request shall fall to the ground, and bring forth no
fruit, as commonly the word of God does amongst us, (such is the hardness of
our stony hearts) then your sin lies at the door, and abides, but my
duty, though in great weakness and fear, is discharged. Now therefore I
commend unto you, both this special and singular work of public and
solemn fasting, and all other godly works, with faith, hope, love, fear,
and watchfulness, wherein consists the sincere doing of the Fathers will:
desiryng and beseeching you all to receive, approve, and fulfill them unto your
lives end, that you may enter most joyfully into the kingdom of heaven.

Thus much by good occasion I have spoken, concerning the two sorts of
professors: now I am to speak by order, of the Apology and defense of the
former sort, for the avoiding of the final sentence of condemnation, contained
in these words: Many will say unto me in that day, The second part of the
text.
Lord, Lord, have we not by thy Name prophesied, and by thy Name cast out
devils, and by thy Name done many great works? In these words Christ
brings in not the unlearned, but the learned and those that seemed to be the
chiefest, and best professors of the Gospel, reasoning with him self,
touching the matter of entering into the kingdom of heaven. The defense of the
best sort of fay^ed profe^^ors.
They allege for themselves two principal and worthy works, not common unto
all, but almost proper and peculiar ^iftes to the Ministers and Apostles of
Christ: that is to say, preaching the word, meant here by prophecy, and
working of miracles, understood by casting out devils, and doing many and
great works. It may seem strange and marvelous in our eyes, that those which
can in truth allege for them selves these two works, should be secluded
from the kingdom of heaven, seeing that of preachers it is witnessed, that
because they turn many unto righteousness, Dan. 12 3.
they shall shine as ye stars for ever and ever: of others, that whosoever
shall give unto any of ye disciples of Christ, in his name, Mat 9.42. Mar. 9.41.
but a cup of cold water to drink, that he shall not lose his reward.
Again, seeing that of all works of love and compassion, these two in our
judgment are without all comparison the chiefest: for what greater love can
any man show toward the soul of his brother, then by preaching to deliver
it from the kingdom of darkness, and translate it into the kingdom of light?
or what greater love can there be showed toward his body, then to cure it
from all infirmities, yea and that which is marvelous, to deliver it from the
possession of devils? notwithstanding we see by the answer of our Savior
Christ, that these works, and therefore al other which be of less value, are
insufficient defenses, either to allege unto Christ for the avoiding of the
sentence of death: or to persuade our own consciences that we are beloved of
God, according to our former doctrine. For albeit they be necessary for diverse
and sundry causes before mentioned, yet they contain no part of that pure
obedience, which by Gods spirit is wrought in all the true members of Christ.
What then is that, which makes preaching and all other works acceptable unto
God, and profitable for ye comfort and salvation of the doer, seeing the works
themselves shall be rejected? Surely to answer in one word, it is the manner of
doing: whereof we have spoken before at large. In consideration whereof,
blessed Paul does justify his preaching, not because he did preach, (for woe
be unto me, says he, 1. Cor. 9.16
if I preach not the Gospel) but because he observed the right manner and
order of preaching. The which manner, The right manner of preaching respects
utterance, and the inward affection. Act. 20.24.
so far forth as I can see and gather, concerns either the utterance of
true doctrine, or the affection of ye mind whence it proceeds. For the
utterance, he witnesses that Christ sent him to preach the Gospel, 1. Cor.
1.17. and 21.
not with wisdom of words: yea that it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. Again, 1. Cor. 2.1.4. and 5. verse.
he rejoices that he came not with excellency of words, or of wisdom,
showing unto the Corinthians the testimony of God, and also that his word and
preaching stood, not in the intycing speech of man's wisdom: but in plain
evidence of the Spirit and power, that the faith of the hearers should not be
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. And to show in what words he
spoke the Gospel of God, and who was the author and teacher of them: he
shows plainly in an other place, 1. Co. 2.13.
saying, Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but in the words which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual things. For as the doctrine and foundation of our
redemption is altogether heavenly, and spiritual: so ought those that be
buylders thereupon, to build after a heavenly and spiritual manner: as the
Apostle teaches in another place, comparing this heavenly man to gold,
silver, and precious stones, and the contrary to timber, hay, and stubble, in
these words: 1. Co. 3.12.
If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
timber, 13.
hay, or stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire: and the fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is. Wherein we see how necessary a thing it is
for us, that be preachers and diuiders of the word, not only to look unto
the foundation of our doctrine, which is Christ: but also to the manner of
utterance, because that also must be tried and examined by the holy Ghost: as
gold, silver, etc. are tried by the fire. Therefore Paul in great boldness,
and authority speaks on this manner to the Corinthian preachers, 1. Co. 4.19.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the
speech of them which are puffed up, but the power. 20.
For the kingdom of God is not in word but in power. Whereby as he would
condemn their speech and manner of utterance, which delyghted the ear, having
no power or strength to weaken and unloose the hold of sin and Satan in
them: so he would commend unto them that manner of utterance, which should
least savor of carnal wisdom, and have greatest power to turn the hearts of
the hearers unto God: and as the Apostle does say of himself, that he used
no such manner of teaching, neither any flattering words, as it is in the first
Epistle to the Thessalonians: 1. These. 2.5
So he does most carefully commend and bequeath it unto Timothy and Titus
his two sons in the faith: 2. Tim. 1.13.
and in them to all other ministers, as a faithful treasure for ye edification
of Christ's body, forbidding them to give heed unto fables and genealogies, 1.
Tim. 4.7.
or to profane, and old wives tales, vain babblings, and oppositions of
science falsely so called, and contrarily commanding them to stay such things,
to speak and exhort with all authority, and to study to show themselves
approved to God, and workmen that need not be ashamed, and finally to divide
the word aright. This kind of preaching touching the uttering of the word,
diligently observed of Paul, and faithfully committed to his scholars, ought
with great care and diligence to be observed of all the ministers of God: that
the faith of the hearers may stand in the power of the Spirit and truth, and
not in the weakness of the swelling words of man's wisdom. But alas, who
preaches thus? nay who does not judge this kind of preaching to be void of
learning, discretion, and wisdom? Wherefore many do stuff their sermons with
new devised words, and affected speeches of vanity, not being content with
the words which the holy Ghost teaches. Many with unnecessary sentences,
proverbs, similitudes, and stories collected out of the wrytings of profane
men: many with curious affected figures, with Latin, Greek, and Hebrewe
sentences, without any just occasion offered by their text, with multitudes of
humane authorities, and diverse opinions of men, in whom there can be found
neither certain rule of truth, neither constancy in judgment, and therefore
very unfit to be admitted into that place as speakers, whereas the fearful
and mighty voice of God, has straightly charged all people to hear his
well-beloved Son, saying, This is my well-beloved Son, hear him. Many with
stagelike gestures, curious pronunciation, and such other actions that are very
unseemly for those men, which have taken upon them before God and his Angels,
to preach and publish unto his people the Gospel of Christ crucified. I would
to God that all the ministers of this land, in this point could put on this
affection of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 2.2.
fully to purpose with themselves to know nothing amongst their hearers, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. So we should not only cast aside this vain,
corrupt, and unprofitable manner of dividing the word of truth: but also
banishe out of our hearts the desire of all such popular praise, and
commendation. But to let pass the utterance of speech, let us come to the
affection of the mind: the general disposition whereof I touched briefly
before, to wit, that we should lay aside all desire of show of humane
knowledge, and purpose only to rejoice in the knowledge of Christ crucified:
the particular affections, required to make our prophesying or preaching
acceptable unto God, as they are commanded in diverse and sundry places of the
word: so the Apostle rejoices, that he observed in a good conscience this
heavenly kind of preaching. In the first chapter of the first Epistle of
Peter, the holy Ghost commends unto the ministers of Christ, an earnest
care, a willing heart, a ready mind, a zealous desire to become ensamples to
their flocks, 1. Pet. 5.2.
saying, Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caryng for it not
by constraynt, but willingly: not for fylthie lucre, but of a ready mind: 3.
not as though you were lords of Gods heritage, but that ye may be
ensamples to the flock. Also our Savior Christ the chief shephearde of the
flock, as appears in the tenth of Matthew. Gospel, Matthew. 10.
sending out his Disciples to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, charge
them wholly to depend upon him, to give freely without respect of filthy
lucre, to fear nothing in the execution of their office, to be fully resolved
in their minds to lose their lives for his sake: finally to keep them selves
in all respects pure, and innocent as doves. Whereunto agrees that
commandment of Paul to Timothy, touching the ordination of Ministers,
whereby he teaches, that every minister ought to be watchefull, sober, modest,
lovers, harborous, a lover of goodness, wise, ryghteous, holy, temperate, and
unreprovable. So that by these precepts and commandments it evidently
appears, with what care of the flock, willingness, and readiness of mind,
desire by example to edify, boldenes of heart, confidence in God, love of
Christ and his sheep: with what full purpose with loss of life to persevere
unto the end, and lastly with what contempt of all worldly praise, and with
what zeal of Gods glory, every minister ought to approve his ministry unto
Christ, and the consciences of his flock. But if we will see these precepts
put in ure and practice, let us diligently mark the life and conversation of
the Prophets and Apostles, especially of Saint Paul: (who as he was the
chiefest in work, so the playnest in declaration hereof,) and compare in every
particular his behavior in the execution of his ministry, with ours. He
says, 1. Co. 9.16.
Though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of: for necessity is
laid upon me, and vvoe is unto me, 17.
if I preach not the Gospel. For if I do it vvyllingly, I have a reward:
but if I do it against my will, notvvithstanding, the dispensation is
committed unto me. But which of us does not rejoice and is glad, when he has
preached a few sermons with lyking and praise of mortal men? What dumme dog
does terrify his own heart from sin, with this woe against him self for
not preaching the Gospel? or who does not for lucre, fear, and praise of
men, rather then willingly and of a ready mind, feed the poor flock of
Christ? Paul, though he was free from all men, 1. Cor. 9 19. and^
yet he made him self servant unto all, that he might win the more: unto the
Jew he became a Jew, to them that were under the law, as though he were
under the law, to the weak he became as weak, and in deed he was made all
things to all men, for the Gospels sake, that he might be partaker thereof. But
where is that Minister amongst us, which through love humbles him self, and
bears with ye infirmities of ignorance, lack of knowledge, wisdom, and
discretion in his flock and fellow brethren? Nay which of us with Paul beats
down his body, 1. Cor. 9.27.
and brings it into subjection, lest in preaching to others he him self
become a castaway? the Lord pardon us this our offense. For I fear me, the
care we have of our mortal bodies, far surmounteth ye care we have of the
salvation of our selves, or of our brethren. 1. Cor. 9.10 33.
Paul did please all men in all things, not seeking his own profit, but the
profit of many, that they might be saved: but as for us, though many I grant
do please all men in all things, yet they seek their own profit and gain,
not the profit of any one that he might be saved. For in deed they make
merchandise of the word of God, they are covered with the clokes of shame, and
walk in craftiness, they handle the word of GOD deceytfullye, preaching them
selves and not Christ Jesus the Lord, nor them selves the servants of his
people: and that which is most lamentable of all, they give great and just
occasion, why the ministry of reconciliation should be evil spoken of and
despised. 2. Cor. 4.1.2.
Contrariwise Paul, he spoke of Christ as of synceritie, as of God in the
sight of God, he cast of the clokes of shame, and walked in declaration of the
truth: he approved himself to every man's conscience in the sight of GOD, he
preached Christ Jesus the Lord, himself a servant for Jesus sake: and to
conclude, he gave no occasion of offense in any thing, but in all things
approved himself as the minister of God, 2. Cor. 6.7.
by the word of Truth and by the power of God. Seeing therefore many of us be
fallen away from our first love, and former zeal, and have embraced this
present world, which (if the Lord be not more merciful) will choke in us all
the graces of GOD: we had need to look unto our selves betimes, and to frame
our selves according to the example of this blessed Apostle, in the careful
and sincere dispensation of our ministry, least our preaching be (though
profitable to others) yet damnable to our selves. Moreover Paul was gentle
toward his flock, 1. These. 2.7 and. 11.
as a Nurse cherishes her children, exhorting and beseeching them as a father,
teaching openly, Act. 20.20.
and through every house, keeping nothing back that was profitable, but
showing unto them all the counsel of God: and to shut up all in one word,
he was very ready, and wylling to deal unto them, 1. These. 2.8
not the Gospel of God only: but also his own soul because they were dear
unto him. Behold here in Paul, as in a most clear glass, a perfect pattern
of a good and faithful servant of God: and on the other side our miserable
imperfections, and sinful degenerating from the same. This kind of preaching
is that only wherein we may rejoice, which is acceptable to God, profitable to
his Church, comfortable to the speaker. This is that true and perfect pattern
of preaching, which Paul committed to Timothy, both in respect of the
utterance, and of the disposition of the mind, which he charge to be kept
and observed, that he might be an example to them that believe, in word, in
conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith and in pureness, 2. Timo. 1.13.
saying, Keep the true pattern of the wholesome words, which thou have heard
of me in faith, and love which is in Christ Jesus. 14
That worthy thing which was committed to thee, keep through the holy Ghost,
which dwells in us. And to Titus, Tit. 2.7.
Above all things shevve thy self an example of good works, with vncorrupt
doctrine, 8
with the wholesome word which cannot be reproved. This is that which
though we allege in the last day for our selves, we shall not be disliked or
rejected. But alas our kind and manner of preaching, whether we regard the
utterance of speech, or affection of our hearts, does far differ from this,
nay it is almost clean contrary to it: for it gives no life to those which
are dead in sin, it has no power to strike in sunder, or to unloose the
hold of sin, no sharpness to cut a sunder the cords of wickedness, it
can not enter to the dividing a sunder of the soul and spirit, the joints and
the marowe, neither can it discern between the thoughts and intentes of the
heart: and why? our words are of our own making, and not such as the Spirit
of God teaches: our matter for the most part is the devises of men, the
disposition of our hearts profane, worldly and carnal, our intent and purpose
is to get honor, and worldly preferments. No maruayle therefore though our
labors be cursed, and not blessed, and we our selves in the day of judgment
be rejected: for as I have taught before, it is not the work done, but the
manner of doing, that pleases our heavenly Father. So that those only which
preach the word in faith, hope, love, fear, and all manner of watchfulness,
in season and out of season, being ready as to deal unto ye people the Gospel
of God, so also if necessity require, their own lives for ye confirmation of
their flock: those I say only shall reap ye fruit of their labors, with
great joy and gladness, even eternal life, wherein they shall shine as ye
stars of heaven. As for others, who have in preaching the word sought
themselves, their own praise and commodity, having little or no care of Gods
heritage, that it might be saved: (of which sort be those whereof I have
already spoken a little before) though they say in the day of judgment, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, yet they shall be sent away to their
own place of punishment, as workers of iniquity. If then the outward work
of preaching, which is so profitable unto the Church for the salvation of
souls, shall be rejected, being separated from the pure manner: who dare allege
casting out of devils, and the working of great miracles which only appertain
to the safety of body? Let not therefore the Papists rejoice, though they were
able to confirm every point of their religion by a great miracle (whereas in
deed they are not, except we will judge their vain forged miracles to be done
by the finger of God:) for if these miracles be separated from the true manner
of doing the Fathers will, the dooers themselves are but workers of iniquity,
as Christ most truly terms them in the verse following: and therefore so
far from being justified by these, or any other works of charity, being
separated from the true manner of doing, that they shall be unto them sufficient
matter of condemnacion. Well, it is neither preaching, nor working of miracles,
that can deliver the preacher or any other from the sentence of death in that
day, neither any other, which proceeds not from the right manner of doing the
Fathers will. But in as much as the wicked ones, which bear the show of
Christianity, may both in the outward work, and in a certain manner of
doing, come very nere unto the acceptable doing of the Fathers will, which in
appearance they do very much resemble: it shall be very profitable to search a
little deeper, How nere the wicked may come to ye ways of ye godly.
if by any means we can find how many, and what be those gifts which the
wicked, over and besides these, may allege for themselves, because they are
common to them with ye godly. It is certain by ye doctrine of our savior
Christ in ye Gospel of Matthew, Mark and Luke, Mat. 13.20. Mar. 4.15. Luke 8.11.
yt the wicked may willingly hear, understand, joyfully receive, and profess
ye word, yea endure for a season, and falsely persuade them selves to believe.
So is it witnessed of Simon Magus, that he heard Philip preaching, understood
him, joyfully received his doctrine, and that he believed, was baptized, and
continued with Philippe: in these words. Act. 8.13.
Then Simon him self believed also, and was baptized, and continued with
Philippe, and wondered when he savve the signs and great miracles that were
done. Notwithstanding Peter affirmed to his face, that he had no part nor
fellowshippe in that business: because his heart was not right in the sight of
God, but full of gall and bitterness, and that he was in the bond of
iniquity. Moreover they may relieve and succor, greatly and highly esteem of
the ministers of Christ, thinking nothing to dear for them: So Paul
witnesses of the Galatians, saying, Gala. 4.14.15.16.20.
And the trial of me which was in my flesh, ye despised not, neither
abhorred: but ye received me as an angel of god, yea as Christ Jesus. What was
then your felicity? for I bear you record, that if it had bin possible, you
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given the^ unto me. Yet they
afterward, as it follows in the same place, esteemed him as an enemy, in
so much as he says he doubted of them. Again, they may abstain from evil,
and do the outward works of charity, Matthew. 23.
whereby they seem very ryghteous unto men, as did the Scribes and Pharisees:
they may give their goods and lands unto the church, 1. Co. 13.3. Acts. 5.1.2.
as did Ananias and Saphira: they may be lightened with the knowledge of the
truth, taste of the heavenly gift and the good word of God, Heb. 6.4.
and the powers of the world to come, and be made partakers of the holy
Ghost, and yet fall from the grace received, as it is in the 6. and 10. chap.
to the Hebrews: Finally, they may suffer banishment and persecution for the
outward profession of the truth, yea they may do all the outward works in
serving of God, and helping their neighbor, which the godly do: but when the
question shall be demanded of Christ, who in deed and in truth is his
brother, sister, and mother, he will answer, Whosoever shall do my fathers will
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, Mat. 12.50
sister and mother. Now seeing how far sinners and ungodly men may resemble
the dear children of God, and yet be void of the graces of regeneration: let
us look into our selves, into our hearts, consciences, and whole manner of our
life, that we may see and know in all our actions, wherein we differ from the
wicked, and how we do our Fathers will: for it behooves every true Christian,
constrained with ye love of Christ, to do all these works before mentioned, in
constant faith, in sure hope, in pure love, in reverent fear, in great care
and study to please God, with zeal of gods glory, and tender love of his
brethren, with joy in the holy Ghost, with a resolved purpose without wearines
and fainting to continue unto the end, knowing that those only shall be blessed,
which shall continue unto the end. This is our living, holy, and acceptable
sacrifice unto God, and this only is our reasonable serving of him: wherein
whosoever continues, shall never perish, but be translated from death to life.
If we want this, though we hear often, know much, speak never so well of ye
Gospel, make never so much of preachers, and rejoice for a time in ye truth:
yet I say, if this faith, hope, love, fear and watchfulnes be absent, we are
bastardes and no children, hypocrites, no Christians, for whom remains
nothing, but a fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall
devour al ye adversaries of God and his truth. I speak this not to discourage
any, or to drive the weak consciences into distrust: but to awake the
slothful, and to terrify the proud, secure, and presu^ptuous protestants,
and also to stir us al up to a more vigila^t care in working our salvation. How
necessary this is to be preached and urged, the ignorance and error of many,
the want of love and fear of God in this land and city, does sufficiently
witness. I therefore, to make an end of this matter, commend this doctrine from
Jesus unto you all, beseeching you for the mercies of God, to receive it into
your souls, to believe it in heart, to commend it in word, diligently to
practice it in life, and with all your strength and might to maintain and
defend it, against all adversary power of Satan and his ministers.

The answer of Christ in the verse following, contains two points. The
answer of Christ.
First he denies these men to be his servants: Secondarily he sends them
away, and banisheth them for ever out of his presence, saying, And then I will
profess to them, I never knew you: meaning by knowing, acknowledging. For the
Greek word ((...)) signifies, not only a bare knowledge of a thing, but an
acceptance or approouing, which we call acknowledging, so that it is all one
as if he should say, Albeit you have by prophesying, and working miracles,
professed your selves to be my servants, and called me Lord and Master: yet
because you did not those things which I commanded you, I did never acknowledge
you to be my servants, and now I do profess unto you the same. O what a
terror, and grief of heart is this, to hear the Savior of the world, in whom
only there is hope of mercy and life, to deny and openly profess, that he
never acknowledged us to be his servants? The servant to be forsaken of his
loving Master, the subject of his godly Prince, the child of his natural
parents, the wife of her dear husband, is matter of intolerable grief and
deadly sorrow: But for a man to be forsaken of the Redeemer of mankind, and
that openly in the presence of all creatures, without hope of reco^ciliation,
whose heart does not quite fail him, and melte away, even to think thereof? O
then what a hell of torments shall it be to the soul, eternally to feel it?
Go to then, you young and desperate ruffians, you carnal and licentious
Protestants, rejoice in your youthful and wanton pleasures, cheer your
hearts in the days of your vanity, walk in the ways of your own lusts,
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, despise understanding and wisdom,
devise your witty proverbs against the just, deride and mock at the ways of
the godly, suffer not your consciences to accuse you, cast away the fear of
Gods wrath out of your hearts, and withdraw no pleasures from your minds: yet
know this for a certainty, that God will bring you, and every work to
judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or evil: at what time
you shall know and feel, by miserable experience, what it is to hear this
voice of Christ, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. As this denial of
Christ shall be most terrible unto the cursed company of al reprobates, so it
shall be most joyful to the little flock of Gods heritage: For they shall not
only rejoice, in that God shall be glorified in the destruction of all their
enemies: but especially in that they shall be acknowledged of Christ, as his
faithful servants and dear brethren, and be advanced into the inheritance of
his Fathers kingdom, in comparison of which honor, all the glory and pomp of
the earth, is nothing else but lothesome beggary.

Touching the second point of this answer, we are to note and observe first,
the sending of them away, and the reason thereof. For the first he says,
Depart from me, signifying thereby, that although they in outward show and
profession seemed to gather with Christ, as his servants, and therefore were
accounted amongst the number of Gods elect: Yet now when all men's hearts and
secret thoughts are opened and revealed, either to their endelesse
destruction, or eternal comfort, whereby the godly shall easily be discerned
from the ungodly: then even preachers themselves, woorkers of miracles, and all
other dissembling professors of the Gospel, shall hear with great sorrow and
grief, this final sentence of death and damnation, Depart from me. If any
man do ask me whyther they shall go from Christ, or where they shall abide
out of his presence, I answer briefly, into everlasting fire: as our Savior
Christ him self does witness in the 25. of Matthewe, saying, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. If then, dear brethren,
preachers of the Gospel, and workers of miracles shall be thrown from the
presence of God into utter darkness, as woorkers of iniquity, for want of the
true manner of doing the Fathers will: O Lord, what shall become of all those
Ministers, which receiving temporal things of the people of God redeemed by
the blood of Christ, do in the hardness of their hearts refuse to minister
unto them spiritual, and to feed them with the heavenly food of the word
unto eternal life? But because no admonition can move them to repentance, and
reformation of this heinous offense against God and his people, I leave them to
answer for themselves unto Christ, at the dreadful day of judgment: at what
time I fear me, that as they have been dum in this life, concerning ye
sounding out of the mighty word of god: so they will be altogether dumme and
speachlesse, when Christ shall call for a wise, diligent and watchefull discharge
of that stewardship which they have usurped, and horribly abused in the Church
of God. As for Atheists, Idolaters, blasphemers, sorcerers, despisers of
magistracy, murderers, adulterers, fornicators, oppressors, usurers, and such
like abominable sinners, how can they escape the vengeance and just recompense
of their reward, seeing that preachers of the word, and woorkers of miracles
shall be thrown into the chains of everlasting darkness? O that men would
seriously consider this, and turn unto the Lord with all their hearts and
souls, in this acceptable time of grace: for even now wisdom cries without,
the sound of the Gospel is heard in our temples: now is the time of peace,
now is the day of repentance: To day if you will hear the joyful voice of
Christ, harden not your hearts with the wicked of this world: but cease from
your own works, and do the Fathers will which is in heaven. So doing, the
God of peace shall sanctify you through out, and keep your whole spirit,
soul, and body blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
reason of this sorrowful departure is, for that in preaching, casting out
devils, and working miracles, they wrought and committed iniquity: for so it
is said, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Not that they did unlawful
works, but because they did lawful things unlawfully: for albeit they preached
and wrought miracles (both which did avail much to the edification of the
Church) yet in regard of the corrupt manner of doing, Christ calls them,
Workers of iniquity. This doctrine condemns all men which do lawful things
unlawfully: how much more those which do unlawful things, though they have
never so great a show of godliness? Good works, I confess, must be done:
but such only are good, which God has commanded in his word, not such as men
by worldly wisdom have devised: of which sort are running on pilgrimage to the
dumme and senseless images, doing of penance at the priests appointment, and
an infinite number of the same, not only in that Popish religion, but also in
all human and voluntary service. For they have not so much as a show of
commandment out of the word, and Scriptures of God: as may easily appear to
him, that has but once in all his life read over the Bible. Here then we see,
how every man may please and displease God: please, if he do that which is
commanded of God, after that manner he has commanded it: displease, if he do
any thing either not commanded, but devised of man: or do the thing commanded,
after an unlawful manner. In consideration whereof, all those that be out of
the Church, are justly termed workers of iniquity, for the which at the day of
Judgment they shall be eternallye condemned. Contrarily, those which are in and
of the Church, which is the mystical body of Christ, because they do works
commanded after an upright and sincere manner, Christ does justly call them,
Doers of his Fathers will: to whom by promise, not by desert, belongs the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting happiness.

Now therefore to make an end, I beseech you, for the love that you bear to
your own salvation, as though Christ should beseech you by me, to abhor
and eschew the cursed behavior of all dissembling professors, to embrace and
practice the upright and sincere manner of doing the Fathers will, to contend
and strive to enter in at the narrow gate of the kingdom of heaven, to fly al
appearance of evil, to abound plentifully in all good works, keeping faith,
hope, love, fear, and watchfulness without weariness and faynting, even
until the last moment of life: that Christ which is our life may receive us
into eternal life, and immortal glory. This is my humble petition unto you,
and my daily prayer for all the Saints and elect of GOD: that we being all,
most perfectly by the holy Ghost, and faith, united and incorporated into
Christ (as the members of the body into the head) might be partakers of the
fellowship of his glory, together with his and our Father, and all the holy
company of Angels, in the heavenly kingdom of all happiness and felicity.
Now I for my part assuredly hope, and persuade my self, that all those that
love the coming of Jesus Christ, will lovingly receive this my petition to do
thereafter: And I constantly believe, that our most merciful Father will hear
my prayers, and grant this my request, to the everlasting praise of his
mercy, and the continual comfort of his Church. To him therefore with his
Son, and the holy Spirit, three persons and one immortal and everliving GOD,
be all praise, power, glory and thanksgiving for ever and ever, Amen.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


