A TREATISE OF THE BEATITVDES OR Christ's happy men.

BY JAMES BUCK Bachelor of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in Suffolk.

Let us mourn and desire. Be meek, and humble, and merciful, and pure, and
peaceable, and hearing ill let us not revile again, but rejoice, and we shall
no less than with miracles attract them that behold us, etc. S. Chrysostom. in
Matthew. hom. 15. in Eth. Non sum melior patribus. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM
COOK, near Furnivalls Inn gate in Holbourne. MDCXXXVII.

To the Inquirer after Bliss, the Introduction to Christ's Beatitudes.
Blessedness is the Beatitudo est qu^etati^ ^^ntis in bono.
rest of an intelligent creature in its proper good, which is comprehensive of
all good. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest, says the
Spirit, Rev. 14.13. All motion tends to rest as its end; that therefore
determines the desires of man, and is his chief good, in which all humane
motions and affections are set at rest. The desire of all Nations is to
blessedness; men cannot but long to be happy; all their error is in mistaking
the ways to bliss. Wherefore our Lord JESUS, the Author of happiness, begins
his first and very eminent Sermon in the Mount, with the Beatitudes, and in
them declares the courses in order and effectual to true felicity. The
Philosophers define blessedness (...).
a power sufficing to live well; whence it is justly premised in the several
beatitudes, the graces whereof contain beatificall virtue, and an interest in
more than earthly fruition; for none could be happy thereby, did he enjoy all
the contents of the world.

Without controversy, whosoever believes in God, hopes in God, loves God, he
is blessed; and so much is distinctly set down in other Scriptures; but our
Master recites only eight happy men, either because all other beatitudes may
be reduced to them, as St. Thomas, and C. Cajetan conceive; or as Scotus is of
opinion, it may well be, Christ meant not to number all, but nominate some of
the chiefest. This is certain, that these specified, had most congruity and
influence to the state of the Apostles and their successors, and all spiritual
men; and they are of principal efficacy in the whole conversation of the
Regenerate, and the best discovery of a true Christian, and so were accordingly
pressed of Apostolical Preachers in the succession of the Church, for the
evidences of a man in grace.

At the first hearing our Lord pronounce Blessed are the poor, Blessed are
they that mourn, Blessed are they that hunger, we may perceive that the
Kingdom of heaven comes not with observation, neither is blessedness found
where the world looks for it; but God has chosen the foolish things of the
world 2 Cor. 1.27, 28. (...).
, weak things, base things, things set at naught, things that are not; ^
Kingdom is erected in poverty, satisfaction educed out of hunger, out of
sorrow consolation. It appears (says Lactantius L 4. ^ 2. App^re^ illi^
pot^ssin it quae^endam esse s^pi^^^ium, (...) i^^^dtit^^ titulus apparet. ^^jus
v^lan eto ^e^^ ne ar^am^n d^^imsu^ operis in propatulo ^sset. the^^u^^um
sapientiae ac veritatis abs^ondit.
) that wisdom must there especially be inquired for, where the sign of folly
appears, under veil whereof God has hid the treasure of his wisdom and
truth, that the mystery of his divine working might not be in open notice.

Dear Christian, give glory to thy Savior, in believing that he both as
wisdom infallibly knew, and as love rightly informed us where blessedness
inhabits; and what the carnal seek in riches, honors, pleasures, admit thou
in Christ's poverty, reproach, sorrow. Of this I am to assure every Christian,
be his faith never so sound and orthodoxe, except he have communion in these
graces, and make them his study and his practice, he can have no portion in
blessedness. Christendom is (...) S. B^^^. p. 61.
now all employed in controversies and disputes of the right faith and
religion, mean while the most neglect to frame their lives according to that
they profess, faith and true religion. But what do I holding Christ's searcher
without, who may be better entertained in the beatitudes themselves? All the
virtue and fruit whereof God Almighty impart to him, and all Christians, and
all for whom our Redeemer suffered, which is and ought to be the continual
supplication

of him that loves in the truth, and according to the common faith, JAMES BUCK.

The Contents.
The POOR.
Chap. 1. WHat poverty in Spirit is, and what the Kingdom insured to it. page
1 Chap. 2. Of the carriage of the Poor, in matters spiritual. page 9 Chap.3.
The demeanure of the poor in externals. page 14 Chap. 4. Of the Kingdom which
the poor enjoy. page 18 Chap. 5. Discoursing further, why God assists the
humble, and resists the proud. page 22 Chap. 6. Of the chiefest exercise of
humility. page 27 Chap. 7. Touching some evidences of blessed poverty. page 30
Chap. 8. Pointing at some ways that facilitate humiliation. page 36 Chap. 9.
Propounding some swasives to labor humiliation. page 40
The MOURNER.
Chap. 1. Of blessed mourning, and the subject thereof. page 49 Chap. 2. Of
mourning for our own sins. page 52 Chap. 3. How Christians are tied to mourn
for the sins of others. page 58 Chap. 4. How many Saints being very
transcendent in their grief for other men's sins, leave them without excuse,
that have no common measure of godly sorrow. page 66 Chap. 5. Of mourning for
our own miseries, and the calamities of others. page 71 Chap. 6. Of the
consolation that attends mourners, and the special comforts of the former
kinds of mourning. page 75 Chap. 7. Of the encouragements to the exercise of
holy mourning. page 80
The MEEK.
Chap. 1. Of Meekness, and the blessedness and subjects thereof. page 91
Chap. 2. Touching the exercise and reward of meekness, in matters Spiritual.
page 96 Chap. 3. Of the carriage and benefit of Meekness in Temporalties. page
101 Chap. 4. Touching the demeanure and support of the Meek, if in their
business they have not what success they would. page 109 Chap. 5. How the
meek demean themselves in public affairs. page 116 Chap. 6. Of certain
considerations helping and assistant unto meekness. page 119
The DESIRER.
Chap. 1. What Christian hunger is, and the sustenance thereof. page 129 Chap.
2. Of the effects and characters of gracious hunger. page 135 Chap 3. Touching
the latitude of blessed hunger. page 141 Chap. 4. Touching the way of freshing
spiritual appetite. page 147 Chap. 5. Of the satisfaction imparted to them
that hunger. page 152 Chap. 6. Of the hunger that shall be satisfied, of the
goodness that satisfies, and how goodness specially satisfies that hunger, by
preserving appetite and activity. page 160 Chap. 7. Concluding in admiration of
the satisfactions which are in Righteousness. page 165
The MERCIFUL.
Chap. 1. Of Mercy, especially in spiritual miseries, and namely, in condoling
with others in their infirmities. page 173 Chap. 2. Of the me^cy exercised in
correction and pardon. page 177 Chap. 3. Of mercy which the merciful obtain,
and how they find Gods mercy in the foresaid exercise of their mercy. page 183
Chap. 4. Of mercy in outward things. page 188 Chap. 5. Touching a serious
encouragement to almesdeeds. page 194 Chap. 6. Touching the manner in which the
merciful practice, that they may be blessed. page 200 Chap. 7. Concerning
inducements to works of mercy. page 205
The PURE.
Chap. 1. Of the subject to be purified. page 215 Chap. 2. Of the nature of
purity. page 219 Chap. 3. Of the excellency of purity. page 224 Chap. 4. How
purity is caused and maintained. page 229 Chap. 5. Touching the necessity of
Purification. page 237 Chap. 6. Of the sufficiency which Purity has unto the
sight of God. page 240 Chap. 7. How fitly the pure are rewarded with Gods
sight. page 243 Chap. 8. Of the fullness of that bliss which Saints enjoy upon
earth, in contemplation of God. page 247 Chap. 9. Of the fullness of this
Beatitude, in beatificall vision. page 251
The PEACEMAKER.
Chap. 1. Of peacemaking, and the peace that is made, and namely, of
Spiritual peace. page 261 Chap. 2. Of peace between neighbors, and private
men, and of unnecessary lawing. page 267 Chap. 3. Containing a double motion to
Lawyers, for the advancement of peace. page 275 Chap. 4. Touching the public
peace of Commonwealth. page 278 Chap. 5. Concerning Ecclesiastical peace.
page 281 Chap. 6. Of the blessing that rests upon the Peacemakers. page 288
Chap 7. Of the qualifications prerequisite in a Peacemaker, and Arguments that
urge peacemaking. page 294
The SUFFERER.
Chap. 1. Of persecution for righteousness. page 308 Chap. 2. Of suffering for
Christ's sake. page 308 Chap. 3. Touching the joy requisite in suffering. page
313 Chap. 4. Of the special glory coming to sufferers. page 315 Chap. 5. That
the best of men have been most persecuted. page 318 Chap. 6. That to be
persecuted for Christ, is the chief happiness under heaven. page 322 Chap. 7.
That the persecuted must not hate, but pray for the persecutors. page 326 Chap.
8. That the Apostles and their successors are liable to most persecution. page
328 Chap. 9. That Christians must be willing to suffer for righteousness, and
for Christ. page 333 Chap. 10. Concluding, that our utmost glory is in the
honor of suffering for Christ. page 337
REcensui tractatum hunc cui titulus est [A Treatise of the Beatitudes, etc.]
nec in eo quicquam reperio fidei orthodoxae aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo
minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur, modo intra sex menses proxime sequentes
typis mandetur.

SA: BAKER R.P. Dno Episc. Londin. Cap. Domest.
Martii 28. 1637.
BEATI PAVPERES. THE POOR.

A TREATISE OF POVERTY, handling the first Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCKE, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

(...). Beloved, give all diligence to be subject to the Bishop, and to the
Priests and Deacons. For he that is subject to them, obeys CHRIST which has
assigned them to their Office, and he that is disobedient to them, is
disobedient to CHRIST JESUS. Indeed he is an arrogant, contentious, and proud
man, that obeys not his Superiors: Now God says, he resists the proud,
but gives grace to the humble. S. Ignatu. Epist. 6. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBVS.
LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and WI^: COOK, 1637.

C R
royal blazon or coat of arms BEATI PAVPERES.
MATTHEW. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, --
CHAP. I. What poverty in Spirit is, and what the kingdom insured to it.
THE skillful in Architecture lay foundations proportionable to the height
whereunto they would raise their buildings, S. Carsar^us. hom, 18.
therefore our Lord minding to erect a fabric, Luc. ^.1^.
that should reach to the highest (heaven) lays the foundation under the earth
in lowness it self. CHAP. 1.
Because the bottom of humility is the principle of virtue, he begins there,
saying; Blessed are the poor, and orders the first beatitude against Pride,
the first sin of the Devil: and Man, for the better insight into which
beatitude, we will discuss in brief, what is meant by poor, what by the
addition in spirit, what by the kingdom of heaven.

For the first, Tertullian is right, Nullas profecto spiriru pauper est nisi
humilis. In libro de patientia.
There is none poor in spirit but the humble, and he that is not proud is
poor, St. Gregor. in Job. lib. 6. c. 16.
poor as conscious of his own nothing; for which St. Basil notes, One is said
to be a servant and poor, for that he has nothing of his own, In Psalm. 33.
(...).
poor in spirit as apprehending his need, and well pleased to be nothing in
himself, all in God, as the indigent and necessitous are sensible of their
own wants, so they of their emptiness and vacuity of all good, and in that
respect they be meet guests for Gods table ( Luc 14.21) as finding no
sustenance out of him; hence the servants that were sent to invite others are
willed to bring in the poor, as certain of their ready coming, who being
privy to their own necessities, neither had nor pretended succor elsewhere,
^^^v. ^.4. In^pes sensu ve^^ant ad me, si qui sunt humiles cord --. quod alibi
dicitur spiritu pauperes, s^d side d^vites, ista veniant ad epulas s^pientie.
Origin. in Genesis hom. 16.
and ( Prove. 9.4) they are by name called to Wisdoms banquet, to which feast
no rich proud Haman may approach.

The poor is an absolute selfe-de^yer, is and loves to be in pure dependence,
abandons all propriety, claim or longing for one thing rather then another,
will never choose but resignes to God, [The Poor.]
to be and have what the Lord sees most fitting in reference to his glory and
service, among other creatures, he preferres not himself above others for
sufficiencies, because the mere good pleasure of God made the difference, he
is content with whatsoever the wise providence of God disposes to him; in the
first of these, he honors Gods loving kindness that freely gives all, in the
second, his judgment, that diversely gives to sundry; in the third, his
righteousness, that duly proportions to every one ( Ier. 9 24) He is not
poor but proud, that conceives he has, or desires to have, or grieves that
he cannot have something of himself not of Gods free grace (1. Corinthians. 4.7.)
for one may desire that which is impossible (after he has fancied and wished
it to be possible) As Lucifer and Adam affected a kind of divinity and
likeness to God in knowing and working of themselves, and would have promoted
themselves out of Gods order, and without obedience, merit, and inhering in him.

There is an insolency in high looks, gate, apparel, attendance, which is,
as it were, the froth of pride, and bears its reproach amongst men; but the
pride most detested in Scripture, is that of the Spirit, whereby the Creature
that is of nothing, would be something of it self. So there is an humility of
the face in countenance, gesture, but the principal humility is that of the
heart, in conscience we are nothing of our selves.

The humble are expressed by the name of the Poor, because the poor are
commonly submisse, S Leo fin de Beatitud page 867.
and the rich high-minded; and to imply, that God generally chooses the poor
of the world to be rich in Faith ( Iam. 2.5) not only to have grace, but to
abound in it; and such are brought to God by a more easy and ordinary work of
grace, when the rich that have much of the world and the man, are hardly turned
to become as children and not trust nor be lift up in their wealth; S. Gregor.
in Job. lib. 4. cap. 3. Says this is eff^cted ex solo miraculo --
as CHRIST'S saying intimates, ( Math. 19.24) There must be an extraordinary
hand of God in way of converting grace, to make them that excel in gifts of
fortune, body, or mind (1. Cor. 1.26) to deny all and become nothing for him.
For albeit there are none worse, then the extreme poor for the most part be,
As St. Peter Da^^an ^^ves of ye coun^^ey ab^ut Eugubium, Hec regio, quo magis
invenitur aliena livitus, eo magis exuberat viti^s In vi^^s Rodulph^ Episc:
^uguben^
yet God most familiarly calls of the poorer sort, and in that sense also the
poor receive the Gospel, as aptest to live by Faith, and delight themselves
in the exercise and riches of CHRIST.

(2) The addition in Spirit carries much sense and imports four things
especially: First, that the fountain of their poverty is the holy Spirit, by
which in all good doings men are acted, like as in wicked they are informed by
the Spirit of the world; whence sprang that phrase, Ye know not what Spirit
ye are of ( Luke 9.55) and the word Spirit imports Gods blessed Spirit, when
it is put absolutely without any limitation signifying what Spirit, or whose
spirit. wherefore it notes here, that our Lord speaks not of common but of
Spiritual poverty: hence ( Luke 6.20.) Lifting up his eyes on his Disciples,
he says, Blessed are ye poor, for a sign that he blessed only such poor, as
were his Apostles, that neglected all things for him.

2. In Spirit notes that the blessed humility is sincere, not alone in show,
but in Spirit: as ( Math. 11.29) Penitents are moved to learn of CHRIST, that
he is humble in heart, not in face only; for He S. Bern de Passione domini, c.
17.
that is humble in heart is not pleased with counterfeit humility, but with
true humility. And it is the solid humility that does good, and draws others to
imitation and perfection in virtue, the fained bears no fruit. Humility is so
graceful a virtue, S. Novat. Catholic.
that Pride it self is affected to go vayled under the color of it, l^st i^
should be abhorred; many that are far from it, assume on themselves a
semblance thereof, to get esteem: therefore our Master requires the reality,
not the bare pretense of it. as ( Luke 1.48) The blessed Virgin says, S. Bern.
de gradibus humilitatis, page 978. Gloriosares humilitas, qua ipsa quoque
superbia pallia^e se apperit, ne vilescat,
God looked upon her lowness in mind, as well as in her estate; she says
lowness in the abstract, the more to debase her self; as we say your
Highness to exalt, and the lowness of his Handmaid, as agnizing her self the
meanest of all Gods servants: but her lowliness was in Gods eye, as well as
man's, and therefore was unfeigned.

3. In Spirit exacts, that this poverty be voluntary; not that all Christians
are bound to renounce their Temporalties (although they that humbly so did in
furtherance to perfection, had the prelation in this (...). S. Nazian. fin 15.
beatitude) but that all are universally obliged in preparation of mind, to
admit poverty as riches, and humble their spirits under Gods dispensing hand,
without any repining at their Fortunes. Many are poor in (...). S. Basil. in
Psalm 33.

Quantos n^videmus humiltatos, sed non humiles: S. Bern. sup^r illud omnis qui
se exa^tat.


condition, but very covetous in affection; these are humbled, but not humble;
humbled with penury and other extremities, not humbled to make at least a
virtue of necessity: frame their minds to Gods providence, and take their
spirit off from lying vanities.

4. In Spirit, declares that humility does chiefly consist in the prostration
of superior reason, and the higher powers of man, subjecting themselves to
God, as nothing without him ( Ioh. 1.12, 13) As spirit is put for the most pure
and sublime part of the soul (1. These. 5.25) And as one says well, The
Humility of the Mind and Spirit is a noble Nobilis inopia est ment^s
humilitas, v. inter opera S. Aug. tom. 9. de duo lecem abasin^um gra^^bas, e. ^.
poverty: This poverty is placed in the Spirit, because the fear of
humbleness is in the estimation of the mind, setting naught by it self;
contrary whereto is the imagination of the mind, and rising of the Spirit in
high thoughts, robbing God of his glory. Will thou understand that there is
robbery in the very thought? he thought it not robbery, says the Phil. 2.6.
Vi^ audire in solaest^^tione rapinam esse etc Gille^ert supra Cant. ser. 19.
Apostle, the most extorting pride is in the mind by thoughts, arrogating to
it self, and affecting what belongs and is proper to God; as the D^vils would
have been, and were in spirit and will, T^tian contr. Greces p. 17^.
latrones Divinitatis -- and ADAM propounding this end to his prevarication,
that he might be as God, was deep in conspiring for the Deity, and in the
guilt of high Treason against Faustus Rhegionsis de libero arbitrio, l. 1. c.
1. usque ad divinitatis ambitu^, and usque ad crimen majestatis accessit.

(...).


God, as the Subject that should strive for the royal seat, and to be King,
or as King.

5. By the Kingdom of Heaven assigned the Poor for their bliss, is meant the
good of the Gospel, both in grace and glory, which is appropriated to them:
The Poor receive the Gospel. Because Spiritual poverty initiates into the
Kingdom of grace, intitles to the Kingdom of glory; as the condition which
renders capable of all Evangelicall good, which the poor may and ought to
apply unto themselves; He that has no money, is to buy Wine and Milk without
price, Esa. 55.1. The poor receive the Gospel to be sovereign over them,
they are willing the Kingdom should be Gods; their mind is not a Kingdom to
them but Gods spirit, which they accept to rule over them and guide them.

It is true, that in all the beatitudes, the bliss is not only enjoyed in
Heaven, but tasted also upon Eearth; yet the poor and the persecuted, as most
going out of their selves, and having least of the Earth, have most of Heaven,
and peculiar fruitions of God and blessedness: and that is the reason, that
whereas in the rest, the promise and reward runs in the future, they shall be
comforted, they shall be satisfied, etc. As St. BERNARD has observed, To
Poverty it is not so much promised as exhibited, therefore Aliis virtutibus
promissio futuro tempore indicatur, p^upertati non tam promittitur, quam datur,
unde and praesenti tempore enunciarum est, quoniam ipsorum est regnum coelorum,
ser. 4. de adventu.
it goes in the present, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: for because in
poverty and persecution there is great hardness in the duty, they are
prevented with a fore-running presence of reward.

By the discussion of the words we find, that notwithstanding the stately
flourishes and fair shows that some sins make, the creature that is poor
of it self is undone by sin: and indeed what is sin but mere privation
and want?

That in truth the spirit is not poor, that expects to be happy in any thing,
besides God and his Kingdom. Whence ( Luke 15.14.16) all the while the
Prodigal desired to fill his belly with husks, he was b^t beginning to be
in want. He that is thoroughly poo^e, knows that nothing but CHRIST can
satisfy for sin, or satisfy a soul: the windy and empty creature
nour^sheth not the hungry soul, but the hunger of the soul.

That this blessed p^verty, is not so much any special virtue, as a sweet
di^pose of the soul, turning it from the empty creature, and converting it to
God, that it may be filled, and so it ^unnes through all the life, and all the
graces of a true Christi^n; and causes denying of himself, and seeking God in
them: in Faith it humbles us to believe without evidence or demonstration, in
Chari^y to respect Gods glory, and our neighbors ^ood, etc. Humility is with
the most excelling Divine, what pronunciation is with the famous Orator; that
is the grace of the whole Oration, this of the whole conversation: it is not to
be restrained to the first entrance, but extended to all progress in religion;
(...), etc S. Basil. in As^ct, in sin.
the soul cannot thrive in Grace, except it grow withal in Humility. For in
the Kingdom of Grace, greatness is measured by degrees in humility, He that
will be great among you let him be your Servant. A Religious person asked the
holy man Evita ejus ^. 36.
BERNARDIN^, how he might bring a Spiritual life to good issue; always
increasing virtue: who for answer, required that he should prostrate himself
flat before him on the ground; signifying humility, to be the foundation of
proficiency and perfection in Christianity. In sum, the grace here blessed in
poverty is perfect humility, the blessing of that grace, that it states in the
Kingdom of heaven a sacred frame of spirit, divinely ruling, in due subjection
to God, according to Laws Celestial.

CHAP. II. Of the carriage of the Poor, in matters Spiritual.
THe Poor, remembering the creatures make, that the best was of nothing; and
has more of darkness and of nothing, then of light and of something; for it
is infinite that it has not, that which it has is finite, and the light
thereof is not without a shadow, as mutable of it self if not sustained: this
the poor remembering abhorres the thought of being independent, and a rule to
himself to do his own will ( Ioh. 6.38) and not seek the good of others, as
the Devil would have bin in his pride a law to himself and in no kind subject
to others; G^rson. com. 4. Sermon ^. de Angelis.
whereas every reasonable Creature put in superiotie is tied to serve unto the
profit of inferiors, that proud Spirit by ambition to exempt himself out of
Gods government, fell out of his protection and ruined himself.

The Angels that stood were thus far poor, as not to presume on themselves,
but Gods free grace and concourse, they using the abilities wherewith God had
graced their nature. Now a lapsed creature is not poor so only, but further
in absolute inabilitie to do any thing of himself pleasing to God, so all the
power which we have, to cooperate with God and work our salvation, is from
the sufficiency of that grace which for CHRIST'S sake is offered unto all, to
whom the Gospel is vouchsafed.

The good in order to salvation is not educed out of our nature, but infused of
Gods grace, ( Romans 7.18.) R^^ 7.18. In my (...) devils nothing (...) good,
Signi^^^rs ^uoniam non a ^ob^^, sed a Deo e bonam ^alatis nostrae S Ir^n^^s, l.
3 c 23.
We are so directly poor as not to have the least Spiritual and good thought
of our own (2. Cor. 3.5) Therefore the propriety of this virtue is in the
acknowledgement of Gods grace, that there S Pr^per ^e vocation^ ge (...) Lib 1.
^^. Epi^t. ad Demetriadem.
is no act, nor moment wherein it would not be ill with us, if, the Holy Ghost
should leave us to our selves.

We are to confess.

1 That the grace which pleases God in rigor of justice is not in us, but in
CHRIST, CHAP. 2.
ours only, as we are made one with him. Phil. 3.9.

2 That our works are not acceptable and rewardable for themselves, and as
proceeding of natural forces, but because of Gods covenant and the promises
whith for CHRIST'S merits, be made to them, and as they flow from, and be
actuated by CHRIST'S grace.

3. That it is not we that work, but CHRIST and his grace in us and by us, we
being but inferior agents, or rather instruments under him, (but voluntary and
obedient instruments) 1. Cor. 15.10. Hereupon (as it is in the relation of the
slaughter of the Fathers in Sina) He that excels in virtue, ascribing all, De
interemptione patrum Sinae, cap. 15. 19. Iun, 14. in Meraphrast.
not to his own labors, but Gods virtue, may bear himself humbly, as who
persuades himself, that he is not of himself the worker of good and honest
things; but the Instrument of grace which works in him.

4. That the good works, whereby we please God and grow in his favor, have
their efficacy from the grace of the Gospel, Adrian de Sacramento
Eucharistiae, fol. 20.
and our Lord CHRIST, as receiving tincture from him; and being preferred in
his dignity and desert by Evangelicall contract, applyable to them.

The Humble thus confessing all good received, and that of grace, (which
prevents and assists and follows and crowns our endeavors) glory not in
their gifts, but the giver and his grace (1. Cor. 4.8) assume nothing to
themselves, as infinitely wanting to divine concourse and helps, confide not
in their own deeds many ways imperfect and short of Gods goonesse, but in the
mercies of God, who (notwithstanding all their unworthiness) vouchsafes his
grace to them, and in the merits of CHRIST, which supply all their defects, and
be equal to the whole will of God.

The poor consider, that if they should pride themselves in the eff^cts of
Gods grace, he might justly withdraw his liberal hand, and permit them to
their own nothing, and that in true esteem, seeing that it is God that work^s
all, as St. Bernard concludes; De donis Sancti spirit^s, c 2. Tanto quisque
humilior esse debet, quanto est superior.
so much the humbler should they be, by how much the more they are advanced:
because the more they receive grace to do, the more they are indebted to the
donor that inricht their poverty.

True humility retains its own propriety in the greatest fullness of grace,
as agnizing that it is still nothing of it self, but all is of grace, and in
God that gives and continues. Therefore our Lord that would not have us lie for
humility, B Aug de verbis Ap^st. fol, 28.
wills us, when we have done all, to say, we are unprofitable. ( Luk 17.10) In
the flower of our best deeds, to be mindful in whose virtue we work, and how
nothing is of our selves, without CHRIST, but imperfection and deficiency, and
how far in our utmost we are less then Gods mercies to us, how remiss
concurrers we were, and users of Gods grace and gifts that our all is nothing,
to that we ought, nothing to that we might, were it not for our sinful
negligence and unproficiency. Away then with all vaine-pleasing our selves, and
resting in what we have done: S Chrysostom. in Phil hom. 2. Zaver in vita ejus. l.
c. 16.
such considerations beget solid humility. S. Chrysostom. de compunctione.
Which is to do like Saints, and yet tremble and deject our selves more then
sinners: because our best is not correspondent to our receipts, but unworthy of
God and his loving kindness to us: the poor of Sion in the faithful use of
their talents be much in judging themselves for their unfruitfulnesse and
penutie in good, and that is their glory to humble themselves more in their
good deeds, then ordinary people do for their Vtinam fratres mei, utinam nos
illam haberemus humilitatem in peccatis nostris quam Sancti habaerunt in
virtutibus suis: Guarricus in purificatione S. Mariae, sermon. 1. (...).
sins.

The Poor as in despair to acts of grace, without attracture from above,
carry all their virtue in God, not in themselves. For as the ship attaines the
Haven more by the benefit of the wind then the sail: so we prosper more by
actual influences from God, then our own habits and (...). S Basil. de
humilitate.
Labors.

A man may be himself in the very habits and use of grace, if he go upon his
own strength therein, and not the grace of CHRIST, to be sufficient for him to
begin and finish each Christian duty, according as it is; not he that lives,
but CHRIST that lives in him and breathes upon him, by fresh and continual
inspirations. St. PETER, in confidence of graces received and habits in him,
put himself before his Brethren, and thought to do something of himself, by
virtue of those graces, and Gods general concourse; who presuming of himself,
fell into a presumptuous sin, and came behind those before whom he preferred
himself, CHAP. 3.
and is an instance, that except the LORD build a house, the laborers labor
in vain, and that our best way to have present and effectual aid, is to lie
low in our selves, and hang entirely upon GOD, as our duty is to know our
selves but poor men, or rather worms, and therefore as coming out of the
earth to S. Greg. Naz. ep. 119 inter Basilianas (...).
creep by the ground to follow our Savior, and be of his company, minding not
high things, but the least of the little ones: for of our selves we are
nothing; yea, as much worse then nothing, as grace is better then sin.

CHAP. III. The demeanure of the poor in externals.
SAint Gregory i. Reg. l. 2. c. 1. pauper spirita esse non p^terit, qui amare
adhuc aeternos the sauros noscit ibid. l 5. c. 4.
shows that to make one of Gods poor, is in contemplation of goods that never
fail to raise the mind unto contempt of those that must needs perish:
Therefore he cannot be poor in Spirit that has not learnt to love everlasting
riches: for till then he is not driven out of the creature, whence, Luke 6.24.
our Lord pronounces a woe to the rich, because they have their consolation,
declaring their condition miserable that can satiate their joy with any worldly
good, which is no proof of Gods special love, which cannot remoove the guilt
of sin, nor fill up the def^ct, nor cure the malady of the Spirit, no more
then fine apparel can heal an inner sore, albeit the carnal heart dwells in
flesh, and rests in the contents thereof, and attends not this insufficiency,
unless God pursue it, and suffer not the creature to yield its common
satisfaction. Hos. 2.7.5.13. Luke 15, 16.17.

Saint James chap. 1.9. aptly enjoynes the brother of low degree to rejoice in
his exaltation, that in Christ's fraternity he was participant of true riches,
the rich in his humillation, verse, 10. as made low in spiritual poverty and
apprehension of want in abundance, and having outward things, as if he had
them not, without any repose in them; whereas generally high degree keeps away
sense of what is needful to bliss, and stays the soul in sensual
pleasures, the portion of unreasonable creatures, Psalm. 49.20. Homo cum in
honor esset non intellexit, ac si diceretur, bon^r absorbuit intellectum. S.
Bern. ep. 237.
Job was rightly called a perfect man, when he was able in his hard trial with
a noble imprecation, to curse himself if he had rested his joy in transitory
riches, Cha. 31.25. If he rejoiced because his wealth was great, and his hand
had gotten much.

Humility is a mere dependence on God, and therefore stands alike affected to
poverty, riches, ignominy, honor, sickness, health, as God bewils them and
orders them for his glory and our souls good: and nothing should so joy the
lover of God as his will, and the good pleasure of his eternal counsel, in
which he ought to satisfy himself, and be as glad at the least as another
would be the greatest. De Kemp. de imitatione Christi. l. 3. 12.
Perfect humility inclines other things equal to that which has most
congruitie with the state of Christ in this world, CHAP. 4.
and which he has sanctified; add the apter way of perfection and
familiarity with him, and therefore to be as the LORD JESUS was: rather abased
in poverty and contemned, as simple to the world, then magnified for policy,
riches, honors. Bonaventura. ser. ^, de omnibus sanctis.
No marvel if poverty was refused before Christ: but since Christ chose it, Et
in suam accepit partem, it is to be savorie unto Christians, and embraced by
them. Seneca reasons against them; who when some point after them as they walk
in the street and say, O viru^ doctum! see a learned man, are more delighted,
then if it were said, O virum probum! there goes a virtuous man. And yet the
Christians be rare, that are not gladder of the gifts that make admirable with
men, Of gratiae gratis dagae, then of gratiae gratum facientis.
then of the graces that make acceptable with God, Luke 10.18.20. When the
seventy exulted; that even the Devils were subject unto them: our M^ster
insinuates, that Satan for his pride fell as lightning from heaven, and
represses the rising of the Spirit for such privileges, and forbids staying in
our joys in the gift of miracles, Tertul. adversus Marcion. l. 2.
or any endowments or operations that men may perish with, and propounds as a
due object of our rejoicing, they having our names written in the book of
life, which is the roll of them that be in the state of true grace.

All which is not against high places in Church or Common wealth, for degrees
are of God; but ambitious seeking of them, and lofty behavior in them. An
Emperor may be humble, a beggar proud, it is the low mind Christ requires,
not the low estate, that men should not affect inordinate eminency, nor think
themselves worthy honor, which God casts not upon them, but lay themselves
down to Gods providence, and the order of his word, for reputation and
advancement, and get a good report by Faith, Heb. 11.39. It is against the
faith of GODS kingdom and wise government to desire of accept glory of men out
of his ways. John 5.43.

And without doubt it is culpable for a man to climb up into a state (moribus
suis et meritis improportionatu^ that suits not with his manners and merits,
and so makes not of necessity a virtue, Vid. S. S. Hilar. de Trinitate l. 9.
but of vice necessity. Gers^^, ^^^plicitudine (...) ^sticorum. fol. 26. v.
moribus suis et meritis inproportionatum.
Otherwise promotion is of GOD, and many in their ignoble rank are as
emulating and conceited of their worth, as who is most, and given to aspire, if
they had any possibility, and because of their forlorn hopes, fuming against
men of quality and desert, and crying down prelacie.

The Poor seeks not great things for himself, and if God allot them, looks
farther then himself in them: It is a passage worthy St. CYPRIANS preferment,
As it is De jejunio et tentatione. Sicut pereptoria est altitudo qu^sita, et
periculo fissima est oblata, non quod potestas quae ex Deo est, sit damnabilis,
aut ordinatio divina peccatorum sit obsterrix, sed quod excellentia^, cujus
spiritus sanctus author, ita debet complecti humilitas, ut qui vocatus est
superior nesciat se sublimem, and per omnia agroscat conditio co^ditorem,
gratia largitorem.
pernicious if it be sought, so offered it is very perilous: not that the
power which is of God is condemnable, nor that the ordinance of God is the
midwife of sins; but that bumblenesse ought so to embrace highness, whose
Author is the Holy Ghost, that he which is called higher may not know himself
aloft, and the creature in all things agnize the Creator, and grace the giver.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Kingdom which the Poor enjoy.
NO man will doubt that the Poor are blessed, that believes them possessed of
a Kingdom, in which is all variety of contents, and the Kingdom of God,
which, according to his super-eminency, transcends all humane satisfactions and
apprehensions, ( Ps. 4.7) Because men seek in Riches and Honor excellency and
abundance, therefore CHRIST D. Thom. 12.69.4.
promised the Poor that take their affections from them, the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereby man attaines the excellency and abundance of all good things.
When man's dominion cease, Gods Kingdom begins: when we see we have no power
to rule our selves, God erects his Kingdom in our hearts; and puts upon us the
holy Regiment of his Spirit: when man is nothing, God is all in all: when the
heart is broken and despaires of the creature, God helps; S. Basil. ibid
because Physicians relinquish, the broken in heart God himself draws nigh to
them, and undertakes their cure (Psalm. 34.18)

( Es. 66.2) The Lord looks to the poor and contrite, as the Virgin Mother
said, GOD looked on her lowliness; and a look from the highest Majesty is such
a grace, that King David, who knew the estimate of such favors, admireth it
should be shown a man. Lord what is man that thou should look on him? Such
testimony and imparting of his grace, satisfies the illighten'd heart ( Psalm.
4.6) Origin. in Lev.
It is full happiness if God look on a man (Lev. 26.9) PETER was almost
perished, CHRIST recovered him with a look; as the Sun looking upon the
fields, that would else remain barren, makes them flourish with its rays; so
God looking upon us, illuminates and makes us fruitful with his beams.

The poor that has nothing in himself, possesses all things in Christ (Gal.
2.20) B. Aug. de continentia, c. 22. Vivo jam non ego, sed Christus, and ubi
non ego, ibi faelicius ego.
Now I live not, but Christ; and where I am away there I do best. We are
happiest in not being, that CHRIST may be instead of our selves, an agent in
us, and for us, infinitely more blessed, potent and satisfactorie. (1. Pet. 5)
God gives grace to the humble (and as Lorinus there notes) grace no where
maintains its name more then in the humble, who takes whatsoever is given, as
freely given by grace, and accordingly gives thanks. As waters run to low
grounds, so Gods graces to lowly B. Aug. de S. Virginitate, c. 35.
hearts; where he has the whole praise of them, Pauper and mendicus ille est,
qui nihil sibi tribuit, sed totum de misericordia Christi expectat. ^. Prosper.
in Ps. 106.
for the poor and Gods Beggar attributes nothing to himself, expects and
takes all of CHRIST'S mercy.

The more the Centurion humbled himself and dissuaded CHRIST from entering his
roof as unworthy, the more CHRIST enters his heart as capacious of him, and
admires and renders him admirable. The lower MARY sat at CHRIST'S feet, the
more of CHRIST and his heavenly doctrine descended into her: the Moon must be
emptyed of light, that it may receive light from the Sun, and diffuse light
and influence to inferior bodies. PAUL must be nothing in his flesh, that
CHRIST may be all, the Spirit inform him and grace be sufficient for him;
that he may both have it in abundance, and plentifully minister it unto
others. The Baptist must humble himself, and say, he is but the voice of a
Crier in the Wilderness: and what is more frail then a voice which fades as
soon as sounded, especially in a Desert? That CHRIST might magnify him so
far as to say, there had not been a greater borne of a woman: when he
thought not himself worthy to stoop down and tie the latchets of Christ's
shoes, Christ thought him fit to whom himself would stoop down, and let him
lay his hand on his head as he baptized him.

Valles secundum Psalmistamfrumento abundant, hoc est humiles spiritu
potiorib^s livinae largitatis muncribus. Tancmar. in vit. Bernwood, Epis. c.
44. November. ^0.
The Vallyes (according to the Psalmist) abound with corn, the humble in
Spirit with the choysest gifts of divine Liberality. The more we go out of our
selves, and are contented to be any or nothing as God will, the nearer we are
to be made something; and so much as we remove from our selves and our private
interests, distrust in our selves, and depend altogether on God, so much we
proceed in him and the common spirit, and abilities to do him service and his
Church.

God loves to follow their poor endeavors with good event, that ascribe it to
his blessing and not their own industry (1. Cor. 15.9) when the pains of
proud Laborers are dashed with ill success; because they would assume the
glory to themselves. St. OWEN In vita S. Eligii, l. 1. c. 9. Nihil n. ex
omnibus quae egisset bonis meritis suis tribuebat, sedomne opus suu^ ad Deum
semper conferens, in cunctis actibus ejus auxilium implorabat.
writes, That all the speech of blessed ELIGIUS was useful to edification, for
that of all the good that he had done, he attributed nothing to his own
merits; but always referring all his works to God, implored his assistance in
all his actions. Whereas God has no pleasure to cooperate with them, that
work in their own strength, and if they succeed, sacrifice to their own net.

Although good works have great account with God, and undoubted efficacy to
rewards in Heaven, yet not only in humility but in duty we ought to refer
all unto God; for that all is of God: and put case we be infallibly certain,
that our works are done in charity, yet in all wisdom and security, must we
resign all to God, and trust in his free goodness and mercy. Because the more
we put good deeds from our selves, and set all over to his grace, the more he
accepts them, and imputes again all his work to us, and grants us the honor
and recompense thereof: and so all is reserved entire for us to the great
reckoning, with good expectation thereof in the interim, and sweet experiences
of Gods approbation.

In fine, They who learn of Christ to be humble, and let God be all, and
meek, to be thankfully what God will, they find rest to their own souls,
(Math. 11.28.29) Quieting it always in God, CHAP. 5:
and his good, pleasing, and perfect will, which is a blessed repose, and a
very Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. V. Discoursing further, why God assists the Humble, and resists the
Proud.
HVmility is a great dignity, even above other virtues; that whereas they frame
the mind pliable to the rule of God in some subject, humility submits it in
all things to Gods ordination and government. As it is the evil of Pride above
other sins, that the inordination which makes other sins to be sins, is
in a manner specificall and essential to pride, as Pride ( Sir. 10.12) The
beginning of Pride is when one departs from God, and his heart is turned from
his maker. Therefore it has for its propriety, that which constitutes the
formality of sin, aversation from God and converting to the creature; and for
that reason is rightly called the beginning of sin. So it is the good of
Humility above other virtues, that what makes them virtues; S. Aug. de verbis
dom. sermon. 13.
that they leave not the heart in the creature, but convert and subordinate it
unto God: that is properly distinctive of humility, which therefore is made the
beginning of grace, and honored in the prime of the Beatitudes, as causing the
soul to put no bar to the spirit, but set it self in absolute subjection
unto God, and so in capacity to receive his graces, and the full benefit of all
his institutions, and inner teaching ( Psalm. 25 9. Math. 11.27) For humility
subjecting the intellect to God, and the whole man to his direction, disposes
to irradiation from Heaven; when as pride swelling in conceit of understanding,
and refusing to be ordered, shuts out divine illumination.

St. PROSPER in his incomparable Epistle to the illustrious Virgin DEMETRIAS,
among other mischiefs in pride numbers this; That Difficile peccatum suum
superbus agnoscit, ^uretiamsi intellexerit, non currit ad medicum, sed de se
sibi remedium pollicetur, nec unquam ibi proficit cura, ubi morbus est ipsa
medicina, cum aliae cupiditates ea tantum bona quibus adversantur iniminuant,
haec dum omnia ad se trahit, simul universa corrumpit.
the Proud man hardly takes knowledge of his sin, or if he understand it, he
runs not to the Physician, but promises himself recovery of himself, nor
can the cure proceed, where the remedy is a malady: and this, that whereas
other lusts waste only that good and virtue to which they are contrary, Pride
whiles it arrogates all to it self; corrupts all at once: Therefore God
withstands the proud, as who are averters from him, and mere opposites to him.

Cum omnia vitia fugiunt a Deo, sola superbia se Deo opponit. Boethius.
When all vices fly from God, Pride alone opposes it self unto God, for by
other vices men turn from God unto some good conceived in the creature, only
by pride they contend to disthrone God, and set themselves in his room, and
be all of themselves, and for themselves: whence to speak with Saint Ambrose,
1. Tim. 6.
God as repeller of his own wrong enters a special kind of combat against
pride, as if he should say, it is my adversary, CHAP. 3.
it sets it self against me, that encounter belongs to me, James 4.6. The
word signifies to stand appointed against another in martial forces and array;
and consequently implies that God, as it were, raises all his powers against
the proud.

^. Chrystom. 3. de verbis Esai ^.
The proud oppose God in his being, Alpha and Omega, the first efficient and
last end. Therefore God resists them and so blows upon them that they lose
their efficiencies and ends: where he is said, S. Basil. in Hexam. l. n 10. ad
f. ^.
Luke 1.51. To scatter the proud that have sparsum cor, and become unsettled,
ever wandering and vagrant in their designs, as who having no certain bound,
being repugnant to the true beginning and end, (...).
and they are scattered in the imagination of their own hearts, and the high
thoughts and plots wherein they glory as rational men, which being not
governed by the Spirit, and out of subordination to GOD are errings, always
fail of their last end, and determine in vexation of the dispersed and unquiet
mind.

Haughty spirits are well compared to smoke, Psalm. 37.20. Ioh. diacon. ex S.
Grreg. in vit. ci^s, l. 1. (...).
Which perishes in ascending and vanishes in dilating of it self: and to a
wheel, Psalm. 83.13. That rising in the hinder part, with the forepart falls to
the ground, and they are also made like a wheel, in that (...). (...).
they moove not to any spiritual height, but run a vain circle and endless
round, Luke 14 11.

The humble is raised in and by his humility, because subject only to God, and
for God, and in God: now for that God is the most supreme, he that is
immediately subject to him, is exalted by that humility to be near unto God;
contrariwise, the more the proud lift up themselves, and go about to be
somewhat of themselves, the further they remove themselves from God, which is
the most debasement of the creature, Psalm. 136.6. The Lord knewes the proud a
far off, because they are only in his apprehension, not in his approbation,
says the Master of the sentences. Lib. 1. did. 36.
The Lord knows the humble, and all good things near hand by their
resemblances, and Ideas in his Divine understanding; but there is nothing in
God whereby he knows the proud, Ego arrogantesnescio id est, eorum vitam in
sapientiae mea art non approbo. S. Greg. moral. l. 28. c. 3.
he knows them afar off by the opposition of humility, whose rule is in him,
he knows them afar off, as standing in furthest distance from him. So sure
is that of St. Augustine. Ad Monimum L. 1. 18. the creature fiout fit clatione
humilis, sic fit humilitate sublimis.
The creature as by pride, it is debased, so by humility it is raised. He
that insolently attempts to be more then he is, shall be less then he was:
and to subdue our natural inclinations under Gods providence, and willingly
suffer his pleasure is the directest way to be raised out of a desolate
condition: Humble your selves to God that he may exalt you. 1. Pet. 56.

The greatest judgments of God have come upon the proud, and his greatest
mercies on the humble. Pride made Angels Devils, Vid. S. August. in psalm. 118.
humility makes poor men Gods, Exodus 6.30.7. Lucifer the Prince in the
highest of all the orders of Angels, in pride assaying to be like God, fell
from the top of Heaven to the bottom of Hell, CHAP. 5.
as the blackest and worst of Devils: S. Isidor. Pelusiot. l. 1. ^p. 15.
and he that succeeded him in place, has a fit name Michael. For a monition
that the creature must not conceit or covet to be like God, Quis ficut Deuteronomy.
but subservient under his grace. Adam proudly aspiring to be as God, knowing
good and evil, became as the beasts that have no understanding, Psalm. 49. Vlt.
whiles the proud word was in Nebuchadnezzars mouth, Is not this great Babylon
that I have built for the honor of my Majesty? he was strangely metamorphosed
into the fashion of a brute, Dan. 4.30.31.

Herod vain-gloriously accepting the honor of speaking like a god, was
instantly smit by an Angel of God, and eaten up of worms. Arrogant Pharaoh
that asked who was God, was taught by vermin to take notice of the Lord, which
also was the discipline of proud Antiochus.

Read 2. Match. 9.
As notable are the mercies wherewith Abraham, Job, Moses, and whoever most
humbled themselves have been of all other most renowned. The sacred Virgin,
because she humbled her self more then any other woman or man, therefore found
the greater favor and grace with God then any other woman or man, I or Angel,
to be compare^^^is Deo Patri: Vid. acta concilij Ephesimi primi, and this
phrase is used by Gerson, and Dionysus C^^thus.
mother to him to whom God was father. The Lord Christ because he humbled
himself incomparably more then all; more then his holy mother: therefore God
highly exalted him, gave him exaltation, Phil 2.
to which all other has no comparison, or proportion, CHAP. 6.
and by that title of humbling himself our Savior merited (what otherwise was
his due) the advancement of his name, and that lowly and manifest veneration at
his blessed name JESUS should be here done by all Orthodox and devout
Christians, and hereafter insolent gainsayers that now refuse, be forced with
infidels, pagans and all wicked men and devils to do the same.

CHAP. VI. Of the chiefest exercise of humility.
MAny are like Caligula, humble servants, but proud Masters; humble till they
get means to be proud with authority, but the trial of humility is not to
be proud in honors* as David behaves himself like a child, Psalm 131. when he
was a Monarch and might have domineerd over men; B. Greg. i^ (...). 7. c. 12.
qua^ (...) ^rtute na^ (...) soler, no^nunquam tame^ stulta meas, de perpetrata
se nequitia exaltat, et quod omni vitio sit gravius, etia^ de commisso vitio
superbitur.
not to be proud, when men have something to be proud of, that is humility;
true it is, that such is the corruption of our na^ (...) then far, it will
rake pride (...) dunghill, glory in shame: some are (...) base as to be proud
of egregious sins, so foolish as to count every thing glorious that is
notorious, but a little common modesty expels that shameless insolency.

The task for humility, is to carry a deserving man through honor and
dishonor without prejudice. That he neither swell, when wrongfully
dispraised, nor be puffed up, when justly extolled: for after the sentence of
Saint Nile, De superbia.
It Is a great matter to endure reproach, but more to pass by praise without
any damage to the soul. Hence our Lord is frequent in prohibiting the
publication of that which concerned his commendation, Ser. 4. de quadrages.
Vicinum est rectis actionibus superbi e malum et de proximo semper virtutibus
infideatur elatio, quia difficile est, ut laudabiliter viventem laus non capiat
humana, nisi ut scriptum est, qui gloriatur in Domino glorietur. (...). Vid S.
Nyssen in vit. ejus.
that we might have a precedent to use all means of avoiding vainglory for
good doing. Gravely St. Leo, Pride is an ill neighbor to good actions, and
haughtiness ever lies at the catch in virtues, because it is hard for one that
lives commendably, not to be took with humane commendation, wherefore I have
to admire the rare quality of blessed Ephrem, that was all of water and sweat
till he dropped hearing of his own praises, out of Christi^n sh^mefastnesse, and
a confl^ct of humility, not to be ov^rcome of honor.

It Is not impossible that the most laudable deeds should be done in pride, for
in them pride has i^s principal throne, and it is easier to do good, then to
be humble when we have done it, 1. Cor. 13.3. Which Saint Augustine observing
writes, Imps. 43. prorsus in ipsa ecclesia ^i^am c^tholica, pat^tis catholicos
defuisse aut deesse posse. qui causa ^^m^nae gloriae p^tr^e tur, si non essent
hu^^^mo^i homine^, non d^ceret apostolus, si tradi ^ero corpus meu^, etc.
I will speak (...) true Catholic Church: think you that therein (...) were
or can be wanting Catholics, that would suffer (...) ^mane glories sake, if
there were not such men, the Apostle would not have said, if I give my body to
be burned, and have not charity, etc. And again, B. Aug in psalm. 72. sunt
quidamqui faciliu^ o^ni^ (...) pauperibus d ^r^^^^nt^, quam ips^ p^^p ^es De^
sunt.
there be some that do more easily give all that they have to the poor, then
themselves become Gods poor. In such that of Saint Prosper is verified,
loftiness In Epist. ad Demetriadem, infl^tio and ambitio, and propriorum
bonorum superba defensio, possunt destruere cleemosy nas, possunt evocuare
martyria, si and magnas opes amore quis humanae laudis, and saeva supplicia non
ca fortitudine quam Deus tribuit, sed quam de se praesumpsit, excipiat. Hoc est
nolle habere, quae Dei sunt, and ibi constituere meritum, ubi divinum cessavit
auxilium.
and ambition, and proud ostentation of our own good make alms, of no grace,
martyrdom of no effect: If a man give away a great estate in affection of
humane praise, and suffer d^re torments, not with the fortitude which God
infused, but which he presumed of himself.

Here is then the activitie of grace, to make the poor in Spirit rich in
Virtue, and the rich in Faith and good works humble in heart. That he which is
rich in Gods Spirit, Spiritu Dei dives es, tuo pauper, S. Paulin ad Alothium
may be poor in his own, as Saint Paulin says, Alethius was, he which is
high in operation, low in opinion. (...). Ser. in S. Athanasium.
As Saint Nazienzen says, that great Saint Athanasius was, he that excels in
knowledge not to be puffed up, but the most learned Vir maxim dectus, and
minime superbus. in Prologo Hist.
be least proud, as Malmesbury says, that venerable Beade was; he that works
miracles, be more admirable for his humility, then his wonder-working, as S.
Bern ser. 2. De ramis palmarum.
Elias, that after fire and rain miraculously fetched from heaven, submitted
himself in lowly wise to run before wicked Ahab.

All pride is odious, but that is most in grace, which is proud of grace and
oppugnes God with his own best gifts; yet because the Spirit of vaineglory, In
Math. Hom. 5. Hom. 15.
(as the author of the imperfect work notes) is chiefly nourished by
sanctity, as the greatest excellency that man partaketh off, therefore the
most learned Father affirms, that he who Qui expertus est vitiorum
superandorum gradus, intelligit hoc virium inan^s gloriae, vel solum vel maxim
cavendu^ esse perfectis, quo primo enim vitio lapsa est anima, hoc ultim^
vincit. B. Aug in Ps. 7.
has experienced the degrees of quelling vices, perceives that the vice of
vainglory, is either only, or mostly to be shunned, of them that are
perfect, for the vice into which the soul first fell, CHAP. 7.
it last gets out. Pride is the heart of the old man, which first lives, and
last dies; worthily the glorious Martyr Cyprian, Lib. 3. Ep 1^ Quia is
ex^t^bit^r qu^ ^e (...), handli^ est, ut magis i^f^d^an^^^ aduersar^um (...),
qui f^iti^em (...) ag^^^^tur, and acrior (...), quia (...) ^perant^m (...).
Because he that humbles himself shall be exalted; It is the humble man's part,
most to fear hutreacherous adversary, who most assaults the strongest, and
being the fiercer for his fall, strains all his powers to conquer his
Conqueror.

That same Phoenix of sin revives out of its own ashes, and often regaines its
life, out of the humility that kills it, and erects trophies over it: for as
holy St. AUSTIN tells us, De natura and gratia, c. 31. Vbi l^tatus homo fuerit
in aliquo b^no opere, se etiam s^perasse superbiam, ex ipsa l^titia caput
erigit and dicit quia trium^has? ecce ego vivo, and ideo vivo quia triumph^s.
When a man is joyed of any good work, and that he has got Pride under too,
out of that very joy pride lifts up the head, and says, why do thou
triumph, lo I am alive, and therefore alive because thou do triumph? We
must take great heed to humble our selves as we grow in grace, because the
more we humble our selves, the greater progress we shall make in grace;
Quanto pl^^ proficim^^, t^nto plas h^miliem^r, quia quanto p^us humiliati
fuerimus, tanto ampl^us pr ^^^mus Faustus (...)
and as we humble our selves in the process of grace, have vigilant care that
we wax not proud of growing in humility.

CHAP. VII. Touching some evidences of blessed Poverty.
THe poor trembles at Gods word, reputes any service of God too good for him,
conceives himself the unworthiest of all Gods creatures, and is contented that
others should so judge of him.

First, the poor trembles at Gods word, This (...) meetely fetches his
derivation from (...), for his dreading to ^ffe^d God and cross the rule of
holiness and happiness.
( Es. 66.2) As understanding the least variance from it, a great hinderance to
his comfort and felicity; and awfully reverencing it, as the word of the Lord
of Kings, mighty in operation ( Heb. 4 Ier. 23.29.) and rightly called the
Kingdom of Heaven, for the dominion that it has over the conscience, and the
manifold graces and contentments, that every part of it ministers to the due
observer, who shall not tremble at thy word, O Lord God of Hosts?

It is Luciferian pride to venture on courses against the known will of God
(Ier. 13.15.17) Michael the Archangell durst not. Jude 9.
Principalities, and powers, and the prime in all the ranks of Angels, that
excel in strength; they dare not offend. and weak men think they should
forfeit their greatness and gentility, if they made scruple of breaking Gods
commandments. But the Poor that have sense of the Majesty of God, and his
word, revealing the evil of sin, and dejecting the soul for it; horror
possesses him, lest he should incur their offense: he holds nothing little,
forbidden by so great a word; and as altogether of no ability, S. Greg. in Job
l. 34. 17. ad tenuissimum malum suum infirmari trepidat.
is afraid of being mastered by his least sins.

2. The Poor not ignorant of his own unworthiness, makes without any
indenting, complete submission unto God, to serve in any work, with what
allowance the Lord pleases. ( Luc. 15.19. Math. 20.7) And counts himself
undeserving prelation in Gods grace and service, and that such is CHRIST'S
pre-eminence, as any reference to him exceeds all worldly promotion ( Ps.
84.10) any office about him any other function, and ^^quires more reverence and
purity, then is found in any man. For which cause, he that was not inferior
to any woman's child, protested that he was not worthy to carry CHRIST'S shoes
( Matthew. 3.11)

He that is poor, by experience of the creatures unsufficiencie, aims at
nothing temporal nor created, but abstracted therefrom refuses any portion
besides God; and knowing himself less then any of Gods mercies, seeks not
them; but only to please him in CHRIST, and that he may be satisfied in all
Gods pleasure fulfilled in him. As RUSHBROCH Apud Ludovic. Blosium, p. 540.
intreates, Like a Spiritual man, be little and low, and whatsoever thou
do or leavest undone, desire no other reward but God, and if thou receivest
any consolation, glory not; but avouch thy self unworthy of GODS gifts, and
please not thy self in them, but return them entire to GOD.

3. The Poor, conceives himself the unworthiest of GODS creatures, (...).
this was St. PAUL'S doctrine ( Phil. 2.3) In humbleness of mind, let each
esteem other better then himself. And his practice (1. Tim. 1.15) reckoning
himself the chief of sinners: and ( Ephesians. 3.8) he accounts himself less
then the least of all Saints: where he elegantly compares a superlative, that
as he had put himself above all sinners for extent of concupiscence and evil
motions, so he might put himself under all Saints, in omissions and good
inclinations; Which the Apostle S. Bern. de vita solitaria. Neque enim hoc
dicebat Paulus mentiendi praecipitatione, sed aestimandi affectione, quim.
perfect examinando semetipsum intelligit, suo peccato nullius peccatum par
esse existimat, quod non sicut suum intelligit, etc.
spoke not in a humor of faining, to gain applause for underweening himself,
but sincerely, as he thought, by diligent search, knowing more sin by
himself, then by any other, or then any charity will mistrust by another.

This to do, consider not only thy own good, but thy evil also; nor only
thy present virtues, but thy past vices; and weigh thy neighbors good as well
as thine own ( Phil. 2.4) his good rather then his evil, Every man grievously
sick complains of his sickness, as the most painful of all other; so he
their is humbled under (...), supposes his (...) the most intolerable. S Chrysostom.
tom. 4. hom. 67.
and think that as there is in thee much latent evil, so there may be in him
much secret good.

The Poor, though in diverse things he be not so extravagant as some other,
fears lest close corruption, Pride and Vanity should make his restraint worse
then others outrage, his glistering, worse then their gross sins. S. Bas^l.
de humilitate.
He ponders himself as himself, not the gifts of nature in him, which may
possibly excel the natural endowments of other, and so the gifts of the
spirit the graces of some other, he ponders not them, for they are Gods; but
his own concurrence therewith, and behavior therein, and then he is far
from ascribing any good to his own deserts; and wonders at the patience of
GOD, vouchsafing to coworke, and continue his grace, in so dry and barren a
heart, and verily concludes that if the gifts, graces, Latroni si tanta
contulisset Deus gratior te foret Francisce.
and assistants afforded him, had been collated on the vilest wretch in the
world, he would have been more proficient and thankful.

Servus S. Ado in Martyrologio. Nov, 29. Th. Martyr Sisinnius when Maximinus
the Emperor asked what he was, answered, ego peccator Sisinnius servus
servorum Jesus Christi.
servorum, was a term, which holy Martyrs and Confessors, speaking of
themselves, used long before St. GREGORY, to express themselves the most
unworthy of all Gods people, and that they and all they had, was for the
Church, and of duty to be in service to the least of CHRIST'S brethren. And
that there was none without some perfection which they wanted, and in that
regard ought to be subject to every one. (1. Pet. 5.5)

How remote from this poverty are those among us; that separate themselves and
say ( Es. 65.5) Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holyer then
thou (Revel. 3.18) Proudly appropriate to themselves the title of Professors,
common to all true Christians, dream themselves and their Geneva to be the
only one, the Dove, the Queen; other Churches to be none, or but Concubines,
As Brightman does on the Revelation, and the Canticles.
contemn government, debase the Church, vilify others, vaunt themselves as
the people and singularists of the world, bless themselves that they are not
as such and such, who in truth are good livers, and right worshippers of God,
as the vainglorious Pharisee preferred himself before all other men, and
thanked God, that he was not as the Publican, to have been like whom, would
have been his happpinesse, and the change of Gods right hand.

4. The Poor is not enraged that others think and speak of him as of no
worth. PAUL that reputed himself of all sinners the chief, could meekely
endure to be used as the refuse and offscouring of all things (1. Cor. 4 13)
Then only men really think themselves vile, when they are not vexed that
others think and say the like.

In the primitive times, some were noted for affectation of humility, by this;
that they never spoke of themselves, but percatores was every second word; yet
if any did never so little cross or slight them, they could not contain
themselves from uttering Pride in all bitterness of revenge. So in our days,
many by demure looks and loud sighs, profess great spectacles of humility,
and at Feasts and meetings, are much in large invectives against themselves,
for hypocrisy and all untowardnesse; but they will never endure him that takes
them at their word: and if any go close to them, and say, thou hypocrite, etc.
such breathing on them, melts the painted colors from their counterfeiting
faces, and their pride breaks out in reviling, and damning all that question
their new Profession.

St GREGORY observes In Job. l. 7. c. 12. Esse humiles sed fine despectu, esse
contenti propriis sed fine necessitate, esse casti sed sine maceratione
co^poris, esse patientes sed sine contumeliis volunt.
them vain, that long after contradictions; To be humble, but without
debasement; to be content, but without any want; to be chaste, but without any
chastizing their body; to be patient, but without any provocation. Whereas they
who are perfect at humility (1. Cor. 4.13) Rejoice in contempt, CHAP. 8.
though in respect to the glory of truth and edification of others, when need
is they justify themselves, and wipe off aspersions of error and ill life, and
maintain their calling and fidelity; yet what concerns themselves, they
choose rather to be esteemed impure and abject, then holy and humble: because
that more accords with their own inner judgment, and more furthers them to
mortification.

The Apostle mentioning his stripe above measure, and the rest which are
written in the Schedule of Et caetera quae scripta sunt in catalogo gl^riandi,
S. Hierom. in Gal. 3.
boasting, as St. HIEROME wittily terms that rehearsal (2 Cor. 11.23)
premises, that he speaks as a fool; noteing that although, he in
condescending to their good, and constrained thereto, did lawfully and by
guidance of the Spirit, recite his own praises; yet out of such circumstances
and simply in it self, it is folly to be offended for disesteeme, and took
with the opinion that others have of us, or any opinion of our selves, as
Gnaricus says prettily, Sermon. de Purificatione. Caterum qui in se gloriatur,
and sibi placet, stulto ho^^^ placet.
That he which pleases himself, pleases a foolish man.

CHAP. VIII. Pointing at some ways that facilitate Humiliation.
ST. BERNARD tells us, that De Quadrag^s. ser. ^. Nihi est fa^t^tus (...), qu^m
humil^ate ^emetips^m.
There is nothing easier to him that is willing, then to humble himself. Which
he may well believe, that has a heart sensible of the manifold inducements, or
rather inforcements to humility, that every one bears about him in sundry and
great infirmities; if we discuss our selves and search our ways, we cannot
but find our selves desperate and broken debtors, and unprofitable servants,
and that when we do our best, our wine is abated with water, our choice
performances lamed with indevotion, and soyled with mixture of sinister aims,
haughtiness and ingratitude; far from that which beseemes Gods infinite
worthiness, and the multitude and quality of his favors to us, both common of
creation redemption, etc: And special which our consciences partly know, and
partly suffice not to comprehend, in innumerable kindnesses and obligations to
duty. And can we recount how guilty we are before God, how unworthy the least
mercy, and meanest provision, how deserving all punishments, for our
iniquities, misdeeds and omissions, for good gifts lost, impaired, unfruitfully
detained, and yet that the Lord has borne with us, and heaped numberless
benefits upon us, can we recount these things and the like, and not humble our
selves in the sight of God?

Notwithstanding, if proud flesh find the humility hard which God exacts, let
us first sue to our Savior CHRIST, who being infinitely loving, and liberal,
will not deny to give grace, and teach us, what he wills us, to learn of him,
how to be humble. And the very praying for it, is a step to it; seeing as St.
ISAAC testifies, De contemptumandi, c, 21. Nullus n. egens and postulans potest
non humiliari.
The more a man multiplies Prayer, the more his heart is humbled, for he that
needs and begges cannot but be humbled Therefore God most communicates himself
in Prayer, and thereby measures his blessings to us, because that is the proper
exercise of humility, wherein a Christian goes altogether out of himself, and
relyes on Gods succor in CHRIST.

2. There is no finer way to confound Pride then this, when any stirrings
thereof arise, and violently transport us, to take confusion to our selves for
our weakness, who with all our forces are not able to suppress the least
proud thought. Sweetly St. BARNARD, Dominica 4. post Pentecost. Elata
cogitatione pulsatus, si ex ipsa materiam and o^casionem sumas humilitatis, quo
nimiru humilius, leinc^ps and objectius le ^^ipso ta^quam le super^^ homine
sentias, Goliam utique Go^^^gladio p^remi^i
being buffeted with a proud thought, if thou take from it matter and occasion
of humility, to think thenceforward more basely and meanly of thy self, as
of a proud man, thou have slain the great Goliath with his own Sword.

Who so would have a lively feeling of his own poverty, let him contemplate
Gods riches, for (...) S. Basi^. (...).
he knows himself, that knows the distance between God and man: Muse in thy
own heart, O my God and all things who art thou! and who am I? and thou will
be comp^lled to exclaim, Vnde mihi hoc, whence is this to me, that the Lord of
Sabbath should vouchsafe to admit me for his servant, Deus meus and omnia,
quis est (...) and quis sum ego?
friend, child, and judge himself honored in my poor service, so remiss,
scant, and unbeseeming his immense dignity and perfections!

Hence St. James would have us set our selves before God that we may be
humble, Iam. 4.10. Job was full of arguments, and would feign have been
disputing with God upon even terms; but when God had lightly touched his
mavelous providence in the ordinary passages of nature, Job confesses
himself vile, and lays his hand upon his mouth, as having nothing else to
say, Job 40.4. A glimpse of Christ's Deity in a miraculous draught of fish, cast
Peter down at his feet in acknowledgement of sin, and fear of his dreadful
presence, Luke 5, 8. Which is also taught by Saint Gregory the great in these
words, Genesis 18.27 Sancti omnes qua^to magis divinitatis arcana conspiciunt,
tanto magis se nihil esse cognoscurt, nusqua^ quippe legit^^, quod Abraham
cincrem et pulverem se esse professus est, nisi cum babert Dei meruit
collocutionem, in Job. l. 18. c. 27.
All the Saints how much the more they behold the secrets of the Divinity, so
much the more they know themselves nothing; for it is not read that Abraham
professed himself dust and ashes, but when he had the dignity to have conference
with God. Is dust and ashes proud? not if it remind what it is, therefore by
the speech the Patriarch takes humility on himself, and is a proof, that the
nearer men stand, and the more they see into God, they humbler they shall be:
men may deem themselves and their righteousness something, all the while they
refer to creatures; but when they enter into Gods sight, in comparison with
whom the light and purity of the Heavens and Angels, is darkness and
obscurity, they discern themselves nothing as creatures, worse as siners.
Thus we cannot seriously think of Gods riches without poor thoughts of our
selves.

4. But the surest course of all other to redress swelling of the heart, is to
prick it, Ps. 41. Contrite and humble be fitly joined: Contrite that is, broken
for sin past, humble S. Greg. in psalm. 5^. alleging S Hierom, to that ^ff ct.
that lifts not up his heart to sin again, Es. 66.2. but keeps it always
under by godly sorrow. We may credit St. Chrysostom Tom. p. 1^0. he said not
simply ^umble, b^t conti^e (...). In 2 Cor. ^er. 4 In l to (...).
and our own senses: that which is contrite and broken cannot be puffed up,
though you would never so feign, rend thy heart therefore, says he, suffer it
not to be puffed up nor sweld: for that which is rent, is not subject to windy
swellings, and if there be any thing that blows it up, it cannot contain the
infla^mation, in that it is rent.

All the wind of vainglory and popular air flies out of a rent heart. O man
look with contrition upon thy feet, which have need of washing, for the
soil which they contract, even in the matter of which thou gloriest: and then
down Peacocks feathers, down high thoughts, avaunt proud devil, get thee
behind me, get thee to hell.

CHAP. IX. Propounding some swasives to labor humiliation.
IT much indeeres humility, that it is a virtue peculiar to Christianity:
learn of me to be humble, Mat. 11. that Doctrine is purely Christian, therefore
Christ is said by St. Augustine De virginitate. c. 31. primus docuisse
humilitatem.
to have first taught humility, CHAP. 8.
and to have in his proper style Doctor humilitatis. Philosophers knew neither
the name nor the thing. It is a virtue above their Ethics: for though among
them moderation to know and keep our measures be commended for virtue; yet
that this should be done in humble dependence on God by grace derived from him,
(...).
in our Redeemer was above their learning. Clemens Alexandrinus said right,
that Strom. 7. p, 527. (...).
men in nature may do the same good that a good Christian, but not from the
same cause, nor with the same intention; for they cannot make God in Christ,
neither their beginning, nor their end. Therefore the acting vertus in
sup^rnaturall strength, and referring them primarily to God and his glory in
Christ, which is the Essence of humility, is above the pitch of Philosophical
contemplation. As blessed Macarius determines, (...). hom. 26 p. 326.
This humility is the differencing note of Christianity: when one is rich in
grace, and yet says, another betrusted this treasure in me, for I my self am
a poor man, to do all in Gods power, and for Gods praise subjecting our
selves to him, and men as graced by him, confessing our poverty, and ascribing
no good to our selves. This humility is De S. Thoma c, 8.
in Metaphrastus word, the cognizance of a Christian.

3. And the experienced Christian is urged to be that humble man, were it but
to prevent the most fearful scourge, substraction of grace, and falling into
grievous sins. It is the observation of Saint Bernard, Supra Cart. ser.
(...), habes huj^s rei evidens documentum de Apostolo, etc.
that sometimes grace is subtracted, not for pride, which already is, but
which would be, CHAP. 9.
if it were not subtracted of which you have a manifest experiment in the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 12.7. so it is beneficial to anticipate the blows of a
withdrawing hand, by studying humility, that we may not be trained thereto,
by the harsh exerc^ses of fiery, temptations to blasphemy, Atheism^, and like
ab^minable suggestions, as Saint Antiochus admonishes, L^^re S Sab (...). 44.
Give not thy soul to pride, and thou shall not be constrained to suffer
horrible fantasies and injections.

Sometimes when Christians will not otherwise humble themselves, God fearfully
humbles them, by letting them run into sins, which make them contemptible,
and so cures sin by sin. As trecle to expel poison is compounded of
poison: so of the Serpents poison God gives a sovereign Antidote against the
Serpent, A^^d (...) t^er^^^^m (...). Rom^g^us in 2 ^^r.
wh^rein God approoves the exquisited dexterity of his healing hand. Thou will, says Tertullian, In S^orp^a^o contra G^ (...). (...).
admire the Ppysitian, when he^ cures ^^t by contraries, but a contrary way,
easing by that which caused pain, asswaging heates, by overcharging with
heats. Thus God remedies pride; either gently, when his children are preserved
from heavy falls, and overcome in light and familiar, ^^^t humbl^d they may not
trust to themselves in g^^at things, who are mastered in small, or if that
suffice not, by the bitter and deadly oper^tion of mortal sin. I dare be
bold to say with St. Augustine (...)
that it is requisite for the proud to sa^ into some open and heinous sin, that
so at least they may sa^ out of conceit with themselves, that fell by standing
in their own conceit: Howbeit, some by ill taking of this physic add to
their disease, Gerson de consol. Theol. l. 1 prosa. 1. Su^t quos eo
periculosius, quo subtilius decipit aestimatio sua, dum, etc.
while they regard not to amend their sundry falls, but rather wax the prouder,
imagining it be with them, as it was with the Apostle, that as he was
buffeted, that he might not be exalted with abundance of revelations, so they,
that they should not be puffed up with the plenty of their virtues. Thus in
scandalous falls they suppose not themselves fallen from grace; but only checked
that they should not glory too much in their store.

But pitying them in their illusions, the temperate Christian may understand
that nothing more forces God to withdraw his hand, then pryding our selves in
his liberality, and that as fire is best kept alive under ashes: so the fire
of the spirit in an humble soul remembering our selves dust and ashes. Whence
humilite is called by St. Basil, (...). 16.
the storehouse for safe custody of virtues treasure.

3. It is humility that keeps virtue in grace, without that God would not
have respected the greatest rarities of his servants, not the virginity of
blessed Mary; D. Bern. de laudib. virginis, sermon 1 Sinc humilitate audeo dicere
nec virginitas Mariae placuisset
nay, humility in ill deeds is more pleasing to God then pride in good, as
Saint Austine collects from the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 18.14. Who
therefore resolves, Videte fratres, magis placuit Deo humilitas in malis
factis, quam superbia in bonis, in ps. 93 melior est peccator humilis quam
justus superb. tempore, sermon. 49,
a humble sinner to be in better case then a righteous boaster.

4. But there is no such attractive to humility as C^rists humbling himself,
all whose form was a representation of umilitie, whose humility was the
satisf^ction for Adams pride, and counterpoison of ours.

Well might Saint Austine say, God man is a grand remedy; if this remedy cure
not pride, I know not what should cure it: Deus homo magna medicina, ^^ec
medicina superbiam si non curet, quid eam curet n^scio (...) semp sermon. ^4.
if we cannot think of Gods riches, without being dejected in apprehension of
our poverty, how shall we think of his making himself poor for our sakes,
and not go wholly out of our selves, and be less then nothing in our own
eyes?

Blessed Pachomius justly cries out, In vita ejus. c. 53. Maij 14.
O stupendous miracle! God who is high by nature, humbled himself, becoming
obedient unto death, and we who are by nature base, are puffed up! As our
famous countryman Gilbert reasons, Iure inan^^ reputatur substantia nostra^
cuj^s assumptione ex^^^^ss^ se dicitur (...) pl^^^^ sup. (...).
our substance is rightly esteemed vacuitie, and emptiness: in assuming
whereof the fullness of all things is said to empty himself, Es. 40.7. Phil.
2.7. But if Christ emptied himself of Majesty, shall we fill our selves with
vanity? if the King of all glory made himself of no reputation for us men,
and for our sins, shall a Christian be as In (...) de anima, (...) gloriae
(...).
Tertullian says, A Philosopher was a creature of vain glory, what shall
induce him to humility, that is not moved with the humiliation of God? as it
is urged by holy Macarius, H (...) s^r. (...).
has God humbled himself for thee, and do not thou humble thy self for
thine own soul? but art thou proud? a^t thou lifted up?

And then let all sound Christians as they grow to perfection, and to their
end, imitate their Lord, who after his glorious actions, and upon his mo^e
glorious passion, was not the prouder but the more humble, ^er ^p^l p. 10.
for then to teach humility, he washed his Disciples feet ( Ioh. 13.2. 17) And
as St. AUSTIN presses the example, De Virginitate. c. ^^ and quantum
commendavit humilitatem cui commendanda criam illud tempus elegit, in quo illum
proxime moriturum, cum magno desulerio i^tueba^tur, hoc utiq, praecipue memoria
retenturi, quod magister imitandus ultimum demonstrasset.
How much did he commend humility, for commending whereof he chose that time,
in which his Apostles beheld him with strong desire, as who was ready
immediately to dye; Therefore they would of all other things, chiefly retain
that in memory, which so imitable a Master made the last demonstration of his
grace. Wherefore let the astonishing humility of our Savior abasing himself
to wash the feet of his servants, yea the filthy feet of the cursed Traitor
Judas, force us unto humbleness of mind, devoted to the ministry of our
brethren, in all services for their good; well considering, that it is
infinitely less for us, to stoop unto any offices, toward our
fellow servants, nay our professed enemies, then it was for the Lord JESUS, to
lay aside his habit of glory, and descend so low, as the feet of his poor
servants, I of his vile Traitor. (...)


Dear Christian should the mystical body, or any part thereof be proud under
a most humble head? Pride and envy are the special sins of Devils, other
vices be attributed to them by figure, these properly inherent in them; and
only the wicked Devils and their followers be proud. Gods people, on earth
be poor and humble, the perfected Spirits humble, the holy Angels humble, the
mother of God humble, God man most humble. After Gersons fine observation, De
consolatione Theol. l. 1. Prosa. 4. Christ's humanity, Sicut in esse
suppositali ficinnititur personalitati filii Dei, quia propriam deserit, nec in
se subsistit ita in esse gratta vel gloriae, sic innititur Deo, quia nullatenus
in se, and ita de Sanctis, quarto perfectiores, tanto humi^us and reverentius
in adjutorium Dei refluunt.
the humanity of Christ as in the personal being, it so stays on the
personalitie of the Son of God, as to be without its own, and not subsist
in it self, so in the beginning of grace and glory, it stays on God, and not
at all on it self, and likewise the Saints, how much more perfect they be, so
much more humbly and reverently do they cast themselves on the aid, and
support of God. He that gives grace to the humble, grant us grace to be
humble, and in all grace to give glory to God, etc.

FJNJS.
BEATI LVGENTES. THE MOVRNER. A TREATISE OF MOVRNING, that handles the second
Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCKE, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

Beati Lugentes, imitamini eum qui flevit super Jerusalem. B. Aug. de Sancta
Virginitate, c. 28. ABRAHAM coming into the Land of Promise, purchased
himself a Monument, and took the Country for an Inheritance by a Grave,
which is a place of weeping and mourning. Pastor Abbas. in vit. patrum, part.
2. in libr. de compunctione, fol. 117. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBVS. LONDON, Printed
for JOHN CLARK, and WILL: COOK, 1637.

BEATI LVGENTES.
MATTHEW. 4.3. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
CHAP. I. Of blessed mourning, and the subject thereof.
THIS ^^^^ning were an unpleasant and harsh subject, had it not blessed going
before, and comfort^ following after; but now the very bitterness of the
mourning is (...), which has blessing in it, (...) with it: well (...) to his
Corinthians how he rejoiced not they were made sorry, CHAP. 1.
but that they sorrowed to repentance, so we treat of mourning, not that we
would your sorrow, or that you should simply mourn, but that you may be
blessed with such mourning as operates to saving and eternal consolation.

But are all that mourn blessed? If they mourn spiritually; for of such
Christ must be understood, as of spiritual poverty, hunger, our Lord
appears to declare sufficiently who are the blessed mourners by placeing them
between the poor and the meek, In Cor. ser 4. in eth. (...)
as if he should say, blessed is every one that being sensible of his
spiritual indigence: does from a broken heart and humble spirit lament the ill
estate of himself and others, yet so meekely to rest content with the pleasure
of his God in suffering evil, and wanting good. Particles in part continued
acts, therefore our Lord saying, blessed be they that are mourning, intends
them that do it constantly, which Saint Chrysostom has observed for us.
Blessed are they that are mourning, that is, that do it continually, and our
Master assuring o^n solution to them only that be mourning, intimates that the
sorrow which is efficacious to (...) perma^^^nt (...) must be constant and
(...), as Saint (...) declares, in ps. 29. ad fin. (...).
the sorrows (...) inta^^^, (...) be such as d^plo^eth son (...) cries and
continual (...) The days are evil, should (...) should we (...) it is the
judgment of Climactus: a true penitent conceives himself to loose every day
in which he mournes not. Gradu. 5. ad finem.


This spiritual mourning is called sorrow according to God, 2. Cor. 7.9.
because as Aben-Ezra In his Comment upon the Decalogue. (...).
teaches more like a Christian then a lew: A man is bound to remember God every
moment, so that whatsoever he does he may not do it but for his honor, and
that he refrain himself from things prohibited only for the glory of God
alone. After this rule sorrow according to God, as God would have it and mooves
it, is devoted to him, and grieves more for the dishonor of God in a sin,
then for our own pollution or punishment, which sorrow is said to work
repentance unto salvation, for that it causes daily usage of penitential
practices by remembrance of sins past, and consideration of the present
preserving the soul in horror of them, and holy confusion of heart, and face
for them, and so preparing it to walk humbly with God, and inferring a
resolution, to forbear whatsoever is offensive, and for to please God, that it
may rejoice in him and his salvation.

Sorrow is the souls averting and withdrawing it self from that it apprehends
evil, all evil is either of fault or pain, and both of them either our own
or others, therefore the holy gro^es, mournes: first, for his own sins:
secondly, for the sins of others: thirdly, for his own afflictions:
fourthly, for judgments upon others.

CHAP. II. Of mourning for our own sins.
THE godly sorrower is touched with grief, first and chiefly for his own
sinfulness, not sorrowing, but the cause makes the mourner; blessed are they
that mourn not for their dead, nor their loss, but for their sin, says
holy Chrysostom, to mourn for worldly things is a vexation annexed to them to
mourn for heavenly things in a worldly manner, is our vanity about them: but
to mourn for Tamm^z, Ezech. 8.14. or with the Merchants of the earth to weep
over the mother of harlots, Revel. 18.11. that mourning is most fleshly and
diabolical, as theirs is worse then bellish that mourn because they cannot
sin, in many particulars so much as they would, have not wherewithal to
avenge themselves, have not means for their lusts in bravery, riot, and other
excesses.

Hom. 22. ad pop.
We cannot complain of the world for lack of mourning, there is lamentation
enough in every corner; this is our complaint, that men mourn in vain, when
sorrow cannot further them. S. Anastas. sermon. in ps. 6.9.
St. Chrysostom Ad pop. hom, 5.7.18.
in diverse homilie^ wittely notes, that sermon remedies u^ evil^ (...),
therefore God appointed it to homile feign, and of a malady of sin made a
remedy. E^^^ 6.21. Blessed are they that weep, exercise their sorrows about
their sins, the only object in which grief availes; I but some will say, we
are of such a constitution as is not capable of tears, if so Christ speaks
again to them, blessed are they that mourn, are you of such a temper as is
not capable of mourning, neither it is not so much the trickling eye, as the
bleeding heart that mournes before God, bemoaning and greatly condemning it
self, 2. Sam. 24.10. Ier. 8.6.31.18. The heart of sorrow is in the sorrow of
the heart: where there is most turning from, and flight of the heart, there is
most of the definition of sorrow, as Romans 9.2. the Apostle defines his grief
by the great heaviness, and continual sorrow of his heart, Prove. 15.13. by
the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.

And herein there is no sorrow like the sorrow for sin, Zachar. 12.10.11. it
equals the greatest sorrow in a family which is mourning for a first borne,
for one only son, 2. Chron. 35.25^
the greatest sorrow in a common wealth, which is the mourning for the untimely
and unfortunate death of a pious and worthy Prince, as was Josiah, for whom
Jeremy made his lamentations, and in the name of the Church and state, (...) ^f
there were ever grief like that grief, I^^. 1.12. The sorrow of grace may
come short of that of nature extensively in tears and other expressions,
because therein grace is lef^ unto (...) false and hindered, rather then
assis^^d from nature (...) spiritual sorrow without: comp^iseth exceeds the
natural (intensively) and in the essence of grief that we most really sorry
for, which in our judgments and affections we most avert and shrink from.
Intell^ctuall grief is the principal, because of the highest faculty (and
belonging to superior reason) whereby the understanding conceives sin the
greatest evil, and the will abhorres it more then any other, and adjudges
greater heaviness to the soul for it. Whereas in ordinary griefs men would
be without all sorrow, or sorrowlesse; holy grief is voluntary, which the
soul assumes on it self, and would increase according to God and religion, in
great desire of godliness embracing all griefs in order thereto. The godly
heart prays for the removal and keeping away of sin, more then any damage
or misfortune, and for that it more composeth it self to sorrow, and in
dislike of it self is smitten with horror and shame, so as it is not in other
griefs.

I shall enlarge my self a little in this matter, to provoke them that can,
and quiet them that would abound in tears: a mean conceit may make a man
laugh more then hearing of a rich fortune befalne him, in which he more
rejoices; likewise lesser griefs may wet the eye, when great sorrows dry the
heart. And although there may be much difference betwixt the tears shed for
joy, which trickle warm down, and the scalding sharp and salt tears that
issue from Cassian. Col. 9.29. S. Isaac de contemptu mundi, c. 29 p. 698.
sorrow, when all that is within a man is affected with grief, the tears that
proceed a turbato fell, from a troubled gall bring bitterness with them, and
running from the eyes, evidence by proof of the taste the nature of salt which
they contracted in the De mirabilib. S. scripturae.
inwards. Yet grief begins to break away when it sheds forth in S. Basil.
(...).
tears: indeed tears are the sustenance of a sorrowful mind, therefore our
Savior justly calls them blessed that weep, because the grieved soul
receive^ therein great content, many mourners would buy that repast at high
rates.

But it is manifest from holy DAVID, that Religion extracts tears, and that in
plentiful measure, from the most valiant and warlike, whenever it finds a
constitution apt thereunto: they that can weep upon any occasion, if
Religious, do often weep for their sins, one of the Ancients resolves, De
vera and fals^ poenitentia. c. 9 Seiat se culpabuliter duru^ qui dest^t dama^
temporis, vel mortem amici, and dolorem peccati lachrimis non ostendi^.
He may k^ow himself vitiously hard, that weeps for temporal losses, or the
death of friends, and utters not his grief for sin in tears. It is reported
of St. PETER, that he wept so often as he heard a Cock crow, and that by
continual running of his tears, as it were Channels, came to be made in his
blessed face. And of St. ARSENIUS, In vit. Pat^^^. par. 2. Sect. ^^ 3. P^^t
conlora^ ejus (...) jugi fletu ceciderunt.
That by perpetual weeping the hairs fell from his eyes, and that all his
life long, sitting at work (...) had a cloth in his bosom, because ^f the
tears tha^ powered down out of his eyes.

( Lam. 3.48, 49.51) The Prophets eyes affected his heart, fo^^^un^ing in a
manner the sorrow thereof, and streaming tears, till the heart melted in
grief; such tenderness (...) by Prayers, ^athe^^, (...)
th^^gh by any (...) after winds comes rain, invoke we then the South wind
to blow upon us, the spirit to descend into our hearts, as a mighty wind, to
raise showers and floods of tears: Cassian. collat 9. cap. 29.30.
no violence is to be used here, h but God to be waited on, that with the
influence of his gracious look he would thaw our frozen hearts. All
consciences witness with St. BERNARD, De modo been vivendi, c 10. Omnis
Peccator tunc se cognoscit visitari a domino, quando compungitur in lachrymas,
uam and Petrus tunc flevit, quando in eam Christus respexit.
Every sinner knows himself to be then visited of God, when he is struck
with compunction, that tears follow.

And though Thunder infer Rain, the threats of judgments wring tears from
believers eyes, yet the soul is more easily melted into such expressions, So
S. Gregor. Amoris flamma succensi ordeamus in lachrymis cum odore virtutum, in
Ezechibom 22. p. 1222.
by consideration of Gods innumerable mercies, then by any representation of
torments, and the sweetest way of distilling tears, is by vehement and burning
love, which is full of soft and tender affects. Which to have at command, and
be baptized and will (as the Fathers speak) with holy tears, is an advantage
of a contemplative Qui provecti sunt in arcem contemplationis, fletum habent in
virtute potestatis, S. Gregor. in 1. Reg. l. 4. c. 5 p. 339.
person, that often retyres himself from the world, and warmes his heart in
meditation, in resemblance whereof we see MARY the devotianall sister that
sat alone she was the weeper.

But to them that would weep because they cannot weep, I say with St.
ANASTA^IUS, Sinaita sermon. de sa^^a synaxi, p. 108.
If thou caust not weep, at least sigh and he sad. And truly if there be a
good man, which cannot possibly weep, how can he possibly but mourn, when he
takes to heart, how his sins are increased over his head, me in number than
the hairs thereof, yea passing all Arithmeticks, and is near to infinity as
number can make them.

Now God be merciful to us, and soften our obdurate hearts, if there be no
bliss for any that mourn not for sin: Where shall they appear, who (Pro. 2.14)
rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardnes of the wicked: Are so hungry
that they cannot be satisfied with their own sins, but they must be glutting
themselves also with the Reprobate acts of others, applauding and taking
pleasure in them ( Romans 1.32.) You may conceive how few are blessed, so few
mourn; now a days it is as it was to DAVID, a reproach to weep ( Psalm. 69.10)
Men can mention their sins with dry eyes and light hearts, yea make
themselves and others merry with them, I glory in them, Hinc est quod
lachrymaram causas tripud^^tes peragunt, hinc est quod mortis sua negotium
ridentes exequurtur, B. Gregor in Job. l. 20. c. 15.
and act causes of tears with triumph, and dispatch the business of their
death laughing. Fools make a pastime of sin, (Pro. 14 9) As if it were but a
laughing matter, which the blessed Apostle could not tell men of without
weeping ( Phil. 3.18.19.)

What that the world has brought us forth Roarers instead of Weepers, a
generation of men so abandoning all sorrow for sin, that they often belly
themselves, and feign to have committed the sins they never did, to advance
their credit as they take it with evil companio^s, as St. AUG. confesses of
himself before his conversion, Confess. l. 2. c. 3. Vbi non suberat qua assso
aquarer perditis, fingebam (...) furcisse quae non sec^nem, ne viderer
abjuctior, quo eram in^^cention.
Many make no burden of grievous and mortal sins, but go light away,
crying is this such a matter? Which matter nevertheless, cost the LORD CHRIST
his dearest blood, and would appear to (...), where they ^^^kened out of their
dead sleep and security, CHAP. 3.
enough to sink all creatures into the bottomless pit. A few soft words, we
are all sinners, God help us, be they never so coldly spoken, and on the by,
suffice the most to bewail sin; but whether that be the broken and contrite
heart that God d^spiseth not, whether it be the mourning here blessed, I leave
to the common sense of experienced Christians, and proceed to the second head
of mourning for the sin of others.

CHAP. III. How Christians are tied to mourn for the sins of others.
HEre I must entreat you to look back a little and observe, that none can
religiously mourn for the sins of another that is not first heartily
sorrowful for his own, a public mourner must begin at home acknowledging
with Nehemiah. Chap. 1.6. I and my fathers house have sinned, and with Daniel,
chap. 9.20. confessing his sin, and so the sin of his people. S. Aug. ep.
122. Vide que^admoda^^ sua peccata prius dixit, and postea populi sui.
How bold is the profane multitude that never took upon them so much as a sad
countenance for their sins, and yet make as if they were heavy, and presume
to cast forth words of discontent at the times. There are abundance that find
much to mourn for in the Church, much in the commonwealth, either in their
own houses, CHAP. 2.
nothing in their own hearts that ascribe all evil to the faults of others,
that turn their mourning for sin into censuring.

Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thy own eye, that thou may see
the sin that is in thy right hand: leave thy usury, thy sacrilege, thy hard
and fradulent dealing, and then we will be patient to hear thee charitably
lame^ting some sca^dal^ (it may be) in the Church, and abuses in the State. Of
a truth, if these people could be persuaded to keep within and note their own
deficiency, they would not have the tithe of the leisure, and forwardness that
now they have, to usurp judicature over whole Churches and kingdoms; nay the
strictest of them might epsy in his own soul such haughtiness, such
insensiblenesse of sin, such impatience, such indevotion, see himself so
impure, so unmercifull, so implacable, so unable to suffer one ill word for
righteousness, for Christ's sake: that his conscience would compel him to cry
out, Va mihi quia tacui, Woe is me for my own innumerable omissions, Ecce ego
peccani, I am the man whose sins pull down judgments on the world, (as
Bradfords frequent confession is) It Is my hypocrisy, va^itie, inco^^^^cy: It
is my pride, my in^^^^tude, my unproficiency that deserve uns^^^^^ble (...)
her, and contagious diseases, that urge GOD (...) the commonweal be ^^^^dled
with male-coo^^^^s, the Church with two confor^itan^s: and (...) with the ^^st
of (...) ^ourning, sighe^ and dep^^^^^on, for the spreading vices of our ti^^
and nation. CHAP. 3.


But (care ever had that we begin with our own) we stand obliged to go on
in mourning also for the sins of other men: S. Basil. Ascet. defin. contract.
qu. 296.
which is a demonstration that a man hates and sorrows for sin as sin,
when he grieves not only for his own (which is his own plague) but for
others also, whose punishm^^^ should not touch him.

A proof of godly sorrow, when one mourns for that God is dishonored and
disobeyed by whomsoever. An argument of brotherly low, when a Christian is
grieved for another evil as his own. An evidence that we hate not the
person, but the sin, when we are sorry for the party sinning. The
Philosopher is right, In his Rhetonques, ^ (...).
He that hates i^ (...) grieved, Christ's anger is employed to issue from
charity, because Marc. 3.5 he was grieved for the hardness of their hearts,
with whom he was angry for the obstinacy of their spirits. Redivivam in illis
partibus infidelium perversitatem suspiras, dignissi^s do or qui dedita deo
corda contristet, nec est apud eos laps^^ illamentabilis, apud quos est
igniculus charitatis. Qui^ unum spiritualium votum est, salus inconcussa
cunctorum. Hormisda, in Epistola ad Possessore^.
So the Psalmist protests his hating the haters of God, with a perfect, not a
malicious hate, for that it was accompanied with grief, Psalm 139.21.22. The
soul that is inst^^ed with charity, longing for the salvation of all, (...)
without grief take knowledge of any ^at^s perdition: the str^e grief is a
testimony of a living member in Christ's mystical body, nor^^ be^ without
feeling in the ma^ectes of those (...) whom God has joined (...) by love, 2.
C^^. 22.2^* which made devo^ (...) De been vivendo, c. 13. Tam diud^let me
(...), qua^diu in co^pore conti^^ror (...).
say, (...) memeber is sens^^^ (...) body, so is it (...) (...) grieved and
mournes not for the (...) ande^str^^ares of his fellow members, he has (...)
in the body of the Church ((...) a corp^r^ ecclesia) And truly considering the
worth of a soul, how can a true Christian (...) grieve, seeing so fine and
noble creatures perish a^ are me^^ souls, each whereof i^ (...) the whole
aspectable world, Lu^^r ^los. ^n^^^. Spirit. c. 6.
The soul as created by God is more precious then all the rarities, ornaments,
and wonders of the universe. All the brave Fo^ts, famous Towers, i^preg^^ble
Castles and goodly Cities of the whole (...). And yet if a man could stand in a
(...) of the world, and see them all as once perishing, his heart were harder
then an Adama^^, if he could restrain sorrow. How then should a Christian
forbear grieving for the perdition of souls! Especially when he contemplate,
that their value is more than doubled in the pries which CHRIST has laid down
for them, wherein they are dignified above Angels. And (...) Christian do
less then (...), that they should perish for whom (...) dyed?

There are very many (...) ^e guilty of another^ (...) (...) is by not grieving
(...) the sin thine (...) grief, for that they are insensible of their
evil, and understand not how, and how miserably they go to ruin: S. Basil.
de morte.
Perhaps while we weep, they will laugh, and even that invites our
lamentation: for if by our mourning they assumed any sense of grief, we might
cease mourning because they would amend: but by reason that no sense of grief
affects them, let us continue S. Basil. Sell. ser. 42.
weeping.

In this our godly mourning we must add grief to our sorrow for them, to whom
we are obliged in several interests. And forasmuch as spiritual bands tie
closer then the natural, we ought in peculiar manner to deplore the faylings
of them that are truly Catholic and Orthodoxe in Religion, and have a name
for right Christian profession, for that they more nearly concern our LORD
CHRIST, and scandalize his Faith and worship.

Sweet JESUS how accursed is their jollitie, that make themselves mirth with the
sins of others, and especially with the diversions of thy best servants,
taking thence their occasions to declame against all forwardness in Christian
service, and conversation; when if they had the least drop of holy sorrow, it
would express It self in such an opportunity ( Psalm. 69.6) Let none of those
that fear thee be ashamed because of me, O Lord God of Hosts. All they that
wait on God, and arigh^ ^^ecnd his honor and worstly, are ashamed when (...)
that have reference to him in a pious way do openly transgress* St. CYPRIAN
De dupl. Martyrio. Totum ecclesia catu^ demittere vultus atque e^ubescere.
(...) might see then, when a sacred Virgin lapsed, that shame filled the face
of the whole Congregation, and cast (...) their countenance. And all they that
with good minds set themselves to serve God, most ardently crave his continual
help, that the Church and holy, courses, may not suffer for th^^ d^faults.

Here I must advise them that mourn for the sins of others, to be (...) that
they abuse not a good affection for (...), greeving at the liberty of others,
(...) of greater knowledge and (...).

That they use it not in hypocrisy or color, for disgracing others under show
of sorrow, and praying God to forgive them, and (...) their hearts. Dissemble
not with God and the world. If thou greevest for thy neighbors find, thou will beseech God to pardon and (...) him, in secret, and not i^ the hearing of
others.

(...) to hide (...) ^tablenesse, and set out thy, (...) with the figures of
Divine and Heavenly grief. God marks for his, (...) and (...) in sec^^^^ for
the (...) those that (...) themselves (...) loud s^ghing and g^^aning in (...)
and ^^ling out in (...)

(...) Religious Father Super. Cant. ser. 24
Sr. BERNARD, There be that endeavor to sha^^^ the (...) they have conceived
and cannot conceive, with the false author of counterfeit demureness; you may
see deep sighs premised, (...) with a sad countenance, dejected look, and
doleful voice, slander comes grav^ly and slowly forth; And truly so much the
more persuasive, by how much it is believed of those that hear it, to be
uttered with an unwilling mind, and rather with the affection of a Condoler,
then any fetch of malice: I am grievously sorry says he, for that I love him
very well, and never could reform him in this thing: Another tells you, I knew
so much of him before, but it should never have g^^e further form, but seeing
the matter is come out by another, I cannot deny it, I speak it with grief,
indeed it is even so, and then adds (gr^nde damnum) it is great pity; for
truly otherwise he excels in many things, but in this particular, to confess
the very truth, he can no way be excused.

These motes removed out of the Mourners eye, it is the mirror of Christian
heart; therefore I may not in conscience omit to reprove those that traduce the
spirits mourning, and impute it to melancholy and de^^emper. Whereas it cannot
consist with charity and true Religion, to bite in sorrow, when God is openly
(...). The sons of (...) with the children of God, first by their (...)
tears from their eyes, then to upbraid them with their sorrows; who (...) can
look cheerfully, when (...) places and companies, there is much blaspheming of
holy (...) the and ^orders* much patronizing of irreverence and singularity,
much arguing for sacrilege and usury, much swearing, cursing, drunkenness and
other exersses. Let the followe^^ of mirth desist from the^^ and the like
enormities that extent grief, and if the righteous testify not joy in their
countenances, we will join with their reprehendars. In the mean while it is
good to be persuaded by St. CHRYSOSTOM, Ser. L^^e compunctin^^^^, one.
And what others due for the bodies of men, to do for our (...) their souls;
(...) them dead in sin.

Shall an One law and m^^ne over (...) Ox, and not a man have racionall
grief, a Christian spiritual, for a d^^d souls Wherefore as JONAS the Father
(...)^ S. Chrysostom. tom. ^. ser. ^4. in sin.
exh^^^^. If thou he from thy self, land thy neighbor (...) for the (...)
that (...) so much as weep for (...) S. Chrysostom. in Heb^. hom. 15.
(...)

CHAP. 4.
CHAP. IV. How many Saints being very transcendent in their grief for other
men's sins, leave them without excuse that have no common measure of godly
sorrow.
DIVines, and of Divines the most learned and glorious St. AUGUSTINE writes
agreeable to all Christian sense, S. Aug. de Trin. l. 8. c. 9.
I know not how, we are more quickened to love of the rule through Faith,
whereby we believe that some have so lived, and hope whereby we no whit
despair; that we also who are men may so love, in that some men did so live,
and thereupon both desire more ardently, and crave more confidently: wherefore
it shall not be unusefull for us to weigh how some have exceeded the measure of
enjoined grief, that we may not defect in this sorrow commanded. How large
was IEREMIES heart, cap. 9.1. who lamenting the Jews for their sins and
judgments cried out, O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears! The good Prophet affected to be metamorphosed into a fountain (as the
Poets (...)) that with weeping continual Rivers of tears, he might overflow
and wash away the iniquity of the times, which the Kingly Prophet performed
(...) some degree ( Psalm. 119 136) Rivers of tears run down mine eyes,
because men keep not thy Law: as if it were said, I oppose floods of tears to
the deluge of other men's sins.

O the almost altogether inimitable transcendency of MOSES and St. PAUL in this
kind of sorrowing, of whom excellently St. CHRYSOSTOM; Ser. 1. in S. Apost.
Fauluns. (...). S. Basil. de flu. lat. q. 3. Origin in Romans 9, B. Na^. apol p.
23. S. Eulogius in Bibliotheca Photij co^. ult. p. 1604. S. Isidor. Pelus. l.
2. Ep. 58.
MOSES indeed chose to have perished with others; but St. PAUL chose, not to
perish with others, but others being saved himself to fall from endless glory
(Romans 9.1, 2, 3) In a rapture and holy trance of superabundant charity, his
affection got as high as any speculation. St. BERNARD Nonne me^th been affecta
sana quadem videtus esse ^^s^^la cunt impossible sir effectu, h^b^r^ si^cu^^
i^ affectu, pro Ch^^s^^ a^^^hem^ velle esse a Christo. De natura and dignitute
a^^^ris Divae. 3. Optat (...) esse a Christo id est solus ^er^^e no o^ne
Isra^^^uer^^^ (...) pora^^, S. Hieron ad M^di^^^^ quest. ^0. Ad ^g a (...) qu.
(...).
asks, Does it not seem in a well affected mind a certain sober being
besides it self, to have that fixed in the affect, which is impossible to be in
effect, to be willing for CHRIST, to be anathema from CHRIST?

The blessed Apostle bore such love to souls, and good will to his nation,
that he would gladly have suffered such pains, as a separate from Christ
indures, to have bought off their unbelief, that they might have enjoyed
Christ and his benefits. As in ^he charity St. CATHARINE of S^^es, is reported
^o have kissed the ground which Preachers trod on, for that they did ^^^perate
with God in the fat^^^^^ of souls: and (...) Gra^^ (...) in c^pendis ^ntrad^^^
(...) ad s^^^dulum f^d^^ ^. 3. cap. 7.
besought God that (...) her faith and body (...) might step up the passage
(...), tha^ (...) ^^ght (...). St. Chrysostom. is frequent in the (...) of the
Apostles charity, saying PAUL De la^^^^^^ (...). 2.
(...) be for and with the (...) of Christ (...) ^^^ber of the punished, thou
without it in the highest of honor. And again, PAUL loved his enemies, so as
no man loves his friends, for who would endure to go to Hell for his friends,
when he might go to Heaven? Likewise blessed MOSES before him, would have
been blotted out of the Book of God for his enemies that (would have) stoned
f him. In Hebr. hom. 19.


To understand that they were not exorbitant in their profound grief, but
fetched an high compass of devotion, let us inform our selves that there is in
hell and damnation, a plenitude of sin and pain; in Heaven and salvation,
fullness of grace and glory: Now a gracious soul may be affected with such
grief for sin, and Gods dishonor, and the loss of other men's souls as to
be willing to divert them, if it might be, with suffering the utmost pains
that condemned creatures do or can endure. And happy i^ he that has so
far denied and mortified himself, Didaem Stella de contemptu mundi l. 3. c.
11. Adrian. fol. 112. Ioh. Avila apud Rosignol. de Christiana perfectione, l.
5. 26.
as to be ready to undergo even all the pa^^es of hell for Gods love, so he
may continue in his grace. For no good heart can endure the thought of being
separate from Christ, as freeing us from sin, and a^ being the fountain of
grace and acceptance with God, in well doing and holy suffering. Ma^^ mesh.
writes, De gestis Pontificum, l. 1. Vt dicerer, ma^^e se esse sine peccato in
inferas quam cum peccato in co^lo.
that S. Ansel^^^ so abhorred sin, That he said he had rather h^^ an ^all (...)
sin, then in Heaven with sin (...) might be (...) admitted) By like
Christian inclinations, devotionall man may be so ^^^^^oured with grace and
divine service as that he would with cont^^^ h^ in hell with more fruit and
honor to God, then in heaven with less.

And that there is possibility for the most dreadful torments, griefs and
dolors to be suffered, without being divided from God, as the welspring of
grace in suffering them, is evident from our LORD CHRIST, to whom God was then
nearest by grace, when he complained as forsaken of him. Put the case here,
the Saints forementioned had enjoyed their wish, they should have been
infinitely happy in not being happy, for the most glorifying of the Creator, is
the greatest glory of the creature.

This is always to be remembered, that such degree of love and grief in them,
was heroical and befell them as cast into a^ (...) of love, and wrapped therein
somewhat beyond the (...) of a traveller; to love God, not for themselves and
their own good, but themselves only in God and for his service and S. Durn.
de diligendo Deo.
glory.

This flower grows not in every good (...) Garden: many ignorant of what
spirit they are become vain in their protestations, and have often in their
mouths, how they could wish to be ^o^^rsed for the conversion of their
Comm^^^^^, for the reformation of their Parishes, (...) ^^ey that know
themselves will not be so presumptuous, as to talk of doing (...) ^^^ch very
few word (...) by (...) ^^ink (...), Let Pro^^lent (...) by the (...) possible,
and what ^^ey should (...) to ^ee like ^^^^ded in their (...) they rise not to
(...) at the Sun, though he come far short, will shoot higher then if he
aimed but at a shrubbe.

And truly, to consider their Cup over running with tears, it will at least
moisten our eyes. LOT was a rare man, that wrought such sorrow upon his Soul,
that continuing in Sodom, the flaming Furnace thereof could not dry up the
Fountain of his tears and mourning from day to day (2. Pet. 2.8) He is an
instance that a Christian sojourning where Hell is broke loose, and overspreads
the face of the earth, may by much exercise, nevertheless maintain continual
mourning, and nourish godly sorrow, even with the impiety that besets him.

Our holy Savior in the midst of the chief honors afforded him in the world
weeps amain, ( Luke 19.36.41) considering the unrepentance of the Jews, and
the miseries which after many years should come upon them for it, that we
might learn to shake off all security, and use means, that our hearts be not
at any time so took with the contents of the earth, but that we may be ever
ready to mourn, as just occasion shall invite (...) then our Master, Ier.
12.15, 17:
when he admonished Ierusa^^^, and she profited not, wept over her, so if thou
live in a perverse quarter, that benefits not by thy example and monitions,
mourn and weep for them. And if obstinacies will die, help to bury them with
tears. This shall demonstrate in thee a good and gracious disposition, after
the saying of St. CHRIS, If the Hom. 23. in Hebr. (...).
body be dead, ^h^^ repute^ them without ^^^^as^ion that mourn not, a soul
perishes; and do thou say, CHAP. 5.
mourn not, but I cannot be a father and not weep. Nor can thou be a
brother and not weep, and not mourn for men and brethren wilfully living and
dying in trespasses and sins.

CHAP. V. Of mourning for our own miseries, and the calamities of others.
I Am something afraid, lest I have been longer handling, then many will be
in practiseing godly sorrow for the sins of others. Therefore, and that I
weary not the Peruser, I will but briefly touch the third and fourth exercises
of mourning for corrections and punishments upon our selves and others. I^.
12.^7. Our Lord Jesus himself was in much perplexity about his passion, for
this among other reasons, which Saint Bernard well prosecutes, De. pass. Dom.
c. 13.
to prescribe his followers (d^^^^i^^ (...) example fr^man) a rule for
doctrine, and pra^^^es, th^^ (...) hanging over our heads (...) when they (...)
pro^^^^^e Lord may and (...) of us, that he would (...) the scourges of his
anger. And yet (...) not remooved by example (...) them thankfully patiently
(...) ^ot he insensible under (...) ^^^rections, but often, and (...) and beg
forgiveness and favor upon our knees, 2. Cor. 12.8. What? a child, and not in
all humbleness to crave pardon under the fathers rod! Iam. 3.33.
Dear Christians, should not we grieve that we constrain God to take hard
and harsh courses with us, against the earning of his fatherly bowels. Compare,
Es. 52.5. Ezekiel. 26.20. Romans 2 24. and it will be manifest, that as God is
glorified in great deliverances, so he is blasphemed in grievous distresses of
his people, many feet slip thereat, and many mouths are opened to say (however
most profanely) if they were good God would use them better: if their faith
were right, God would rebuke their enemies. Is not true Religion reproached,
when the adversaries thereof prevail by force of our sins? should it seem a
light thing in our eyes, we occasion such blasphemies against God and his
truth, and the generation of his children, by provoking him to bring as under
the ^aile!

That of grief in our own miseries. Now as briefly to speak of commiseration
in other men's calamities exercising as men, humanity and compassion to them,
as Christians pity and fellow-seeking: Read ps. 79.80. Esai. 22.4. Ier. 4.19.
read Psalm, 90. how Moses the man of God was affected, beholding in the
wilderness the death of ^o ^^o^ men, and remember how our sweet Lord i^ (...)
^^t visit o^ Jerusalem, wept wh^^ (...) came within sight thereof, Luke 19 40.
(...) de^^^g ^^e (...) of the chi^ and the multitude o^ ^^ule^ therein, it
moved his bowels that (...) should miserably be destroyed, the glory of all
Asi^ the beauty of the whole earth raced to the ground.

Verily if we cast our eyes over the world we shall see, that if ever, now is
time to weep: to pass by the holy land, which yet who has under dominion,
Read Idiot. de morte. c. 7.
we cannot think of without sighing; who can but lament the fortunes of
Greece, whose children are pitifully oppressed by the Turk, and tyrannically
kept from means of learning, which if they had, so as to peruse their ancient
fathers, and accordingly to reform themselves, in diverse particulers, possibly
they might be as flourishing a Church as ever. Is there any Christian bea^^
that can without sorrow meditate the desolation of the (...) Churches, and the
poor terms of Christ^^^ (...) there, to those of former ages, that three
Patriach's, and the relics of famous Churches under them should be enslaved
to Pagans, that from Jerusalem to I^^rirum in the most goodly countries of the
earth, in the prime of Saint Paul's travailes and plantations, Tarcisius should
overflow, and Mahomet be honored, where CHRIST was worshipped. And (...)
ho^^^, what sorrow suffices in behalf of (...) ^^^ring nations, the hea^^ of
(...) religion is (...) of dangerous superstition, (...) novelty. Oh
Christianity, (...) dome Religion should (...) of so many brave (...) and
(...) the fury of war. (...) noble and worth^^ (...) held out of their
dominions. That our land is afflicted with unkindly seasons, letting in evil
diseases and inconveniences upon us; that the plague, the perpetual
forerunner of an angry God, the Lords harbinger ( before him goes the
pestilence, Hab. 3 5) has set an heavy foot in several places. And who is
ignorant of other numberless causes for our greatest grief.

But alas for grief, These times in our exigents and the excision of other
Churches and States, in stead of mourners, produce us wantons that make much of
themselves, Amos 6. with Wine and Oil: Intus vino, extus oleo.
Wine within to make the heart glad, and oil without to make the face shine,
but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, the troubles of the
Catholic Church, which argues their mirth unordinate and unchristian. Es.
22.11.13.14.

Now lest any man should slack his grief with conceit, that it is good for men
to be afflicted, good for the Church to be tried in Gods furnace, good that
offenders should be punished by God and men, Let him hear Tertullian, In lib.
de spectaculis bonum est cum puniuntur nocentes.
Who but only offenders will deny this; and yet innocent persons ought not to
rejoice in the punishment of others, when it rather suits with the innocent to
grieve, that a man like himself should become such an offender Tom. 4. Hom, 18.
and (...) the grave sentence of St. Chrysostom. If God punishing says, as I
live I delight not in the death of (...) dies, ^^e should imitate the Lord,
(...) because a s^une^ ^at^ given occasion to be justly (...).

CHAP. VI. CHAP. 6.
Of the consolation that attends mourners, and the special comforts of the
former kinds of mourning.
BLessed are they that mourn, why? because holy sorrow is of it self a
blessed affection, and the rectifying of our grief is a part of our
happiness, and makes our mourning beatificall, They shall be comforted, Es.
61.1.2.3. Christ was therefore Christ anointed with the oil of gladness to
comfort all that mourn, and give them the oil of joy; S. Chrysostom.
we cannot but bless the sorrow that renders men the subjects of his
comforting. They shall be comforted, both here and hereafter; and the less
here, the more hereafter, Luke 16.25. And for that no content of this life is
comparable to the least degree of joy in the other, they are happiest that
receive least of their consolation in this world. S. Hi^^^^ in ps. 89.
It is a most pleasing consequent of godly sorrow, that we shall (...) it, 2.
Cor. 7.10. which is (...) inducement among men to any action of di^^^^^^g.

For the inte^^^^, it i^ (...) Christians very mourning is so (...), as an
(...) grace, so that his continual mourning (...) not him to rejoice, (...)
mournes a (...) Bernard fits our purpose, De conversione ad clericos c.. 19.
beati qui lagent, lugeat abundanter; lugeat, sed ron sine pietatis affectu, et
obtentu consolationis.
Blessed are they that mourn, let men mourn abom^^^^^ly, (...) as they can,
let them mourn, but not without godly affection and taking of consolation,
such as the Gospel affords the faithful in their mourning. A heart most
rejoicing in GOD is ap^est to sorrow for that which might interrupt communion
in God; and mourning then proceeds most kindly, when the soul most delights it
self in God, and in (...) love acts sorrow.

S. Chrysostom. in Phil. 4.4. and. in Col. ser. ult. in Eth.
If you mark it, the greatest mourner in Israel was the sweet finger of Israel.
A Christian is never more assuredly joyful, then after, yea in religious
sorrow, Psalm. 94.19. Much the fitter for my holy performance, worldly sorrow
works de^^^, eating the heart and marrow, and drinki^^ up the vital spirits.
Sorrow according to God not (...) ^^pentance and life, chear^th and quickneth
^he Spirit, to work out the full work of repentance and salvation. Sorrow at
things for which we ought to be sad, is worldly and of the flesh, so far as
it vexes, distempers and indisposeth to any good action, not raising the heart
to Godward, but making it averse and unready (...) ^^^ces of Religion.

Cassian de Coenob. institutis, l. 9. c. 11.
One spiritual affection ex^^^^ (...), one scripture ex^ort^th (...), Blessed
are they (...) mourn, rejoice (...). Have your affect (...) Gods command,
(...) red for all (...) and works of (...) the sorrow (...) of (...)
involuntary and ^^^^^^ing, but spontaneous, CHAP. 5.
g^^^^full and quieting the (...), this mourning is not by necessity of nature,
but liberty of free grace ( Zach. 12.10) The spirit of grace is powered upon
converts and so they mourn, whence their error is discovered th^^ think
amiss of Religion, o^ it is killed the spirits of men with sorrow and
mortification, who do not mind that it ^^th ^om^^^ter which (...) ^^th the
^^^ld of sin and causes (...) sorrow (Jud. 16 8) (...) should forget his name
if he caused disconso^^^^ grief and mourning without comfort. There (...) was
spiritual man, who in his sharpest conviction and contrition, thought not
himself (...) th^^ ^ver before, who (...) God (...) sensible of his sin,
that be ch^^^ (...), ^^o would exchange the sorrows (...) full, ^e^ or any
world by pleasures. (...) proved by St. BERNARD, (...)
saying, (...) had (...) that a (...) the grief which pr^^^eds from aba^^^
(...) world.

(...) to Saints, the (...) earthly solaces. CHAP. 6.
Common tears have operation, that heavy minds take great pleasure in
weeping: how should not then the tears which through Divine grief are
distilled from a pure heart, be most satisfactory? Oh that men could perceive
the fruit of godly sorrow, that it is not frustraneous but effectual to
everlasting consolation. The Spirit that is our Comforter descended in form of
a Dove as having no gall, and that which carnals account gall, is sweeter then
their honey.

Now let us in few words point at some comforts, which are peculiar to the
several heads of mourning before specified; first, he that mourns for his own
special sins, has for his comfort the assurance of their pardon written in
his face, and on the Tables of his sorrowful heart. Tears (says St. AMBROSE)
Latrymae solens legationem accipere pro peccatis. in ps. 37.
are went to undertake an embassage for sins: and they are Ambassadors that
always return peace to the melting spirit, and assure deliverance from the
sins, for which there is such weeping, Luke 7.38.47. It is no s^^^ll comfort
to a penitent, that though he cannot be without sin in the body, he can
ever (...) for the sins of his flesh.

2. They that mourn for the sins of (...) marked for Gods peculiar, ^^^h
^.4. (...) in the forehead with the (...) Ta^. Before (...) Hebrew letters were
changed by Ezra, Ta^ had the S. Hierom in Ezech. et in 1. Esaia vis^^^e.
Tertul. adversus Iud. os.
form of a Cross (as the Greek and Roman^) God therefore would here them
(...) with his own imp^^^^^ the figure of his Cross, in token that in his
passion of all others they should be freed, and so are they signed in their
foreheads, because all may read in mourners faces testimonies of Religion. That
sign is a seal that Christians shall not be charged with their sins, whose
iniquities they lament: worthily St. Gregory the great, Holy men In Reg. l. 4.
c. 2. Divina propitianis auxilio ^^uninutur.
by this that they devoutly sue unto God, for sinners are fenced with the aid
of Gods merciful grace, The same Sign is a confirmation, as St. Chrysostom.
speaks, That we shall receive a retribution for every Christian sigh. (...).
In Romans sermon. 31.
that they may not be in any sort defiled with their crimes, whose uncleanness
they could not wipe away with their prayers.

3 They that mourn in their afflictions, convert themselves to him that
smites, and greeve that they compel their loving father to deal strangely
with them, shall have their chastisements sanctified to them, and find that of
God in them, as to bless the time that ever they were afflicted, as Lewis the
godly King of Erance in his conference with Henry the third told him. Apud
Gulielm. Paris. p. 1201. Reversus aurem ad meipsum, ^r ad cor meum regressus
and ingressin.
It is hard to recount the troubles of body and mind that I endured as Christ's
Pilgrim, and all things went ill with me (...) I thank thee oh most highest,
but returning (...) my self and my own heart, and retireing in the cl^fer
(...) which the Lord of his grace varable fed me, then if the whole would had
(...) subdued unto me.

4. They that mourn (...) all judgments and the causes thereof, and pu^
themselves between Gods w^^^h and (...) p^^^^ of the (...) Ephrem reports of
the holy Fathers def^nct in his time, Page 767.
They were useful to the Lord, they saved themselves and others, by excellent
examples of life. They were hold out as a glass to all beholders, One of them
was able to (...) God for many men, Two of them were able to stand before God
in holy prayer, and assuredly pacify the Lord God for many thousand men.

This is certain, that mourners and supplients do the best service in the
world, and in universal judgments exempt themselves, ^onah. 14.14. Ier.
15.11. have at least quietness of mind, in and under them; and this noble
record in their conscience that they drew not on the vengeance of God, but
withheld it what was in them, when secure Christians, that do not lament
public sins, that do not deprecate common judgments, in national and
overflowing scourges have this cold comfort, that they may (...) themselves,
they made up on breaches but in lieu of mourning for iniquity, reviled
authority.

CHAP. VII. Of the encouragements to the exercise of (...).
IF (...) specially (...) ^^em, Ier. 13.^. CHAP. 7.
Though Moses and Samuel stood (...) me, a^ yet my mind and (...) people, Moses
and Samuel are mentioned above others, because they prayed for their enemies,
the God of love most regarding their inter^essio^, that have the charity to
mourn for the evil, and be earnest for the good of an (...).
(...) supposition shows, that i^ any things be^ devised can prevail, the
standing up of the righteous shall speed. God himself infini^^^s that he
enforced, and suffers (...) by the prayers of his children, Dead (...) alone,
sh^w^^ that he may be held by the prayers of his S^i^^s, (...) Saint Hierom
cel^^sta. In l^^. 2^.
Therefore God saying, let me (...) animated Tertul. (...) Marc^^^^^ l. ^.
(...) dis^^^^^^ illos, ut ille postul^^do et s^^^^t ipsum ^fferedo non sinrret.
S. Greg. in Ioh. l. 5. 9. qui^^ est se^^^ d^^^re admit (...) procandi (...)
pra^^re (...) didiretur, (...) pro populo (...) qod qu^^ (...)
^^^^san to strive in prayer, as implying how (...) might do with God, and
that the (...) overcome of him unless he should let his hold go. And the
Prophets thus understood God, therefore Jeremy desists ^ot^ praying for this
people, though the Lord himself (...) my (...), ^^^led him to leave off, Ion.
^4.^^. but (...) ^ore fervent in prayer, (...) perceiving thereby in what ill
condition (...), and dreading lest (...) duty and service, which he (...)
Lord, Exodus 32.9.^^.^1.

Moses will not be (...) proffer and entreaty induce to omit duty! That he
had rather forgo his part in heaven, and be ever in extreme pains, in and
for love to his Church and Country, then with the neglect of mediating for
them to enjoy sovereign honor in this world, and glory in the other! Clemens
Alexandrinus justly exclaimes, How great was his perfection, that had rather
perish with his people, then be saved alone! Strom. 2, (...). S. Clem. ad
Corinth. p. 69.
What a gappe might a soul so extended in love stop? what would not the Lord
do, if good Christians should intervene and wrestle with him in this manner?

Oh therefore all that make mention of the name of the Lord keep not silence,
give him no rest; pray and beg audience for the prayers of others, as godly
Nehemiah does, Neh. 1.11. Now is a time to remember that Elias was a man like
us, that we may endeavor to be like him in effectual fervent prayer, James
5.16.17. It is a desperate case with any people, when good men's hearts are as
it were benumbed and indisposed to pray for them, and their own hardened, that
they cannot faithfully petition for themselves. We have no greater cause of
lamentation, then that generally men are averse from holy recourses unto God in
set prayers, and set fasts, the chief helps of devotion and holy mourning,
and they, whose profession hinds them to be otherwise, be more ben^ ^o
inveigh against the times then mourn for the abominations, and beleevingly to
follow God, and importune him of remedy.

And what can enharten them to be importunate, if this does not, that our God
is not only easy to be entreated, but ready to be commanded in this kind,
Es. 45.11? Who can tell whether of those two astonishing wonders most to
admire, either that Almighty God should beseech sinful men by his Ambassadors
(2 Cor. 5.19) as if God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be
ye reconciled unto God; Or that the same omnipotent God should descend so low,
as to will us to command him in the behalf, and for the good of sinful men,
Concerning the works of my hands command you me (Si quid apus est impera)
command what you stand in need of is an elegant kind of speaking used often in
Plantus, and frequented by the courteous in our and other languages, to
express inclination and forwardness to minister and do a kindness. S.
Chrysostom. Tom. 7. sermon. 1. c. 6.
Sure I am God bids us not command him in deep complement, but in Divine
sincerity, Ian. Guliel. in Plant.
as facill to be overruled by the mediation of his trusty servants, 1. Sam.
16.1. Ierem. 11.14. God forbad Samuel and Jeremy to pray when he was resolved
to punish. By which prohibition he manifests that he is not minded that his
servants should lose their labor in Praying. Thereby we may be certain, that
Abraham and Gods friends shall cease asking, before he cease granting, Genesis
18. If we can mourn and pray, Genesis 11.
God can and will reform and comfort.

And to speak a little more generally, mervellous is the efficacy of godly
sorrow and tears to all entents and effects of grace, as bitter Potions and
salt water kill worms, so the water of brinish and salt tears (such as PETER
shed when he wept bitterly) kill the worms that otherwise would be ever
gnawing the conscience. They quench the enemies fiery darts, they supple the
soul that the heavenly seed may take and bear fruit in it. The Lord imposes
not on us vain and barren grief, but the religious sow in tears, Psalm. 126.
that have virtue stamped on them to fructify unto life eternal. And to use
the words of St. BASIL. (...).
Every pious tear becomes a seed and loan of everlasting joy. They are a
sovereign bath to cleanse the soul, I mean tears issuing from a pure heart:
for as foul waters purge not but pollute; so tears that flow not from pure
hearts and heads ( Ia. 4.8, 9) as ESAUS tears of indignation and terrene
affection. But tears of devotion and heavenly inspiration have a purifying
faculty. Therefore blessed Chrysostom. prettily calls tears the sponge of Tom. h.
51.
sin, and often magnifies Gods mercy that has granted us this laver to wash
away our deadly sins; Our duty is, as all civil persons every day wash their
face and hands in fair water, so daily to wash our hearts and hands and
purify our whole man and whole life in holy tears. We ought (says RURICIUS)
to rinse our face in tears, Ruricius Lemovic. episc. l. 2. ep. 14. faciem
nostram debemus magis lachrymis rigare, qua^ Levacris.
rather then in any lavers, and to complain of our spiritual drought, and
beg rain that the windows of Heaven might open, and cause a flood in us.
Such was the act of holy St. De eo quod legitur in Job in sex tribulationibus
forte enim non reperiret ignis exureus, quod interim fluens lachryma diluisset.
BERNARD, would to God some body could g^ve waters to my head, and a fountain
of tears to my eyes: It may be that burning fire should not find, what
running water had before washed away.

Observe that CHRIST promises his mourners in sorrow, what men seek in
pleasures, content and comfort. Fill we then our earthen vessels with tears
the water of co^trition, that CHRIST may convert it into wine of supernatural
consolation. Once it is decreed that none shall eat the Lamb without sour
herbs, and let it not seem burdensome to us to mourn, Romans 8.22, 23.
seeing even brute creatures by their instincts groan for men's sins: and the
whole world condoles with us, and vehemently longs for the day of Redemption,
that an end may be put to sin. In all the universe there is no creature, that
joins not with us in grief for sin, but devils and unrighteous men. And our
Faith owes homage to CHRIST, affirming that they also who now excessively
rejoice and laugh, out of place in the valley of tears, out of time, in the
day of visition and mourning; whereas now they have no pure nor solid joy,
shall hereafter have entire and mere grief, (...)
and nothing but grief in all the kinds and degrees of it ( Luke 6.25.) Ye
shall mourn and weep too. Wherefore let not them that mourn regard though
careless people give them for melancholique, Weepers shall laugh, as their
grief has a Rod and ^^ci^ an ch^^^ bodies, so shall their joy, which they
shall not be able to (...) for the exc^^^ing ^^^^^^fied.
but say Mourners shall rejoice when you shall be sorry, they shall laugh when
you shall cry.

Of this all believers may be out of d^^^^. As any increase in grace so they
more anch^^^^^ favor penitential sadness, and their sorrow grows according
to God, then which there is not a duty more purely religious, nor more accepted
of CHRIST, who has girt himself with a towell to wipe all tears from
mourners eyes, in the other life, and in this, lets not one rear fall besides
his bottle. It is a precious martyrdom before God, when a Christian torments
himself for the evil converse of others (2. Pet. 2.8.) is so good, as to
greeve for all that are bad. Mourning is the proper vane of the spirit, who
appeared (as St. CYPRIAN De spirito Sancto.
notes) in the form of a Dove ( Matthew. 3.16) which served for a hieroglyphick
of the holy Ghosts mourning in the hearts of true Christians, and breaking his
affections in unutterable groanings.

Finally Beloved, no Christian must entertain thoughts of travailing to
Jerusalem any other way then CHRIST went, and it is written that our Lord went
to Jerusalem (that signifies, the sight of Peace) by Bethany, which signifies,
the house of grief. In a mystery to decipher, that the hearts must be
acquainted with sorrows, the eyes with tears, that would come to the sight of
true peace in beatificall vision.

St. PAUL would have us look unto JESUS the author of our Faith, and if we
look upon him, shall we not see him a man of sorrows, compounded as it were
of sole grief, who having no sins of his own to sorrow for, lamented the
sins of all the world, assuming on his blessed soul a sorrow equivalent to
them all: and the pure grief of the Religious mourning for the sin of
others, has the best proximity to the holy sorrow of our Lord.

I conjecture that men said, our Lord was Jeremy rather then some other of the
Prophets; for that the vehemency of Christ's bewayling those corrupted times,
presented the spirit of that mournful Prophet.

St. CHRYSOSTOM urges thee to tell him where Christ laughed? No where, but
thou read that he was often sad, when he saw Jerusalem, he wept, when he
considered the traitor he was troubled, when he was about to raise LAZARUS he
groaned: and do thou laugh? In Hebr. hom. 15:
Not so good Christians, but our head mourning, let all the members condole and
mourn together with him.

The God of all consolation stay the weak hearts of his children, that they be
not carried away with the streams of Corruption, but that they may be
dissolved in grief for this wicked generation; that if it be possible, they
may so lift up their voice and weep, that their cry may get above the clam^ur
of those sins that make the heavens weep, and the Land mourn: He grant that
we joy not the joy that is the begetter of sorrow, S. Chrysostom. in Phil. sermon.
^lt. in fo. (...)
but greeve the grief which is the mother of joy, and by which we shall enter
into the joy of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. To whom with the Father and
blessed Spirit be glory, as it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.

FINIS:
BEATI MITES. THE MEEK. A TREATISE OF MEEKNESS, handling the third Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCK, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

S. Aug. de Sanctis, Sermon. 19. Solent medicinae periti aegritudines quas
curandas suscipiunt aliquando curare per contraria, aliquando per similia, --
Majores nostri planxerunt dies sues, and avi eorum planxerunt dies suos, nullis
hominibus dies placu^runt, quos vivendo egorunt. Sed posteris placent dies
major^us, and illis iterum, illi dies placebunt, quos ipsi non sentiebant, and
ideo placebant, quod enim presens est, acrom habet sensum. B. Aug. de diversis.
Sermon. 19. cap. 3. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBVS. LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and
WILL: COOK, 1637.

BEATI MITES.
MATTHEW. 5.5. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
CHAP. I. Of Meekness and the blessedness and subjects thereof.
Meekness does aptly follow immediately after Mourning, as which moderates the
Soul that it refuses nor comfort in any occasion of grief, but in all sorrow
voides disturbance. Thus St. BASIL describes, In Psalm. 33. (...)
They who are of restrained manners, and freed of all passion, so ^^to (...) no
perturbation habit in their souls, CHAP. 1.
those are termed Meek. Without this meekness calm it, the heart of man is
as a tr^ubled Sea, when it cannot rest whose waters cast upon it and dirt, Esa
57.20. S. Gregor. in Job. l. 4. cap. 2^. lib. 5, c. 30. St. Aug epist. 149.
rayses soil out of its own distemper, casting plat-formes of debates and
stuff, and fancying imaginary contentions and vehemently acting them with him,
and him, giving ill words and returning worse answers; yea many times when in
the Act of provocation it retained patience, bethinking S. Greg. past. lib. 3.
10. Clem. Alexand. Strom. 4. p. 356. 357.
it self thereof, it is exasperated and angry with it self for such
forbearance. Hence it is, that the Scripture uses verbs in a mood which the
Hebricians call Hithpael, and which purports reciprocal working, Isychius in
Lev 3.
to intimate how an unmeeke mind reflects upon, and troubles it self. Psalm.
37.1. Ps. 73.21. (...)
My heart is leavened, swelled and imbittered with repine and wrath; for ( Iam.
3.14) Emulation is bitter when once the heat of anger has any thing violently
inflamed the spirit. (...)
I whetted and sharpened my self (Iracos) and so was cut to the heart and
pricked with choler, in my reins, to wit, the seat of the i^rascible
faculty, the ordering whereof not after the motions, and lusts of the flesh,
but according to the inclination and guidance of the spirit, is the meekness
of which we entreat.

The Stoickes were so far t^^^, de^^^ding passions from a wile and virtuous
man, because anger, grief and other affects, which be perturbations in others,
carried by passion in a wise man are disposers of the sensual part, agreeable
to the direction of the intellectual, and so subordinated to God, made
religions. Hence it comes that the wrath of Man as fuming from the flesh,
works not the righteousness of God (Iam. 1) but unfits and sets off from good
duties: but the anger of the spirit prepares men to all godly operations, and
aversation of sin, Be angry and sin not. Ephesians. 4.

As ( Job. 11.33) CHRIST groaned in his spirit and troubled himself, his
Deity limiting how much his Humanity should greeve and be molest^^^, and all
his trouble issuing from inward principles of voluntary heaviness, and bounded
by wisdom and grace. So they that are Christ's have of his Spirit to govern
their affections and excite and allay them, not by carnal instigations but by
godly considerations, which makes, that when others are contemptible in their
passions they be venerable in their affections.

(1. Sam. 11.6) The spirit of God came upon Saul and his anger was kindled
greatly, which is well deduced by St. Gregrie, 1. Reg. l. 5. 1. Vt irasci
mionis potuorit, prius in eum spiritus Domini ins^li^t, quam metuenda sit ergo
Sanctorum ira cerni^^^, si ^^s^^ta me^ in eo^ Domini (...) cogit^tums; (...)
ergo (...) regintur, (...) indig^^te and de^^^^ter pollumus povunt, Si eorum
(...), mortum S^^^^ spiritus creli^^e --
The spirit of God came upon him, that his anger might be kindled greatly. Was
not see thou how much the anger of Saints is to be diueded, if we (...) Gods
spirit coming upon them, if, (...) ^old them cowardly mora^^, we attend not
ha^^ spirit inwardly m^^ning. So est therefore (...) are correctedby the (...)
of our Superio^^ (...) ^ee accordingly ^remble under their indigni^^ (...), if
not so sw^^^ ^he Jova^ that their impulsion (...) of the Holy Christ.

The 37. and 73. Psalms may serve in place of a Commentary to this text, and
by them it app^ares, (...).
that Meekness is a just proportioned temper of the mind, whereby it is
prepared to the well abearing of it self Mansueti scilicet portantes ^ugum
Domini, Matthew. 11. Remigius in Psalm 36.
in the yoke of CHRIST, to commit the kingdom unto God, to be quiet and
silent, not to take displeasure at any of the Lords dealings with our selves or
others, to be affected unto God, in Plato's (...).
phrase, exceeding exceedingly, and to all other things to stand indifferent.
This the sentence of the most learned S. Aug tom. 10. in append. de eo quod
co^monemur, ab scandalis mundi cavere. Mites sunt qu^ous -- in omnibus bonis,
qu e faciunt, non placet nisi Deus, in omnibus quae mala patiuntur, non
displicet Deus.
Father. They are meek whom nothing but God pleases in the good which they
do, and whom God displeases not in the evils they undergo.

Those meek are blessed, because they shall inherit the earth, and have a
comfortable fruition of Gods mercies in all conditions, enjoy the benefit of
all the promises which godliness has for this life, and that which is to
come, with perpetual gladness and cheerfulness in the land which the Lord
their God gives them. What the rigorous, fierce and violent seek in
differences and endless desires, security and to have their will, that the
meek find in accommodation, refusing to choose for themselves, and accepting
what God sends. As Salvian says, De gubernatione Dei, l 1 p 324, -- Nullienim
ut opinor beatiores sunt, quam qui ex sententia sua atque vtto agunt.
The godly, contenting themselves always in all estates with the will of God,
are ever blessed; for none (I suppose, o^ are more blessed then they that fare
according (...) their own desire and wish, seeing this is the very notion of
blessedness, for a man to have which he will, and will what is convenient.

The word Tanquam possessionem haereditariam recipinum ea, quae promissa sunt
nobis. St. Ambros. de obitu Theodosit.
Inherit notes, that we receive those things which are promised us, as an
hereditary possession, and Inheritance is a free, sure, and honorable title.
That the meek, as regenerate and adopted in CHRIST, have not only a lawful,
but a sanctified use of common favors. That they confine their desires to that
portion which their heavenly Father has allotted them by his will, abhorring
that which comes not by means and ways prepared and approved in Gods
testaments: certain of this, that if they should possess all the earth, there
would be no blessing in it, were it not Gods legacy to them. That as their
heritage they intaile the goodness and mercies of God, for both lives to their
posterity, as in any after generation they shall be capable thereof. Psalm.
37.22.26.29.

The meek inherit the earth; condescending to others so much as reason and
Religion suffer, they purchase themselves good will and furtherance to
promotion; and whereas the difficult and angry, vex their own ghost and make
their lives tedious, displeasing God and their neighbors, the meek and
moderate enjoy themselves and the creature, with the favor of God and man.
Wisely St. Chysostome; ^omil. 75.
The meek, that put up wrongs, shall not thereby prejudice themselves, but
preserve their estate, when the proud and peremptory often lose their
patrimonies and their Soul^^^^^. They that depart sometimes with their right
for ^^iets sake, and what they may forbear suits in Law, CHAP. 2.
increase their substance, when they that are extreme in maintaining their
own, and hasty to contend, do frequently spend their stock, always lessen
their store.

But this is but a little part of our Masters intent, aiming at higher things,
and propounding that meekness, which is not only a work but a fruit of the
Spirit; and therefore sweet of it self, and desirable for it self,
participating as of the labor, so of the gain in godliness.

Let us then in search of our Lords meaning, inquire into the chief subjects
about which Meekness is versed; namely, in matters Spiritual, Thom. de Kemp.
de imitatione Christi. l. 2. 9. 10. ad fin.
and Temporal, in the success of our private businesses, and in the issue of
public affairs, in each whereof, we may observe both the virtue of
meekness in the practice of lenity, and the blessedness in the inheritance of
the earth.

CHAP. II. Touching the Exercise and reward of Meekness in matters Spiritual.
IN Spiritual matters the work of Meekness is, at the pleasure of God to
take alike the withdrawing of inner sweetness, and the overflowing of the
cup in sensible devotion obediently to endure the molestation of the Old man
and presence of evil, the imperfection of the New man and absence of good.

Concupiscence is ever inhabiting in us, but it does not ever equally assault
us, God in grace restraining it, and curbing the enemy that he may not stir
it, nor tempt so much as he could, disquieting the Soul with his fiery darts,
and violent injections. But when to humble God's servants and let them know
themselves, and for other holy ends, Sin and Satan are let loose upon them,
with all forces to invade and buffet them (2. Cor. 12.7) that encumbrance
passes all other vexations.

PAUL met with infinite miseries, calamities, oppositions, persecutions, but
all of them did not so weary him of his life as the encounter of Concupiscence,
in which he bemoaned his wretchedness, and sued to be speedily delivered from
the mortal body, Rom 7.24.

Therefore it is the perfection of Meekness, and manifests the power thereof
in the greatest measure of resignation, not to despise the chastisement of God
smiting Subtractionis verbare, nor be impatient under his most grievous hand,
scourging with the Rod of the oppressor, permitting strong temptations.

The inhabitation of Sin is more redious then any prison or penance, and it
is a servitute worse, then Turkish, worse then Egyptian or Babylonian, to be
captive and sold under sin, so that it may act in a man whether he will or
not, and provoke and molest all his senses and faculties with offensive motions.

For albeit Concupiscence, as remitted in Baptism, be not reckoned for a
sin, unless it be consented to in its inclinations, and therefore the
Apostle urged much, but not consenting, said; It is no more I, but sin that
dwells in me, Romans 7.17. Yet because Concupiscence is in its own nature
evil, the stirrings of it are more then any thing else ingrate and irksome to
a renewed mind.

Notwithstanding in the bitter conflicts thereof and strivings of the Flesh and
the Spirit, the Meek says not (with Rebecca) why is it thus with me? But
rather says, it is the Lord, and I will bear the Indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, until he pleades my cause, and judge the
Enemy ( Mich. 7.9) it suffices me that his grace is sufficient for me, that,
though I be burdened, I do not fail, though I be hard driven, I do not
yield, but resist. Although Grace detest and abandon Sin more then Hell, more
then the Devil, and ever earnestly labors and solicites for complete
purification from all the relics and fomes of it, yet attends it therein Gods
leisure, contented to serve him in hard battles, with lusts warring in the
flesh, till he shall think fit to release. Thus St. Paul in the heat of
contention with Sin, praying for deliverance meekely thanks God ( Romans 7.25)
as glad he could stand in so cruel assaults, and willing to continue the
fight so long as God should judge it meet to hold him in wars, which is a
work of perfect Meekness.

Moreover the Meek is not malcontent, though in Spiritual things his
ability of performance be not answerable to his will, Dacxian in speenlo
Monachorum. page 386. 387.
desirous to do the will of God in earth, as it is done in heaven, but
satisfied with the daily bread, which to that end he begs, the allowance of
necessaries for Soul and Body, which God affords him for the fulfilling of his
Will in this life, who alone is the mere determiner what quantities even of
Heavenly and Angelical bread are most fitting for us, that we may not be lift
up, but glorify him in his gifts.

Now the inheritance of this Meekness is to repose the soul that complies
with God in celestial peace and tranquillity, that it may rejoice and be
quiet evermore, and in every thing, balanced against all tempests, releeved in
all maladies: According to that Proverb, Mansuetus homo cordis est medicus,
now he were an ill Physician if he could not cure himself, an ill Physician
of the heart, if he could not cure his own impassioned heart with the
prescripts of reason and receipts of grace.

We may take knowledge that the graces of the Spirit, that seem repugnant,
fear, joy, hope, grief, -- have their mutual intercourse as from the same
Spirit, whose operations be diverse, but not contrary, and as spontaneous and
moved by faith they be coassistant, and work according to occasions from God,
without any impediment one to the other. And Meekness therefore withstands not
the acting of any Christian virtues, but the miscarriage of the Flesh in them,
which feign would that its melancholic and distempered passions, Inter
lachrymas and suspiria.
turbulent resistance of evil and inordinate appetite of good might go for
grac^s.

Thereupon in the rank of the Eight happy men, the Meek is seated between
the tears of the blessed Mourner and the fighes of blessed hunger, Meekness
is in the middle between bitter grief and burning desire, because it is not
the lenity of the Spirit but the stupidity of the flesh, which sorrow according
to God does not go before, and desire in the Lord follow.

Therefore the Meek lament Sin, as who are with sorrow to fight against it,
and waste and wash away the remainders of it with their tears, but so, that
repenting they pacify themselves in CHRIST, and be not tormented greatly with
the remembrance of past and pardoned sins, but humbled only and provoked to
more abundant care and diligence (1. Cor. 15.9.10) They multiply also vehement
desires but not impatient, desire ever freedom from Concupiscence, desire all
perfection ( Phil. 4.8) but content those desires perpetually with Gods present
assistance and dispensation.

CHAP. III. CHAP. 3.
Of the carriage and benefit of Meekness in Temporalties.
We have done with the work and (so to say) wages also of meekness in
Spiritual matters, consider we now the use and fruit thereof in Temporal
things, in which the meek deprecate excess, as much as want crave the happy
mean, reverence so far the judgment of their heavenly Father as to count
that the happy mean for them, which his wise and good providence orders to
them, and so void of repine, anxiety, and coveting, roll themselves upon God
for the things of this life.

They deprecate excess as much as want ( Pr^v. 30.8) Give me neither poverty
nor riches, Pa^e canonis mei ale me, there is his craving, the mean and
standing to Gods judgment what is mediocrity. The convenient provision for
several men, is such a proportion of outward things as best avails them to a
happy life, as the Philosopher admirably well described, (...). Tanquam bonum
nostrum, sed tanquam necessarium nostrum. S. August. de sermon. Dom. in monte.
lib. 2. 16.
Riches (is a state proportioned unto blessedness, for that wealth is no
otherwise to be desired, thou as it promotes to a blisfull and virtuous life:)
is not to be sought as the one thing we ha^^^ood of, but as things we may
make use of, and (...) our necessary any further, then it may be used to the
Kingdom of God and isntrumental to the righteousness thereof ( Matthew. 6.33)
must not be aimed at by men as our scope, but added by God as a vantage in his
service.

Now no man can tell what portion of these outward things is most expedient for
himself or another in order to Gods kingdom ( Eccles. 6.12) who knows what
is good for man in this life? Only God is the just and competent Judge of
mediocrity and competencie, as who sees not alone what is in man as things are,
but what would be in him if things were otherwise with him if (Pro re nata)
in the apparent (1. Sam. 23.10. Matthew. 11.22) that God fore-knowes not only what
is and shall be, but what might and would be occasions serving, tho in defect
of such applying matters it never be.

(...).
This is that God, dear Christian, who gives to every of his servants talents
according to his several ability ( Matthew. 25.15) the faculty which he has
to receive and employ; wherefore as the quality of Metals is discerned by the
touchstone; the weight of metals by the scales: So our conveniencie of states
is discovered by Gods present ministration, to each of the faithful in their
callings; the due pondering whereof induces them to keep moderation in all
fortunes and occurrences. Many may think themselves, and be generally by
others thought fit for riches, honor, promotion till they have them, and then
prove themselves unsufficient to weild them. As TAC. a judicious Historian
relates of Galba, Lib. 17 page 143. Major privato dum privatua sui, t and
omnium consensu. cap^x imperij, nisi imperasset.
that in the joint esteem of all men, he had been held meet for the Empire,
if he had not been Emperor.

To them then that exclame of fortune, and imagine if their means were
augmented they could better serve God, and more profit men, I tender this
thought; that God who loves them believing and in charity more then they can
love themselves, is not so neglective, I will not say of their good, but of his
own glory; but that he who has in hand the gold of both the Indies, would
rain gold into their bosoms, if so they should be furthered to the setting
forth of his most worthy virtues and praises.

The meek in honor of the divine hand that orders lots, and accommodates to
men their fortunes, purge their spirits of repine and vexing at other men's
abundance and prosperity, and of avaritious and immoderate desires, and
coveting that which is another, and would not fit them, or of any more then
God collates on their industry and faithful serving him in their stations, in
which they content themselves with the Revenues of their diligence: and as
Lactantius Lib. 1. c. 4. Cibo extemporali quem Deus subministrat.
speaks, (...), to utter it in the words of Dionysius Halicarnasseus
epitomizing, the oration of Isocrates (...).
with the extemporarie food which God supplies, which is a principal aim of
the 10th. Commandment. Not to affect that which is another, but to be
contented with things present, and in them not to seek great things for pomp,
but indifferent for continual use; and so howsoever the goods of fortune ebb
or flow, to confide in God, and refer themselves and their ways unto him.

The Meek commit themselves to God for their livelihood, and willingly obey
that sweet command (1. Pet. 5.7) cast your care upon God: which is one of the
most comfortable precepts in all the Scripture, and we might be happy if we
would exonerate our selves of distracting cares, and labor in hope, before him
that sets the heart at liberty but not the hand, enjoynes work, forbids care.

Even reason condemns their irregular anxiety, that disquiet themselves in
surmizes of future casualties and uncertainties, projecting and forerunning
their own evils: Labor and providence help, care and diffidence what do they
advantage! Cast we them therefore into his bosom that orders lots, that our
care be no corrivall to the divine goodness, so he will liberally provide for
us and ours, his Church and people, and cause all things to cooperate to our
good, when we cannot conceive the manner.

Now St. Ephrem De fide, tom. 1. p. 80.
is very right, if we trust not God for things of the body and this life, we
are manifested to want faith for matters of the soul and the other life. By
these mean and momentarie things, the Christian is tried whether he trust God,
and if he be not solicitous for the present matters, it is clear that he
keeps hid within him sound and entire Faith. By our reposing our selves then
on Gods promise for temporal things and the body, we may discern whether we
in truth rely on him for those of the soul.

It is an easier task for Faith to believe the promises, wherein God ingages
his care over us for this life, whereunto common experience and light of reason
conduce, then to give credence to the truth of the Resurrection of the Body,
the Incarnation of God, the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, and
other Articles of Christian belief, that transcend all demonstration, and
compass of reason: Therefore many that think themselves strong in the Faith of
those high mysteries, may understand the deceit of their own hearts, by
distrusting God for small things; if we be unbeleeving in little matters, elude
not our selves, we are not faithful in great. ( Luke 16.10) And persecution
for Christian Faith would discover our Infidelity, as want does our unbelief
for Temporals. De oratione, c. 123.
Commit then unto God the things which be requisite for the body, and so it
shall be manifest that thou committest unto him things that are necessary for
the soul, as St. Nile writes.

And that if the carriage of the Meek, as in externals they wholly depend on
God, well pleased with what he carves unto them, come we to the inheritance
which by such meekness they obtain upon earth, and that is the gift which God
bestows on him who is good in his sight. To eat, drink, and make his soul
enjoy good in his labor (Eccl. 2.24.26) Which by the frequent repetition
thereof, seems a chief argument of that book, an instruction to hope for
nothing but vexation, when we will be projectors and cut for our selves, to
think good of all Gods courses, and use his good as it comes, without
diffiding for to morrow.

Which certainly is the fruit of the Holy Ghost for a man to apply himself and
be content with things present, for the flesh is never satisfied, but whiles it
preferres that it has not, neglects what it has; and so deptives it self of
both. And rational men have herein placed humane and worldly beatitude to
mind nothing but that which is Cardan de varietate rerum, l. ^. c. 40. p. 383.
present, and of that only the little which sober use requires from day to
day. And our Lord holds our desires to the present teaching us to say in Prayer
( Luke 11.3) Give us this day our daily bread. And promises to prolong the
days of obedients in the Land which he gives theme ( Exodus 20) intending them
much fruition in life and living, S. Chrysostom. in Genesis ser. 54.
in that they lose not their time, but enjoye themselves and the creature and
all their desires, confined to the present and Gods pleasure.

When the immoderate that are of vast spirits and attempts ( Psalm. 54.23) live
not half their days, cannot be executors of their own wills, nor compass
one half of their essays; but be snatched away before the time come in which
they set themselves to be happy ( Luke 12.20.21) with him whom the Gospel
surnames a fool, for that he made not present use of his wealth, but put off
and reserved the commodity thereof to years that were not his.

The Meek inherit the great gain of godliness contentment which is the very
good of riches, but grows not of riches nor any things external, but as the
word ((...)) imports; out of a man's own sufficiency: when the godly will make
perfect resignation of it self unto God, and rests in his dispose, as most
firting, and by his grace rules the inferior powers accordingly: (...).
Autarkie, or selfe-sufficiencie is that whereby men command themselves and
their affections, and so bring content into every condition (Phil. 4.11, 12) I
have learnt in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, I am instructed
both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer need. Faculty to
content our selves is a grand mystery, (...).
which they that are initiated in Christianity learn, by practicing
selfe-denyall, and conformity to God. It is Christian art of all other worth
the studying, and to be preferred before all liberal Sciences, Professions and
dignities of men; B. Gregor in Ezech. hom. 19. Nunquidnam fratres are est
aliqua humiliari? Ars amni^o, and mira disciplinae scientia, quae toto nobis
est cordis anni su disceada.
skill indifferently to have and want what the world admires, that neither high
things may puff up, nor low cast down.

( Matthew. 4.4) Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God: and God commands a blessing on that which the Meek
take in good part, whereby the benefits vouchsafed them are sanctified; and
make good their several ends in them. So that a little of that the Righteous
man has, is better then the riches of many wicked (Psalm. 37.16) This is some
portion of that hundred fold ( Mar. 10.30) which now in this time, and in this
earth the Meek receive, in respect of true use and satisfaction of which, they
reap more from their estate, such as it is, then the same an hundred times
multiplied could afford, without Gods grace in a contentfull mind.

There is not any so small a gift of God, which is not tendered by him with
infinite good will, which they that have grace taste in the ministration, which
they meekly and thankfully accept from Gods hand. Steeped in this love, the
least crumme of our daily bread surpasses in contentment all the treasure of
the world, out of that tincture. I dare be bold to affirm, that no man
bethinking himself, shall ever devise or find out the thing or things, which
being collated on him, he would desire no more, because our understanding
cannot apprehend so much as our will can affect, whence it is consequent, that
all things which may befall a man are so far from contenting him, that even
all things that a man is able to fancy in his mind, are not sufficient to
produce a contented mind.

S. Basil. hom. That God is not the cause of evil.
So then only godliness remains, which actuating meekness, thereby solidly
persuades the conscience, that God has us beloved in the Mediator, and
therefore cares for us, and all things considered, assigns us that which is
meetest for us; which contents and glads us with the joy that beseemes our
fittest condition, Eccl. 9.7. And whereas Nihil tam necessa^ium est, quam
cognoscere quid non fit necessarium.
nothing is so necessary as to know what is not necessary: this resolves a
Christian, that whatsoever the Lord our God withholds from him, CHAP. 4.
is neither necessary nor expedient; and inables him to say in his own wants,
what Socrates is reported to have said in other men's excesses: Quam maltis ego
non egeo!
How many things can I be well without!

CHAP. IV. Touching the demeanure and support of the Meek, if in their
business they have not what success they would.
THe Meek accept with all thankfulness, that success with which God follows
their endeavors; according to that of ORIGIN: In Ezech. hom. 5. Pondus ultra
tene lovet:
Take not up the burden thou can not bear. As servants of Divine
providence, they limit their attempts by their power and place; stretch not
themselves beyond their tedder, and without teene let the stone lie that they
cannot lift. Eccl. 9.1. We read, that the hearts and the works of the
righteous are in the hand of God: that is, as St. Prosper De vocation^ gentium,
l. 1. 9. Tantum in studiis suis proficiunt, quantum ille donaverit.
interprets, they cannot go no further then God leads them, prevail no more
then is given them from Heaven.

The more to pacify our spirits, it is worth the observing, that success is
not always after men's dexterity, but Gods good pleasure. However rewards be
according to the worthiness of their labor, as no doubt the Doctor that with
a good a^me preaches most sufficiently to conversion, shall be most glorified,
though he convert not so many as some other less sufficient Guigo. Carthus.
Meditat. c. 16.
teacher. ( Es. 49.4, 5) My work is with my God, though Israel be not gathered
together, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, who does not
recompense events but labors (1. Cor. 15.10) I labored more then they all. Of
which devout St. Bernard writes to the purpose in hand, in this wise: He says
De consideratione, l. 4. c. 2. Plus omnibus laboravi non ait plus omnibus
profeci, aut fructificavi, verbu^ insolens religiosissime^ vitans, alias enim
noverat homo, quem docuit Deus, quia unusquisque secundum suum laborem
accipiet, and non secundum proventum, and ob hoc in laboribus potius quam in
profectibus gloriandum putavit.
not I profited or did more good then they all, religiously shunning an
arrogant expression, and otherwise the man that God had taught, knew well that
every one shall receive according to his labor, not according to the event,
and therefore he chose to glory in labor not in success.

For their help against discouragement in little or no success, the Meek
promise themselves no great matters, as they use that are young and
unexperienced. Melancthon somewhere writes, that when he first began to preach,
he was in hope to convert all that should hear him; but that afterward he
found their Dutch Proverb overtrue, that he was too young a Scholar to make a
Lamb of an old Fox. Mere Scholars would rule the world by Books, and
therefore fret and take on if Towns and Countries be not so orderly as fine
wits could contrive they might be. But meek and wise men expect not to find
Plato's Commonwealth, or any Eutopia's upon earth, rather they would look to
find the Philosophers stone, then a people or policy correspondent to
Philosophers Books; therefore they hope not for all that they wish, neither
tear they their own hearts, CHAP. 5.
nor exclaim greatly of their Neighbors, though they fall a good deal short
of their speculations.

2. They presume not on their own force in any kind, forasmuch as God loves
to give good event to rash and unapt proceedings, rather then to wiser trusted
in; and so much as we diffide in our selves and rely upon God and his
assistances, so much ability and likelihood we have to perform and prosper in
Gods works, and no more.

3. They wait evermore for Gods call, assured that God will send them when he
means to use their help: and that Gods calling is the original of success,
and the only proof that labor is not lost when it succeeds not. Hereupon our
Meek man determines and says in his own heart, let God use my voluntary
service, at what time, in what place, matter and manner he thinks good, I will
not run before he sends me, but I will follow whethersoever he calls me.
With all possible care he prepares himself, that once he may be fit for Gods
service, obtain of this, that if he could do the work of a thousand
laborers, God would in his time lay weight enough upon his shoulders, and that
he will not be angry with them for standing idle, that he calls not to work.

4. The Meek hold it not the office of servants to choose their work, but
cheerfully to finish the task imposed by theirs Masters: therefore they
stomach not that God uses their (...) and gifts, CHAP. 4.
when and as he pleases, believing the Psalmist, that it is a blessing to live
by labor ( Psalm. 128.12) they give all diligence in their places, and refuse
no labor as vile, which God has annexed to them; resolved that the Lord has
not a command, in the keeping whereof there is not great reward.

The great Overseer of all things judges it convenient, that not a few of the
strongest parts, and most choice endowments should be employed in low ranks,
lost those orders should seem despicable, and none be thought deserving, that
were not aloft; but in those poor places, God supplies more hearts ease and
contentation to his meek and worthy servants, then a Kingdom or Popedom
acquired by unwarrantable means, can in any degree parallel, or any other
place yield them, till God set them in it; that they of great sufficiences may
not disdain, if their inferiors be exercised and raised, but keep their
station till the Lord of all says, ascend up higher.

Now the inheritance left unto these Meek is wondrous beneficial, to rejoice
in what ever fruit of their labor, to apply themselves to their vocation,
remit the event unto God with their prayers, and so rest quiet; though many
times that ensues not which they would, always humbling their diligent hand
under Gods mighty hand.

( Mark. 4.26.27) (When a man has done) his part, prepared the ground and
committed thereto the seed then he may sleep; leave the increase to God, sleep
and rise night and day to have ^n eye to his field, and defend it from wild
Beasts, so securing himself in the divine, as not to abate humane providence;
which is to trust but not to tempt God. So the sleep which God gives his
Beloved ( Psalm. 127.2) is after they have done their work in the Lord to lay
them down resting in Gods blessing, not their own labor, and not perpl^xing
themselves with the issues that are in Gods hand.

Iordanus Dominicanus was a wise man, this was one of his sayings. Inscitiae
illum argueremus, qui jactis feminibus stratu^ comportaret in agrum, ut
incrementum, vri decrementum frugum observaret etc. In vit. ejus. c. 72. Febr.
13.
We would argue him of folly, that when he had sown his seed should carry a
bed into the field to observe how it grew. The fruit of men's labors passes
their observation, often times the seed, that men think perished, lies safe
under the clods and springs up after some showers; so by some peculiar
visitation, the paints of men that were esteemed lost come to good effect, and
appear a groundwork of happy success unto other men's endeavors. Ioh.
4.36.37. Neither is it a regrate to the Meek, that things are here involved,
and that frequently attributed to one, which was executed by another: (men
being foolishly ambitious when there is choice, to ascribe the good that is
done to them that are of most note, or that strike the last stroke) for they
look to him that is invisible, that knows how to distinguish and manifest
what was compassed by each man's industry, and in the year of his Iubilee, the
day of revelation, to cause every one to return to his own possession, CHAP.
5.
and rest upon them the credit and reward of all the good effected or
occasioned by B. Gregor. in Job. l 21. c. 8.
them.

One rare advantage of Meekness is, that it fortifies a man not to be overcome
of the evils of his calling, and relinquish it for the crosses thereof; and
will to give over all doings, because he cannot do all he will, but to proceed
in his vocation, and do the work of the day in the day, maugre all the
importunity and ingratitude of the world.

The Apostle Jude v. 23. bids us save some with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, whence the meek man supposes himself to be in the world, as it were in
a fire kindled from hell, which utterly to extinguish is not in him, it goes
well, if for his part, he can pluck out a few firebrarnds. As a Pastor, if in
his Parish he can snatch out of the fire be it but one or two (so to say)
smoakie brands ends, blesses God, and lets the filthy be filthy still, and
ceases not preaching, because the world declines as its ages. The Meek run
not out of the world because of the crossenesse thereof, fly not employment in
the Church and State for the griefs, perils and molestations adjoined
thereunto, and for that they cannot ever keep an even course, and have their
minds.

The Prince of Apostles amplifies Lots grace, that settled in Sodom, 1. Pet.
28. He was not discouraged at the wickedness of the place to fly them and the
world, but in confidence of God takes heart, though with much and daily grief
for their sins, to continue among them; CHAP. 4.
to try if by any means he might convert them to God. St. Paul (1. Tim. 3, 4)
wills the domestical government of him to be looked into, Evagr. hist. Eccles.
l. 5. c. 19.
that should be ordered a Bishop, because even petty Magistracy shows a man,
and proves his virtue and meekness, and much more the greater. I will shut up
the point with that ( Eccl. 10 15) the labor of the foolish wearieth every one
of them, because he knows not how to go to the City: the mind of all men
seeks beatitude, the good and consolation it was made for. As Boethius nearly,
De consolatione Phi. l. 3. proso. 2. Bonum suum repetit, sed veluit torius
domum, quo tramite revertatur, ignorant.
It inquires its own good, but as a drunken man, is ignorant which way to
return home; the home or City the Wise man means is the place of rest, and
secure repose where a man may be at quiet, which is the chief good that is a
Sanctuary to the heart in all greevances. And the Meek skill the paths to this
home and City after the sentence of St. Nile, as Sermon. de gula.
a speedy travailer quickly gets to a City, so he (the student of meekness, of
wisdom) to tranquillity and quiet of mind: however accidents may chance he
has where to eat the labor of his hands (1. Sam. 30.6. Psalm. 42.5.11) stays
himself in God, and sings return unto thy rest O my soul, in the midst of
provocations and unfortunate casualties.

CHAP. 5.
CHAP. V. How the Meek demean themselves in public affairs.
IN the carriage of public matters, whether Civil or Ecclesiasticke, the
Meek abide always the same, as there is nothing new under the Sun, the
world is ever like it self, bad in all generations; there always have and
ever will be offenses in officers, corruptions in Courts. Its impossible for
the most excellent Governors to reform all things that are forced not to mend
some, lest the rent should be the worse, and to look through their fingers
when great men slip, lest curbing a disorder they should make a confusion:
Nestat (...).
As David tolerated Ioab with willingness by compulsion, which David though we
see propounded by God himself, to be as an exemplary Ruler unto Kings.

Hezekias and Josias were they not a couple of incomparable Princes, (...).
yet the Prophetical Scripture records, how prevalent abuses were in their
Reigns. What Minister, Master, Supervisor, can so rule his little flock,
small family, petty charge, that there be no defect nor disorder? then if there
be any equity in him, let him seriously weigh in what he should do in a great
house, in a very great land. I am not ignorant that every unwise man thinks
what the slave speaks in the Comedian: that he should have been made a King.
And he that is unmeet for a sorry Trade and mean science, Oportet me fuisse
Regem.
conceits himself fit for the government of all the world: but wise men are of
another mind, therefore Magistrates find them the most moderate censurers of
all their actions. As for us, remembering the general and great exorbitancie of
man's nature, the strange depravation of manners, the intractable and rebellious
indisposition of the times, we may justly thank God and our Rulers, for any
measure of help and happiness by their authority, and comparing our Island with
other Countries, it will appear no Nation has so little cause to complain,
none so much reason to bless God and their Prince.

A Meek man will set before his eyes ( peccata temporis, vitia gentis) sins
of the time, sins of the Nation, above all force of Law in Sacrilege,
faction, usurie, swearing, drunkenness. If all the virtues of David, Hezekiah,
Josiah, and all other the most famous Princes that ever swayed scepters should
as we humbly pray, in the most heroical degree, be conferred and united in our
Sovereign Lord, he might repress I grant, as he has begun already, and I
hope he will more and more repress: But pardon me if I doubt, whether so
mighty and gracious a hand could pluck up the roots of these national sins.
Ingrate creatures that we be, who inveigh against our Governors, when their
good proceedings are crossed by our sins: Instead of striking every man upon
his breast, and crying Lord be merciful unto a state that l^bours under the
burden of my many sins, and blot out the transgressions that slack the
work of Reformation, and hinder the Honorable designs of them that care for
the public good; if any thing falls out otherwise then well, the generaltie
imputes it to some of the great ones and unmeeke, as they be furiously taken
on, and think it good service to censure and blaspheme dignities.

Taste now how sweet the fruit of this meekness is, as Subjects should to
understand what person a man susteineth to discharge his own part, and not to
swim with the stream of corruptions, for the rest to commend the cares of
Princes and his Superiors unto God in humbleness of prayer, if any thing
succeed according to his pious supplication, to render the praise to God, and
his Vicegerents; if not to attribute it to the world, and the course of things
under the Sun, and the iniquity of the times. To entertain matters that are
well carried with a thankful mind, and in other with an indifferent; to let
things have their course, and tolerate that which God indures. How ever things
go, and times and manners be, not to eat up his own heart, and consume
himself with fretting: no, no, since nothing will be the better for his
indignation. Thrice happy and blessed are the Meek, in what Land soever, that
thus inherit the earth.

CHAP. VI. CHAP. 6.
Of certain Considerations helping and assistant unto Meekness.
NO doubt by the passages foregoing some may be so far in love and desire of
Meekness, as gladly to hear of all furtherances thereunto, who in their
devotions may make use of these particulars following.

First, when it is worst with thee, seriously muse whether there be any of all
thou know with whom thou would readily exchange thy self and all that is
thine, for him and all that is his. It is likely there is none would make
scruple to change his Beauty with one, his Wealth with another, his Honor with
a third, his Learning with a fourth; but certainly, there is no wise and godly
man, but he would take a long time before he would make a total and complete
charge with any other under heaven. Be ashamed then to be discontent if being
but one man thou have not all things, seeing all things expended, thou art not
inferior to any one, thy self being Judge. This verity was not wholly
unknown unto wise Solon, who (as Valerius tells us) said that Lib. r. c. 2.
Aithat si in nuum locum cuncti mala sua contulissunt, futurum ut propria de
portare domu^, quam eu omni miseriarum acervo partienem suam far mallent.
If all men could bring their several evils into some one common place, every
man would rather carry home what he brought, then stand to take his share by
equal division.

Secondly, meditate what ease and quiet there is in dependency upon God and
resignation, and into what briars they cast themselves that seek what God
casts not upon them. Which (as St. AMBROSE Sermon, 3. Quod siliis Israel
subtiliter prophetatum est -- Manna enim illis contra d^vina praecepta
tractantibus effecti sunt vermes, id est contumacie ultores et vindi^^s.
writes) was finely prefigured in the children of Israel; for when they
touched Manna against Gods command it turned into Worms, that is, revengers
and punishers of their Disobedience. The Manna which God me'tes unto us is
heavenly bread, that which we scrape together of our selves proves a Worm,
gnawes the Conscience and makes us fret. It is not in the power of man to fever
vanity and vexation from any creature, that is the sole work of God, removing
the curse which man's sin introduced; hence the best creatures cause vexation,
had otherwise then God wills and blesses them to us: Ego animo cupido atque
oculis indomitas fui. Perpol saepe peccas, ut sit ubi quid tantopere cupias. Et
similia multa apud Plaurum.
and therefore, we must prostrate all our plots at Gods feet, and break our
desires at his will, that our eyes be not untained, set on all they see, nor
our hearts longing and sick of the Creature, that we be eager of nothing;
else we cannot do but we shall over-doe, nor have but we shall be had, and so
God be urged to scourge us in our loves, and deprive us of comfort in that
which abridgeth him of us.

B. August in Isal. 122.
Thirdly, he that would be Meek must take heed of being proud ( Eccles. 4.8)
for the proud are conceited, will elect and cut for themselves; therefore God
blows upon them and scatters them in their imaginations, so that in their best
wisdom they reap nothing but vanities and vexations. Wherefore learn of
CHRIST to be humble and meek, first humble and then meek, and whosoever
dislikes his fortunes, let him say with DAVID; Quis sum (2. Sam. 7.18) Who am I
Lord, that thou have brought me hitherto, and with JACOB, (Minor sum) Lord I
am less then all thy mercies (Genesis 32.10;) and with the BAPTIST, (Non sum
dignus) I am not worthy to carry thy shoes (Matthew. 3.11) and then, if he can,
let him hold himself too meanly entreated in any state, or too basely employed
in any work.

Fourthly, look for nothing but evil under the Sun in the world, and of the
world ( Eccles. 5.8) If thou see Oppression and violent perverting of
judgment in a Province, marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher then
the highest regards, who would not permit evil if he could not draw good out
of it. Quiet thy spirit then with that of Boothius, De consolations
Philosophiae, lib. 4. prosa, 6. Si disparentem providentia^ spectes, nihil
usquam mali esse perpendim.
If you respect the providence that orders all things, you may perceive there
is nothing any where ill; for as St. THOMAS there declares it, Very evils, are
good, respect had to the divine Providence, which disp^ses them to the good of
the universe. Suffer we Gods will to be done (if Gods infinite holiness can
permit what he hates) we may hate and grieve for the evils we cannot help,
and yet be meek and undisturbed. Eccles. 7.12. Consider the work of God who
can make that straight which he has made crooked, and who requires that
at-our hands. Therefore go to acquaint thine eyes and ears without
disturbance, to see and hear what thou abhorrest; expect scandals, and say
therein, Sic est mundus, this is the fashion of the world. He that would have
nothing to offend him shall be more offended then any other.

It is not imposed on thee to expel the Devil out of the world, and rectify
all things, leave them unto Millenaries and Old-wives dreams, of Paradises
upon earth, and reforming all things as they were in the good beginnings of
your grandmother Eve. Make thy peace with God and approve thy doings to him,
then smile at the frowns of fortune, and advance thy self above the contempt
and sinister judgment of the world; and with the divine Apostle (1. Cor. 4.3)
Care not for man's day, this is their hour, their day wherein they will say
what they list. But we have not learnt where Meekness dwells, if we be
transported with anger or grief for their Obloquie or censures. Sweetly
Dionysius Carthusianus, Sermon. 6 de St. Andrea. Absit ut adeo pueriles,
insipientes, defectuofi, ac debiles simus, ut pacem, virtutem ac gratiam cordis
nostri, in aliorum manu, and in potestate improbitatis eorum ponamus.
God forbid, that we should be so childish, undiscreet, imperfect and weak,
as to seat the peace, virtue and grace of our hearts in other men's hardness,
and within the power and reach of their impiety.

Fifthly, Let patience have its perfect work (James 14) which is so to subject
the will of man unto Gods will, that he would not have his evil lessened nor
his good increased, but as God well pleases. Desires not to have the thing
which God (that is wisdom and love) thinks not good to impart, kisses the
sovereign hand that smites him, in affliction believes it good for him to be
afflicted; as blessed AUGUSTINE writes, Epist. 149. Ego tu lecto sum -- Sed
etiam sic, quoniam id Domino placet, quid aliud dicendum est, nisi quia recte
sumus.
I am sick in bed, but even so, seeing that pleases God, what should I say
else, but that I am well. The proficient in meekness cannot devise the
accident or ill hap, which he finds not in his heart to take patiently,
considering it ordered by God, As the noble Earl Picus Mirandula Nisi scrinia
quaedam deperirent, quibus elutubrationes ejus and vigiliae stipabantur -- E
vita ejus per Ioannem Franciscum Picum.
said, he could not be angry for any event, unless some Caskets stuffed with
his notes and collections should miscarry, to the loss of his watchings and
night-paines, but seeing all his studies were for God and his Church, and no
such thing could happen without Gods command or permission, he hoped that in
such a hazard he should not be over-gone with grief and passion. For this
reason ( Luke 21.18) we are admonished to possess our souls in Dum arcem in
mente susceperit, omnes mox perturbationes compescit. Exorat 2. ad missam apud
St. Ambros.
Patience, which as one of the Ancients speaks; S. Gregor. in Job. lib. 1. c.
9.
No sooner takes the Fort of the mind, but it instantly allayes all
perturbations, keeps the Soul in possession of it self, which in extremity
of passions is besides it self, whether too much grieved or over-joyed; for
St. Hierom informs us aright, S. Hierom. in Eccl. 7. Pati^ntia non solum in
augustiis, sed and in latioribus est necessaria, ne plut quam condecet
exaltemur.
Patience it necessary not only in adversity, but also in prosperity, that we
exalt not our selves more then beseemes us; nay it is held the greater of the
two to be temperate in joys, and pass through praises without damage. So by
the perfect work of Patience a Christian is perfect, as who in his own sense
is neither wanting in good nor exceeds in evil, and no more took with one
thing then another, but always and in all things alike, at Gods pleasure and
service.

St. Ephrem shall close this discourse, Adeversionem superbiae. p. 90.
When thou take heavy and bitter things that are against thy will as if they
went with thy will, then acknowledge thy self to have attained the measure of
a pious and religious man, Job. 1.21.

Empty thy self then of all propriety, election, pleasure or inclination to,
or in one thing more then another, learn how to find God in every creature,
that thou may with the same thankfulness receive evil and good, unless
thou might see in Gods glass what would confer most to thy final bliss,
give no prelation nor make no choice of one thing more then other; but conclude
that the best which God assigns, and whiles thou art below be this thy vote.
God in CHRIST is enough for me, poverty, riches, sickness, health, honor,
reproach, inferioritie, promotion, something, nothing, what God se^s fittest
for me to glorify him and do service among men, let that come in the name of
the Lord.

God all sufficient, grant us in meekness so to inherit heaven upon earth
through righteousness, that we may possess the earth that is above the
heavens, the land of the Living in stabilitie and soliditie of eternal good.
Thou Lord that have created such large desires in us, as nothing can satisfy
but thy self, be thou the portion of our inheritance, that however things go
or come, we may find out lots fallen in good ground, and live eternally
contented in and with thee, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
BEATI QVI ESVRIVNT. THE DESIRER. A TREATISE OF Christian Hunger and Desire,
handling the Fourth Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCK, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

PSALM. 107.9. Inanis fuit anima quamdiu in errore fuit, sed recognoscens se
esse in errore esurivit, sed clamando ad Deum satiata est bonis -- Remigius
Altisiodor. ibid. Dum satis putant vitio carere, in idipsum incidunt vitium
quod virtutibus carent. Quintilian. lib. 2. cap. 4. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBVS.
LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARK, and WILL: COOK, 1637.

BEATI QVI ESVRIVNT.
MATTHEW. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for
they shall be satisfied.
CHAP. I. What Christian hunger is, and the sustenance thereof.
THis Beatitude, which perfects Desire, succe^ds orderly after the former
qualifying anger that the other having rectified the Irascible faculty this
might accomplish to Concupiscible, and the Soul having purged ill humors in
godly sorrow, and concocted passions in holy Meekness grows hungry and
thirsty of righteousness. CHAP. 1.
Spiritual desires are expressed by hungring and thirsting as connaturall to
new life, and aspiring after all kinds of good in all extent and variety of
affects, and issuing from all parts and powers ( Psalm. 84.2) and most
importunate and working Hunger, and Thirst; either of them signifies ardent
desire, both together the most exceeding vehemency thereof, all this implies
the excellent virtue of Grace which by guidance of the Spirit is thus desired.

In common hunger and thirst there is a want, and a sense thereof, and a desire
of such relief as is naturally known requisite, and pain till such supply be
made. In this Christian hunger and thirst there is likewise an apprehension of
our deficiencie, and a longing for the succor which is spiritually known
convenient to strengthen the soul, and much inner straitning and dryness till
therewith refreshed.

ANGELOMVS teaches rightly In 1. Reg. c. 2. -- Famelicos fidei praevidit.
that our Lord saying, blessed are they that hunger, had an eye to faiths
hunger bitten. For the hunger and thirst must be correspondent to the food,
which being Evangelicall comfort in remission and sanctification, requires
evangelicall appetite in faith and repentance, we must not only perceive our
own emptiness by the Law but in the Gospel have sense and knowledge of
divine goodness and supernatural sweetness, or we cannot hunger and thirst
righteousness.

Now we ought to understand that in Spirituals the appetite is as well from God
as the meat; Neither could we hunger the bread that comes down from heaven,
unless, as St. FVLGENTIVS speaks, Ad Monimum de prae destinatione, l. 1. c.
1. Nisiah ipso fastidientibus esuries detur, qui se ad satiandos esarrentes
donare dignatur.
Hunger were granted to them that loath meat by him that vouchsafes to give
himself for satisfying meat to the hungry. For as an affection above nature
it is immediately from God the infuser of all grace and donor of all
blessedness, who denies it to none that labor for it, as they are assisted by
the helps which for CHRIST'S sake be graciously affoorded unto all. Therefore
(Paschusius soundly applies) this hungering against sloathfull remissness, In
Matthew. 5. Esurientes and non torpentes, neque in se, aut in suis quibusque
rebus affluences --
and not doing what in us lies, and against all proud resting content in our
own store, and what we have or can have of our selves without the free grace
of God in CHRIST ever inabling us, Luke 1.53.

Whereas in participles is signified acts with the continuation thereof, when
it is said, (...)
Blessed are they that be hungering and thirsting, it is employed that hunger
and thirst in those that will be blessed, must be perseverant unto the day of
refreshment, and that they must run through our whole life, and the sounder
life the more hunger, Psalm. 42.12. In Gods temple the fire must not go out by
night, Levit. 6.5. And the mystery thereof as St. CYRIL declares is, Hom,
Pasch. 2, p, 20.
That the fire which CHRIST came to send must be cherished in us all the time
of our lives, that we may be ever fervent in Spirit (Romans 12^ 11) inflamed in
bu^ning desires.

Shortly then the hunger here blessed, is the advancing the desire of
righteousness above all other desires, either that we have to any inferior
good, S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 41.1. S. Aug ad Maxima^. Out of which Bishop Prima
siut transcribes in Apoc. 1.
or that the wicked have to any evil, which is the work of the Spirit of
might and fortitude, that subdues all several pleasures, and masters all
pains in the way to righteousness, (1. John, 4.4) Greater is he that is in
you then be that is in the world; therefore, as a more powerful Agent, he
exciteth stronger desires to holiness in the religious then they be, that
transport carnals to ungodliness, S. Chrysostom hom. 75.
and make them more hungry of their lusts then of their meat.

The food of the hungry is Righteousness that is absolute conformity to Gods
will, for we hunger bread to do Gods will on earth as it is done in heaven.
S. August. contr. 2. epist. Pelagian. lib. 3. c. 7.
The world has a Dogs appetite, insatiably hungers and thirsts, but what,
rapine of other men's goods, unjust gain, mammon of unrighteousness. Maximus
Constantinop. de charitate cent. 3: sent, 42.
But Christian hunger is to do equity and all works of Justice with an
abundancie of transcendent affection, as inclined thereto by divine motion, and
that it may feed of the heavenly promises made to them; if they be done from
principles of grace. Yet rests it not in particular Justice, S Chrysostom.
but extends it self to universal righteousness in all duties to God and
man, to righteousness as righteousness in all the latitude. And none can be
righteous without such thirsting; because as PLATO defines, Righteousness is a
(...).
habit whereby the bavir is Indiciously desirous of whatsoever appears good
unto him, Hence the Christian longs not only himself to be completely just,
but that Justice might also have a perfect work in all others, prays and
labors that the whole world might be a Paradise, all things carried according
to the highest right. All righteousness is to a good heart as the best meat
to a hungry stomach ( Psalm. 119.130) How sweet are thy words unto my taste, for
my own sustenance and confirmation, sweeter then honey to my mouth in the
refreshing of others; Quia plus ut d^lectat prouemi aedificatio, quam abiqua
terrenaru^ rerum dulcedo.
for the edification of my neighbors does more delight me then any sweetness
of any earthly thing.

CHAP II. Of the effects and Characters of gracious hunger.
IT lays a holy and pleasing necessity upon the mind, will and affections,
(...) in Matthew. 5.
that they cannot but think of desire and covet Righteousness, as the hungry
and thirsty do (...) and drink, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8.9. There is a proverbiall
speech, that hunger breaks through stone walls, with what violence does our
sweet Master cast down the Prince of Apostles ( Math. 16.23) when he was
objected an a fence between him and his meat, this sacred hunger wrastles
through all impediments of divine service, stands not upon labor or cost, so
it may ear the (...), sets the soul besides it self in affection to
righteou^^^sse that it is senseless of trouble in Gods cause, CHAP. 2.
and distracted, that I may so say after St. BASIL, with divine distraction for
the fruition of good, De incorrupta Virginitate, page 112. (...).
that it may enjoy as much as it would of that which is really contentfull, nor
can there be mingled such a bitter cup, as the thirsty spirit would not for
righteousness sake gladly drink. Prove 27.7. The full stomach lo^theth the
hony-combe, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet: as Salon
interprets, to him that hungers and thirsts righteousness, all the bitterness
of adversity in this life is sweetness, which he patiently indures for the
love of eternal Omnem amaritudinem pro du ce^ine sum^t, quia p^t eater
sustinet omnem praesentis vitae adversitatem pro amore su pernae, id est
aeternae beatitudines.
blessedness.

Secondly, hunger of Righteousness inferres abstinence from the worlds
dainties, and laboring for the meat which perishes not. For will, if
uns^ined works to its power, and as St. MACAR inquires, What is the
demonstration of Hom. 37. ad fin. (...);
will but voluntary labor? The hungry Christian makes Religion his meat, In
Cant. sermon. 5. Quandoquidem pinguis jam factas est panis Christi. Tractatur in
conciliis, disceptatur in judiciis, disputatur in Scholis, ca^tatur in
Ecclesiu, religiosa sunt h ec negotia, sed vade ad exitus aquarum: pensa, quis
generalior istoru^ finis fit operum, vide si non per haec omnia quadam
exerceantur mercimonia de Christo. quastuosares nomen est Christi,
affects other things in reference to that, and not that in reference to other
things, as many are hungry of diverse offices in Christianity for temporal
living, not for eternal life; now that CHRIST'S bread is not dry, many would
eat it in sensual appetite. Gravely our Countriman GILBERT, He is handled in
Councils, discussed in Consistories, disputed in Schools, sung in Churches,
all those are Religious employments, but ponder what is the more general end
of all these works, see if by all those there be not made marchandises of
Christ, CHRIST'S name is a gainefull thing.

But he that hungers Righteousness is far from aiming principally or
greatly at temporal advantages in Sacred functions. It is an observation of
St. GREGORY, Some that they may enjoy God use the world by the way, and some
that they may In Job. l. 2. cap. 5. Sunt nonnulli qui ut fruantur Deo
dispensatore utuntur hoc saeculo, and sunt nonnulli qui ut fruantur hoc saeculo
transitory uti volunt Deo.
enjoy the world will use God on the by; but they that hunger righteousness,
make it their chief and their all ( Eccles 12) they are not of them that use
God and his worship, as if they used him not in service (to the Scene and
Hypocrites stage) but they cause all things to stoop to righteousness, and in
the Kingdom of grace, let grace have the dominion and command all.

Thirdly, hunger of Righteousness devotes us to Gods word the food of our
Souls, as natural hunger affects men to ordinary meat and drink. Theod.
studita ser. 4.
Thus blessed Caesarius resolves, Thou do hunger righteousness, if thou
be disposed meekely and chearefully Iustitiam esuris si verbum Dei patienter
and libenter audire volueris Hom. 26. Where he much urges this matter.
to hear Gods word. There is no hunger in him that leaves his stomach at home
when he comes to Gods house. Now hunger is not affectate of this or that
juncate but desirous of wholesome food; therefore, they but pretend hunger that
are of itching ears or of dainty ears.

Of itching Ears that divert the hearing of sound doctrine proposed by the
holy Catholic Church, and are insatiable in g^dding to some Lectures where
teachers raise doctrines of their own fancy, and make uses against the
public Spirit, and for the private ghost of every hearer, which suits to the
lust of women and vain men, who thereby are exempt from all judgments but
their own and made Judges of Scripture, and at liberty to deny whatsoever they
list not to say the Scripture means, and take into their faith what they
please to hold the Scripture intends. 2. Tim. 4.3.4.

Of dainty ears that listen more after curious terms and passages of wit that
furnish the tongue, then eff^ctuall dispensing of truth, that may convert the
conscience, and nourish the heart ( Ezech. 33.32) Mark what the great Preacher
St. Chrysostom. tells his auditory, this destroys the Church, that you seek not to
hear a pricking Sermon, but one that may delight in the sound and composition
of words, hearing us as it were Ministrels, and we do miserably following your
lusts, when it were expedient to root them out. Tom. 4. ser. 3 4. In Act^ ser.
16.


To him that has hunger, the whole Scripture is refection, and profitable to
edify in Righteousness (1. Tim. 3.16) which is assured by our Lord saying;
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God. Matthew 4. Shall not that be favourie which God breathes. DARIAN
shows in his In speculo Monachorum, page 389.
glass, that the word of God has incomprehensible sweetness and virtue, for
whatsoever the holy Spirit has indicted, is in very truth, vivisicus cibus, and
the delicious fare of a chaste, sober, and humble In speculo Monachorum, page
389.
soul. Hence the more holy desire has been kindled in any breast, the more
has it burned in love to the word, as DAVID the man after Gods own heart,
desiring to do whatsoever might be pleasing unto God, could not satisfy
himself in uttering most affectionate longing admiration and respect of the
word in all the titles and names thereof.

He that hungers righteousness performs service to God with such content, as
the hungry and thirsty eat and drink: and applies himself with like speed
to Gods work, as the most hungry does to his meat. St. GREGORY NAZIANZEN
writes, that zeal indures no delay, and one day is a whole age Ser. 14. in
Cyprian. (...)
to them that long and are sick of desire. The Israelites were to eat the
Passover in haste, that is after the application of blessed GAUDENTIUS, Non
lento cord et ore languido, Tractatu 2. ^od cum omni avidirare animi, quasi
vere ^surientes.
but with all greediness of mind as truly hungring and thirsting
righteousness. In the body weak labor and faint exercise abate stomach and
impair health; and for the soul, that of St. BASIL is a sure rule, Definit.
co^^r. 130. (...).
whatsoever referres to godliness if it be not done with love and life it is
dangerous.

We must suppose our selves dying, if we savor not our meat the things of
God, and considering that true habits of virtue and grace act with delight and
pleasure, think not our selves well if we perform not every spiritual duty
in spiritual sense and joy, as tasting the good thereof, and remembering how we
ought to serve God with all our strength, unite our powers in all duties of his
worship, to do them as to God, heartily and with spirit; in Gods matters not
to do our best tends to nothing. So EUSEBIUS GARLICANUS Ser 3. ad Monach. Nisi
cu aviditate, cu^ bona voluntate, cum laetitia Dei opera egeremus, Deo nos
perite neverimus.
We must know our selves perishing to Godward, except we act the works of God
with greediness, with good will, with gladness. Wherefore they are in an ill
condition, that without inner relish and motions, observe Christianity as a
custom, and superficially pass over the services thereof. S. Chrysostom in Hebr
ho^. 1^. (...).


Under dryness of heart, when we taste not the bread of heaven, find not joy
in good duties, in such indisposition of soul we must do as when we are
sickly and out of temper, force our selves to eat against stomach, and so
revive appetite: Exercise and labor will produce health, and health hunger,
for as natural hunger is a sign of bodily health, so spiritual of souls
health.

S, Chrysostom. in Ge^. ser. 4.
In this point of hunger and content of well doing, we must distinguish between
that delight which the will educes, expending the dignity of God and his
service, and how holy and good all his will is (this is a virtue and in our
liberty by CHRIST'S grace) and that joy which flows from without and recreates
in divine offices, but is no grace, nor in the compass of our will, but an
arbitrarie encouragement for beginners. This is well taught by the most subtle
Scot. supra 3. Scat. did. 27. Aliqui qui dicuntur devotr. sentiunt aliquam
majorem dulcodinem, quam a^ii multo solidiores in amore Dei, qui centuplum
pro^ptius sustinerent martyriam, nec dulcedo est actus voluntatis elicitus, sed
passio quaedam actui retributa, qua Deus allicit, and nutris parvulos ne d^^
fierunt tu via.
Doctor in these words. Those that are ^^^ed devout have gust of greater
sweetness then others that are far more solid in Gods love, who would a
hundred times more readily endure Martyrdom, neither in sweetness an act
derived out of the will, but a certain passion contributed to the (...), wh^
re^p^^^ ad allures and nourishes little ones, that they faint not by the way.
Thom de Kemp. de Imitatione Christi, l. 6. T. 16. in fin. Rosign^^ de
Christiana perfectione, l. 5 c. 6. Reignald de praxi poenitentiali l. 2.10, 134.
It is better for the grown and experienced Christians, that they can and will
serve God at their own costs and charges without any pay here, and against all
inward reluctancie, and difficulty, that they be able to outgoe nature, and
quicken appetite purely spiritual to duty, as duty and gladding the spirit, S.
Bern. ser. 6. in quadrages. Maltoque virilius agunt si virtutes ipsas, non pro
delectatione quam experiuntur, sed pro virtutibus ipsis, and pro solo been
placito Dei, tota intention, et si non tota affectione sectantur, nec (...)
est, quia out time complaceat qui hujusu^^di est, Prophetas admonitioni
delectare in domino (...) non de affec^^ l^^^tur. sed de (...) affect^^ en^^e
beat^^^^^^ est, (...) vero vertuti^.
not delighting the sense, which is the sincerity and quintessence of blessed
hunger. This is to do manfully as St. BERNARD finely deduceth it, to pursue
virtues for the virtues themselves, and for the sole good pleasure of God with
all affection to them, though not with delectation from them, and such a one
complies the best that may be to the Prophets monition, delight thy self in
the Lord; for he speaks of that delight which is a virtue, not of that which a
reward.

CHAP. III. Touching the Latitude of blessed Hunger.
HOly hunger is in continual appetite of well doing, and proficiencie in
righteousness never satiated, nor thinking our selves just enough: as St.
BASIL collects In ascat. (...).
hence, that a Christian is to do good with insatiable desire always pressing
after more. Here only it is a virtue to be avaritious, and never satisfied. God
that is of infinite goodness and sanctity, must be loved and served with
illimited desires and endeavors of purity. CHAP. 3.
The borne of God strives to be pure as Christ is pure, righteous as he is
righteous ( Ioh. 3.3.7) aims at all righteousness sets himself no bounds,
erects no pillar as if there were not a plus ultra, being confin^d to nothing
but divine pleasure and imitation, he is universal, for things, times, places,
persons, ever like himself and resembling God.

There is no measure not stints set love and desire, but that may be always
greater: charity propounds not to love God for any set time, or with any set
degree, as St. BERNARD Epist. 253. Vera virtus finem nescit, tempore non
clauditur, n^^e est (...), charitas nunquam excidit. Nunquam justus arbitratur
se comprebendisse, nunquam dicit satis est, sed esurit semper, sititque
justitiam, ita uti si semper viveret, semper quantum in se est justior esse
contenderet Non enim ad annum vel tempus instar merce^arii, sed in aeternum
divino se ma^cipat famulatui. Sempiterna itaque justi esuries sempiternam
meretur refectionem.
discourses; the righteous never says enough, but ever hungers and thirsts
righteousness, and if he should live ever, would ever do his best to be
more righteous; which perpetual hunger of the righteous merits everlasting
refreshment, and is one reason that our service that is but for a time, is
crowned with eternal recompense. DAVID the man after Gods own heart, fulfils
(Acts 13.22) all his will; that is the plenary will of God in all the
particulars wherein it variously notifies it self, he that has the mind of
Christ (1. Cor. 2.16) would have nothing of Gods will and of righteousness
unfulfulled, but extends his desire to all that is good in all the
denominations and circumstanc^^ of it. Phil. 4.8. ^^NIEL is termed a man of
desires, (vir desid^^^^rum) for his study to understand the complete will of
God, and accommodate himself thereunto ( Dan. 10.11) And the vessel of
Election powers forth himself in most aff^ctionate entreaties to all
Christians, that they would prove not only the good, but the perfect will of
God; that is, have ever in their desire still greater glory unto Resignol, de
Christian. perfectione, l. 3. c. 10.
God, and direct to that scope all their assayes and consultations.

Let our eyes always look on, and look up to see what a distance there is
betwixt us and heaven, how far the measure of a man is short of the measure
of an Angel, that we may discern what a way we have yet to walk. The
Apostle Phil. 3.12.15. as St. Primasius notes, Galli himself imperfect
perfect, Imperfectum perfectum se dicit,
imperfect as not comprehending what he desired; perfect as hungering
Righteousness in all the plenitudes thereof, and with all labor aiming at the
highest prize.

Now we may justly be provoked, to desire all that is good, because no good
desire shall be unsatisfied ( Psalm. 81.11) Open thy mouth wide and I will fill
it; multiply therefore thy godly desires: thy desire is thy capacity of good,
after the saying of Mr. Florus, Quantum Al^^^veris, tantum cap^^^. Florus
Magister adversus Amular^^^.
Thy receipts shall be according to thy desires. If we be open in desiring,
God will be free in giving, we may aspire and attempt good enterprises to our
pow^^* yea beyond our power, because CHRIST has blessed such hunger, and it
can^^t be in vain under Gods helping hand, according to the animation of
Archiepisc. Eborac. persuading HALITOA^ to write a Penitential, Archiepis^.
E^ora^^^s^s in Epist. ad ^olitgarlum. N^l^ timere hujus operis (...)
magnitudinem, (...).
Fear not you the greatness of this work; for he will be with thee that
thus said, (...) thy in^^^ and, I will fill. And if the Lord (...) ins^^^
satisfy our craving sto^^t^, ^^t t^^ thi^ (...) or blunt the edge of our
(...), but ^s in nature the longer we are withheld from meat the more our
hunger increases; so if God answer not speedily our religious desires, let us
not abate but augment them as languishing and wounded with his love, and he
will in issue measure us satisfaction proportionable to our appetite; Qui
replet in bonis desiderium tuum, That is the Souls mouth.
for he is a God that satisfies the mouth with good things ( Psalm. 103.5)
giving us here to obtain what we do not amiss desire, and hereafter
accomplishing all our desires in himself, Psalm. 34.10. Matthew. 7.7. If at the
command, counsel, or allowance of God, we desire impossibilities as things
stand, God satisfies in that he admits those desires and conformes to them his
grace and glory. It is an observable speech of Radulphus Flaviensis; He that
endeavors what he can In Lev. l. 19.7. Qui conatur quantu^ potest, etiamsi
plene hic illam obtinere non possit jubilem cum venerit conatus illius
implebit, beati qui esuriunt, etc.
(total freedom) though he cannot fully attain it here, when the Iubilee
comes it will accomplish his endeavors, blessed are they which hunger
Righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

Desire we therefore Angelical perfection to do Gods will on earth as it is
done in heaven, to be free of all Concupiscence, he loves not good as good, he
hates not evil as evil, that desires not the possession of all good and
deliverance from all evil. Pray we that God would have mercy upon all men,
that all men may be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth; that all
things in the Church and State may hold plenarie conformity with Gods will,
since no godly desire is frustrancous, glory shall fill the mouth that grace
opens.

T.C. in his fury against the Surplisse, declaimes that it is a token of
pureness from sin and infection, T. C. Part. 1. p. 80.
and of a glory which neither they have nor can have, nor ought so much as to
desire to have, so long as they be in this world, which is marveilous, seeing
we are to desire that to be done in this world which is done in the other (1.
Ioh. 3.3) And many like strains of Holy-writ seem to argue that it is not
absolutely impossible to compass purification from all sin, and full
sanctification in respect of the liberty of man's will, and liberality of Gods
grace; for albeit none have attained it, the sole le^ and defect was in
themselves, that were wanting in desires and labors; which St. AUGUSTINE. often
learnedly prosecutes and especially in his Treatise of Perfection. However the
desire of the things is not only lawful but so necessary, as no charity can
subsist without desiring to be clear of all sin, and in all correspondence
with God.

Wherefore it was a pious wish of LUDOVICUS BLOSIUS, Ah Lord, would to God I
had for the honor of thy In specul^ spirital^ c. 7. Vtinam ^^mine, utinam pro
ho^^^ nominis tui, haber^m tantum amorem and affectum ad^re, quantum unquam
aliqua creatura habuit.
name, as great love and affection to thee, as ever had any creature. Nay
fur^^^^, the desire to love God as much as all his Saints put together do love
him, is an excellent desire, Provided (as LANSPERG wisely cautions) there
Epist. ad ^^^^lem animam, (...)
be not therein an appetite of singularity, as if thou alone would perform
as much as all others, but only an affecting to love, (...) much as all can
love, because love cannot be sa^^^fied.

^riefly, as men can no otherwise any (...) near so much sin as in thoughts
and desires, which may be in short time innumerably multiplied and reiterated,
so neither can we so heap merits as in spiritual intentions, thoughts and
transcendent desires, which for that the forenamed LANSPERG In Pharetra divini
^^oris, page 7.
a worthy writer of devotion, has admirably expressed; I will recommend it to
the Reader in his words. Here is the nobility of the Soul that it is able to
desire infinite, for God himself being infinite, will not be loved of us with
a finite but infinite affection, and there is nothing but our desire that can
stretch it self to infinity, let our desire therefore exhaust it self in
infinite love and affection of adoring and honoring God. Seeing that which is
not possible to be done, is landable with all inclination to be desired,
because whatsoever we ask of God willing it to be and our impot^ncy is the
sole cause that it cannot be, this desire though it never be effected is
crowned by God for a deed, according as our Savior avouches it to proceed from
the heart that our works are praised or condemned: so then where no work can
ensue, the desire of the heart stands for the work: which desire having ability
to rea^ch it self in infinitum, the godly will is able thereby to procure it
self from God the praise and merit of infinite works, notwithstanding that it
cannot (operari infinita) perform infinite works, for that the power of
working is not able to dilate it self so far, as the power of willing; you
see then how much it availes to convert from the creature to God, with a will
advanced by desires and aspirations, and with mental Prayers set on fire by
love (ab immenso immensa postulare) to require of the Almighty things above all
might, since the munificence of God is so great, CHAP 4.
so great his loving kindness, so great his liberality, that he is ready at
all thy desires, for as much as it is he that ^oves thee to de^^re and pray, and
permits no one desire or s^gh sent up to him to return void or empty, for
that I speak not of other secrets which he work^th in thy soul, either he
more clearly i^^ightens thy heart, or more effectually draws, or more sweetly
a^ures, or more deeply wounds, or inflames with more vehement love, or infuses
new grace, or increases and confirms what was given before, or he graciously
refreshes thy mind, or intimately joins and unites himself.

CHAP. IV. Touching the way of freshing Spiritual appetite.
ST. MARK the Hermire rightly affirms it a good beginning De temp^^^^^^ in
sermon.
of grace when a man afflicts himself, uses the help of hunger and thirst
that he may not be full, and thinks himself just and rich in grace. It is a
fine course to frequent fasting, that men may have a feeling of their
imperfection, and not conceit themselves with Laodicea, to be wealthy and ne^d
nothing, as it befell brightman and the Desciplinarians his admirers, to take
into their Faith an idle fancy that their Geneva is Paradise, my Heaven upon
earth, perfect for Doctrine, and Discipline, and government, and when none are
more distempered, to imagine none sound but themselves.

That we be not sick of like disease, we must by the means aforesaid
sharpen our stomach to the best things and the emulation of the primitive
Church for voluntary disciplining our selves with the blessed Apostle (1. Cor.
9) in labor and watching and such kind of restraints and devout exercises
has the force of affliction, and the operation of Mandrakes, to provoke
appetite, Cant. 7.13. The Mandrokes, as one gathers out of Lucas Abba^ in
summariola ex Aponio: Herba magni odoris inter caeteras virtutes, his maxim
dicitur tribuere medelam, qui st^^macho laborant, ut nec continere, nec
appetere possunt cibos, Cum mag^^ desiderto in tribulatione requirunt cibos,
quos in delitiis fastidiebant.
APONIUS, are a herb of strong savor and among other virtues chiefly
medicinable for them that labor of a loathing stomache, that can neither covet
nor retain their food, which he interprets of afflictions, that make men in
their distress, with much desire to crave the food, which they loath in their
delights: As surely under tribulation, the Saints send forth more odoriferous
smell, the sweet odor of whose virtues which they scatter far and wide,
others take to be resembl^^ by Mandrakes, and no question the zeal an^
extraordinary devotion of spiritual men, Angelomus.
is very operative to raise appetite in languishing souls.

Chri^tendome is grown coathy-stomackt, men loath Manna and hunger for husks.
If notice be given that small doles of common meat shall be dispensed, with
what greedines and violence will multitudes cro^d in, b^ when wisdom has
furnished a table and inv^^^, good (...) and constitucions must ^^^pell them to
come, or Gods house will be empty, and his board unprovided of guests. Could we
be persuaded now to go in the Churches fields and scent the Mandrakes ( Matthew.
13.7) how would the blessed Martyrs and Confessors, religious men, holy
Virgins, Widows, our zealous forefathers, how would they have prized the means
and opportunities that we neglect confer we the fresh appetite and active
religion of our renowned Ancestors with the deadness of our barren faith and
professing devotion, and shall not men be confounded for their indifferency
and luke-warmnesse.

Now the best exercises to perfection, holy days, holy vows, holy vigils,
holy procession, set fasts, set prayers, are lamentably slighted, and those
pious exercises that be frequented, are generally followed more for custom
then conscience; and men are induced to ^^te rath^r to satisfy others then for
any hunger, and whereas they should hunger and thirst heaven, they hunger and
thirst earth, and this world, nay hell; and make provision for most
unreasonable and worse then heathenish lusts. Then if there be any scent or
savor in us, let us smell the Mandrakes; among other, royal D^^^d that
breathes forth every where incomparable affection to Gods sweet ordinances,
patient Job that esteemed the word above his appointed (...), above other our
dear Lord Jesus, whose mea^ and drink was to do the will of his heavenly
father, that if our stomach be not (...) killed, we may recover appetite and be
ble^^^d, hungering and thirsting righte^^shes.

DIONYSTUS CARTHUSIANUS was a learned and godly man, he in his Sermons often
excites to this hunger, therefore I will end this Chapter with a little touch
of his ardent incentives to it. Excellent and choice Christians are said to be
full of grace, not that they may not receive more grace, but because they
abound in the grace of God and gifts of the Spirit, howbeit they daily grow in
grace, and the more plentiful grace they have obtained, the more abundantly
they promerit to be perfected in grace, and the more they are replenished, the
apter are they rendered for the increasing of grace, for which cause our
SAVIOR says, to him that has shall be given, and he shall abound; grace
issues of grace, profiting is in order and serves to proceeding: Furthermore,
as one sin by the guilt and burden of it inclines to another, and makes a
man more unworthy of grace; therefore it is written (peccator adjicit ad
peccandum) so one good work dispose^ to another, for this is certain, that
how much the more perfect and vehemen^ any is in love, so much the more
earnest, speedy, ready, frequent, and f^^vent affects has he to GOD, and so
much the more fully* and frequently does he execute the Acts of other virtues
in due time De S. Stephano ser. 1. Circa Epist.
and place.

Wherefore as Student* of Spiritual affections, we are daily to exceed our
selves in our first fervor and first diligence, and most vigilant custody of
our hearts and senses, striving to grow in Faith, Hope, Charity, and the gifts
of the In festo conceptionis Mariae. ser 6.
blessed Spirit: Labor ^e continually to avoid ordinary negligences, vanity,
sloth, lightness, CHAP 4.
I to abhor all venial sins (quasi mortalia) as if they were mortal, to
make daily progress in humility, patience, meekness, sobriety, and other
moral virtues, that we may learn wholly to break, repress, and beat under
foot the beastly movings and assaults of all passions, cease we not a day to
advance our hearts in Prayer unto our LORD and Maker, to insist in close
meditations, wholly to devote our selves to virtuous deeds, and often to intend
and direct all things to the honor and glory of God, that we may truly say
with the Psalmist (oculi m^i semper ad Deum) ever zealous and praying for the
common good of the Church with burning desire, and longing that GOD may be
duly honored of all, our selves especially serving him with all our strength,
and not failing to induce others thereunto to the best of our powers, by
entreaties, exhortations, and good living, this consider that the Kingdom of
God happens not to sleepers, sluggards, slothful and negligent, but to the
vigilan^, laborious, attentive and fervent, who fruitfully improve all the time
granted them* let us note and tremble at that in the Revelations, because thou
art lukewarm, I shall spew thee out of my mouth. Let us mark how eagerly and
stoutly Task men labor for small wages, for a few pence; why are we remiss
then in the service of God, why do we his work negligently, that have not
apetite and temporary rewa^d, but eternal bliss, incomprehensible joy, the
chief good, all good promised unto us, how great is our blindness, how great
our folly and dullness, that w^ are more affected to earthly and carnal
things, the^ to heavenly and eternal, CHAP 5
beseech we God that he would vouchsafe to illighten and inflame our hearts
that terrene and temporal matters despised, we may bend unto God with all our
affection, and by gracious doings, gather our selves a treasure in In Nativ.
Domini, sermon. 2. Circa Evangelium.
heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the satisfaction imparted to them that hunger.
SAtisfaction is most fitly propounded to the hungry souls, as the aim and
end of all desires. St. CHRYSOSTOM. tells us that Wise men d^fined pleasure, when
desire going before satisfaction Ad Theodorum lapsum (...).
follows. Therefore blessed are they that hunger in that they are satisfied.
Because unjust men therefore extort and taste forbidden fruit, that they may
be filled with temporal goods, Our Lord promises sufficiency to them that
hunger justice, and that which all wealth cannot afford, satisf^ction of heart
and mind.

The tenure of our satisfaction does well run in the future, that they shall
be satisfied, in as much as all content here, is but a taste of that entire
satisfaction which we shall have, when we come to see God, and ear the bread
of Angels. Psalm. 126.1. In our greatest joy below, facti sumus sicut co^solati,
we be but as it were comforted, for that as Remigius expounds, how great soever
our consolation be here, it is but a quasi, a shadow, a resemblance Quia
quantacunque hic sit consolatio, est quasi umbra, and quaedam t^ntum similitudo
futurae consolationis.
of future and full consolation. There is no doubt that in the Resurrection we
sh^lbe fully satisfied with all the righteousness we here desire, and have
every desire then and there abundantly sufficed; when God shall be all in all,
and to speak with St. CYPRIAN, his presence filles up all De asce^sione
Domini. Illius praesentia omnes animae and corporis implebit app^titus. S.
Greg. in Evang. hom. 36.
the desire and appetite of soul and body; every affection and sense
replenished with apt delights, that which they cannot be in this world ( Eccl.
1.8) that our soul, and our flesh, and all our bones may say, Lord who is like
unto thee? As the wicked shall be tormented in all their senses, and namely in
their taste with famine ( Revel. 18.8) and with thirst, as the Gospel treates
of the thirst and ever burning tongue of the cruel De siti and lingua semper
ardente. Ecclesia Lugdunensis adversus Iobannem Scotum. Ansbert. in Rev. 16.9.
Actus elicitus charitatis.
Miser.

And yet Christian hunger shall be sempiternall, as which is an act, which
properly arises out of never failing charity, desire shall never cease, but be
ever satisfying never satisfied, they shall be filled not that they shall
surcease desi^ing, but that they shall desire nothing whereof they are not
full, and their desires be sweet unto them. Wittily St. BERNARD S^p^r Cant.
ser. 84. Nunquid consumma^io gaudii, desiderii consumptio est, oleu^ magis est
illi, n^m ipsa fl^m^a ^ic e, t adim plebitur letiria, sed desiderit non erit
f^^^a, as per hoc nec q^^^rendi.
as his ^^nner i^, shall the Consummation of our joy be the Consumption of our
desire, it shall rather be oyl^ unto it a^ that is fl^we, thus it is, our joy
shall be filled up, but there s^allbe no end of our desiring nor therefore of
our seeking. Not that we shall seek what we have not, but freshly desire, and
ever ^new rejoice over our eternal joy.

Ioh. 6.35. Our Master says, they that drink of the water which he gives,
shall never thirst; for that it takes away thirsting, as a p^ine, continues it
only as a pleasure, and mean to render drinking contentfull, for without
thirst none drinks with delectation. Hence not only on earth, but in Heaven
also, the Saints shall everlastingly thirst the waters which they drink with
most pleasing delight; ( Psalm. 36.8) They shall drink of the River of
Pleasures. The Prophet after the exposition of blessed AMBROSE Aviditatem
bibentium voluit exprimere, quasi torre^tem ipsu^. vellent ebibore si possent.
would thereby express the greediness of the drinkers, as if they would
drink up the River it self if they could. Wisdom says of her self ( Sir.
24.21) they that eat me shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet
be thirsty. Which the incomparable St. PAULINE has amplified in rich verses,
that I translate, like one that challenge no perfection in the spirit and art of
Poesy.

De Celso puero pa. 232.
Qui te Christ bibent, dulci torrente refecti,
Non sitient ultra* sed tamen and sitient.
Nam quos divini satiavit copia verbi,
Hos Dulcedo magis pota sitire facit.
Totus enim dulcedo Deus, dilectio Christ es,
Inde replere magis, quam satiare potes,
Et desideriis semper sitiendus avaris,
Influis, exciperis, nec satiatur amor.
They that drink Christ refresht with pleasure store
Shall thirst no more, and yet be thirsty more;
For whom the word of God does satisfy,
Those sweetness makes the more they drink more dry.
For God all sweetness is, and CHRIST all love,
Thence they can fill, but not satiety move.
And always thirsted with greedy desire,
Flow in and fresh, but do not quench the fire.
We can desire nothing which we shall not have, because our satisfaction shall
be infinite, and because our satisfaction shall be infinite, therefore it shall
exercise and advance endless desires. Read Ansbert In apoc. l. 8. ad fine^.
magnifying the Marriage feast and blessed banquet of CHRIST, where there is
hunger without anxiety and fullness without satiety; Parba de statu domin Dei,
l. 4. c. 5.
desire without anxiety in fruition, and satisfaction without satiety, because
above the sense. As St. MAXIMUS has it, that which is not sensual but above
the sense cannot cl^y the sense.

No question of their being satisfied that are blessed, Constantinopol. in
Epist. ad Georg. presbyterum, page 613.
but our Lord as in other beatitudes so in this, commends the happy effects
here; and that satisfaction which they that hunger and thirst find in him for
such their hungering and thirsting, so they shall be filled, and proclaims the
liberality of God furnishing all the capacity of the creature with competency,
and delighting to infuse, and shed abroad copiously of his goodness according
to any aptness and preparation made, and most of all to them that abstracted
from the Creature refuse to be comforted but in him, nay reputing themselves
unworthie of all consolation, hunger not to be filled with comforts in God,
but to be satisfied with his good pleasure ( Psalm. 107.19) He fills the hungry
soul with goodn^s; he fills, that is, ple^tifully takes up and supplies all the
desires of the hungry, with goodness; though hunger except against nothing
that is wholesome, yet God satiates his hungry with the finest wheat ( Psalm.
91.16) the most choice of evangelicall and celestial delicates, he filles the
hungry with goodness, because only goodness satisfies the hunger of
Righteousness, nor could any be blessed though satisfied if not filled with
goodness, and indeed it is the propriety of sole goodness to fill up the
appetite of the soul, mean things may stir but they cannot stay desire.

The assurance of satisfaction is an infallible difference between natural
and spiritual hunger, spiritual and carnal desires. The restless desires of
men after honor, riches, pleasure, prove hunger and thirst to abound in the
world, but not blessed hunger and thirst, because ever unsatisfied, and so
far as this concerns particular justice, a little justly got is more
satisfactory, then all unrighteous gains, the hunger whereof can never be
allayed, but it makes the soul like hell, and begins to plague it here in a
hungry worm. The proper satisfaction of a man and of rational desires,
cannot consist in meat, drink and corporal solaces, as thought Epicure,
Aristippus and other; As St. HIEROM terms In Eccles. 9.8. Cyrenaici, and
c^eterae pecudes philosophorum.
them, Beasts of Athens, brutes in the habits of Philosophers, but in virtue
and grace, wherein is the perfecting of his chief faculties, and the
participation of the divine nature.

Natural hunger and thirst are tedious, as PLATO In Philebo. (...), etc.
discourses and painful, the members that want nourishment sucking it from the
veins, which having not to minister to them, are thereby distracted, and put
out of their union and harmony. But spiritual hunger and thirst are delicious,
therefore St. Augustine In Epist. ad Maximum. Nisi quod in spe adjutorii
devini, est in illo app^rita tranquillus erdor, and sla^ma securior.
averring the hunger of the righteous to exceed the hunger of the voluptuous;
adds, saving that in hope of divine assistance, there is in Christian appetite
a burning that molests not, a flame that consumes not: for that the hungering
of grace is with the firm expectation of a quiet mind, reposed in Gods mercy
and alsufficient reply. Besides that, such thirsting is the work of the Holy
Ghost, and heavenly influences, are not only gracious but glorious, very
cordial, and tasting of highest content.

It is no little satisfaction to the soul, that it can hunger and thirst,
desire to desire, desire to greeve when the heart is dry, and melts not into
sorrow; that to will is present with us, that by hunger and thirst we may
discern ourselves living: as St. BERNARD alleges his hu^^r for life,
Soltloqui^ 5. Tame tu domine certe certus sum, per gratiam tuam de siderium
desideriitui, and amore amoris tui, b^bere me, in t^to cord and in tota anima
mea.
O my Lord, certainly I am certain^ th^^ by thy grace, I have in all my heart
and in all my soul a desire of thy desire, and love of thy love. JORDAN has
observed and the Naturalists Sermon 14^. Nam homo plerumque aliis intertus,
negligent fami^ ^^pore and indig^^tiae ^ibum sum^re, nisi per fame^ quae est
appetitus cibi d^s^derabilis admoreretur.
signify as much, that God has grafted in man's nature that he should take his
food with pleasure, as for his virtuous exercise in moderating delights and
grievances so for his better preservation, that in i^^^^^ents and infami^e,
hunger the app^tite of conte^rf^ll fo^d might admonish him not to neglect
himself, CHAP. 6.
and they whose soul dwells not in flesh, not forget to receive due sustenance,
how much more necessary was it that not alone in eating and drinking, but also
in hungring and thirsting spiritual nutriture Christians should find
sweetness, lest otherwise we should dead our appetite, and let our souls
famish if hunger were not grateful, as effectually in order to eternal health
and happiness.

CHAP. VI. Of the hunger that shall be satisfied, of the goodness that
satisfies, and how goodness specially satisfies that hungers by preserving
appetite and activity.
1. Righteousness renders not its satisfactions to any, but those that hunger
and thirst, aspire after it with sovereign and most importunate desires, it
was said that the gods sold all things to men for labor, here we see our God
sells his meat to us for hunger, and requires no price but thirst for the
water of life, he makes over his greatest blessings to desires, Idiotam de
amore divin, ^. 10.
and therefore there is nothing cheaper to buy, nor dearer to possess. Now
because none can hunger and thirst, but by the spirit of life the satisfaction
of the Gospel is assured to them, and Christians must be thankful, and
content themselves in the hungering and thirsting righteousness, for desires
of grace are the dew of Heaven, and the soul could not hunger and thirst
grace, if it tasted nothing of the sweetness thereof. S. Le^ sermon. de ^^atit.


Longing and affectionate desire is only from some taste of the good desired,
and that this will which divines say is accepted for the deed, that is the
desire which is accepted for the grace desired, when the desire is in the
proper faculty that is proportioned and directly exercised about the good
desired, as desire of appetite does not argue appetite. For it may be in them
that have no stomach, because the appetite is in the inferior and ^eslative
powers, the desire thereof in the higher and intellectual, but desire of meat
in the stomach, which is the fear thereof, does always prove appetite; so
desire of grace in the will which is the proper seat of grace, presupposes
holy inclinations there, and that desire it ^. Aug. in Ps. 11^. v. 20.
ever working, and uncessant till it be satisfied with more and more grace,
but desire of grace in the intellect only, apprehending it and the necessity
thereof, does not ever presume; it for that is but a kind of woulding, and may
be without intended will to (...).

3. The goodnes^e which does satisfy all the hunger of righteousness, is the
sole good of Christ, which alone is able to cons^mmate all desires, his water
satisfies in the wilderness, wh^ deserted of al other succor ( Esa. 48.21) that
is wonderful, Christ's water takes away hunger, and his bread thirst. Ioh.
6.37. Every thing that is his, being of infinite virtue, and comprizing all
satisfactions. The repast of the soul is summed up in the Apostles blessing
(2. Cor. 13.14) The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, S. Ambr. ibid. The grace of
our Lord Jesus seems to be set before the love of God, because God set his love
upon us in him, and his merits deserve all the favors which we receive.
the love of the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all:
The love of God sent us a Savior, by whose grace we are saved, the Communion
of the spirit states us in that grace. All good desires are perfectly satisfied
in the love of God, that love completely merited in the grace of Christ, that
grace fully communicated by the fellowship of the Holy Ghost; in whose sole
communion (to use the words of blessed (...), hom. 5.
Macarius) the faithful soul can find rest for all its affections. Manna was a
principal type of Christ's satisfying power, Wis. 16.20.21. Manna serving the
appetite of the eater, tempered it self to every man's liking, now whereas
Moses records only the taste of wafers made of honey, the most learned Doctor
St. AUGUSTINE S. Aug. retract. l. 2. c. 20. S. Gregor. in Job. l, 6. c. 9. l,
20. c. 16:
and the Fathers, resolve that scruple thus: That Manna to them that took it
as ordinary food, tasted as is expressed by MOSES, but to them that received it
as Sacramental and adored the mystery in it, the taste was as is declared in
the Book of Wisdom: after the verse of RUSTICUS ELPIDIUS, Nam dignis quem
quisque velit, d^t Manna saporem.
Manna's t^^^e was that which best pleased ^^rthy re^eivers. Nor was that a
vain type for our hidden Manna (Revel. 2.17) which CHRIST gives has
correspondence to each particular appetite, and gives every one that delights
in God the special desires of his heart, ( Psalm. 37.4) for it killes brutish
and diabolical appetite, satisfies reasonable and godly desire, confirms us
that remembering our selves to be as CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS finely speaks,
Str^m. 3. (...):
the Children not of Concupiscence but of will: we may not covet but desire,
not lust but will. Ioh. 1.13. Our LORD says, that he who drinks of the water
which He gives, shall never thirst. Ioh. 4.14. Because that water allayes the
fire of Concupiscence after stolen waters that he which drinks thereof may
only thirst righteousness. Quench me the en^mies fiery darts in the
Fountain of Wisdom, and the River of Living water, that spring in thee, which
is the swasive of St. PAULINE to his friend Epis^. 6. Tria inimici c^^^^ntia,
fo^^ s^pientia, and s^^^l^e aqu^ in (...) ^^ting^e.
SEVERUS, and if the will be good and of good, CHRIST satisfies hunger in
giving desert to desire.

3. The goodness of CHRIST satisfies especi^lly the hunger of Righteousness,
by sustaining the Christian in strength of appetite and labor, it was our
Saviors meat and drink to do his Fathers work, as satisfying his desires
of his Fathers glory ( Ioh. 4.34) in n^t^re earnest endeavors are the
satisfa^^ion of strong desires, which render insensible of hunger, (...).
and feed the soul in a man's pursuing his a^^ec^ion, in religion vigorous
following good deeds i^ the best refreshment to godly d^s^res ^ug^entati^n of
love, and the labor of love is the (...) of a pious mind.

Honey seems not sweet to those that are sick of a Fever, and have their
tongue imbittered with Choler: so he that is in the Gall of bitterness, says
as it is in St. BASIL, The Law is (...). In exhortatione ad S. Script.
good, but sin is sweeter: but he that has his senses exercised to discern
good and evil, has experience that more sweetness is tasted in obeying the
Law, then in satisfying lust, of which every man may easily have trial in
himself. To which St. LEO the great appeals, saying; that if a rational De
jejunio sept. Menfis sermon. S. S^seipsum sibi rationalis homo comparet, omnesque
suorum actuum qualit^tes vera inspectione dijudicet, nunquid in intimis
conscientiae suae, hoc delectationis inveniet, de iniquitate commissa, quod de
equitate servata.
man compares himself with Himself, and with true inspection discusses all
the qualities of his acts, shall he in the secrets of his conscience find
that delectation of iniquity committed that he does in righteousness observed,
enter into your consciences after holy actions, try if they make you not a
Feast.

We cannot desire and much less do any thing according to divine will, but
we shall meet with food in it; for how should not that which is pleasant to
GODS will be satisfactory to any good will? Hence to the Righteous the Word is
sweeter then honey, the Holy day is a Festival, the Sacrament a Supper, tears
are bre^d, and bounty is a blessing. Taking therefore notice of the
satisfaction which is in Holy services, let us follow the advice of the famous
Prelate HINCMOR, Hincmar Episc. Rhemens. in opusculo 55. c 54. Sicut cotidianas
and necessarias pensiones corpori re ^dimas, ita cotidianas atque continuas
bonorum operum scilicet continentiae lectionu^, vigiliarum and orationum atque
lachrymarum. and eleemosynarum, atque sacrae hostiae oblationum, gemituum quod;
ex praeteritorum poenitentia, and Sancto futurorum desiderio, pensiones
animabus nostris, effu^dentes eas in conspectu domini, reddere studeamus.
As we render our body daily and con^^nient allowance, so let us study to give
our souls their daily and continual pensions of good works, p^^^ing them
forth before God in Sobriety, reading, watching, and Prayers, in tears, alms,
and oblations of the sacred best, CHAP. 7.
in sighs also from Repentance for our sins past and holy desires of things
to come.

CHAP. VII. Concluding in admiration of the satisfactions which are in
Righteousness.
BOnum hominis the good which all men would have shown them, is found in
Righteousness. Whatsoever man as man in the utmost extent of reason can
desire, is with overplus contained in Religion; of necessity the degree of
satisfaction must be answerable to the good whereof we have fruition, the
higher the good the larger the content, there is no comparison between the joy
in a Million and a Mi^e. Hence profound observations and rare inventions in
Arts and Sciences promote to deeper and more sincere delights, then riches and
honor, because they are the contents of the intellective part, these of the
sensible. Thus the graces and gifts of the Lord JESUS create purer and more
entire pleasure then all the favors and sufficiencies of the world, for that
all these are but a natural good, and the other are a spiritual.

A man of indifferent conceit, may fancy greater contentment then all the good
of the world could minister if it were in his possession, but the most
exquisite wit cannot devise a satisfaction any thing near that which accrewes
from righteousness satisfying God; from peace beyond all understanding of man
and Angel, from joy in the Holy Ghost most glorious and unspeakable, who as an
infinite Agent stampes incredible worth and contenting virtue on all his
actions.

Wherefore the righteous are willed to rejoice again and again ( Phil. 4.4)
because it is impossible for them to over-joy their Spiritual good. I can no
less then commend that of Cabasil^s De vita in Chrisio. l. 2.
The thirst of humane Souls needs some infinite, water which therefore the
finite world cannot suffice, he that drinks of that water shall thirst again,
but they that drink of Christ in whom are all things, there is no let, but
they should love as much as nature can effect and joy as much as they can joy.
etc.

For as the good of the world is much less then our desires and thoughts* so
our desires and thoughts are far inferior to the good of Christianity.

Yet Tertullus is a witness, that Despectaculis. Plures denique invenias, quos
magis periculum voluptatis quam vitae avocat ab hac secta delicatus es
Christian, si in hac vita voluptatem concupiscis, imo nimium stultus* si haec
existimus voluptatem --
a man might find many whom hazard of pleasure more detained from Christian
profession thou peril of life, I will not say as he does to such thou art
nice, O Christians, if thou covetest pleasure in this life, (...) wise if thou
conceivest carnal pastimes to be pleasure^ Suerly they are foolish that for
the sports of the world forsake the pleasure of the Church which God meats with
so overflowing a cup, that his servants are at times driven to beseech him to
hold his hand, as does blessed Ephrem in that petition; De vita religiosa. p.
557.
Now Lord my God I adore and implore thy ineffable goodness, confessing my
infirmity! remit somewhat the sourges of thy grace, and reserve it for me in
thy treasury.

Excellently St. LEO, Gods people have their Spiritual De quadragesima, sermon.
12. habet populus dei spiritales epulas, castasque d^licias --
banquets and chaste delights, whosoever has had the lightest, say in the
taste of his inner man of the sweetness of GODS mercy and truth whereby all
his providence is dispensed, and made any experiments of those joys that shall
never be allaid with any regrate, in admiration of eternal, he will despise
all corrupt and fading good; well does he say, who so has tasted, and the
Psalmist, Come taste and see that the Lord is good. Psalm. 34 8. For as
BONAVENTVRE, a man of curious devotionall expression says, Dominic: 1.
advertus sermon. 20. taste and see, quia dominus est adeo dulcis, ut qui cum
gustaverit quam sit dulcis, Augustanti credere omni^^ non poterit.
God is so good, that he who has not tasted him how good he is, will not any
wise be able to credit another tasting that he is so sweet.

The good things, which God has prepared and revealed in his Saints here
below, are above the capacity and credulity of a man in nature. 1 Cor. 2.9.10.
Eye has not seen nor ear heard, which are the senses of discipline and
learning, nor has it entered into the heart of man which is the seat and
throne of reason.

They so far surmount all secular indignation and much more contentations,
that as St. Bernard testifies. The soul that has tasted and bin satisfied
with Super Cant. sermon. 35 B. Aug. Epist. 121.
God, fears (as to be cast out of Paradise into hell) to fall from those pure
joys to the consolation and or rather desolations of the world.

Matthew. 22.2. The satisfaction of the Gospel is resembled to a feast, no
ordinary but a marriage feast, made by no common person, but a King, and that
for no subject but a son, and therefore carried in all variety and state to
shadow out he exceeding abundance of all manner of delights which the soul
participates in Gods kingdom, and the righteousness thereof.

Apocalypse 3.20. If any man open I will come in and suppe with him, the
transcendance of which offer forced this exclamation from Bishop Agobard Sermon,
de trinitate, quid unquam tam dulce? quid tam jucundum? vae illis qui talem
hospitem a se repellunt.
what was ever so sweet, what so pleasant! woe be to them that exclude such a
guest, that enters not only as a guest but as a feast, that cheeres the heart
with himself!

The Soul is too greedy that God does not satisfy, he that has God for his;
what would he, what can he have more? Psalm. 73.25. whom have I in heaven but
thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, nor heavenly
thing nor earthly do I desire but thee alone?

Seeing that God alsuffizing now suppes with his and at the Lambs supp^r will
gird himself and minister to them by presenting all his good before them. Can
we do otherwise then wonder with ORIGIN, In Cant. hom. 2. -- as St. Hier.
translates, Beata illius latitude animae, beata strata illius mentis, vbi pater
and filius, and non dubita una cum Spiritu Sancto, ^^cumbit, conat, and
mansimeus facit -- Pax ubi primus ci^^t est.
Blessed is the latitude of that Soul; blessed the table of that heart, where
the Father and Son no doubt with the holy Spirit, sit down, suppe, lodge;
where the first service is Peace, Joy, Righteousness, and what the second
course shall be passes the apprehension of men, the comprehension of Angels.

Lord IESV, all our desires are to thee, who only have satisfied for us, and
who only can satisfy us.

FINIS.
BEATI MISERICORDES.

THE MERCIFVLL.

A TREATISE OF MERCY, handling the Fifth Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCK, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

St. VALERIAN. Sermon. 4. Manus arida nihil colligit, aut si collegerit, mox
amittit. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIEVS. LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for JOHN
CLARK, and WILL: COOK. 1637.

BEATI MISERICORDES.
MATTHEW. 5.7. Blessed are the Merciful.
CHAP. I. Of Mercy, especially in Spiritual miseries, and namely in condoling
with others in their infirmities.
HArd times, and harder hearts call for treaties of Mercy, and require another
S. Chrysostom, who for much pressing of mercy was called of many Georg.
Alexandrinus in vita ejus, cap. 22. (...).
The Preacher of Almas, the Prelate of Mercy. Which mercy is the virtue whereby
we are affected with other men's miseries, and ready to succor them unto the
utmost of our power, considering them as tied to us in bands of humanity, and
further indeared in the bowels of CHRIST dying for them as for us. Mercy is at
both ends of this verse, the Duty in the beginning, the Reward in the close,
the grace to show the mercy of man, the bliss to find the mercy of God. And
mercy is assured to the merciful, because our mercy by Gods ordinance
effectually works to the procuring of his, and that it may not irke us to be
exercised about misery the proper object of Mercy, mercy is thereby engaged to
us, to free us from all misery: and because the merciful respect not so much
the merits as the miseries of men; therefore mercy is made over to them, that
(as St. Thomas speaks) They may receive more then they deserved or could have
desired.

Now forasmuch as the miseries of men are either of Soul or Body, mercy
regards both, and disposes to give not only corporal but spiritual alms,
which are to be preferred before them, according to the prelation of the soul
before the body, in which the poor may equalize the rich, counsel, comfort,
correct, forbear, forgive, pray for others. Some of which at least we may
extend to the proudest (...) their scornful spire, who would (...) i^ take
other kindnesses from our hands. As STEPHEN can pray for SAVE and those that
st^^ed him, whether they will or not, and therein further them that would not
have received other courtesies from him; moreover, the Lord JESUS takes to
himself the relief of the soul as well as that of the body, agreeable to the
sentence of St. Gregory, In Ioh lib. 14. c. 27. -- Ita cum nescienti cuilibet
rectum consilium datur, hoc ille accipit cujus membru^ est, qui eruditur.
As when victuals or raiment is given to the needy, the Lord witnesses that
he received it; so when good counsel is given to any ignorant, he receives
it, whose members they be that are instructed.

Hereupon the Righteous that know the worth of a soul, tender it in all
offices of piety, but the more part of us are not so respective of our Friends
souls as God commands us to be of our enemies Ass, Exodus 23.6. Which blessed
Chrysostom observes, saying; Tom. 5. sermon, 91.
We will help up an Ass fallen down, but we neglect and despise the soul
of our Friends gravelling under worse burdens, (then can oppress an Ass) and
we smite them not kindly, when we see them go shamefully into Tave^^es, etc.
Tom. 5. ser. 91. (...).


For the better remembrance, I will reduce what I intend to deliver touching
Mercy expressed to the Spirits of men, to the particulars of compa^^^o^,
correction, pardon.

For the first, the merciful are compassionate and despise not others
incurable weaknesses, but labor their help in mercy and gentleness, Jude,
verse. 22.23. Reason and natural love moved (...) that (...) should pity the
Soul that (...). 51 (...)
How much more will grace and Christian charity cover and recover infirmities,
concealing what stands with our vocation, (...), and morally wi^^ing (...) men
in their wants, heal their maladies, not upbraid, exasperate, deride, make
table-talke, and Towne-talke of them. In other men we should consider our
selves, In aliis hominibus nos ipsos cogitare debemus. Lictant. 6. 10.
and reminding what we have been, or might have been, or may be, put on
bowels of fellow-feeling to them ( Galath. 6.10. Tit. 3.3) and murmr not that
God spares the worst livers (as St. Augustine persuades) Noli quia tu
transasti, velle misericordiae Dei pontem subvertere etc. in Psalm. 93.
Have not thou a will, because thy self art over, to turn aside the bridge of
Gods mercy.

Our Savior ( Matthew. 9.13) applies that of Hos. 6.6. I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, to exalt charitable interpretations above harsh constructions, and
patient striving to reclaim sinners before ungentle use and aversation. Mercy
to say pity of our neighbor is his evils (whereof sin is the greatest) and
endeavor to redress them is a direct service of God, and another guess sign
of one sincerely religious, then much hearing, reading, receiving, which with
all formalities profit not to salvation without mercy.

This mercy releeves more, convents more, then proud separation and storming
against Sinners. I read in the lives of the Fathers, In vit. Patrum, l. 2. In
L. contra fornicationem, fol. 122. Neque possibile est ut cum duritia and
ausseritate, facile ab intention sua aliquis revocetur, quia nec Demon
expellit Daemonem, sed magis benignitate eum revoca ad re, quoniam and Dominum
Deus noster consolando ad se homines trahit.
That it is not possible that any one should easily be withdrawn from his
intention by hard^esse and rigor, for neither does Devil exp^ll ^^vill, but
(...) him to thee by kindnesses; for even the Lord our God draws men to
himself by mercies and comforts. Be we therefore practisers of mercy in
admonishing, persuading, advising them that are (...) the way, removing all
stumbling blocks from before them, always praying for them, and ready to
prevent them with offices of best love.

If you of the Laity would so exercise mercy, St. CHRYSOSTOM holds, In Hebr.
hom. 30. (...).
you might reform me things among your selves, then by your public Teachers;
because you converse much together and mutually know each other, and have
special interests in one another. Have you not read or heard how in the first
flourish of Christianity, the Church was propagated and the world astonished by
acts of Mercy. Ah! that merciful men are took away, and in lieu of them is
risen up a root of bitterness, that cannot afford so much as a sweet look,
or kind word, be peremptory to condemn all they dislike, but who seeks to
reclaim men with goodness, and by mercy to amend them and make such as God
would have them!

CHAP. II. Of the mercy exercised in Correction and p^rdon.
ARNOBIVS In Psalm. (...) comparabile (...) est, qua^^^ (...) quicunque super
(...) terra (...) est^^^tur -- (...).
junior, does not without ground pu^naunce it an incomparable gift of GOD, that
any righteous man is held ou^ before us upon the face of the ^^th, -- and that
he ^ blessed, who has the happiness to kno^ a (...) of God, that may correct
him (...), and reprove him in Gods love --. Such correction is either in
censuring, or in chastising.

In censuring the merciful are favorable arbitrators, rather then judges of
other men's doings. For as Cassian declares, Coll. 11.11. aevidens indicium est
animae vitioru^ facibus nondum eliquatac, in criminibus alienis, non affectu
misericordiae condolere, sed rigidam judicantis tenere censuram.
It is an evident token of a soul not yet purged from the dregs of vice, in
other men's offenses not to condole in affect of pity: but demean themselves
after the rigorous severity of a Judge. If the merciful judge at all, they
judge as God does of his servants, evangelically passing by many defects, and
accepting the goodwill and pure intent, and they do not presume to judge any,
until they have put themselves in his clothes, and made his case their own.
Admirably Guide Carthusianus, Med. 16 ind^e eum prius quem judicare vis aut
corripore, et sicut tibi expedire senseris, si ita fis, sic facito -- nam et
Christ^s prius induit hominem, quam judicaret.
First put on whomsoever thou will judge or reprove, and as thou would think
expedient for thy self, if thou went in his condition, so deal by him. Matthew.
7.1. for CHRIST also put on man, before he would judge men.

The merciful if he knew himself to excel others, would in Christian charity
be grieved that those he loves as himself come short of him in spiritual
gifts, and adjudge that wanting to himself, wherein his fellow members were
defective. He dares not take up an absolute opinion, that any particular man,
is for the present out of grace; for that supposing he understood him a little
before to have committed some mortal sinn^, he cannot tell what God may
presently work in his heart by inner contrition. He is far from their
malignant nature that makes the worst of every thing, and from the evil humor
of temerarious suspecting, CHAP. 7.
especially when he discernes men well employed, not like the Pharisee that
misdeem'd the poor Publican that he saw stand praying by him, as his
successors mis-judge them, they call profane in their devotions, in their
reverence in Gods house, in their veneration at the name of our Lord JESUS, and
say they rest in externals, without pious and inward motions, as if they were
gods to know what instincts their hearts were stirred with, or as if when a
Christian saw another perform a solemn religious act revere^tly, he ought not
to think him then penitent, and smit with remorse, and some godly inspiration,
how bad soever he had formerly known him.

It pitties the merciful, that generally the world makes the miscarriage of
others the burden of their talk, but more that they, who glory that they are
not of the world, should waste their conference in uncharitable censures, as if
the Children of God had nothing else to do, but find fault with the sons of
men, which ^^^^es nothing so much the minds of men from all Religion.
Dionysius (...) writ^^, Thus (...).
wisdom (...) rash and ^^just suspicious and judging especially of things
^^ternall, unknown, indifferent, -- And yet that is one of the worst
cor^^^^ions r^^guing in the heart of many of the religio^^ that they repro^e,
bold and ^^advised in judgeing of others.

Of late there is sprout up a generation, all ^^^se show of (...) if you take
their faulting of others, CHAP. 2.
their exclaiming of the times, their complaining of the state, their defaming
of the Church, you leave them not so much as one fig-leafe to cover their
nakedness, and destitution of all truth in their sayings, and honesty in their
dealings. They speak of a damned crew but there is a more pestilentiall order,
and that is the damning crew of censurers, they call themselves professors,
but their profession is to judge all but themselves, and there is no mercy with
them, nor respect of dignities or callings, but they give all that side not
with them for little better then Turks, and all that are against them for
worse then Jews.

In chastising the pitiful Christian opens all his bowels of mercy, and
because the duty is unpleasant of it self, sweetens it with much ingredience
and all kind circumstances of love. As St. Bernard Octo puncta. Fraterna
correctio debet fieri cum magno moderamino, cum gemit^ and benevolentia, suo
loco, tempore semper oratione praecedente.
teaches that brotherly correction ought to be carried with great moderation,
with sorrrow for them, and good will to them in time and place, and with prayer
always premised -- and so done it is a work of excelling mercy, whether it be
in words or deeds -- according to the worthy judgment of Saint Augustine, be
In e^chiridio. c. 72. Qui emendat verbere que^ inpotestas datur, vel coerc^t
aliqua disciplina, and tamen poccatum ejus a quo lasus et offensus, dimittit ex
cord -- vel orat ut ei dimittatur, non solum in eo quod dimittit atque orat,
verum etiam in eo quod corripit, aliqua emendatoria poena plectis, eleemosynam
dat, quia misericordiam praestat, etc.
that by stripes amendeth one, over whom he has command, or restrains him
by any discipline, and yet forgiveth him from his heart the sin wherewith he
was injured and offended, or prayer that it may be forgiven, not only in that
he forgives and prays, but also in that he corrects and punishes with some
medicinable pain, he gives an alms because he shows mercy. By that means
therefore the Righteous reform their inferiors of sin, the most extreme
mischief incident to them, they smite in kindness, and thence their reproof
is sovereign as balm. Psalm. 141.5

And surely as St. HILARY there comments, Veniam prastar^ illicitis non est
misericordiam praestare, sed justitiam misericordia non tenere.
To grant an indulgence for unlawful courses is not to show mercy, but to
neglect the right of mercy, for mercy dispenses it self by just rules and fit
conditions in the receiver, Psalm. 62.12. all the Lords paths are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25.10. Quia and ipsa misericordia aquis est librata a ponderibu^.
Inter opera St. Hier. ib.
Because even mercy it self is equally weighed and distributed.

Yet the merciful when there is necessity of punishing, do it not without
touch of conscience for their own sins, and a heart sensible of humane
weakness, and commiserating the same, and therefore they put far away all
unchristian menaces, reviling and domineering over offenders, not as many who
use superiority as a license to mistake men's names, and say imperiously what
they please of those that are under them. Origin I^ Romans 32
notes, That to speak ill and give bitter terms it a vice whereunto humane
frailty is so bent; especially toward subjects and inferiors, that they think
it calling not miscalling. And when by way of penalty something accrewes to the
poor or himself for offenses convicted, that causes not a merciful m^n to
abate his sorrow that a Christian should ^o offend, those pecuniary amercements
being imposed (...) to hinder, not to occasion to remit grief i^ ^^y for
sin. So much of mercy in (...) briefly of that which is in pardoning, which
is the proper function of Mercy, here it reigns and manifests all its virtue,
Ephesians. 4.32. There are two kind of Alms expressed in two words, Luke 6 37.38
Give and forgive. Give -- Erogando quod habes bonum, Forgive -- Remittendo quod
pateris malu^^ St. Aug. hom. 29.
Give by imparting of the good thou have, forgive by remitting of the ill thou
suffer, by which two the most learned Father avouches sins to be done
away, and that we make Quasi faenus trajectitium. This forgiving Mercy
consists in remission of all displeasure and rancour against men, and cleeres
the mind of all ill thoughts and wishes to them, as our Savior forgave the
world his death, and namely them that had most hand in it, and most effectually
desired God, by the sweet relation and affection of a Father, to forgive them
also, Luke. 23.34.

Which was gloriously imitated, Act 7.59.60. by the blessed Protomartyr. Who as
St. BERNARD dilates it, Sermon. de S. Stephano, clamat voce magna, quia magna
utique charitate, positis genibus quia vera and humili simplicitate pro se
orans stat and ^rigitur, pro lapidantibus flectit genua, quis audivit unquam
talem! --
Cried with a loud voice, because in great charity, upon his knees, because in
sincere and humble integrity, he prayed for himself standing, for them that
stoned him kneeling --; for that he more doubted of audience for them then for
himself, and would as devoutly intercede for them, as he could for himself
in the greatest hazard. Imitate thou thy Lord and his faithful servant, and if
thou be not able to pray for thy trespassers, beware of imprecations against
them, for so through Gods help by daily growth thou shall proceed at length to
supplicate for them. (Vener, Bed.) In Lac. 23.
Mercy moves and shines in its own sp^^^^, wh^^ Charity has a perfect work
in us, (...) consider the evil of men against us, CHAP. 3.
as their misery not ours. Here is the perfection of Mercy, and we are perfect
as our heavenly Father is perfect, when we are thus merciful as he is
merciful. Matthew. 5.48. with Luke 6.36. And therefore the holy Doctors have
ever urged this as the touchstone of Christianity, and most certain trial
of sincerity in grace.

CHAP. III. Of Mercy which the merciful obtain, and how they find Gods mercy
in the foresaid exercise of their mercy.
THe merciful shall obtain Mercy, and it is the excellency of this grace,
that it is returned upon it self for a reward, there can no higher blessing be
given for mercy then mercy, it is the bliss of the soul to be Gods Euchamah
-- The word (they shall obtain mercy) imports, (...).
that Mercy is the original of all recompense coming to the gracious, mercy
that God entered into a covenant of grace with them, that he makes exceeding
precious promises to them, that he concurres with us to good, and elevates
that good in his CHRIST, all is Mercy. The same word intima^es that not alone
grace and glory, but the mercy of God, which transcends all glory, shall be
given in retrib^^^o^ of the works of mercy, touching which (...) you shall
(...) S^. AUGUSTINE, De correptione and gratia, c. 13. -- cum enim dicitur,
judicium fine misericordia illi qui non fecit misericordiam, manifestatur in
his in quibus inveniuntur bona opera misericordiae judicium cum misericordia
fieri, ac per hoc etiam ipsam misericordiam meritis honorum operum reddi. --
Mercy shall be rendered in just judgment to the merits of good works, CHAP. 2.
for when it is said he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy, it is manifested that he in whom are found the good works of mercy,
shall have judgment with mercy, and thereby also that mercy it self is
rendered to the merits of good works.

Now to give a brief view what divine mercy is obtained by the several
exercises of mercy forementioned. 1. They that are tender to others in their
weaknesses shall have experience of Gods pitying them in their infirmities, and
in the depth thereof cherishing the spark of his grace. For as St. Aug says
de civitate Dei* l. 20 30. The Jews are there compared to a broken reed,
perdita integritate* and to smoking flax, amisso lumine.
Es. 42.3. CHRIST will bear with their deficiency in knowledge and obedience.

2 God is not strict to enter into judgment with them that forbear judging;
Matthew. 7.^.2. but at his tribunal conceales the sins of the righteous who
used not to publish their neighbors defects, whereas after St. CHRYSOSTOMES
fine observation, [Hom. 3 ad Pop. Antioch.]
Rash judging others agravats our own judgment, for God will pron^unce
sentence against us, not only according to the nature of our sins, but also
according to our judgment of others. Likewise the merciful providence of God
orders that they who be indifferent in weighing the actions of others, ^e^t
wi^h answerable dealing from others. Luke 6.38. Which confers much to their
quiet and contentfull living, when as they that like Ismael have a hand against
every man, Genesis 16.12. are required with having every man's hand against them,
in Plau^^^ his phrase they are friends to no men, and have all men their foes.
CHAP. 3.
Common censurers that approve none are disallowed by all. In Bacchid. Nullis
amici sunt, inimicos ipsi in se omnes habent.


Shortly thus, they who by virtue of their callings rebuke the world publicly
of sin, and curb offenders, albeit they exactly observe rules of Mercy,
shall have their judges, and ill tongues walking against them, as the Lord
JESUS had, and DAVID that sang of Mercy and Judgment was rewarded evil for
good; yet in ordinary converse, they that be out of office and be no medlers
neither censorious, are generally well spoken of. Agreeable to that of St.
AMBROSE, In exhortatione (...) virgins, si a^^i d^rogaveris is ali^ona Itagua
flagellum non metaes.
If thou keep thy own Tongue s^^m evil speaking thou shall not need to
fear the scourge of another man's tongue, Job, 5.21.

Thirdly, they that execute justice in Mercy, shall taste the mercy of God even
in the cup of Judgment, and be able to repeat after the Psalmist, Psalm.
129.75. Thou have afflicted me^ in very faithfulness, in the truth of thy
loving mercy, and according to the league of grace, favorably offering thy
self in all thy ways; all Gods judgments in this life are directed by hi^^,
and All Gods aim (...) the good of men.

That of Galiel^^^ Ahi^^d^r a^fi^ In summa (...). l. 1. c. 14 ^. 5. Proprie
loquendo, ^^^quam Them inflixit (...) in praesenti ad i^itium ^tern^
damnatianis, nisi secundi^^ even^^u^, quantum e^^m ad intenti^em Dei, quant^^
(...) s^ ^rat, tam ^en^^i, quam M^ri^ Nos^ s^r^ri inst^^^ p^^am ^d (...).
is most (...), In pr^pri^ty of speech. God never inflicted any p^^ishment in
this life as ^begi^^ing of eternal d^^^^tion, but only in ^^gard of the (...)
for (...) the la^^^tio^ of God so ^^rst (...) him, ^e infli^^ed p^^^shment
(...) Herod for his (...) will (...) Mary the (...) of (...).

Psalm. 136.15. The mercy of God which indureth for ever is tendered to men in
all his carriage and dealings with them, but the most resist the Spirit, and
open not to God knocking loud at their doors by hard judgments, but they who
administer all their corrections with sweet affects, are assisted by God to
receive his chastisements with the right hand and savor them, and the loving
kindness that exhibites them and is offered in them.

Fourthly, they who are merciful to forgive sins against them, find mercy
to the forgiveness of all their own sins, Matthew. 6.14. our forgiving is a
condition, mean, and cause inferior why we are forgiven, howbeit the sole
obedience of CHRIST is the proper merit which deserved this in strict justice,
that such respect should be promised and annexed to our pardoning. In forgiving
others, we benefit and purge ourselves, that St. Chrys^stome Tom. 5 H S. sermon:
46. (...) --
might say, Forgive the sin of servants, that thou may have thy Lord and
Masters pardon for thy sins.

None are so prevalent to prevail with God, as they that pardon and pray;
therefore Ierem. 15.1.2. MOSES and SAMVEL are set for instances of all possible
impetration, as who forgave and interceded for those that did them wrong.
Contrariwise, if we be merciless and forgive not, neither will our heavenly
Father forgive us, nay we forfeit and lose his former pardon and grace
afforded us ( Matthew. 18.34, 35) God (...) by our measure, forgives us as we
forgive, is Sermon. 5. in Quadrages. -- durissimi^ nos vinculis illigamu^, nisi
quod profitemur impleamus.
Sacratissimum pactum, as St. LEO informs, and therefore so saying, we bind
our selves in hard bands, except we d^e as we speak; We have no license to
ask, nor can we in faith beg Gods gracious pardon, without we be our selves
merciful to remit. Whence St. Augustine concludes, that De diversis Sermon. 9.
Tentatio horrenda, molesta, tremenda. omnibus viribus, omni virtute vitanda.
The having a will to revenge is a horrible, griev^us and fearful tentation,
with all our powers and with all our strength to be avoided: as which is
against the conditions of our peace and remedy of our sins.

Tenthly, And that I may here propound, that which both animates to those
exercises and reflects on all other declarations of Mercy, the merciful as
they do all their good deeds from mercy to men, so they enjoy all the
blessings they reap from mercy in God, and have in the least of them a sense
of his infinite goodwill, from which all things issue to them. It is a De veri^
virtutibus, c. 25. Non enim tam parvu^ donam corporale vel spirirituale a Deo
fluit, in quo non sit inclusus imme^su^ Deus cum omni divina virtate, pensandus
enim est affect^s Dei da^tis.
saying of worthy Albertus the great, There flows not from God so small a gift
Corp^rallor Spiritual, in which God Almighty with all his divine virtue and
goodness is not included, for the affection with which God gives is to be
expended. -- Hence Psalm. 126. His mercy endures for ever, is twenty six times
repeated; to signify S, Prosper, ibid.
that eternal mercy is at the bottom of all Gods proceedings with us, and
that there is no benefit which followed home leads not to it, and whereby the
faithful may not come to the touch of everlasting mercy.

This sets an estimate upon all Gods works and gif^^ i^ Christian minds
believing them testimonies of incomprehensible mercy and love, CHAP. 4.
and raises them accordingly in comfort and gratitude, they respecting gifts
not in themselves but as given by God and that with illimited affection. That
in each particular favor should be involved love which passes all
understanding of man or Angel. Ephesians. 3.19. Loving kindness which is sweeter
then life (Psalm. 63.3) All life is sweet in it self, but sweeter in the
fountain from which it springs, the very life of glory delectable in it self
above all imagination, is not so delicious in it self as in the loving
kindness which conferres it.

CHAP. IV. Of Mercy in outward things:
We have a little seen into men's works of Mercy in spiritual miseries, and
Gods mercy to those works; let us nextly search how the bowels of the
merciful extend themselves to others in their corporal necessities, where
mercy assumes the name of goodness, and verifies it in doing good to all in
liberality, bounty, charity, etc.

And let not the poor complain that they are shut out of all possibility to
act this part of Mercy, for they officiate in this service, if being in favor
with the wealthy, they mediate and excite them thereunto, and if they mourn
with them that mourn, grieve and sigh together with their fellow members in
temporal calamities.

It is a truth delivered by VINCENTIVS an apostolic Preacher in his time,
Dominica 2. post Pasch. sermon. 2.
He gives more to a poor distressed man, that yields him compassion in his
heart, then he that gives him an alms without compassion. For he that yields
compassion, gives something of himself, he that bestows external goods,
gives something of himself, and he that has no compassion sometimes gives,
but he that has compassion never omits to give, but distributes freely, and
counts all little, to releeve his own spirit and bowels, wherein he is
straightened, and the rich often sooner find a gift in their hand, then compassion
and mercy in their heart; therefore compassion has the preeminence in and over
contribution, and in compassion the poor may have advantage of the rich, as
moved by his own extremity.

Besides, it is bounty in a poor man to be thankful, and so to deprive the
rich of pretending the ingratitude of the poor, for the cause why they slack
their hands: especially it is devotion in him patiently to bear Gods hand for
the edifying of poor and rich, seeing none can deny it more and more
rewardable^ in adversity to give Thanks, then in prosperity to give St.
Chrysostom. tom 4 hom 1.
Alms, as for Lazarus, Tom. 5. hom. 10.
neither to blasphame God nor man, nor murmr in his utmost want; aggravated
by fight of the rich man^ plenty, for him famisht with hunger and to^mente^
with painful sores, not to repine that an ungodly Miser should be so provided,
and himself that feared God (...) to crave the use of his Dogs, (...) was the
poor man's alms, and a greater benevolence to the Church, then if he had
given barne-fuls of Corn, millions of gold and silver.

But who can be so poor as justly to moan for inabilitie to be an
Almes-giver, when a cup of cold water, if any should want fire, is took by
CHRIST in good worth. -- Is any so poor that he has neither victuals to
feed the hungry, nor apparel to cloth the naked, nor house to harbor the
stranger, nor feet to visit the sick. St Chrysostom. tom. 5. hom. 42.
Excellently St. Augustine, We cannot want to spare for God, if we spare to
spend on our lusts, nothing can suffice Covetousness, a little may suffice
God, two mites sufficed the Widow to show mercy, two mites sufficed to buy the
Kingdom of In Psalm 47. Superflua multa habemus si non nisi necessaria
teneamus. Suffecerunt duo nummi ad emendum reguum Dei.

De 12. abusionum gradibus.


heaven.

Well then there is no excuse for the Poor, but quartus abusionum gradus est
Dives five misericordia, a rich man without mercy is an intolerable abuse.

The mercy here blessed is to be shown in alms, (...) elecmosyna, alms.
which carries its name, and the blessed Fathers frequently give notice, that
God omnipotent to provide for his poverty, could easily by the hand that
inricheth some, have ministered unto the rest, but that he would grace and make
us happy by taking us in for instruments to good deeds, as the Merciful in
his good doing, becomes an organ of Gods Clem. Alexandr. Strom 7. page 537.
(...).
goodness. Whence our Lord mentions it as a privilege, that we shall always
have the poor among us, in whom we may entertain, and in a sort oblige the
rich man's maker, approve our love to him, and make sure his love to us. The
exhortation of blessed Casarius fits our purpose, S. Caesarius Arti^t. Epicsc.
hom. 1. Noli despicere inop^m, qui cum sibi pauper fit, facere te divitem
potest.
Do not thou despise the needy, who though he be poor himself can make
thee rich; for if we be respective of Gods ordinance, and look to the poor
we cannot scruple, but that God will see to us, and that our assisting under
him shall find acceptance and recompense with him.

And verily nothing more provokes a religious mind unto merciful works, then
regard of Gods promise and assumption, that the righteous should never be
deserted. Psalm. 37. I have been young and now am old, yet did I never see the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging Bread, as if he should say, I have
observed that Gods special providence raises them friends, and for my own
part from my youth up I have been careful in all my dominion, that the
righteous and their issue might not be destitute of conveniences. It is a witty
speech of Clemens Alexandrinus, Pa^dag. lib. 3. c 7. (...).
If any say, that he has oft-times seen the righteous wanting bread, this is
^^^so^^, and where there was not another righteous man, that with DAVID would
have seen no such thing, but have had respect to Gods good word, and appeared
to them for whom his heavenly Father undertook.

Possibly there are none that think them not happy, who had the grace to
contribute and minister unto CHRIST in his own blessed person, But B. Aug. de
(...) Dom. sermon. ^6. Nol^ del^re. No^ tibi obstultit istam dig^^tionem, cum ^ni
in. quit ex mirtmis.
greeve not that thou have not Christ to see^^, and entertain as MARTIN had,
he has (...) reaved thee of that bonum, saying, I was hungry and ye fed me,
in that you did it to the least of my brethren you did it to me. Our Lord has
left the poor in his room, you shall not have me always, but the poor,
therefore the wicked so far as necessitous, it is done to CHRIST, which is
collated on them in reference to his will and bloodshed for them. And the more
indigent they be and unable to requite, the more our charity is advanced by
them.

Luke 14.12. Luc. 14.12. Spoken ne impensae grtiae vicissitudinem requirant. S.
Greg. pastor. l 3. 21.
Our Master wills his followers to divert and fear the retaliation of their
good turns (for good duties least rewarded in this world, are most esteemed
and retributed with God) and to practice upon them that could not repay their
kindness in kind, they cannot; therefore it is atract properly Christian,
mere goodness, and pure Religion to commiserate and succor them, Iam. 1.27.
and of the better expectation, that they cannot recompense, seeing for that
cause God substitutes himself, who will return more then any could and the
more the less they could.

Wherefore as God styles himself, The King of Kings, Lord of Princes, Father
of Orphans and Widows, prefixing to those of high degree his title of power,
to those of low degree his title of provision; as it is applied by (St. Isidore
L. 3. 291. (...) --
Pel^sia^^^*) So if we keep distances, let it be with men of state, but let
us condescend to those of poor condition, and let our sweetest influences fall
on the lowest ground. It is not Christian to expend more in presents to rich,
then in gifts to poor.

But our Savior did not in vain foretell, CHAP. 2.
that in the latter days the love of many that forsook not the right faith,
should grow cold in all offices of charity. Matthew. 24.12. especially in costly
devotions and chargeable duties of mercy. St. Basil sermon. (...).
St. Basil witnesses for his time thus, I know many that fast, pray, sigh,
express all charglesse religion, but give never a penny to the afflicted, what
are those the better for all their other virtue? there are but a few of David's
royal spirit, that prefer a duty of charge in Gods service; 2. Sam. 24.24.
who can other then lament that abundance of iniquity in excess of apparel,
building, gaming, and some few sumptuous feasts (exemplifying all Gesner)
should have drunk up the materials of charity, in ancient hospitality, and
relief of the poor, and of piety also, in maintaining the decency of Gods
houses and public worship. Yet true it is, that the proverb of old, and cold
has held in all ages of the Church, the first and best love abating by
degrees, of which blessed Cyprian takes up a heavy complaint of his days,
compared with the Apostolical: Th^^ they sold their houses The simple estate
pra^^tonum at no^c de partimon^o noc decimas damur, et cum vendere jubeat
dominus emimum popius et argemus.
and their lands, and laying up treasure for themselves in heaven, offered the
prices to the Apostles, to be distributed for the uses of the poor, but now we
give not the tith of our patrimony, and when the Lord bids us sell, we buy
rather and turn gatherers.

CHAP. 5.
CHAP. V. Touching a serious encouragement to Alms deeds.
THat the coldness which respectively possesses all parts of Christendom
kill not our charity, inform our selves what heaps of blessing and reward are
assured to it, one little riveret brings us to the ocean of Mercy, Luke 6.37,
38. Our kindness shall with much advantage by all kind of measures be
returned into our bosom, that we may have abundance of solace and inward
content, which our Lord there amplifies with admirable elegancie, worldlings
take every thing with the left hand, and when they are moved to communicate,
say they know not what need they may come to themselves, when they therefore
ought to be pitiful to others because themselves may come to need.
Ingeniously St. BASIL, (...). Sermon. habito (...).
Whether need will ever come or no is uncertain, but sure the time will come
in which you shall repent ye that you did not dispense your wealth. The wise
man says, Eccles. 11.2. Give to fix and also to seven, for thou know no^
what evil may come on the Earth; because such Judgments may come on the
Nation as may overwhelme thee in distresses, therefore whiles thou have
opportunity be distributive with the freest, and give example unto others how
thou would be used thy self, and put something in Gods hand against a need.
Ponder well the words of the Theologue; S. Naz. inter Epist. S. Basil. 138.
(...).
Why should thou treasure up for Thieves and mothes, and mutability of times,
removing and casting uncertain riches one while on one, an otherwhiles on
another.

Would thou have enough and Gods grace, give plentifully, the prevention of
beggary in the seed of the righteous is that he was ever merciful, Psalm.
37.25, 26. Let him give nothing that would be a beggar, or have his beg. God
will not be overcome of us in goodness, but he will far exceed our
liberality. I beseech you let us not have such mean thoughts of our good God
as to imagine we may come our selves to want, by scattering on his waters.
Holy St. Austine shall quit us of that mistrust, B, August. hom. 27. Operarias
Dei es, quando dat indigenti. Qui^ ergo mernas ^ infidelis, ne in tam magus
domo tantus, pater familias non pascat operarium suum.
Thou art Gods workman when thou give to the Poor thou sowest in winter what
thou may reap in summer, why should thou fear then, O thou unbeleever!
lest in so great a house so great a housekeeper should not feed his own
workman.

Can we maintain our selves any ways so well as in Gods work? Can we lay up
any where for our Children any wh^^ so well as in Gods storehouse? Some allege
the multitude of their children and their great charge, for the extennating of
their Charitable works, who for that very -- hoc ipso operari amplius d^beas,
quo mult^rum pig^^^^ pateres, plure^ f^^t pro quibas depreceris -- hoc est
charis pignoribus in posterum providere, ^^^e*
cause in the Judgment of blessed Cyprian, ought to work the me^^, as having
many for whom they must become humble suitors (...) GOD, and this is (...) ^y
engage for and were pledges, this is to provide before hand for our future
heirs according to the faith of holy scripture, saying Junior fui; Psalm. 37. I
have been young. But if God take a child or two from these complainers, they
do not as the fathers press them, and us that would if there had bin the let
of their bounty, send them at least their portions into heaven by the hands of
Christ's receivers, wherefore we may well believe St. ZENO Ista est
infidelitatis excusatio. -- de sustitio p. 125.
that it is but an excuse of unbeleevers.

If a man of worship or credit should speak or write to one that is of
reckoning and wish him to disburse such or such a sum of money, to the poor
about him, and he would take it as a debt and favor, and see him repai'd, the
rich man having many children would not stop his credence and ready laying out
of great sums. And how then would we be thought believers if in like case Gods
word and writing, Gods oath and solemn undertaking prevail not with us? Fitly
to our purpose St. PETER CHRYSOLOGVE sermon. 25. Vsura mundi centum ad unum, Deus
unum accipit ad centum, et tamen homines cum Deo nol^nt habere contractum, sunt
forsan de cautione so^iciti, quare, no^ne homo homini exiguae chartulae
obligatione constringitur? Deus tot and tantis voluminibus cavet, and debtor
non tenetur:
Psalm. 19.17. Men give for use twelve, or ten, or eight in the hundred; God
takes it at an hundred for one, and yet men will have no contract with God,
peradventure they are doubtful of his assurance, why is not man bound to man
by the obligation of a little paper? God gives assurance in so many and great
volumnes and is not held debtor.

St. James the Apostle of mercy is terrible to those monsters amongst men that
live without bowels, Chr. 2, 13. There shall be judgment without mercy to him
that shows no mercy, mere judgment without any ingredients of mercy, God
causing that which is afflictive in the creature, to excruciate the damned, and
suspending in it whatsoever might comfort them. For albeit Gods mercy be over
all his works, and so over all the pains in hell, punishing them there less
then sins deserve: yet is their judgment without mercy, because their
torments are without all mixture or sense of my actual consolation. And is it
not very equal that they should find no mercy at CHRIST'S hands, that were, I
will not say unchristian, but inhumane, as in the common miseries of mankind
to dispractise such mercy, deeds as nature called for and men's abilities might
easily afford, and CHRIST so recommended and fore-declared, that he would
specially proceed by them in his last judgment. ( Iam. 8.6.7) The Lord swears
by his excellency, even that his mercy which is over all and which rewards
above all desert and dignity, Supra condignum.
never to forget them that cruelly use and grind the face of the poor:
unpittifull hard hearted oppressors, not that to men, which righteous men are
to beasts, how should they obtain or expect the least dram of mercy from God?
The unmercifull rich man that was so incompassionate to LAZARUS in his wants
and pains, as to neglect him desiring a crumme of bread, in Gods supreme
equity is himself denied a drop of water to cool his tongue, tormented in
flaming fire, that St. CHRYSOSTOM. might for just cause say, In Phil. sermon. 1. (...)
Eth. (...).
Feed the hungry that ye feed not the fire of Hell.

CHAP. 6
But mercy rejoices over judgment, as a strong evidence of freedom from
condemnation, and of every sovereign virtue to cleanse away sin, Luc. 11.41.
Dan. 4.27. Prove. 22.6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged away. S. Clem.
Apost. Constitut. l. 7 13.
CHRIST'S justifying grace is especially confirmed to them and powerfully works
by them as effectual means. So the blessed Fathers apply, that the ransom of
a man are his riches, and with them the Faithful are said to redeem their
sins in works of mercy, Redemptio hominis di^ ti^ ipsius redime peccata tua
elcemosynis. Dan. 4.
and to do them for the redemption of their sins. Not that an all-sufficient
redemption for all sins is not made in CHRIST, or that any alms can be
pleasing out of Christ's satisfaction, but because the redemption and
satisfaction of CHRIST is made over to us by and for alms deeds, S, Basil.
asc^t. def. contract. qu. 271.
which God accepts in CHRIST as a real penance and revenge for sin, and
virtuous under him to prevent sin, and procure, not only spiritual and
eternal but even temporal blessings. Hence sprang that of the holy Bishop
CAESARIUS, Hom. 22. Miseria pauperum medicame^tum est divitum.
The poor man's misery is the rich man's medicine, because if he duly
accommodate the poor in his misery, there shall be a healing of his own
infirmities God extending mercy to the merciful: the Jews write wittily upon
their poor man's box, which they call (...).
the Coffer of Righteousness, (...) ( Prove. 21.4) A gift in secret pacifieth
wrath: a gift presented our Lord CHRIST in his needy members conduces much to
amity and grace with him, and gets friends.

Luke, 16.9. CHAP. 5.
Our Savior so far dignifies the poor, as to make them the favorites in
his house, that as he is received in them, so they might receive in him
everlasting habitations and the rich be admitted for their sake and good
officers about them, and thence be moved gladly to minister to them, and
reverence them as their Patrons. Hereupon St. ODO S. Odo Cluniacensis. Caecos
and claudos Paradisi asserebat futuras ostiarios Ioh. monachus in vit. ejus, l.
2. c. 4.
affirmed the Blind and Lame to be the Porters of Paradise, the Door keepers
at Heaven gate, for that men enter by their furtherance, and for favors done
them, look then what banding there is among men by presents and suits to gain
the assistance, of them that have hand in preferring to high places, or voice
in election to beneficial and honorable functions, such ambition ought there
to be in Christians, Elegantly St. Hier. os Pammachlus: Supra obitu Paulinae.
Munerari^^ pauperu^ and ege^^^ ^^^didatus sic (...) ad coelum.
by all kind of benevolences to join the goodwill of the poor and miserable
whom our Lord JESUS has ordained his substitutes here to take Alms, hereafter
to receive the Almes-givers into Heavenly Mansions.

CHAP. 6.
CHAP. VI. Touching the manner in which the merciful practice that they may
be blessed.
THe very name mercy intimates that every act thereof has an inner touch of
commiseration, and is from bowels affectionately inclined and earning after the
good of others, as it is recorded of our Lord CHRIST, that in all his doctrines
and miracles he was moved with compassion. Hence the merciful do their good
deeds with that cheerfulness, and expression of true respect and pity, that
the receivers are refreshed, as much in their manner of doing, as in the thing
done. Pure religion contents not it self to give, but visits the distressed
James 1.26) so far as we may with convenience we are to minister unto them
in our own persons, and thereby glorify God in them and comfort them as with
the succor given, so with the honor done them in giving.

Historians deservedly give great applause to the incomparable Princess, the
Empress of Theodosius the Great, that her Majesty would her self visit the
sick and miserable, and prepare relief for them with her own Imperial
hands. Declam. 5. p. 54. Genus ultionis est pastere and non misereri. Voluit
nos ille mortalitatis artifex De^^ in commune succ^rrere, and per mutuas
auxiliorum vices, in altero quenque quid pro se timeret asserere, nondum hac
charitas est, nec personis impensa reverentia, sed fimilium accidentium provili
metus, and communiu^ fortuitorum religiosus horror, in altena fame sui quisque
miseretur.
Quintilian holds it a kind of of revenge to feed and not commiserate, and
adds that God the Artificer of frail nature would have us assist in common
and by mutual returns of help, every one to testify in another, what he is
afraid of for himself, this is not yet charity nor reverence vouchsafed
persons, but provident fear of like casualties, and religious horror of
common accidents in another man's hunger, every one pities himself. Now then
Christians ought not only to have a natural fellow-feeling in other men's
calamities, knowing themselves obnoxious to the like, but a consideration of
CHRIST that suffered for them, and is observed and ministered unto in them. Thus
the first Christians (which St. Chrysostom. also notes, In Rom sermon. 7. in Eth.
(...).
( Acts 4.25) Put not the moneys for which they sold their estates, in the
Apostles hands, but laid them at their feet, declaring their Faith and the
pity and reverence which they bore the Apostles; for they did not apprehend
themselves to give, more then receive: and therefore gave as officiously, as
the most needy use to receive.

2. The grace of this glorious virtue is to be directed with a purity to God
and his glory, and kept free from ostentation and sinister looks at vain
glory and renown among men. Which vice does dangerously shroud it self in
this exercise of Religion, as highly magnified over all the world, and
therefore our Master here put a special caveat against it ( Matthew. 6* 1) and
as cautioned by him, the merciful at the day of judgment, when CHRIST makes
commemoration of ^^eir good deeds, are brought in saying* Lord when did we
minister unto thee (Matthew. 25.37) to approve that their left hand did not know
what their right hand did, that they aimed not at notice in their devotions,
and were, as blessed MACARIUS Hom. 36 page 296. (...).
would have the righteous, how much soever he labor, and how many alms
soever he does to be affected as if he had done nothing.

( Iam. 1.27) It is religion to show mercy because Faith regards Gods will and
worship, and eyes CHRIST in the judgment, and therefore against natural
inclinations inlarges the hand and heart, and overcomes unwillingnesse to give,
he knows not how to administer an alms that thinks it lost if the poor
deserve it not. The Philosopher if he likes not the man, can find in his
conscience to tender manhood, and practice humanity, we must further respect
the godhead in our liberality, and refer to CHRIST what we confer on the
poor; Plus tibi pecunia proderit, si ita deferas pauperi ut conferas Christo.
alms as a sacrifice must be first offered unto God, ( Heb. 13.16) with a
dutiful and holy mind and so communicated to the necessitous. And because we
therein serve God, we are to content our selves with his acceptance, and not
slack our hand, though men be ingrate and misprize our works. It was nobly
resolved by St. ISIDORE PELUSIOTE, Lib. 3. Epist. 390. (...), etc.
I would gladly be a Benefactour to all, and endure punishment as one that
injured all, rather then be injurious unto any and be crowned and renowned, as
a benefactour to all.

3. The Righteous is merciful with discretion, and improves his best wisdom
in distributing, so as may be most profitable to men, and honorable to CHRIST,
Origin in Matthew. tract. 31. p. 183.
especially of Church goods, and that which is sacred to Religious uses, he
reckons it high providence to be ever laying up something in Gods treasury,
and assents to the blessed Prelate Manus pauperis gazophylacium Christi est,
hom. 2.
CAESARIUS, that the poor man's hand is CHRIST'S jewell-house. And howbeit God
has not put the measure of our alms doing under necessity of command that
somewhat might be left to our devotion, and our voluntary abounding in
contributions known pleasing God to be the more rewardable, yet seeing the
Jews (besides many extraordinaries) were to give a disme to the poor, all
indifferency binds us under the Gospel, to exceed what was prescribed them
under the Law, because of free promises and times of greater grace, and our
exemption from much expense in sacrifices and Leviticall purifications.

This makes the wise Christian to rejoice, when an occasion of doing good is
tendered him, and to look out for opportunities of dealing Mercy ( Psalm.
41.1) Blessed is he which considers the Poor, and tarries not till the needy
crave his charity. One man in his need will seek to thee, thou must seek and
find another necessity: which holy St. AUGUSTINE In Ps. 146. (...) qui
intelligit superagenum and pauper^^ non expectat ut peta^, ali^ te quo ^r^^
in^^gens, alium tu (...) quaerere indig^^^^. Tanquam deli^^^^ fisco red^endum.
affirms. Men will never do, except they constantly lay aside something
according to their Revenues, as it were a duty that must be paid the King, so
CHRIST had his Bag -- render to CAESAR that which is Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods. Let God have his tenths, his subsidia pro pauperibus. And
in their Alcoran they have a saying, that if men knew what a heave^ly thing it
were to distribute alms, they would not spare their own flesh, but slice it
into carbonadoes, and give it to the poor.
I have read that the Turks are wont to send their servants abroad purposely
to hearken among their neighbors, which of them have most need of victuals,
money, raiment* who shall condemn Christians that divert objects requiring
mercy and moving to pity. Luc. 10.13.

4. The right performer of mercy shows it in simplicity, as with a single eye
to God, against all by-respects, so with a single eye to his estate, against
all vain excuses, of such as have to waste on their lusts in riotous excesses,
have nothing for Christ in pious uses. As men can find money for unnecessary
lawing and to satisfy their idle humors, and we hear no great complaint of
wants, till we come to motion for CHRIST. But as St. AMBROSE Ser. 36. Cum
dixeris ut aliquid pauperibus largiantur, statim tibi objicinat, necessitates
insi^ita suut, tributa sunt gravia, fiscalia explicare non possumus, and tanta
tibi ingerunt, ut quasi reum te statuant, quod hoc illos minoris comm^nere, non
intelligentes quod omnibus necessitatibus necessitas solutis (...) praefer^^d^,
finely sets them out, when once you speak that they would give something to
the poor, presently they allege against you, that infinite necessities are
upon them, grievous tributes and taxations, that they are not able to pay their
compositions and other rates, and heap so many things against you, that they
would almost conclude you criminal that you would so much as monish them of
such a business, little understanding that the necessity of saving souls
should be preferred before all necessities.

Now the simplicity we treat of is, in filling up the defects of other with
all that is not requisite to the decency of our own state and vocation, which
appears equal in all reason, for when by right of nature all things were
common, that the division made by Law of nations, CHAP. 7.
may stand with justice, and not be dammagious to the more part of men: they
who abound, are tied to supply the want of others out of their abundance.
Whence CLEMEN^ ALEXANDRINUS learnedly describes, Paed. l. 3. c. 11^ (...).
Singleness a virtue substracting all superfluities, when we detain nothing
idle by us, but what we do not need, bestow on others for their use. Pro.
3.27. Withhold not good from the owners thereof, to whom it is due: which
justifies the assertion of St. AU^USTIN, In Psalm. 47. Res alienae possidentur,
cu^ superflua possidentur*
other men's goods are withheld when superfluities are possessed. Be we therefore
merciful as our heavenly father is merciful, perfect as he is perfect. He is
perfect that has nothing defectuous, nothing superfluous, we are then in our
proportion perfect, when we are content, and feign no causeless want, when we
are communicative and keep no superfluity.

CHAP. VII. Concerning inducements to works of Mercy.
1. MErcy is a weighty matter of the Law, ( Matthew. 23.23) a substantial duty
which many commandments much drive at, and has a precedence above other
virtues related to our Neighbors, as most resembling God in goodness, to
which it is proper to be diffusive and participate it self to subjects
needing, and capable thereof; and in power to fill up the emptiness and lack
of indigent creatures without impoverishing it self, as In Ep 10. Inter
Faustinas, charity, ad similitudi^em divinitatis, d^t quod habet, habetque
quod dederit.
Graecus says, that charity in similitude of the Deity, gives what it has,
and has what it gives.

Mercy is proper to God he ownes it in special manner, and styles himself the
Father of mercy, as taking cause from himself to show mercy, not of judgment
as receiving inforcement from us to practice Pater misericordiarum, non
ultionu^, quia miserendi causam sumit ex proprio, judicandi ex nostro. S. Bern.
in not. dom. sermon. 5.
severity: and God declares his Almightinesse chiefly in showing mercy, and
magnifying it over all his works, in the supporting them in their being (
Psalm. 144.9) and in that his omnipotency provoked can forbear and be kind to
the ill deserving, and punish the worst, less then their demerits, and so
exalt mercy over all his works, titles and attributes, as the brightest
mirror of divine nature and goodness. In mercy therefore is our best
resemblance of God, and for that reason mercy invests men in the venerable name
of God, Hoc in Deo praecipuum est, hoc in potente laudandum, non coelu^ fecisse
qui potens est, sed misericordem esse qui justus est, sed miserentem esse qui
Rex est, sed dissimulantem esse, qui Deus est. S. Hilar. in Ps. 145.
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh is the Lords words to Moses, when he put
him in ability to do good (Exodus 7.1) That Iustine Martyr might determine him
an imitator of God, who supplying to the needy whatsoever he has received of
God, is made a God to them that receive of him. Hereupon Kings are called Gods
because of their dominion, Ep. ad Dioguetum.
and latitude of power, to slow into, defend and succor whole Countries and
Nations, and hence he that is made by another is named his creature, and he
that raises a man is termed his maker, and he that releeves is said to
recreate. It is virtues part to be an agent rather Truly considering Aristotle's
Maxim, Eth. l. 4.1.
then a patient of goodness, and the Apophthegme of our merciful Savior ( Act.
20) It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. We ought as St.
Gregory the Divine observes, S. Naz. (...). p. 138. 139.
to render a thank-offering to God, that we are of them that be able to be good
doers, not of them that need to be receivers: and must understand our selves
deficient in mercy, until we come to take greater delight in ministering to
others in their necessity, then we would in being ministered unto in our own
adversity.

2. It has affinity with the matter foregoing, and availes much to strike
impressions of mercy on the rich, if they shall but seriously po^der, what a
great blessing it is to them that there are poor. We may boldly aver with
Chrysostom. that without poverty riches are unprofitable, Hom. 15. ad Pop.
if like Adam and Eve, we had a whole world but no body to make ready provision
and attend upon us, what joy could great men have of their riches, if there
were not poor men to do mean offices for them (1. Cor. 12.22) the members of
the body which are less honorable are most necessary, so of the body politic
and ecclesiastical, if superiors had not subjects, to grace them with their
service, their very dignity would be dishonorable; upon this ground the Prince
of Apostle wills us to honor all men. 1. Pet. 2.17. observing there is none
that excels us not in some gift, and what l^^ employments the highest should
descend to, if there were not inferior to perform them how than should not a
considerat man be respective and free to them in their need, that are so
needful. Hermus that St. Paul greets with a salute by name. Romans 16. Largely
deduces, that Lib 3. Simil. 2.
seeing the rich thrive by benefit of the poor man's Prayer begging daily bread
for them, therefore it is meet they should impart their wealth with them, that
their bowels may bless them, and spirits be quickened in devout supplications
for them, and God that despises not the poor hear their orisons for them,
and so the rich support the poor as the elm the vine, and the poor lade the
rich with fruits as the vine the Elm.

3. It is the highest preferment of riches, and our best providence to employ
them in service to God and duties of mercy, which turns the Mammon of
unrighteousness into means for godliness; and of the furniture for
covetousness makes provisio^ for mercifulness, you may believe St. Zeno, gold
and silver are money if you lay them out, Idols if you hoord them up. De
avaritia ser. 2. Si erogaveris pecunia est, si servaveris simulachra. Sed haec
de avaris, non ad avaros.
He had a blessed auditory, who preaching against unmercifull creatures and
slow of giving, could say, But th^se things of the covetous, not to the
covetous; those things to you brethren, but not concerning you; for our poor
have forgot how to beg, our widows make wills, and more might I say in
commendation of your blessedness, if ye were not mine.

This renders wealth true riches, when it promotes our account and reckoning
with God, then are riches justly called goods, when they are instrument all to
good uses, but let them that pervert and detain them from being service^ble to
Christ and his poverty, listen to the glorious Martyr Cyprian L. ^. Epist. 2.
Possident ad hoc tantam ne possidere alteri liceat, and O nominum quanta
diversitas! bona appellant e^quibus nullus illis* nisi ad res malas usus est*
they possess only to keep others out of possession, and O the contradiction
that they make in adjects and names, they call those goods which they make no
use of, but to evil purposes. This likewise is our best providence, and
constitutes men truly rich, for Lactantius is therein L. 5. 16. Divites sunt
non qui divitias habent, sed qui utuntur illis ad opera justitiae.

Dives in Ecclesia est, qui pauperi, non sibi dives est. S. Ambr. Ep. 82.


right, not all that have riches, but that improve them to works of
righteousness, they are the rich.

That which we keep must be left to others, that which we dispense is eternally
our own, hence came that of St. Eucher, in his most godly and eloquent Epistle
to Valerian, Si amas te, proximum dilige, quia nihil magis commodis tuis dabis
quam quod contuleris alienis.
If thou love thy self be kind to thy Neighbor, for thou can not more
advantage thy self then in profiting him. And that of Ennodius to Symmachus
the Pope: He erres that supposes a conscience near, L. 4. Ep. 8. Errat qui Deo
proximan^ consc^enri^m credit commodis invitari, detrimentum est sanctae
voluntati non exhibere beneficium, sula pu^aris lucra, qu^e vobis de
liberalitate nascuntur, qui divitias dum ^ribuitis a^cipiti^.
and inward with God, to be allured by advantage, it is damage to a holy will
not to bestow favors, you esteem them the only gains which renew to you of
liberality, who receive wealth in giving. We have what we give and can always
have no more then we give, now after the pretty saying of Bishop Ruricios, He
loves not goods that would not have them always, he shall depart a Beggar out
of this world, that sends not his portion before out of his estate unto
eternal bliss. The more men transport into the land of the living the richer
they are to Godward* L. 2. Ep. 47. Mendicus de hoc ^u^do discedet* nisi do
rebus suis portionem suam ad aeternam beatitudinem ante praemiserit.
who can other then admire the incredible wealth of St. JOHN the Elcemosynarie
Patriarch of Alexandria, that dyed one of the richest that ever was read of, as
appears by his last will and testament* Vit. ejus c. 48.
I thank thee O Lord my God, that they have counted me worthy to render thine
to thee, and that of the goods of the world, there remains with me but the
third part of a penny, which also I bequeath to the poor that are my brethren
in CHRIST. Beloved, why should we not be ever giving since we shall carry
nothing with us, only if we have done good works, we shall carry them with us
to the heavens, or rather as St. ELIGIUS speaks, they will carry us with them
to heaven. O^^ra ta^tumneo in b^n^ si egerimus, ipsa nobiscum ad coelos
po^ta^imus, imo nos ipsa ad coelum portahunt. apud B. Aud^enum in vit. ejus.


4. L^stly, we may meditate how alms and acts of mercy for their prelation
above other virtues have appropriated to themselves the name of charity,
devotion, good deeds, good works, because there is no true religion without
them. Nay if we go no further then nature leads, this virtue bears the name of
humanity, as very proper to men, and because the more humane people be, and
instructed in liberal arts and sciences, the more tender hearted and
merciful; hence in all Greece mercy had an Altar, and was adored only at
Athens Pausanias in Atti^is p. 49 (...).
the Nurcery of learning and humanity. So both Christianity and humanity
enforce mercy upon us, if we would be found true in either; wherefore the
Apostles mutually exhort each other to remember the poor ( Gal. 2.10) And
sithence all the holy Fathers and Doctors have urged nothing so much on
Christians, as Almsdeeds and works of mercy. And the Lord JESUS in the
representation of his proceedings, at the last judgment specifies mercy alone
for the grace eternized with his co^memoration.

All which considered, as we have faculty and opportunity, let us do good to
all especially to the household of Faith (Gal. 6.10) do good without exception
to worthy and S. Isaac Presb. Antioch. de contempt^ mundi. c, 8. c, 52.
unworthy, as St. ISAAC admonishes, by that means thou may bring the
unworthy to good, because the soul it quickly drawn by temporals unto the
fear of God: goodness is of a victorious nature, yet in this case the
prescript of St. GREGORY is seasonable, to give panem refectionis, cum verbo
correptionis, double food to him that sought, but single instruction for his
soul with refectio^ for the body. A benevolence kindly exhibited insinuates a
wise reproof into the heart, removes prejudices from the mind against our
good meaning, and opens the inmost affections to receive information.

Do good especially to Orthodoxe and sound believers: For it is seemly to
follow God; and where he gives his spirit and best gifts, there to multiply our
chief^ collations. The wicked leaving, what in them is, the godly to wants,
discover it to be but an evasion, when they pretend to give no more, because
^he needy are ungrate and undeserving. To him that is not of the world but of
the Church St. Chrysostom. offers a rich thought, think To^* 5. ser. 4:
with thy self if heaven were ready to fall, and God should honor thee so
far, as to give thee power to support it, would thou not conceive it a
great glory? So now God vouchsafes thee a greater, to sustain that which he
respects more then Heaven, his faithful members of whom the world is not
worthy. Heb. 11.38. If all the good of the world were weighed against one of
them, his worth would overpoise and weigh it down. To contribute to the Saints
is so high a service, that the great Apostle desires the earnest prayers of the
Church, that he might be pleasing to them in his ministration ( Romans 15.25.31)
It is a noble function to be as Ratbert witnesses St. Adelhard was,
Thesaurarius pauperum. in vit. S. Adelhard. c. 13.
Treasurer for the Poor. To be a Kings Almoner is a great dignity, and shall
it not be honor to be Almes-givers to the God of Heaven, nay to give Alms to
the King of Heaven, feasting in the refreshed bowels of a Saint.

FINIS.
BEATI MVNDO CORD. THE PVRE. A TREATISE OF PVRITIE, handling the Sixth
Beatitude.

BY JAMES BUCK, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes: and yet
is not washed from their filthiness. Ier. 51.7. Calix aureus Babylon. Quoniam
qui a veritate deficit, quarit illec^bram ut specie saltem pretiosa ad bibendum
aliquos illicere possit. B. Ambr. de Elia and jejunio. c. 15. NON SVM MELIOR
PATRIBVS. LONDON, Printed by B.A. and T. F. for JOHN CLARK, and WILL: COOK:
1637.

BEATI MVNDO CORD.
MATTHEW. 5.8. Blessed are the Pure in heart.
CHAP. I. Of the subject to be purified.
Our Ma^^er is very Methodicall in propounding the ^^^^^^des; (...) after that
of mercy, which d^^h most accomplish the practique life; lays forth this of
Purity, that (has correspondence with the gift of understanding, and) does
be^^ dispose the contemplative. And purity (...) justly (...) ^^de of Mercy, as
which (...) of in the intention, (...), 27. CHAP. 1.
And mercy is of a very purging virtue. Prove. 22.6. and cleansing the soul of
uncharitable humors, apts it for embracing and following all truth in love,
after the saying of blessed CHROMATIUS; The Merciful that carry the eyes of
their heart sincere and clear even to their adversaries, may plainly without
let or watering behold the unapproachable brightness of GOD, for that
clearenesse of conscience and purity of heart, suffer no Cloud betwixt the
Lord and our sight.

In this Beatitude there is a gracious preparing of the mind for God; Blessed
are the pure in heart, and a glorious revealing of God to the mind: for they
shall see God, in the preparation you have the matter disposed, the heart and
the manner pure.

To the matter RICHARD VICTORINUS a Schooleman of rare contemplations, says,
That a reasonable In lib. de Patriarcbis.
soul is the chief and principle glass wherein to see God. This the Israel
of God must continually hold, wipe, look on; hold, lest falling down, it sink
to the earth in love; wipe, lest it be soiled with the dust of vain thoughts;
look on, that it divert not the eye and intention, to vain studies, but keep
at home and learn to know it self, and in it self, God. When the Lord in
Scripture calls for the heart, he means thereby the powers of the reasonable
Soul understanding and will. And so CHRIST blesses the pure in heart, because
that is the springhead of rational performances: And therefore all ope^^^^^ns
being from faculties, if they be purified from carnal and secular affections
and aims, the whole man shall be ordered unto God, as if the fountain be
pure, the streams run clear; hence ( Matthew. 23.26) our Lord wills us to
cleanse that which is within, that the outside may be claue also: Druthmar in
Matthew.
and ( Prove. 4.23) We are required above all keepings to keep our heart,
because an estimate is took of our works by the state thereof. And it matters
more how the heart affects, then what the hand acts, whether in good or
evil: cleanse we then our hands, cleanse our mouths, but above all cleansings
cleanse our hearts.

But who can say his heart is pure? Well in our Saviors meaning? They are pure
in heart, these heart does not smite them with remorse of deadly sin, and who
intend and endeavor against all sin; which is to cleave to God with purpose
of heart, and serve him with all the heart. Dissemblers and their sacrifices
are monsters in religion, because without an heart, and therefore prodigious
and fatal to themselves. The Harlot wipes her mouth, lip-laver and lip labor
is the hypocrites work, he washe^ his face and makes that shine, But wash thy
heart, O Jerusalem: if thou would have the signification of thy name, sight
of peace: for none but the pure in heart shall see God, nor enter into his rest.

Cant. 8.6. Set me as a feale upon thy heart, (...) soul upon thy arm: and
elsewhere a sense in (...) upon the fore head, as St. Ambrose (...) CHRIST
Delsant c. 8. Si^^ ^^^^lam Christus i^ f^^^ to ut semper conf^reamur, in cord
^e semper diligamus, in (...), ut semper apurant^^.
(...) ever confess, on the heart, that we may ever love, on the hand, that we
may ever labor. Wash we then our sace that we may witness a good confession,
wash our feet because we cannot stir abroad and converse in the world, but
we shall contract some soil, though our heart be right, and our intent holy,
Ioh. 13. Wash our hands ( Iam. 4.8. in innocence which are the instruments of
external operations, but most of all wash we our hearts, that are the
worke-houses of internal actions.

Read Lev. 1.6.8.13. They were to flea their burnt offerings, and cut them in
pieces, and wash their inwards and their legs. St. CYRIL of Alexandria Ho^.
pasch. 22. p. 240 (...).
writes, that the fleaing off the skin was a riddle of naked discovery, for
nothing at all in as is hid, nor does any thing lie latent from the divine and
pure eyes of God, but that pierces to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirit, Woe is me, that what is latent in me, is not as what is patent. S.
Ephrem. conf. and reprehensio suiipsius. p. 69.
of the joints and marrow, and that is the cutting of the creature in pieces.
Besides that, he injoynes the inwards and feet to be washed, which our Redeemer
expounds for us, saying; Blessed are the pure in heart. We then for our parts
are to flea our sacrifices, not to rest in the superficies and outside of a
good life, and bare appearances of good, but to reprove our hearts if the best
side be outward, and our inmost intentions, affects and endeavors, equal not
our external shows. We are also to cut them in pieces, that is to examine
all and singular the actions of our whole conversation, lest vices should
conceal themselves under semblance of virtues. To wash the legs, CHAP. 2.
any thing that comes near the earth; to wash the inwards, all the principles
of operation: Many have a demure look, a fine face, and a white skin, but
flea them and you shall find their inwards full of avarice, deceit, pride,
faction, and all uncharitableness.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Purity.
THat briefly of the subject to be prepared, there follows the manner of
preparing the heart, to wit, by Purity; which I will open in declaration of the
quality, the excellency, the necessity, the maintenance, and the sufficiency
thereof, for apting the soul unto the sight of God.

The nature of Purity, is to preserve the soul unspotted from the world, and
all things therein that it may be absolute for GOD, that all our desires be
neither to earthly things, nor heavenly things, but to GOD alone: that no
creature in heaven or earth, may intervene between God and our hearts, but
that they be reserved entire, free, and ever ready for God, which purification
(as Lupus Abbas Epist. 30. Crassu^ gla^coma nostris obductu^ oculis putimur.
testifies) faith begin^ here, charity finisheth hereafter. Psalm. 73 25. Wh^^^
have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
that, (...) (...) the hope of (...) happiness (...) of any heavenly creature,
or in the contents of any worldly excellency, and not in God that made us, our
eyes are ever-runne with a thick filme, we cannot see God. Purity does away
those scales, affects exact correspondence with God, averts all alienation from
him, more then any death; it abhorres the least spot of the flesh, but
specially strives to keep all corruption from the heart, that the vital and
principal parts may be untainted, most of all it purges the spirit from
inordinate affects and passions that molest and distract the soul, and so
confound the senses that it cannot receive the impression and resemblance of
God. It strives daily to refine the thoughts, and spiritualiz^ the intellect,
that cleared of fancies and errors, and all created imaginations, it may the
more desire to be immediately joined and become one spirit with him that it
apprehends above all apprehension.

Attend the voice of David's pure soul, Psalm. 16.2. My Soul thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my God: after the true interpretation of IDIOTA, Idiota
in Psalm. 15.
A man has that for his God, which he has for his chief good, and he has
that for his chief good, in which he a conceives all good, which if he have
alone, he thinks himself happy, and which alone if he wants, he holds
himself miserable. The soul is purged that can s^y to God, thou art my God,
because God alone suffices it. So that if there were propounded to it all the
Kin^domes of the ^orld, all the goods an (...), all the good in heaven, yet
would it not our offend God to have them all.

The blessed Apostle ( Romans 8.35.3^) makes a royal expression of a ^ur^
spirit, wherein he signifies that purity causes t^^ heart to adhere in that
wise unto God, as no creature possible can divert the love there of from God in
CHRIST, which St. CHRYSOSTOM De compunct. in sermon. 1.
inlargeth in a most lofty and divine rapture to this effect. Nothing can
separate a pure heart from GOD, not all the felicity not all the misery of
this present world, not all the glory, not all the pains of the world to come,
not though he should fall from Heaven, and be cast into hell, which St. PAUL
means by height and depth: not possibilities, as life, death, famine, sword;
not impossibilities, as for Angels, Principalities, Powers, to join together
and end^^vour the diversion of his heart from God, ^ot (...) other creature.
Thus he amplifies his love, intimating that not only all things which really
exist cannot divide it from GOD, but no other thing that might be should be
able to estrange it. If God should create more excellent creatures then any
are, how excelling soever they should never alienate the affection of a pure
heart from the Lord himself.

That of DE K^MRIS agrees with the experience of a Spiritual man. De
imitatione Christi, l. 2. c. 6.
Refusal to be ^^^forted by any creature is a sign of great Purity and
inner repose. The pure h^^rt denies conjunction with any creature and (...)
above, (...) after the (...) of God himself (...) of his (...) aside Riches,
CHAP. 3.
Honor, Pleasure, Earth and Heaven, Angels, Archangels, Cherubin, Seraphin,
stand you also aside. It is immediate union with God himself, and the sweet
confirmations of his love made by himself in his own person that I seek, and
which alone can content me.

CHAP. III. Of the Excellency of Purity.
WOrthily RADULPHUS FLAVIACENSIS on Lev. 21.28. Whatsoever living thing is
consecrated to God, it must dye; They that are CHRIST'S crucify the flesh, and
the affections thereof: let men therefore praise their Fastings, their
Watchings, their relieving the Poor, their visiting the Sick (sancta sunt
ista omnia) these things are all holy, but if any purifying his conscience
before God, mortify the vices thereof (hoc sanctum sanctorum est) this is the
holy of holies, whose praise is not of men but of God.

Naturally, look how much more excellent any creature is, so much more simple
and pure: and the most perfect condition of the creature is to retain its
simplicity and be purged from all things adventicall and meaner then it self,
By Purity the Soul returns in Gods help to its original integrity.
and this none can be ignorant of, that any (...) in polluted by mixture of
that which is baser then it self, as gold by that of silver, wine by that of
water, whence PLATO (...).
defines purity, a separation of the worse from the better. Now for that all
things in the world are inferior to the soul, the mingling it self in them
defiles it: and as it separates from them it grows purer, and more accommodate
for God. In like sort things are improved by ingredience of that which is
better then themselves, as other metals by that of gold. Judge then what the
prerogative of Purity is, whereby the soul inheres in God, and comes to be
one with him that is infinitely good.

It is an elegant observation of St. VINCENTIUS Domin. 15: ser. 15.
that a Pope or Emperor receives more honor from being Gods servant, then a
commander of men: because every creature that is middle, between inferior and
superior, takes greater dignity from subjection to the superior, then by
dominion ever the inferior; as water takes pollution from the earth,
purification from the air. If there were any grace diviner then Purity, GOD
that i^ the Ocean of all perfections, would not from it be called light, and
call his (...) Children lights, as keeping their Purity in co^^^^t
ge^erations, as the Sun beams do theirs, when they shine on most impure
places, th^^ holy Eph^^^ De perfections M^na^^i. p. 474.
gives the reason, Blessed (...) the p^^e in he^^^, because like the Sun,
they shine even in darkness.

Albeit our God and Savior has not in vain the name admirable, and all
things that are his are wonderful: Nevertheless, nothing so ta^es Saints as
his holiness, and bears them into eternal admiration. Psalm. 57.4.10. Holy
DAVID in God praises his word, magnifies more the goodness and holiness of
God in his word, then his highness and greatness in the world, and therefore
gives the book of Scripture the prelation to the book of Nature. The holy
Angels that are of all creatures the nearest to God, and see him in his light;
cry holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Psa. 6 3. Rev 4.8. Thrice holy Father,
Son, and blessed Spirit, as admiring God for his holiness, and rejoicing
therein to be like unto him.

The Seraphims that have high degree among Angels, burn most in the love of
God, and sing most in the praise of his holiness, crying, to utter vehement
affection in them, and joyful adoration of the holiness so repeated by them; the
holy Angels and perfected spirits, might cry all and only wise, omniscient;
and innumerable other Epithors of divine exaltation, but without ceasing, they
reiterate the memorial of holiness, as most pleasing to God of all his
titles, and for the honor whereof he principally ordained the greatest of all
his works, Gods incarnation, and man's redemption. Whence we may be astonished
considering the dullness of lapsed man, that having possibility and
commandment to be holy as God is holy, nills that, but would feign be like God
in greatness, not in goodness, forgetting that the devil and man sell, for
that the (...) and the other as St. GREGORY In Job. l. 29. c. 6. Esse Deo
similis non per justitiam* sed per potentiam concupivit.
notes, CHAP. 6.
was affectate to be like God, not in purity, but in power: men are desirous
to follow CHRIST on the water but not on dry ground, ambitious to be like him
in miraculous actions, not studious to take after him in the moral.

But whatever carnals may fancy, who so as have any sense of holiness, desire
likeness therein to God above all other things that are excellent, and wherein
they might possibly resemble God. For Beloved, ponder all the degrees wherein
it is possible for men to be like God: are they like him in being? So are
stones. Are they like him in motion? So are stars. Are they like him in life?
So are trees. Are they like him in sense? So are beasts. Are they like him in
reason? So are Devils. There remains only being like him in Grace, and so are
none but Saints and Angels. Why then resolve we not, that the best that can be
in the Creature, is to be pure as GOD is pure?

To be pure God, is impossible for the creature, and sicut Deus, to be pure as
God, is the next altitude thereunto, hence that word ( Psalm. 80.6) I have said
you are Gods, is by the Fathers applied to the adopted and sanctified, as
advanced to the highest representation of God. The Ar^^pagite among others
passes this sentence: D. Dionysus de Ecclesiastica hierarchi^. c. 1.
There is no other way to salvation, but for him that would come to salvation
to become a God. And what would he be (...) not be a God (...) would he wish to
(...) regards not to be like God. CHAP. 3.
We say of those that are eminently gracious, that they have much of God in
them, and the holy man is styled the man of God, Virtues what are they, Lib. 4.
cap. 80. (...), to be void of anxiety, duplicity, impuriti^.
to speak with St. Damascene, other then Characters of the divine nature. Is
not Purity and holiness the first and best robe of our nature, the grace of
Gods image us? We would be angry that any should deface and defile our
portraiture, and do we imagine that God has not indignation, that we suffer
his image to be polluted in us, yea by us? Well might St. GREGORY NAZIANZEN be
so urgent, Sermon. 4. (...).
Let us fear only one thing, to fear any thing more then God, and to
disgrace his good image with our naughtiness. The Psalmist has not in vain
joined, holy and reverend is his name, Psalm. 111.9. But for insinuation that no
quality strikes such reverence on others, as that of holiness.

Let no man despise thy youth (1. Tim. 4.12) but be an example to believers in
all purity: which will raise thee above contempt. Doubtless there are not upon
the earth any such despisers of true sanctity as Machiavellians, yet Herod whom
CHRIST surnamed the Fox, Mark. 6.20. for his subtilty in the craft of a
profane Politician, that HEROD observed the Baptist with much reverence and
fear, because he knew him a just man. Purity and righteousness is a ray of
divinity, and therefore imprints more awe and admiration upon beholders, then
riches, honor, strength, bea^^^^, eloquence, learning, or any (...)
qualification.

CHAP. IV. CHAP. 4.
How Purity is caused and maintained.
Ye have purified your hearts by obeying the truth, 1. Pet. 1.22. The
regenerate are renewed in the holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4.24. Holiness
effected by truth, error pollutes; (...)
it is truth that purifies, and right Catholic says, Act, 15.9. Sanctify
them in thy truth, Ioh. 17.17. And the truth that sanctifies is not that of
Philosophy and humane demonstration, but that of scripture and divine
revelation, this truth purifies, as it is taught and proposed by holy Church,
which is therefore the Pillar and foundation of truth, 1. Tim. 3.17. Whereupon
in the Creed after the holy Catholic Church, succeeds the communion of
Saints, because there is no true sanctity, save in the holy Catholic Church,
the best in Heretics and Schismatickes is hypocrisy and superstition.

Now if any wonder that such should live precisely, let him understand that
heresy and schism ( Gal. 5.20) are fruits of the flesh, and therefore
consonant to corrupt nature and not crossing the reign of sin, and in that
regard has the (...) and our flesh are not against (...) so for demureness
and (...) grace them. Whereas (...) against (...) back, and the devil hinders
admitting and living in accord to them. Not to go far for instance, you see
the judaizing sabbatarians and ridiculous pointers as more erroneous, exceed in
pretense of sanctimony and zeal the hottest unconformitants. Thus of old
Nestorius and Eutyches, and well nigh every ringleader of untruths, ushered in
their accursed falsehoods with great sedulity in preaching and appearance of
devotion. The Scribes and Pharisees were a generation of vipers, for that they
taught pestilent opinions, that destroyed their Mother Church, and poisoned
their followers, yet they had a righteousness, and very bewitching and popular
shows of godliness.

Upon these grounds I will satisfy, if they will be satisfied, the Patronesses
of unsound and schismatic speakers, and no readers; that make allegation
that our Parishes are full of notorious ill-livers, and unclean creatures,
when as the places where their teachers exercise are most reformed. First, they
shall give me leave to demand this question of them, whether were better the
Scribes and Pharisees, or the Publicans and sinners? And I dare say for them
that the Publicans and sinners whose vices were indefendible, and written in
their faces, were nothing so ill nor dangerous as the Scribes and Pharisees,
who leavened their Country ^^^h a venomous Creed, and graced their new arti^^^s
with civility and curious demeanor of themselves, the bane of whose doctrine
was more perilous then the contagion of the others life. CHAP. 5.
Then to return them answer, we confess that too many in our Churches are
rotten and unsavory members, for whose amendment we preach and daily pray,
expecting their conversion in Gods time, for the interim while they abide in
the obedience of the Church, their skin is more foul, but their minds are not
so corrupt as be those of the factious Brethren, that resist the Truth, abhor
the Discipline, despise the government of the Church, withstand antiquity,
introduce many prejudicial novelties against the Sacraments and diverse others
weighty points of Religion. Our stray Sheep run their own riotous and wrong
ways, but they think not themselves wiser then the whole Church and State.
You shall have of the wildest of them, that will not against all reason and
godly manners; sit at the Gospel, at the Creed, at the Lords Prayer, at the
Confession and Absolution of their sins, their spirits are not so remote from
inclination to our Savior as n^^ to bend their bodies, and yield some
observable obeisance at his venerable name JESUS.

Lord that many of these who insult over others as impure, should not attend
how they defile themselves in the very midst and means of their purity! Tho
they hear much, yet gadding from their own leaders to unlearned declai^ers,
are they not unclean, tho they strictly keep (to speak to them in their
language) Sabbath; yet if they profane Holidayes, established by good
authority though they make long prayers in private houses, CHAP. 6.
yet if they contemn the most religious prayers of the Church, are they not
unclean, though they receive often, yet if it be with that abominable
irreverence which I dread to mention plainly, are they not most unclean?

Sectaries would persuade the eluded world, that our Preachers are enemies to
perfect Christians, because they are as vehement against them, as they be
against people of open misdemeanour.

But they may, and the whole world with them take witting, that the faithful
dispensers of CHRIST, do to their power cry down all the sins of the time,
and that their Lord has in special required that they should not spare but
cry aloud, and lift up their voice like a Trumpet, Esa. 58.1.2. to the
conviction of Hypocrites; and that our sweet Savior himself, was most bitter
against them, and said not, W^e be to the Drunkards, we be to the Fornicators,
etc. for they denied not their sins to be sins, they made it not conscience
to practice them; whereas he many a time redoubled, W^e be to you Hypocrites,
Scribes, and Pharisees hypocrites; because they bore out their courses for
pious, and defended their opinions and practices as expedient to life.

No marvel then, if we be tender of them that conf^sse their sins, and
insinuate lovingly to break them (...) they acknowledge evil, and force the
Word more earnestly upon the conscience of disobedients, that maintain their
doings good, and that think none good do otherwise.

They complain that their Professors are discountenanced in all parts, and
will not regard the reason thereof, that they no sooner begin to profess but
they turn practisers against the Church, take up contrariant opinions,
distaste her Orders, dispraise her Governors, and at least in every corner
murmr and groan against her, and which of all things she most abominates,
upon their knees they twice a day beg that she might be metamorphosed into
another Amsterdam.

When as in all ages Spiritual men, St. ANTONY, St. BENET, St. BERNARD
honored their Churches and Rulers, brought in no new opinions, nor orders for
Gods public worship. All their care was to excel others in Piety and
sequestration from the world, they were for their Churches, and Churches were
for them, and they that could not equalize did canonize them.

Had they in their Pulpits and Celles, nothing but exclaimed against the
received doctrines and ceremonies of the Church, the Bishops and Clergy that
interred them under Altars, would have thought it honor enough to have buried
them as St. Gregory did an hypocritical Monk, under a dunghill.

CHAP 5.
Pass in your thoughts over Seas, believe me not if there be any Church in the
world endures like use, what should I remember Rome, Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, Russia, Armenia? Will the Lutherans tolerate any that are
known to disallow their Doctrines, disuse their rites? Will Geneva suffer any
that approve not all her Doctrines, observe not all her orders? And shall the
Church of England much more agreeable to the Primitive Church then they are,
cherish in her bosom those that would eat out her bowels, be in her, but not
of her? Let our Complainers, as godly men have done in former ages, and now do
in other Churches, reverence their mother Church, teach her doctrines, use and
commend her Ceremonies, honor her grave Fathers and learned Clergy.
Themselves and their disciples differ from others but only in purity and study
to please God, and then if any open their mouth or hold up their hand against
them, all our Preachers and Magistrates will be for them; otherwise let them be
silent if they be silenced, and excuse our Governors, if they punish their
untruths and unconformities, and us if for Sions sake we cannot hold our
peace, and for Ierusalems sake we cannot but maintain the integrity of our
Mother.

Nor let them take on as if they were adversaries to Purity, that disfavour
Puritanitie, which assumes some form of godliness to repugne the truths of
GOD, and credit the dissensions and troubles that they make in the Church and
State. Nay we are and God forbid we should not to the utmost be exhorters to
Purity, CHAP. 4.
and reverencers of the pure in heart and life. And beloved, why will ye not
all be of their honorable company, that are pure of heart and conscience? If
any say he would but he cannot, let GERSON Tom. 2. Sermon. 1. I^ festo omnium
Sanctorum. Si dicis vellem benefacere, vellem mundus esse conscientia, vellem
abstinere a peccatis, sed neque^, ^oli frater dicere nequeo, sed ^^lo, certe
potes, sed non vis juvarete.
prevail with him not to say I cannot, but I will not; certainly thou c^nst,
but thou will not help thy self Because God prevents all with sufficient
grace, and is always ready to assist them doing, and to do; therefore thou
can not, because thou will not leave sin and be pure.

1. John, 3.3. Purify we then our selves by especial pen^nce after any deadly
sin, Luke 15.3.

By lifting up pure hands in Prayer, which is most operative to purge and
elevate the mind.

By frequent use of the most reverend Sacrament, the divinest sustenance of a
pure heart.

By watchfulness and jealousy of all things suspicious to stain a soul.

By much exercise in good works, all and every whereof raise to similitude
with God, and leave upon the heart a tincture of purity. He that long since
wrote in the name of L. 4. c. 16. p. 513. Sanctificatio rationalibus creaturis,
bonorum operum exhibitione and meritorum praerogativis conceditur. Ibid. c. 20
p. 598 Vitae munditiae secundum meritorium distantium singulis exhibetur,
dice^te v^s^ electionis, unicuique data est gratia secundum mensuram.

Gordon de varletate rerum. l. 8. ^. 4^.


Charlemagne against the adoration of Images, says that Sanctification is
granted reasonable cre^tures, by performance of good works, and according to
the prerogative of them.

Naturally the Soul is refined by abstinence, by exercise of good arts and
good manners. How much more shall it be purified in and by holy fasting,
religious converse and sacred contemplation, used in Catholic faith from a
pure heart to godly intents.

Lastly, let us wash our souls in the cristall fountain of Gods holy Word,
hearing, reading, and continually meditating of the same, which is most
acceptable to God, most content^ull to the good Angel that attends each of us,
most offensive to the wicked Spirits that besiege us; For as ORIGIN In Number. hom
27.
has it, It is to them, above all kinds of torment, and all pains, if they
see any devote his endeavor to the word of God. Ye are pure through the Word,
Ioh. 15.3. Hide we then that in our hearts, that they may be kept clean.

And if through natural debilities, they cannot retain it as they would, let
not that overgrieve the well disposed; because as a soul seive is cleansed by
the water that runs through it, so are our Souls by the Word, and wholesome
instructions, and discourses, which they desire to remember, and do not
retain. Ex vit. Patrum, part. 2. fol. 168.
You may read in the lives of the Fathers, how one bemoaning himself to an
Abbot, that often hearing the monitions of the Ancients he retained nothing, was
bade to take one of two empty vessels, which chanceably stood by, and put
water into it, and wash it, which done, the Abbot asked whether of the two
vessels was the cleaner, and was answered, that into which the water was put;
then the oldman said to him, so is it my son, with the Soul that frequently
hears the words of GOD, though it retains nothing of the things which it
inquires, yet it is more clens^d then that which asks nothing.

CHRIST'S blessing, CHAP. 5.
and the blessing of his Church, and the goodwill of his Ministers, is and for
ever be upon his servants, that by the ways aforesaid, and their like pursue
this Purity, that follow after holiness and peace.

CHAP. V. Touching the necessity of Purification.
CASSIAN does not amiss conclude, that Collat. 19.2.
the Active life may be continued without the Speculative: but the
Contemplative, cannot be compassed without the Practique. Sanctification is
necessary to efficacious knowledge and blisfull sight of God, without holiness
none shall see God, Heb. 12. Wisdom enters not into an impure S^ule. Sap. 1.4.
Tollatur impius ne Deum videat. Es. 26.10. S. Aug de quantitate animae. c. 33.
Neither is it possible with a foul and dustie glass to take the
representation of Images, nor with a mind darkened in passion and prejudice, to
undertake the illumination of the Holy Ghost* Epist. 64. -- (...). -- (...).
which is the resemblance of St. BASIL. The pure light is irksome to eyes
affected with ill humors; so is Gods holy nature and will, to minds corrupted
in sin; therefore they put far from them him and his Sanctifying knowledge.
Ioh. 21.14. An impure one cannot look on the brightness of true light, and
that which is a pleasure to clean minds, is a pain to S. Leo. sermon de bea^it.
polluted.

Two things are requisite to sight, convenient distance and attention, Purity
supplies them both, for it sets the heart near God, and renders it vacant for
God. They are severally mentioned, Psalm. 46 8.10. Venite and videte. Vacate and
videte.

Verse, 8. Come and see. For as in the bodily eye, remote distances make the
discerning of that which is seen obscure, but the approach of the beholder
makes that which is discerned manifest: so in the sight of the mind, he who
draws not near to GOD in good-doing, and acts of grace, cannot with the eyes
of the mind, purely behold God and his works. Hence came that of St.
ATHANASIVS De incarnat. in fin. (...).
the great, Without a pure mind, and resembling the Saints in life, a man
cannot apprehend the mind of Saints, for as if one would see the Sun he
purges his eye, and purifies the innate light within, to discern that which
shines from without, or if he would behold a great City, he goes near to
it; so he that would comprehend the mind of Divines, must cleanse his own
mind, and draw near to them in similitude of life.

Verse. 10. Vacate and videte. If the mind be otherwise busied, it often sees not
what stands before the eyes; so MARTHAES cumber and MARY'S contemplation cannot
consist. The mind must keep holiday from vain labor after Riches, Honor,
Pleasures from Envy and all wickedness against our neighbor, that the Soul
being still and disquieted with no passions, the irradiation of God may come
clear and perspicuous, as in a bright mirror for a type of this, Levit. 14.8.
the cleansed of his Leprosy, after he returned into the Camp, was to abide
seven days out of his Tabernacle; Because when the soul desists Radulph. Flav.
from sin, it must tarry to a Sabbath of rest, before the conscience afford
it a repose, that it may dwell in God by sweet contemplation, and God dwell in
it by divine illustration. This is the reason why many of the more perfect
Saints were so contemplative and able to inhabit a long time in the secret
places of the most high, Psalm. 91.1. for that having mortified in themselves
all earthly desires that could keep a long vacation for God, and with inflamed
affections continue heavenly intercourses.

St. PAVL is struck blind and then given to see, the mind must be abstracted
and turn the eyes from vanity and created perfections, or it is not apt to
fix the heart on God and meditate the wonders of his Law, 1. Reg, 19.15. ELIAS
covered his face with his mantle when God passed by; for a man ought to avert
his eyes from all Creatures as unworthy when he would behold the glory of GOD.
And when man tastes the bread of Angels in contemplation, S. Odo Cluniacensis
sermon. de Magdalena.
The sweetness thereof means the Soul from all things sensible, and from the
trouble of their cares, that it sets aside all Temporals, and longs to be
alone with God.

CHAP. 7.
They that would be accurate students of CHRIST, must refrain not only from
forbidden fruits and pleasures, but from tolerable delights, that they may be
the more transported into heaven. For ordinary Christians it shall be well if
they so order their lawful pleasures and affairs, that they lose not
themselves in them, but find and see God in the creature; which rule is laid
us down by St. GREGORY, The heat of business is then rightly In 1. Reg. l.
5. page 419: Actionis fervor tunc rest disponitur, cum sic insistimus operi,
ut tranquillo cord, eum cui opera nostra consecrare nitimur, videamus.
tempered, when we so follow our work, that we may with a quiet heart see him
unto whom we labor to consecrate our works.

CHAP. VI. Of the sufficiency which Purity has unto the sight of God.
THe Soul that charity has made blind to all things under God is meet to see
God; we are taught by In Eccl. 7. Practica est praevia introductio ad
Theoricam.
Olympiodorus, That the Practique is a previous introduction to Theorie. And
therefore Socrates did wisely begin with Morality and urge virtuous living,
that the mind might thereby be advanced to higher knowledge, as was long ago
noted by Tom. 1. l. 4. c. 14.
Freculphus, Zach. 11.17. If a Sword be upon a man's right hand it son strikes
out his right ^^e. Thus St. NILE, In Asce^ico p 940:
The cunning and action of the right hand being neglected through sloth,
extinguishes with it self the light of Contemplation. Vices, CHAP. 6.
are as ill humors in the eyes of the heart, they dim the visive faculties
in Spiritual things. 2 Pet. 1.8.9. He that is without the sundry graces of
the Spirit, is blind with the dissembling Pharisee, cannot look up unto God in
matters of Religion, cannot see a far off; that which is within the veil,
our future retribution.

Purity rids the Soul of these humors, and so the heart is a clear glass,
apt to gather and reflect divine irradiations, and represent the Image that
shines from the Word. 1. Tim. 3.9. The mysteries of Faith are held in a pure
conscience; Wherefore the exposition of St. PRIMASIVS In Apoc l. 2. Vbi purus
intellectus and habilis ad intelligendu^.
is pithy, Blessed are the pure in heart where the intellect is pure and
accommodated to understand. What is the incorruption wherewith we are to serve
God, Ephesians 6.24 Incorruptio vice est castitas corporis, and puritas mentis, --
In tractatu super venite ad me omnes, inter opera Johan. Gerson.
but purity of flesh and spirit, putting away sin the sole impediment of
divine information, and duly preparing the intellectuals to see God. Take we
then our Lords counsel, Revel. 3.18. Annoint our eyes with eye salve that we
may see, as Ruricius Ruricius, l. 2. Ep. 16. Collyrio bonorum operum oculos
cordis acuamus, ut illic Deu^ videre possimus.
moved his friends with the eye salve of good works, let us sharpen the Eyes
of our heart, that we may there see God. The pure in heart may boldly crave to
be instructed of God, as ready to embrace all his truth in love, and desiring
to know all the pleasure of his will that they may fulfill it, Psalm. 119.10.34.
St. MAXIMUS says, De virtute and vitio centur. 3 Sent. 27. Ibid. sent. 42. 45.
Virtuous affection is the face of a contemplative Soul raised to the altitude
of true knowledge, and without doubt Spiritual actions are the Eyes of that
face.

That the perfecting of the Practive part not the Speculative makes way to
divine vision, evinces it intended, and obvious to all even the unletterd, for
the meanest servant may have a pure heart.

Ioh. 7.17. CHRIST requires the doing of his Fathers will for the knowledge of
his doctrine, intimating that the dispose for supernatural knowledge by which
the Soul is directed unto happiness, lies not in dexterity of wit but in
purity of heart. And Ioh. 14 23. he promises, that his Father and he will
manifest themselves to them that love him and keep his Commandments,
signifying that the heart which purely affects good things shall not be
deserted of convenient knowledge, whereas the head that would know much for
discourse and not for practice, may see many things in common light and nothing
in the light of life.

A head as large as SALOMONS without a pure heart, conferres not so much to
inwardnesse with God and initiation into the mysteries of his Kingdom, as does
purity of heart in a shallow brain, which forced that ejaculation from a
devout man! O most loving Lord IESV CHRIST, thou love him that preserves his
Idicta de amore divino, c. 17. Qui servat munditiae puritatem.
Purity incorrupt, for like loves its like; and because thou art pure and of
all the most pure, therefore thou love the pure and make them of thy
counsel, as it is written, Prove. 22.11. He that loves pureness of heart the
King shall be his friend. Keep we then with all diligence the white robe we
received in Baptism undefiled, preserve we the virgin integrity with which
our souls were there endowed, CHAP. 7.
strive that there may be no spot in our face, nor wrincle in our clothes; for
the liker we be to God in purity, the liker shall we also be in knowledge.
Here we are pure but in part, and therefore know but in part, when we shall be
pure as God is pure, we shall see God as he is, and know as we are known.

CHAP. VII. How fitly the Pure as rewarded with Gods sight.
I Have at length done with the gracious preparing of the mind for GOD, and
will now proceed to the glorious revealing of God to the mind, the pure in
heart shall see God that is the portion of their bliss, to know God as he is
knowable, imperfectly here in contemplation, all-sufficiently hereafter in
beatificall vision, which is the greatest testimony of divine love. John,
14.21. My father and I will love him and show our selves unto him. To be short,
in this reward we may distinguish the fitness and the fullness, the fitness
both in respect of the quality and in regard of the quantity.

First, in respect of the quality, the grace fitted the heart to see, the
reward ministers the best object to the sight, and the pure heart is blessed
with the sight of God that is purity it self, Psalm. 18.26. Tit. 1.15. To the
pure all things are pure, God is always before their eyes which therefore
stay not in the creatures, but by use of them lift up the heart to God. It is a
true saying of de Kombis, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
As in our Country GOD is the glass in which the creatures shine, so by the
way the Creatures are the glass in which God is seen. Undoubtedly if we bear
a pure heart in our breast, every creature will serve us for a Book of learning
and glass of life: seeing there is not so poor a creature in which we may
not espy God and his praise and goodness, filling all things. That we may
reverence God in his creatures, observe his work in them, and improve them in
some measure to the pure ends, for which they were made.

But to the impure and unbeleever nothing is pure, they gather soil from the
best gifts of GOD; because there is no creature so good if but it be rested in,
it abates the purity and dignity of the soul made for God, and meet to be in
communion with him; and because the defiled mind and conscience of the impure,
draw from every creature what is agreeable to themselves.

Secondly, for the fitness in regard of the quantity that stands in this, that
as all that are pure see God; so the more pure any is, the more he sees God;
after the assertion of blessed PAVLINVS, In Epist. ad Desiderium, quanto purior
cord, tanto capacior Christi.
The purer that any is in heart, the more capacious of CHRIST; which is
verified in this life in the sight of grace, in the other life in the sight of
glory.

In this life, that of Hesychius Cent. 1. sent. 71.
holds; So much the more copiouslie shall men see God by how much the more
studiously they purge themselves. God so far communicates himself to pure
minds, that St. ANTONY the great, a man experienced therein does in this wise
exhort to Purity, This Hesychius cites out of B. Athanasius in the life of S
Anton. Cent. 2. sent. 77.
Be we of pure mind, for I believe that a soul purified throughout in every
power, and standing now in its own nature may become so quicke-sighted as to
see more acutely, and matters more remote then the Devils can, as which has
GOD revealing unto it.

In the life to come, God shall be seen and known; as the Theologue resolves,
after the proportion of our Naz. de Baptismo ad fin. (...).
Purity. The Saints shall be by light of glory advanced to similitude of God
void of defect, yet as a quality admitting degrees, one exceeding other, and
none equalling CHRIST's humanity; which St. FVLGENTIVS Ad Ferrandum qu. 3. p
75. Illa divinitatis indesinens vesio, ipsa fit beatitudinis indificiens
plenitudo, inde enim sunt beati mundo cord quia Deum videat, in tantum ergo
divinitate Sanctae trinitatis videbimus, in quantum capiemus dono gratiae ut
videre possimus. St. Ephrem. De mansionibus beat. p. 19 St. Isaac de contemptu
mundi c. 17.
deduceth hence in this sort, The endless vision of the Deity be that the
indeficient fullness of felicity, for thence are the pure in heart blessed,
because they see God; wherefore we shall so far see the Deity of the whole
Trinity, as we shall receive by the gift of grace, that we may be able to see.
To which I shall add that of the worthy authors ELTHERVS and BEATVS: L. 1 p.
^59 Quantu^ plus dilexit proximum, tantum and illic plus videbit majestatem
Dei. S. Ephrem. de vita religiosa page 547 S. Eligius apud B. Audoenum. l. 2.
16. Radulph. Flaviac. in Lev l. 19. Walter Hilton in the devotion all Book
j^yn'd with Hanpole p. 193.
How much the more a man loves his neighbor here, so much the more he shall
see there the majesty of God.

As though all bodies rise in glory, yet they have their distinct lustres in
the day of Revelation, wherein the different conditions of the Souls in glory
be expressed in the body. 1. Corinthians. 15. There is one glory of the Sun, and
another of the Moon; So albeit that all glorified souls do see GOD, yet in
that sight there is one degree of them, who in the burden of the flesh made it
their chief and constant work to purge their soul to that intent; another of
them that encumbered themselves with worldly cares, and hardly were divided from
the world by the violence of death. Likewise as there are diverse orders of
Angels among whom the higher exceed the lower in extent of knowledge, as St.
Chrysostom (...) -- St. Athanas. de communi essentia Patris and filii, and
spiritus Sancti.
reasons of that, Ephesians. 13.10. If Principalities knew not, much less did
Angels know: yet all of them see the face of God. Thus when the day comes that
men shall be equal unto Angels, and the measure of a man be as the measure of
an Angel ( Revelation 21) some more unlearned man that studied purity may
have the place of a Seraphin, when a great Clerk that was more forward to
read then to pray, may be but in the rank of an inferior Angel.

CHAP. 8.
CHAP. VIII. Of the fullness of that bliss which Saints enjoy upon Earth in
contemplation of God.
SO much suffice for the fitness, weigh we now the fullness of the reward,
they shall see God, and he being the truth, Primum verum, and summum bonum.
our minds were made to know the good, our wills were made to enjoy the sight
of him as intellegible, in this and the other world is the utmost consummation
of our intellectual faculties in both; as St Basil more largely prosecutes, In
martyrem lulitta^ (...).
The knowledge of God to them that are counted worthy thereof, is the supreme
of all good things, to which all intelligent nature aspireth, which God gvie us
to partake in purifying our selves from the affects of corruptible flesh. And
again brethren, (...). Epist. 139. ad fin.
Think not the Kingdom of God to be ought else then the true understanding
of things that are, which the Scriptures also call blessedness; for the
Kingdom of heaven is within you.

But let us severally expend this fullness as it concerns Contemplation while
we live by faith, and vision when we shall live by sight. For the former, the
highest happiness of a traveller is to see God in CHRIST, and to be made
privy to his good, holy and perfect will, to apprehend in their proper Species
and operations his divine verities, such fight therefore is the aim of a
comtemplator. And in this our pilgrimage, we never are in such a paradise, as
when we be rapt up in holy meditations of God, and the profound mysteries of
our Lord CHRIST. One could not be happy had he all created good, but all our
Felicity stands in GOD, Thom. de Kemp. de imitatione Christi. l. 3. 16.
not as he is seen and praised of the simple lovers of the world: but as
Christ's true believers look to know him, and as the Spiritual and pure
hearted whose conversation is in heaven, do sometimes taste him.

Psalm. 65.4. O God of our salvation, happy is the man whom thou causest to
approach unto thy self; it is heaven to be with God, when God therefore draws
us near to himself, this is heaven upon earth. When we draw nigh to him, he
gives peace and quiet to all our powers and affections in him, and when we are
not nigh him, there is nothing but perturbation and vexation in our minds,
running wild and distracted after endless varieties and vanities.

Wherefore for a Christian to sail in full gusts of the Spirit, and by divine
contemplation to be advanced above sensible devotion, (...).
and have the mind drowned in the depths of God, and his incomprehensible
grace; these are the plain first fruits of heaven, and the abundant recompense
of our Practiques.

The divine light is as darkness, invisible for the excelling and supereminent
(...) of, and inapproachable for the (...) of supersubstantiall luster flowing
from it, in which, the drawer near to God is overwhelmed, 1. Tim. 6.16. That
light cannot be attained or guessed at by any argumentation or Art of man;
otherwise it had not bin affirmed inapproachable. The Lord should have bin a
finite God, if we could have fully conceived him; therefore the less we can
comprehend him, the more we have to admire and adore him, and in that we see
him not, we may touch him, as discerning him to transcend all knowledge, Psalm.
139.6.

Darkness is Gods pavilion, in this life none see him, in the other none
comprehend all of him; God appeared in a thick Cloud, Exodus 19.16. which cloud
was to obscure all things that were not God, that so God might be discerned. 1.
King. 8.12. In the thick darkness GOD will be seen, when all the Creatures
are out of sight and respect, and the soul measures not God by them, but
perceives him without and above them, an infinite being, of which all the
Splendor in the creature is but a dark shadow.

In this dark all things will be indifferent to us, when we judge not of God,
by ought in the Creature, but find him alike in all, alike without all, and
therefore do not distingui^^ nor (...), but let him afford us himself in what
he please, or remove the creature to reside in ^s (...).

This is a great privilege in the time of (...) if we draw ^igh unto (...)
pure and humble Souls he will draw nigh unto us and compass us with his
bright rays, and thereby inflame our affections, and sublimate us above our
selves and conjoyne us immediately to himself to become one Spirit wih him, as
the Iron in the fire becomes fire, yet remains Iron, a taste of which
elevation is so glorious, that Heaven and Earth are shadowed in comparison
thereof, which may induce us daily to set apart some space of time to recreate
our Souls in ISAACS walks, and forget the world in the thoughts of God, and
cease not till we can say, My meditation of him is sweet, Psalm. 104.34. and
that we have some relish and sense, how gracious the Lord is.

The contemplation of God is like a glass exposed to the Sun, transformes us
more and more from glory to glory in his blessed Image, 1. Corinthians. 3.18. Psalm.
57.17. I will attempt to translate another strain of In Psalm. 129. (...).
St. BASILS, that is; The true beauty and most desirable and visible alone to
him who is purified in heart, that is all about the divine and blessed Nature,
on whose lightnings and grace whosoever fixes his eye, participates somewhat
from it as it were in a tincture, dying his own sight with a flourishing
luster. Psalm. 4.6, 7. Lord lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us, and
thou shall put gladness in our hearts. For as Gradu. 30.
Climacus takes up a Simile, If the face of a Friend, whom we love, does most
truly change us, and render us all chearie, and pleasant, and void of
heaviness; what shall the face of GOD do, coming invisibly on the Soul that
is cleansed from all filthiness: CHAP. 9.


CHAP. IX. Of the fullness of this Beatitude in beatificall vision.
FOrasmuch as Man is an intelligent creature, therefore his Happiness must
needs be in the acts and exercise of his intellectuals; hence our fruition of
GOD is set out by sight, John, 17.3. The prelation of Man above Beasts, is to
know his Maker, the highest exaltation of man in the best and immediate
knowledge of his maker, if 1. King. 10.48. the Queen of Sheba was struck with
admiration at the order of SOLOMON'S Court, how shall it not be full
happiness to see the form of the celestial Court? I extol the wit of PICVS
Earl of Mirandula; In Heptapio, in proumio lib. sept^^i. Haec est vera
faelicitas vt simus v^us cum Deo Spiritus, vt apud Deum non apud nos Deum
poss^^^mus, cognosc^m^^ sicut (...), ille enim nos, non per nos, sed per
seipsum aguavit, ita and nos cognoscamus illum, per ipsum and non per aut,
(...) est tota mercer, haec est vtt^ (...).
Naturally the Creatures cannot know GOD as he is in himself, but as he is
in their selves. This is true felicity that we may be one spirit with God,
that we may possess God in God; not in our selves, knowing as we are known;
for he knows us not by us, but by himself, so we shall know him by himself,
and not by our selves, this is the whole reward, this is Life eternal, 1. Cor.
13.12.

That which mortals cannot, we shall see God as he is, 1. John, 3.2. and
arrive to immediate conjunction with God without any creatures intervening, the
Lord plainly and without any riddles manifesting himself and his Essence to
us, in his own light, Ostendum meipsum ill^, ^tique in forma Dei non in forma
ser (...) -- In that (...) of him ^^lfe ^s eternal Li^e. Ioh (...). B Aug de
Spiritu and litera. c 22.
John, 14 21. And in the form of GOD not the form of a Servant, or any
created form or representation.

Luke, 12.37. The Lord disposes himself to reward in his own person the
fidelity of his servants, and makes his faithful fit down in eternal rest,
comes forth and ministers because he satisfies us with illustration of his
own light, and immediately by himself and in his own person, we receive our
repast, as St. Gregory In Evang hom. 13. Transiens autem Dominus maistrat,
quia lucis sua illustratione nos saetiat --
expounds it unto us.

We shall be as Angels beholding the face of God, not only his back-parts,
Exodus 33.20.23. as he is known in his effects, by his words and works; For
the back parts are all notifications of himself The back parts of God, are
(...). S. Nazian. sermon 34
after himself, but we shall see his face also, Matthew. 18.10. his nature and
substance, that which is distinctive and essential to God; as men are
distinguished and known by their faces; so God by his Essence, which knowledge
of God is the end wherein meet all the desires of rational natures.

And that natural desire in all Souls tending to see God, as St. ANTONIUS
Hist. tit. 5. cap. 8. sect 17. S. Aug epist. 111, 112. cap. 8. St. Greg. in
Job. L. 28. c. 28 Inter opera B. Athanasii disputationem cum Arrio. p 117
reasons, cannot be in vain; whence it appears erroneous to hold, that we
shall not see the divine Essence. The request of MOSES, Exodus 33.18. I beseech
thee show me thy glory, is the Petition of every good man. John, 14.8. Show us
the Father and it suffices us; sight of the Father suffices a reasonable
Soul, and without that it is not sufficed whatsoever it sees and knows,
glorious are the sights which God here shows his pure-hearted; yet as it is in
St CYPRIAN, In Prol^go ad Cardinalia opera Christi. Nec tamen in hac visione
plena potest esse sufficientia, donec in splendoribus Sanctoru^ in die virtutis
suae, cognoscatur ratio gignentis and geniti and procedentis.
They cannot be fully satisfied in those sights, till in the glory of Gods
Saints in the day of his Power the mystery of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost be disclosed.

When we shall see God as he is, we shall alike see all the Divine persons,
because they are one in the same Essence, the Father in the Son, the Son in
the Father, both in the holy Ghost, all in each, and each in all. So the
Essence cannot be seen, without sight of the Persons, nor one person without
the rest: otherwise PHILIP and his fellow Apostles would not be satisfied in
the sight of the Father, if he could be seen without sight of the Son and
the blessed Spirit, whom they equally desired to see.

But when God manifests himself, as St. Gregory the Divine declares, S. Greg.
Nazian. in plagam grandinis. (...).
Ineffable light receives the godly, and the vision of the Holy and kingly
Trinity shining most clearly and most purely, and mingling its whole self
with the whole mind, in which alone I chiefly place the Kingdom of Heaven.

Because we shall see God as he is we shall (...) knowledge of all the divine
attributes which in him are one with themselves, and with the divine Essence,
be divided only by our imperfect manner of understanding, and therefore in
Gods light present themselves as one primary object to the mind. Then, in
their platformes and Ideas we shall see the Idea's of all natural things in
their several Joseph Angles in 4. part. 2. p 117. Quilibet beatus videt omnia
quae in Deo formaliter id est quidditative continentur, verbi gratia, attributa
omnia, quae formaliter id est quidditative convenient, constat ex B. Iohanne
dicente, videbimus eum sicuti est, ergo and omnia quae sunt in ipso
quidditative, scilicet attributa omnia and omnes relationes, alioquin enim si
beatos aliquod divinum attributum lateret, non illu^ sicuttest viderent, They
see also in God the quiddities of all things, etc.
kinds, (tho not all individuals) for that Beatitude satisfies all natural
desire; and the intellect has a natural desire to know them, and therefore
could not be at rest without knowing them.

Now the Creatures are perfectly and pleasantly known in the sight of the
Creators wisdom, as in the Art after which they were made, then the causes of
all hidden qualities and secrets in nature shall be evidenced in God, which is
the ambition of Philosophy. Then the stupendous depths of Gods free grace
shall be opened in the book of Life, together with all the Mysteries of Gods
word and our Faith, which is the perfection of Divinity.

This seeing of God in his Essence, is no let but that one Angel or Saint may
see more then another, and CHRIST'S soul more then all other; S. Aug. de
Civitate Dei. L. 1. c. 6. cap. 29.
for though they all immediately see God, yet he being infinite none can
comprehend the whole of God, and every one apprehends according to his
capacity, which is diversified by their degrees of grace; for after as they
had here more light of grace, they shall there have more light of glory; B. Aug
de verbis Apost. sermon, 21. c. 7.
in which they shall be strengthened to larger apprehensions.

The finite seer cannot comprehend him that is infinite, therefore the highest
orders of Angels are brought in covering their faces before God, as not able to
comprehend his total To apprehend God digne prout est -- Vrique est omni
creaturae. S. Bern. in Cant. ser. 5 De Passione Dom. c. 17. S. Chrysostom. Sermn.
(...). S. Greg. in Job. l. 10. c. 7.
fullness, nor affecting it, which is impossible for creatures and would
ruinate their beings, were they extended in infinitum beyond their reach. The
Soul of our Lord JESUS, although it sees in God all things that are, have
been, or shall be, yet it sees not all things that might be by Gods
omnipotency, but has knowledge above all Angels and men, yet finite, and in
its fullest glory has not that knowledge of the divine Nature which the divine
nature has of it self; neither as our worthy Countriman GILBERT writes, Super
Cant. ser 40 Nec admitti potest in aqualitatem notitia.
May it be admitted to equality of knowledge.

So then to see God is not to comprehend him (which is only proper to God
himself) that is to know God as he knows himself, and whatsoever is
comprised in him and feifable by him. Howbeit which Gerson fitly observes, In
Patria dicuntur in patri^ comprehensares esse, quoniam (...) ser^^dum totum
poss^ (...) totum (...) vell^ (...) Cant. by (...)
In Heaven they are said to be comprehensors, because they apprehend according
to all their power, all their understanding, all their will. Thus PAVL will
hold himself a comprehensor when he has: attained to the very essence of
God, and there apprehends all that he desires and can contain, Phil. 3.13.
till when he is restless in his desires and endeavors of perfections.

But that I may summarily discover the fullness of that B^atitud^, which is
(...) seeing God, the vision of him who comprehends all good, must needs
conclude all desires, and replenish all the powers and possibilities of the
creature, and therefore sight of divine nature inferres perpertuall
confirmation in grace, because the understanding sees therein, and the will
enjoyes all eminency of good. 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him for we shall
see him as he is.

Hence it issues, that the privation of this blessed vision is the hell of
hells, Idiota de morte. c. 18.
to be punished from the presence of GOD, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Departing from the
eternal God is worse then entering into everlasting fire, the loss is
infinite, the pain limited.

The learned Father In quo uno est requies. S. August. de catechizandis rudibus
lib. 4.17.
cathechizes, that where there is any right Judgment, the greatest horror is
not to see him in whom alone is satisfaction, and he makes a delicate In Psalm.
137. -- Cui fueris iratus intereat, quem rap^re volucris rapintur, quem cedere
cadatur, quam domnare damnetur, quem possidere possideas.
supposition, that if God should come and speak with his own voice, and say
to a man, Will thou sin, sin do whatsoever thou please, whatsoever thou
affectest in all the Earth, be it at thy service, let thy anger be death, let
men be beaten and condemned at thy will, or reserved to thy use, let none
resist thee, none say what do thou? none, I will not do what you would have
me, none why have you so done? Let all those earthly things which thou
desire abound with thee, and live in them, not for a time but for ever, only
thou shall never see my face. Brethren why did you sigh, saving that there is
sprung up in your hearts, the chaste fear that indureth for ever, whereby one
would cry out and say, rather let all th^se things be took away and let me see
thy face. If men be in so great desire to see an earthly King in his state and
glory; how much should Christians desire to see and accompany the King of
glorious state in all his glory!

Now beloved, this suspends all wonderment in heaven and earth, that a worm
should be exalted to see God, fallen man be restored and blessed with the same
Beatitude wherewth God himself is blessed, for the blessedness of God is in
seeing himself, and enjoying his own infinite beauty, B. Macar hom. 5. p 74.
and that blessedness is imparted to us, for we shall see him and have
fruition of his infinite nature and perfections, albeit not in his infinite
measure Etherius and Beatus, l. 2. p. 379. Perfecta requies est, quia Deus
cernitur, tamen aequanda non est requiei illius, qui non a se in alium transit
ut quiescat.

S. Aug de Trinitate lib. 15. c. 16.


who is his own blessedness, and alone understands all the infinity of his
goodness and happiness.

John, 17.3. This is life Eternal to know God, and rightly is it termed
Eternal, because it alters not, because by reason of their seeing God their
thoughts vary not. And for that, God is all in all unto the blessed, all their
joy and blessedness is always the same and unchangeably before them
altogether. For in the Beatitude flowing from the divine vision there is no
alteration, as there is no change in the divine Nature, that which has been
is, that which is that is the very same which shall be, this is peculiar to
Eternity that it is altogether at once, and has nothing in it first or last.
Which propriety the glory of Saints participates, for that the joy thereof is
without all Succession, and is enjoyed all at once admitting nor dimunition nor
increase for ever. So as the joy that is received throughout all Eternity, is
perceived in every moment thereof; and the elect Angels and men secure of
everlasting felicity, and having before their eyes Eternity replenished with
joy, in every instant rejoice an eternal consolation.

1. Pet. 1.4. Our inheritance is incorruptible, impolluted, idefeisable.
Incorruptible, to say, unchangeable, and ever the same; Impolluted, that is to
say, immixt of whatsoever might stain or discontent; for there is no impure
lust to disquiet, nor any thing to move lust: all things as in God are without
all imperfections, all things are Life in him, all things Purity, and causing
pure and glorious thoughts. Indefeisable, because the blessed are immutably
confirmed in grace, and therefore cannot sin, and therefore cannot lose nor
lessen their happiness. Vnfading also, because as the Nature corrupts, so the
content decays not; but as every unchangeable is perpetually as solatious, as
in the first entrance; and though always the same, never tedious, because
infinite; and therefore as contenting, so continuing desires.

But I must end, discoursing of the joy that shall never cease: Wherefore in a
word of St. PAVLS, Heb. 4.1 Let us fear lest a promise being lest us entering
into rest, any of us should so much as seem to come short. For, seeing it
could not justly be counted grievous Dionys. c^rtbus. de 88. Philippo and
lac^bo sermon. 4.
to pass through the pains of Hell, if so we might be purged, and come to
see God. What appearance of exception can there be against the easy task of
going to Siloam to wash and see, to wash away unsavorie lusts, the riddance
whereof out of the Soul, is above all the contents of the world, and after,
and for that to see the GOD of all Consolation, and from the fountains head to
drink rivers of Pleasure. To which he bring us, that has washed us in his
own Blood ( Apoc. 1.5) JESUS CHRIST the righteous, to whom, etc.

FINIS.
BEATI PACIFICI. THE PEACEMAKER. A TREATISE OF PEACEMAKING, that handles the
Seventh Beatitude.

By James Buck, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

MATTHEW. 18.19. D^cuisti concordiam simul junctam vinci omnin^ non posse,
quicquid simul petitur a cunctis, Deum pacis pacificis exhibere. B. CYPRIAN.
Epist. 1^. Quicunque odio aut longinqua inter se lite dissenserint, and ad
Pacem revocari, diutina intention nequiverint; a Sacerdotibus civitatis
primitur arguantur, qui si inimicitias deponere, perniciosa intention^
noluerint, de Ecclesia coetu justissima excommunicatione pellantur. Council.
Agashease cap. 31. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBUS. LONDON, Printed by B.A. and T.F.
for JOHN CLA^^, and WILL. COOK. 1637.

BEATI PACIFICI.
MATTHEW. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Sons
of God.
CHAP. I. Of Peacemaking, and the Peace that is made, and namely of Spiritual
Peace.
THere need no Prefaces to excite good will unto a Treatise of Peace, for the
very name of Peace is sweet, and therefore a discourse thereof, naturally
pleasant: haste we then to the discourse it self; CHAP. 1.
and to avoyde confusion, while I handle Peace, I will distinguish in the
Beatitude, the blessed agents, the Peacemakers; and the blessing of those
Agents, They shall be called the Sons of GOD. In the blessed agents I shall
expend their work, Peacemaking, and also the extent of that work.

To the First. The work that CHRIST here blesses is Peacemaking, the work of
Righteousness is Peace, Leo sermon. de Boatit. Extra dignitate^ hujus nominis
sunt improbarum perilitates capiditatum, foedera scelerum, and picta vitiorum.
but the Combinations of evil lusts, the leagues of wickedness, the compacts
of vice, are without the honor of this name. Peace as a fruit of the Spirit is
only in lawful agreements, the wicked as wicked have no peace, they may have
their confederacies of which that holds, which St. HILARIE presses against
CONSTANTIUS the Arian Emperor, Vnitatem procurat ne pau sit.
he procures unity to prevent Peace.

Consent in sin, and bad fellowship of Brethren of iniquity, Gen 49 5, 6.
Esaias 8.12.
which the Scripture much detests and dehorts, merits not the sacred name of
Peace, Psalm. 34.14. 1. Pet. 3.11.
if such peace should follow us, we ought to fly from it, and buy the sword
that CHRIST came to send, Matthew. 10.34. for the disbanding of sinful
Conspiracies: the Peace we are to make, is concord in good, and to make such
Peace is more then to take it existing and offering it self; namely, to do
our best to bring it into being. Holy writ requires to this making of peace,
seeking and pursuing, Seek peace and pursue it.

Seeking notes, that we must look after it as a true good directly in order to
salvation, as an ingredient of Gods Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof,
which we are to seek with our supreme affections and endeavors. Matthew. 6.33.

Pursue intimates violence and religious force to be employed for the
production of peace. And the word ((...)) elegantly insinuates, that with such
spirit as contentious men follow suits, we should contend and sue for peace,
all our contention must be for concord, our strife for unity, our war for
peace; Ad fratrem (...) excidit. p. 116.
we are (says blessed Ephrem) the soldiers of peace, and pilots in a calm.
St. Paul moves the Ecbrewes (Heb. 12.14) to follow peace with all men,
despising no man, neither thinking any so ill as not to regard his amity, and
accord with him, peace was the ordinary salutation of Gods ancient people, as
who were to wish and seek the peace of all they met, and considering all men
sociable creatures, to maintain at least humane society with them.

2. Chron. 19.2. Good Iehoshaphat is blamed, not that he had a league of civil
peace with wicked Ahab, but for a league of peculiar familiarity, and
friendship, whereby he entangled himself to countenance his person, and be
assistant to him when he went contrary to GOD. Mark with what inforcement the
Apostle urges to peace with all ( Romans 12.18) If it be possible, so much as in
you, make Peace with all: For that is (...)
He says not if it be facile, but if it be feacible, use all possible means
for it, by your selves and others, leave no courses unattempted to compass it,
if you cannot find it, make it further what may pacify, forbear what may
provoke; he makes not peace, that does not his utmost to produce it. So far
as is in you have peace, and if the averseness of another, hinders perfect
peace which is not in the love of one, but the liking of diverse; yet let there
be peace ever on your part, no breach on your side, but good will affecting
atonement also with them.

(...).

Dicturus cum omnibus hominibus pacem habentes, quia hoc di^ficile esse
perspexit, praemisit si fieri potest, and subj^nxit quod potest fieri, cu^
dicit quod ex vobis est, quia fi nos mente charitatem erga odientes servare
cupimus, and si illi pa^em nobiscum non habent. Nos tamen cum illis ^ine dubio
habeatu^. Sixtus 3 Ep. 3.


Finely SIXTUS the third, being about to say have peace with all men, because
he foresaw that to be difficult, he premised if it he possible, and subjoyned
what is possible, when he says, so far as is in you, for if we desire to
preserve in our mind charity toward them that hate us, although they have not
peace with us, yet without doubt we have peace with them. As DAVID ( Psalm 120
7) speaks of himself, Ego pax, I am peace, all the interruption of it is by
the importunity of my adversaries, as for me I may be called peace, being
peaceable, as Peace it self.

And that bri^fly of the good work of our blessed agents the Peacemakers,
(...).
because we are to enlarge our selves in the extent of that happy work, which
is according to all the variety of peace, beatificall virtue flowing over all
the kinds of Peacemaking. The Spiritual, the Oeconomicall, the Political,
the Ecclesiastical; of all which I will orderly entreat.

The Spiritual peace is in reconciliation with God, when repenting of sin,
we are reunited to him, and revested in his love and grace. This is the peace
of God, because there is no peace to the soul but in God, and from God. Out of
whom and without whom, there is nothing but trouble, and pain, and infinite
misery, he is our Peacemaker. That which St. Basil gravely determines, In Ps.
29. Perturb. (...).
Perturbation is caused by alienation from God, pray we then that the light of
Gods countenance, may shine upon us, that we may be in a constitution
beseeming Saints, quiet, and meek, and every way untroubled, by the
preparation of peace ready to every good work. The Lord will bless his people
with peace (Psalm. 29.11) The God of peace sanctifies and makes peace in the
soul, through operation and sense of his grace, enables to subject the flesh
to the spirit, affection to reason, and by the nurture of God and his
discipline to hold correspondence with with him. Pax enim nostra a defiderio
creatoris in^hoatur, et manifesta visione per ficitur. Quia videlin^t corpus
ejus, quod mente inhabitatur, ^ perversit desideriorum moribus, sub justitiae
dispositione refrae^ctur.

In Gal, 5.22 No p^taemus pacem in ea tantum esse quaerendum, sicum alio non
jurgemur, sed tumpan Christi, hoc est haeroditas nostra nobiscum est, si
tranquilla meus nullis pass^n^bus perturbetur.


Great is the peace of those that love Gods law, who enjoy all things with a
testimonial of reconciliation and peace with God and his creatures, and have
the creatures suppliants each to other, and all jointly to God, that they may
receive virtues to be beneficial to them. Hos. 2.18.19.21.22. And they shall
know their Tabernacle to be peace; which blessed Odo contracting the morals of
St. Gregory, thus paraphraseth: Peace is either in the beginnings which Christ
gives here, or complete when the believer departs into peace, for our peace
begins by the desire of the Creator, and is complete by manifest vision of him,
therefore the tabernacle of the ^ust has peace, to wit, because his body that
is inh^^^^d by the m^nde, is bridled under the dispose of justice, from the
disorderly motions of lusts. Phil. 4.6, 7. The peace of God discharges the
heart of care, and allayes the perturbations of the whole man. Ioh. 14.27.
Peace I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you, let not your heart be
troubled: Strom. 1. (...).
whereupon St. Hierom, Let us not imagine, that peace is only to be sought in
this, if we wrangle not with others, but then CHRIST'S peace thas is our
inheritance, is with us, if a quiet mind be disturbed with no passions. How
beautiful are the feet of ^he Ambassadors of the Gosp^ll, that be dispensers
of this peace! Romans 10.15. In very deed says Clemens Alexandrinus, Blessed are
those Peacemakers, who instruct and induce into that peace, which is in
reason, and a life led according to God, them that be here impugned by
ignorance in their life and erring course. Only we must beware that we delude
not consciences with false peace. Ier. 6.14. rather let us smite them with
Christ's sword, that cuts asunder the bands of iniquity, then any ways cast
the^ into carnal security, instead of spiritual peace. The pacifying and
making up co^tentio^s amongst me^ quarelling for worldly goods is good, but
here (potior and sublimior pacificatio intelligenda est a nobis, S. Chro^ariu^.
illam dicam qua homines gentiles, qui inimici sunt Dei, per instantiam
doctrina adducuntur ad pacem, qua peccatores emendantur, and Deo per
poenitentiam, reconciliantur, qua rebels baretici corriguntur, qua ecclesia
discordantes ad unitatem, pacemque formantur) justly are such called the sons
of God, as imitating Christ the son of God, who is our peace and reconciliation.

CHAP. II. CHAP. 2.
Of Peace between Neighbors and private men, and of unnecessary lawing.
OEconomicall Peace, is that of the family, between husband and wife, Parents
and children, masters and servants. 1. Cor. 7.15. Which if it be wanting
division ruins the house, neither would God have this neglected by his
Ministers, and therefore prescribes, pax domui huic, peace be to this house,
for the Apostles greeting and benediction. Repugnant to this peace are
conventicles, and such as creep privily into houses, and divide families with
the novelties of their superstition, so as the father and master remaining
right to the Church, they corrupt the wife and maid, and which is evil theft,
screwing themselves into the good opinion of females, they draw no small
contributions from women and servants, without and against the will of their
husbands and masters.

But we shall let these Foxes alone in their boroughs, out of a longing to be
in the quicker pursuit of political peace, which is either private of some
particular persons, or public of the whole state. For the former it concerns
all neighbors to have peace one with another, and not embrace it on r^^sonable
offers (for he hates peace that is spoken to for it, and is still for war,
Psalm. 120.6, 7. but to tender conditions of peace, and demand it at the hands
of others. This office God imposes on every Christian, even toward the worst
Pag^n, therefore it is excess of pride in any man to affirm that he scorns
to seek to such or such, who it may be, are meaner then himself, if they will
sue to him; much may be. Indeed when men are fallen out, if one chance to be in
worldly respects a little better then the other, it is wondrous how they bear
themselves upon it, crying let him come and seek unto me; if they be equals
they will spend much, rather then yield to make the first tender of an
agreement, but to crave a peace, that will they never do. Here beloved think
how infinitely God almighty is above us. Therefore as St. Gregory divinely
reasons, when we by sinning had made difference between us and God, and
notwithstanding God first sent his Ambassadors to us, In Evang. hom. 32. Cum
inter nos et Deum discordiam p^cc^do fe^imus, and tamen ad nos Deus suos
legates prior m^sit, ut nos ipsi qui peccavimus ad pacem Dei rog^ti ven^amus
er^bescat ergo humana superbia, confundatur quisque si non satisfaciat prior
proximo, quando post culpam nostram, ut ei reconcili^ri debemus, et ipse qui
off^nsus est legatis i^t ^venie^tibus obsecrat Deus.
that we who had sinned might be entreated to come unto peace with God, let the
pride of man blush, let every one be ashamed, if he do not first satisfy his
neighbor, seeing if after our fault, even God himself, that was offended, does
beseech us by his legates intervening, that we would be reconciled to him. Well
the^ we must ask peace, and if we cannot have it for asking, buy peace, in
quiet putting up tolerable losses and injuries, and remitting somewhat of our
interest for peace sake. Aptly does St. James chapter 3.17. in the epithets of
heavenly wisdom, to peaceable join moderate; for there can b^ no peace
without some moderation of extreme right and mere law. ( Matthew. 17.23) Christ
yielded of his right, to eschew suspicion of scandal, in the^ that apprehended
not his title. After which example, he that sues should rather depart with some
of his right, then commence suit, and he that is sued, should with the Psalmist
restore that he never took, rather then enter his defense in law. Consult with
flesh and blood, it will allege that it cares not to give, but it cannot
endure, that another should take for himself. Now listen how St. Chrysostom. helps
us against this infirmity, Hom. 74. ad Populu^.
One would more willingly part with a thousand talents, and think it loss
grievous, then to have three half pence took from him against his will. This
therefore is rather and more an act of religion, and this we see done by
Abraham (Genesis 13.8, 9) After strife raised giving liberty to Lot, though his
nephew, and inferior, to choose his own end. And let not any suppose it will be
any prejudice to their cause to proffer peace, nay the good providence of God
orders in all experience, that the more condescending men be for peace, and the
more fair in the carriage of their suits, the better are their issues.

And he that has the best cause may most securely, and with most honor make
a tender of peace, therefore ( Matthew. 18.15) Our Lord wills him that is out of
the offense to repair to the offender, and ( Matthew. 5.24) him that is out of
passion to mediate for reconciliation, because he that is in grief, is not so
fit to perform it, they are to be especially for peace, whosoever have best
faculties, friends and abilities to manage suits. These things so being, quaere
is made whether it be lawful to go to law, to which it is truly answered,
that although it be most honorable and counsellable to put up wrongs, rather
then to right them by legal contestations (1. Cor. 6.7) yet in matters of
title and consequence, it is no sin to take the benefit of law, if peace be
otherwise sought, and cannot be attained. When our Master ( Matthew 5.40) says,
if one will sue thee for thy cloak, let him have thy coat also; he counsels,
but he commands nothing save preparation of mind, patiently to suffer
trespasses done us by forgery and color of law, and that we should rather
admit the doubling of any wrong, then wage law with vindicating affections,
meaning and menacing the utter overthrow and undoing of the adversary, and yet
this complaint observed, would abate a world of processes, which are frequently
more out of rage and stomach, then for any wrong or damage.

Shortly one may say of our Law that of the Apostle, the law is good if one use
it lawfully. Now to use it lawfully the monition of the Wiseman must not be
transgressed Contend not with one that is mightier then thy self. Luke 14.31.
When one comes against us with 20000 we must compute, whether we be able to
withstand him with 10000, and if not, comply with him, and count the first end
best, it is against true wisdom, albeit a man's cause be honest and just, to
enter lists with them that are too strong for him, and tempt God for unlikely
assistance, that might overcome not right (Sir. 13.2.3) Again, they cannot
lawfully use the law, that are not able to dispatch a suit without
extraordinary distraction and impediment in the best things, for such are not
apted by God to sue; and therefore they should rather lose a little of their
worldly goods, then endanger their souls, better then all the good of the
whole world. Without controversy it is one of the most difficult of hard
duties, to follow a suit in love. Men lightly no sooner begin to endeavor
prosecution of suits in charity, and with temper of piety, but their suits
readily determine in some equal or convenient order or agreement. It may not
be buried in oblivion that God would not have David build a house to his name,
1. Chron. 28.3.
because he had bin a man of war, and had shed much blood; among other reasons
to signify, that the best and most just wars (such as David's were) do yet
somewhat stain, for that if neighbors upon an impossibility to expedite a war
without some tincture of inhumanity, and bad excesses. Likewise some soil and
dust will be contracted in following a lawful suit, for therein will men so
long as men, more or less walk the ways of the world, or grace works a kind
of miracle. It is much observable that unnecessary and frequent use of lawing,
habits men in dispositions to contend for small, or no occasions: hence it
comes, that howbeit, they who are most in law, of all men most complain, and
verbally wish them that are out to keep the^ well, and (...) peace; yet
themselves are so bewitched, that though they always declame of the
inconveniences in lawing, they seldom or never give over suing.

Peradventure some is musing now, that all this is true, but that he has such
an injury thrust upon him, as no living soul can brook, have but the patience
to sit down a little, till thou may reckon with thy self, whether the
remedy will not be worse then the malady. Hes^od insults over his brother as a
child, that he could not read the riddle, (...)
that half is more then the whole, half with peace, So our Chaucer --

If I had righted all my harm,

My clothes would not have kept me h^lfe so warm.


more then the whole with strife. When the Solicitors, the Attorneys, the
Counselors, the Sergeants and Court fees, and the charge of your attending are
deducted, and the loss of your time and labor summed, the greater half is
gone.

Now if any be ambitious to have a day and conquer, cannot the Sun sooner
force a man to lay aside his garment then the wind? A little reflection of love
will more speedily melt and master an adversary, then much boisterous standing
out in terms of Law. Men often sue out of high spirit, and to have their wills,
and that is as uncouth a way to come by their will, as any other in this earth.
For that a worm when trod upon turns again, and winds one into some deal
of trouble before he shake it off Commune with thine own heart, and inquire
whether it be not better, fairly to appear to thy neighbor and seek peace,
then notwithstanding the braverie of thy spirit, to be burried from Court to
Court, to stand bare as a poor suitor, when thou give a rich fee, to dance
attendance after a Subsolicitor, thy self to solicit even servants, for
access and expedition.

General y a tithe of the P^ losophy, respect and insinuation that is ^x^cised
to oun^^ll, and for judgment would suffice o draw the pa^ti^s m^n impleade, to
accord in some rbi^ra^ion, or other loving end. Lord JESUS what a molestation is
it to an ingenuous mind to be entangled and cumbered in sui^es, to be unto
his cost, made conscious unto the abuses, that in some mea^ure will ever be
found in some officers of Courts, yea and himself to be wound in sometimes to
descend into dishonorable attempts rather then fail^!

The Author of the imperfect work, Author operis imperfecti in M^tth hom. 12.
Quia necesse est ut humilies te coram judice, and subditus fias illi, propter
necessitatem cause. And again, quia omne judicium irritatio cordis est, and
cogitationum malarum. Aut verbis aut fraudibus, aut pecunii^ expugnetur, causae
tuae adesse festines; et si ab initio confilium non habuis^i ut ageres, postea
si^ agere ipsius controversiae necessitas non compellit, nam primum pro lucro
ta^tummodo festinabas, postea jam and pro pudore contendis, and magis contentus
es etiam peccare, tartu^ ut vincas, quam vinci tantum ut non pecces.
has a rare disswasive from lawing, because thou must needs humble thy self
before the Judge, and be subject to him, for the necessity of thy cause.
Again, because all suite is a provocation of the heart, and evil projects. If
men b^ once entered, they desire not the truth of the cause may appear, but
however, to have the victory; so if thou see that thy cause as it often
falls out is overborne, either by favor, or fraud, or bribes, thou make all
haste to assist thy cause, though from the beginning, thou had no purpose so
to do, in process the necessity of the controversy compels thee to do so,
for at first thy strife was only for gain, afterward thou contendest also for
glory, and art more content even to sin, only that thou may overcome, then
to be overcome only that thou may not sin.

But if there be no redress, but a Christian is necessitated to proceed in
courses of law, as it familiarly happens, chiefly to beneficed men, who are
sworn to defend the rights of the Church, and who in suit are not so much
themselves, as others, because if they succeed, the benefit for the greater
part issues to their successors. Yet in them and all suits, if a Christian will
make no breach in his Christianity, he must imitate our famous Countryman St.
RICHARD Bishop of Chichester, Fit^ ejus c. 10. Apr. 3. Ai^bat n. si inter
parts fint lites and dissidea, dum suum quaeque vult you repe^ere ac tueri, non
debere charitatis signa inter Christianos omitti, aut negari, sin inquit quod
meum est volo recuperare, non debeo, quod Dei est alteri subtrahere.

The ancient Popes by Apostolical authority refused for testes, Suspectos
inimicos, aut facile litigantes, S. Pontianus Epist. 2.

Ejus qui frequenter litigat, and ad causandum facilis est testimonium nemo
absque grandi examine recipiat. Conc. Carthag. 7. c. 54.


who demeaned himself most lovingly to them he was forced to vary with in
defense of his Church, expressing all good will, and grace to them in special;
for said he, If between parties there be actions, and debates, whiles each
will demand and defend his right, the expressions of charity ought not to be
omitted, or denied amongst Christians, for if I will recover that which is
mine, I ought not to retain from another that which is Gods.

When all is said, there is no such way to put by an huge mass of contentions,
and discharge wranglers of their frivolous suits, as if the grave Judges shall
be pleased to shame, and, as their sage wisdom knows best how, to censure
them that molest their Country, with suits of no value. And in truth it is
pity, that without some exemplary penalty, any one should be permitted to
trouble his Country, and 24 honest men for a trespass of a halfepenny, a
farthing damage, etc. Zach. 8.16. Ye that sit in places of judicature, are to
judge judgment of peace, therefore nothing is more congruous to their
honorable seat, then to affront quarellers, and absurd plaintisses.

CHAP. III. CHAP. 3.
Containing a double motion to Lawyers, for the advancement of Peace.
WHiles I am searching after all means, to qualify the vain humor of
Lawing, it is not importune to propose a double suite to the Lawyers themselves
for the advancement of peace. The one is, that they would refuse to plead in
an ill cause, and use competent diligence, to examine the truth of a cause
before they undertake it. Epist. 54. As if a Judge sell jusium judicium, aut
testis verum testimonium, Epist. 59.
For that of St. Augustine is certain truth, it is theft to sell things not
saleable, as for a Judge to sell just judgment, or a witness true testimony,
or an advocate the defense of a bad cause. It is not denied, Lib. 12. c. 6.
Neque vero pudor obstet, quo minus susceptam cum mellor videretur litem,
cognita inter dicendum iniquitate dimittat, cum prius litigatori dixerat verum,
nam and in hoc maximum si aequi judices sumus beneficiu^ est, ut non fallanum
vana spe litigantem, neque est dignus opera p^troni, qui non ^titur consilio,
and certe non convenit ei, quem oratorem esse volumus injusta tueri scientum.
but that by misinformation, though they be wise and wary, they may come to
appear in an evil business, all that we request, is their forbearance after
they discern the injustice of the side they stand on, which Quintilian exacts
of his Orator. Let shame be no hinderance but that the injustice perceived in
the pleading he dismiss the cause, which when it seemed the better he
undertook, when he has told the truth before unto his Client: for even in
this if we be equal Judges is very great kindness, that we deceive not the
Client with vain hope, neither is he worthy the patronage of an Advocate or
Counselor, who governes not himself by his counsel, and verily it suits not
with him, whom we hold for an Orator, wittingly to maintain unjust matters.

And if a man could not be a good Pagan Orator, and wittingly defend in an
unjust cause, with what face shall he bear the name of a Christian Lawyer,
that r^gards not causes, but fees? Let them look to their consciences and
practices. Theologues unanimously agree, that Pleaders are bound to
restitution, if after they take knowledge thereof, they bear out an urighteous
suite.

Apost. constit. l. 4. c. 3.
St. CLEMENT testifies, that from the beginning, Bishops were to repudiate the
oblations of notorious sinners, and among other to shun pleaders that
undertook the defense of an unjust cause: S Gelasius p. 1. Adversus
Lupercalia: Bonarum causorum impugnatio, malaru^que defensio.
And St GELASIUS concludes, among other sins that attract general
judgments, the impleading of good causes, and defending of bad. Now if they
except that Divines dispute against the truth, and why then may not they plead
against it? If the cause go ill, the blame is in the ignorance, or oversight
of the Judge. The answer is ready and clear, that Divines dispute against the
truth, only for exercise, neither intending, nor enduring any to be borne into
credence by their arguments; which if they conceive any to be, themselves are
tied to solve them. And we are not against Lawyers pleading at their plea^ure
in their hals and chambers, for trial of their wits, and bolting out cases,
but in judicial pleas, when the real interests of men are in earnest skanned,
every good man must say with PAUL, I can do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth, and by our rules if pleading an ill cause they see it taking,
themselves are obliged to discover the mist, that obscures the truth.

My other suite to Lawyers is, that they would be pleased to consider, that our
special vocation must hold intelligence with our general calling, and
therefore because all men as Christians are called to peac^, and ought what in
them is to prevent contention, and promote peace, Lawyers when Cli^nts repair
to them, like as they give them advice for their suits as Lawyers, so as
Christians they are to give them counsel of peace. I spare to suggest how, if
God put these good motions into their hearts, they will not want words, to
incite unto peace, and a word from one of them will be more prevalent, then an
oration of some other. There is reason they should be more jealous of
themselves then ^th^^ men, that they be not criminal in omitting (...)
persuade peace, because their gaining by the contrary puts them in danger to
neglect the most Christian office.

As ( Hos. 4 8) God complained of the Leviticall Priests, that they did eat up
the sins of his people, and set their heart on their iniquity. Whereas
sacrifices served among other uses for a kind of mulct to restrain sin,
diverse that lived thereby, counted other men's sins, as their meat and
drink, and because the more sins, CHAP. 4.
the more sacrifices, they lift up their hearts in desire of them, and joyed
upon complaints and informations. So there is peril left the livelihood of men
increasing by suits, they should forget to sorrow for the contentions
multiplying in their country, for preventing whereof a conscientious man of
law, will bind himself seriously to commend peace unto all that have recourse
to him for counsel. And in so doing, we will wish that eminent profession good
luck with their honor, and that they may still ride on, and prosper.

CHAP. IV. Touching the public Peace of a Commonwealth.
PVblique Peace is the happiness of a State. Psalm. 144.13, 14. Blessed are the
people that are in such a case. (...).
PLATO says, that a City is at the best by peace. The Prophet could wish no
greater bliss to his beloved City, then that peace might be within her walls.
Wherefore all good subjects must concur to make peace, praying that Princes
may live in peace, 1. Tim. 2.2. And fly the effusion of Christian, of humane
blood, which condemns their cruel spirits, that rejoice in wars, and are no
more affected, with the shedding the blood of those, that dissent from them, in
some controversies of religion, then if they were Turks, or Jews, or dogs,
but God will scatter over all desolate places the people that delight in war,
according to the prayer indicted by his own spirit, peace is the end of war,
Deuteronomy. 20.10. God give us peace, war be to his enemies. Ier. 29.7. Christians
though captives, under idolatrous and persecuting states, are to intercede for
the peace of them, and their Cities.

Though the Commonwealth should be against the Church, yet because the Church
subsists in it, she ought to seek the peace of it. Judge then whose spirit is
in too many, both of the Church of Rome, and of our own Schismatics, that
they esteem it conscience to speak evil of them that are in authority, if
they stop the current of their faith, and repute all war religious, that is
against the enemies of their opinions, be such children of peace, or sons of
confusion?

Surely there is no greater demonstration of the malignant spirit reigning in
men, then to blaspheme the Gods upon earth, to revile dignities, and attribute
all public judgments to public authority, to be turbulent in all
assemblies, given to change and undermine the foundations and pillars of Church
and State. 2. Pet. 2.11. The Angels though by their office they make report of
the miscarriage of Princes, yet their accusation is without railing, in
contemplation and reverence of their high functions, and Gods image in them.

Jude v. 9 Has a marvailous amplification that MICHAEL who is the prime in the
supreme order of Angels, when he contended with the devil, the captain of
all the ranks of evil spirits, durst not bring against him railing
accusation, because though the devil be deserted of all grace, yet he remains
in the principality of his naturals, and in eye to the eminency thereof, the
Angels forbear his reproach. Here is astonishment! Durst not the highest
Angel in heaven, revile the most wicked fiend in hell, and how then dare men
calumniate and de^ame the gods upon earth? But let us turn our thoughts from
sectaries, to meditate that where unity is in a land, illic mandavit Deus
benedictione^ (Psalm 133.1.3.) there God commands a blessing, but a Kingdom
divided -- therefore all good people must labor to preserve good
correspondence between rulers and their subjects, and good conceit each of
others. Seditions, sidings, heart-burnings, distaste of the present regiment is
a great unhappiness in a state, and an object of tedious consideration to the
wise. ( Jude. 5.15.) Because of the divisions of Reuben, there are great
thoughts of heart. The Political writers observe it a dangerous forerunner of
alterations, sinisterly and unreverently to apprehend and interpret Governors,
and that there seldom or never come any more pleasing then those they so
misprise, God punishing upon them the dishonor of his Vicegerents. And so
much shall suffice to have spoken of Political Peace.

CHAP. V. CHAP. 5.
Concerning Ecclesiastical Peace.
PEace is the leagacie that CHRIST bequeathed his Church. Ioh. 14.27. De
simplicitate prolatorum. Dona omnia suae pollicitationis and praemia in p^cis
conservatione promisit. Hanc nobis haereditatem dedit.
My peace I leave unto you: as the glorious Martyr Cyprian dilates it, he has
engaged all promises and blessings to us, in the preservation of peace, and
left us peace for our inheritance. Therefore we must sue for this peace, as
the chief inheritance of the Church. Our Lord would have all his Church one
fold, and in it one Faith, his truth followed in love, and all his members tied
together in the bond of peace. The Kingdom of God is in peace, therefore out
of peace, out of grace, fiery spirits that inflame and kin^le discentions, are
enemies to the Churches bliss. The Churches were at peace with the word for
the first and best times. Pray we then for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that seek her quiet.

Our great Master has laid two special commandments upon us ( Mark 9.5) Have
salt in your selves, and have peace one with another, injoyning incorruption of
doctrine in salt, S. Gregor. in Evang. ho^. ^. Pastor. l. 2. c. 4.
unity of affections in peace, and implying that the salt of true doctrine is
not savourie it nor seasonable, but as it consists with the peace of the
Church: and therefore Churches and States often times for cause prohibit
predicants or disputants to intermeddle one way or other in diverse tenets,
because though one part should have salt, neither would have peace. Iam. 3.17.
The wisdom that descends from above, is first pure then peaceable; Sermon. de
multiplici utilitate verbi Dei. Tum demum a Deo esse noveri^ si pacifica si^^,
etc.
wherefore devout St BERNARD informs us right, if a thought seem pure not
tending to vice, but pretending the image of virtue, thou shall finally know it
to be of God, if it be peaceable, and subject to the judgment of our
Prelates, Fathers and Brethren in CHRIST.

Then as in all sciences and professions the inferiors and learners submit to
the superiors and Masters: this course ought the Faithful to take in all
opinions of Divinity, private men to inquire of their Rectors or Curates, that
are known to be conformable, the Rectors to resort to their superiors in the
Church, and the present Church to refer it self to the general prime and
Apostolical. Private spirits that love by-ways, walk not the beaten way of
the Church, are far from the spirit of Christ. Prove. 1.8. My Son for sake
not the Law of thy Mother, not of the chief mother on earth, our holy mother
the Church.

This I may safely assevere, that in all ages so much the more Learned
Religious and Holy that any man has been, so much more observant and
reverencing the Church, the particular Church wherein he lived. 1. Cor. 14.32.
Let the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets. He has sucked in
the proud spirit of Lucifer, not the humble spirit of our Lord JESUS, that will
not conform and be subject to his Church.

As if doubt arise what is Law in England, and I say not professed Arbitrators,
or young Attourneyes, but able Lawyers differ in their opinions given under
their hands, and which is more, the Judges themselves sitting on the same Bench
agree not what is Law, then it is remitted to some general meeting of the
Judges, and when they have d^bated the case, what the greater part concurres
in, that must be held for the Law of England, otherwise there would be no end
of suits in England.

So if question be what is Church-doctrine in England, and I will not say this
or that Apothecarie, Weaver and the like, not Masters of Art, but crafts-men,
dissent in their conventicles, but great Divines are of contrary judgments.

And grant that Bishops themselves should disagree in their opinions, then what
the greater part of the Fathers of the Church consent upon, that must be held
the Faith of the Church of England, or there can be no end of controversies in
the Church of England. O that men would well and seriously consider, that as
the law of England is not in bare dead statutes, but in the lively voice and
accord of the great masters of law, the grave Judges, discussing statutes and
concluding what is law: so the Faith of England is not in the sole dead letter
of our Articles and Church book, etc. but in the living spirit and consent of
the Fathers of the Church, as proper Judges in Spiri^ualties, determining the
sense of the Articles, and declaring to us, the opinion of our Mother the holy
Church of England. And as the Judges have been, are, and no doubt shall ever
be able to resolve what is Law in England: so the worthy Prelates are and will
ever be sufficient to determine what is Faith in England; for our Bishops will
never be more to seek in their prof^ssion, then the Judges are in their
faculty. Wherefore as it were intolerable affectation in a Thealogue, to
attempt to show the learned S^rjeants and Iudg^s what is common Law, so is it
unsufferable presumption in a man of law, or any Layman, to go about to teach
skillful Church men and Bishops, what is Divinity, what Faith in England.

Walk we then by this rule, that peace may be upon us, let the Priest obey his
Ordinary, the Ordinary his Primate and fellow Brethren; and let the Sheep hear
the voice of his conforming Pastor, and inquire knowledge at his lips, that
so the Sheep may satisfy himself in its Pastor, the Priest in his Bishop,
the Prelate in his Metropolitan, and all the rest in the unanimi^ie, and peace
of the Church, which peace of the Church is disturbed, not when ignorant people
are informed against their fancies, lusts and liking, but when authority is
crossed in their rites, rules, and decrees. As to resume the former similitude,
they should disturb the peace of the State, not who deliver for law, what
Country-folks, and rural Counselors neither know, nor think to be law, but
who should publish that to be against law, which the Judges with great assent
give for law. So they disturb the peace of the Church, not who teach against
the belief of foolish Galathians bewitched by parlour Preachers, but who
contradict, what the rulers of the Church generally believe, and give out for
the Faith of the Church.

And as it should not advantage a Phantasticke crossing the resolution of the
Judges to say, the Judges are men, and may err, and that other Lawyers may
have as much insight in Law as they; so it excuses not a disobedient to
allege, that Bishops are men, and may be deceived, and that private Divines
may have as much skill in Theology as they. For nothing could be finally
concluded, if under pretense of the Judges being men, and the Bishops men,
that have not infallibility, their sentences might be controled by their
inferiors and ordinary subjects, and as private Divines and Lawyers may
possibly have as much knowledge, as Bishops and Judges: so many Bishops and
Judges have as much learning in Divine, and humane laws, as any Lawyers and
Theologues; and therefore are of sufficiency to determine, and decree for
political and Ecclesiastical peace.

But which would pity a man's heart, and increases the misery of them that
sustain the government of the Church, they that will not suffer themselves to
be guided by whole learned Churches, endure themselves to be seduced by a few
injudicious Sect-masters. And after a deal of fuming against the authority of
the Church, whatsoever I. C. or T C. says, is with them both Law and Gospel,
when not only Catholic Faith, but common sense adjudges it safer to follow
the conduct of whole Churches then singular persons. Of a truth the state of
private Christians, that repose themselves in the bosom, and judgment of
their Church is very secure, because they conscionably serving God in the Faith
thereof, though the Church should be mistook in some particulars of lesser
consequence, the Lord will impute it to her obedient children for invincible
ignorance, and accept their devotion, and service.

In Fox Page 1723.
Wherefore Bishop Ridley says judiciously, He that will not obey the Gospel,
must be tamed, and taught by the Law; gainsayers are to be openly rebuked,
and curbed by spiritual censures, and penal laws; otherwise Kingdoms,
Houses, Churches, States, will be all in divisions through them, that cause
more tumult in Church and Commonweal, then Swearers, Drunkards, and like
en^rmious livers. Which may serve by way of Apology, against the clamours of
ignorant Zelots amongst us, crying out of unmercifulness in Rulers, because
they are (as such as they say) more opposed and punished then profane ill
livers.

Beloved if St. PAUL were alive, he would wish they were ( Gal. 5.12) there is
all reason it should be as they say, for that they do more mischief by
cunning hypocrisy and corrupt doctrine, then the other by dishonest living.
Howbeit against their calumnies such vicious livers are deservedly made
examples for their scandalous conversation, so often as they be detected in
Courts. I pray you if a man live civilly for moral carriage, and yet be ever
complaining of the statutes of the land, and faulting the conclusions, and
directions of the Judges, shall not he deserve to be restrained more then an
intemperate liver, that lives in good liking of the present state and is no
medler: and is there not the same cause that in the Church they that bear a
semblance of godliness in a malignant talent, that they may be the more
popular in resisting the constitutions thereof, should be censured sooner and
more, then obedients that are defective in some moralities.

Neither is there any Church except ours, where unconformists are suffered. For
whatsoever copy of a countenance they sometimes make abroad, at home, and
where they can command, neither Geneva it self, no nor Amsterdam, will permit
any of their subjects to be, and go against their orders, articles, analogies,
and ca^echismes. No man is ignorant that in some countries they tolerate diverse
religions, but what religion soever any man professes, to the doctrine and
discipline of that he is close to hold himself, or else he is cast out.

CHAP. 6.
Now our disturbers bear themselves for children of our good mother, the holy
and ancient Church of England, not for New-Englanders nor Amsterdammites, and
yet in our Temples will they have fashions by themselves, which is gross
confusion, and a most factious deviation from Ecclesiast^cke peace, the
fullness whereof let us for ever entirely wish to holy Church.

CHAP. VI. Of the Blessing that rests upon the Peacemakers.
WE have done with the blessed work of Peace makers, and will now proceed to
their Blessing for that work; They shall be called the Sons of GOD. Which
blessing incourages to the work; if thou find it a great labor to make
peace, consider that it is a great matter to be a child of God. They shall
be called, and Gods calling is no empty sound, but constitutes what it
calls. 1. Ioh. 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us,
that we should be called the Sons of God. The honor of that title is so
great, that as the highest style, the creature is capable of, it serves for the
chief inducement to virtue, and rapts into admiration all contemplators, that
God should be so incomprehensibly gracious, as to advance a poor worm to that
sublime dignity. Very divinely St. PRIMASIUS, In Romans 5.2. Quod sperare nullus
audebat, quod si forte in mentem alicujus in^rdisset potera^ aestimare, se in
blasphemia^ incurrisse, quod adeo magnum est, ut a mu^tis pro ipsa magnitudine
incredibile videotur, eo quod speramus gloriam filiorum Dei nos consecuturos.
We are preferred by Faith and Hope higher then any durst have presumed of
himself, to be and be called the Sons of God. Which no man durst have
hoped, which if by chance it had come into a man's mind, he might have judged
himself to have incurred blasphemy, which is so great, that for the very
greatness it seems to many incredible, in that we hope, that we shall obtain
the glory of the Sons of God.

Therefore our Redeemer rayses the estimate of a Peacemaker to higest by
intitling him, to an appropriation in Gods Sonneship. Hence sprang that saying
of St. NAZIANZEN, Sermon. 17. ad finem. (...).
we must understand so great a good stored up for Peacemakers, that in the
order of happy saved men, they alone are denominated the Sons of God, they
and those that love their enemies. The peaceable is the son of God in his
constitution, the peacemaker in his function. For when the mind is sweetly
reposed in God, without contradiction of the flesh or world, there arises inner
peace, In Ps. 28. ad finem. (...)
which is the state of the purified soul, and such are most the Sons of God;
for though mercy resembles men to God, in outer operations, yet peace most of
all in the inner affections. Shall I venture to translate a passage of St.
BASILS. Peace seems to be the most complete of Beatitudes, being a good frame
of the ruling power, so that the peaceable man has his distinctive note, in
that his manners are composed, but he that is combatted of evils has not yet
attained the peace that is of God, which the Lord gave to his Disciples, which
transcending all intellect keeps the souls of the worthy: which the Apostle
wishes to the Churches; saying Grace and Peace be multiplied to you. Thus the
peaceable is the Son of God in constitution, now the peacemaker is the son
of God in function by special vice-gerency, to the God of Peace; who makes
those that are of one mind to dwell in one house, and by officiating CHIRSTS
place (qui facit utrumque unum) that makes both one ( Ephesians. 2.14) Good Pastors
and people are styled the salt of the earth, Qui facit unanimes habitare in
domo una.
L. 7. ad fin. Dum pauperes spiritu: Pars erant condime^ti, beati dum pacifici
totum fuerant condimentum.

Sermon. 53. Non pervenitur ad nomen filii Dei, nisi per nomen pacifici, pax est
charissima quae spoliat hominem servitute, dat nomen ingenuum, mutat apud Deum
cum condition personam, ex famulo filium, liberu^ facit ex servo Pastoral. l.
3. 24.

S. Leo de quadrages. sermon. 11. Dice^te domino beati pacifici quia filii Dei
vocabuntur, deponantur omnium desideriorum, odiorumque certamina. Apud enim
summum patrem, qui non fuerit in charitate fratrum, non habebitur in numero
filiorum.


as not only themselves peaceable, but making peace among others, and so
preserving the world from tumult and confusion.

Finely St. OPTATUS, the godly as poor in spirit, as meek, as just, were a
part of the seasoning, the blessed as Peacemakers are the whole salt. No virtue
is more dignified, then that of Peacemakers, in the hearts and mouths of all
men, agnizing them as the true children of the God of Peace, better and more
then men.

Prove. 12 20. The counselors of peace shall have joy, they that are somewhat
angry with them for the present, will thank them afterward, and highly praise
them, which should set an edge on our affection of peacemaking. In the word of
CHRYSOLOGUS, There is no coming to the denomination of a Son, but by the
name of a Peacemaker. This blessing pronounced by CHRIST on the Peacemaker,
involves a malediction upon the peace-breaker, as St. GREGORY reasons, if
peacemakers be the children of God, make-bates be the children of the devil.
And this is heavy news for tale-bearers, whisperers, medlers, setters of
discord, animators of others in suite, men full of debate, and delighting in
contentions.

Wherefore as we prize the noble style of Gods Sons, let us study
pacification. Col. 3.12. Let peace be umpire in all our actions, all things be
carried as may stand with peace. Only beware that our inclination to peace
degenerate not into a carnal affectation of ease, and forbearance to discharge
our conscience and place for fear of troubles. Matthew. 10.34. But beg we of
God the gift of wisdom, S. Aug. de verbis Apostoli, sermon. 24.

S. Aug. de civitate Dei. l 10. c 13. Pax est tra^quillitas ordinis.


that as St. AUGUSTINE teaches, corresponds to this Beatitude, for that
executes things in due order, And Peace is defined the tranquillity of order.

Brethren ye are called unto Peace (1. These. 4.11.12) That is our calling,
therefore we are every man in his rank, to officiate the services of peace.
St. CALIXTUS piously decrees, S. Call. p. Ep. 1. Hom^ni religioso parum esse
debet, mimiciti^s altorum non ex^rcere, vel non augere male loquendo, do, nisi
etiam eas extinguere been loquendo studuerit.
that it must be little in a religious man, not to exercise the enmities of
other men, or not to add oil to the fire of contentions by speaking ill,
unless by fair speeches he study to quench it. Let none then acute others in
strife, but each reminde other of the duties and commodities of Peace, and make
it our labor, In vita ejus c. 1. Ma^^ 8. Pacem habere cum omnibus pacem
suadere, and ad pace^ revocare discordes.
with the parents of St. PETER Archbishop of Tarentasium, To have peace with
all, to counsel peace, and revoke into peace parties at variance.

St. PAUL (1. Cor. 6.5) Blaming the Lawsuits among the Corinthians, casts some
aspersion upon them all in those words, I speak to your shame, is it so that
there is never a wise man among you? Studendum est Epis. copi^, ut dissilentes
fratres, sive clericos, sive laicos, ad pacem magis quam ad judicium
cohortemur. Conc. Carth. 4. c. 26.
So then it is some discredit to wise and understanding men, not to mediate and
use such means that the controversies falling out amongst them may be
compromised and composed.

All men are to make peace, but most of all men, CHRIST'S Ministers are to ply
that blessed work, publicly and privately, as who not only by general
vocation, but also by special calling are the servants of the God of Peace. 2.
Tim. 2.22 24. And the servant of God must not strive, nor animate others in
strife, but labor a Peace. Hence it has ever been a maine endeavor of all
holy Bishops, and most famous and worthy Preachers, by their exhortations and
entreaties to reconcile parties at difference, as Peter Raizan has noted in
the life of St. Vincentius. In vit S, Vincentii Ferrarii c. 8. April. 5
And Guigo Carthusianus relates that St. Hugh In vit. S. Hugonis Episc.
Gratiano politani c. 11^ Omne febre molestiora sibi placita*
Bishop of Grenople, was induced to be present, and judge litigious causes,
only in respect of peace, especially in behalf of the poor, and the Church,
for he would say that pleas and law terms, were more grievous to him then ague
fits, and that by all means he would renounce them, if that he did not know
that he should therein offend God. When he perceived implacable hatred in
any, and irreconcilable defiance, then strongly assured of Gods assistance, and
melted in affections of charity, and humility, be would most instantly and
devoutly supplicate to the parties offended, for the offenders, and for that
cause not stick to prostrate himself at the feet of mean persons, CHAP. 7.
forasmuch as the common people are incident to extremes, because they be of
little judgment, and so are acted by objects rather then acting, therefore the
Ministry that rules the ears and orders the consciences of the multitude, S.
Hieron. in Galat. 5.3.
must frame them to indifferency, which shall not be impossible to compass, if
by effectual urging the essential and well known duties of Christianity we
win their hearts, and so train them on in moderation and accommodation to
the State and Church.

I will speak my conscience freely without dissimulation. I apprehend our
English people to be as tractable, and inclinable to all obedience in
government, and excellency in religion, as any other in the world, save as they
are distracted by some unconforming ministers, who by factious and seditious
teachings, repugnant to the master of humility and meekness, the Lord of
pea^e, become the authors and fomentors of all rents, schisms, and disquiet in
the people. It has ever been grateful to the multitude, to utter invectives
against governors, especially Ecclesiastical, hereupon to be gracious with
the people, and have them flock to their lectures, these men pleasers, and
(which is baser) these women pleasers, can never exercise without some fault
finding with the higher powers, especially the Clergy, and Ofcers of the
Church, for that is a hidden mystery to multiply benevolences, and (...), even
from such as can ^^spare the^ (...) a pride, to terrify people with fears of
alterations, and I know not what, which themselves dread no more then the
falling of the sky, only they are most active and wise in their generation,
and know no contributions come, for sermons of repentance and obedience to the
God of heaven, and gods upon earth; and that the silly vulgar hold no man
zealous and excelling, that exceeds not so far as to merit censure in some
high Court. But I will take my leave of these men of separation, praying that
they may once entertain the peace of God and his Church.

CHAP. VII. Of the qualifications prerequisite in a Peacemaker, and Arguments
that urge Peacemaking.
IT is a good lesson of Aegidius Minorita, He that would keep peace, must
prefer all men before himself. In vita ejus c. 38. Qui pacem servare vult,
debet omnes sibi anteferre:
Phil. 2.2.3. For so he will gladly yield to other, and suffer by them without
grudging, as we bear patiently the injuries of our Superiors, Parents, Lords,
Masters.

He that is in peace is not suspicious, he that would be in peace must not
cast the worst, but draw things to fair construction, attend the disposition
of men that he provoke them not by indiscretion, but apply himself to them in
their own way. Iam. 3.17. He must be equal, and seeing he would not have
others stiff with him, he is to condescend in tolerable matters, both for
judgment and manners, and not be his own judge, but contented to have his
differences arbitrated by temperate and discreet men. 2. Cor. 6.5. He must be
easy to be persuaded by indifferent and intelligent persons, and cautious,
when he is injured how he runs for counsel to the^ that make a living by
contention, or that be themselves controversy men, and of a quarrelsome nature
and conversation, but let him repair for advice to men of peace and moderation.

Lastly, according to Christ's method ordering the Beatitudes, he must be pure
in heart, and so a Peacemaker. Wisdom if it be first pure, will then be
peaceable. Iam. 3.17. A heart purged of vainglory, rancour, ill will, is ready
to seek and make peace. Take away bitterness, self-will, high-mindednesse and
their like, and you raze the Pillars of contention and lawing, for many and
many sue not so much for injury done them, as to avenge themselves and damnifie
others. In (1. Pet. 3.11. We read, eschew evil, do good, Si contendamus
vere^dum est, ne nos quoque jud^cemur esse carnoles, scriptum est enim. 1. Cor.
3.3.11.16. B. Ambros. de fide l. 5. 6. 1.
then follows seek peace and ensue it, for that is the way to have peace in
our consciences, and with God, and with man, for nothing interrupts our peace
with God but doing of evil, and omission of good. And among men. Iam. 4.1.
Whence come strifes, debates, contentions, come they not from hence, from the
lusts that war in our flesh. Wherefore depart from evil, and all unkind
offices; do good, love all, pray for all, be courteous to al perform not only
duties of justice but mercy, let charity make that benign, long suffering,
patient, not seeking thine own things, but the things of others, and thou art
in the suburbs of Peace, and if thou seek, shall easily inquire and make it.

Thus of the qualifications prerequisite in a Peacemaker, now for the
inducements for every man to make peace in his station, Ministers by monition,
Magistrates by power, and all by Prayer and practice.

1. Weigh your own experiments and compare the content of peace and quiet of
the whole man therein, with the regrate that accompanies contention, and see if
the falling out with one man sprinkles not the soul with more gall, tedious
and unpleasant thoughts in one day, then peaceable living with a whole town
all a man's age, that the Psalmist might justly sing, that it is not only good,
but pleasant to dwell in unity. Ps. 133.1. and St. Paul Gal. 5.22. couple joy
and peace. That in Esaias, there is no peace to the wicked, the Septuagint in
much sense translate, (...).
there is no joy: and for that which we say is he well, the Hebrews asked is
there peace to him, for he is ill at ease, that is not in peace. Romans 14.17.
the Kingdom of heaven is in righteousness, peace, joy, of which wittily St.
Isidore Polusiate, L. 3. Ep. 246.
in Christ's Kingdom righteousness produces peace, and peace brings forth joy.

De simplicitate Praelatorum. Pacomquar^re debet filius pacis.
2. A true Christian is a child of Peace, Luke 10.6. And as St. Cyprian infers,
the child of Peace, must seek peace, the child of peace that is regenerate
and sanctified by virtue of divine peace, and has thereby unruly passions
allayed in him, is in the nature of that peace of God inclined to peace with
men, the wicked as at difference with God the fountain of unity, are prone to
jarre with all others, have no peace in themselves, and their own affections,
which prompts them to disquiet and injury others, and much more when they are
wronged to revenge it on others, the wicked have no peace of conscience, and
therefore make no conscience of peace. Noah's Dove returned to the Arc with an
Olive branch, an ensign of peace, the Church is the house of peace, and every
child thereof must erect what in him is, the banner and the color of peace.
What is the mystery of that ( Es. 11.6, 7) that through the virtue of CHRIRTS
Nativitie, the Woolfe shall cohabit with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid,
the Calfe, the yang Lion and the Fatling keep together, in the leading of a
little child, the Cow feed with the Bear, and the Lion compasture with the
Ox, and a suckling child play with the Aspe and Cockatrice, but that grace
acccommodates, and forms the worst, and most harsh natures to peaceable
converse, takes the Beast out of a man's bosom, and leaves him humane and
reasonable, one that would benefit all, will hurt none. Psa. 85. Righteousness
and peace kiss each other, grace and peace go inseparably together.

3. Iam. 3.14, 15, 16. Where strife is there is confusion, and every evil
work, the confluence of all the mischief and evil that is hatched by the
pestiferous wisdom of earth, man, devil* God is not the author of confusion,
but of peace. 1. Cor. 14.33. and what good can be in that, wherein God has no
agency? And what evil can be in that which is of Gods efficiency? It is
observable that among the seventeene mortal sins annumbred by St. PAUL (
Gal. 5) eight of them are of the adverse part to Peace, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, and that all the nine
fruits of the spirit, there specified, are peace, Pausanias reports that at
Atheas, after the statu^s of those that denominated their t^ibes, were (...).
the images of the gods Amphiaraus and Eirene, bearing the child Pluto in her
arms. In Atticis. p. 13.

Ipse qui pax est, atque charitas, sedem in bonis and pacificis voluntatibus
constituit. B. Hilar. in Matthew. Docu^sti concordiam simul junctam vinci omnino
non posse, quicquid simul petitur a cunctis Deum pacis pacificis exhibere, B
Cypr Ep. 1.

In tantum humanae pacis studuit concordiae, ut unitatis merito, omni^ quae a
Deo precanda sunt, impetranda esse confirmet, etc. S. Hill.


and the assistants thereof; to imply what a concourse of fleshly evils is in
strife, and that all the sweetness of the spirit issues and meets in peace.

If we were mercenary peace might allure us as breeding plenty, therefore the
Greeks prettily contrived Eirene (peace) to be nurse of Pluto (their god of
wealth.) Job. 5.24. Peace is a tabernacle for the custody of outer things, the
peace of God keeps, all peace is of a saving nature. Then if we looked no
further then this earth, it is the period of temporal favors, to go to the
grave in peace. Genesis 15.15.

Now if we be for God and his graces, Psalm. 76.2. In Salem is Gods Tabernacle,
the Lord inhabits in peaceable souls, in pace locus ejus, God would have
Solomon the mirror of peace, called Iedidiah (2. Sam. 24.25) beloved of the
Lord; God approves his regard of peace, by that respect in which he assumes to
gratify it. Matthew. 18.19. If two of you shall agree, whatsoever ye shall ask
it shall be done unto you: which St. Hilarie thus expounds, he was so studious
of concord, and peace among men, that all things to be desired of God* are to
be obtained by the merit of unity, for which cause St. CHRYSOSTOM. affirms that
nothing so promoves our affiance and affairs with God, In Tom. hom. 2.
as does peace, for before his judgments charity, and unity grow cold. And
what has not our Savior done to dignifie peace, SOLOMON his type after the
signification of his name, the very flower of peace, 2. Chron. 22.9.
Melchisedech the forerunner of his sacred order King of Salem, which is King
of Peace. Heb. 7.2. Our dear Lord JESUS pleased to be borne, in the time of
the most ample Peace, that ever the world enjoyed, for the renown of peace and
to evidence the most supereminent blessings to concur with it. Nay this great
peacemaker of Heaven and earth. Col. 1.20. Vouchsafed to bear the
chastisement of our peace. Esaias 53.5. Would rather dye then not make peace.

CABASILAS wills us to take notice, De vita in Christo. l. 6.
that peace is so precious, that when CHRIST came upon earth, that he might
minister peace to men, and found nothing valuable to it, he laid down his own
blood in liew of the worlds peace, for because of those things that were then
produced and existing, he saw nothing comparable to the peace and
reconciliation he sought, he framed a new nature to himself, his own proper
blood, which exhibited he immediately became the reconciler and Prince of Peace.

Seeing then that God is the giver of Peace, Christ the Prince of Peace, the
Holy Ghost Peace it self (ipsa pax) the Gospel the word of Peace, the
Evangelists Ambassadors of Peace, Believers Sons of Peace, and that all
Christians are called unto Peace, let all hands join to make Peace, let us
judge Peace, and before and after and above all pray for Peace.

Ah Lord JESUS! breath once again upon thy people, and say Peace be unto you,
make up the breaches, that are in thy Sion, the rents that are in thy seamlesse
Coat, reunite the divided Churches, and grant that all they that confess thy
Holy name, may agree in the truth of thy Holy Word, and live in Unity and
godly Love, etc. Amen.

FINIS.
Beati qui Persecutionem patiuntur.

THE BLESSED SVFFERER.

A TREATISE OF PERSECVTION, handling the Last Beatitude.

By JAMES BUCK, Bachelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Stradbrooke in SVFFOLKE.

Quid illud, quod soletis de sustentatis persecutionibus gloriari, si Martyrs
non facit causa sed poena, cum diceretur, beati qui Persecutionem patiuntur,
frustra est additum propter justitiam. -- B. AUGUST, Epist. 2^^. Sic inter nos
composuerunt Clerici and circumcelliones vestri, ut vos Persecutionem, nos
Passionem sustiner^mus. NON SVM MELIOR PATRIBVS. LONDON, Printed by B.A. and T.
F. for JOHN CLARK, and WILL. COOK. 1637.

BEATI QVI PERSECVTIONEM PATIUNTUR.
MATTHEW. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they that are Persecuted, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Persecution for Righteousness.
THis Beatitude fi^ly ensues that of Peace, ^. Aug. de sermon. Domini in monte

That we should not think Peace to be always good, be subjoynes, Blessed are
the Persecuted. S. Chrysostom. hom 75.

This enlarged by St. Chrom^rim.


because they that are at peace within themselves, will not be disturbed by
external war, and that we may not look for a Peace here without Persecution.
And it as aptly closes all the rest, as a golden cross upon a chain of many
linkes, CHAP. 1.
for that the practice of Beatificall virtues, exciteth the displeasure and
contradiction of sinners It is proper to this Beatitude, that CHRIST doubles
it, pronouncing them blessed, that are persecuted for righteousness sake,
verse. 10. And them, that are reviled, and persecuted for his sake, verse. 11.
Whence some Moses gave ten Commandments, JESUS nine Beatitudes ( S. Chrysostom.
upon that 1. Cor. 15.28) when all things are subjected unto him. Cajetani
sentacula.
have took occasion to part it into two, and number nine Beatitudes; but it
seems better to determine the Beatitude to be but one, for the pious bearing
of unjust injuries, and then to distinguish two degrees therein, the one
absolute, for patient enduring of any wrong for a righteous cause, as Naboth
suffered, and that obtaines the Kingdom. The other superlative in such
suffering for a religious cause, and that obtaines a great reward in the
Kingdom. However the reduplication adds to the esteem of the Beatitude, and
animates our nature, that is averse from passion.

I will briefly touch upon the bliss that is in suffering for Rigteousnesse
sake, and then more largely handle that which is in suffering for CHRIST's
sake. Of the former three things, in three words.

1 Persecuted in regard of the inflictor, implies attempts by violent and
offensive ways to draw men unto something unlawful (and persecution imports
no single wrong, but a peremptory seeking the ruin of the persecuted) in
regard of the sufferer it signifies indurance of that which is most tedious,
and which nature flies, rather then to contrary, or divert any office of
righteousness, and that sets the price upon passion.

2 They are persecuted for righteousness, that suffer for just and sober
demeanure of themselves, and because they will not omit duly to officiate the
places wherein God sets them, Opus imperfect.
be it by great men for faithful and discreet applying Gods word against their
extravagancies, or by the multitude for not joining with them in national or
common sins, thus the Prophets suffered, and were Martyrs. St. Anselme
discourses, how Vitam S. Anselm. l. 1. c. 38. Palam est enim quod qui ne lev^,
contra Deum peccatum committat, mori non dubitat, multo maxim mori non
dubitaret, prius quam aliquo gravi peccato. Deum exacerberet.
St. John Baptist is honored by the Church, as a chief Martyr, who was slain
not because he would not deny Christ, but because he would not conceal the
truth, and forbear to speak against incestuous marriages: and he proves that
St. Elphege might justly be reckoned a Martyr, had he been put to death, only
because he would not redeem his life from the Danes, with such a sum of
money, as he could not levy without exaction, and oppressing his Tenants. For
it is evident that he who sticks not to dye, that he may not commit a light
sin against God, would a great deal much the more not stick to dye, sooner
then he would provoke GOD with any grievous sin.

This matter is most considerable in the Churches greatest prosperity, when
they that cannot take up other arms, be whetting their tongues against them
that follow after Righteousness. In Ps. 93. Magnus in qui^et Apostolu^, (...)
c^ilum vol^^^ q^omodo Elias (...)
B. AUSTIN does often largely insist in the dangerous tentation, that is by the
generality of l^^se Christians insulting over a few strict (quasi de ipsa
iustitia) and he is confident, that not only in times of Persecution, but
every day be there made Martyrs, De temp. sermon. 232 Sed quotidie martyrs
siunt. Domin^s ad marty^ti gloriam reputabit.
all that suffer any evil, because they will not yield to drunkenness, etc.
the Lord will repute it in an aestimate of Martyrdom: And he treates thus
with his auditorie, In Ps. 30. Concione ^. Incipe quicunque me au^is vivere quo
modo Christianus, and vide si non tibi objictatur and a Christianis, sed
nomine, non vita, non moribus. Noli erubescere spe tua, quomodo vivit in cord
tuo, sic habitet in ore tuo, quia non sine causa signum suum Christus in front
nebis sigi voluit, tanquam in sede pudoris, ^e Christi opprobrio Christianus
erubescat.
begin whosoever thou be that hear me to live as a Christian, and see if
thou be not upbraided for it even by Christians, but in name, not in life,
not in manners -- be not thou ashamed of thy hope, as he lives in thy heart,
so let him habit in thy mouth, for not without cause CHRIST would his sign
should be fixed in our forehead, as in the seat of shamefastness, that a
Christian may not be ashamed of the reproach of CHRIST.

Truly because as the profession of Christianity is hated by the Pagan, so the
virtue and power thereof by the profane, therefore we are at our Baptism
signed with the sign of the cross, for signification that we must not be
ashamed of Christian deeds for the opprobrious words of them, that are
Christians only in words, but shame and sorrow be upon them, who as St.
BERNARD says, De conversione ad Clerices, c. 31. Vsque adeo persecutionem non
sustinent propter justitiam, vt persecutionem malint, quam justitiae pertinere.
are so far from suffering persecution for righteousness, that they had
leifer be punished, then retain unto righteousness: as diverse suffer for
drunkenness, uncleanness, theeverie, perjury, heresy, schism, and
disobedience.

3 The Kingdom of Heaven is assigned unto sufferers, as theirs by right and
title of passion, by which rod the Lord gives deliverie and seisin thereof. And
it is said theirs is the Kingdom, not theirs shall be: the reward running in
the present, because God here crowns the difficulty of that service, with no
small tastes of heavenly joy.

STEPHEN* upon earth sees heaven open, Quid est quod Stephano exit obviam
beatitudo, and quasi extra coeli januas procurrit. Dronel in Zodiaco
Christiano. signo 9.
and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7. Beatitude as
it were running forth of heaven gates to meet him, for a declaration of those
says and preambles of beatificall vision and glory, which sufferers enjoy upon
earth. Romans 8.18. Remigius ibid.
The passions of this time are not worthy to be compared to future glory, if
one could have endured sufferings from Adams first sigh to the last man's last
breath, all those passions should have no full equality, nor just condignity to
the value of GODS Kingdom, the worth of eternal life transcends the dignity
of good works even as they issue from Grace, but for CHRIST'S merits it is
especially proposed to them, that have the charity to suffer for it, because if
any thing might be compared to future glory, passions would.

For that of LACTANTIUS holds, the Lib. 3. c. 11. Vis et natura virtutis in
malorum perferentia est.

(...). S. Clem. in Ep. ad Corinth. p. 8.


quintessence of virtue lies in the indurance of misery, therefore godly
suffering^ as the best deserts of the creature, are in highest reference and
respect to Gods Kingdom.

Excellently our worthy Countryman GILBERT, Supra Cant. ser. 30. Passiones
huju^ temporis cooperantur quidem, etsi non compaparantur ad futur^^^ gloriae
coronam.
the passions of this life, though they may not to be conferred, yet they do
confer to the future crown of glory, the thought whereof makes the Righteous
look up in their deepest pressures. ALTISIODORENSIS has a pretty strain. L.
Tract. 7. c. 5. quest. 4. Quoniam Petrus passus est proprie pro se, crucifixus
est vultu verso in coelum, ac si diceret ego patior pro regno coeli, ut illud
habeam, Christus vero passus est pro nobis non pro se, unde crufixus est vultu
verso in terra^, ac si diceret, propeccatoribus patior.
CHRIST suffered for us and our salvation, not his own, and therefore was
crucified with his face looking down to the earth, as if he should say, I
suffer for sinners: PETER because he suffered properly for himself, was
crucified with his face looking up to Heaven, as if he should say, I suffer for
the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. II. Of Suffering for CHRIST'S sake.
WE have touched upon the positive degree of Bliss, in the suffering for
Righteousness sake, now let us handle the superlative in suffering for CHRIST'S
sake, in pursuance whereof we shall go through these particulars. 1 The
Happiness it self, blessed are ye, when men revile and persecute you. 2 The
joy required in that Happiness, rejoice and be exceeding glad. 3 The cause
urging that joy, for great is your reward in Heaven. 4 The Argument concluding
that cause, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

First, for the happiness in suffering for CHRIST, Reproaches, Persecutions,
all injuries in word or deed, are blessed to the Sufferers. CHRIST here shows
himself (as is noted by St. CHRYSOSTOM) Lib. 1. Against the disp^nisers of
Monastical life.

Opus imperfect.


ready to reward, not only for death, imprisonment, stripes, but for simple
disgrace and injurious speeches. As in action we shall not lose the reward of a
cup of cold water: so in passion we shall not lose the recompense of a light
word, or gesture of disdain. He which touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye, Zach 2.8. Where says SALVIAN, De gubern Dei, l. 8. Ad exprimendam
teneritudinem pietatis suae, tenerrimam partem corporis humani nominavit, ut
apertissime intelligeremus Deumtam parva suorum contumelia laedi, quam parvi
verberis tactu, humani visus acies laderetur.
to express the tenderness of his gracious affection to us, he named the most
tender part of man's body, that we might most plainly understand, that with
how little a touch of a small stroke, the sight of man's eye would be offended,
with so little a contempt of his Servants is GOD injured.

And say all manner of evil of you, asperse you with all the evil names and
words that are in use, and coin new terms to diffame you, all evil is not
found in any man, but may be forged against him by a spiteful tongue, as DAVID
says of DOEG, thy tongue devises mischief, Psalm. 52.2. Neately St. HILARIE,
Quam natura ad eloquendas rationabiles cogitationes consulti cordis praparabat,
ipsa potius irrationabiles cogitat iniquitates.
that which Nature ordained to utter the reasonable devices of an advised
heart, that tongue fore-runnes the heart, and it self devises unreasonable
imputations. Broches contumelies that the heart knows not, and many times
cannot believe, so the tongue is the deviser, and all the Author.

It is worth the observing that our Master having spoken of revilings, after
one word of persecutions, which are the pains and penalties inflicted on
Christians in their bodies and states, returns again to more reproaches, and
saying all manner evils, that he might insinuate a method of the devil, in
his instruments first to traduce good men and causes, and then to proceed
against them as evil, and then to publish more and more obloquie and
scandalous fames of them.

And the same order of our Lords speech, imports that shame persecutes more
then pain, the tongue abstracts more from CHRIST, then the hand, nothing goes
more to the quick in the ingenuous then infamy. Hereupon Infidels, Heretics,
Schismatics, carnal Gospellers, have always with this weapon most oppugned
and prejudiced the Church. Neither were there ever any more outrageous in this
kind, then our Sectaries, and false Brethren, as their libellous Pamphlets
witness to the all world. Hence the Prince of Apostles in a passage of fiery
trial, interposes the special of reproach. 1. Pet. 4.12.14. And St. Paul (Heb.
10.34.11.36) records the trial of cruel mockings, amongst the most vexatious
of sufferings, and our Savior extends the blessedness for Persecution to all
words of disgrace, to up^old generous and noble spirits in bearing vile and
ignominious speeches.

Yet it is here declared, that ill words bring no bliss with them, unless
they be spoken falsely, for justice the grace of other things, is the
discredit of The Christians yt are mispoken, say it would never greeve them if
they had deserved it, may be put to School unto Socrates, who was unjustly
condemned to drink poison, and as he was setting the cup to his lips, his
wife Zantippe cried out, innocentem cum perimi quid ergo inquit, innocenti mihi
mori, sarius esse duxisti. Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2.
passions. 1. Pet. 2.20. Let patience therefore have its perfect work ( Iam.
1.4) which is to suffer undeservedly with a quiet mind.

And to the perfection of this Beatitude it is required that we be mispoken,
not alone falsely, but also for CHRIST'S sake. As. S. ISIDORE PELUSIOTE teaches,
Lib. 4. Epist. 9. and lib 5 Epist. 138. (...)
if we be falsely ill spoken of, though not for CHRIST, me shall receive the
reward of patience, but we shall not partake of that high blesfulnesse, which
we should partake of, if both did concur.

The Scripture uses in one meaning, for CHSISTS sake, for his name, for his
words, enlarging the glory to all sufferings that befall men, because they
belong to CHRIST, believe and observe his sayings. 1. Pet. 4.14. If you be
reproched in Christ's name; signifies that its not properly the Christians that
be reproached, but Christ in them, in whose person and name, and for whose
cause and truth, they are rejected. Luke 10.16. And therefore he so speaks,
PAUL why do that persecute me? Psalm. 69 10. (...)
The reproaches of them, that reproach thee are fallen upon me, the reproach is
cast directly on CHRIST, reflect^d on us, as his name is called upon us, were
it not for our reference and obedience to him, the wicked world would neither
say, nor do ill by us.

CHAP. 3.
Elegantly St. Paulinus, Epist. 1. ad Aprum. O beata injuria cum Christo
displicere.
it is a blessed despite to displease with CHRIST, we fare no worse then
CHRIST, and his name, and the Gospel of grace, nay the Gospel of glory, which
suffer with us, and in us, and therefore sanctify and consecrate our
sufferings to us. S. Hierom.
It is a blessing to be cursed for CHRIST, when CHRIST is in the cause, reproach
is desirable, for the reproach of Christ is more honorable, then the renown of
men, and convertible with the glory of Angels: as St. Basil writes, In Ps. 55.
in sin. (...).
art thou dishonored for the name of Christ? Happy art thou, for this thy
shame shall be turned into an Angels glory. Wherefore to be reproched and
persecuted not in the name of a moral honest man, and a Philosopher, but in
the name of a Christian and true Believer, is the highest advancement, and does
consummate the bliss of Passion.

CHAP. III. Touching the joy requisite in suffering.
THat for the happiness in suffering, now to the joy required in that
happiness; Rejoice and be exceeding glad. Rejoice, be not only patient as
in that which hurts not, but joyful, and thankful as for a beneficial
favor. Be exceeding glad, as of an extraordinary further^nce, and preferment
in CHRIST. Count it all joy when ye fall into many temptations, Iam. 1.2. For
there is no one without a beape of graces and mercies in it, therefore esteem
variety of sufferings a subject deserving not some measure, but the whole
affect and faculty of joy.

St. BASIL rehearsing that ( Hebr. 11.36, 37, 38) they were scourged, bound,
imprisoned, stoned, sawne a sunder, tempted, slain, adds a these are the
braveries of Saints, (...).

Thus the Primitive Christians were affected. Act. 16.25. Magis damnati quem
absoluti gau^^us. Tertul, ad Scapulam.


blessed is he that is held worthy of sufferings for CHRIST, more blessed he
that abounds in such sufferings. Martyrs joyed in a sentence of condemnation,
as offenders in 2 sentence of absolution. 2. Cor. 15.31. The Apostles joy in
daily subjection to death, and other passions, and continual expectance, and
preparation for them, was so great, clear, and undoubted, that he swears by
it, by our rejoicing in Christ Jesus I die daily.

The holy Abbot IOHANNICIUS Non solum la^^batur probris pro Christo affect^^
sed etiam ^^plebat majora p^ti. re^^^ scient quia per ^a majora cause queretur.
Evit^ ej^^ c. 49. Nov. 4.
not only rejoiced, being reproched and persecuted for Christ, (...)
but also wished that he might suffer more, well knowing that thereby he should
reap more fruit. 2. Cor. 12.10. I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproach, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for CHRIST'S sake. Which PAUL did as
purely loving himself in God, and therefore most pleased with what profited
most to his purgation, proficiencie, perfection. And this may we take for a
proof of our spiritualitie, if tribulation be savourie to us, and we find
upon earth a paradise i^ passion. 2. Cor. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ. Aegidius Minorita asks, In
Vita ejus. c. 40. Quid causae est, quod^ aegre forimus afflictiones? Non
concupiscimus medullitus spiritales consolatto ^es.
what (...) the cause that we take afflictions heavily, and answers, we do
not heartily covet spiritual consolations.

It is mere carnalitie to aspire after an exception from the cross, and to be
always treading upon roses, to wish this beatitude to any, rather then our
selves and ours. Faith moves in its own orb, when it renders exceeding glad,
notwithstanding the heavines through manifold temptations. 1. Pet. 1 6. Thus
St. VALERIAN, Hom. 16. Perfectae fidei est, lucrativis locum dare suppliciis.
it is the exercise of perfect faith to give way to gainful penalties. At any
rate to take up where we are strangers those disgraces, which in our Country
will pass for the highest dignities. That ARNOBIUS JUNIOR repeating these
words, who ^^^^n say all manner of evil of you falsely for my sake, rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, might for cause
press them in this sort, Si recti estis fide, nolite quaerare lauds hominum
in terris, quia habehitis Angelorum in coelis. In Ps.
if ye be right in Faith, seek not the praises of men upon earth, when ye
shall have the applause of Angels in heaven. And this has brought us to the
cause, why we should be joyfully glad in the happiness of suffering, for
great is your reward in heaven, they purchase a great degree in glory.

CHAP. IV. CHAP. 4.
Of the special glory coming to Sufferers.
BEsides the reward of heaven which is equal in all the saved, there is a
reward in heaven, diversified according to our actions and passions for CHRIST,
This makes the Apostles strain so hyperbolicall as it is in the original* 2.
Cor. 4.17.
and the reward for persecution is the greatest, which therefore for its
latitude is not specified, but styled simply great, as above all the degrees of
comparison, and exceeding all the hyperboles of our speech. 2. Tim. 2.11, 12.
If we suffer we shall reign. CHRIST'S p^^^ may lose their lives, not their
rewards. He that took off ^aul^ head, could not take away his crown. In his
Preface ad asue^ f^^^. (...).
Follow Christ and conquer, (as St. BASIL admonishes) for thou followest, 4
victorious, King, who will have thee partaker of his victory, and if tha^
(...) killed thou shall more then conque^^.

We hold our selves more bound, to them that suffer for us, then to them that
any other ways minister to us. CHRIST'S specially acknowledges them in heaven,
that were confessors on earth.

Matthew. 10.32. The Martyrs field brings for the (...) fold, the glorified
bodies (...) most glorious in their skars, every Saint has his (...) the
sufferer (aureolam) an additionall flourish of triumph. Qui vol^nt detrahit
famae mea, nolens addit mercedi meae. S. Aug. cont. lit. Petilian. l. 3. c. 7.
12. De bono viduitatis, c. 22.
He that with his will detracts from thy reputation, shall against his will
add to thy retribution. In all the universe there is not a worthier sight then
a Martyr suffering. 1. Cor. 4.9. We are made a spectacle to the world, to
Angels, and to men. The Lord looks down from heaven, and sees no sight so
meriting his aspect (as Minutius Faelix says) In Octavio p. 10. Quam pulchrum
spectaculum Deo cum Christianus cum dolor congreditur.
How goodly a spectacle for God is a Christian encountering with pain!
Therefore CHRIST that fits at the right hand of God, as judge of quick and
dead, at the passion of Stephen stands to behold the good fight of faith,
stands as Advocate for his, S. Ambr. de fide l. 2. 7. Christus sedot ad dextram
Dei, quasi judex vivorum and mortuorum, stat quasi advocatus suorum, s^abat
ergo quasi sacerdos, qu^ndo patri hostiam boni martyris offerebat, stubat quasi
lo^^ iu^^atori braviam, tanti prasul certaminis redditur^^.
stands as Priest offering to the Father the sacrifice of a prime Martyr,
stands as supervisor, and ready to render the prize to the valiant Champion.

Our Lord remembering the persecuted of rewards, allows the time of
persecution, for a season, to meditate recompenses and retaliation. Heb.
11.24.25. MOSES chose afflictions with the people of God, rather then the
pleasures of sin, and esteemed the reproach of CHRIST greater riches, th^^ the
treasures of Egypt, because he had respect to the recompense of reward. So in
damages indignities Christians may support themselves with contemplation of
future advantages and honors, and in place have an eye at glory and prelation
therein, to be thereby the more encouraged in the Lord, and the better to
subdue the unwillingnesse of the flesh to conflicts, and hard services in
Christ.

Iam. 5.11. Behold we count them blessed, that have suffered, invites us to
reflect our judgments on our consciences, and seeing we count and call the
Martyrs and Confessors blessed whenever we mention them, and think their
noble army, the supreme of all orders in the Church militant and triumphant,
and prefer their lot, that went out of the world by the glorious way of
Martyrdom, before any other departure, and would rather have lived a Confessor
and dyed a Martyr, then have been great Alexander, or very Caesar, yea or any
believer that was no sufferer.

Therefore in reverence of the opinion, which all Christians have, touching
their blessedness which endured much for CHRIST, we may no^ only admire it in
others, but desire if God please to share in it with others, and by name with
the goodly fellowship of Prophets. And so I am come to the argument that
concludes the cause, that urges all joy in the happiness of suffering. For so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you, it manifests conformity to
the chiefest Saints and servants of God.

CHAP. 5.
CHAP. V. That the best of men have been Persecuted.
SO Persecuted they the Prophets from ABEL to ZACHARY. Origin in Ier. hom. 11
Matthew. 23.35. From the first to the last, no Prophet without his Persecution.
From the beginning to the end of the Churches race, Abel esse renuit quem Cain
malitia non exercet. S. Greg. l. 20 c. 29.
he must refuse to be an ABEL that is not exercised with the malignitie of a
CAIN; therefore think it not strange to be reviled and persecuted, all holy
men before us did suffer, all CHRIST'S fraternity do suffer, and all that will
live godly shall suffer: say then with venerable BEDE (in 1. Pet. 5.9.) Pudeat
solos non posse pari.
Let not us then for shame be the sole impatients that cannot suffer. There
never was Prophet that was not persecuted, except it was SOLOMON, of whom it is
scarce more agreed that he was a Prophet, then disputed whether he be a Saint.
Wisely IDIOTA, De vera patientia c. 9. Solus Solomon in delitiis fuit, and ideo
forte corruit. S. Hier. ad Eustochium.
all the Saints were trained through misery, only SOLOMON was the worlds
darling, and perhaps therefore fell so greevously. Well whiles we live by the
Rivers of Babylon, let us sing this song, we are not better then our fathers,
and they of the world, are always like themselves, repugnant what they can to
the true Church.

Iam. 5.10. Take my Brethren the Prophets that have spoken in the name of our
LORD, for an example of suffering affliction -- and knowing that God is
unchangable and that he will free and honor you in distresses and
oppositions, as he did them, be not addaunted, when CHRIST calls to appear
for him, use no indirect means to escape as Clandestine teachers, that have
one faith in Widows houses, another in Consistories, before authority say
what they would have them, when they come at home deliver women's dreams for
Oracles and for Gospel.

And considering that the closser any draw to GOD, and more they be separate
from the world, the greater is the rage of the Devil, and his agents against
them to vex them in all harsh trials; let us not be scandall'd at the
fl^nders that are raised against the Orthodoxe, neither conceive the worse but
have we the higher thoughts of them. GOD will exercise his grace where he
gives it, if we go scot-free remember GODS lot was not on the scape-goue. It
is to be feared our strength is little that GOD does not vouchsafe us that
honor, or that we are not faithful in our vocations, but let the world
sleep, that we may be ^^iet.

Their case is ill that effeminate themselves, and their doctrines, and their
doings, to avoid female displeasure; but much worse theirs, who to escape the
scourge of them, whose tongue acknowledges no Lord, cavil and carpe at the
zeal of others, who are stirring in their places, to animate wholesome laws
with execution, and to reform their charges. Art thou be that troublest
Israel? 1. Reg. 18.17. Think ye the Propets were not counted too busy.

I will not deny Gods people to have their slips, but the world does not for
that cause molest them, as it might be thought, they were reviled and
persecuted only for their infirmities and indiscretions, if the Prophets that
were privileged men, and had the spirit of infallibility, and gift to foresee
and foretell futures, that in their whole carriage were guided by the spirit,
that spoke in the spirit, and by direction, and authority from GOD, if those
Prophets had not been crossed and ill used before and above others, nay if
CHRIST himself (Prophetarum opus) the end of all Prophets, the fountain of
innocence, wisdom and all perfections had not for the best works, met with
the worst, use possible both in words and deeds.

But now Nec nobis ignominia pati a fratribus, quod passu^ est Christus, nec
illis gloria facere quod fecit judas. S. Cypr.
it is neither shame for us to suffer of our Brethren, what CHRIST has
suffered, nor credit for them to do, what JUDAS has done. Matthew. 10.23, 24,
25. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master, and the Servant as his
Lord, if they have called the Master of the house BEELZEBUB, how much more shall
they call them of the household, fear them not therefore.

CHRIST they said, that he was a Samaritane, worser then a simple Pagan, by a
heretical idolatrous Religion; sometimes that he had a Devil, and wrought by
Beelzebub; sometimes that he was Beelzebub himself the chief of Devils;
therefore we are not to fear the suppositions and bruits of men, being the
world is transported with such fury against orthodoxalitie, and purity of
Doctrine and Life, that if God himself be incarnated and dwell and teach
among them, they will slander him to be not only a Devil, but the Prince and
worst of Devils. This then is a sovereign remedy of impatience in crosses and
tribulations to call to mind the usage of Christ and holy Prophets, who
meekely endured far greater calumniation and persecution. And after the
sentence of de Kempis, De imitatione Christi, l. 2. c. ult. Si eligendum tibi
esset, magis optare deberes pro Christo adversa pati quam multis
consolationibus recreari, quia Christo simili^r esses and omnibus Sanctis
conformi^r.
If thou might be at thy choice, thou oughtst to wish rather to endure
adversity, for Christ then to be recreated with many delights; because so
thou should be more agreeable unto Christ and conformable to all Saints.

CHAP. 6.
CHAP. VI. That to be persecuted for Christ, is the chief happiness out of
Heaven.
I Have made a survey of this Beatitude in the parts, and will now gather from
the whole these four deductions. First, that the chief happiness under
Heaven is to be reviled and persecuted for righteousness and CHRIST'S sake.
Secondly, that the persecuted therefore must not hate but love and pray for
their Persecutors. Thirdly, that the Apostles and their successors, are of all
most incident to be persecuted. Fourthly, yet they and others according to
their place, must not neglect righteousness and propagating CHRIST'S name.

For the first, a it is choice gift not only to believe, but also to suffer
for Christ's name, Phil. 1.29. To be not only followers of Christ, but his
ensigne-bearers, and graced with carrying his cross after him, which is the
most creditable, blessed and beatified office in all Religion and
Christianity. St Theodore Studita collects it hence, Sermon. 87.
Fathers and Brethren, GOD has collated on us a high privilege, Persecution
for him as he says; Blessed are ye, when men revile and persecute you for my
sake. This the immunitie and freedom of Christians and their principality.

St. Ignatius wrote, ^. Ignatius Ep. 16. ibid.
That it was better for him to dye for CHRIST, then to have the Empire of all
the ends of the earth. This the highest promotion Gods children can be brought
unto, their b^st testimony, and most converting and persuasive declaration of
truth. Hence as Sulpitius relates, Histor. Sacra: l. 2. Mu^to validius tum
martyria gloriosis mortibus queraebantur, quam nunc Episcopatas pravis
ambitionibu^ appetuntur.
In the tenth most grievous Persecution, Martyrdom was more strongly sought by
glorious passion, then the Popedom afterward by base ambition. St. Chrysostom
scruples not to say, Tom 5. hom. 35. In Ephesians sermon. 33.
That if a man love Christ he would wish to be bound for Christ, rather then
to inhabit Heaven, may be also then to sit at Christ's right hand. The most
glorious act, that can be in a creature is to suffer for the Creator; Gre^at.
compendium introductionis ad fidem, l. 2. c. 19.
therefore God founded his Church in blood, and brings millions to himself by
Martyrdom and Passions, because he is no other way so much glorified in any
creature, not in the heavenly Bodies, nor in the heavenly Spirits, who humbled
themselves in an instant, and without any resistance in themselves, or any
passion, when Confessors and Martyrs have that respect to God, as in regard of
his love, fidelity, and reward, to despise all the favors and contemn all
the frowns of the world, to forsake ^ll that is dear, to sustain all that is
dolorous notwithstanding the averseness of a lapsed and corrupt nature. We
boast of CHRIST'S active obedience, but glory more in his passive, that he
pleased to suffer insuperable grief with a painful and shameful death for us.

This I am taught by St. CYRIL, St. Cyril Hierosol. ser. Catechet. 13.
Every action of Christ is the glory of the Catholic Church, but the glory of
glories is the Cross; and therefore St. PAVL said, God forbid, that I should
glory in any thing but in the cross of Christ, Galat. 6.14. So though all good
actions be well-pleasing to God, yet above all holy passions. This St Isaac
testifies, De co^temptu mundi, c. 17 p 605 Pretiose in conspectu Domini
tribul^tiones, quae sunt pro ipso and propter ipsum: and super omnem orationem,
and sacrificium and odorem, and sudor illarum super omnia aromata.
Precious in the sight of the Lord are the tribulations* which are for him and
his sake, and above all prayer, and sacrifice and odor, and the sweat of them
is above all perfumes.

That of Origin is most true, In Psalm. 37 hom. 2.
It is impossible for any s^t in this earth not to be hated, CHRIST JESUS was
hated, yea GOD himself is hated of the wicked, and his good Spirit, and
would not thou behated, but loved. Bravely. Picus Earl of Mirandula to his
Nephew. Act 5.41. Epist ad I^hannem Franciscum Picum. fol. 104 -- Gaudeamus and
nos si t^nta apud Deum gloria digni sumus, ut ejus gloria in ignominia nostra
manifestetur -- Ne omni nobis been merendi occasion sublata, praemii eti^m
spes relicta nulla sit.
The Apostles rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer reproach for
Christ's name, let us also rejoice if we be worthy of so great glory with God,
that his glory should be set forth in our shame. If the world hated him by whom
it was made, shall we vile men, and in respect of our sins worthy to be
hated and reviled, take it so ill, that lest they should say ill, we should
begin to do ill, rather let us take it gladly, and if we be not so happy as
for virtue and verity to suffer stripes, bonds, imprisonments, swords, think
it goes well with us, if we suffer the detractions and hatred of the ungodly.

The course of Christianity is thus (as blessed Macarius declares) Hom. 15 p.
186. -- (...).
Wheresoever the holy Spirit is there follows as a shadow Persecution and
opposition, as we see in the Prophets, our Lord CHRIST, and his Apostles, for
since Christ's Cross that the Spirit forsook the Jews, and passed to
Christians, no Jew has been persecuted, but only Christians have been made
Martyrs. It is a prerogative of the true Church, to be capable of saving
hatred. The world cannot hate you, says CHRIST of carnals, and complyers to
any Sect and humor. Because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you, Ioh. 15.19. says he of them that are sincere in faith and
life. St. Hierom, In Epist. ad Asellam. Gratias ago Deo meo, quod dignus si^
quem mundus od^rit.
Religiously thanks God that he was worthy of the worlds hate. For it is a
wonderful kindness, to be neither hateful nor hating, but unjustly hated.
Which forced that doxologie from blessed Epist. 1. Domino gratias, qui and mihi
miserrimo peccatori dedit dicere, oderun^ me gratis.
Paulinus, The Lord be thanked, who has given me also a miserable sinner to
say, they hated me without a cause. How have we to bless God that the world
cannot epsy its own ill conditions in us, that when every body in the whole
universe is hated, and spoken against for something or other, our portion
through Gods goodness is to be hated for his truth and grace shining in us,
and reviled for his blessed name and image!

When man is borne to misery, they are much bound to glorify God, whose misery
is turned into martyrdom. Discreetly Prudentius, Perl Stepharu^^. Hymno 10.
horreti^ omnes hasce carnificum manus, number mi^iores sunt manus m^dentium? --
Ye dread the Tyrants and Executioners hands, are the Physicians and
Chirurgians hands any gentler? Who would not choose torments for CHRIST, rather
then tortures by diseases, rather to be rackt for Christ, CHAP. 7.
then wrung with some gout or cramp? rather to S. Clem. Apost constit lib. 5 c.
5.
have his bowels examined with instruments of cruelty, then to be searched with
the cholicke and stone. Take we it then for a divine love token if in lieu of
common defamations and calamities, the reproaches of Christ, and his troubles
come upon us. As St. Roch said in this case, Et si antea dulcissime Jesus. me
servu^ tuum esse existim^verim, nunc vero cum me tormentorum tuorum part
donaveris, charum me tibi esse et jucundum compertum habeo. In vit. ejus. c. 7.
Per Petrum Ludovicum M^ld. Aug. 16.

Opus imperfect. in Matthew 10 hom. 28.


Heretofore sweet Jesus, I conjectured my self to be one of thine, but now that
thou have given me part in thy torments, I know assuredly that I am accepted,
and gracious with thee.

CHAP. VII. That the persecuted must not hate, but pray for the Persecutors.
SEeing they are occasions of their so great bliss, the persecuted must not
hate but love, and pray for the persecutours. Albertus the great tells us, that
De veris virtutibus, c. 1. A Chr^stian pro certo majorem gratiam and gloriam
consequeretur ex persecutione, quam ex favore, si modo debito sciret e^ frui.
Christians should, without fail, compass more grace and glory by
persecution, then by supportation, if they knew how to improve it in due sort,
as the enemies of holy Martyrs advantaged them more to eternal felicity then
their friends. Hereupon the holy Father Ammonas gave an excellent rule. C.
Paraenetico 2. inter ^per^ B. Ephrem p. 499.
As often as thou remembrest them, that have afflicted thee, intercede for them
all in truth and with all thy heart, as for them, by whom great advantages have
been procured to thee. And St. Leedegar is an admirable example of that rule,
who immediately before he was violently put to death prayed thus. Ignosc^ illis
qui me affligunt, quandoquidem ego, clementissime pater, per eos credo me in
conspectu tuo glorificandum. Vrs^nus in vit. ejus. c. 17. Oct. 2.
Pardon them that afflict me, for by their means, I believe that I shall be
glorified in thy sight, most gracious Father. Shall we take out of Lansperg In
pharetra divini amoris. p 77. I bless thee pro paterno amore quo mihi patienda
omnia in salutem convertis, oro etiam t^ duloissime Pater pro omnibus qui mihi
adversa unquam intulerunt, ut tu illis non solum ignoscat, sed etiam non
imputes, imo (quia fuerunt ministri aeternae dispensationis ac providentiae
tuae) aeternae illis mercedem tuae beatitudinis couseras.
his quire of love, an arrow that flies very high? I bless thee O Lord, for
thy fatherly love, whereby thou turnest into my safety all that I suffer. I
beseech thee also most sweet Father, for all those that have at any time
inflicted any adversity upon me, that thou would not only pardon, but never
impute it to them, nay because they were the ministers of thy eternal
dispensation and providence, collate on them the reward of thy eternal
blessedness. I can but admire that of St. Basil, touching those that disfame
us for Christ, De Spir. Sancto c 6 (...).

(...).


If the damage thereby growing to them, did not cause in us heavines and
continual sorrow, I should almost have said that we acknowledge thanks to them
for their blasphemies as procurers of our bliss. And no less that of his most
intimate St. Gregory Nazianzen, Christ wills his to fly from Persecutors, for
that being Christians, they ought not only to look after their own things
(no not in case they be most strong and constant) but also to spare those that
persecute them. Contra Iuliau. (...). p. 29. (...). Contr Julian. erat. 2. ad
finem.
So that for their part they infer nothing to their peril. Especially we are
to pity and petition for them that are our adversaries out of an illuded
conscience, Ioh. 16.2. the Devil transforming himself and infatuating of
them; wherefore (as Origin moves) Let us not hate but rather love them and take
pity of them, they have a devil and are beside themselves. In Ezech. hom. 13.
-- Daemonium habent patiuntur insaniam.


CHAP. 8.
CHAP. VIII. That the Apostles and their Successors, are liable to most
persecution.
THe Apostles and their Successors that bear about the world the name of
Christ, are most liable to be reviled, and persecuted by all, and most of all
by them, that retain the name, but not the right faith of Christ. Therefore
our Lord delivering this Beatitude changes the person, and having said Blessed
are they that be reviled for righteousness; he turns him to the Apostles and
says, Blessed are ye when men revile and persecute you for my sake, and
concludes it with this, So persecuted they the Prophets. That is, as the
Prophets were persecuted by seduced people, that boasted themselves to be the
temple of God, the temple of God, -- So you and your followers, shall meet with
worse usage amongst deceived creatures that fancy themselves to be Gods Church
and the only peculiar people. Our Savior, Ioh. 16.2 saying; The time shall
come, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God good service; after the
application of George Patriarch of Alexandria, In vita S. Chrysostom c. 74. In that
he names the one and only God. (...).
He specified them that under pretext of the Church make havocke of Gods
people, for hiding their envies and ill doings, they counterfeit in words to
take care for the Church, which in deeds they lay waste. And much more intends
he those that by a perverse creed, believe light to be darkness, and
darkness light, antiquities to be old errors, novelties to be divine faith,
and consequently holds it the Lords work to shed Christian blood, and curse
them that do it negligently, and do not to the utmost pursue true catholicall
Christians with the sword of their mouth, and the mouth of their sword.

Quintilian cries out, Declamatione, 265 Nullam petulantiam magis odi, quam
quae se propter hoc exerit, quia pulat licere.
I hate no insolency more then that, which practices out of a conceit of its
own lawfulness. I abhor no ctueltie like that which springs from opinion of
duty, and devotion, and sanctity, and singular zeal. The holy Bishop Serapion
is my Author, Episcop. Thymeos. Contr. Manichaeos, p. 104.
Of all obstinate impiety, this is the most injurious, to carry Christ's
colors and wage war against Christ. One would more willingly suffer of a
Pagan, then of a Christian, of one that is held whereabouts he suffers for a
misbeleever, then of him that is magnified for a sole Gospeller. Many suppose
they could readily suffer, if it might be generally thought that they suffered
for righteousness, for Christ; as S. Ado in Martyrologio. lan. ^. Sozom. hist.
l. 2. c. 8.
The noble personage Attalus of Perga, was carried about the amphitheater a
Title going before him, in which was written, Attalus Christianus. But this
irkes them that they should be imagined to persecute, when they are persecuted,
or to suffer as erring and evil men. Now beloved, this is a great piece of
self-denial, which must be antecedent to crosse-bearing, that we deny our own
will in suffering, and take up crosses, not of our choosing, but of Gods
appointing.

And the Lord will have it thus, that it may be a matter of Faith, not of sense
to suffer one thing to dye for Heaven, another thing to dye for our Country,
and Christ himself suffered, as a company-keeper, as a usurper, as a seducer.
To entire patience we must beg wisdom, Iam. 1. to distinguish betwixt the
allegations of crafty opposers, and the true reasons of their opposition, and
attend Gods discerning eye that looks through vizards and dislikes not his own
caus^s for forged aspersions.

St. Basil the great, gravely informs, Ep. 70. (...). Epist. 71.
That this is most grievous, when neither the afflicted undergo passions in
full assurance of martyrdom, nor the people repute and reverence them in the
rank of Martyrs, because the name of Christians is vested upon the
persecutors. There is one crime now vehemently pursued, the accurate
observation of the traditions of our Ancestors. How much better pretenses and
shows the enemies of truth make, and how much greater fame and opinions be of
them in the world, so much more ^ifficultie there is in suffering, and
therefore so much more deserving is the passion.

Some may ask what Persecution there can be where the supreme Magistrate is a
defender of the true ancient Faith? I answer that which is the wonder of all
Persecutions, that he and Governors under him should by disobedients of the
Church, whom they curb, be sl^ndered for Persecutors. For the cause making the
Martyr, when the cause is good the Sufferer is persecuted, when the cause is
uncatholicke the complayner persecutes, charging Gods vicegerents, with
wrongful chalenges of the vilest tyranny. It is a true definitive of Pelagius
the first, In Epist 3 Non persequitur nisi qui ad malum cogit, qui autem malum
vel factu jam punit, vel prohibet ne fiat, non persequitur ille sed diligit.
He persecutes that compels to evil, but he that either punishes evil done,
or prohibits it to be done, he does not persecute but love. Wherefore
Sectaries giving themselves out to be persecuted when they are restrained of
opinionative vanities and unconformities, do therein blaspheme dignities and
be themselves by unjust complaints, murmurs, imprecations, Libels, -- base
persecutors of the higher powers.

Thus in the times of great Theodosius and his sons, the Arrians (bridled by
penal Laws) assumed to be the only Catholics, misnamed the true Catholics
Homousians, burdened the Princes and Bishops for persecutors, and vanted of
themselves, as suffering for Christ and Scripture, Scripture, -- And the
Donatists in much distraction dreaming themselves to be Christ's Vnica, and sole
peculiar, exclaimed against the Emperors, for not granting them toleration
freely to practice their Religion of the new cut, inveighed against the
orthodoxe Bishops for endeavors of their cure and restraint, and damned Gods
Church of persecuting. St. Augustine often advertises, that Paucitie and
Persecution have ever been the usual pleas and prescriptions of Heretics.
Paucitie as a semblance of Christ's little flock. Persecution as a covert for
the condign punishments, blame and shame which for their untruths they incur
before religious Authority.

But it has lamentably happened in our Church which to my knowledge has not
fallen out in any other, that many who yet will needs go for her members and
children before-fet with Geneva --, and thence full of deep prejudices against
the Doctrine, discipline, and government of our holy Mother, so as to accuse of
halting those that go not their by-way, and divulge such as divert from them to
decline, themselves to be the sole Professors and the Church, others to be
temporizers, usurping and practicing over and against the Church. And their
Sect-masters under cloak and clamor of persecution, suck up the fat of the
earth, and in poor stipendiarie, and Lecturers places gather great estates in
lands and moneys, and some now and then politickly force themselves (by their
open irregular carriage) to be deprived of petty livings, that as deposed, and
persecuted men, they may get up thrice the value by the benevolences of women,
bewitched with their long prayers and endless uses. Which women by rude
declamations against Schoole-learning, and of deceit by profound Scholars and
great read men, they have rendered unteachable, and of a special Faith that
all, who say or do ought against them are heavy Persecutors.

Thus a few Schismatickes are a little snibbed for gross absurdities and
disorders, and the Fathers and chief of the Clergy, and the whole Church of
England be by them and their associates without compare persecuted and reputed
as limbs of Antichrist; whence many be abstracted, partly to have the resort,
fees and custom, partly to avoid the censures, and outcries of a spreading
faction. So necessary it is to take up our last conclusion, that Christians
according to their callings must not neglect Righteousness, and to propagate
the name of Christ for dread of any Persecution, Revel. 21.6, 7.

CHAP. IX. CHAP. 10.
That Christians must be willing to Suffer for righteousness and for Christ.
SAint MARTIN is brief with us, Episc. Dumiens. In libro de moribus. Si vis
beatus esse, cogita hoc primum contemnere and contemni.
If thou will be happy, cast thy count Inprimis to despise and be despised.
To despise the speech of people that are injudicious and unrighteous, and be
despised for courses above the sphere of carnal and corrupt aims and
judgments, 2. Cor. 6, ^ Heb. 13.13. Let us swim against the stream of the
corruptions and errors of our times, sail against the wind of popular air
and breath, let that rather blow up the fire of the Spirit in us. To contend
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; for the first Love, first Doctrine,
first Discipline. Devout St. Bernard laments in an Epistle, That some great
Prelates in his days though they assented not to their tenets, connived at the
Petrobusians --; because their Officers gained more by some one of them, then
by many hundreds of orthodoxall and conformable Christians. This we see that
many in places of action, and command, that by Non-Conformists they may not be
proclaimed for Persecutors, but spoken of as moderate persons, suffer not only
the Canons and constitutions of their dear Mother, but the Religion of the
Fathers, and their forefathers to be buried quick.

But let the Prophets who were contented for ancient Faith and truths sake, to
suffer in their names and persons, be a precedent for us, to stand for the old
and good way maugre the exclamations of upstarts Spirits, CHAP. 9.
and their conjured adherents. Be not ambitious of a false Prophets shadow;
that is, vulgar applause. Luke 6.26. Woe unto you, when all men shall speak
well of you, for so did their Fathers of the false Prophets. For common folks
have no fancy to that which antiquititie and authority countenance.

Now beloved thus, whereas there ought to be penal laws, against Heretics,
Schismatickes, and Vnconformitants, and Rulers by connivence, and not following
those Laws against them, be guilty of their Perdition. Wittily St. Hierome,
Contra Pelagianos lib. 3. Haereticum interficit, qui esse Haereticum patitur.
St Leo Epist. 93.
He murders a Heretic, that tolerates him to be a Heretic. Therefore,
the powers are to compel men to enter Gods house Luke 14.23. For in this
Tertullian is right, Adversus Gnosticot, duritia vincenda est, non suadenda.
Obstinacy must be enforced, not entreated. Hence the defamatorie words, which
the Seducted brute abroad of them that proceed with constancy herein, have
the estimate of martyrdom before God. And lest any should sooth themselves,
that because they favor not the way, they be not obnoxious, though they block
not up the Schismatic in their passage, let them ponder that of Gerson, Sermon
ad regem Franciae nomine universitatu Paris -- Ego te non puniam, sed
infernales Diaboli te cruciabunt, eos ego non prohibeam.
A man that does not evil but suffers it to be done, God will judge and say; I
will not punish thee, but the infernal Devils will plague thee, them will not
I hinder.

It is certain, that under most Christian and most excellent Princes, not
only subordinate Commanders may meet with affronts, if they be zealous
against deceivers, but the greatest and best of Princes be themselves subject
to misprisions and taunts, if they be serviceable to CHRIST, and assistant to
holy Church, further then Women and weak judgments approve. Yet for all that,
Royal King DAVID, 2. Sam. 6.21, 22. will dance before the Arc, maintain with
all his might the Orders of the holy Church and be himself humble in Gods
public worship; though not alone Damsels of the Country, but some Ladies of
his Court, gave him in glorious for not taking state before God. Non erubuit
David foemineas opiniones, nec opprobria apud mulieres subire, pro religiones
negotio verecndatus est. St. Ambros. epist. 36.
DAVID blushed not to be slighted in the opinion of Females, nor shamed he to
under go reproaches among Women for the matter of Religion. So St. Ambrose,
Neither lost he any renown by it; for blessed Gregory is not alone in his
admiration, Quid de ejus factis ab aliis sentiatur ignoro, ego Davidem pius
stupeo saltantem quam pugnantem. In Job. l. 27. c. 27.
I wonder more at DAVID dancing, then fighting.

A betting herefies and schisms gets a name, but for a time, whiles the heat
of a faction lasts, but defense of the truth winnes everlasting praise. Whence
no Writers are so famous, as they that were the hammers of heretics, St.
Austin, St. Hierom, St. Cyril, -- no Bishops so illustrious as they that were
most active against them, S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Leo, -- no Emperors so
glorious, as they that most fortified the Church against them, Theodosius,
H^norius, Martian.

And whereas of all the Sects in Christendom, that deserve but the name of a
Church, there is none for the whole constitution thereof, in Doctrine,
Discipline and Government, more remote from Gods truth and undoubted
antiquity, ^^^^i in t^to (...) faciam nomina^i.
then the Congregation of the Disciplinarian faction and the rest of that
adherency. Therefore, no industry, wisdom, power can be better improved, then
in purging all Churches of that leaven, and reducing all to uniformity among
our selves, and conformity of the pure and primitive times, nor is any of them
to be suffered in his superstitious and cross way, for that he may be in some
things of laudable converse, seeing there scarce ever was Heretic that fained
not a singularity of good living to grace with the multitude his innovations,
and contrarieties to holy Church, and the Wolf that appears in a
Sheepes-skinne, is not therefore to be endured in the fold.

I confess these Novellists take license to say all they think evil, and do
all they presume inconvenient against those that hinder the building of their
Babylon, and they have a Creed that admits for articles all the calumnies,
which they forge against a Conformist. But for all the mysts that they cast,
and dust which they raise, the brightness of their name, who are obedient to
God, and his Church, will break out at length if not before, yet at the day of
revelation; nor may we think long to expect that, since our Lord JESUS that
sits at the right hand of GOD has the infinite patience to endure his name to
be cast out as evil among Infidels and miscreants until the last day.

CHAP. X. CHAP. 10.
Concluding that our utmost glory is in the honor of suffering for Christ.
THe holy martyresses Faith, Hope, and Charity, uttered a speech consonant to
their names, SS Fidei, spei. charitas, -- in vit. illarum, c. 6. Aug. 1.
What can be more pleasant to Christians then to suffer for CHRIST? Although
we should not have such recompenses as are hoped, what excellency of glory
does it not exceed to suffer for him that made us? John, 13.31. The business
of Suffering is termed glory, because there is nothing so opprobrious, which
suffered for God becomes not glorious. Whence St. Chrysostom I^ Matthew. homil.
8. (...), etc. St. Primas. in Heb. 2.

An boni nostri qualitas ex populi potius pendebit erroribus, quam ex
conscientta nostra, and judicio Dei etc. Lactantius, l. 5. c. 12.


Wishes to be disgraced and contemned for God, rather then to be honored of all
Kings: for there is nothing, nothing at all parallel to that glory. Be we
ready then to sacrifice that repute which consists not with the suffrage of God
and right men, and with conscientious discharge of our vocations.

Look we to Gods will, and he will see to his own and our glory. 1. Pet.
4.14. If ye be reproached for Christ's sake, happy are ye, the Spirt of glory
rests upon you. To credit you by such contumelies and make you a name with God
and his people in both Churches, and the spirit of envy cannot reproach so
much as the spirit of glory can honor. He will tender the respect of his own
gifts and fruits, and convert the shame that is put upon them into praise.
Experience ratifies that of Dionysius Carthusianus, Fer. quinta Paschae sermon.
4. Tentatio facit hominem etiam in hoc mundo famosum and gloriosum, ita quod
alir innitantur ei u^ sustentamento. And our Lord said to St. Anthony, Quia
viriliter dimicasti in toto orb te faciam nominari.
Tentations make a man famous and glorious even in this world, so that others
rest upon him, as a sure stud. Hence the Lord says, Rev. 3.12. Him that
overcommeth will I make a pillar in the temple of my God. Opposition
illustrates a Christian, causes notice to be took of him, and his graces to
spread their pleasant odours far and near.

Sermon de Vitali and Valeria. Apr. 28. Sicut unguenta redolere latius nesciunt,
nisi commota, et sicut aromata fragrantiam suam non nisi cum incenduntur
expandunt: ita Sancti viri, omne quod virtutibus redolent, in tribulationibus
profundunt.

Garolus a Basilica S. Petri, in vita Caroli Card Borromaei. l. 2. c. 11. Ex se
res adversaetum misericordiam movent, tum amorem, quod si exitum habeant
faelicem atque mirabilem, si cum opinione Sanctitatis etiam conjungantur,
accedit non mediocris veneratio.


As sweet Oils yield not abroad their sent, unless they be stirred, and sweet
Spices dilate not their fragrant savor, except they be burned; so whatsoever
is odoriferous in holy men by virtues, they diffuse in their tribulations;
which is the Simile of S. Peter Damian. Cant. 1.2. Thy name is as an ointment
powered forth. None have so precious and ample a name, as they that are molested
for their righteousness and Christianity. Malice is talkative, and a
Heretics ill word is a commendation in an Orthodoxes ear. Adversity of it
self moves pity and love, and if it be fairly borne, and joined with opinion
of Sanctity, there accrues no small veneration. God always smelt a pleasant
smell in a sacrifice of blood, therefore the Spirit of glory rests upon his
patients. As Theodore Edissen capitulates, Ex 50. Capitulis Theodori Edisseni
-- juxta proverbium (...).
Give blood, and take Spirit; if he that gives a cup of cold water shall not
lose his reward (as St. Bernard inlarges it) St. Bern in Psalm. Qui habitat
sermon. 9. Scimu^ quis promisit, (...) eum quidem qui pro nomine suo, calice^
aquae frigidae dederit s^tienti, mercede propria caritarum, nunquid tamen -- In
retributione aequabitur ei, qui non aquam porrigens, sed sanguinem funden^,
propinatum sibi hiberit calicem salvatoris, etc. This passage (delivered by me
at Norwich in a Sermon without the least alteration) is as I hear, perverted
and distorted by Brother B. in his late lawless Pamphlet, as if I had stirred
up Princes to shed the blood of Puritanes, and threatened them with
Bloud-shedding.
what is his glory, that gives a cup of warm blood.

John, 12.24, 25. Except a corn of Wheat fall into the ground and dye, it
abides alone, but if it dye it brings forth much fruit. CHRIST'S death was in
effectual order to a glorious life; so the mortifying what we hold dear, is
the sowing it, to be multiplied with the large increases of God. Thus as St.
Gregory writes, In Evang hom. 32. Frumentum si servas perdis, si seminas
renovas.
The saving of Seed is in the sowing, one bushel of Corn well sown in good
ground, is worth ten in the barn; Christ is no barren soil in returning
what is sown in him, that which we keep from Christ in our granaries and
custody, abides it self, and in its own nature and corruption, that which we
sow in him, alters, augments and fructisies. Psalm. 126.5. The righteous sow in
tears, beause their crosses have (Sementivam vim) the force of good Seed to
produce fruits of righteousness and glory. When Gordius was threatened with
pains Apud St. Basil. sermon. in Gordium. (...).
he lift up a martyrs voice, Sow many in me, that I may reap manifold, -- How
much am I damnified, that I cannot many times dye for Christ?

Matthew. 10 39. He that loses his life for my sake shall find it. Godliness
is such gain, that the losses thereof are above all the findings of the world.
I may say with Tertullian, In lib. ad Martyrs, si aliqua amisistis vitae
gaudia, negotiatio est aliquid amittere, ut majora lucre^^s.
If you have forgone any joys of this life, it is traffic to part with any
thing to gain much thereby. The true way of finding life, liberty, fame,
friend, fortune, or what else we most affect, is to lose it in Christ, a dram
of credit scatterd and lost in him is worth an ounce, S. Bern. in Psalm. 90.
Sermon. 10.
worth a pound in our own hands, that we may learn to admit praise and
favors in this life with patience and content, as encouragements for beginners
to make progress, and not be weary of well-doing, but to embrace reproach and
persecution; for divine service with desire and comfort, as a Prophets
condition, and state of perfection in our Lord JESUS, by whom and in whom,
glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

