A DIALOGVE BETWIXT COSMOPHILUS AND THEOPHILUS ANENT THE Urging of new
ceremonies upon the Kirk of SCOTLAND.

1 Ioh. 1. 15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If
any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. MDCXX.

To the Christian Reader.
I Have penned this conference anent ceremonies; short, that thine eyes should
not be wearied with the reading of it: plain, that thy wits should not be
troubled with the understanding of it: general, because they are particularly
in sundry treatises already handled. My purpose only is, the information of
the simple and unlearned, to guard their minds, that they be not drawn or
stolen away from the truth, by these common and deceaving arguments, which are
much in the mouths of those who mind earthly things. The speechmen in it are,
Cosmophilus, that is, a lover of the World: and Theophilus, that is, a lover of
God. The love of the one of their two opposite objects, either to God or to the
World, leads the opposite armies, whether of preachers, or of professors in
these decaying days. The true badge of the lover of God, is, zealously to
plead for God and his cause: although it should be to his worldly disadvantage.
The true badge of the lover of the World, is to plead for the World, and the
belly-advantage: howsoever under a fair (although a fectlesse) profession. That
proverb proves now over true, The belly is busy, and witty: and it wants
ears. venture est ingeniosus* venture non habet aures.
Ye may perceive many in this age among us, who draw their wits from their
belly, and their wealth to it. So that; although a loud plain speaking truth do
meet these bellywitted-men in the teeth: yet they hear not, they are deaf;
for they have no ears where their wits are. But the day will dawe, when they
shall be forced to hear on the deafest side of their head. O then, how careful
should we be, knowing the terror of that day, to persuade men to the love of
the truth: and to persevere in it our selves, preassing to approve our selves
both unto God, and unto the consciences of men: that so we may receive that
crown of glory, that fades not away, when the chief Sheephard shall appear.

Worlds-love the soul insnares in many woes,
Gods-love the soul repairs with many Ioes.
A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Cosmophilus and Theophilus anent the Ceremonies.
Cosmoghilus. GOOD morrow precise Theophile.


Theoph. As much to you politic Cosmophile.


Cosm. Ye look very pale upon it How? Has not your tender stomach as yet
digested the ceremonial piluls, for the purging of your Puritan humors?


Theoph. Well Cosmophile, ye make but a mock of the matter of my mourning; yet
I will answer you in your own terms: surely they will never digest with me.


Cosm. And why so I pray you Theophile?


Theoph. Because they are so full of Antichristian ingredients, my stomach
loathes them, and all such Romish Drogs and Dregs.


Cosm. No Theophile, ye must not say so. The particulars in these articles,
the practice whereof is presently urged (except it be kneeling in the act of
receiving the sacrament) were in use in the primtive Church, before the
Antichrist occupied the Roman Chair.


Theoph. I see Cosmophile, ye except kneeling in the act, and that justly:
seeing it has neither father, nor mother, but the Antichrist in his full
growth: and I am sorry it should find so many protestant patrons. As to the
rest, how ancient soever some of them may seem to be, yet all were but humane
inventions, beginning and rising with the Antichrist, whatsoever the intention
was. As for their use, it ended in abuse: their devotion in superstition: as it
ordinarily befalles to all human devices in matter of divine duties. And the
Antichrist having settled himself in his throne, called them in, and many other
also of that quality, to his coyn-house, and stamped them all with his
Idolatrous image, that henceforth they might be known for the proper and
peculiar coin of his kingdom, wherever they were fouud current in the world.


Cosm. O but they are now purged from all these abuses, and superstitions.


Theoph. Indeed Cosmophile, it is no small pains would purge them. For
although they be like wax in receiving; yet are they like brass in reteining
the stamp of superstition: they are like the Leopard, that cannot change his
spots. I would think them then rightly purged, if the kirk were altogether
purged of them. They should be purged as the fire purges the stubble; seeing
they defile the purity, and deface the beauty of Gods worship.


Cosm. You must not think Theophile, that it is a good reason to reject any
thing, because it has been, or is in the Roman Church.


Theoph. The reason is good enough Cosmophile, and holds well in these things,
without the which Christ's Kirk may be, and abide in good case, accomplished
with all her orders and ornaments, wherewith the Evangell has adorned her: in
these things, which (being indifferent as ye say) have been abused and defiled
with idolatry: in these things, which, for the most part, are badges of the
Romish beast, and baits to superstition: if the brazen serpent, Gods own
ordinance being afterward abused to idolatry, was broken and abolished; much
more their base and bruckle ceremonies, man's invention, should be.


Cosm. O but some of these remains Theophile, even in reformed Churches, and
are not much disallowed by sundry learned Protestant Theologues.


Theoph. True, they remain Cosmophile, but as a black spot in a fair face,
which many of of the godly-wise would be glad were wiped away. As to men's not
disallowance, or silence it makes not lawfulness. I could give as learned
Theologues, two for one, disallowing.


Cosm. It is your ministers Theophile, who misinforme and mar you, they might
easily close up all question and controversy about these matters, if it
pleased them.


Theoph. How so Cosmoph. what would you have them do?


Cosm I would have them to propone and prove to the people, these three notable
points. 1. the indifferency or lawfulness of the things urged. 2. The strong
and lawful authority of the urger, both King, and Kirk. 3. The great hurt
will come to the party urged, in case of disobedience.


Theoph Ye presume too high Cosmophile, to prescrive points of preaching to
Past^rs, whose place, and grace is above your reach: and indeed it were more
easy to propone these points, then to prove them. But tell me, I pray you,
with what conscience and countenance they could preasse to prove the
lawfulness of these things, wherein sup^rstition and profanitie have such
place, as is clearly proved in these treatises, wherein they are particularly
handled. I will only in general give you some few strong impediments that
prohibit this proof.


Cosm. What are these strong impediments ye pretend, Theophile?


Theoph. I will give you these three Cosmophile. 1. The bands of their
fideli^y. 2. The credit of their ministry. 3. The duty they ought in
reverence and charity, to their worthy predecessors in this our Kirk.


Cosm. What call ye the bands of their fidelity?


Theoph. Their oath and their subscription to that confession of faith, which
two do bind us also which are professors.


Cosm. O but these bonds may be loosed.


Theoph. I confess they may be violently broken, but lawfully loosed they
cannot be. For an oath is the strongest bond that the tongue can make: and
subscription is the strongest bond that the hand can make. If ye break these
bonds, tell me, what shall bind a man?


Cosm I tell you Theoph. our superiors, King and Church may loose them.


Theoph. No Cosmophile, that may they not. For both consented, yea and by their
authority presented this confession, and urged these bonds on all: binding
first themselves, then others, to hold fast their profession, according to that
confession, during all the days of their life. So the bands of the grave must
bind al, before we can be loosed from these bonds. Indeed Cosmophile there is
harder, and faster knots in them, then ye consider of; namely in the band of
the oath.


Cosm. What be these I pray you Theophile?


Theoph. In that band there is a double, and indissoluble knot. The one, the
persuasion of the truth. The other: the promise for the truth. In the former,
the takers of the oath solemnly professed their persuasion wrought in their
hearts by Gods spirit, through his word, of the undoubted truth of that
religion, doctrine, and discipline professed in the Kirk of Scotland at that
time: and after to be continued therein: and by the contrary, the detestation
of all false religion, Papistry, and all the particular points thereof, as they
were then condemned by our kirk. In the latter, they solemnly promised to
maintain, defend, prof^sse, and practice that true religion, in all the points
thereof: and to abhor and detest the contrary.


Cosm. It is true Theophile, that band and the knots thereof, holds fast upon
the substantialll points of religion, doctrine, and discipline, which a^e
unchangeable; but not so upon the changeable rites and ceremonies about them.


Theoph. Surely Cosmophile, the matter of the oath, and all the particulars
thereof, are like a holy Taber^acle, so jointly and soundly compacted, and knit
together, that the loosing of one pin, bring^th perrill to shake all loose. So
albeit some might seem to be indifferent in themselves severally and apart
considered: yet ye must not think it (...) thing indifferent, to single, and
pick out the small pinnes of it (as ye account them) at your pleasure, lest
all (as is like this day) fall down about your ears.


Cosm. But will you consider Theophile, that your forms, and ceremonies for
the which; and ours against the which ye stand, have not entered in that oath,
being but things indifferent.


Theoph. Yes but they have Cosmophile: for in it ours in general terms are
included, and yours excluded, and abjured. Farther, this oath is relative, and
has respect to the former confession, books of discipline, and acts of
assemblies. By the which particularly, and expressly our forms were received,
ratified, and passed under practice, as agreeable to Christ's ordinance: and
yours rejected, and debarred out of our Kirk, as Antichristian rites.


Cosm. That oath Theophile, so far as it concerned these outward, and
alterable forms, or the like, was but indefinite, and conditional: that is,
such forms as it should please the Church for the time to appoint, continue,
or change, according to that power and liberty she did profess herself, in
sundry acts of assemblies, to have over such indifferent things.


Theoph. It was both determinate and absolute Cosmophile, even in these forms,
and such was the mind of our Kirk at that time, which (as I said in the former
answer) received ours, and rejected yours. So that her Profession of her power,
in the change of things indifferent, extends not to their forms, which are so
particularly and by name excepted: and the great seal of that solemn promise
set upon the continuance in reteining of the one, and in outholding and
withstanding of the other.


Cosm. I think Theophile, that was an unadvised Oath, in respect of these
indifferent forms, which should not be made the subject of an Oath: seeing
they are so subject to changes.


Theoph. I think Cosmophile, ye are evil advised to condemn so wise, and
worthy a Kirk, consisting both of preachers and professors of all estates, in
an errand of so great importance, as if they had not known nor kept these
inseparable conditions of a lawful oath, which the Lord himself expressed,
Ierem. 4. 2. That an oath should be in Truth, and so not false: in Judgment,
or discrerion, and so not rash: In Justice, and so not unrighteous, or
unequitable. The first and last respect chiefly the matter of a lawful oath;
and the mid, the manner. Now that this oath was given in truth, and to the
truth, it is clear, because they swore their resolution and persuasion of the
truth of these heads contained therein. That it was given in judgment, not
rashly or unadvisedly (as ye say) it is clear by the words of the confession,
where it is said, that after long and due examination of their conscience,
being thoroughly resolved in the truth by the word and Spirit of God, they gave
it. That it was given in justice, it is clear, because all the particulars
they swore too, were, and are agreeable to GODS word, serving for the
edification of the Kirk, and overthrow of the kingdom of Satan, and of his
eldest son the Antichrist: and that their forms, which ye call indifferent,
were not such in the judgment of our Kirk, when they appointed the one, and
discharged the other, is evident by the religious and grave reasons given for
their so doing. As that ours were according to Christ's institution, agreeable
to the simplicity of the Evangell, profitable for the preservation of the
purity of Gods holy worship, and eschewing of the occasions, and countenance of
superstition, and conformity with Rome: but yours by the contrary.


Cosm. I see then Theophile, ye are loath to grant these forms to be
indifferent.


Theoph. That I am Cosm. and although I should, ye would be little nearer your
purpose. For it is neither the unadvisednesse of the manner; nor the the
indifferency of the matter of an oath, will loose the band thereof once laid
on, as long as the indifferent matter is not turned to a sinful use, or abuse.
Although such cases might possibly hinder the making of it: it is only the
unlawfulness looses all. The oath which Joshua and the Princes of Israel gave
to the Gibeonites, Ios. 9. 14. 15. was unadvisedly made: for they consulted not
(says the text) with the mouth of the Lord: yet it was advisedly kept, for
the religious reverence to the great and glorious name of God. If ye be able
to prove, that our formerly established forms are turned unlawful,
unprofitable, inequitable, profane, or superstitious, go to, try your wits.
Your Bishops and Doctors publicly professed they would not, they could not.


Cosm. Yea but for all that Theophile, your former forms must to the door.


Theoph. Sure then Cosm. yours must fly in at the window: For ye have no
lawful warrant to bring them in, in the room of so old and kindly possessors,
who have all your lyfrent takes, sworn, and subscribed to them, to stand sure,
under the penalty of that dreadful damnation, in the great day of the Lord.
Beside in so doing, shall ye not undergo the guiltiness of double perjurie
by the violent ejection of the one, which were sworn to: and the fraudulent and
forcible intrusion of the other, which were sworn against.


Cosm. Ye aggreage the matter strangely Theoph. in making it both sinful and
hurtful.


Theoph. I will add the third also Cosm. shameful. Consider that worthy example
of good Abraham, and ye shall see that, and more, Genesis 14. 22. 23. When the
king of Sodom offered to him the goods which he brought back, after battle
against the Kings, he refused to receive them, and why? I have lift up my hand,
says Abraham, to the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven, that I
should so do: and wherefore that? lest the King of Sodom should say, I have
made Abraham rich? Abraham thought, that had been to him a great discredit, and
shameful slander. Now have we not all lift up our hand to this LORD, the most
high GOD, possessor of heaven and earth, that we shall continue in the
maintenance and obedience of these comely and customable forms of our Kirk,
and not to borrow, beg, or bring back again these forms abhorred, and abjured:
lest, beside both sin and skaith, to our great disgrace and shame, it should
also be said: The Antichristian King of spiritual Sodom, has enriched, or
rather bewitched us.


Cosm. I will leave now the purpose of the oath Theoph. and come to the persons
who^ it concerns. Howsoever, it would seem that these who have personally taken
it, cannot be freed from the bonds of it: yet ye know, such as were not come to
perfect years at that time: who have never personally taken it: as also the
succeding posterity, are not bound by it.


Theoph. Indeed Cosm. (to pass by the professors, whose case is alike with
preachers) there are few either among our Ministers, or among your Bishops, who
are not personally bound, both when they passed their course in the Colleges
of Philosophy, and when they entered in the office of the Ministry, beside the
renewing of these bands sundry times since in particular synods, and
Assemblies. As to these forenamed, who have not personally taken it, or in time
coming shall not, they are bound really. Because this bond of their parents
and predecessors (who at that time represented the whole body, and all sorts of
the members of our reformed Kirk) as upon their parts it was personal: so also
it was real, passing to their children, being about a matter which concerned
their good and welfare; as well as theirs, who took the oath. Now to clear
this point Cosm If that oath of Israel to the Gibeonites, bound old, and young,
parents and posterity, in a matter more private, and of less importance
(albeit the oath was obtained by craft, and ignorance) much more does this oath
bind, in a matter so public, so profitable, and with such knowledge,
conscience, d^liberation, resolution, and persuasion made unto God.


Cosm. That oath of Israel Theoph. concerned this present life: but this oath
concerns our religion; and the life to come: so they are not alike.


Theoph. It is true Cosm. the two lives are not alike. But as for the oath, if
the band of it hold fast an^nt the one, and the matters belonging thereto: tell
me, by what reason it should not far more hold in things concerning the other?
If even common civil bands, or worldly contracts without an oath, binds parents
and predecessors, who make it: and children and post^rity, who made it not:
much more should this religious contract, and holy covenant, sealed both with
oath and subscription, bind both to the constant profession, and practice of
that truth, which is according to godliness. Did not that religious vow which
Joshua made, chap. 24. 14. I and my fathers house (says he) will serve the
Lord, bind not only those who were present, but even his posterity through
their generations? Did not that stone which Joshua set up as a witness of the
covenant, which the people did make to for sake all strange Gods, and to serve
the Lord, verse. 26. continue a witness of the transgression of children and
posterity, who (after Joshua and all the Elders that outlived him, were dead)
brake that covenant, and served Baalim, Iud. 2. 12. Did not likewise that
solemn oath and covenant made by Asa King of Judah, and his people, that they
would seek and serve God, 2. Chron. 15. bind all, old and young, parents, and
posterity, among whom, whosoever afterward fell away, were even guilty of the
breach of this particular oath and covenant, as well, as of the general
covenant to be Gods people. Here are in the like case, like examples.


Cosm. I grant Theoph. your reasons move me almost to be of your mind.


Theoph. I would wish Cosm. your almost, were altogether. And now in end I
entreat you, seeing an oath should be the end of all controversy, Heb. 6. that
ye would once end all controversy about this oath* and as ever ye would dwell
in the mountain of God, learn to make greater conscience in keeping the great
oath of God. Beware of dangerous and damnable jugglery, to play fast and loose,
with this so holy and religious a band. Remember, and consider that fearful
example of Ezekiah king of Judah, 2. Chron. 36. 13. who breaking that oath
which he made by God to the King of Babel, but a man, but an Ethnic man,
received such an hard and heavy challenge, and threatening from the Lord, by his
Prophet Ezekiel, cap. 17. 18. 19. As I live, says the Lord, I will surely
bring my oath, that he has despised, and my covenant that he has brok^n, upon
his own head. O! may not they look for the like challenge one day, or a
heavier, who do wittingly and willingly break that covenant, and ^espise that
oath, made by God himself, to God himself.


Cosm. Now come to your second impediment Theoph. which you call the credit of
their ministry: What? will you have them to stand upon the points of their
reputation?


Theoph. Surely Cosm. as Men I say nothing: but as Ministers I say they should.
For if they lose the credit of their calling, they lose also the fruit of their
labors in it. If they in public preaching shall turn their tongues, and allow
those, as lawful, and religious rites, which before they condemned as Romish
relics: may it not be justly said, that their preaching is not yea and Amen:
but yea and nay, 2. Cor. 18. 20. Will not the simple people say, what shall we
believe now, when one and the self same tongue speaks contraries from the
chair of truth? Will not the Papists rejoicing, say? Take up your Ministers
now, ye may see, if their talking be worthy of trusting, who whiles affirms,
wh^les denies: whiles disallowes, whiles allows, the self same things. Surely
a pulpit contradiction draws with it a self conviction, and a just imputation
of levity and inconstancy in preaching, far worse then if it were in
practice: and that which is worst of all, a comfortles desertion of the spirit
of power and grace.


Cosm. But they have been too rash Theophile, in their Sermons, speaking
against these things: So they must not be ashamed to recant, and confess their
oversight.


Theoph. Ye are but rash in so saying. They had the warrant of Gods word; and
the warrant of the Acts, both of Kirk and kingdom for them, to speak against
such superfluous, and superstitious ceremonies. So recantation h^re, were but
the incantation of some transporting passion, as fear, favor, avarice,
ambition: and confession of an oversight, were a great oversight in the not
constant professing of the formerly avowed truth. I have seen the day Cosm.
when even your principal pillars have spoken zealously against them also. But
this late indifferency of theirs, with the following commodity, has cooled
and quenched their former fervencie.


Cosm. Now to come to your third impediment Theoph. let me see what
undutifulness the receiving back, and practicing of these ceremonies can import
upon your ministers part, to their predecessors in this Church.


Theoph. By so doing Cosm. they should (so far as in them lies) discredit
all their former care, knowledge, and conscience of so many grave, godly and
learned men, who in so many lawfully called, and well constitute Assemblies, by
constitutions wisely and advisedly enacted, according to God^ word, did
establish in our kirk these forms of ours, so long possessed to the great good,
and edification thereof: and did banish yours back to Rome, whence they came:
yea for-faulted them, never to be reduced, or restored.


Cosm. Yet Theoph* for all ye have said, if these things be in themselves in
different, or lawfully, why may they not be received?


Theoph. Ye would be an evil Musician Cosmophile, ye sing ever one song, and
strike ever upon one string. But give me license to question you a little; Why
confound ye indifferency and lawfulness? Seeing (to speak properly and
strictly) indifferency is in respect of the nature of a thing: and lawfulness
in respect of the use of it. It is true, we have a liberty in things
indifferent, to do, or not to do: but when we come to the particular and
determinate act or use of them, if they be found expedient and profitable, then
properly are they counted and called lawful. But this is your custom
Cosmophile, under the generality, ambiguitie, and plausible sound of words
(passing by the proper signification of them) to color all your purposes,
which you propone: that ye may steal away a conclusion by appearance, where
there is no logical or lawful consequence.


Cosmoph. I will answer to your first question Theophile, I call them things
indifferent in themselves, which are neither commanded nor forbidden by Gods
word: and so neither good nor evil in themselves.


Theoph. Then if so be Cosmoph. are ye not forbidden by Gods word, and told,
that it is not good to plead and persecute so hotly for them, as ye^ do? And
is this a good argument of yours, Those things are indifferent in themselves,
that is, neither commanded, nor forbidden, neither good nor ill: Therefore we
vvil have them reduced, and repossessed in our Church. Indeed Cosmophile, ye
have need to learn better Logic from your Doctors. For it is not the
indifferency of a thing, that will vvarrant the admission, far less the
readmission of it again into a Church. Ye must come to the use, wherein a
thing is neither evil nor good, lawful nor unlawful, expedient nor inexpedient.
And if ye can prove, that your forms in their use are expedient and
profitable, and ours not at all, or less then yours, I shall approve.


Cosmoph. Think ye then Theophile, that there is such such difficulty, or
rather impossibility in that probation?


Theoph. I think it certainly Cosm. that even your Philosophers stone, that ye
so brag and boast of, shall not be able to turn this lead into gold.


Cosm. And why so Theophile?


Theoph. Will ye Cosm. put them to the trial of that true touch stone, of
these Apostolical rules, order, comeliness, edification, peace, charity, Romans
14. 1. Cor, 14. ye shall easily perceive, what ye and they both prove. Let
woeful experience this day be judge, and give out sentence. The Papist, and
Protestant are so confounded in the use of your forms, that hardly in outward
show can they be discerned; answers that to order? The obscuring and defiling
veil of Antichristian ceremonies, drawn upon the comely putitie, and
simplicity of the Evangell, agrees that with comelines? The weak ones
offended, and distracted with doubting, what hand to turn to: the Papists
heartned and hardened in their superstition: the stronger, and well resolved
grieved to see things go so; makes this for edification? By dissension and
division, the bowels of a motherly Kirk rented; stands this with peace and
charity? So these rules clearly reveal how perilous and pernicious your
forms are* put case in themselves they were never so indifferent.


Cosm. Will ye look Theoph. to the example of our neighbor Kirk, so wise and
learned, which uses and makes so much of these forms.


Theoph. We will keep us within the boundrod Cosm. and say nothing, or little,
of our neighbors, among whom many both worthy preachers and professors, have
ever, and yet do, stand out against them. Only this far for the form and
state of their Kirk: their case and ours is very far different. They are free
(although not of every conscientious band) yet of the bands, which, beside
these, binds us strictly. As 1. the band of Oath. 2. Subscription. 3. ^o long
peaceable possession. 4. public profession. 5. uniforme practice; all standing
and pleading for our forms: and against yours. They have continued and kept
them still, which our Kirk did so advisedly cast out, and so long has holden
out, as pestilential clouts of that Romish infective superstition. So if ye
would leave your unlike examples, and your jangling in generals, wherein ye
take room to reele, and ^unne to many starting holes: and if ye would consider
particularly what is the singular case of our Kirk in this respect, ye would be
forced to confess, that it is not a thing lawful, nor indifferent, to reduce
them. And albeit in the judgment of some Theologues, where some of them are in
a Kirk, and cannot without the disturbance of the peace thereof, be removed,
they may be tolerate: yet all in one mind affirm, that being once removed,
their reduction is not tolerable. The consideration of this point Cosm. I hope
shall close your mind, if not your mouth.


Cosm. What Theoph. is not pest-clou^s, and clothes oft-times cleansed, and so
applied to good use? Will not careful preaching cleanse all?


Theoph. Seeing ye urge preaching Cosm. go to shall not this be a particular
point of it, that a^ the monuments and remainders of Idolatry, and all the
occasions and entisements to it, be removed. What will become then of your
ceremonies? The truth is Cosm. as long as that man of sin has place upon the
face of the earth, they will never be cleansed. And as for preaching, it is
appointed by God, not to cleanse them, but to consume them, and him both. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Indeed Cosm. ye may be the Popes Pensioner, for the pains ye take to
vent, and advance his wares.


Cosm. Yet seeing other things Theoph. which have been abused to superstition,
are purged, and retained: as for example, our Temples, and Churches, wherein
the true God is now truly worshipped: tell me, why may not these things in
like manner be purged and retained?


Theoph. I desired you before Cosm. to hold off your unlike examples, but ye
do not: therefore by answer either to content you, or convict you, I say 1.
Temples, or Kirkes have a needful use, both natural and civil, in the
commodious, and comely containing of people, for the public practice of Gods
worship. So the abuse may be purged, and they retained. But the best use of
your ceremonies is but abuse* which being removed, they fall, as idle, and
fectlesse things, to the ground. 2. Albeit a Kirk be the place, wherein God is
publicly worshipped: yet it has no place or state in the exercise of that
worship, as any part, point, or ceremony thereof: as your forms have. 3.
Sometimes some needful circumstances may require, even the Temples to be
removed, and razed: as the Temples of Idols were in the days of Constantine,
and Theodosius, two godly Emperors.


Cosm. Would your Ministers Theoph. in their doctrine, tell the people, that
these ceremonies should be, and are used, without any Papistical superstition
and opinion of merit, of inherent holiness, and efficacy, or of necessity, as
if they were essential parts of Gods worship, this would purge all.


Theoph. If they should so do Cosmophile, how would you purge them of the
slander of inconstancy, who before in their doctrine have told the people so
often, that such ceremonies should not be used at all, because superstitious. And
albeit they should tell, and tell again, as ye prescrive, what assurance have
ye, that thereby the hearts and minds of simple people should be purged of that
natural inclination they have to superstition: so long as the objects and
occasions of it stand in their eyes. And so much the rather, when they see such
things so violently enforced, as if they were matters of greatest efficacy and
necessity in Gods worship. I must say Cosm. little wit makes meekle travel.
Were it not better to fill up the pit, and so to take away all danger of
falling in it: then to spend time unnecessarily to warn folks to go by it, who
notwithstanding, possibly through forgetfulness, carelesnes, or want of light,
might fall into it? Preachers and preaching may be better employed, then to be
made slaves to your ceremonies, by giving continual warning to saif from their
ill, when no sound warrant can be given for their good.


Cosm. Now say to the second point Theoph. may not the authority of King, and
Kirk, lawfully reduce and impose these forms?


Theoph. They may not Cosm. in respect their hands are already bound by these
former bands: they must come from some new found land, or go to it, who make
this thing.


Cosm. But answer me Theoph. is there not lawfulness, and strength in their
authority to do it?


Theoph. I have answered that already in effect, Cosm. But I will add this
further: It is true, God has given authority to both, but with this
restriction, and direction, (says the Apostle Paul 2. Cor. 13. 10.) not for
the destruction, but for the edification of his Kirk. For the power of
authority is the power of equity, and not of injury. Now by urging to
re-edifie that, which was justly destroyed: and to destroy that, which was
lawfully built; what humane authority can free the doers from transgression,
Gal. 2. or themselves from guiltiness.


Cosm. That holds only Theoph. in matters of substance, according to the
Apostles meaning, and not in matters of ceremonies.


Theoph. It holds both in substance and ceremony, Cosm. where the edification
of a Christian soul may be hurt, or the course of the Gospel hindered.


Cosm. Ye curb the power and authority of the King, and Church strangely
Theoph. that denies it to them even in things indifferent.


Cosm. I have told you Cosm. that there is nothing indifferent, that breaks
these Apostolical rules. Man's authority is not absolute in things indifferent;
but i^ is tied to these former scriptures: from the which, if it vary, it wants
the warrant of divine authority.


Cosm. But Theoph. this twofold Christian authority, takes away all perril of
offense, and prejudice against these rules.


Theoph. One thing said, and another thing seen, Cosm. We see sensibly, it
rather continues and increases offense. For the hearts of the lovers of the
truth, of King, and Kirk, are exceedingly grieved, when they see humane
authority enforcing, what divine authority has forbidden: And the hearts of
the enemies to all, wonderfully comforted, when they see authority so favor
and further their forms. For then there is no peril of offense, when the
expediencie and utilitie of the use of things indifferent, is evident: but if
that be not, the injunction of authority is very inexpedient, unprofitable, and
doubleth the danger.


Cosm. The Papists Theoph. have but small cause of comfort hereby. For ye see
how far we differ from them in points of doctrine.


Theoph. But if ye will call to mind Cosm. how they place almost the life of
their religion in their ceremonies, and that by them the very power and purity
of true religion, have been piece and piece weakened, and worn out; ye shall
easily perceive, that they cannot but conceive a great hope, that we shall with
time, by following and affecting so fervently their forms, fall in likewise
upon their faith.


Cosm. Ye perceive not Theoph. the wise intent of authority, to draw the
Papists to us, by conforming in some measure in outward shows, or ceremonies
to them.


Theo. Well Cosm. that intent had never yet a good event. For it is the express
precept of God in scripture, both of old and new testament, that we should be
in every things (so far as possibly can be) unlike to Idolaters. We are
commanded to come out of Babel, both in conscience and countenance, in inward
affection, and outward fashion: in substance and ceremony. We are commanded to
beware of Idols: to hate and cast away their garments, coverings, and
ornaments: and to eschew every appearance of their evil. It proves never well
to be wise above that which is written. Before ye had yielded to their
ceremonies, ye should have seen them in some measure, yield to your substance.
Ye have been over sudden Cosm. in going awayward to Rome, to meet them: but who
sees, that they have any mind to meet you midway. Ye think to draw them to
you: but ye have chosen the wrong cords, their own ceremonies, by the which
they will draw you nearer to their Babel: then ye shall do them to your
Jerusalem. And if they seem to draw near to you by such means, ye had need to
beware of Judas kiss, that is, treachery and cruelty under the cloak of
hypocrisy.


Cosm. Ye are too much afraid for so few, honest and innocent ceremonies; the
peaceable receving whereof, will make you quit of the cumber of any more.


Theoph. It is not your word or vote will cleanse them, they have been so often
convict and condemned; and to receive one ceremony, is to receive all. For
they are not loose, bnt linked, as in a chain, so inseparably, that draw one,
draw all. It is but your policy to let some few, that look most smoothly,
appear, and to hide the rest, which will follow hard on.


Cosm. Let alone Theoph. trouble not your self, your shallow wit cannot
conceive the draught of so deep wisdom.


Theoph. It may well be a deep wit, but it seems to be no divine wisdom, to
trouble the peace of so well a constitute Kirk, by intruding such idle
ceremonies; as if there were worth in them, to countervaile the meanest point
of that peace. Surely even an approved politic wit, would be loath to make
such an interchange: seeing any one of the least points of the peace of Christ's
Kirk, is worth all your graceless and peacelesse ceremonies.


Cos. Now I desire to have your particular answer severally: first for the
authority of our Kirk. Have not the conclusions of that late assembly, holden
at Perth, credit to take away all scruples: and to satisfy your conscience
anent the receiving and practicing of these forms.


Theoph. Certainly they have not Cosm. for it is Scripture, and not
Kirk-conclusions, which settles, and satisfies the conscience. As for that
Assembly, the unlawful constitution, the violent and posted proceeding, and
the crafty closing of it, well enough known to all, declares those conclusions
to have been, rather collusions, and delusions.


Cosm. What means the man? Does the credit of that reverend Assembly weigh so
light in the balance of your brain?


Theoph. I am not speaking fantasy Cosm. but verity. I will put in bellance
with that unlawful assembly which was so divided in judgment, and consent, all
the former worthy, and well constitute Assemblies, for the space of more then a
Iubile of years, consenting in one mind and mouth. Then let a constant and
conscientious hand hold it, and ye shall sensibly perceive, how light and little
worth your one is in reducing these superstitious forms, in respect of the
weight and worth of all those, in removing them.


Cosm. Well Theoph. ye should not reason against the Acts of an Assembly: nor
set your self as a Judge, to censure them, and your superiors.


Theoph. Ye see Cosm. it is not I, but many godly, and grave Assemblies reason
against one pretended assembly, and do justly challenge it of levity, and
perjurie for restoring those so deservedly forefalted Romish rites. Farther, ye
know, that how sever the Lords injunctio^s are to be receved without
questioning; yet the ordinances of the Kirk, are presented to us, not with the
necessity of believing, but with the liberty of judging. For albeit the
judgment of jurisdiction, to censure, belongs not to me: yet I should have the
judgment of discretion to satisfy my conscience, by the warrant of the word,
in all points of obedience to my superiors.


Cosm. Say what you please Theoph. against that Assembly, it will stand, and the
decrees of it will have place, ay and while they be reduced.


Theoph. Stand as it will Cosm. to the formalist, it shall not stand in my
conscience: neither shall the decrees thereof have place in my practice: neither
should it, or the decrees thereof, stand to others, seeing both it, and they,
stand against all good order, and the wholesome doctrine of the word. The good
people perceive this: and therefore they skar, and skunner with the iniquity,
and vanity of the conclusions thereof. Where before they did ever willingly
subject themselves to the constitutions of our ancient Assemblies, because they
evidently saw the equity and the utility of the conclusions, and lawful manner
of their proceedings.


Cos, It seems then Theoph. ye mind to play the schismatike, and make a
separation: seeing ye^ mean not to stand to the judgment of our Kirk.


Theoph. Your kirk Cosm. what do you call your selves a kirk? are ye comparing
a kirk scarce cropen out of the cradle, and a cripple halting kirk, with a kirk
so ancient, so honorable, and endued with such wisdom and prudence, by long
and manifold experience; which studied carefully to walk ever uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel? As for schism or separation, it seems ye
vvot not what they mean For in the unity both of judgment and practice, we
yet stand with the kirk wherein we were baptized, and brought up: and
whereunto we gave our right hand of fellowship, and band of fidelity: which
being broken by you, ye may justly be called schismatikes, both from this
Kirk, and from your selves also: seeing ye have broken down the beautiful
walls of our Jerusalem, and have re-edified the cursed walls of Jericho. Ye
have built a Kirk to your self, standing upon thritten rotten pillars, but
painted with ceremonial colors, all of the workmanship of Rome.


Cosm. Now let me hear Theoph. what ye can say particularly to the kings
authority: may he not lawfully enjoin these things?


Theo. Not Cosm. seeing (beside that which has been said already) they want
the warrant of the word* and ye know, that the book of the law of God, should
lie ever open before his eyes, to lead him in every point and appointment of
any thing (within the bounds of his authority) that concerns the work of God,
and his holy worship.


Coms. See ye not Theoph. the credit of his royal authority engaged to the
advancement of these errands?


Theoph. I see it not Cos. for it was the credit and commendations of the good
and godly Kings of Judah, to root out, and remove Idolatry, and all the
monuments thereof, from among Gods people: and by the contrary, a discredit,
and dispraise to those, who either planted, permitted, or reduced them.


Cosm. But is he not a Prince, wise, learned, and religious, without a peer
this day living upon the face of the earth, who would be loath to do any
thing, but that which is lawful.


Theoph. I acknowledge he is, and so was David, a most worthy Prince and
Prophet too: yet he needed a Nathan, both to draw him to repentance, and to
direct him in things concerning the house of God.


Cosm. There is not a minister Theoph. within his dominions (yea join them all
together) that knows so well what belongs to the house of God, as he does.


Theoph. It may be so Cosm. but I know it should not be so. Every one should
be best skild in his own craft. And I am sure a spiritual office-bearer in
the house of God, sanctified and set a part by him to that service, both should
and will know best the will of his master, anent the points, and discharge of
his own calling: and likewise, what concerns the weil, good order, and diet of
the family, and domestickes thereof. Surely it may seem strange, and must
spring either from a high presumption of self conceit: or from a high contempt
of the holy ministry, that credit shall be given to every one in their own
calling (yea go even down to the basest mechanics) but it shall be denied to
Ministers in their calling; they and it both being subject to the rash censures
of every raving spirit, rushing in upon them.


Cosm. Is he not our native and gracious King, Theoph. and should we not in
these things pleasure him, and give to him his own due: else it is a token we
lack true love and loyalty to him.


Theoph. He is Cosm. the Lord preserve and bless him. We would most willingly
(God is our witness) pleasure him in all things, wherein our king of kings
is not displeased, and our conscience damnified. We will most gladly give to
our most Christian Caesar, what belongs to him: and to give farther, is not
fidelity, but flattery, and spreading of a net to his feet: not loyal love to
his weil, but self love to the world, and our own private commodity.


Cosm. I see Conscience is a great doer with you Theoph. in every thing ye
pretend conscience, conscience.


Theoph. And I intend it also Cosm. It shall God vvilling, be a doer with me,
as long as I dwell in this tabernacle of clay. If ye count more of a great
conquest then a good conscience, sometime ye will smart for it.


Cosm. Well Theoph. if ye care not for his pleasure, yet I think ye will
respect his displeasure, and fear his Majesty's offense, which will draw
with it so many fearful evils upon the Church, if these things be not yielded
to.


Theoph. We protest Cosm. next unto the displeasure of the Almighty God, we
most fear, and would fainest flee his displeasure. As for his Majesty's
offense, ye make it to be the offense of anger, not of ignorance. For of
ignorance it cannot be, in respect of his so great a measure of light and
knowledge: and of anger, it will not be, in respect he is endued with so
peerlesse wisdoms and clemency. So neither can he stumble through lack of
light; neither vvil he tumble over his anger, as ye say, upon his loyal
subjects. So I affirm Cosm. ye deserve neither Bishopric, nor pension, at his
Ma. hand, for such uncharitable prognostications.


Cosm. It appears Theoph. protest as ye please, that the great reason, why ye
will not yield, is, because the King will have it. So it seems, ye delight to
be opposite to the King in every thing.


Theoph. I say ye delight to calumniate Cos. we reverence his will: but we
must rest upon the vvil and word, both of his and our king. Yea and your great
Donns, and Doctors professed, that reason, Scripture, and antiquity are against
these things: and ye have nothing for you, but his Majestis will, and the
fear of his offense. But it seems ye favor most your own commodity, seeing ye
look these light ceremonies shall bring with them some solid substance to you:
and so ye receive them as typical.


Cosm. But what needs all this obstinate standing Theo. against matters of
ceremony? I confess, if any alteration be urged in matters of faith, we
should give our lives before we yielded.


Theoph. And what needs all this violent urging of matters of c^remony, as if
they were metamorphosed in matters of faith. For there is not such danger for
commission against Gods ordinance, as for omission of man's. And make what ye
will of them, it is too near marching. For they have made an innovation and
alteration of the confession of faith, sworn and subscrived by us: so that a
new one is thrust into the room thereof. Moreover, whatsoever is a matter of
conscience, cannot be denied, but in so far, it is also a matter of faith. Now
will you, or dare you say, that there is no conscience to be kept in the using
of such things as may defile Gods holy and pure worship. But I will come near
you, and try your faith a little Cosm, He who swears, and for his worldly
hinderance changes, does he not cast a great impediment in his own way to the
mountain of God? But he, who swears for his spiritual furtherance, and yet
changes, casts a far greater, if mercy and repentance remove it not.
Believe ye this Cos. it is Gods word, Psalm. 15. Believe ye that all the points
of Gods worship, both inward and outward, should be directed by his word?
Believe ye that there should be no communion betwixt Christ and Belial. These
are matters of faith, founded on Gods word. Look to your self: for if this
word rule not your faith, your fancy will misrule all.


Cosm. Ye must not say that these things urged, are matters of faith.


Theoph. If ye mean of your faith Cosm. it may be it hold; the wings whereof
seem to be so sore clipped, that ye cannot fly, nor see farther then the fire
side. But I must tell you, take faith in what sense ye will, whether for the
doctrine of faith: or for that divine holy habit of the soul; they belong to
the one, as a part of the subject: or to the other, as a part of the object,
that is, ye must believe, that they are either with, or against the word.


Cosm. Now last, will ye consider, how commendable a thing it were, that the
Churches of all his Majesty's kingdoms were uniform and conform: as in
substance, so also in ceremonies of religion.


Theoph. If so it should be Cos. then it were needful that your ceremonies, to
the which you would have us to conform, were first freed of superstition, which
shall never be. Therefore ye must turn you, and consider where the best forms,
the reformed forms are, according to the holy pattern: and let conformity be
there, and so uniformity: else it may be justly counted but a deformity.


Cosm. Some things ye have said I confess, to the first two points. Now let us
come to the third and last, which, I hope, will put you to your peremptories,
concerning the inconveniences will seize upon the parties urged, in case of
disobedience.


Theoph. What are those inconveniences Cosm. and on whom in that case will they
light?


Cosm. They will be Theoph. according to the condition and quality of the
persons. It professors in private estate, they will be fined: and it may be
also the communion will be denied to them. If Professors in public state, they
will also loose his Majesty's favor, or their place. If preachers, then
deprivation from their ministry, and privation, either of bodily, or country
liberty will follow, by warding confining, or banishment.


Theoph. O inconvenient ceremonies, which draw after them such inconveniences!
I see it is a just complaint, which many worthy divines take up against them,
affirming that these indifferent ceremonies (as ye call them) have bred
greater difference, and division in the kirk, and yet do, then the doctrine it
self. They have ever been (as the story of the Kirk in all ages reports) that
apple of contention cast in by that old and subtle Serpent, which has vexed
the Paradise of God. Therefore would to God (say they) that the Kirk were once
rid, and freed of them.


Cosm. Tush Theoph. they will be, and will abide in the Kirk when ye and I both
are dead and rotten.


Theoph. I hope ye shall prove a false Prophet Cosm. and if so be, what shall
I say? offenses must come, but woe unto them by whom they come. Heresies,
schisms, and troubles must be, that they who are approved of God, may be
known. 1. cor. 11*


Cosm. But answer to the point Theoph. I perceive ye would fain shift it.


Theoph. I confess I would feign shift your ill, if I could: but not an
answer to you. I would understand, by what reason ye can enforce obedience
to these things? And if not, by what equity, ye can bind their punishments
upon their backe^ in case of non-obedience?


Cosmoph. It is sufficient that king and kirk will have it so.


Theoph. It is not will Cosmoph. but reason that I crave. Gods will, I know,
must and should go for reason: but man's will wants that privilege. I have
answered before sufficiently to that only wil-argument, or violent reason of
yours.


Cosm. Think ye it not very equitable Theop. that the benefits of the Church be
denied to those, who deny obedience to the Church: and that they may be justly
fined in their purses, who will not obey in their persons, the command of the
King and Kirk; and last, that they are unworthy of his Maj^sties favor, or of
a place of state in his kingdom, who will not follow his practice, and obey
his precept?


Theoph. Not surely Cosm. For what equity is it, to deny the benefits of the
Kirk to those, who are both in, and of the Kirk; or to punish either in purse,
of person, for obeying rather God then man. As to vvorldly favor and places:
it is better to keep Gods favor, then coilye men's: better keep peace in
conscience, then place in earthly kingdoms.


Cosm. Now I will leave the Professors, and come to the Preachers. It will go
very hardly with them, if they obey not. For the Church will take their calling
from them, and close their mouth: and the king their living, and their liberty.


Theo. That is a hard saying, indeed, and draws with it a great hinderance to
the free course of Christ's Evangell: and a furtherance to the Antichristian
course. Yet if so shall be, the comfort of faithful Preachers is, that no
creature is able to take a good conscience, the love of God, and the liberty of
the Spirit from them. But I will ask, what kirk is this of yours, that will
close up the mouths of the faithful servants of Christ. The good people it
cannot be: for they heavily regrate such iniquity. The faithful Pastors it
cannot be: for in none of their meetings, general, provincial, or
presbyteriall, have they allowed such work. So it rests, that your Bishops must
be this crabbed Kirk, who being once so solemnly banished out of our Kirk, as
belonging to that Antichristian crew, has cropen back again upon us, and
minds after this manner, to revenge the old quarrel. Alas Cosm. if they proceed
after that fort, how shall the rooms of honest Preachers be supplied?


Cosm. Ye may be sure Theoph. they will get anew to fill their rooms.


Theoph. There may be anew Cosm. and yet little worth, who will rather defile
their rooms, then fill them; who will love the fleece better then the flock:
who will study more to be Patrons of Episcopacie, and ceremonies, to please the
Bishops: then paternes of piety, charity, and sobriety, to profit the people.


Cosm. But ye must consider more deeply of this matter, Theoph. ye must not
think that your Ministers should leave their calling, and forsake their flock,
for such things: that will be an ill and ungodly doing.


Theoph. Ye mistake the matter very far, Cosmop. for they are not leavers of
their calling, but your Bishops are reavers of their calling from them. They
are not forsakers of their flocks, but your Bishops are wilful and violent
ruggers of them from their flock. They are patients and not agents: sufferers
of violence, and not actors in that wickedness: who would rather leave, and
forsake their lives, if it lay in their hands. Your Bishops indeed Cosm. for
their worldly ease, profit, and preferment, in effect willingly have left their
former calling, or pastoral charge, and violently thrust honest men out of
their places: because they will not allow their evil course.


Cosm. Nay but they should not suffer themselves to be deprived of their
ministry, and loose the exercise thereof, for matters of this indifferent
nature.


Theoph. Ye must confess then Cos. that far less should your Bishops, whose
words these are, d^prive them from their ministry, for matters of that
indifferent nature: and if they do, they are damned of them own selves, Tit.
3. 11. They avow and argue them to be matters indifferent: but they urge them
as matters of necessity, and lay upon their omission, the pain of deprivation.
Therefore our faithful Pastors, who count them not indifferent, may lawfully
suffer themselves, rather to be deprived from their calling, then deprive
themselves of a good conscience, by doing any thing against it.


Cosm. Let alone Theoph. I tell you over again, it is better for them to yield
to these things, then to loose their ministry, or the exercise of it.


Theoph. They loose no ministry Cosm. who keep a good conscience, and give
testimony by suffering to Christ's cause: that is a special point of their
ministry, when they are called to it. They stand in the reputation of GOD,
faithful ministers, let men account of them as they will. As to the closing up
of the exercise thereof, ye may perceive how the contrary will fall out. For
the liberty taken from them in their own parishes by men's malice, is given to
them in prison, or banishment, by Gods providence. Albeit they be cast in
bands, or under banishment, yet Gods word is not bound, nor banished.


C. Beside the former, will ye consider Theo. their inconveniences also* they
will loose their worldly moyen and maintenance* and this yland will not keep
them.


Theoph. Will ye consider Cosm. that the earth, and the fullness thereof, is
the Lords, and that this Island is but a silly angle of it. If it cast them out,
and close the door upon them, their provident and gracious Lord, who has
called them, will care for them, and open in foreign nations to them a wide
door for the entry of the Evangel, as experience declares. They will never want
maintenance, who have care to maintain, and entertain a good conscience:
which is a continual feast. Alas Cosmo. it is a lamentable thing to see, how
some learned men, sometime well thought of, have turned now both their tongue,
and their pen, to the wrong hand, for worlds gain: and do direct the darts of
their variable wits, unsettled judgments, and salerife learning, against the
truth, and sincere patrons and professors thereof, their friends: where before
they wont to throw them against their Romish enemies. Your golden, or godless
hammer, breaks all, and makes much halting, as also writing with the left hand.


Cosm. Yet will ye think Theop. what account your ministers should make of their
precious ministry, and of that worthy work.


Theoph. There is nothing in your mouth, but a Ministry, a Ministry. But I
must tell you, a Ministry, and take a good conscience from it, is but a
misery. What is the price of it, when the power of it is gone? and the worth of
it, when the virtue is away? Is not grace, and a good conscience the life of
it? if they be gone, it is but a dead ministry, and so far better to bury
it, then to bear the dead burden of it.


Cosm. Ye care not Theoph. for making of empty pulpits, silent ministers, and
so a destitute and desolate people.


Theo. The Lord knows the contrary: albeit I confess, that pulpits are then
most empty, when those who occupy them, are empty of holy humility, heavenly
wisdom, and Christian courage for Christ's cause. Silent sufferings of
faithful ministers for the truth, prove oft-times as profitable to Gods
people, to confirm them in it: as eloquent Sermons of the truth to inform
them of it. That people is most desolate, whose Pastors are most dissolute,
either in doctrine, or life. God can and will provide for his people, the means
and instruments of their comfort, as pleases him best.


Cos. I am of that judgment, that a minister should not suffer the loss of his
calling for any thing, but for that he should suffer the loss of his life.


Theoph. And ye will not say, that any Christian magistrate will or should for
such omission take his life: and if any would, then the case is altered
(although the practice of such ceremonies were indifferent) and turned in the
case of confession, and necessity, for the which one might lawfully suffer.
Your judgment is not sound Cosm. touching this matter: for there is great
difference between doing and suffering. We may suffer the gratest evil of
punishment, rather then do the least evil of sin. We may commit no evil of
sin, how small soever, that good of any sort may come of it. Now, to practice
these superstitious ceremonies, is many ways scandalous, and to give a
scandal, is sin, or moral transgression expressly forbidden in the law.


C. Now I have kept my great Gun last, a Moonce which will blow up all your
answers in the air.


Theo. Go to Cos. mount your Moonce: It may be your Gun mis-give: or your
bullet be but a windy bladder.


Cosm. Have at you then Theoph. when these two divine duties, to wit, The
preaching of the Gospel: and The not practicing of inconvenient ceremonies (as
ye call them) cannot both the performed together by your Pastors: but of the
necessity, if they stand to the one, they must fall from the other: then the
greatest and weightiest duty, which is the preaching of the Gospel, should
prevail: the liberty whereof in that case, they should redeem even by the
practice of these ceremonies: and so let fall the lesser duty, which is the
not practicing of them.


Theop. Your great Gun Cosm. has raised a great smoke but has done no skaith
to the cause. For ye divide between these two divine duties, by supposed
necessity, which is both wrong and weak. Wrong, because it is no divine
dividing necessity, by any ordinance of Gods word, which (by the contrary)
couples these two duties together: but it is an humane dividing necessity, by
violence of man's enforcing authority. Weak, because experience, our
school-mistresse, may tell you, that the Lord oft-times keeps together in the
persons of faithful preachers these two duties in their performance. Experience
proves this in the persons of sundry, who are violently thrust out from their
particular charges. Thus divine providence stands out against your humane
violence. Again, for farther answer, I will let you see the inequality, or
different quality of these these two duties: To preach the word, is an
affirmative duty and respects the doing of good: Not to practice inconvenient
Ceremonies, is a negative duty, and respects the not doing of evil. Now the
affirmative may be without sin in some cases, and sometimes and places omitted:
as when one can neither keep, nor redeem the liberty of preaching, unless he
enter his conscience captive to some one sin, or other. But the negative
cannot in respect of any circumstance, be omitted, without sin. Because to
omit the duty negative of The not practicing of these ceremonies, is to
practice them, and so to commit a sin: seeing superstition and scandal are the
two inseparable companions thereof. So albeit the former duty seem weightiest
in the quality, or kind thereof: yet in the knot, or band, it is not so strait,
and absolute, as the other.


Cosm. Well then Theoph. I see there is no remedy, but your Ministers must go
for Virginia, and so play the Evangelists.


Theoph. I count that better Cosm. then to play the Anguillists here, slipping,
and sliding to and fro, by the wimples and windings of their wits, and ways,
so that, no gripe can be had, or holden of them. Better to preach the Gospel
of Christ in Virginia, then to practice the ceremonies of Antichrist in
Scotland. Oh how is the sometimes faithful nation going on to become an
harlot! Go out of Babel my people, and bide out of Babel: to return to Rome,
is but to draw on our ruin.


Cosm. Now Theoph. ye have given an answer to all my three points, but not
answerable to my mind. These former inconveniences, which I have alleged, I
see, must light upon your Ministers.


Theoph. No wonder Cosm. because your mind is in the Swines trough, not on the
throne of grace. If these ills of yours light upon our Pastors, they will be
but the light and easy yoke of Christ upon them. But the impious imposers of
them, shall be one day countable to the Prince of Pastors for it.

Now to close with you at this time, Cosmophil^. seeing I am not able to
convert you, nor ye able to pervert me, (I thank God) you and I must part
company: I know, ye will retire your self to your sworn, and mensworne
companions, Dem^^ and Diotrephes.


FINIS. Januar. 1. 1621.

