THE LAWFVLNES OF KNEELING IN THE ACT OF RECEIVING THE LORDS SVPPER.

Wherein (by the way) also, somewhat of the CROSS in Baptism.

First Written for satisfaction of a Friend, and now published for Common
Benefit.

By Dr. JOHN BVRGES, Pastor of Sutton Coldfield.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes for Robert Milbourne, and are to be
sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Grayhound. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD COVENTRY, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
TO a Rejoinder made by me in Answer of a Reply given to Bishop MORTON his
Defense of our Church Ceremonies, and now, by his Majesty's Command, published,
I have been persuaded to add (by way of Supplement) another little Treatise
of like subject, first written in Answer of a Private Letter; because some
hope is conceived that it may do some good for the stay of such as are yet but
inclyning, or satisfaction of others inclined already to a contrary opinion,
but not yet fixed in the same. I know the hazards that I shall run, in this
Work; expecting various Censures, and some (perhaps) bitter: My comfort shall
be the sincerity of my heart before God, for whose Truth I have spoken.

To your good Lordship whom God and the King have honored with the highest
place of Judicature (under His Majesty) in this Land, and who have honored
God, the King, and your Place by matchless Diligence, and spotles Integrity
(of which my poor self, among others, have tasted) in the discharge thereof:
and unto whom my self, my prayers, and all the service I can do, are obliged,
I have presumed to Dedicate this small Piece, in testimony of that
thankfulness which mine heart yeildeth as a Tribute due to your Honor.

Accept, I humbly beseech you, this Mite, pardon my boldness in this Dedication,
and be pleased to think that, of the many thousands who truly honor your
Lordship, and heartily pray for Your present and eternal happiness, there be
not many more seriously Devoted thereto, then is

Your Lordships humble Servant JOHN BVRGES.

A Table declaring the Contents of this Treatise, in the several Chapters of
it.
CHAP. I. THe Definition of a Ceremony, page 1. CHAP. II. The meaning of that
phrase, In the worship of God, p. 2. CHAP. III. How our Ceremonies may be
called Worship of God, and how not, page 2. CHAP. IV. The same exemplified by
Instances in diverse particulars, page 4. CHAP. V. What is meant by matters of
mere Order, page 8. CHAP. VI. The scope of the second Commandment, page 10.
CHAP. VII. Of the terms of Service, Worship, Adoration, and Veneration, page
12. CHAP. VIII. That Adoration and Veneration differ not, but by men's wills,
page 14. CHAP. IX. Of Divine and Civil Adoration, page 14. CHAP. X. Whether
Kneeling be any Divine Adoration by divine Institution, or Application of it
to true Divine Worship, page 15. CHAP. XI. The first Argum. against our
Ceremonies, answered, p. 18. CHAP. XII. The second Argument, answered, page 23.
CHAP. XIII. The third Argument answered, page 25. CHAP. XIV. An Objection used
to strengthen the former Argument, answered page 29. CHAP. XV. The first part
of the fourth Argument, answered, p. 36. CHAP. XVI. The second part of the
Fourth Argum. answered, page 42. CHAP. XVII. The Defense of the Answers given
to the fourth Argument, page 43. CHAP. XVIII. Six Questions about Kneeling,
answered. page 55. CHAP XIX. The Objection from Christ's example, answered, p.
63. CHAP. XX. The Objection from Table Gesture, answered. p. 64. CHAP. XXI. The
Objection from Idolatrous Introduction, answered, page 64. CHAP. XXII. That in
the most ancient times, before the Corruption of the Doctrine of the Sacrament
began, the Sacrament was received with adoring gesture, page 76. CHAP. XXIII.
The same showed to be the practice of the Church in the time of Theodoret. S.
Augustine, and Cyril, page 84 CHAP. XXIV. A Vindication of Dr. Morton, now
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, quarrelled by a namelesse Replyer, falsely
charging Dr. Morton with abusing of Cyril, Augustine, and Chrysostom in this
point, page 91. CHAP. XXV. More Instances showing the Antiquity of this
gesture of Adoring, or Kneeling, page 98. CHAP. XXVI. Instances of the practice
of the Church about the eight hundred years after Christ, page 99. CHAP.
XXVII. The former Instances were of times preceding those wherein the Doctrine
of the Real presence was hatched, p. 100. CHAP. XXVIII. The second Observation
in the practice of the Ancient Churches, page 106. CHAP. XXIX. The third
Observation in the practice ^f the Ancient Churches, page 107. CHAP. XXX. The
fourth Observation touching the same. page 109. CHAP. XXXI. The fifth
Observation, page 109. CHAP. XXXII. The last Observation, together with Answers
to the objections made against Kneeling, page 110. CHAP. XXXIII. The Conclusion
of the whole. page 118.
Faults escaped in the Printing, to be thus corrected.
PAge 4. line 4. and 5. read, and this belongs to lin. 14 r. and in respect.
p. 8.28. for and not, r is not. 11 17. for in general, r in particular. 13.8
r. ldpan. 20. vlt. r. to reverence. 22.25 for in all, r. in old times. p. 25.
l. 28. r. or so reputed. 31.12. r. Dialacticon, and so elsewhere. 38.17. dele
or that. l. 18. for ita, r. illa. 45.36. for our, r. one. 37. r. ceremony. p.
52. 36. r. Sacramentalls. 54.36. r. of which. 68.18. for if meaning, r if
meant. 70.30. dele it. 72.7. r. Guitmund, and Bereng arius. l. 14. r. whole
Christ. 75.14. r. who liud in the year 800.79.17. orare to pray. 18. r.
adorare to adore.

In Marg. page 37. r. Chamier to. 3. lib. 19. cap 1. ^ 10. where not the words,
but the m^^ter is more fully. p. 91. l 12. read 21.

Where D. Ames is quoted with reference to the number of Disputations, not of
Chapters, the Author followed the first Impression of his Disputations, and
not those latter Editions distinguished by Chapters.

The Lawfulness of Kneeling in the Act of receiving the Lords Supper, first
written for the satisfaction of a Friend, and now published for common Benefit.
CAP. 1. The definition of a Ceremony.
SIR,
BEfore I meddle with any your objections, or questions concerning our Church-
Ceremonies, I hold it needful to set down certain Heads, to which I may
refer in answering, beginning with the Definition of a Ceremony.

A Ceremony is an outward action purposely done in reference to some other
thing, of the substance whereof it is no cause or part.

1. Thus the recital of the Creed at Baptism, is a Ceremony serving to show,
unto what Faith every one is bound by the stipulation of Baptism; whereas the
recital of it as a profession of our Faith to the honoring of God, is not a
Ceremony, but an act of relig^ous worship and service to God in it self, for
the substance of it.

2. The term of Circumstance is not so fit for our use, as that of Ceremony.
1. Because it is more large; for though every Ceremony be a Circumstance of
that matter to which it serves as a Ceremony: yet is not every circumstance a
Ceremony; for, some Circumstances are intrinsecall, and essential to actions,
and specially making up their nature. 2. Any casual thing may be a
Circumstance, but to a Ceremony it is essential, that it be purposely done.

Ceremonies which we may call Religious, in distinction from merely Civil,
are Divine, or Ecclesiastical which we will call Humane.

The Sacraments, as touching the use of the outward Elements, in such manner as
is prescribed, are Ceremonies, in relation to the things internal: yet are they
of the substance of the Sacrament, quoad externu^, in respect of the external
part thereof; and because of the divine Institution, the observance thereof is
religious worship of God de se, of it self. The like be said of the Ceremonies
of the Law of Moses, during the Obligation of the Law. Our disquisition is not
of such, but only of such as in suo individuo, in the very particular
individual, are of humane institution, or (which is to us all one) application.

CAP. 2. The meaning of that phrase, [In the worship of God]
NExt, we must state the meaning of this phrase [ in the worship of God] For
it may signify that which is done to God for a piece of worship to him in and
of it self, as is the blessing, breaking and delivery, of the Bread in the
Lords Supper. Thus nothing can lawfully be used or done in the worship of God,
more then he has prescribed. Otherwise, a thing is done in the worship of
God, which is not done as a part of the essential worship, but only as an
arbitrary adjunct. Thus we use our Ceremonies.

CAP. 3. How our Ceremonies may be called Worship of God, and how not.
We must also understand one another, when we affirm or deny our
Church-Ceremonies to be worship of God, lest we have, as S. Aug. speaks, litem
interminatum, an endless controversy, and seem to assent or dissent, when
we do not.

Any act internal or external, done with intention to honor God thereby, is
Cultus, worship of God. This done to that which is not God, as if it were God,
is Idolatry against the first Commandment.

When the honor is intended to the true object of religious worship, God, it
is either mediately done to honor him, as in the duties of the second Table,
done in obedience to God; or more immediately, as in the duties of the first
Table, done to God for his honor.

The immediate worship of God is either Internal and principal, or external
and secondary.

The internal consists in those actings of the soul, which as it were
naturally arise out of the true knowledge of God, and may be reduced to
Dependence on him, or Homage to him.

The external worship of God, is some outward action done in relation to the
internal worship of God, which gives subsistence to it; and so, to the
honoring of God.

This external worship of God is either false, when it is framed merely of
the will of man, which is the thing forbidden in the second Commandment. Or,
wholly according to the will of God, and then is true worship external.

The true external worship of God is so, and so called Ratione medij, or modi,
in respect either of the means, or manner of worship.

In respect of the Means, all true worship of God is grounded either on Gods
special cammaund, to have such a thing done to him; and this is properly
worship ex se, in and of it self: Or upon Gods allowance only, as touching
the particular; and this is worship of God ratione medij, as it is a means of
performing it: but not ex se, in and of it self, but per aliud, by virtue of
some thing else. Of this sort are the bodily gestures, whereby as by outward
signs we profess to give honor to God, whereof no particulars are
determined in the Word.

In respect of the Manner, the external worship of God consists in the
reverend usage of his prescribed worship, and is contained in those rules of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14.26, 40.
Let all things be done to edification, according to order and decency. And
to this belongs the third Commandment; which forbidding all irreverent use of
Gods Name in his Titles or Ordinances, commands the contrary in general.

Now because God has not particularly prescribed those external Rites which
belong to the manner of his outward service, therefore the same are not
properly, and in themselves religious worship. D. Ames Me^^^ll. part. 2. s^^p.
1^. these. 23.
And yet because the Genus; or general nature of them, Order and Decency; and
immediate end, the edification of men is commanded, therefore reductiuely, and
in their general nature, in respect of their utmost end, which is the
honoring of God, they must be vouchsafed, in that sense and notion, the title
of Divine worship. And in this sense we affirm our Ceremonies to be worship of
God, otherwise deny them to be worship.

Only I would have it considered, that the same humane Ceremony which has
rationem modi, respect unto the manner, may have also rationem medij, the
respect of a mean in worship; but not medij per se, of a mean of and by it
self, as namely, kneeling in prayer. That this distinction may appear not to
be devised for a shift, I will (in a Chapter by it self) confirm it by
Witnesses, and otherwise.

CAP. 4. The same exemplified by Instances in diverse other particulars.
THis the Scripture confirms, when it says, that Hannah served God night and
day, Luke 2 37.
in fasting and prayer. It is plain therefore, that her so frequent fasting
was a service of God, and not only her Prayers. And yet not a service as her
Prayers, in and of it self, it not being so commanded of God, T. C. Answ to
the Rhemists.
but as a thing in general commanded, and in that particular manner allowed
only, because it did, as Mr. Cartwright says, give a speedier wing unto
Prayer: and it was an act of religious worship, yea and a means of it, not in
and of it self, but per aliud, by another thing, or propter aliud, for another
thing: yet it was worship in some sense, or else Saint Luke was deceived.

The second Commandment (says M. Cartwright) condemning all will worship,
Cartwright. p 96. with 98. and p. 100.101
requires that we worship God as himself has commanded or allowed in his
Word: which are also the words of Bullinger. The same M. Cartwright divides
the Worship of God into Substantial and Circumstantiall. The Circumstantiall
he places in bodily gestures, accommodated to the several acts of instituted
worship: Good, then (in his judgment) there is a worship which is commanded in
particular, which is Substantial: and there is a worship which is only
allowed in the particular, (though commanded in genere suo, in his kind) which
is but Circumstantiall; and what is this, but a worship which ^s so properly,
in and of it self, and a worship which is not so simply in and of it self,
which to the other is an adiunct, not a part of it.

Thus Chamier, To. 3. lib. 20. cap. 5. says of Vows arbitrary, that they are
Culius Dei, non per se, sed per accident, and propter aliud, Worship of God,
not of themselves, but by accident, and for some other thing.

Thus Iunius in Bellar. Cont. 7. cap. 10. an. 13. says, Partem esse cultus Dei
ambigue dicitur. Si proprie interpreteris falsum est enunciatum, That it is a
part of divine worship, is ambiguously said: If you mean properly, the
assertion is false. ( viz. which said that the observation of the Anniversary
feasts of the Nativitie and Easter, etc. was pars cultus divini, part of divine
worship:) for (says Iunius) Accidens contingens non est rei pars, sed
adiunctum dicendum: A contingent accident is not to be termed a part of a
thing, but an adjunct: si figurate, nulla est consequentia, if it be spoken
figuratively, there is no consequence in it, viz. to prove that the Church
might make Laws binding the conscience of and by themselves, as Gods Laws
do, which constitute proper necessary worship.

Thus Polanus, Syntag. p. 528.
who (in Syntagmate) defines the true worship of God to be the performance of
what he has commanded in obedience to him to his honor: yet in his
Partitions printed at London, See also Page 131, 132, 133, 134.
1591. page 128. he says, that An Ecclesiastical Rite or Ceremony is outward
Worship of God, Quo Deus externe colitur, whereby he is outwardly worshipped,
not forgetting or crossing himself; but taking the name of Worship in the one
properly considered, and improperly or reductiuely in the other; in which sense
he in the other places calls the Institution and Observance of Holy days,
worship.

Theol. printed at Land. 1613. page 383.
Mr. Fenner makes bowing of the knee or head, modulation of the voice, lifting
up of the hands or eyes, to be parts of the external worship of God: which
Mr. Cartwright (in his Catechism on the second Commandment) calls
Circumstantiall worship, in distinction to that which he calls Substantial.

Tilenus in Syntag. printed at Sedan, 1613. page 383. says, that a vow of a
thing commanded, is cultus Dei per se, worship of God in and of it self; but
of a thing not commanded, is cultus Dei per accidens, worship of God by
accident only.

Bucan. Instit. page 566. says, That Ecclesiastical Rites may not be deemed
or taken to be worship of God per se, and ex opere operato, of themselves, and
as a work done.

Melancthon in Corpore Theol. printed 1571. page 719. having showed that no man
may institute any worship of God, adds, i. e. Works that God so allows,
that he holds himself to be honored in them, ex se, of themselves. And
page 52. Opera, works whose immediate end is, that God may be honored [per
illa] by them.

This difference of worship which is simply necessary, ratione praecepti, and
medij ex se, in respect of precept, and as a mean of it self, and of worship,
ratione medij, as a mean, non precepti, sed probati, not commanded, but
allowed, must be acknowledged in sundry acts of holy men reported in
Scriptures, as also that difference of medium, and modus cultus, of a means,
and manner of worship. For in the Freewill offerings, when a man was left at
liberty to offer a bullock, goat, or sheep at his pleasure; if he chose a
bullock to offer, that sacrifice in that particular, was not commanded, but
only allowed. Indeed the Manner, because it was prescribed, was Cultus sub
praecepto necessarius, worship by precept made necessary. 1 Ki^^ (...) 2 Chro.
6. and ^.
Salomons peace offerings of 22000 bullocks, and 120000 sheep, at the
Dedication of the Temple, and burning some of the Sacrifices on the Brazen
Altar, and some on the floor of the Court, and his Prayer, kneeling on a
scaffold, with his hands stretched out to heaven, were all worship of God; but
not all of the same Consideration: For sacrifice to God was then necessary ex
praecepts, by virtue of a commandment; the number of bullocks and sheep, was
worship ex fine, in respect of the end, and of allowance only: his prayer was
worship ex se, of it self; the Ceremonies of it, worship reductiue ad modum in
genere suo, having respect to the manner in the general kind thereof: the
burning on the Altar was necessary in se, in it self; that in the Court only
lawful, before the brazen Altar was consecrated (which was but then in fieri,
in the making) and upon the present necessity.

That Princes should hold Gods people to him, was of command, and necessary,
but that Joshua should endeavor it by the Monitory stone set up at Josh. 24 2^.
Shechem, ( 2 Chronicles. 15.14.
Asa by an oath, Nehe. 9. v. 10.1.
Nehemiah by subscription) was only of allowance, not of precept, and worship
to God, not per se, of it self, but propter aliud, in reference to some other
thing, and ex fine vltimo, with respect to the utmost end.

The like is to be said of Salomons 14 days of Solemnity used to the
honoring of God, at the Dedication of the Temple 1 Kin. 8.65.
: Hezekiahs and his Princes designment of 7 days more 2 Chronicles. 30.23.
: Mordecaies Purim days Hester 9.
, and a number such like, in which there was certainly some worship of God
intended, but not simply and in the things themselves, as in the observation of
the Sabbath day, but reductiuely and propter aliud, in reference to some other
thing, which was the soul of this worship.

This will show in what sense we may call our Ceremonies worship of God, and in
what meaning we deny them to be worship.

And this will show the difference betwixt us and the Papists, Bell To. 4. col
14.^5.
for they profess all these Ceremonies to be a part of the Divine worship,
yea necessary and meritorious, such as even extra casum scandali and
contemptus, without the case of scandal and contempt, says Bellar cannot be
omitted without sin, which is indeed to pronounce them divine worship in
themselves: Com. in Col. 2.23.
whereas we say with Zanchie, That whatsoever is added to the worship of God
delivered in his word, added (I say) by men as part of divine worship, is will
worship; that is, as he there also says of Traditions of men, wherewith the
consciences of men are bound, and which are joined with an opinion of divine
worship and merit.

CAP. 5. What is meant by Matters of mere Order.
THe next consideration may be of these words, Matters of mere order. For
Order is sometimes taken strictly in opposition to Confusion; and as so, is a
distinct thing from decency. Thus it is used, 2 Cor. 14.40. in which sense
Order is but the timing, and placing of each thing before or after other.

De Polit. Ecclesiast. page 1.
But Order is sometimes so largely taken, as to comprehend the disposition and
manner of handling any ordinance of God, and is as large (says M. Parker) as
Policy, and taken Pro disciplina tota, for the whole discipline, so Col. 2.5.
And so Paul uses the verb, 1. Cor. 11. vlt. Other things will J order when I
come.

Yet we take it not so very largely Pro disciplina tota, for the whole
discipline in respect of the essentials thereof, prescribed of God to remain
in perpetuity, and not under the Churches dispose.

Whatsoever therefore in the worship of God, or government of the Church, is
not Essential or Divine, but may be varied and disposed of, according to the
general rules of the Word; that we call Matter of mere Order in
Contradistinction to matter of Simple Necessity, whereto the Conscience is
bound; because in these things, nothing but Obedience is left to the Church;
but, a power of Disposing (which is to Order) is left to her in those things,
to do (according to the general rules of the Word) therein, whatsoever, says
Master Calvin, The necessity of the Church shall require. That is, for Peace,
Safety, Profit, Edification, and Advantage in spiritual things.

Order in the strict sense, admits (as the Replier to Bp. Morton faith) no New
thing, but only the disposing of things ordained in time and place. But Order,
in the large sense, admits all such things vnprescribed as belong to the
Churches service, and furtherance in the service of God, and as Melancthon
says, ad ornandum ordinem, to adorn order.

In this larger sense it is (...), good or comely order, Iun. anim ad. in
Bellar. de cultu sancte^ ^ lib. 3. cap. 10. annotat. 13. Repl. 1. part. page 44.
and thus Iunius takes it, when, to Bellarmine objecting the Feast of Purim
appointed by Mordecai, to prove thereby that the Church may make Laws proprij
nominis, properly so called, which in themselves do bind the conscience:
Iunius answers, Praeceptum fuit politicum, (that is, as the Replier
translateth it, It was a Precept of order:) Iunius adds, Ibid. annot. 34.

De Romans Pont. page 841. etc.


Non sequitur ex dispari, But that which Bellarmine would thence infer, being
of a different nature, follows not. Neque enim negamus suam Ecclesiae
politiamesse, sed imperium per se obligans conscientiam. Nor do we deny the
Church her policy; but only her imperial authority, that of it self binds
the conscience.

Thus Doctor Whitaker takes it when he says, that All which the Church may
determine off, belongs ad (...), to good order, and by this he puts off
afterward Bellar. objections, as Iunius does.

Thus the August. confession. Artic. 7. de Abusibus. Docemus pastores
Ecclesiarum posse in Ecclesiis suis publico^ ritus instituere, sed tantum ad
finem corporalem, h. e. boni ordinis causa, viz. ritus vtiles ad docendum
multitudine^, vt certas dies, certas lectiones, and siqua sunt similia; Sed
sine superstitione, and sine opinione necessitatis, vt has ordinationes
violare, extra casum scandali, non ducatur esse peccatum, etc. We teach that
Pastors of Churches may institute public rites in their Churches, but only to
a corporal end, that is, for good orders sake: viz. rites profitable to teach
the people, as namely certain days (to be observed) certain lessons (to be
read) and such like: but without superstition, and without opinion of
necessity; and that it should not be accounted sin to violate these
ordinances, unless in the case of scandal which might follow thereupon.

Instit. 4. cap. 10. sect. 28.
For as Master Calvin says, when a Law is once known to be made publicae
honestatis causa, iam sublata est omnis Superstitio, for public comeliness
sake, all Superstition is taken away from it: and when it is known, Ad
communem vsum spectare, euersa est falsa illa obligationis and necessitatis
opinio, etc. To look at common use or benefit, that false opinion of
obligation and necessity, is overthrown and removed.

Whatsoever therefore is ordained in the Church, as an Arbitrary and moveable
Rite or Ceremony, in the use whereof no Immediate or proper worship of God is
placed, but the thing in it self still reckoned to be indifferent; that is a
matter of mere Order, sensu largo, in the large acception of Order.

CAP. 6. The scope of the second Commandment.
TO these I will add something about the scope of the second Commandment.

The scope of the second Commandment is, by forbidding all will worship, under
the usual and grossest kind of it, to inioyne and tie us to such means and
ways of worshipping God, as himself has commanded or allowed, as Master
Cartwright says.

Whatsoever therefore is forbidden in this Commandment, is either Directly
forbidden, or only by Consequence.

1. Things Directly forbidden, I call such as are Prohibited either Expressly,
or Analogically, as it were in recta linea, in a direct line.

1. In Express terms, two things. 1. The making of any Image or similitude
(not simply, but) to be a representation of a Godhead to us in the Essence,
Properties, Special presence, or Dispensation of grace thereby. Of which the
reason is, that all such fansied representations, speak nothing but lies of
the Godhead. 2. The tendering of any service or honor to God, so much as
outwardly, at, in and by such an Image made by the only will of man: all which
service though by man intended to God, yea though to the true God, yet falls
short of him, and rests in the Image, as if it were only done to it;
therefore is it said, Thou shall not bow thy self to them, nor serve them.

2. Analogically, are forbidden: First, all false Imagination, and conceits of
the Godhead, in respect of his Being, Presence, Dispensation of grace, or
will. For all these do falsify the true God to us, as does an Image or
outward shape, made for representation of him, at man's pleasure. And secondly,
the Substitution or use of any ways and means of serving God, merely after
the will of man, i. e. which God has not either commanded in particular, or at
least allowed in General.

2. By Consequent, all such things, as do provoke necessarily, unto the breach
of this Precept, are here forbidden.

On the contrary we are enjoined to receive such (as I may say) Images or
representations, as God himself shall institute for declaration of his
presence, Glory, Grace, or Will. For as Doctor Ames Medul. lib. 2. cap. 13.
These. 11
well says, tibi, in [non facies tibi] is not redundant as sometimes it is,
but Emphaticall to show that God restrains men from doing that which he
reserueth to himself alone in that matter. And secondly he requires all due
respect and reverent Adoration, to be performed to himself, by such ways and
means as himself has either Commanded in particular, or in particular
allowed, by commanding the General kind, to which that particular belongs.
And by Consequence he requires such means to be used as may further us in
this true worship of him.

CAP. 7. Of the Terms of Service, Worship, Adoration and Veneration.
1. WE sometimes use these terms promiscuously and indifferently, yet is there
a difference betwixt some and others of them. For Service is more large then
Adoration or Veneration, which is Worship in our language. All Adoration is
Service, but all Service of God is not Adoration, or Veneration.

(...)
2. The Jews had no word which directy answers to Adoration, but use the
Terms which signify some bowing, whether of the knee, head, back; or
prostration of the whole body, grouelling on the belly, and face to the ground.
Hence in the Commandment; Thou shall not bow down, which is to say, thou
shall not worship nor adore them, nor Serve them, nec coals.

Adoration therefore, and Veneration or Worship, strictly and properly
understood, signify such Gestures and comportment of the body, as serve for a
sign and expression of Internal esteem and respect of that, to which these
expressions refer. And yet are the words applied and translated sometimes to
Angels or other Creatures which can make no bodily expressions; And sometimes
to the inward reverence of the Heart, because the same is usually amongst men,
expressed by some bodily signs.

4. The outward Adoration consists in bodily signs, but the Service of God
stands not in them simply. Hence our Divines rightly deny any humane Ceremonies
to be parts cultus scil. in se, parts of worship to wit in themselves, but
only adjuncts to essential or proper worship, i. e. Service of God; who yet
grant them to be parts of the external Adoration: which external Adoration
is not Cultus in suo Individuo, worship in the particular individual, because
not prescribed; but only in suo genere, in the general kind of it, and as it
leans unto some other service of God, to which it serves as matter of
Decency, or Order, which God has in General required.

5. The outward Expressions of Adorations never were devised or instituted of
God, but taken from the customary usage of men, which generally did use some or
other as bending and bowing in sign of respect, reverence or honor one
toward another. And yet all the world never agreed in one fashion of showing
respect. But have pleased themselves in several ways. See Heylins History of
the World. Edit. 4 page 686.734.729.805.


The men of I^pall salute one another by putting off their shoes; as they of
China by putting off their hatts one to another, as we do.

In Ethiopia the Subjects sit in the presence of their King in sign of
Subjection, because Standing before him is there a token of greatest dignity.

The Negroes give sign of reverence to their King by sitting on their buttocks
with their Elbowe on their knees, and hands on their faces, as not worthy to
look on him.

They of the Hands called Bucalaos show their highest reverence to their King
by rubbing their noses, and foreheads in his presence; perhaps to signify
their itching after his favor.

Kissing of the King, was with the Jews a sign of Homage, and subjection with
love. Hence, they kissed Saul. 1 Samuel 10.1.
Hence that phrase, Psalm. 2.11
Kiss the Son: and from that received formalitie, came in Adoration of their
representative gods, by kissing them: As, Kiss the Calves, in Hosea; Hosh.
13.2.
and thus in Job, If my heart have kissed my hand in secret, for, Job 31.27.
if I have so much as in my mind intended to worship the Moon. And from this,
kissing of the Emperor or his garments, and so of the Idols in reference to
their Deities, came the Latin word Adoratio, and not from bowing or kneeling,
as some have observed.

The Jews adored in prayer, with their heads and faces covered, in sign of
awful reverence; we, by being uncovered.

Some Nations worshipped sitting on beds before their Idols, as Lib. de
Oratione.
Tertull. shows. And by the same reason by which Altar Damascenum says,
that sitting cross-legged, as the Turks do at their meals, should be amongst
them (if they were converted) a comely fashion of receiving the Lords Supper;
by the same, any of the former fashions in the Nations aboue-said, should be
comely expressions of giving honor to God, because by use and construction
amongst them, they are understood for signs of giving honor.

CAP. 8. That Adoration and Veneration differ not, but by men's wills.
ADoration and Veneration have no formal difference betwixt themselves, either
from the nature of the words, or common usage of them; much less by any
Scripture-limitation. Only, because there is a difference of the supreme
honor due alone and above all to God, and that which in an inferior degree,
is allowed to Gods excellent Ordinances or Creatures, some men do suppose such
a difference in these words: which yet is really no more in the words
themselves, then the twelve Signs in the Zodiac. Nor is this distinction any
better then that of (...), and (...), by which men suppose a distinction of the
Divine and supreme worship proper to God, and that inferior regard which may
be showed to the Creatures. In which the difference is just, as in casting
Counters, wherein one is but one penny, another stands for one shilling, a third
for one pound, without any difference made in the Counters themselves.

CAP. 9. Of Divine and Civil Adoration.
AS Adoration, and Veneration differ not in the words, but only by the
intendments of men in using them; So Adoration of God is not differenced by any
outward expressions, which men use in token of honor from Civil Adoration;
but either by the intention of the mind, or by the ordinance of man. Hence it
is, that we find all the same words which import bowing of the knee, head,
trunk, or prostration on the face, familiarly given to such reverence, as was
thereby signified, as well in civil respects unto men, as religiously unto God
in his worship. And it is well observed by Buxtorfius, that the Jews knew, or
had no outward gesture which was appropriated to divine Adoration, save only
prostration with their feet and hands spread and splayed out, as in a swimming
frog, which might not be used any where, no not in Gods worship, save only in
the Sanctuary. And this was made a distinctiue sign of supreme Adoration or
Veneration, only by the appointment and intendment of it. They are therefore
much deceived, that think Kneeling to be any more a sign of Divine
adoration, then other expressions of Veneration, as sitting bare-headed, though
with us it is a sign of greater respect then the other. But there are in
Divine, as well as Civil veneration, diverse degrees of intension, which vary
not the kind one from another.

CAP. 10. Whether Kneeling be any Divine Adoration by divine Institution, or
Application of it to true Divine Worship.
1. THe last thing to be considered, is, Page 88. and 783. and 809.
that God has not fixed the gesture of Kneeling to any one act or other of his
own external worship or service, as Altar Damascenum rightly observes; no
not to Prayer. For as for those words, Psalm. 95.5. O come let us worship, i. e.
prostrate and bow down our selves, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, it is
not a Precept, as that Author of Alt. Damasc. says, but an Exhortation: and
does (say I) no more prove that God required it necessarily in any act of his
solemn worship, then those words, [ Praise him in the daunces] and [ O clap
your hand,] or [ Shout out for joy,] do prove, that God required them to dance
in his solemn praises, to clap hands or shout. Only it is true, that such
Exhortations show, that these were allowed of God, as they were used of godly
men in his solemn Service, as expressions of joy in honoring of God.

2. And if that Scripture did intend an Injunction preceptiue for Kneeling, yet
no more then for bowing or falling flat, which we translate Worship. And if all
these had been instituted gestures of religious worship in the Temple, by
virtue of that Exhortation, yet should not this of Kneeling be assigned to any
act of religious service more then other, seeing all those three are put
together conjunctiuely; Let us Worship, Bow down, and Kneel, etc. which will
manifestly prove, that they were all three indifferently used, and to be used
in any duties of worship, when they came before God, and meant to express
their holy reverence of their God.

3. Whence also it was, that (as August. observes) the holy servants of God,
publicly or privately, even in prayer it self, sometimes stood, as did the
Publican and Pharisees, who are blamed, not for standing in Prayer, but for
praying to be seen of men; Some sat reverently before the Lord, as David, 2.
Sam. 7. though commonly they used to kneel, or bow themselves down. As also
that they used all three sorts of bowing, or external Adoration, both
occasionally upon any extraodinary message, or other signal of Gods presence
or favor; or ordinarily in the several acts of his worship, as well as
kneeling in any of them, with free conscience, because God in his wisdom had
spared to enjoyne any one or other set fashion of external gesture as fixed to
the freehold; God providing that he which could not perform the gesture,
might yet perform the service, yea and Adoration to him by such expressions as
he could well use; as David Adored in his bed, 1. King. 1.47. And that the
consciences of men might not be snared by such a necessity; nor occasion given
to superstition in matters of that Quality.

4. Neither are they well advised which will needs have Kneeling a gesture of
religious Adoration, because it is as they say, a sign of the greatest
reverence or humbling of our selves; For if bowing the head and back, be not
greater, yet surely prostration flat on the ground was: For as Saint Augustine
says, He that touches the earth with his knees may go lower, but so cannot
he, who touches it with his belly and face. And yet even that gesture of
prostration was used in giving civil honor and respect to men, and not only
in Adoration to God, as has been said.

5. Wherefore, as Calvin says of Kneeling in prayer it self, Inst. 4.10.29.
that though God have not prescribed it in particular, yet in as much as it is
a part of that Decorum which God requires in his worship, It is so humane that
we may also call it divine: even so say we of any gesture which is known to
be a sign of reverence and respect.

And valesse we shall grant this, we will be driven to say, that they did
not Adore the Idol that kissed the Calves, as did they that bowed the knee to
Baal, nor they that lifted up their eyes or hands to the Idols of the
Mountains, as well as the man that bowed and humbled himself. Nor may we any
more say (as others have, truly done) that Honorius the third was the first
man that decreed Adoration to the Sacrament it self, because he only decreed
that men should reverently bow themselves to the Sacrament (not in receiving
it, but) when it (after the Consecration) was elevated by the Priest, or carried
in the streets. For this bowing (belike) was no gesture of Adoration, being
usually done in Civil reverence to men. Only kneeling is Adoration.

Yea, and hence will follow, that neither Pope, Ordo Bon.
nor Mass Priest adoreth either Christ or the Sacrament in the act of
receiving, seeing the Pope, for state, receives it sitting, and the
Mass Priest, by the Canon of the Mass, reuerenter stans ad Altar, reverently
standing: Nay, that they which refuse to receive this Sacrament Kneeling, and
will either stand, or sit bare headed reverently, yet they Adore not Christ
himself or God in partaking the Sacrament, because they use not that which is
the proper gesture of Divine Adoration, as they say, Kneeling.

6. That Christ the son of the living God is to be Adored both Internally and
Externally, out of the Sacrament, and in the Sacrament, though not as contained
in the Elements, or existent, quoad corpus, bodily in the place where was the
substance of Bread and Wine, as they speak, he is not a Christian that
doubts, as Chamier well says. But An mayor cultus propter Ritum? Is the
worship of him the greater for the outw^rd Ceremonies? he means by the
Question, that without question it is not. But it must be greater, if this
gesture were only a gesture of Adoration and none other which are not
altogether equal with it for signification of highest reverence. I add, that
by this Divinity a man may be bare-headed or put off his hat, or make
courtesy, or bend his body to the very Sacrament it self. without any
reference of these signs of reverence to God or Christ, and yet commit no
idolatry, because he does not give to them any Divine respect, or Adoration, in
as much as he does not Kneel; which were a strange Paradox to be taught.

7. Finally, I would have men consider, to what extremity (not so much
ignorance, as) the desire of victory has carried these men, who taking Kneeling
to be an instituted Ordinance of God, annexed to some duties of his external
worship; do complain of our translating of Gods own ordinances out of their
proper place, by applying the use of Kneeling to the receipt of the Sacrament,
Course of Conformity wrirten by a Scottish-man unnamed.
comparing this to that Impiety of Jeroboam, who translated the worship of God
from Jerusalem to Dan and Bethell, and altered the day and month of Gods holy
Feast, to another month and day devised of his own heart; As if they had, or
could make it plain, that God had nailed kneeling to prayer, or to some other
of his services, as we are sure that God had confined all Sacrifice-worship,
to the place that he had then chosen to place his name there, and utterly
disallowed his people to alter the times of any his prefixed solemnities. Now
come we to the Arguments.

CAP. XI. The first Argument against Kneeling answered.
Arg. 1. NO humane Ceremonies which are more then matters of Mere order, may
lawfully be used in the worship of God.

But some of our Church-ceremonies are more then matters of mere Order.
Therefore some of our Ceremonies cannot lawfully be used in the worship of God.

Answ. What we intend by these words used in the worship of God, has been
set down, in Cap. 2. and also what different notion there is of the word
Order, Cap. 5. According to which I answer, That if you understand Order in the
strictest sense, the Minor is true, but the Mayor is false; For then, no humane
Ceremony which tends properly to Decorum, should be lawful; which is
contrary to the Text, 1. Cor. 14.40. which requires all things to be done
Becommingly or Decently, not only according to Order. But if Order be taken in
the larger sense, as it ought, then is the Mayor true but the Minor false,
which says that any of our Ceremonies (viz. in the Churches Intendment and use
of them) are more then matters of mere Order. Let us try that by the Argument
brought to prove the Minor.

Whatsoever ceremonies are instituted and used to stir up men in respect of
their signification, unto the remembrance of their Duties to God, are in such
use matters of more then mere Order. But such is the intended use of some of
our ceremonies (as is plain in that Public declaration of Ceremonies in
express words affirming so much:) Therefore some of them may not lawfully be
used, etc.

Answ. I confess the Minor to be true of some our Ceremonies; but deny the
Mayor Proposition which supposes the use of a Rite or Ceremony for
Signification, to be more then matter of mere Order, when it is not imposed
or observed as operative, or as necessary to be observed as a service of God
in it self, or binding the conscience Ex se of it self, but with a free
conscience. For this can be esteemed but a matter of mere Order sensu largo,
in a large sense: The Mayor therefore is faulty by opposing things Coordinate,
if they were opposite. I show it in the like.

Bellarmine would prove that the Church may make laws to bind the conscience,
the observation whereof shall be a proper worship of God. To this end he thus
disputes: The Christian Churches observed the Aniuersary feasts of Christ's
Nativity and Resurrection etc. not for Order, but as Commemoratiue Ceremonies
for Commemoration (...) man may be helped with two crutches, but hindered with
three or four: and more, with more.

2. Because, in sundry of them, they labored to express the Mysteries and
History of the Gospel, as Brentius objecteth, which was (as I may say) to
shut out the clear Sun-light, and set up a little candle: or, at the best, to
set up a Candle where the Sun shines, to give light.

3. Sundry of them, (as the Churches Declaration of Ceremonies says) were
utterly unprofitable, and others dark and dumb.

4. Many of them consisted in the use of consecrated Creatures, consecrated (as
Bellarmine says) to signify and effect supernatural effects; which was to
put upon them the very nature of Sacraments.

5. Because they placed (as Calvin says) ipsissimur^ Dei cultum, the very
worship of God it self in the use of them. But that they were not refused for
the very reason of significancie alone, appears both by the practice of all
Churches, which retain some or others of that kind, as the Feasts of the
Nativitie, and Easter: And Judgments; for all that ever I saw, Perkins. Zanch.
professedly allow some such; as namely, dipping under the water in Baptizing,
as more significant then sprinckling: and even the use of the Cross, as a
mere significant Rite, as at the first usage, yea and Kneeling at the
Communion, as a token of godly reverence, which in all times before the
Doctrine of the Real presence, Beza himself judges to have been of lawful
and profitable use. And the Treatise called, Dialecticon Eucharistia, printed
at Geneva, and set out with Beza his Works and liking, says, it might also
be now well reserved, when the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church is
restored. And this the Dutch and French Churches do professedly allow, never
thinking it either unlawful, or inconvenient because of the signification, or
more then a matter of Order; for they profess to leave all Churches, (as, say
they, is fit) to their own liberties therein. All the exception which any of
them takes, is from respect of some inconveniences which they supposed it to
be subject unto; which are not such but that Master Cartwright himself
resolves, Com. in Luke 22.14.
that a man must not refuse to receive the Sacrament kneeling, when he cannot
have it otherwise. I conclude therefore, that this exception against our
Ceremonies, that they are Significant, is the child of that unhappy civil
war, with which the Churches of England and Scotland, have been, and are
vexed.

CAP. 12. The second Argument answered.
FRom the scope of the second Commandment, and the public Declaration of the
Church, touching our Ceremonies aforesaid, this Argument may be framed:

Arg. 2. All Ceremonies devised by Man, or added to those which God has
prescribed, which are enjoined or used as means of minding us of God, or
helping us in any part of his worship, or carrying us unto him therein, are
against the scope of the second Commandment.

But the Cross and other our Ceremonies are devised by men, or added and
applied by men, to those Acts of worship which God has prescribed, as means
to carry our thoughts unto God, and the duties which we tender to him, as the
Declaration aforesaid shows.

Therefore these our Ceremonies as we intend and use them, are against the
scope of the second Commandment.

Answ. Before Answer to this Argument, some Phrases must be explained.

1. Added to those which God has prescribed, is a doubtful speech. For it may
signify, addition of them as acts of worship even as the other, and made
parts of it, and not only adjuncts to it. And in that meaning the Mayor
Proposition is true, but the Assumption of our Ceremonies is false.

2. Again, to be means of carrying us up to God, or minding us of God and
our duties, etc. are ambiguous phrases, and may be understood two ways. 1. So
as these means are used and understood as efficient and operative means,
which work by some virtue supposed to be in them, as the Papists fancy of
their hallowed trinkets; or else, as means only occasional, and obiectum a
quo, objectiuely, which works at all nothing upon us, but presents unto the
senses an occasion whereby the mind works upon it self: as was the case of
Ioshuah his stone, set under an Oak in the Court of the Tabernacle. In the
former Notion, the Mayor is true, but the Minor false of our Ceremonies. In the
later sense the Minor is most true of our Ceremonies, but the Mayor which
says, that the use of such means for an help to us, is against the scope of
the second Commandment, is apparently false.

For so far is that commandment from bending against the devising and
applying of such helps, as helps to us in the worship of God, that it does
rather require some such. For, In his Catechism on the 2. Commandment.
as Mr. Cartwright says, God in forbidding us to bow down to an Image or
similitude set up by man's will, does on the contrary require, that we bow our
selves in worship of him, and use such gestures as agree to the worship in
hand. Of which, seeing God himself has not given any particular prescription,
he has left the devising or application thereof (under general rules
aforesaid) unto men. And that such a thing is lawful and useful, Exodus 13.16.
Number. 15.38. Deuteronomy. 12.12.
God (who utterly forbids any resemblance of himself to be made by man)
has witnessed by his own Institution of Phylacteries and Fringes, as
monitorie remembrancers unto man.

Indeed, if God in that second Commandment had simply forbidden all Images and
Pictures to be made, as the Turks understand that Law, then it would have
followed by Analogy, that men might not devise or use any significant
Ceremony at all. But when it is so, that he has left free unto man the
picturing, engraving or expression of any visible creature, or history of
things done, even by God himself, so far as it can be well shadowed out by
such workmanship, to teach and to mind us of things profitable, as M. Calvin.
Justit. 1.11.12. shows, and all our Divines accord; It will be impossible to
bring our significant Ceremonies, intended not as an immediate means of
worship unto God, but immediately for an help and monitor to our selves, under
the lash of that second Commandment.

For 1. the object is altered. 2. The immediate use (when man's edification, and
not the worshipping of God immediately is sought thereby) is clean altered
from such use of the forbidden Images, as that Commandment forecloseth.

All our Divines (I think) are of one mind in this, that Ceremonies ought to
be Exercitia pietatis, exercises of piety, which may serve to us as
expressions and incitements to duty, as Calvin says, which may edify unto
the worship of God, as Paraeus speaks. Yea, Par. Com. in Romans 14.
even those which simply concern Order and Decency, ought to be to
Edification, as Dr. Ames says, and those of Decorum, such as may show and
breed in us a Veneration of Gods ordinances. So as significant Ceremonies can
not for such an intention of Edifying men, be blamed more then other Rites;
unless it be for speaking as it were to the same end, which others do, only
more plainly: as touching which I refer to the last Chapter, and what I have
foresaid about the second Commandment.

CAP. XIII. The third Argument answered.
Whatsoever worship of God is not commanded, is not accepted of God. But
Signing with the Cross and kneeling are worships of God not commanded. Ergo
Crossing and kneeling at the Sacrament are worships not accepted.

Answ. I refer to the fourth Chapter for the Notions of worship, and then
Answer thus, that if you understand worship which is properly so and ex se, of
and in it self so reputed, the Mayor is true, but the Minor false of these our
Ceremonies: if you understand worship Improperly and per aliud, in reference to
some other thing, the Minor is true of our Ceremonies, but then the Mayor is
untrue.

For, as necessary and proper worship is commanded, so there is a
Circumstantiall (as Master Cartwright calls it) or Reductiue worship, which is
(as touching the particular) only allowed. Now, though God does more accept of
the commanded worship, yet he accepts also that which he allows.

All prescript forms of prayers to God, if they be found, are (as touching
that external form) allowed worship only, but as touching their substance and
internal form, they are prescribed; and in that respect, otherwise acceptable
then only for the outward form which is not worship in se and propter se, in
it self and for it self as the other.

The use of indifferent things says Paraeus, does please God, but non tanquam
cultus, scil. in se: but not as worship, to wit, in and of it self.

But to prove our Ceremonies to be worship (suppose in se and ex se, in and of
themselves) at least in our opinion and use of them, you object to this effect.

Object. 4. Dedication is worship. Ergo, the Cross in our use of it.

Answ. I deny the Consequence, which if you will prove from the thirtieth
Canon, your Argument must be thus formed.

By whatsoever means a thing is dedicated to the service of God or Christ, by
that means God is worshipped properly, and that means is made a proper
worship of God in se, in it self. But by the sign of the Cross the baptized
Infant is dedicated to the service of him, that dyed for him, at the thirtieth
Canon says. Ergo, By that use of the Cross God is properly worshipped, and
the signing with the Cross is made of us, a means of proper worship to God.
To this Argument thus framed I further answer, that the Mayor is not found. For
as Chamier says of vows to God, that every vow to God is Formally worship,
but not so Materially in the matter voluntarily vowed: So I say, dedication of
any thing unto God, is worship Formally, but not always the matter dedicated
Ex se, of it self, and much less the outward manner and Solemnity of
dedicating.

I deny not but there may be and is something done in Dedication of a thing to
God, which ratione praecepti in se, in respect of Precept and in it self is
worship Essential: But there be annexed thereto, other things, which pertain
not Essentially to that Dedication, but only to the outward solemnity. And
though those Propter aliud, with reference to some other thing may be called
worship, yet are they no proper worship, or means of it in themselves.

In the Dedication of the Temple there were Ingredients of both sorts. The
sacrifices, prayers, 1 Kings 8. and 2 Chronicles. 6.
and praises of God with joy, were Essential means of the Dedication and
worship; but Salomons kneeling on a brazen Scaffold before the Altar, and
stretching his hands toward heaven in prayer; the set number of his
Peace Offerings the lengthning of the Solemnity unto seven days and 7. days,
were means of the Dedication, not ad esse, to the being, but ad ornatum, to
the ornament, parts of the solemnity and manner of worship, not worship ex se,
but per aliud, in reference only to some thing else, as they served to
express and further their holy rejoicing and thankfulness.

The like may be seen in Nehemiahs Dedication of the holy City, which was
dedicated with praises to God, Neh. 12.27, etc.
offerings and prayers Really, but by a Perambulation about the walls and other
solemnities there mentioned, Complementally and in Ceremony. The former
reallities were Essential means of the Dedication, the other only Accessory
Ceremonies adjoined to the real things, and no means of worship in
themselves, but per aliud, by way of reference and reduction.

The Jews did Dedicate their own houses with prayers, hymmes, feastings and
other Solemnities, says Mr. Ainesworth, on Deuteronomy. 20.5.

If it seem hard, That the Dedication is by the Canon referred to that use of
the Cross. I answer, that the Canon does not refer the Dedication to the
Cross simply, as though that were the sole or principal means; but only, to
that as a Ceremony. For thus go the words. Esteeming it a lawful Ceremony and
honorable badge whereby the Infant is dedicated, etc. And if I should say that
Nehemiah dedicated the walls and City of Jerusalem, by going about the walls
thereof in two divided companies, you could not gainesay me, nor would mistake
the matter. For it is usual to ascribe a thing done not alone the principal
Agent, but to any Instrument, yea sometimes to occasions which work not, or to
adjuncts as Mr. Cartwright well observes in his Answer to the Remists upon
those words of 2. Cor. 4.17. where it is said that our light affliction works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; [ Worketh] yea and it
is an usual kind of speech to say, a thing is done by such a means as works
not at all to the doing, but only declares what is done, or to be done. Thus
Genesis 41.13.
Joseph is said to have hanged Pharaohs Butler; The Priest to have made Leuit.
13.
clean the Leper, the verse. 19.
Sacrifices to make Atonement, the Ministers of the Gospel to John 20 23.
remit sins, Jeremy Iere. 1.10.
to plant and pluck up kingdoms, and to make them drink of the Lords Cup of
affliction. And thus we say in Marriages With this ring I thee wedd, which is
after expounded that they have declared their consent of Marriage, by giving and
taking of a Ring. Nor could the Makers of that Canon otherwise understand
themselves in those words, unless they would thereby cross all that they have
said before in the body of that Canon, in which they deny to the Cross any
Operative virtue, and profess that the Sacrament is not better with it, or
worse without it. That the child is fully baptized before that be used, and
incorporated by the virtue of Baptism into the mystical body of Christ, that
they use it only as the Fathers in their best use, as a Ceremony and Badge. All
which must be overthrown, if Dedication be otherwise ascribed to the Cross,
then as unto a Ceremony, which signifies the use of the Dedication it self
(which is Really made by Baptism) which is, to profess the faith of Christ
crucified, etc. And that they so meant, and no otherwise, my poor self, and
others who have stumbled at the Phrase, might have assured our selves out of
the body and words of the Canon, and the reference of their meaning to the
Book of Common prayer, which expressly shows that this Ceremony is used only
in token, etc. And in sooth (had not the Popish abuse and Superstitions about
the Cross, made us jealous of all use of it) who would not have thought this a
decent Ceremony at the administration of Baptism, to reminde all the
congregation of their Christian profession, and warfare to which the Sacrament
it self does oblige them?

Wherefore if you were to subscribe to the letter of the Canon, as you are not,
nor any man else, you need not fear to take that interpretation of Ceremonial
and only declaratiue Dedication. For without violence to the Canon or mistake
of it, it is not possible to understand it otherwise. And therefore I say, that
as I would not let my Curate use it, if I held it unlawful, so I will not
forbear the use of it my self, now that in my conscience I think the
intended use thereof to be lawful.

CAP. 14. An Objection used to strengthen the former Argument answered.
Object. THere is no man that doubts whether Kneeling be worship or no.
Ergo, At least that Ceremony of Kneeling when we receive the Communion, is not
a matter of mere Order, but of Worship.

Answ. 1. It has been showed before, cap. 10.1. that the gesture of Kneeling
is neither worship, nor sign of it, but when so meant. A Carpenter kneeles to
drive a nail; does any man think this to be worship? 2. That it is from
common use, and by construction a sign of respect or reverence as well in
Civil as Sacred uses. 3. That it is not in any action of Gods solemn service,
either unlawful, as prohibited of God; or necessary, as commanded of him:
though in some Actions, more suitable to the kind of Service, and more
commodious to us. 4. Lastly, that it never was fastened by divine Ordinance to
any one kind of religious action, or other. Wherefore the Question, Whether
God has given man any power to mix Actions of his worship, more then to
devise new worship of God, may very well be spared. For it supposes Kneeling
to be a worship by it self, or at least ingraffed by the hand of God, into
some one action of his service, which is not so.

2. We yield Kneeling in the act of receiving the holy Communion, to be in
our intention, largo sensu, in a large sense, a worship of God; that is,
propter aliud, in reference to some other thing, not in, or ex se, in or of it
self, but only as all Circumstances observed as matters of Order and
Decency, and Edification, for the honoring of God in his services, are
worship, and not otherwise. The public Declaration of the Church is that which
must assure us of the intended use, which because it is by some negligence left
out of the later printed Books of Common Prayer, I will here set down, that
I may be sure you shall know it. There, after a Preamble it is said in these
words:

The 5 Rubric s^t at the end of the Communion. It is extant in all Books
printed (as well in octavo, as in fol) in 5. and 6. Edw 6 reestablished 1. Eliz.
and still in force.
Whereas it is ordained in the Book of Common Prayer, in the administration of
the Lords Supper, that the Communicants kneeling, should receive the holy
Communion, which thing being well meant for a signification of the humble and
grateful acknowledging of the benefits of Christ, given unto the worthy
Receiver, and to avoid the profanation and disorder, which about the holy
Communion might otherwise ensue, lest yet the same kneeling might be thought,
or taken otherwise, we do declare, that it is not meant thereby, that any
Adoration is done, or ought to be done, either unto the sacramental Bread and
Wine, there bodily received; or unto any real and essential presence there
being of Christ's natural flesh and blood. For as concerning the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, they remain still in their very natural substances, and
therefore may not be adored, for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians: and as concerning the natural body and blood of our
Savior Christ, they are in heaven, and not here, for it is against the truth
of Christ's natural Body, to be in more places then one, at one time.

3. To which I add, that to take away all appearance of tendering any Adoration
to the outward signs, then brought to the Communicants, the Church thought
good afterward 1 Eliz^
to have that short Prayer, The Body of our Lord, etc. then to be made for
each Communicant before he receive, (which in King Edwards Book was not
appointed) to the end that the Kneeling might not so much as seem to be
undertaken upon the sight and respect of the Sacramental signs, and in
reference to them. Thus careful have our Fathers bin to show us their minds,
and to take away all appearance of evil, and ground of suspicion.

4. And it is worth the marking, that this gesture is at that time only
appointed as a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgement of the
benefits of Christ, which (if it be not by our own fault) we then receive; and
not at any other time, when it might be supposed to be intended to the
Sacramental signs, or to Christ, in and by them.

For as that learned Author of the Treatise called Dialecticon Eucharistia,
printed at Geneva, and set out with the second Tome of Beza his Works, in his
life time, says, The Bread is to us the Body of Christ when we adore and
receive it, not as they do in Popery at the Elevation, when they only look
on, or Circumgestation, when it is carried in the streets, and they that Adore,
receive nothing. And for this cause Mr. Calvin in answering that objection of
the Papists, Inst. 4.17.37.
that they adore Christ in the Sacrament, says, Si in Coena, etc. If this were
done in the Supper, I would say, Eam demum Adorationem esse legitima^, quae non
in signo residet, sed ad Christum in coelo sedentem refertur, that were yet a
lawful adoration, which rests not in the outward sign, but is referred to
Christ himself sitting in heaven. And he gives, after, this reason, that
they have no promise of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, not as signatum in
signo, as the thing signified in the sign, when it is consecrated to be
honored and carried about as a pompous spectacle, and invocated; but when it
is received. For our Lord that said, This is my body, said, Take, eat, this is
my body. The Sacraments consist in their use, and are not Sacraments out of
their use. The water in the Font is no Sacrament of Baptism, but in the use of
it.

5. Our Church therefore by appoynting this gesture at that time when we
receive bodily the outward things, spiritually the inward grace annexed (not by
corporeal presence, but by institute Relation) to the same; has not referred
this Ceremony to the outward things received of the Ministers hands, no nor
simply to the benefits received of, by, and with Christ, as a sign of our
partaking them, but only to our humble and grateful acknowledgement of those
benefits received from Christ, as the Declaration shows. So that unless
humble and grateful acknowledgement of those benefits agree not to that very
hint of time, when, by virtue of Gods Ordinance, we receive them, the
signification thereof by the gesture, cannot be unlawful or uncomely, though
it be not simply necessary, but a matter of Order, not of proper worship in it
self.

6. They therefore which spend their wits and time to prove, either that we
ought not to give Adoration to any sanctified creature; or, by adoring it, to
transfer our adoration to God or Christ; or to persuade men that this gesture
is used of us, at least for Veneration of the consecrated creatures, had (in my
opinion) too much time to spare, and not either Judgment or Charity enough.
For it is not done in relation to the Signs, or simply to the things
signified, but only as an expression of our humble and grateful
acknowledgement of what we receive, and is to the honoring of God and Christ
by Consequent and reduction only belonging, and that but as an outward and
free Rite or formalitie.

7. But if in the Supper it self we had respect unto the sanctified
creatures, as the ordinances of our Lord; and, by bowing our selves, not to
them, but upon occasion of them then brought to us to be received, not resting
the honor or adoration in the elements themselves, though sanctified, but
only referring it to God and Christ the Son of God, not as carnally present in
them, but sitting in heaven, and by his Spirit wonderfully communicating his
body and blood to us; you see we should have had M. Calvin's approbation, as
well as the ancient Fathers, S. Augustine and others which I could name, and
not herein deserve to be matched with such of the learned Papists, as would
have no Adoration to determine in the Images themselves, but to be referred
unto, and rest upon the Prototype, or first Sampler.

8. For the Lords Sacraments and Word are, (as Calvin says) the lively images
of God, and of his own making, not ours. And therefore we may lawfully, and
must have such a respect unto them, as we may not have to any thing devised by
man; and we may by them, (as obiectum a quo, by an object from whence, and
medium per quod, a means by which) tender our adoration to God, which by an
Image of our own heads made, we cannot do, without either breach of the 1
Commandment, if the adoration determine in the image, or prototype thereof
being a mere creature; or breach of the 2 Commandment, though the adoration
were referred only to God. For he has said, Thou shall not make to thy self,
etc. but never meant to restrain himself from such representation of
himself, as he should like to give; or, us from worshipping him and serving
him in the use of them. See Cap. 9.

And hence it is, that the people of God, before and after the Law, have taken
notice of Gods presence or grace manifested by message, as Exodus 4. or signs
ordinary or extraordinary given them of God, and have with free consciences
thereupon kneeled or bowed down themselves to God upon, at, or before those
representations of Gods special presence or grace. Wherein if any man shall
match them with Durand, Occham and others that worship Images, made at the will
of men only in relation to that which is worshipped, he shall be injurious to
the Saints, and give encouragement to that Popish conceit, without reason.

The Author of Altar Damasc. yields that the Jews, at, or before the Arc,
which was Gods instituted sign of his presence, or Temple in respect of the
Arc, and so before the burning bush, Ex. 3. or armed man Josh. 5. or cloud,
Ex. 33.9. or other sign given of God as a sign of his special presence,
might lawfully upon sight or respect of such a sign, Adore God. But says he,
the Sacraments are not signs of Gods special presence but grace: and before,
or respectively to such signs of grace Adoration is not lawful, though only
referred to God.

But this man opposes without reason, presence and grace, which both did often
coincidere, fall both into one, as in the Arc, and cloud, and armed man, which
were so signs of his presence, as they also were signs of his favor and
grace.

That Armed man in Joshua, professes to come as a Captain of the Lords host.
Paul says, our Fathers were baptized under the cloud. The Arc is called the
Arc of the Covenant; therefore Presence and Grace in these signs, are not
opposite but conjunct.

2. He erreth when he supposes the Jews to have used this Adoration only
at, or before the sign of special presence, and not of Grace. For they did it
to God upon occasion of his signs of favor, as well as those of his special
presence. See Pet. Mart. on 1 King.
For when the fire came down from heaven, to burn, and as it were to show
Gods acceptance of their Sacrifices (which was not simply a signal of his
Presence, but of his special favor) the people fell down and worshipped God
as well as at his foot stool the Arc, or Cloud, Levit 9. 24. and 2. Chron.
7.3.

Ezra 9.5 and 10 1. with 5.17. and 3.11.
3. He mistaketh in saying they bowed and adored God at or before the
Tabernacle or Temple, in respect of the Arc only (so he means) which was
therein. Ezra kneeled and cast down himself before the very place of the
Temple, as the house God, though there was neither Arc any more after the
captivity, nor Temple then standing, but only the place which God had chosen
for his name to dwell in, and a foundation of the Lords house.

Chemnit. in exam. part. 2. page 91. edit. 1578.
It is much more sound which Chemnitius observes that the people of God, upon
any occasion representing Gods special Presence or favor to them, whether it
were only by a Gracious message (as in Ex. 4. and 12.) or Action (as in Genesis
24.26 48.) or sign thereof given from God, they Adored and cast down
themselves, of which we have spoken much already, Cap. 10.

4. But if it were lawful to Adore God only at or before his own Signal of
his special Presence, the Arc, why not at the Sacrament, referring all the
Adoration to God in Christ? For was the Arc any better sign of Gods presence,
then the Bread and Wine are of the body and blood of Christ, whose names he
himself has honored them withal, as the Arc was honored with the title of
Jehovah, i. e. for the representation and Sacramental Relation sake?

Does any man divide Christ himself from the Graces of Christ? verily we in
the Sacrament have no hope of partaking the Grace of Christ, but by partaking
himself his very body and blood, though not carnally or bodily, yet really and
in truth; not in at our mouths, but into our souls as spiritual food.

The conclusion of all, is, that if our Church intended that we, in receiving
the Communion, should look upon the Bread and Wine not simply as creatures,
but as Sacraments of our Lords institution, and so beholding them, Non qua
sunt, sed qua significant, not as they are in their own nature, but as what
they there signify should tender a knee-worship or Adoration, not at all to
them, but only to God or Christ his son, by occasion of them, we should
therein do no more then the ancient godly Fathers did before Popery, as that
learned tract Dialecticon Eucharistiae shows; I am sure no more then the
godly Jews did, as has been showed. And yet even this Ceremony, so used,
should be no proper worship of God, or worship of and by it self, because it
is not then and so commanded of the Lord; but only, Improper and Reductiue
worship, and though not commanded, yet allowed of Gods word: And therefore but
a matter of mere Order in the sense aforesaid.

5. But I have already given in our Churches (public) Declaration, by which
appears, that she goes not so far; but understands this gesture to be
only for Signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgement of those
benefits bestowed of Christ in this his Ordinance upon (not all men, but) the
worthy Receivers. And therefore they which condemn this Church of a
Will Worship, yea of flat Idolatry for this; and teach the poor people to
forbear the Communion, rather then to receive it kneeling, have more to answer
for to God and his Church, then perhaps they think of.

6. For while they piously intending to sail from (as I may say) the
North Pole of the Popish Idolatry, not heeding the Equator, have sailed,
though not home to the South-Pole, yet too near it, into another extreme of
Superstition and Disworship of God. Disworship, in turning their backs upon
the Lords table, for a gesture not forbidden of God: and Superstition in
placing such a necessity in sitting or standing, which are neither of them
commanded of the Lord (as is confessed) that they think themselves highly to
honor and please God in the choice of those gestures, or else not to
communicate. This is to worship God after the traditions of men; Or else the
Jews were not guilty of it, by forbearing out of conscience* and for fear of
pollution, to eat their meat with unwashed hands. Only this is so much the
worse, as the spiritual food which they dare not touch nor taste, unless they
may take it sitting or standing, is better then the bodily from which the Jews
abstained. The Lord who has given many of them godly desires, vouchsafe in
mercy to clear their judgments, and not to lay this error to their charge.

CAP. 15. The first part of the fourth Argument Answered.
Arg. 4. THe Law, (i. e. the 2. Commandment) forbids two things: 1. The
devising any new ways of worship. 2. The using of prescribed worship otherwise
then they are directed. But some of our Ceremonies are devised new ways of
worship, or usage of the prescribed worships otherwise then they are directed.
Ergo, the Law forbids them.

Answ. What things the Law of the second Commandment does forbid, I have said,
and grant the same, or, with it, the third Commandment to forbid these two
things you mention. But I will consider these two apart, and so make two
Arguments of one, for perspicuities sake.

The Law forbids the diuising of new ways of worship, But our Ceremonies
are devised new ways of worship, Ergo.

I suppose you mean, that as the Devising is forbidden, so the things devised,
etc. otherwise we shall be untouched, who only use these Ceremonies, but
devised none of them. And then I say, that the terms are ambiguous, and must
be made clear before the Answer be given to the Argument.

1. Worship of God (as has been preoued) is Proper or Improper, Ex se, or per
accidens, of it self, or by accident, and per aliud, by reference to some
other thing; As for example, says Chamier. In Ieiunio nulla pietas est, Cham.
Tom. 4. lib. 46. cap 1.
nisi quatenus vtile interdum testandae internae poenitentiae and praeparationi
ad preces, In fasting there is no worship, but as it is useful sometimes for
testification of inward humiliation and for preparation to prayer. So ways, (i
e. means) of worship, are also either means by the use whereof Immediately of
themselves, Service is done or supposed to be done to God; or means more
remote, and not in themselves or by themselves any service, or reputed any
service of God, but by accident, and per aliud, in reference to some what else,
as in Chamiers instance, Fasting. By new ways, you mean, not lately taken up,
but such as have not their Prescription in the Word. For all substantial or
proper worship, is new worship to God, which himself has not Commanded. And
then I answer, That of Proper and Immediate worship Ex se, of it self, or so
esteemed, the Mayor is true, but the Minor false of our Ceremonies, which being
acknowledged things of indifferent nature, and such as the Church may at
pleasure alter, cannot be understood to be made, in that sense, any new
worship, or ways of worship. But if you speak of worship in a larger meaning
of the word; and, by ways, understand any means tending (at the long run)
to the honoring of God, and intended only as Adjuncts to the proper worship
of God, and for an help to us in the same; Then is the Minor true of our
Ceremonies, viz. that they are, in such a notion, new devised ways of worship.
But the Mayor, which says, that all devised ways of worship are even in that
sense forbidden, is manifestly false. For example, This or that prescript form
of prayer, is a new devised way of worship, as touching the Set-forme, yet not
forbidden. The Fasts of the fourth, See Zach. 8.19. and Iunius his Annot.
fifth, seventh and tenth months, reminding the very months and special days
of their calamities, that they might with more life and feeling humble
themselves before God, in the ^aptiuity, were such new devised ways of worship
to God, in our sense, and not commanded of God, Zach. 7 4. yet not forbidden or
condemned, as Master Cartwright confesses. And the like is to be said of all
vnprescribed circumstances (considered in their particulars) which belong to
Order, Decency and Edification, that they are remote and accidental ways of
worship, and devised, or, (which is all one) so applied and determined by the
will of man; and yet, neither commanded nor forbidden, but only allowed in
themselves.

Medul Theol. part 2. cap 14. These. 24.
For to say, as Doctor Ames, Praecipiuntur in genere sub lege Ordinis Decori and
Aedification is, they are commanded in general under the law of order,
comeliness and edification, is not reasonable. For if these particulars be
commanded which fall under the general heads, then must the observation of the
particulars be necessary, because commanded, and not things left to choice.
Neither is it sound which he says, Habendae tamen sunt tanquam ex voluntate
Dei praeceptae, Ibid. These. 27.
they are to be reputed as commanded out of the will of God. Or (as after)
that, if they be to all points well ordered, or that, Constitutio ita habenda
sit quasi simpliciter Diuina, that constitution is to be taken as simply
divine; for the constitution is only of the particulars, and is limited to
things left of God Indifferent in themselves, and therefore cannot be said to
be simply divine, but, after a sort; No not when the things are in kind such as
necessarily follow of those things which God has expressly commanded, Ibid.
These. 24.
which is Doctor Ames his second reason. For example, the very particular place
where, and hour when, we must meet unto the public worship of God, are not
in themselves particularly commanded in genere suo, under their general, and
the observance, even of them, must be with a conscience free from tie to the
place or time, in regard of themselves; otherwise, there is a superstitious use
of them. So that that which in them may be called Divine and a commanded
Circumstance of worship, is, a place, and a time as commodious as we can; but
not, this place or this hour. And if all conueniences require this very place,
and this very hour, yet is not the place required propter se, for it self,
but propter aliud for some other thing: It is therefore better to say, That the
particulars devised or determined by men, to be observed as Ceremonies or
outward Rites in the worship of God, are in all particulars, when they most
agree to the general Rules of the word, only Allowed. And yet, if by the
neglect and contempt of such external Rites, Violatur aliquo modo sanctitas
cultus religiosi, the purity of religious worship be violated (as Doctor Amer
says, Ibid. These 23.
and says well) then the Observation of them must aliquo modo some way be
some worship of God, howeuer (as he also says) In ijs non proprie consistit
cultus religiosus, religious worship consists not properly in them, not
properly says he; but yet, in a sort, say I.

And indeed if we will admit no more into the worship of God then is
commanded, as the Anabaptists require, we shall, in baptizing, only lay on
water in the name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and not
use ( lawfully) any of those set prayers, before or after, nor rehearse the
sum of the Christian faith, nor have any special witnesses, nor then give
the name as it were to show that we are as it were without a name, or being
Lo-ammy till we be entered into professed Covenant with God; nor, any
Scripture then read to show the lawfulness of baptizing Infants, no
Interrogatories to express the conditions of our Covenant with god; and not
only, no sign of the Cross as a monitorie Ceremony to the congregation,
forasmuch as God has not commanded any of these thus to be done, in the use
of that Sacrament.

The like may be said of all the Readings, Prefaces, Exhortations and Prayers
(excepting that only which by repeating the institution, and praying for the
blessing of God on us in that use of them) are prescribed in our Leitourgy,
even till we come to the breaking of the Bread and to distribution of it and
the Cup. Namely, that these, so far as by the will of man they are devised,
and determined thus to be done, They are not things in their particular thus
commanded of God, and therefore Ex se, of themselves, are not proper worship
of God, respectively to that very form, Order, and time of using them; But
either as they are in their own General, as the prayers; or, referred to
Order, Comeliness and Edification, which God has commanded to be aimed at,
and observed in all actions of his worship, i. e. propter aliud, for some other
thing. So then in themselves only allowed, and Improperly worship of God.

And if in such things thus devised and determined by men, which are not in
themselves necessary, but only lawful, there may be no respect at all of
honoring God in the use of them, though not simply for themselves; How has
the Apostle told us that one man eats; or, observes the day to the Lord, and
another eats not; or, observes not the day; and, this man eats not; and,
observes not the day, even unto the Lord? Or, what ground of faith could men
have in doing things so contrary, as eating and not eating; unless it were,
that God had allowed either, but commanded neither the one nor the other? For
the Command of one must have bin the Prohibition of the contrary. But in rebus
medijs, in things indifferent, Quo supra in Romans 14.
says Paraeus, not only diverse, but even contrary things please God: but non
tanquam cultus, not as a worship in themselves. For in such things, no
contrariety, yea no variance from the pattern given in the Mount (as I may
say) I mean Gods Prescript, is tolerable.

A man is bound, at such a time, to pay an hundred pounds in current English
money. In this case if he pay it all in gold, or silver; or, in both, at the
time, the bond is discharged, because it was only for such a sum of current
English money.

But if a man be bound to pay the same sum at the same time, in good gold,
silver of that value will not discharge his bond, because it was not only for
the value in current money, but for the species or kind of money. In this case
therefor, the specios, ex se and in se, the very particular kind, in and of it
self, is part of the payment, as well as the value. But in the other case the
Species or particular kind simply considered ex se, of it self is nothing to
the payment, save only in the General, as it is current money, and secondly as
it amounts to the Sum. So is our case. Where God himself has for his
service determined the Circumstances; as, under the Law, The place of
Sacrifice, and times of their three solemn Feasts, or Apparel of the Priests,
or ought else in particular; Those very Circumstances were part of the proper
and principal worship, as well as the maine Actions, because of the Command of
God. But where God has commanded only the maine substance of a service to him,
and not prescribed the particular manners, but only given rules of direction,
those particular circumstances are not any worship or service of God in
themselves, nor may without Superstition be so esteemed, but only as they are
parts of Order and Decency, and serve to the Edification of men, which God has
required in all the maine Actions of his prescribed service, i.e. the
particulars are propter aliud, in reference to some what else a worship of God,
and in themselves only allowed not commanded means thereof.

I marvel sometimes at some of our brethren, who, to prove that we make our
Ceremonies a very worship to God, tell us that if the very same things were
done to the very same end by Divine institution, they must needs be worship;
and then true worship, because required of God, and therefore ours must needs
be worship of God; and not being commanded, Will Worship. As if they had not
yet learned, That the only command of God does make that to be in it self,
an Act of necessary and substantial worship to him, which though to the same
end, and in the same manner done voluntarily, nor was, nor is esteemed any part
of the real worship in it self, but only per and propter aliud, by and for
some reference to some other thing. As for example. The building and use of
Altars here or there, before God had chosen out the standing place for his
Altar (though to the same end, for which the Lords instituted altar served, i
e. for Sacrifice) was not worship in respect of the place, or kind of stone
used, or height, length, or breadth; But only as an allowed Instrument of the
necessary worship, not sanctifying the offering, as did Gods sanctified Altar,
but sanctified, in a sort, by the offering.

To conclude, All that either in truth is, or may be esteemed a proper and
necessary part of Divine worship, and means of honoring God, even in the
thing so done, must be so made by the will of God, or else is vain and
will worship.

But such things as are not understood, or used, as in themselves necessary,
immediate, and proper worship of God, but only by accident, and propter aliud,
in reference are worship but after a sort in themselves, and have no Precept of
God upon themselves, in their particular, but only an allowance or General
warrant. And this is no otherwise a Will Worship, then was the worship of the
freewill offerings, wherein the particular choice was left free to the men
themselves. Only, if a man will enhaunce the value of this Improper and
reductiue worship, and have it go current at a higher rate, then God ever
allowed, even for proper service in it self, he shall then make of his
improper worship, a proper will worship to Gods dishonor, in as much as he
will needs return it to God at another rate, then God himself set upon it in
his allowance. Which is as one should offer to pay the Kings Subjects in silver
or gold pieces, rated above the value, which the King himself has set on
them. This is a non-payment, though the Species or particular kind, be
current, because the value is not right. And when men think to honor God by
such means, so esteemed, they dishonor him, not simply in the means, but
because of the misprizing and abuse. And so much for this Argument now to the
next.

CAP. XVI. The second part of the fourth Argument answered.
THe Law, secondly forbids the prescribed worships of God, to be used
otherwise then they are directed. But, the Observance of our Ceremonies is an
usage of Gods prescribed worship otherwise then the same is directed. Ergo.
Forbidden of the Law.

Answ. If by [ otherwise] you mean ( in any other outward manner;) and, by [
directed] understand [ commanded] the Mayor is false. For the circumstances
concerning the outward manner, (as touching their particular determination) are
not commanded of God, but under the General rules of his Direction, left unto
the choice of men, as is confessed in general words by all men that oppose our
Ceremonies, howeuer they pare this grant afterward, of purpose to exclude our
Ceremonies from all relief thereby.

But if by [ otherwise] you mean so otherwise, as that, we disioyne what God
has united, the outward worship from the Internal, i. e. the body from the
soul; or, that we alter that which God has Ordered, as in the
halfe-Communion of the Papists, etc. Or that the manner and external fashion
be not framed to the general rules of Gods direction, Order, Decency, and
Edification; Then the Mayor is true, that such things are forbidden by the Law,
i. e. either by the second or third Commandment. But then the Minor, touching
our Ceremonies, must be denied to be true, till it shall be proved, which
will not be by this Argument, but must be, if at all, by some particular and
just exception against them.

CAP. 17. The defense of the Answers given to this fourth Argument.
THis Answer will not seem to satisfy the Argument, till we have discovered
and removed sundry petty engines, which have been planted against it, and seem
to some men to batter it to the ground, and to make nothing of it, which I
will, so far as I can, set forth Ab ovo.

When the day of Mercy shined on the Church of God, and gave men strength and
spirit to withdraw themselves from that leprous Church of Rome, nothing was
more necessary, then to make the people know, that the vain pomp and
Stage Plays of human Rites which went then current for an high service of God
(while in the mean time his own prescribed service, was either obscured and
defaced, or annihilated and neglected) was no true service of God. Hence, you
shall find the Divines of that time laboring mainely upon this point, That
nothing may be esteemed or used as a worship of God, such as he would reward,
and men might not omit without sin, (which was and is the rate of all the
Popish Ceremonies in their accounts, from the greatest to the least of them)
save only what God himself has in his word prescribed. In the mean time
they denied not a liberty to the Church, for ordaining of things for Order,
Decency, and Edification; and such, and so many, as the necessity of the Church
should at any time require. But not for a worship, understanding worship as
their adversaries did, for such an act as in it self was pleasing to God, and
so as he would be offended if it were not so done to him.

Hereupon sundry well minded people began to think of all that in Popery was
made part of the divine worship, and urged as necessary for conscience sake, to
be so observed to the honor of God: And not considering warily, whether
things were at all in themselves too blame, or only in respect of the
superstitious use and opinion of them, they concluded, that all was unlawful
to be used in any Act of religious service, which was not commanded (which, of
service properly so to be called, is true) and thereupon resolved, no Temples,
Bells, Fonts, Gossips, etc. And because they found not a plain command for an
Oath in cases of Judicature; no swearing: and, for the like reason, no
Baptizing of Infants, No set forms of prayer, or Order of reading Scripture
since it is not in the Bible; no habits, no gestures, but such as were
necessary in common use; nothing at all observed which might have any
particular reference to any thing Divine or Ecclesiastical, not so much as a
Cloak or Gown for a Minister as a distinctiue garment, nor ought else which
might be called Ecclesiastical. And as men went with more or fewer sails
carried along with this conceit, so have they fallen short or gone further in
their misapplication of the true ground of Divinity, which our great Divines
had delivered ex hypothesi, conditionally and in a strict sense of the terms [
Worship of God.]

From hence, in the first Admonition to the Parliament, they quarrelled at the
frame and form of our Church-orders; and, set down this rule, whatsoever is
not commanded of God in his word may not be recieued in the Church. This, when
Master Cartwright undertook to defend against the late Archbishop, Doctor
Whirgife, he (as he was a man of a great wit and parts) found how that speech
might be mainetainable, and yet some liberty left unto the Church in
constituting matters of Order; namely, that in as much as the things left unto
the Churches determination, were limited to certain general rules of the word
which are Commandments, therefore the partioul^rs which according to these
rules were appointed, might be said to be commanded, (just as we heard out
of Doctor Ames, praecipiuntur in genere suo, they are commanded under their
general) which was but a mere shift of his wit. For though those general
rules be Precepts, yet the various specialties which fall under them are not
thereby commanded (not those, specially) but only allowed.

But when this Answer was found too short to smite down our Ceremonies, for
which, this was pleaded, that they were not contrary but agreeable to the
statutes of Gods word; and, as such, intended, and to be used; and that, if
they would disprove any thing they must insist upon that particular, and not
think to condemn it by a general Sentence, as Master Hooker told them: Then
they sought out a new way, i. e. That things left to the Churches dispose, are
only Circumstances of time and place, and such things of Decorum as were as
well received and practiced for like ends in common use, as in Ecclesiastical.
And by this rare devise (which I take to be Master Jacobs) they have made a
shift to rescue Churches, Bells, Fonts, a Communion Table and Cloth, and Cup,
and if need be, a Church yard to bury in, and some few other matters from the
sentence of the Rigid Anabaptists. But have left all other things, which are
(as they speak) stated in, i. e. appropriated to any actions of Gods external
service, to be executed as guilty of some treachery against god, in his
worship. Therefore (says Master Jacob) God has not left unto the Churches
liberty or determination, so much as our Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. Which (a
better man then he, and one that from my heart I both love and honor) Doctor
Ames has taken, as upon trust from him or other such Author, as his words
before alleged may witness in part; and some others of like alleadgement; as
namely, Partis 2. disp. 15. Sec. 25. where he boundeth and restrains all
that is left of God unto the choice and disposition of men in this manner, Illa
igitur qua pertinent ad ordinem and Decorum, non ita relinquuntur hominum
arbitrio, vt possint quod ipsis libet sub illo nomine Ecclesiis obtrudere: sed
partim determinantur generalibus Dei praeceptis, partim natura ipsarum rerum,
and partim circumstantijs illis quae ex occasion sese offerunt; These things
therefore which pertain to order and decency are not so left to the pleasure
of men, that they may, under that name and pretext, obtrude what they list upon
the Churches; but are determined partly under Gods general precepts, partly by
the nature of the very things themselves, and partly by those circumstances
which occasionally offer themselves. Of which sentence the former half is most
true; the later, not so sound. For then nothing at all beyond mere necessity;
as, a time, and place (which are his own instances. These. 24.) or such, as the
very nature of the things necessarily urges; or, casualties; as for example,
to meet in a wood, in time of persecution; or, when there is no help, to set
the bread and wine upon the bare ground; Nothing, I say, more then these, are
left unto the Churches ordering; nothing that may, by any signification, help
to remember us; Nothing that may serve to breed reverence toward Gods
ordinances, and put some special outward marks of difference betwixt common
or sacred, Civil or Religious affairs; nothing of gestures, habits,
memoratiue days of Christ's Incarnation or Resurrection; No prescript form of
prayers to be used otherwise then as a Plat-forme, as Altar Damascenum;
unless perhaps sitting at the Communion in token of Co heireship with Christ,
because in Civil use it is a table gesture, and fashion of familiarity.

I will allege some few of our great Divines, and see whether they by Rites
and Ceremonies left unto the liberty of the Church, mean nothing but the same
which our men understand by Circumstances of time and place, common as well in
Civil, as Religious use, though I grant not few to be such. And because they
are wont to name time and place, putting thereto a blind [ etc.] or [ et
simitia,] we will see whether about Time and Place, the learned Divines, and
they be of one mind.

A special place destinated, Zanch. Tom. 4. page 764.
and in respect of the use sanctified, and called Sacred, which unless in case
of extreme necessity, should not be employed to any other then the destined
uses, Zanchie allows and requires as a thing comely. Will Altar Damascenum
(trow you) permit this to the Churches liberty?

An Altar of Stone, or a Table of wood, page 485
Zanchie and others leave to the Churches determination, as in se media,
indifferent in themselves, though a Table be fitter. Will our men say so?

That the Communion Table should not (but in case of extreme necessity) be
put to common use, Zanchie requires. Ibid.
Is this their rule?

That Table and Vessels for the Communion, page 785.
he calls holy Vessels, as dedicated to holy use. Is this all one with
Civil use?

That one lawful End of building Temples, is Significancie, Repl. to Bish.
Morton, part. 1 cap. 3. sect. 32.
to remind us of our Communion with God, and his in heaven, Zanchie affirms.
Then says the Replier, Away with all mystical Churches.

As touching Times of worship, besides the Lords days, Calvin. Inst. 4.10.31.
Calvin puts that under the Churches hand and determination, as not
determined in the World; Sect. 29.
and on what days the Lords Supper should be administered.

And Zanchie says of the Solemnities of Easter, Pentecost, Quo supra p. 676.
the Ascension and Nativitie of our Lord, sanctified as of the Ancients; or
kept holy, it could not be disliked. Nay, that laudabile est, and honestum
atque vtile, it is laudable, honest or seemly, and profitable, and proves it
too. So in effect Iunius cont. lib. 4. page 283.
Will ours allow these Feasts in memorial of the mercies on such days
bestowed, as a Circumstance of time, necessary as well in Civil as Religious
uses; Do they not condemn the Feast of Dedication, as rashly instituted by
the Maccabees? And of their own heads tell us, that the Feast of Purins was
either only a merry meeting, of friends; as Mr. Jacob, and Altar Damasc. Or,
that Mordecei was a Prophet; as the Replyer, only because they would not have
it thought that the Church may, by her authority, separate a whole day to the
solemn worship of God, unless for Fasting perhaps. Not that the Church can
make an hallowing Holy Day as is the Lords day, the Sabbath; but, hallowed
days for the use to be observed with free Consciences.

But beside Time and Place, the Divines refer to the Churches determination,
whether the Public Prayers shall be all said, or sung; as Zanchie; what
Psalms on what days, Calvin quo supra Sect. 31. What habit shall be worn
inadministring the Lords Supper, whether their common, or a peculiar garment,
woollen or linen. And Zanch (for the signification) preferres the linen,
though in other respects he says; rectius reijcitur, it is better rejected of
some Churches. Chem. exam. part. 2. page 36.
Chemnitius allows some of the old significant Rites used anciently in
Baptism, while only so used. Iunius professes that if we were agreed in
Doctrine, and the superstition removed, we should not disagree with the Papists
for the Rite or Ceremony of Exorcisme. The like he says of the use of the
Iunius cont. 2. page 1726. an. 23. page 1743.
Cross in sacris. But what do I mention these or other particular persons,
such as Bucer, Melancthon, against whom and Lavater, Zanchie, and some others,
there is a praemunire Caveat added to the Replyers first part, That forsooth
some of them wrote in the dawsing of the day, others lived in England, as
Martyr; Chemnitius was a Lutheran; Zanchie was of a timorous disposition; they
were not well informed when they gave approbation to our Church Rites, and such
other gear: by which all men may know, that the judgments of those grave
Divines suit not with theirs in this matter. And furthermore, that they had
rather sink the reputation of all the Lords Worthies, then yield themselves to
have mistaken any thing. If any particular man be of weight with them, it is
Mr. Calvin, who in truth deserves the first honorable chair of them all.
When the Bishop Morton had produced a Testimony of his, ex Instit. 4.10.30. as
full and direct as could be, to show what he judges to be left unto the
determination of the Church in matters of Discipline and Ceremonies not
determined in the Word. The Replyer (not reciting the text of Calvin) ^elleth
the Bishop, that there is nothing which without the aequivocation of the word
Ceremony will serve his turn; Calvin meant nothing but necessary
Circumstances of Order, as time and place, etc. but no significant Ceremonies.
Calvin says, God has given certain general Rules, unto which must be
squared whatsoever the necessity of the Church shall require of time and
place, etc. for, there is no necessity of our significant Ceremonies. Wherein
he makes a pretty shift of escape under the shadow of that word necessiti^.
But in following the same matter, Calvin faith, what the utility of the Church
shall require, counting that necessary to the Church, which is either of it
self, or by accident necessary for the Churches Peace and building up, as he
has before in that Chapter said, and does after.

The necessity of the Church required that old Decree of Abstaining from blood
and strangled, which in it self was not necessary, nor (as Mr. Sprint has
showed) simply conuendent. Which for our use of the Ceremonies instituted, is
argument enough; unless there be no need of our Ministry in the Church, or
of the Churches quiet, on of obedience to our Prince in things not evil in
themselves. But, there is yet no necessary use of our significant humane
Ceremonies in the Church. Simple necessity there is none. But necessity of
utility, Calvin acknowledges, when of Symbolicall Rites, he professes
himself to think some such to be a profitable help to the weaker sort,
Sect. 28. Which likewise in his Treatise of The Right way of Reforming the
Church, he does also profess: Denying himself at all to strive against
Ceremonies, which are either for Order, or yet for Decency, Vel etiam symbola
sunt and incitamenta eius quam Deo debemus reverentiae, or such as are signs
of, and incitements to that reverence which we owe unto God. And in his 78
Epistle to the Lord Protector, Ceremonias ad vsum captumque populi esse
accomodandas, Ceremonies must be accomodated to the use and capacity of the
people; which must be understood, in part, of some significant Ceremonies:
else, why ad captum populi? must the peoples capacity be so much respected?
Indeed Calvin requires, that such significant Ceremonies be but few, and such
as may not obscure Christ. But that he allows some such to be instituted of
the Church, even for the help of signification, is as clear as the Sun at
Noonday. And he that will mark how the Replyer labors to hide the light
of his Testimonies, shall find, that his Reply thereto borrowed much from his
wit, without asking leave of his Conscience. But why do I detain you in the
Survay of particular men? The Harmony of Confessions, set out with the Notes of
the French and Dutch Churches, will best show how much the Churches of Christ
have judged to be left unto the determination of men. And how short of that
allowance all those men come, who will not permit her to constitute so much as
one merely Ecclesiastical Ceremony, but to contain her in the constitution
of such things, as all men of themselves are bound to observe, even without any
Constitution, and which no power of man can forbid.

You ask me, Where any such power is given to the Church? I answer out of Mr.
Calvin, and Dr. Ames too; viz. where she is enjoined to do all things of Gods
prescribed worship according to Order, Decency, and to Edification. For what
does necessarily serve unto those rules, she is rather commanded, then simply
allowed to consider and take care of. And sure I am, that though Order strictly
taken, belongs but to Vbi, quando, to place and time, etc. yet the
determination of that, belonging to each Church, requires many things. Now, as
Order and Decency in the outward manner of handling all and the several parts
of Gods instituted service, is required of the Churches; so is it, that all be
done to Edification; which is not that all, that men lust to impose under the
name of Order, Decency, and Edification, is commanded or allowed by that
charge of the Holy Ghost; but that all, which she is to dispose of, be such
indeed, so far as she can judge. Whence will follow, that in Rites serving to
Order or Decency, there should be what help we can to Edification by the
significancie of those Rites. For seeing the outward ordering should be such,
as may most edify, as Dr. Ames says, how can it be but such a Rite as is
Comely for the matter in hand, and agreeable to the use and intent thereof,
shall be unto men the more helpefull, if it carry some manifest signification
in the forehead? For this reason Zanchius prefers (and so does M. Perkins)
the ceremony of Immersion under the water, before that of sprinkling, or laying
on the water, as holding more Analogy to that of Paul, Romans 6. that we are
buried with Christ in Baptism.

And the same Zanch. To. 4.601. Edit. 1613.
Zanch, speaking of the Ceremonies used in taking a solemn oath, laying the
hand upon the Altar; or, as the Jews, and we, upon the Book of the Covenant,
or lifting up the hand to heaven, says, That none of these Ceremonies are to
be disliked, because they all have their, and those weighty significations.
And, in sadness, when it is to us so familiar a thing in all solemn actions, to
have something signified to us by Ceremony; how can it be blameable in a
Ceremony of the Church, that it is significant, I mean, simply eo nomine, in
that very respect? For, if there be a surfeit made of them, or any operative
virtue supposed to be in them, or any necessity or opinion of worshipping God
by them ex se, as of and in themselves, such use does pollute them, and all
that so use them.

In gestures, it will be acknowledged readily, that they may be fitted to the
several kinds of Gods prescribed Service, even for signification, as M.
Cartwright, and M. Fennor show. But (says Altar Damasc.) we must not be
tied to them. In which, if he meant, not tied by the conscience, as if it were
a sin, even in it self, not to use them in the public service of God, I am
fully with him: But either I foulely mistake him, or else his meaning is, that
what we will do freely of our selves, this way, is good; but if once the
Magistrate or Church require it to be done, then all is marred. Think of
this, and think withal, whether the same men which refuse kneeling in
receiving the Communion, (all or most of them) do not also forbear to kneel
when the Commandments are read, to every whereof, a prayer for pardon, and for
grace to keep that law, is subjoyned. Yea, and when Public profession of the
Faith is made, to stand up: which is a most comely gesture, and without all
exception. And tell me, in Conscience, what can be the reason of such
refusal, but because it is so appointed by the Law, and Authority both of
State and Church? otherwise, they would like well enough then, to stand.

Ob. But gestures (say they) signify Naturally, or as it were Naturally, but
our exception is against such things as signify only by appointment of men, as
the Ring in Marriage, Surplice and Cross; and these we condemn.

I answer. 1. That they question our kneeling, though it signify giving of
honor never so naturally; not only as misapplied, but as a significant
ceremony. 2. For the Surplice, that it is but a distinctiue garment, as the
addition of Hoods, to be put on after men's Degrees, may show. But, let it
signify the pureness that ought to be in the Minister of God, in Gods sight
and service. The Ring is merely a civil sign of the Matrimonial Contract,
as is Joining of hands. The Cross indeed would not signify what it does of it
self, but by Institution. But as I have showed, the very bodily gestures do
not of themselves signify; but, by the Intention and Customs of men, which is
as by second Nature. And so does putting off of the hat signify a respect
also; which, when they allow, though appointed by men, at the Sacrament, the
signification notwithstanding, this is but a made quarrel, that our Ceremonies
signify, not but by Institution and long Custom of men. And I pray you, what
difference upon the matter, whether by natural light, or general notice of
the meaning, the Ceremony be significant? And, why not? Forsooth, this is to
give them part of the nature of Sacraments. Indeed, some in their heat call
them Sacraments; as, Master Parker in his Treatise of the Cross. But Doctor
Ames checketh that over-shoot, and says, they are but Sacramentalia,
Sacramentals; not well understanding, that Ceremonies were called Sacraments,
scil. not from this, that they signified, for so did almost all Popish Rites,
(witness Durandus) but because they were appertinent to some of their
Sacraments, non ad esse, but ad ornatum, not to their being, but to their
comely being.

Take away, says Saint Augustine, the Element, and there is no Sacrament; and,
take away the thing signified, says Zanchie, and there is no Sacrament
neither. Sacraments therefore, are not simple signs; but Significantia,
obsignantia and instrumentaliter exhibentia quod significant, signs
signifying, sealing and instrumentally exhibiting that which they signify. The
symbolicall Rites in Popery, used to effect some supernatural grace, by their
use, were indeed presumptuous and saucy counterfeits of divine Sacraments. But,
that mere signification of a moral duty, should more then participate the
proper nature of a Sacrament, I shall then believe when I shall perceive the
sign of the sun in a shop-window, to partake the nature of the same; or of
Baals Image, made to represent the same. The nature of the Sacraments
consists not simply, in that they do signify, which is common to all
signs; but, in that they signify the Covenant of grace by divine institution,
and seal it to us. Nor do I believe that Joshua pitched a Sacramental sign
in Shechem, though it was to reminde them of the Covenant of God, of which,
Circumcision was the Sacramental sign: I will now content my self only to
oppose this; that this Imagination, that significancy makes a Ceremony to be
evil, does not appear to me to have entered the heart of any learned man, Jew
or Christian, till it was of late taken up against our Ceremonies for a Covert;
for this I am sure of, See in the Archb. Def. page 120. his words.
that the Jews had of their own devising above (as Master Cartwright says)
twenty for one, more then we have of Ecclesiastical significant Ceremonies.
Of the ancient Christian Churches, it is rather to be lamented (as Augustine
in his time did) that they ouerdid, in having so many; then needful to be
proved that all Churches had some such significant Rites. And as for the later
Churches of our Religion, some have more, some as many, some fewer then we;
but all, some. And that the judgment of the Churches in their Confessions, and
of the prime men which have written, is for the allowance of some significant
Ceremonies merely Ecclesiastical, though they think (as I do) the fewer the
better, is manifest. Epist. 8. page 211. Tom. 3. opuscul. 2.14.82.
Only Mr. Beza has a passage which seems to contrary this which I have
said, namely, That all symbolicall Rites ought to be abolished: Contrary to
what we had of Mr. Calvin, that some such are to be allowed, as a profitable
help to the ruder sort of men. But these two learned men differ not save in
show; for Calvin, by symbolicall Rites, means such only as are used to
signify some duty to be done. And Beza means such symbolicall Rites as
were used not merely for signification, but as having some operative virtue in
them, either ex opere operato, upon the very doing of them as the Cross; or by
means of their Consecration by prayers. This to be so, I prove by Beza
himself in his 8. and 12. Epistle; from one whereof this Objection is taken.
For Beza confesses the Aduersus fratrem Baldwinu^ in opuscul. vol. 3. p. 324.
Epist. 12.
Crossing to have been sometimes of (at least) tolerable use; yea, and now,
the Superstition being removed. Kneeling, sometimes a profitable sign Epist.
12. Opusc. Tom. 3. p. 220.
of Godly reverence in receiving the Sacrament. The use of the Epist. 12. pa.
219. and Epist. 8. p. 212.
Surplice, to be ex se, res media, of it self a matter indifferent; yea, and
so the other two. Wherefore, he did not judge mere Signification to have
defiled or tainted them, for then their use had never been allowable or
indifferent. Therefore this exception against our Ceremonies, that they are
significant, was not verily the cause of the quarrel; but the quarrel of this
exception. And now I return, that the Church has Commission to determine of
Ecclesiastical Rites, which in truth shall appear to her upon due
consideration to be of necessary use, whether per se or per accidens, of
themselves or by accident, unto the edification of it self, by Rites used for
Order, and Decency: and when need is, significant. And thus much the very
definition of a Ceremony, V^sin. Catech. impres. Ann. 1621. p. 772.
which Paraeus has, may witness; when, of Church Ceremonies, he says, That
they are external and solemn Actions instituted in the ecclesiastical
Ministry, Ordinis vel Significationis gratia, for order or significations
sake, which he makes, after, two sorts, Divine and Humane. Now I come to your
Questions, which I will answer to in short.

CAP. XVIII. Six Questions about Kneeling answered.
Quest. 1. WHether you allow kneeling to be worship.

Answ. Worship is either Cultus Service, or Adoration or Veneration: kneeling
is a part of external Adoration per se in it self, as is the being
bare-headed; but, not Cultus ex se, service or worship of it self, but per
aliud, with reference to another thing, as it is a sign of true internal
reverence acknowledged to God, and a part of that comeliness which becomes
men in partaking the seals of the Covenant of grace, done to his honor. It is
in it self no more then a Circumstance of worship, like as Fasting is, of
Humiliation and Prayer; in a word, Cultus reductiue non proprie dictus, worship
reductiuely, not properly so called; lawful, not commanded, as before has
been showed.

Object. But, if this be not worship, there is no worship of the body?

I Answer, yes; for the very bodily Action of Eating and Drinking in the
Supper, is, on the Receivers part, Cultus dei externus, external worship of
God, because commanded. So is the bodily speaking in preaching and prayer
publickely. Howbeit I confess, that, of the gestures, there is no bodily
worship, i. e. Cultus Dei ex se, worship in and of themselves: Nor, religious
Adoration, but ex intention, in respect of intention only: For, God has not
differenced Divine and Civil Adoration by gesture; yet is ours, religious, in
this use.

Quest. 2. Whether, if it be; it may be lawful for men to prescribe any thing
of it, to any other action of worship then is warrantable, either by Precept,
or Example.

Answ. That which all men might of themselves lawfully do in the Action of
Gods worship, the Governors of the Church and Magistrate may lawfully require
to be done of them all, i.e. So, as they might lawfully have done it libera
conscientia with a free conscience. Indeed if God had tied it only to some one
ordinance of his, by Precept, neither men, nor Angels might translate it.
Warrant by Example you have before, from the use of Gods people in several
sorts of his worship. And that the Eucharist it self is an Action of divine
worship, who dare deny? But I take no examples to be warrants to us further
then they are warranted by the Word.

Quest. 3. Where the Church has power given to it, to ordain any Ceremony?
Indeed it has power to direct and take care for Decency and Order, 1. Cor.
14.40. But order is no Ceremony, nor Action, but the accommodation of Vbi,
Quando Prius, Posterius, and necessary circumstances to such actions as be
prescribed.

Answ. I have immediately declared the Churches commission out of 1. Cor.
14.26.40. and showed how, for the reason of Order, Decency and Edification,
the Church must needs ordain some Ceremonies. For if at all there be none,
Religion (as touching the solemnity of it) will come to be as some have said
(which Chamier also observes) as it were but a name. Vide Chamier To. 1.
Panstrat. lib. ^. cap. 19. n. 18.
And if such things as need to be done for Order, and Decency be not settled
(as Calvin shows, Just. 4.10.31.) all will be dissolved.

The late devise of circumstances, I have showed before, even the Place for
public worship; and, hour of meeting (which men would have to be nothing
but circumstances, as they are designed to that special use) are Ceremonies,
not qua sunt, sed qua inseruiunt cultui sacro, as they are subseruient to
divine worship. Therefore does Zanchie call them, Ceremonies. And if place and
time, as they fall under such observation, be no Ceremonies, then neither the
Tabernacle nor solemn Feasts were Ceremonies. These were, I confess, Divine,
as commanded; those, are, in their particular determination, Humane; yet,
Ceremonies, in their use and reference to the worship then and there to be done
to God.

Quest. 4. Whether it be any less then Idolatry to annex grace unto any
thing save unto Gods own Ordinances, which our Declaration seems to do,
acknowledging the Ceremonies profitable to Edification, and stirring up of our
dull minds to mind holy duties; unless we say, Edification, and quickening
of the heart be no Graces.

Answ. It is Idolatria interpretatiua, interpretatiue idolatry to ascribe to
any creature (yea, though sanctified by Gods ordinance) the efficiency of
grace, which none can work as a cause thereof, efficiently, but God. But it is
neither idolatry, nor unbeseeming us, to acknowledge any means by which grace
is wrought through the power of God, not wrapped in them, but resident in
himself that freely gives the grace by the right use of them. This we
ascribe to Gods Sacraments, but not to Church ceremonies.

The Declaration, you speak of, only says; that some of our Ceremonies are
apt: it does not say, able to stir up our dull minds; and, not apt to do
that, by any virtue in them, or from God by them to us; but only, as external
objects and occasions whereby our minds work upon themselves; for it is said,
by some notable and special signification.

Chamier shall resolve this, who has these words. Cham de Canone. lib. 9. cap.
20 s. 40. p. 337.
Neque enim vllus sanus asseruit omnia in Scripturis contineri quae momentum
aliquod habent ad fide and pietate animos informandos, sed duntaxat omnia
dogmata fidei and pietatis. Praeter haec autem, plurima sunt, in quibus non est
nullum eiusmodi momentum, nor did ever sound Divine affirm all things to be
contained in Scriptures which have any use at all for information of men's minds
touching faith and piety; but only that all doctrines of faith and piety are
there: But besides these (doctrines) there are very many things which are not
of no moment unto us: Vt multa naturalia, in quibus authorem mundi licet
agnoscere; in Ecclesia, Ritus and Ceremoniae, as many natural things, in which
we may learn to acknowledge the Creator of the world; in the Church Rites and
Ceremonies. Where you see that, as unto Gods creatures, so unto Ecclesiastical
Rite and Ceremonies not contained in the word, he grants some furtherance
to faith and piety not efficienter, as an efficient, but obiectiue, by way of
object. And Calvin requires, that Ceremonies made for decorum, comeliness,
Calv. Inst. 4.10.28.
should be such as breed a veneration of Gods ordinances, to the end that
talibus adminiculis ad pietatem excitemur, by such helps we might be excited
unto piety. At whose words, any man that will, may quarrel as justly, as at
our Declaration. And indeed, all Ceremonies that some way are not apt to edify
us are unprofitable; and yet, the effecting of grace may not be ascribed to
any such.

Quest. 5. I desire to know whether our Ceremonies be not within the compass
of those things that perish with the using (i. e. that leave no grace, or ought
else behind them) which are according to the commandments of men, and if they
be, how we can submit our selves to their bondage, contrary to the Apostles
prescription?

Answ. I take not our Ceremonies to be within the compass of those things,
Col. 2.
of which the Apostle says, they perish in the using (i.e. they come to no
such use or end as is aimed at in them) because those (as Zanchie shows) were
such obseruances as men devised, or used, with an estimation of worshipping God
in them ex se as of themselves, and that the conscience is imbondaged to that
superstition. For that, being down right will worship (when, to Gods own
precept, other things were added by men, as necessary, and binding the
conscience, as Zanchie says) could yield nothing to men but their labor for
their pains. Like as, in Math. 15. In vain they worship me, teaching for
doctrine (i.e. imposing upon the conscience) men's Traditions; as if they could
not be left, without sin. For the tradition was, that to eat with unwashed
hands, defiled a man as much as whoredom.

But in using Rites and Ceremonies prescribed for order, decency and
edification, nor as necessary in themselves at all, nor as any worship of God
per se, by and of themselves, nor as binding the conscience, extra casum
scandali and contemptus, without the case of scandale and contempt, we attain
the end of our observance, which is, the discharge of our duties to our
Governors, the peace of the Church, and our Ministry. And the Church
obtains her end, that the service of God is outwardly so ordered. And if the
ordinances of God be, by men's prejudice, not the more regarded, but rather the
less; or, that they which need not the help of such external Rites, shall
despise them; or, others, through carelesnes or ignorance shall make no use of
any such Monition, as is, by a Ceremony, presented to their remembrance; yet
shall the fruit remain to us, according to that which we have sowed.

Therefore to the second member of this fifth Question (which supposes that
which I will not grant) I need not Answer. But, on the contrary, pray you to
consider, if by the Tradition only of men, without my word of God, we shall
say to our selves, wear not a linen Garment in Gods service, make not the
sign of the Cross in B^ptisme, kneel not when you receive the Communion;
for, if you do, God shall be dishonored and offended with you: for, such and
such good men say so? I now demand, if this be not to imbondage our selves
unto the tradition of men, which say (as it is there) touch not, taste not,
handle not; and so, bind our consciences where God has left them free. Verily,
I cannot see but such fear of God is in vain, because, by, and from the only
precepts of men; and all that is so done, perishes in the using; and though
God in mercy may, and will forgive this sin of their ignorance; yet they can
for this have no reward of God; for, who required this at their hands? Stands
the kingdom of God in such things, or his service? Tom. 4. lib. 15. cap. 14.
s. 16.
I conclude in the words of Chamier, Nam quia noluit spiritus quicquam oneris
imponere Ecclesiae, in rebus quidem indifferentibus, certe qui ijsdem sieve
vsurpandis sieve cauendis legem ponit, because the spirit would not impose any
burden on the Church in things indifferent, certainly he that imposes a Law
touching either the using or shunning of those things: ( i.e. as he has
before interpreted, as binding the conscience) Hune nocesse est per
consequentiam contradicere legibus prius positis, viz. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and Deuteronomy. 12.
Non adds, etc. It must needs be that such an one by consequence does
contradict those laws imposed of God, thou shall not add to, etc.

Quest. 6. I desire to know, whether we may with good Conscience, suffer the
making of Gods Commandments void by our own Traditions, as we do in
pressing these Ceremonies with so much violence, and inflicting such sharp
punishments on the neglect of them, and passing by Adultery and Drunkenness,
etc. as venial sins.

Answ. I take your meaning to be, by the Traditions of men, when you say [by
our own Traditions,] and that you mean [as they, or some do,] when you say [
as we do in pressing them.] For, we that are called only to the
observation, whether Private men or Ministers are pressed, but press them not.
And then I answer 1. That the pressing of lesser duties, more then greater,
caeteris paribus is a sin, which we may not suffer to go without Censure,
or Reproof, when we have opportunity. But that we should resist it by not
observing the lesser duty, because they sin who press it more then a
greater, will not hold. For of those that did so, and are for so doing
reprooved, our Lord says, These greater things ye ought to have done, and not
to have left the other undone. Math. 23.23.

If you object, That tything of Mints and Cumin were duties contained in the
Law, but ours be Ceremonies instituted by men. I grant that difference; but
yet say, that if they be such as have allowance in the Word as lawful, the
observance of them is a duty on our part to be performed for Conscience sake,
though not of the thing for it self, (as in all things commanded of God) yet
for Conscience sake of obedience to our Prince and Governors, whom, in lawful
things God has commanded us to obey. So I take it to be a duty to do this;
though, a greater duty (because immediately commanded) and simply necessary at
all times, to abstain from whoredom and drunkenness etc.

2. I answer, that a lesser fault in it self, may sometimes be justly more
punishable then a greater; as when a greater is confessed, and a lesser
defended; or, when he that has power to inflict grievous penalties in the
lesser case, has not Commission to do so in the greater, which is our Bishops
case, See D Ames his Book of Conscience, pa. 304. s. 6. first Edition.
wherein the fault is in the Laws, not in the Judges. And 3. That a thing
which is in it self the lesser evil, may be for the consequence the greater;
as, stealing of grapes in the Palatinate, is worse then Burglary, or breaking
of an house in the night, though a man steal not to the value of six pence, is
more obnoxious then stealing an herd of cattle with us. Which I speak not to
excuse any man, who willingly does pursue these lighter matters more eagerly
then the more important; but to show, that your rule of greater and lesser,
must be understood cateris paribus, with respect to circumstances, and not
absolutely.

4. I answer, that though it be a sin not to be suffered without reproof, to
press the lighter things more eagerly then the more important; yet does not
that necessarily make void the Commandment of God, but only misplace it. The
making void of Gods command by man's Tradition, is, when men of themselves
appoint something to be done, which may discharge the conscience from the bond
of that which God has commanded. And this was the case of which our Lord
spoke, Mark 7.11.
Thus you make the Commandment of God of none effect; namely, because they
taught, that if a man had once sworn by the Offering, that his father or
mother should have nothing by him. That this oath should free him from the
Conscience of honoring (with my relief) his father or mother.

Indeed if our Ceremonies were so delivered unto us, we ought not to suffer
them, but to reprove the tender of them, and reject the use. Yea if at all they
were delivered by our Church as necessary in themselves, or as proper parts of
the service of God in which we use them; or, not as mere Rites of indifferent
nature, and mooueable at the Churches pleasure, and such as (were it not for
Order, Discipline, and Peace sake in the Church) we might, without any offense
to God, as well leave, as use. For though this Condition, should not make void
any one of the ten commandments as did that of the Jews, yet because it is
contrary to the Law which forbids all addition to it self, that is, as
Chamier says, to bind the Conscience per se, by and of it self, we might not
suffer that impiety to pass without contradiction; nor, by our Conformity
countenance such a superstition.

And as this is true on that hand, so is it on the other, that if any man, how
holy, learned, or good soever, shall deliver this tradition to men (not having
any word of God for himself) You may not wear a Surplice in Gods Service, nor
make the sign of the Cross at Baptism on the child's forehead, nor kneel in
receiving the Lords Supper; for if you do, you shall sin against God, and
dishonor him, and it will one day lie on your Conscience as a sin: I may not
suffer such a superstition without reproof, not yield any practice to the
command or direction of this humane Tradition, for the very same reason. For,
as it is superstition de rebus medijs in vtramque parte^ statuere, in things
indifferent to make peremptory laws on either hand, either that it must of
necessity be so done in obedience to God; or, it must not be so done, for
direct obedience to God, as the only Lord of the Conscience: So it is my
duty, without partiality on either hand, to show my dislike of their contrary
superstitions.

Nor can it be said, that the one side does urge Conformity more eagerly then
the other does Inconformitie. For they urge Inconformitie directly for
Conscience sake to God; and affirm, that it is Ignorance, or an ill Conscience
in any man to use them, or both: whereas the other urge them not at all to be
used for any Conscience sake, or necessity in themselves, but only for
Conscience sake, because they are determined and imposed as matters of Order,
and external government by lawful authority.

Indeed the Church Officers inflict more grievous penalties upon the refusal
of these, as having authority of Law. But the other, at least some of them,
inflict deeper wounds, by casting all men which conform, out of the hearts and
good opinion of all they can, as time-seruers, belly-gods, and what you will
else that naught is. Nor is the Suspension of a Minister (in my conceit) a
smarter stroke then the suspension of the Lords Sacrament from being received,
unless the gesture of sitting or standing may be yielded to them.

I lament the pressure of either side (if it could be helped) with all my
heart, and yet must remember this proverb, Crudelem Medicum intemperans aeger
facit, the intemperance of the Patient, puts the Physician upon an harsh course
of cure. The Lord God of Peace and Mercy, guide our hearts and minds in the way
and study of truth and peace.

CAP. 19. The Objection from Christ's example, answered.
Opp. THe Arguments against Kneeling, taken from Christ's Example,
Table Gesture, Idolatrous introduction, prohibition to fall down before a
consecrated creature, I confess have not moved me much. That which I desire
to be satisfied in concerning this gesture, is, First etc.

Answ. If you had said, these Arguments had not moved you at all. I would of
them have said nothing. But lest they might at all solicit your thoughts, I
will say something of each of them in order.

As for Christ's Example, Vid. Raynold. in Censura de lib. Apochr. praelect. 79.
which Altar Da. allows to be so, p. 74^. and appears true ex Joan. 13.23,
25.
if it bind to that gesture which he used, then it binds to lying along. For
what ever is to be done by pattern, must be cut just to the pattern, or else it
is not done so. For, that Christ did so eat the Passover with his Disciples;
and the Disciples so partake the Communion in that gesture which our Lord non
tam instituit quam retinuit in Coena, not which he instituted, but rather
continued, is by all the learned on that side confessed. Altar Damasc. p. 745.
Mr. Ainsw. Annot. in Exodus 12. Amongst whom this is a rule, that such things as
our Lord then did occasionally, are ( Altar. Damasc. p. 741.) no examples to us
to bind us to the like, and therefore (say they) we are not tied to the
night, or to after supper; or to unleavened bread; or to washing of feet, or to
the sex, or number of Communicants: which is well said. But, say I, Vid.
Tremel. in Math. 26 ex libro Talmudico-Scaliger. in Emendat. temporum lib. 6.
page 534.
that gesture was as occasional as the rest: for it was the custom and
Ecclesiastical Ordinance of the Jews, to eat the Paschall-Feast so, lying
along on beds, in token of the rest which God had now given them in their own
land, which being a profitable Ceremony, our Lord himself observed it, and
continued the use of it in the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, though it was a
gesture used in the Passover; that he might teach us, by his Example, not to
be scrupulous about gestures, but to conform our selves to the lawful
customs of the people of God where we are. So, Christ's Example is for us.

CAP. 20. The objection from a Table Gesture answered.
2. THe Table Gesture urged, does cry down the Argument from Christ's Example.
For if the thing required a Table Gesture, by nature of it self, then must we
not ground it upon any examples, but refer the examples to the Table gesture,
as the ground thereof. Nor was that gesture of discubitus, lying along with the
Jews a common table gesture, but used only at the Sacrifice, or Sacred
Feasts, says Altar Damasc. which is much for us, Altar Dam. page 743.
as intimating that it is comely and convenient in our feasting before the
Lord, even in the gesture of the body, or manner of using it, to show and
witness, that we are not at a common Table; for the Jews used this gesture
freely at their Sacrifice-Feasts, not at their common supper or meals; and
tied themselves to it strictly only in the Paschall Supper, that no other
might then be used, without breach of their Constitutions. This our Lord
followed.

Altar Dam. p^g 7^6.
They which urge this Argument most, confess that it is not fit or lawful to
use all other Formalities of a common table at the Lords Table. And therefore
the use of a common table gesture, urged by some of them so far, as to say to
Receive kneeling is not to receive the Lords Supper, is a most unreasonable
strain full of Faction, and not free of Superstition. For any gesture in case
of necessity, any comely gesture accompanied with manifest signs of
Reverence, is, no doubt, lawful in public; and no one, by any divine Law,
necessary: therefore determinable by the Churches of God, as an indifferent
Rite. Epist. lib. fol. 177.
Does Christ heed us, whether we take it sitting, standing, or kneeling? says
Oecolampadius.

CAP. 21. The Objection from Idolatrous introduction answered.
THe third Argument from Idolatrous Introduction, is a poor one; yea, if it
were granted that Antichrist, even in his height, had brought in this Rite of
kneeling when we receive, for adoration of the Sacrament. For his misapplying
of that gesture to the honor of a creature, as if it were God, cannot make the
use of the like gesture unlawful to us in the worshipping of the true God, who
condemning all bowing before an Idol, has required it to himself in his
external service, though not with determination with what kind of bowing. And
if the Popes abuse of kneeling have made kneeling unlawful, then the Arrians
abuse of sitting at the Lords Supper in neglect of Christ, and to show
themselves as it were his companions, should make sitting (not being instituted
of Christ) to be also unlawful. Yet the Councels of Cracovia, Vdislauia,
Peterborne, and Seadan (cited in the Altar of Damasc. Latin, page 751.) did
not condemn sitting for this abuse of the Arrians, as unlawful to be used in
the Lords Supper, but only dissuade all of their society to use it, leaving
to them as indifferent standing or kneeling. And, till of very late, those
which spoke most against our use of kneeling, were not so rash as to count it
unlawful; but only, for the abuse or peril which might possibly ensue,
Inconvenient. So Beza, so M. Cartwright.

2. But I deny that the gesture of kneeling when we do receive the Communion,
was brought into the Church by Antichrist, i. e. the Bishop of Rome, as is
pretended; or had any Idolatrous introduction, whatsoever may, since the
introduction, have befallen it.

The Adoration of the Sacrament we know to have been brought into the Roman
Church, Lib. 3. Decret. tit. de Celebratione Missae. cap. Sanct. i. e Tit. 41.
cap. ^
after the determination of Transubstantiation. For that Decree was at the
Council of Lateran, 1215. under Innocent. 3. But, Adoration, about the year of
our Lord, 1226. But Honorius did not appoint the Adoration to be used in the
act of receiving, but at the Elevation, when, say they, Christ is offered up as
an heaue-offering by the Priest; or, when it was carried through the streets
to the sick. And to increase the belief of Christ's real presence under the
Species of the Bread, the Feast of Corpus-Christi-day, and Indulgences were
after granted by two other Antichrists succeding Honorius. But none of these
made any Decree for Adoration of the Sacrament, at, and in the very time of
receiving it, but when it was Elevated, or carried abroad to the sick, or in
Pomp.

2. Neither was the Decree of Honorius for Kneeling, to it or before it, but
only for bowing of the body to it reverently. As the Disputer against
Kneeling, and Altar Damascenum do rightly observe. Alt. Damasc. p. 783.
But that Altar Damascenum says, this bowing to it was in sign only of
veneration, such as to Images, not of divine Adoration; that is, without
reason, said and conceived only in favor of his fancied difference of
Veneration and Adoration, made by the very outward signs or gestures. For the
reason of decreeing bowing and not of kneeling to the Sacrament, could not be
because they would not give divine honor to that which they believed to be
God, but because the ancient Decree of not Adoring openly and solemnly on
their knees, no not in prayer on the Lords days, and the Pentecost, would not
permit the gesture of kneeling openly and solemnly to be observed in the
Churches for Adoration of the Sacrament.

So that so long as that Decree for standing in their public service kept any
life in it, there was no decree for Adoration of the Sacrament, by kneeling to
or before it.

Indeed since that time the Church of Rome has changed the gesture of bowing
to that of kneeling: The Priest when he has consecrated each Species, and set
them down upon the Altar, must now by the Canon of the Mass adore the
Sacrament Kneeling. And so all the people must now do at the Elevation, etc.

Thus we confess Kneeling before and to the Hoaste, to have come in by
Antichrist, when midnight was upon the face of the world, and Antichrist in his
height. But we wait for some evidence to prove, first that Antichrist brought
in the Rite or Ceremony of Kneeling in the Act of receiving the Sacrament. And
secondly, that Kneeling so brought in, was intended as any sign of Adoration
of the Sacrament, or Christ as existent under the forms of bread and wine.

Page 788.
Altar Damascenum boldly tells us, that with us, Idem ritus, eodem momento,
eadem forma, eodem actu vsurpatur, quo apud Pontificios, adeo vt externa specie
ne hilum quidem differunt, the same rite, in the same moment of time, in the
same form, in the same act is used, as is among the Pontificians; so that in
respect of outward species or form they differ not at all.

He forgets himself somewhat; for with us, the Bps. or Ministers
communicate Kneeling, See Ordo. Romans apud Bibl. Pat. Col. To. 8. page 390.
colum. 1. liter. B. Edic. Colon. 1618.
as well as the people. But with them, the Pope, when himself performs the
office, receives sitting, as being a type of Christ, the Mass Priests receive
standing reverently, by the Canon of the Mass. The people indeed receive it
Kneeling as we do. But before the gesture of Kneeling can be proved to be of
Idolatrous introduction by Antichrist after the Transubstantiation, as is
urged, three things must be showed. First, that the Rite and gesture of
Kneeling in the Act of receiving, is, and has been in the Church of Rome it
self always Idolatrous, i.e. done, or to be done in Adoration of the visible
Sacrament it self. Secondly, that some Pope did bring it in. And thirdly that,
since the Transubstantiation: in all which, he will be to seek.

For granting that the people do Kneel in receiving, (as did also the
Priest, till such time as the doctrine of Transubstantiation begot the Canon of
his standing, for fear of shedding ought) I deny, that Kneeling in the very
time of Receiving, was ever in the Church of Rome any Rite of, or for Adoration
of the Sacrament it self, or any creature, and therefore not Idolatrous. I
deny not the error of their minds concerning that they received into their
mouths. But I deny, that they ever intended Adoration of the Species, at that
moment of time when they took it in their mouths: But then turned themselves
to God rather, to give him thanks, which was not uncomely.

My reasons are first, because it was never yet enjoined by any Pope that they
should then Kneel. Nor is this gesture of Kneeling any of the Roman Rites,
nor so mentioned by Bellar. de Missa. lib. 2. c. 15. Nor in the Rubricke of the
Masse-booke, which tells us of standing, sitting, knocking, bowing and
kneeling; and when they must be. Nor ever menti^ned by Durandus, or Duranius,
who write of all the Rites and Ceremonies which are of use by any institution
in that Church, or have been. Secondly, because so often as in the Mass,
Adoration to the Sacrament is to be performed by Priest, or people, it is in
plain terms said, let him or them then adore the Sacrament. But it is not
said so at the time and moment of receiving; but on the contrary, when it is
carried to be given to the sick, the direction is, to let him have a sight of
it, that he may first adore it, if he will; which shows that they do not
esteem any sign of reverence to be given for Adoration of the Sacrament when
it is received, but only when it is on purpose looked upon. Thirdly, for that
it is an incongruous thing in their superstition, to Adore a thing which is not
higher then their polles when they adore it, because they cannot be said to
humble themselves to that which is lower then they can cast themselves. And
hence Master Morison tells of one in Sauoy, ^^prauata^ Religionis O^igo, et
incrementu^. Edenburgs. 1594. page 75.
brought in danger of punishment, for doing his reverence to the Host carried
by, out at a window, when he was higher then it, for this was despicere
Sacramenium, to disregard or despise the Sacrament.

I conclude therefore, that it is impossible to prove, that the gesture of
Kneeling at that moment of receiving the Sacrament, was in the very Church of
Rome idolatrously intended to the Sacrament.

And as touching the Introduction thereof by any Pope, I also deny that to be
proved, or probable (if meaning) of kneeling with respect to the Sacrament in
the very moment of receiving it. For there is not to this day, any decree of
any Pope or Council, so much as that it should be taken Kneeling of all the
Communicants, much less for Adoration of the Sacrament it self.

Page 723.
Altar Damascenum alleges out of the Romish Rituall, Postea ad communionem
accedit, incipiens ab ijs qui sunt ad partem Epistolae, sed primo si
sacerdotibs vel alijs ex clero danda est communio ijs ad gradus Altaris genu
flexis tribuatur: vet si commode fieri potest, intra sepimentum Altaris sint a
laicis distincti, sacerdotes vero tum soli communicent. Then he goes to the
Communion, beginning from those who are on the Epistlers side: but first, if
the Communion be to be given to the Priests or others of the Clergy, let it
be administered to them kneeling at the steps of the Altar; or, if it may
conveniently be done, let the Priests be distinguished from the Laics by
being within the railes of the Altar, but then let the Priests communicate
alone. Such another I find alleged by M. Morison Quo supra. page 69.
. And a third I remember in the Order of Salamanca for the Friars. But all
these concern only the Clergy, who coming to receive so near the Altar, are
appointed to do it kneeling on the greeces or steps of the Altar, which is
done in veneration of the Altar, or of that which stands thereupon, and not
for Adoration to the Host when it is put into, their mouths, and is not given
as a rule to all the people whereuer they communicate, or when it is
communicated to them.

But it will be perhaps objected. That the people of all sorts do receive
kneeling in their Churches. I grant it, but I deny that ever it was by any
Pope, since the Transubstantiation, devised or imposed upon them as a Rite or
Ceremony to be observed in receiving. For then, we should surely either find
when, and by whom; or, at least, that it was done, or had not been so before,
which I do not believe that any man can show.

And the reason why there never was any constitution made in the Roman Church
for this gesture, was, as I conceive three fold. 1. Because if they had made,
til of later ages, such a Law, they had openly crossed the ancient Rite and
Canons made against Kneeling on the Lords-dayes and Pentecost, in any their
solemn worship of God. Therefore they rather liked to wink at the closer
breach of that Canon, by such as out of private devotion should kneel, when
their turn came to receive, on those days of Station, then to cross that by
another Canon expressly. Secondly, because they found all men but of a general
devotion and desire of honoring God in that Action, of themselves to kneel,
they did not find any need, to require that to be done, which was universally
done of the people, by an ancient Custom. And thirdly, because this which had
been observed of old times, before their new conceit of a Real presence,
seemed to give better testimony to that conceit, then if the Ceremony had been
by themselves instituted. And indeed this we find, that when the doctrine of
Reall-presence by Consubstantiation, began to get head, which was above 100
years before the Transubstantiation, the Patrons of that error did plead the
Adoration, which had been generally observed in the use of the Supper before
that (but with intendment of the same to Christ the Son of God, as sitting in
heaven, and not as existent in or with the bread) to prove the Real presence
thereby. For In tertiam partem Thomae Tom. 3. page 781.
Suarez says, as the Real presence proves the Adoration a priori, so the
Adoration proves the real presence a posteriori.

Thus Alger. de Sacram. Altaris. lib. 2. c 3.
Algerus, who lived above a hundred years before the Transubstantiation, or
voydance of the substance of bread was resolved of; but yet, when a Real
presence of Christ's body, in, and with the bread was apprehended; urges his
matter, saying, Cassa est veneranda sedulitas Adorantium and venerantium, etc.
the venerable sedulity of such as adore and worship is in vain, if Christ be
not there: And after, we Adore the Sacrament it self, Sacramentum ipsum
adoramus tanquam diuinum quiddam, as a divine thing, and speak to it as to a
living and intelligent thing. O lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, etc. Quia non quod videtur, sed quod vere est, Christum ibi esse
credimus, because we believe Christ to be there, not in show, but in truth.
Wherein, howeuer he do pervert the customary fashion of the Church in
receiving this Sacrament Adorantes adoring it, referring it to the Sacrament it
self; and misinterpret those words of the Canon, O lamb of God, etc. which
were intended to Christ himself in heaven, W. Strabo in Bibl. patr. Colon. To.
9. p 961. i. e. cap. 23. de rebus Ecclesiasticis, etc. Florus, a Minister who
lived ann. 860. in his Exposition of the Mass, Bibl. Colon. To. 9. page 304.
and not as locally in the Sacrament, (as Strabo shows) used in the time of
the breaking of the bread for the Communicants; yet thus much is manifest, that
before his time the Church, as he speaks, generally did use Adoration of
Christ himself in celebrating those mysteries. And in his time, and after,
before the Transubstantiation, they did Adore Christ as coexistent with the
bread, which perhaps gave occasion to Auerrois (who lived eighty years before
Honorius) to say that Christians did adore their God, and then eat him. For,
at that time, the error of Consubstantiation had gotten strength, and they did
as it were confine the local presence of Christ to the bread once sanctified,
at least in the Sacramental use of it, and did perform divine honor to the
Son of God as being therein. Not yet intending to adore that which was seen,
but that which was taken to be therein (vt contentum in continente) ineffably
there, yet ( ibi) there. The difference betwixt these and the former ages was,
in this, That the former Ages did, in receiving the Sacrament, Adoring, as Aug.
said, not that which is seen and perishes, but that which is believed, etc.
adore Christ as therein mystically, as the signified thing is in the Sign,
without any opinion of Christ's bodily presence in the creatures themselves, or
of alteration made in the substance, nature or form of the creatures; whereas,
that Age dreamed of a Consubstantiation, The following, did embrace that
monster of Transubstantiation; and then, when all the substance of the visible
creature was held to be gone, they did easily turn and entend the Adoration to
the visible things, as if there had been now no substance of any creature left
therein, but only the appearances of familiar creatures, under which, Christ
himself was substantially; but invisible.

That there was this difference, the writings of the several Ages will
manifest to any diligent Reader; and among other things, this cause (which is
kept, I confess, still; though stripped of the sense it had) that, in
celebrating or consecrating, the prayer was not made, that the Bread and Wine
might be made the body and blood of Christ in themselves, as is now fansied;
but, Vt nobis accipientibus fiant corpus and sanguis Domini, to us receiving of
them they may become the body and blood of the Lord. Intimating that the Real
presence of Christ (in a spiritual manner) is not effected in the visible
signs; but, in and unto the faithful Receiver of them. And that all the
conversion and changing of the Bread and Wine was only in their use, in that
they were mystically, and in type, the body and blood of Christ, as the Arc
was Jehovah, as the Rock was Christ, 1. Corinthians, 10.

The Adoration therefore of Christ in the use of the Sacrament, has always
been in the Christian Church; First, without any reference of divine honor to
the visible things themselves as being really turned into Christ, or containing
him within themselves. Afterward, from the prevailing of Guilmund and other
against Berengarine, and the truth, for a real presence of Christ's conjoined
with the bread, they directed their Adoration to the creatures; but, not for
the creatures or Elements sakes, but for Christ's sake. At last came in the
Adoration of the Sacrament or visible element of bread it self, as having no
substance or material subsistence, but only the natural Body of Christ by
virtue of Consecration, and by Concomitance wholly Christ, who is God to be
adored for ever. In the first times and second, the adoration was only in the
use. For out of the Sacramental use they did not believe such a Real
presence: but, after the abomination of Transubstantiation once got the field,
because there was then nothing of the creature supposed to be left, but the
Accidents; and those, as Bellar. himself speaks, united to the person of the
Son of God. Then followed, that wheresoever that appeared, Divine honor was
held fit to be done thereto, as unto the very Son of God incarnate, and
certainly existent under those Species of Bread and Wine, as ever he was on
the Cross, or in the womb of his mother; only (for fear of frighting us)
he is pleased to be there invisible, and as after the manner of a Spirit, but
yet in his very true natural body, the same that was crucified, say they. This
most abominable Idolatry followed indeed the Transubstantiation. But the two
other sorts of Adoration of Christ in the use of the Sacrament went before
this. The middle also was Idolatrous, not in obiecto, in the object, as the
last, but interpretatiue, because they conceived very Christ to be coexistent,
then, with the sanctified Creatures; and as so, adored him, but not the visible
creatures. The first Adoring was undoubtedly lawful, when the sanctified
creatures were understood to be the Body and Blood of Christ, not in rei
veritate, as being changed the one into the other, or one coexistent with the
other, but in significante mysterio, in a signifying mystery, as August.
spoke, made the Body and Blood of Christ, not by any alteration of their
substance, form, and nature, as Theodoret; but only by their Institution and
Deputation to that use: and therefore were not the very Body and Blood of
Christ, nor did exhibit the same (as was after dreamed) to the mouth and body
of every Receiver of them, but only to the soul of the true believers, who
received spiritually and by faith, rem sacramenti, the thing signified by the
outward elements. For all that while, the adoration or divine worship was
directed only to Christ as sitting at the right hand of God in heaven, and that
in the act of Communicating.

Hence the 1. Nicene Council exhorts, that men should not be humiliter
intenti, humbly intent to the things before them, but look up higher. Hence
came into the Lyturgie, Sursum corda, lift up your hearts. Hence many plain
speeches of Saint August. Chrysostom. and others, that the Receivers must, as
Eagles, mount up to heaven, and take hold of Chirst there: Prepare mentem non
ventrem, fidem non dentes, their heart, not their stomach; faith, not their
teeth to receive Christ himself, and feed upon him.

That Adoration preceded Transubstantiation, Ann. 1130. lib de Canonii
observantia proposit: 23. prope finem. Tom 11. Bibl. Pat. Colon page 460. D.
Col. 1.
which was defined at the fourth Lateran Council, Ann. 1215 I show. In the 11
Centurie we have in Radulpho Decano Tungrensi, the manner of receiving the
Sacrament set forth in these words: Inclinatus autem dicit antequam communicet,
Domine Jesus Christ qui voluntate patris cooperante Spiritu sancto, per mortem
propriam mundum viuificasti, libera me per hoc sacro-sanctum corpus and
sanguine^ tuum ab omnibus iniquitatibus and malis meis, etc. Cum distribuit,
dicit, Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi proficiet tibi in vitam aeteruam,
Amen. The Priest bowing himself before he communicates, says thus: O Lord
Jesus Christ who by the will of the Father, and the consecration of the holy
Ghost have quickened the world through thine own death, deliver me by this thy
most holy body, and blood from all mine iniquities and evils whatsoever, etc
And when he distributeth the Eucharist unto others, he says, The body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be available to thee unto eternal life.

Anno 1090. Extat. in Bibl Pat. To 11. page 383. lit. B. col. 1. about the
year of our Lord, 1090
In Micrologo de Ecclesiasticis obseruationibus, cap. XVIII. these words,
Orationem quam inclinati dicimus antequam communicemus, non ex ordine sed ex
religiosorum traditione habemus, scil. hanc: Domine Jesus Christ qui ex
voluntate patris. Item and illud, Corpus and sanguis Domini Jesus Christi quod
dicimus cum alijs Eucharistiam distribuimus. Sunt and aliae multae precationes,
quas quidem ad pacem and communionem priuatam frequentant: sed diligentiores
antiquarum traditionum obseruatores, nos in huiusmodi priuatis orationibus
breuitati stucere docuerunt, potiusque publicis precibus in officio Missae
occupaeri. That prayer which, bowing our selves, we use to say before we
communicate, we have not by any order, but by tradition of religious men: to
wit, this, O Lord Jesus Christ who by the will of the Father. And this also,
The body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, which we say when we distribute
the Eucharist. There are also many other prayers which indeed men use at giving
the Pax and private communion: but such as are more diligent obseruers of the
more ancient traditions, have taught us to study breuity in such private
prayers, and to be rather busied in the public prayers in the office of the
Mass.

These two witnesses, and especially the elder of them, Micrologus, who dyed
above a hundred years before Transubstantiation was defined, tell us these
things. First, that beside the public solemn prayers, they had sundry
private. Secondly, that they had a prayer which the Minister used to say
Inclinatus, bowing himself immediately before he received, and another for
each Communicant, the same which we have. Thirdly, that those prayers were not
ab aliquo ordine, by any appointment, but of the Tradition of devout men. These
testimonies do prove that they received with Adoration, whether Inclinati
bowing themselves in their bodies, or on their knees.

For men never knew till now (if any be so blind to believe it) that kneeling
is any more a gesture of Adoration then bowing, Inclinate capita Deo, bow your
heads to God, in Chrysostomes Leiturgy was taken to be a posture of Divine
Adoration, and not only Kneeling. Vasquez de Adoratione lib. cap. 4. number. 36.
Welfare Vasquez yet, The external tokens of Adoration, are bowing down of
the body, bending the knee, prostration, knocking of the breast, folding of the
hands, baring the head, censing, kissing, setting up lights, etc.

But Inclinatus may agree to Kneeling, or to bowing down; Vide Synod. Turon.
Can. 37.
And like enough; that on the Station days, Lords days and Pentecost, they
did rather bow, then kneel; I mean, the public Ministers; and kneeled on
all other days when they were by Canon bound to pray Kneeling. In which days
they also did communicate, and therefore must needs be understood to receive
it Kneeling; for when it was delivered, that prayer was said, The body of our
Lord, etc.

Yea it is said by Amalarius, Anno. 800. Amalar. de Ordine Antiphonarii cap.
52. apud Bibl. Patr. Colon. Tom. 9. part. 1. page 411.
who lived eight hundred year before Berengarius his time, and therefore
before the decree for Consubstantiation or Real presence in, or with the
Bread, That according to the Order of the Roman Church, in the end of the
Psalms they used to say a versicle before the prayer, Quam solemus facere genu
flectendo sieve vultum declinando in terram, which we are used to make
kneeling, or casting down our face toward the earth, whereby is manifest that
at some prayers even in Easter week (for of that he speaks) they did use
indifferently bowing down of the head, or kneeling: and therefore did
understand the bowing to be as much a sign of Adoration, as kneeling, and
that we may as reasonably say Inclinati kneeling, as it may be said bowing,
or bowed down.

The story of Plegilis reported by Rabanus Maurus (which is botchingly peeced
to Paschasius his book, Anno. 830.
de corp. and sang. Domini, cap. 41.) Though the thing reported be like to be
a fable, or else was a delusion of Satan to help on the doctrine of the Real
presence, which was then in brewing; yet so much of it as serves our turn may
be well alleged; Namely, when it is said, that when he was in celebrating
the Communion he pro more procumbebat, according to custom felt on his knees,
which shows plainly that after the consecration, and before the receiving,
the manner was that the Priest fell on his knees. For else would not Rabanus
have said, pro more procumbebat.

These witnesses may (I think) serve to assure us, that at that time, when the
Real presence was come into dispute; and after that, till the way of
Transubstantiation was defined, They did use to communicate with Adoration. And
yet it cannot be showed that any Bishop of Rome did appoint it so to be.

CAP. XXII. That in the most ancient times, before corruption of the doctrine
of the Sacrament began, the Sacrament was received with adoring Gesture.
NOw, for the more ancient times, in which the doctrine of the Sacrament was
the same which ours now is, (as Orthodoxus Consensus most largely, and
Duplessis de Missa and others do manifest:) I say with that learned Treatise
Dialacticon Eucharistiae confidently, that the Fathers did receive the
Sacrament Adoring; Adoring, not the Sacrament but Christ; and to show this, I
will begin as high as I can, and come downe-wards.

Tertullian de oratione, Cap. 14.
after Reproof of other abuses about prayer, comes at length to say,
Similiter de stationum diebus, non putant plerique sacrificiorum orationibus
interueniendum, quod statio soluendo sit accepto corpore Domini. Ergo, deuotum
Deo obsequium Eucharistia resoluit, an magis Deo obligat? nonne solennior erit
statio tua, si and ad aram Dei steteris? Accepto corpore Domini and reseruato
vtrumque salvum est, and participatio sacrificij and executio officij. Si
statio de militari exemplo nomen accipit (nam and militia dei sumus) vtique
nulla laetitia, sieve (not as it is printed, sine) tristitia obueniens castris
stationes militum rescindit. Nam laetitia libentius, tristitia solicitius
administrat disciplinam. Likewise on the days of Station most men think they
should not be present, at the prayers of the Sacrifice, because the body of our
Lord being taken the Station is to be dissolved. Does then the Eucharist
dissolve the observance devoted to God, or rather more oblige unto God? Shall
not thy station be more solemn, if thou shall stand even at the Altar of God?
The body of our Lord being taken and reserved, each is safe, both the
participation of the Sacrifice, and the performance of that observance ( viz.
of standing in prayer.) If station take the name from the pattern of soldiers
(for we are Gods soldiery) verily neither joy or sorrow happening to the
camp, dissolues the stations of Soldiers, for joy observes discipline more
cheerfully, sorrow more carefully.

The place is dark, and must be opened, before we can make use of that
Testimony, wherefore first we must know, what the days of station do mean.
De la Cerda, the Jesuit upon this place, number. 143. and 151.152. Bell lib. 2.
de bon. oper. cap. 22. aliique.
Some take them to be their set days of Fasting. But that cannot be. For
Tertullian himself does difference them one from another, lib. 2. c. 4. ad
vxorem, where showing the mischief and hindrances which a woman shall have by
taking an Infidel to be her husband (as some then did in their second
marriages) he says, Vt si statio facienda sit, Maritus de die conducat ad
Balneas: Si ieiunia obseruanda sunt, Maritus eadem die conuiuiun exerceat, etc.
Where Ieiunia is not put as an explication of Statio, as if they signified one
and the same thing: nor is statio put for the Vigils in the times of their
fastings, as de la Cerda on that place, and Bell. lib. 2. de bon.operib. cap.
22. would have it: for those Vigils (as the same Cerda and Bellarmine there
confess) were only de nocte of the night, not of the day; whereas Tertullian
speaks expressly of station as an act proper to the day time, saying: if a
station be to be performed, the husband may that same day lead her to the
Bathes; if fastings be to be observed, the husband may the same day hold a
feast. That Gloss therefore of the Jesuits is but a dream. It remains then,
that Station is used in a proper not figurative sense, to note some solemn act
performed in the day time: and that Statio and Jeiunia are put for different
things and the station is let by carrying her that day to the Bathes; Fasts,
by her husbands appointing of a Feast that day. Besides fasting could not be
absolutely hindered by going to the Bathes: nor Vigils at all, by holding a
feast in the day, if the Vigils were held only in the nights. Stationum dies,
therefore were those days wherein (by a Tradition universally received) they
stood in prayer, and at all the solemn worship of God: of which Tertullian
says, Tertull de Coron. Milit cap. 3. Edit. Paris. ^an. 1674.
Diebus dominicis iciunare nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare, we hold it
an heinous thing to fast on the Lords days; or, to adore on our knees: Eadem
immunitate a die Paschae ad Pentechostem vsque gaudemus, This immunity we
enjoy from Easter until Pentecost. This Ceremony of standing on those days,
and of not fasting on those days, served to express their belief and joyful
remembrance of our Lords Resurrection from the dead. This is that which
Tertullian calls, deuotum Deo obsequium, a devout duty (or service) unto
God. And that Tertull. in this place, by Station, where he says, quod statio
soluenda sit; means the very posture or gesture of standing, in the place
alleged; appears yet further in the words themselves, when he says, Nonne
statio tua solennior crit, si and ad aram Dei steteris? shall not thy station
be the more solemn; if thou stand at the Altar?

The Communion Table then is, after the phrase of that time, called the Altar.
The Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, the Sacrifices. The prayers used in
that action, about the blessing or consecration of Bread and Wine to that use,
the prayers of the Sacrifices. All which, by the word [ Eucharistia] there
used, as it were expositiuely, are manifest. Wherefore there can be no other
meaning of Tertullians words alleged, but this: That on those days on which
the solemn worship of God, was (by a Tradition called Apostolical) performed
standing and not kneeling; Many men, or most men [ plerique] withdrew
themselves, when they came to the celebration of the Supper, because the body
of our Lord, that is, the Sacramental bread, being taken of the Ministers
hand, The station, i. e. standing must be dissolved, or left. And because
standing on those days might not be left (as they thought) therefore they
rather left the Sacrament on those days, then they would break the rule of
standing on those days. Therefore they forbore: which can have no reason but
this, that taking the holy things at the Table standing; yet they used not to
partake them, [ i. e. eat the bread or drink the wine] in any other gesture,
then what was on the station days then forbidden, Kneeling.

And it is to be marked that he does not say, Anno 200.
accepto corpore Domini statio solvitur; but soluenda sit, i. e. when, after
the taking of it ( Tertul. de corona Milit. c. 3. Nec de alioru^ manu quam
praesidentium sumimus. Edit. Par. 1624. In Tertull. adorare is Orare lib. de
Oratione: and the 1. Council of Nice restrains it only to prayer. Canon 20.
iuxta Binii Edit. 1618.
as was then the manner) of the Ministers hands, they came to receive it into
their bodies.

If the gesture then used, had been standing, this scruple could not have come
into their minds: no, nor if it had been sitting, for that, was not forbidden
in all the solemn service of God on those days, but used, as appears in
Justin Martyr, in hearing the word of God read and preached. Only kneeling was
then restrained, and that (say some) not only in prayer, but in all the divine
service; Tertullian says not, de geniculis orate, pray kneeling, but Adorate
adore, as Altar Damascenum observes: The people therefore, not daring to
kneel, on those standing days, and not liking to receive the mysteries in any
other gesture, then that of Kneeling, whereby they might better show their
discerning of the Lords body, in the most humble gesture when they partaked the
mysteries; chose on these days, on which they might not Kneel, to forbear
the Sacrament, and to take it on other days, when they might kneel in
receiving it.

That it was thus, the Remedies which Tertullian propounds, do make yet more
clear. For he, to persuade them not to absent themselves from the Sacrifice
prayers made at the Altar (i e. the Communion Table) because of that; First
tells them, that their standing shall not be taken away, but made solennior,
more remarkable, if they shall stand at the Altar, and therefore they might come
to those prayers as well as to others, and stand in them at the Altar, yea, and
take the Lords body, i.e. as he Tertull adversus Marci. lib. 4. cap. 40.
elsewhere expounds himself, the figure of his body, the bread; and not,
assumere, not eat it at that time, but reserve it and carry it away with them,
and eat it at home in private, where they might receive it Kneeling. which in
the public assembly they might not then do, in the Station days. This he
says, accepto igitur corpore Domini and reseruato, vtrumque saluum est, and
participatio sacrificij and executio officij. both are by this devise provided
for, both the partaking of the Sacrifice, i.e. the Sacrament of Christ's
sacrifice; and the performance of that duty of not kneeling in the public
worship of God, on those days of Station.

And that they might see he had no meaning to dissolve the station, or
standing, he adds, that if the name be taken from Military fashion, (as we
are Christ's Soldiers) then the standing must be observed, because Soldiers
never left their stations, for any joy of good, or sorrow of ill success: but
still they kept their station, more chearefully if things went well, and more
carefully, if ill. Nam laetitia libentius, tristitia solicitius administrabit
disciplinum.

In sum, the people would not come to take the Sacrament, when they might not
kneel in the Act of receiving or pertaking it, and therefore forbore to come
unto the Communion Table, and prayer on those Station days. Tertullian wishes
them to come, though they might not then kneel, and to take the Bread in
public standing at the Table, and reserve and carry it away with them, and
receive it at their own houses, as they desired, kneeling. Thus should the
Eucharist be received, and the tradition of standing on those days in the
public worship of God, be also observed.

I allow not the devise, but only relate it: and out of it, do (in my
conscience) observe, that the Christians then did, and before had used,
assumere adorantes, to take it adoring, Anno 230. Origin Hom. on Diversos. Vide
Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. in 2. Domin. post. Epiphan. alleged in the Tract of
kneeling, p. 195. by Ro^hester.
in reverence, not to the visible signs, but the internal grace.

And this agrees well with that advise of Origin, given to every man, that
when the Lord comes to him in the Sacrament, he, humbling himself should
say as did the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter into
my mouth: which words have, (if not since that time, as Durantus affirms, yet)
for many ages, been used by the Communicants immediately before the receiving;
or some other such like prayer, to which the Communicant said, Amen.

Now, that from that time of Tertullian, it was a common fashion to take (i.e.
accipere) the holy mysteries in the public assembles on the Lords days and
Pentecost, and to carry them away, and use them privately in their own houses,
or elsewhere every day, ante omnem cibum, fasting, as Tertullian speaks; or
when they would, is manifest (if, Tertul. ad vxorem. Cyprian. Heironym.
any thing) in Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierome, and others. And, that they did in
private, receive the same kneeling, or prostrate, and that with the approbation
of the then Pastors, appears in the example of Gorgonia, and the applause of
that famous Bishop who reports it, Greg. Nazian. who tells, Anno 380. Greg.
Nazian. Orat. in laude^ Gorgoniae. Edit. Paris. 1609.
how for recovery from her sickness and pain, after all other helps in vain
used, she went to the Church and Altar in the night, and there prostate with
faith before the Altar, etc. And having laid her head to the Altar, with like
(that is, as is before expressed, with a great) cry and tears wherewith she
abounded, (like to that woman who of old washed the feet of Christ) and
professed that she would not part thence, till she had obtained cure, and
afterward had with this her medicine, (that is, of her tears, as Elias
Cretensis expounds it) rinsed her whole body and that if her hand had any where
hid (or laid up, (...) any part (...), of the signs of (Christ's) precious body
and blood, she had mingled it with her tears (O admirable thing!) (she
presently felt her self cured of her disease, etc. Which place I urge not,
conceauing that at that time she did receive those holy mysteries from the
hand of any Minister then administering the same unto her, it being in the night
season when she is said thus to have done; but that she (in case she had any
where reserved any part of the mysteries formerly administered to her, and
intended now privately to have eaten and drunk the same in the night) could
not but have mingled them with her tears: and thence to show, (as Billius also
notes upon the place) the ancient custom of those times to have been this:
viz. to reserve the Sacrament, and to eat it privately, as (says the same
Billius) Tertull. lib. 2. ad vxorem testifies. For, would Greg. Nazianzen have
supposed her to have lyd up any of those signs or Christ's body and blood, to
have made use of them at such a time when she was privately prostrate, and
praying with tears at the Altar, if such a thing had not then been in use?

This reservation might possibly be begun before, by reason of persecution;
or, for that reason the rather continued. But I conceive, the either first or
most prevailing occasion was this, that on the Lords days they might not
receive it kneeling, and their devotion and ignorance together was such, that
they held it not fit assumere, to take it, but kneeling or prostrate; not
adoring that which was seen, as Augustine says; and therefore not the Bread
or species of Bread, but that which was not seen.

This abuse of Reservation was after marked in the church, and thereupon all
men condemned as accursed, who should accipere, and not sumere, take it in the
Church, but not at all partake it. 1. Council of Toledo. And, by the Caesar
Augustan Council, all men denounced accursed, that should take it, and not
receive ( assumere) it ( in Ecclesia) in their Church or place of their holy
meetings.

The ancient Rite of not kneeling in their solemn or public prayers or
worship on the Lords days, or betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, still continued,
often renewed by sundry Synods, and was in a manner vnniuersally observed. The
people therefore that might not still carry the holy things out of the Church
as they had used, but must partake them there, were permitted, rather then
appointed to kneel, when they did sumere, and use some private prayers: only
at the public prayers they stood. And the Ministers, though on those days
they might not kneel at the consecration Prayers, (I mean about the Sacrament)
yet they performed them inclinati, bowing their faces toward the ground. And
the common people after they had taken the sacred things at the Altar or
Communion Table, or otherwise, standing, betook themselves to their private
devotions, first on their knees, and so received the Sacrament kneeling in
their own places, till that afterward it was carried to them where they were;
as, in the Church of Rome was the manner, at least, Ann. 800. See Ordo. Romans

That this is true, Sozomen. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 5. who lived, Ann. 430.
appears in Sozomens History of that woman, who being tainted with the
error of Macedonius, yet to give her husband content, (who threatened to leave
her if she would not receive the Sacrament in Chrysostomes, the orthodox
Church) went thither, having provided her self of some other bread from home;
This woman therefore takes the sacramental Bread of the Pastors hand, and
then kneeling down as if it had been to prayer (says Sozomen) convayed that
away, and put her own bread into her mouth, which, when she would have chewed,
was turned into a stone: By astonishment whereof, she discovered to
Chrysostom all the matter. Let him that will and dare, censure the matter;
namely, that there was no such miracle done; yet, that Sozomen has so related
it, no man can deny. And thence must needs appear, that the manner of
Communicants was so to do, seeing she that desired to be thought to
Communicate, did so no doubt, as others used to do, outwardly, in
Communicating. Chrysostom. Hom. 61. ad popul. Antioch.
And this agrees with Chrysostomes words, Adora and Communica, Adore and
Communicate. Nor can this of Chrysostom be put off, by the ambiguous and
different meaning of the word Adore, as if it might (perhaps) only mean
internal adoration, which all men confess to be necessary in that action.
For, Chrysostom shows of what kind of Adoration he speaks usually in
this matter, namely, of External.

For in his seventh Homily on Matthew, Anno. 400.
he exhorts (by the example of the Magi, or Wise men which came out of their
own country) to Adore, i.e. externally to come to the house of Bread. -- But,
to adore and honor the Son of God: warns men, that they counterfeit not as
Herod, who said he would come to adore, but meant to kill: and says, that
such like are they which having Mammon in their hearts, do abuse unworthily
the Communion of the mystery: -- who seem to adore, but as much as in them is,
kill him whom they feign themselves to adore. -- He concludes, (...).
Timeamus igitur, Let us fear therefore, lest when we carry the show of
suppliants and adorers, we be indeed enemies. Let us then when we are about to
adore, cast all things from us etc. In which passage he pl^in^ly requires so
the outward adoration, as it should not be separated from the inward; and
shows, that adoration, which even Hypocrites might perform, must needs be
only external, and in the fashion (as he says) of Suppliants.

The same Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10. exhorting (as he does in his
seventh Hom. on Math.) by the example of the Magi, to come humbly to worship
Christ, pleads that they have more reason to honor his Body which is set
before them on the Altar. For, that which is worthy of highest honor (says
he) I will show thee on earth. For, as in the Court of Kings, not the walls,
nor the golden roof, but the Body of the King sitting in his throne is the
chiefest of all: So, in the heavens is that kingly body, which now on earth is
set before thee to be seen, etc. In which passage it is plain, that he
calls for such Adoration, as the Magi performed to Christ lying in the
cratch; not, because he thought the very natural body of Christ to be locally
there upon the Altar, which he, even there, affirms to be enthronized in the
highest Heavens: But because the Bread is the very body of Christ in a mystery
only; for he could not else say, It is to be seen on the Altar-table. Nor
was this Adoration which he calls for, intended terminatiue, to determine in
the Sacramental bread, or the species which appeared; or, in Christ as
contained therein; but only before the same, and by occasion thereof unto
Christ himself sitting in glory as M. Perkins well says. Perk Works Ann.
1609. Vol. ^ p. 642.

Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 9.


For, as Augustine says, He that adoreth a profitable sign which God has
commanded, (mark well, that this makes no room for Images which God has not
commanded) and understands the signification, does not adore that which is
seen, and perishes, The baptized that were of ^eeres did adore (when they
were baptized) not Baptism, but Christ.
but rather that unto which all such things are to be referred, of which he
after gives instance in Baptism, and the Lords Supper. This will not hold in
images, nor profit them who adore Christ as contained, and existent in the
place, where had been the substance of Bread and Wine, (as they say) indeed,
is still; Jewel Artic.
Defense pa. ^^9. Edit. pr^^^.
any more then for adoration of water in Baptism. The Sacraments (says Bishop
Jewel) in that sort, i. e. in respect of that which they signify, and not in
respect of that which they are in themselves, are the flesh of Christ and are
so understood, and believed, and adored; but the whole honor rests not in
them, but is passed over from them to the things which be signified.

His meaning is, that no more is, or may be done, respectively to the
Sacrament, then that which we call Veneration; that, which in strict sense, we
call Adoration or divine worship, reserved to God; of which two, the difference
(as I have showed) cannot always, nor needs to be showed, in, or by the
outward gesture, but is only in the distinction, and intention of the mind. 1
Chro. 29.20.
The people worshipped (says the Text) God and the King. Where the outward
adoration was one, as the word by which it is expressed, is but one; but the
Religious and Civil, were distinct in the mind, intention and reason of
either.

Well says Doctor Ames, D. Ames Antibell. Tom. 3. disp. 37. art. 23.
That veneration or reverence is due to the Sacrament it self as Gods
Ordinance, And that Christ is to be adored in the use of it, though not as
enclosed in the Bread and Wine, or existent in the place of their substance.
This digression is to clear Chrysostomes, and the other Ancient Fathers
meanings. Now, return we to the History.

CAP. 23. The same showed to be the practice of the Church, in the time of
Theodoret, Saint Augustine, and Cyril.
THeodoret, Dial. 2. has this passage: Anno 430.2^. Coccius.
Neque enim, etc. For neither after the Consecration do these mystical signs
depart from their proper nature, for they remain in their former substance,
figure, and kind or species, and therefore are they both seen and felt as
before. And yet are they understood to be that which they are made, and are
believed and adored, as being the very things which they are believed to be.
This testimony shows plainly, that Theodoret believed neither
Transubstantiation, nor Consubstantiation. Not Transubstantiation, for he
denies any change to be made by Consecration, either in the substance, for me
or species: nor Consubstantiation, for he says not, that in, or with those
mystical signs is that which is believed and adored; but that the signs
themselves ar^ understood to be that which is believed and adored, id est, to
be that in a Myste^ie: ^or else how said our Lord, This is my body? How Paul,
The rock was Christ? And yet Theodoret plainly shows, that these; not,
Elements, but signs, i. e. Sacraments of Bread and Wine sanctified by the will
of Christ to that use, are believed and adored; not meaning, that the adoration
should at all rest in the visible things, in which no real change was made,
but was referred to what they are, in their signification and use, the body and
blood of Christ, inseparably knit to the person of the Son of God, or Deity
in that Person.

(...) adversus ^^^^um. ^ialecticon ^^thar.
Thus was God worshipped in the Bush, as Lyra says; and in the Arc, as that
learned man, forenamed; and it appears, Psalm. 95.6 to be so. Thus David's
dancing before the Arc, was, before the Lord, 2. Sam. 6.

^^g de Cate^hisan^^s ru^ibus. cap. 3.
The signs (says Augustine) are visible things, but invisble things are
adored in them. He says, that invisible things which are in them are adored,
not as if he had once dreamed of Christ's being ( ibi) there contained in, or
under the species (for he often professes, that Christ's natural body, where
it is, is visible, and occupies a place, or else could not be a body; and is
now, and shall be only in heaven, till he come to Judgment) but that the
Adoration is intended not at all to the Signs themselves, as they are visible
things; but to Christ himself, which is not seen; who is in the Signs only,
ut signatum in sign, by virtue of a Sacramental Relation, not by any Local
inexsistence.

The same Theodoret, in Dialog. 3. reasons from the Adoration done outwardly
to the Sacrament (though in Relation to Christ) thereby to prove that the flesh
of Christ it self, being the flesh of the Son of God, is to be Adored,
saying; How is the Architype it self base or contemptible, whose type is to be
Adored and reverenced? Where, first it is manifest that he esteems and
calls the Sacrament but a type of the body and blood of Christ, which is the
Archtype. and therefore favors not any real Carnal presence, but excludes
that: And yet, seeing, from the Adoration done to the type in reference to
Christ the Archtype, he so disputes; he plainly shows, that it was usual
and known to all men then, that such external Adoration or veneration, was
performed in the celebration of the mysteries unto them as types, to be passed
over (as Jewel speaks) to the Archtype, and not to rest in them. And he
that will interpret this Adoration to have been only internal or mental,
must conclude, that to the very person of Christ, no external Adoration must
be given. For how else will Theodorets Argument stand good?

That this was not alone in some places; Anno 400.
or in the Eastern Churches, but in many or all; and in the West also take we
the Testimonies of Saint Ambrose and S. Augustine. They both, led with the
Latin Translation, Psalm 94 6. Adorate scabellum eius, in stead of ad
scabellum; reading [ worship his foot-stoole] for [ worship at his foot-state]
are troubled to think how that speech could be right, when it was not lawful
to Adore any creature. And think you, these mea^t to Adore the consecrated
Elements as if they were no creatures? verily no, for Ambrose says, that they
remain the same that they were, and yet are turned to another thing: that is,
in use, and mystery an other thing; but in their substance, still the same
creatures. Upon this, Ambrose first, and Aug. after him; and many others, after
them, enquire what that same footstool (in the Psalm) may be, which men
must Adore. They find in Isay 61. That the earth is called the Lords
footstool. Well, then men must worship the earth. But this they also abhor,
lest they should offend him that is Lord of heaven and earth. They then
remember, that Christ's humane body was earth of the earth, and that the same,
as taken into the unity of the person of the Son of God, was to be Adored for
the Deities sake, to which it is inseperably united. Here is the ground. But
then, how shall we Adore that flesh which is not present with us? Hence
Augustine: And because he has walked in that flesh, and has given us that
flesh to be eaten unto Salvation, and no man eats that flesh unless he has
first adored it, It is found how such a footstool of the Lord is adored, and
we not only shall not sin in Adoring it, but shall sin in not Adoring. But
does the flesh quicken or give life? Our Lord himself has told, commending
(to us) the same earth. It is the spirit that quickens, but the flesh
profits nothing. And, Ideo and ad terram quamlibet cum tu inclinas and
prosternis, non quasi terram intuearis, therefore when thou bowest or
prostratest thy self to any earth, thou ought to behold it, not as earth,
but look at that Holy one, whose footstool that is which thou do adore,
for thou adorest for his sake; wherefore he has added here, Quia sanctum est,
etc. In this large passage of Saint Augustine, it is manifest that his devise
is, to forefend all Adoration of any mere creature, and to acknowledge the
humanity of Christ only, though a creature, to be capable of divine Adoration,
in respect of the Deity to which it is personally united. Therefore Augustine
was no Papist, nor will his Testimony at all serve their turn, which worship
any thing, that is not also God, as the Man Christ is.

Beza therefore says, that in Aug. time they did receive, Adorantes: he means
kneeling, adversus H^s^us^u^ p. 311
But withal, the Text of August. does manifestly show, that Christ God and Man
was adored of every Communicant; before he received the Sacramental flesh of
Christ in the Eucharist: And that this was, in Augustines judgment, so far
from being a sin, that it was a sin not to do it

But to this is Rep^y to Bishop Morrow, part. 2. cap. 22. to the testimonies of
Aug. and Chrysostom. Beza says it ought to be received both with internal and
external Adoration. Quest. and Resp. lib. Quest. 243.
answered, that every true Communicant must adore Christ before he partake him
in the Sacraments, but that is internally by faith and love, etc. This is true
I confess; but is so far from excluding the outward expression by some bodily
sign of Godly reverence, that it rather does require it, that God may be
worshipped in body and soul together.

But this must not be pleaded, to void the Testimony of Aug. alleged to
prove external Adoration before communicating. For first, the Text of the
Psalm speaks of bodily worship, and therefore must bodily worship be in
Augustines eye, when he would show to what, or rather whom that worship, which
the Psalm requires, may be tendered. Secondly, when he says Et ad terram
quamlibet te inclinas and prosternas, to whatsoever earth, i.e. flesh of Christ
thou bowest and prostratest thy self, look not on it as earth, i.e. as flesh,
but look at that holy one whose footstool it is that thou do adore, i.e.
Look to the Godhead of Christ whose flesh thou do Adore in the mysteries.
It cannot therefore be denied with a good conscience, that Augustine speaks
of outward Adoration performed by the bowing or prostrating of the body before
the mysteries; not, to them determinatiuely, but in Relation to Christ
himself, and that for his Deities sake. Ambr. de S. sancto lib. 3. c. 12.
Which is also the same that Ambrose speaks of the flesh of Christ saying (
which we adore in those mysteries) referring the Adoration not to the mysteries
or signs, but to Christ which is represented to us, and Sacramentally
exhibited by them. One thing more I would have to be marked in Augustines
words, that he reckons Inclination of the body, as well as Prostration on
the knee, to be external Adoration, as all men use to do; contrary to the
new learning of Altar Damascenum which will have kneeling a proper gesture of
Adoration, not other bowings (such as we use in sign of reverence to men;)
contrary to Scripture and Common-sense.

And this of Augustine agrees with Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de
incomprehensibili natura Dei.
who speaking of the adoration of Christ in the mysteries says, that therefore
the Deacon cries not, inclinate capita, bow your heads (which, in the
Leitourgy bearing his name, we find, inclinate capita Deo, bow your heads unto
God) after the consecration; not to God, as there contained, but represented.

To the Testimony of Augustine I add this, that the Christians in his time
were taxed by the Heathens for worshipping Ceres and Bacchus. From whence is
manifest that something was then done, which gave them color of that
calumniation: For the times were not now, with Christians, as formerly, when
the Heathens durst feign any thing against Christ; as whom the Imperial power
did persecute. And to put the matter out of danger, Augustine shows, that it
was their manner, or Rite of receiving the bread and wine of the Lords Supper.
Aug. contra Faustum Mazichaeum lib. 20. cap. 13.
A Cerere and Libero dijs Paganorum long absumus, quamuis panis and calicis
Sacramentum nostro ritu amplectamur, it a patres nostri long fuerunt a
Saturniacis catenis, quamuis pro tempore prophetiae Sabbathi vacationem
obsernauerunt: We differ wide from Ceres and Bacchus those Pagan Idols,
although we embrace that Rite in receiving the Sacrament of the Bread and Cup.
So our Ancestors were far from the chains of the Saturnian heresy although
for the time of prophecy, they observed the rest of the Sabbath: whereby it is
plain, that like as the Jews observation of their Sabbath called Saturnes
day, was the occasion that moved the Gentiles, yea and Manichees, to say that
the Jews worshipped Saturn; So the Ritus, the manner or fashion of the
Christians receiving the Sacrament of Bread and Wine, occasioned the malicious
Gentiles to say, that they adored Ceres and Bacchus, as their own Gods.

Fulkes Answer to the Rhemists on 1 Cor. 11.
It is true, I confess, which Doctor Fulke says, that the Pagans did never
worship Bread and Wine: and it is as true that they did not challenge the
Christians for worshipping Bread and Wine, for the very Cicero de natura
Deorum, (...) such a (...) as to be^^e^e that very thing which he eats, to be
God.
Heathens counted it a madness in any man to worship that as God which he did
eat. This madness came into the world, with Transubstantiation. Wherefore the
Pagans did conceive, the Adoration used in receiving the Bread and Wine of the
Lords Supper to be intended and done to Ceres and Bacchus their own imaginary
Gods, Gods (as they thought) of Bread and Wine: like as they took the
observation of Saturne-day the Jews Sabbath, to be held in honor of Saturn
their Idol; as says Augustine, the Manichees also did. And therefore this is
a pregnant evidence, not for the Papists, that the Sacrament was it self
adored, as being made a God, but only for this, that they did then, Panis and
vini Sacramenta suo ritu amplecti, receive the Sacrament in that fashion and
rite that the Gentiles used; which Ritus was, external Adoration, referring it
unto Christ by them. (...). Damasc.
The Altar Damascenum would not have us think, that the Heathens had any more
color of occasion, then only a solemn reverent usage of Bread and Wine. (...)
But this is but a shift, when Augustine himself has told us, that no man did
communicate, but he first adored. And we have, out of his words, learned how.

I will add one Testimony more out of the Mystagogick catechism of Cyrill,
either of Jerusalem, in whose name it commonly goes, who lived An. 370. or
John of Jerusalem, under whose name, Master Robert Cook says, Cook in
Censura.

Du' plessis response a Leuesque de Euroux, p. 422. vid Causab^a.


it was marted, etc. and whole, that learned Duplessis takes it rather to be,
(as I for my part do not) who lived near An. 600. In this book, Catechis.
5. This Author after he has showed in what manner the Bread should be taken,
says, Then come to the Cupp of the blood, not stretching out thy hand, Sed
pronus and in modum Adorationis and venerationis, decens, but bowing down, and
after the manner of Adoration or veneration, saying Amen. Where it cannot be
denied that, some prayer was used at the delivery, to which the Communicant
said, Amen, which we find currantly to have been in use long before, viz. An.
251. namely, Ann. 251.
when Nouatianus the intruding Bishop of Rome, in administering the Sacrament to
the people, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 42.
took every man's hand betwixt his own; adjuring him that he should not
return to Cornelius (the Bp. (by right) then of Rome) and suffered no man to
taste of the mysteries, till (in stead of that, he should have said, Amen.) he
said, I will not return to Cornelius. Secondly, we mark, in Cyrill, that the
Cup was received by each Communicant with Adoration.

CAP. 24. A Vindication of Doctor Morton, that Reverend Bishop of Coventrie and
Litchfeild, quarrelled by a namelesse Replier falsely charging Doctor Morton
with abusing of Cyrill, Augustine and Chrysostom in this point.
Reply 2. part. cap. 3. sect. 25. page 52. and 53.
We are come to about the 600. year. Now before I go any further, I will
take into consideration the Reply, made against some of those Testimonies, in
a late in temperate and scoffing Libell, called a Reply to Doctor Mortons
defense, etc. part. 2. cap. 3. Sect. 21. setting down his words.

The learned Bishop of Chester, to prove that, the Sacrament was received with
some adoration, by bowing of the body, before the time of Honorius, has
alleged Cyrill, Augustine and Chrysostom. Let us hear the Repliers Answer.

Repl. 1. I answer that the Question is here of Kneeling not of other gestures.

Answ. To which I reply, that the Question is, of Kneeling only as a gesture
of adoration; and therefore the proof of bowing for adoration, comes home to
the cause, though not to the word. And, if bowing to the Sacrament, be not
adoration, as well as kneeling, why does himself cite and allow Bale,
Duplessis, Jewel, Hospinian, and Z^pper, affirming with one consent, that
Honorius the third, was the Author of adoration of the Sacrament, who only
appointed the people reverent bowing of themselves to it, at the Elevation,
etc. As is in this Section, alleged by himself.

Repl. 2. Answer. It is not now either enquired, what was voluntarily either
spoken, or practiced by particular men, but what was enjoined unto Churches.

Answ. I reioyne. The Question is, whether the Sacrament was commonly received
with adoration, before Transubstantiation was known, or thought off? This when
we prove by Records to have been so; Is it not a mere shift, to tell us,
that they enquire for a Decree, not voluntary practice only? As for that he
adds [ of some few] it is a blind. For, the Testimonies alleged show the
ordinary custom of the Christian Churches, then. And if nothing will serve for
proof but a Decree, then can they not prove Kneeling of the people in the act
of receiving, ever to have been in the Church of Rome. For they themselves,
namely Costerus, Coster. En^^^r page 353. Edi^. 1590.
maintains it, not as a Decree, but as an ancient custom continued (says
he) from the Apostles time.

Let us have our measure, and then will appear, that either we prove
Kneeling; or, in stead of it, adoration by bowing, to have been in the
Primitive Church; though not, to the Sacrament it self; as, since: Or else,
that they can not prove any Adoration, by kneeling in the act of receiving the
Eucharist, no not in the Church of Rome. For neither of us can show a Decree,
but only a Custom. For, as for that which is alleged out of the Roman
Rituall; that, to the Clergymen, kneeling upon the stayres of the Altar, the
Eucharist should be delivered, it does not at all belong to the common people,
who might not kneel there, at the Communion; and the kneeling in that case
required, See before in Cap. 10.
was respectively to the Altar, or things thereon, not to the Sacrament as then
received. That this kneeling respects the place, the Altar, Crucifix, or
host thereon, and not the partaking of the Sacrament, may appear by this,
that the Priest himself is tied by the Masse-booke, to receive reuerenter
stans, reverently standing.

Repl. 3. Answer. These very places Cyrill, Augustine, and Chrysostom are
usually urged by Papists for their Idolatry: the Defendant therefore does not
well in borrowing their Weapons to fight against us withal, for the Borrower
is a servant to the Lender. But the Ceremonies themselves being borrowed of the
Papists, it is no marvel if our Prelates be beholding to the Papists for
proofs to maintain them by.

Answ. To this I rejoyne. 1. That the same testimonies are alleged by the
Papists wrongfully to prove their Idolatry. For, that Adoration which the
Fathers professedly referred to Christ as sitting in heaven, the Papists
transfer to the Sacrament it self, as being, in the substance, nothing but
Christ, and whole Christ. 2. The Defendant borrowed not those Testimonies from
the Papists, (who were not the Owners but Abusers of them;) but of the Fathers
themselves, to whom (it is not uncomely to say) we are debtors, and to God for
them. 3. There is, by us, nothing here said for maintenance of our Ceremonies,
which we suppose to be maintainable so far, as not to be unlawful by the
Scriptures. The point herein hand, was only matter of fact, viz. Whether the
ancient Churches received the Communion adoring, yea, or no? The salt-biting of
the Bishop, (as borrowing proofs from the Papists maintenance of Popish
ceremonies,) makes nothing to the Answer of the evidence produced; but turns
the Readers mind, by a brackish gybe, from off the cause, to the persons of the
Bishops, which is not plain dealing.

Repl. 4. Answ. As for Cyril, 1 Doctor Fulke says of one precept of Cyrils
about the Sacrament, extant in the same page, one of which the Defendant cites
his, Verily I took it for a mere superstious precept, may not this be also
superstitious which the Defendant cites? Sure I am, that about the Sacraments,
and about the Cross and Chrisme, there is much superstition taught in the
Catechisines which go under the name of Cyrill.

Answ. I reply, Something in Cyrill was superstitious, Ergo, this, is such an
inference as the Replyer durst not affirm; and therefore only asks if it
may not be: which is answered with another [May it not be no superstition?]
But superstition, or not, is nothing (now) to the question, which only is,
Whether the thing was done or no? But this is the Replyers ordinary course, to
let the cause alone, and fasten upon something else; as if, to say any thing
after a man, were to answer him. But the Replyer has more to say about Cyrill.

Repl. 3. J say, Cyrill is corrupted, both by the Defendant, and by the Bishop
of Rochester, p. 183. For 1. the Greek word (...), Rochester translateth it,
[^alling on thy face,] ana the Defendant, [bowing of thy selfe] whereas, though
the word be many times used in such a sense, yet as Stephen (in his great
Treasury shows) it signifies properly a gesture of the eyes, which
appears plainly by the words compounded of it, (...).

Answ. This Answer looks toward the matter. But what had the Replyer to do
with the Bishop Rochester? Surely nothing, by the task of his Reply to Bishop
Morton, but that he had a desire to give him something of his good will. The
Bishop of Rochester alleges not the Greek text of Cyril, which (perhaps) he
saw not* but, the Latin translation of him, which is, Sed pronus and
adorationis and venerationis in modure, dicas Amen. If (...), be not well
rendered, [ pronus] in Latin, as it is yet pronu^ may be turned ( falling on
the face) without corruption. For so Martial lib. 1.88. Fe bibis i^^^^dam (...)
^ane pronus aquam.

At least it does signify a bonding of the ^a^e downwards, as Rober^ Stephen
observes in his Latin Treasury, as contrary to supine. And this was enough to
the Bishop of Rochesters turn; Vivorum cadauera supina fluttare faeminarum
prona. Plin. l. 7. c. 17. But, the Bishop (then of Chester) turns it, bowing
thy self. What corruption is in that; unless he should have said bowing thy
self with thy face downwards, which he meant, and so did Cyril: for this
gesture is opposed to streting out of the hand. [not stretching out thy hand,
(...), but bowing thy face downward,] and not (as the Replyer) looking with
the eyes downwards, which is no impediment to stretching out the hand, as
bowing, downward is. But the word (says he) is many times used in such a
sense. He should have said, mostly: But if it be many times to used, why is the
Bishop said to have corrupted the Text? Forsooth, Robert Stephen says, it
signifies properly a gesture of the eyes. Good, and does not Rob. Stephen show
that it is frequently used for bowing down of the face? And then, whether
sense is fitter. the place must show, not the word, mistake there might have
been, but not corruption. But it is utterly untrue, that Robert Stephen does
say, that (...) does signify properly a gesture of the eyes, (...) pronus sum,
propendeo, inclino me, vel inclino caput, sum capite obstipo, demitto oculos,
says Stephen. Where, casting down of the eyes, is the last, and only made a
secondary ^ense of the word, as following upon the bowing down of the head;
and not the p^imary, and proper. Therefore the same Robert Stephen, in his
Greek Concordance, renders it incuruo me, and in his Treasury, (...)
inclinatus, supplex. But, the compound (...), and (...) show it? Clean
contrary. For, (...) is erigere se, contrary to (...). So in John 8.89. where
the words (...) and (...) are both used: the one not for looking down, but for
bowing down to write one the ground; the other, not for looking up, but
lifting up himself again. As for (...), it does signify bowing down, to
look into; as in Joan. 20.11. So that the Replier has falsified his Author,
to make good his challenge: and the Bishop of Chester has not corrupted Cyril.
But, he will give us a reason why, in this place at least, (...) should only
be [ looking down.]

Repl. And that Cyrill respects the gesture of the eye it is very probable,
because in receiving of the Bread, he bids the Receiver first to sanctify
his eyes with it, and then to take it. In proportion whereof those words cited
are used concerning the Cup, (...), etc.

Cham. de Canone lib. 9. c. 20. (...). 1. Damasc. (...). side^, (...). 4. cap.
^3.
Answ. I answer. This probability is grounded upon a mistaking of Cyrils
words, which are not, that the Communicant should sanctify his eyes, by
looking on it; but, per contactum by touching of it, as Chamier says, and the
place it self. So Damasc. says also, That they should put the mystical Bread
to their eyes, foreheads, and lips, etc. and then where is the Replyers ground?
But he has yet more to say.

Repl. And besides, Cyrill does manifestly refer the Adoration and worship
he speaks of, to the saying Amen. (...), (...). i. e. Looking down
steadfastly upon it, and saying Amen, in manner of Adoration and Veneration.
What reason then had Rochester first, and Chester after, to apply the manner of
worship and adoration unto the bodily gesture signified in the word ((...)?)

Answ. If the Adoration be there referred to the prayer used at the delivery
of the Cup, in the very act of receiving the same; Then was there Adoration
used (and that by Order not voluntarily) in the act of receiving, (...). Al^
(...) Damasc.
which is the point for which Cyrill was alleged. Let them, in receiving,
referr^^ their Adoration to Amen; that is, unto the prayer used at the
delivery, who will question them? But they rather condemn the use of any such
particular prayer for each Communicant at that time; One, as a private worship
in public; Another, as a mixing of several worships; forgetting that every
Communicant performs his private worship, when he receives: And, that Bread
and Broth, Cream and Strawberries, Wine and Sugar agree not better in our
bodily meats, then some acts of worship with other some, though not all. 2 Chronicles. 29.^8.
The people adored, the Priests blew with Trumpets, the Levites sang, and all
this continued till the burnt offering was finished. Here is a mixture of
private in public, and several sorts of worship at the burnt offering.

2. The Replier having complained of two learned Bishops, that they had
corrupted Cyrill, in their translations, does himself indeed corrupt him, when
he renders (...) [ looking down steadfastly upon it] of which like sense of
the word he can give no example, as if his grief were not at mis-translation,
but only that any but himself should corrupt Cyrill.

3. The Adoration (...), must needs be referred to the gesture, for it
denotes the same, as all men know. And therefore the Bishops did right in
referring it to the gesture required in the word (...), of which this is a
declaration in what manner they should (...). The Replier is forced to put the
words out of their own order, to refer the Adoration to Amen, though it
gain him nothing.

Repl. 3. Seeing Cyrill has no precept of bowing the body at the receiving of
the Bread, he cannot be so interpreted, concerning the Wine, without imputation
of superstitious advancing of the Wine above the Bread.

Answ. I have showed before, that the manner was, when they had taken the
Bread, to carry it to their own places (I mean) in the Churches, where they
went to the Table for it; and then, to receive it kneeling apart. And this was
(as I think) the cause, why Cyrill requires Adoration when they come to the
Cup, which they might not carry away from the Table, as they did the other; and
not so, for the Bread, because that custom had settled that, long before: viz.
that men did sumere Adorantes.

Repl. 4. Seeing Cyrill had such leisure to appoint his Communicants so many
superstitious toies about the Sacraments, with particular description, as that
he should in taking the Bread, hold his fingers together, bear up his right
hand with his left, take it in the hollow of his hand so borne up, taking great
heed that no crume fall, etc. he would surely more expressly have spoken of
Kneeling, if it had been used in his time.

Answ. This follows not: for that being (as we have showed) so ingrafted in
the peoples hearts, to receive the Bread into their mouths, after some private
prayers, Kneeling; There was no need to instruct them in that at all, and
therefore Cyrill insisteth in the newer Inventions about the Bread, in the
manner of taking it at the Table.

Cyrils Testimony (we see) has put the Replyer to many shifts, and will not
be shifted off. As for his Answer to those alleged out of Augustine and
Chrysostom, viz. that they speak only of Internal Adoration, though it have
some countenance from some men of excellent learning, yet it cannot stand with
their express words, as I have showed before. Wherefore I may now go on with
some other witnesses of this point, That the Communion was received with
outward Adoration before the Transubstantiation, or Reall-presence (as they
call it) was known.

CAP. 25. More Instances showing the Antiquity of this gesture of Adoring or
Kneeling.
Ann. 530. In Authentica de priuilegus dotis haere^^cis mulieribus non
praestanuis.
ABout the year of our Lord, 530. Justinian the Emperor made a Decree, that
heretical women should have no down. In this, he describes such as shall
be held meet Judges of this matter (among other things, by this) that they do
in the Catholic Orthodox Church receive sacr^-sanctum and Adorabilem
communionem, which very term of Adorable, i.e. venerable, was, no doubt, given
unto it, because of their reverend esteem, and manner of receiving it, with
outward Adoration, not simply (as often is said) to it; but, to Christ, in, and
by his ordinance.

Ann. 580. a^ Coccius, but possevine sets him higher, at 340.

Bibl. Patrum Tom. ^. part 3. pa 887 and 888. Anno 595.


Ioannes Climacus grad. 23. thus, Nam simea sunt turpia illa and sceleratae
verba, quid est quod dorum coeleste suscipiens Adoro? quomodo possm^^n^ and
benedicere, etc. Which shows in mine apprehension, that the manner was to
take the Communion adoring. Remigius Rhemensi^ (who lived in the end of the
fifth Century, An ^89. as Earonius says) in his Commentaries on 1. Cor. 11.29
C^m timore and tremore debemus accedere ad illud terribile Sacramentum, vt
sciat men's reuerentiam se debere praestare e^, ad cuius corpus sumendum
accedit. Where, though we have not the name of adoration; yet, the reason of
it, that by the very comportment of the body in coming to that dreadful
Sacrament, the mind might understand what is the internal reverence due to him
that gives his body, the Son of God: whether kneeling, or Bowing, comes to
one.

CAP. 26. Instances of the practice of the Church about the eight hundred
years after Christ.
I will add no more, save only these observations, that how ever in those
days, the public prayers were generally performed on the Lords-dayes, and
Pentecost, according to the twentieth Canon of 1. Nicene council, S. Germanus
Arch Constant. Rerum Ecclesiasticarum theoria. Bibl. patrum. Colon. Tom. 8.
page 61. colum. 1. lib. C.
standing and standing upright. Yet when they came to the prayers about, or at
the consecration, the Ceremony was, that the Ministers did pray, inclinantes
se, or bowing downe-wards with their heads and faces; Etenim quod pronus
Sacerdos mystagogiam faciat, id declarat eum cum solo Deo colloqui, vnde and
diuinam lucis apparitionem cernit, and ad splendorem conspectus filij Dei
exhilarescit, and se subtrahit timore and verecundia, quemadmodum Moses quum
Deum vidit in monte, ignis specie, perterrefactus recessit and eccultauit
faciem suam, reuerebatur enim percipere a glor^a Dei faciem. For in that the
Priest performs the mysteries bowing of himself, that shows him to converse
only with God, whence he sees a divine apparition of light, and both cheeres
up himself at the splendour of the sight of Christ beholding him, and also
withdrawes himself out of fear and modesty: Even as Moses when he saw God in
the Mount, in the form of fire, being afraid, retired, and hid his face,
because his modesty feared to look upon the glory of God face to face.

In the Roman Church (as appears in the Book set out first about or before
the year 800. mentioned by Amalar. de Offi^^is Eccles. lib. 31. cap. 31.
Amalarius who lived An 830 called Ordo Romans in Bibl Patr. Colon. Tom. 8. pa.
397. and 401.
Ordo Romanus) direction is given to the Bishop, when he must inclinare se,
bow himself down in some part of the Canon, (as it was called) of the Mass,
and when, the Deacons, and Subdeacons must stare inclinati, stand bowing
themselves down; when, se erigere, erect or raise themselves upright. Amalar.
de Ordine Antiphonaris lib. cap. 52. in Bib. Pat. Colon. T^m 9. part. 1. ^^g.
4.1.
Amalarius, de glorioso officio quod fit in Romana Ecclesia in Paschali
hebdomada (in which the Canon was, that they should pray standing) mentions a
prayer, Quam solemus dicere genua flectendo, sieve vultum declinando in terram,
which (says he) we use to say kneeling, or bowing our faces to the earth, as
has been showed.

CAP. 27. The former Instances were of times preceding those wherein the
Doctrine of the Reall-presence was hatched.
1. IT may not be truly objected that, at this time, the doctrine of the
Reall-presence was settled in the Church of Rome; and that therefore, they now
began to use this bowing at the Consecration. For this Book does not show what
was then made, but what was also before that time the received fashion of the
Roman Church.

2. Neither was the Doctrine of Christ's Reall-presence in his natural body,
then received of that Church, howeuer Amalarius himself muttereth something of
it, whose error was then opposed and censured by a Synod held at Carisiacum, as
is showed by that most reverend and learned Answer to a Challenge p. 73 and ^4.
Archbishop of Armach. Doctor Usher.

Yea, and Paschasius Radbertus, who lived somewhat later then Amalarius, viz.
An. 880. and did indeed teach the Real presence of Christ's natural body, in
and with the Bread, which is Consubstantiation. (For of the Bread it self, he
says that, the body digesteth it [Etsi Paschas. Radbertus in Mat. l. 12. Tom.
^. Bib pat. Colin. part 2 page 1202. colum. 1.
corpus digerit quod extra est] which be calls still Bread, as well after as
before Consecration; and affirms, that alone to profit nothing) yet this man
confesses, Ibid p. 1201.
[ Audiui quosdam me reprehendere, etc.] that his opinion was reproved of
others as excessive and beyond the truth, etc. Whereby is manifest, that, as
yet, it was but an error creeping into the Church, as appears by the
confessed oppositions of Bertram, alias Ratranus, Rabanus, and others mentioned
in the learned Answer of that Reverend Bishop, quo supra. To which I will add
the Testimony of Tom 9. Bibl. pat. Colon part 1. page 934. colum. 1. D. Floruit
and vixit. Ann. 870.
Christianus Gramaticus, alias Druthmarus, in his exposition on Math. 16.26. [
Deditque discipulis suis and aiit, accipite and comedite, hoc est corpus meum.]
Dedit discipulis suis Sacramentum corporis sui in remissionem peccatorum and
conseruationem charitatis, vt memores illius facti, semper hoc in figura
facerent, quod pro ijs acturus erat, non obliuiscerentur, [Hoc est corpus meum]
i. e. in Sacramento. and post. Sicut denique si aliquis peregre proficiscens,
dilectoribus suis quoddam vinculum dilectionis relinquit, eo tenore vt omni die
hoc agant, vt illius non obliuiscantur: Ita Deus praecipit agi a nobis,
transferens spiritualiter corpus in panem (vt in margin, panem in corpus) and
vinum in sanguinem, vt per haec Deo memoremus quae fecit pro nobis de corpore
and sanguine suo, and non simus ingrati tam amantissimae charitati. [And he
gave it to his disciples, saying, take, eat, this is my body] He gave to his
disciples the Sacrament of his body for remission of sins, and conservation
of charity, that so they being mindful of his act, might always do this in a
figure, which he was about to do; and should not forget it. (This is my body)
that is, in a Sacrament, or mystery. And after, lastly as if one going a
journey should leave some bond of love among his friends, on condition that
every day they should do such a thing, that they might not be unmindful of
him. So God has charged us to do, spiritually changing (the body into bread:
for so the margent has it) bread into his body, and wine into his blood, that
by these we might remember what Christ has done for us of his body and blood,
and not be ungrateful to a most loving charity.

Florus Magister who lived An. 860, (as Coccius) wrote an Exposition of the
Mass, wherein he has these words, Bibl. Pat. Tom. ^. part 2 page 300. colum.
1.
Cum panis and vini creatura in Sacramentum carnis and sanguinis eius
ineffabili spiritus sanctificatione, transfertur, manducatur Christus:
Propterea manducatur in Sacramento, and manet integer totus in coelo, manet
integer totus in cord tuo. When the creature of bread and wine is changed into
the flesh and blood of Christ by the ineffable sanctification of the spirit,
Christ is eaten: he is eaten by parts in the Sacrament, and whole Christ
remains whole in heaven, whole Christ remains whole in thy heart. Whereby is
manifest that he believed not either Consubstantiation, or Transubstantiation,
but a Sacramental eating of Christ in the mysteries apart, and a spiritual
Communication of whole Christ to the heart, even as we do. Hence he there
also says, Totum hoc quod in hac oblatione corporis and sanguinis Domini
agitur, mysterium est; aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur, quod videtur speeiem
habet corporalem, quod intelligitur (he says not quod inest) fructum habet
spiritualem: All that is done in this oblation of the body and blood of the
Lord, is a Mystery: one thing is seen, another is understood: that which is
seen has a bodily shape, that which is understood (he says not which is in
or under the bread) has a spiritual fruit.

Yea, that then the Church of Rome did not believe any such Reall-presence, as
after it did, may appear by these Arguments.

1. That they did not understand the Bread to be made the very body of Christ
by virtue of any words of consecration used by the Priest; but, by the
ineffable working of the Holy Ghost, as Florus says. And secondly, not the
body of Christ in it self, but to the faithful Receiver, to whom the Holy
Ghost does communicate the true body and blood of Christ spiritually, unto
life. Therefore was the prayer in the Roman order at the consecration (when
Michrol. de Missa rite celebranda c. 14.
none were present, but Communicaturi such as were to communicate) vt oblatio
fiat nobis corpus and sanguis Domini, that the oblation may be made to us the
body and blood of the Lord: not, vt fiat, simply that it may be made, but (
nobis, to us) i. e. as is after expressed, nobis accipientibus, to us the
Receivers. They did not then, think the Bread to be made the Body of Christ,
in it self; and to gazers on but to the faithful Receivers, [Vt efficiatur
fidelibus corpus and sanguis Christi,] that it may be made so to believers
says Florus ibid. quo supra.
Florus. Indeed the Roman Missall remains still the word [ nobis] and the
words quod sumpsimus;] and use them when the Priest alone communicates, making
a solecisme betwixt the old words and the new practice. Thirdly, they did not
think, that which they saw to be the Species of Bread and Wine; and to have
under that show, the body of Christ; but that which they saw, to be the body of
Christ, i.e. In a mystery, Quo supra. cap. 18.
Cuius corpus ibi confringi videmus and credimus, whose body we see and
believe to be there broken says Micrologus. So it was the body of Christ as
they saw it, and saw it broken, which could not be said of his natural body,
but only of the mystery or Sacrament of his body.

4. They did not believe whole Christ to be in either Species, as must needs
have been believed, if they had conceited that his very natural body had
been in, or with the Bread or Cup, or existent under the shows of them: For
Florus expressly says, we receive him in the Sacrament per parts by parts.
And therefore, to teach the people, that howeuer in the Sacrament they receive
the body and blood of Christ apart, as communicating with him in his death;
yet, whole and living Christ is spiritually communicated to their souls to
give them life. The Roman Church observed this Ceremony, Ordo Romans quo supra.
pa. 401.
that at [ Pax tecum] when the Bishop after the consecration, came to receive,
sitting in his Seat, he breaking a piece of the Bread, and putting it into the
Cup then held before him, said, Fiat commixtio corporis and sanguinis Christi
nobis accipientibus in vitam aeternam, let there be a commixtion of the body
and blood of Christ to us receiving it, unto eternal life: meaning thereby, to
signify the uniting of Christ's body and blood in his Microl. de Miss. etc. c.
14. Amalar. de offic. Missae l. 3. c 31. Expositio Missae Edit. per Cocciu^.
pa. 142.
Resurrection, and to pray, that by virtue of partaking of Christ raised from
the dead to dye no more, they which partaked his body and blood apart in the
mysteries, might live for ever. The words [ Et Consecratio] are now found in
the Roman Order aforesaid, but were not so (as it seems) in that co^ie,
which Amalarius then followed. For he, out of that Ordo-Romanus, reports
only these words, Fiat commixtio corporis and sanguinis Christi nobis
accipentibus in vita^ aeternam; but no word of Consecration. Nor does it fit
the matter intended. For the Bishop did not mean to consecrate a Sacrament of
Christ's Resurrection. And both the Bread and Cup were consecrated before. The
present Roman Missall observes the Ceremony of putting a parcel of the Host
into the Cup, at that time of [ Pax tecum:] but has, without any great show of
change, altered the words, and to another meaning. For whereas it was only
said, Fiat commixtio corporis Christi, etc. which is in plain terms, Let the
Resurrection of Christ profit us to eternal life, who receive the Eucharist.
They have now made it, Haec commistio and consecratio corporis and sanguinis
Domini nostri Jesus Christi fiat nobis, etc. as meaning to teach that there is,
in the very Sacramental signs, or under them, a mixture of Christ's Body and
Blood made; and so a presence of whole Christ in every drop of wine, and crumme
of the bread by Concomitancie. Haec Commistio fiat.

Lastly, that the Roman Church did not then believe any Real presence of
Christ, as brought under the Species, by the Priests, and formal words of
Consecration, appears by this, that when the Bishop did consecrate, there was
but one Chalice, or cup of wine before him: of which a little was after powered
into other vessels of wine, to consecrate that for the Communicants, Quia vinum
etiam non consecratum sed sanguine Domini commixtum sanctificatur per omnem
modum, because the Wine that yet was not consecrated, but only mixed with the
Blood of our Lord, is sanctified by every way by them used: whereas now, the
Consecration is limited to certain formal words, and to only so much as the
Priest intends to consecrate; because forsooth, no more can be made the Body
or Blood of Christ then is at that instant, turned thereunto. Wherefore I now
assume as manifest, that the Roman Church was not as yet, nor before the 900
year of our Lord, possessed of the dotages either of Consubstantiation, or
Transubstantiation. And yet even then observed, upon the Station days, when
they might not kneel in public prayer, yet at the Celebration of the
Sacramens to bow down themselves in those prayers (wherein they might not
kneel) in token of their humble and reverend acknowledgement of the special
grace of God, signed, sealed and exhibited to them thereby. And, that they
likewise had care, in the act of receiving, to discern the Lords Body
reverentia singulariter debita, with reverence then specially due to it, Rhemig
vixit An. 590. habetur in Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. part. 3 page 887 Colum. 2. A.
as Augustine speaks, no man can doubt. For therefore Rhemigius the Bishop of
Rhemes, in 1. Cor. 11.24. etc. coupleth the consecration and participation in
that respect, saying, Quotiescunque accedimus ad consecrandum, vel percipiendum
Sacramentum muneris aeterni, quod nobis Dominus pijssimus in memoriam sui
dimisit tenendum, cum timore and compunctione cordis, omnique reuerentia
debemus accedere: So often as we come to consecrate or partake the Sacrament,
etc. we ought to come thereto with fear and compunction of heart, Treat. of
kneeling, page 195.
and with all reverence. So also before him Caesarius Arelatensis. hom. 12.
alleged by the Bishop of Rochester, shows that during that Action the
people were required to abide in the Church, Humiliato corpore and compuncto
cord, with humbled bodies and compunction of heart. Wall. Strabo de rebus
Ecclesiasticis cap. 19
This reverend carriage Wall. Strabo shows to belong to Decency and to Order
required of Paul, 1. Cor. 14. which Decorum or Decency being requisite In
singulis sanctorum operibus, tamen etiam atque etiam in sanctissimi sanguinis
and corporis veneratione seruari debet, etc. in all works of the Saints, much
more ought it to be observed with all veneration of the most holy body and
blood of Christ, etc and after, Secundum ordinem autem, vt sanctificationem
eorum ae cibis caeteris long distare sciamus, It is according to Order, that
we may know that the sactification of those do differ far from other
meats. There he treats of the receiving of the Communion fasting, and
proves the fitness of it, from the respect of that Decency and Order, in
which it ought to be received, and which requires sober men. This man was so
far from the thought of Table gesture, as he takes it to belong to Order that
the great distance betwixt this and common food, should be showed in the bodily
receiving. Yea he calls the very Act of receiving veneration, because it was
received with veneration, Ephesians. 3.14.
like as Paul understands Prayer by bowing of the knee, because that was the
common gesture; For this cause do I bow the knee to God, etc. So Strabo says,
in the veneration of the blood and body of Christ, in stead of [ in the
receiuing] because it was not received but with veneration; that is, External
Adoration of Bowing or Kneeling.

CAP. 28. The second Observation in the practice of the Ancient Churches.
MY second Observation is, that to take it of the Ministers hands, and to
partake, or receive into their mouths, was not always the same; nor always
done at the same time, or in the same place. For they did for a long time take
it at the Church, carry it home, and there receive it. And after the Councels
of Toledo, and the Caesar-Augustan Council had tied them to assumere in
Ecclesia, receive it in the Church, they did yet, in the Greek Church, come up
to the Table, or Chancell, to take the Bread standing, but stayed not to eat it
there, but carried it to their own places, and there (after private prayer for
themselves) did eat it kneeling, as (out of Sozomen) has been showed. As for
the Cup, because they could not take that away with them, as they did the
Bread, they did receive that Adoring, as has been showed out of Cyrill.

Ordo Romans quo supra. Tom 8 Bibl. Patr. page ^0^
And in the Roman Church, the Priests and Deacons called Ministers of the Altar,
came to the Bishop then sitting in his Seat, kissed him, took the bread of his
hand, and then went away in sinistra part Altaris communicaturi, to the left
side of the Altar to partake it, where there can be no doubt whether they did
kneel, or no, if we remember what has been alleged out of Micrologus. And
as for the Subdeacons that were not allowed to go to the Altar to
Communicate, they came to the Bishops seat, Lib. Sacrar. Ceremon. 2. page 181.
kissed his hand, and took it in their mouths, but not in their hands, which
any man must conceive to be kneeling, as the Book of Ceremonies expressly
affirms. The Bishop, and others at his appointment, carried unto the people,
in their own places, and put it into their mouths, which I know not how they
should well do, Disput against Kneeling, and Al^are Damasc.
without that the Receivers kneeled. So then the Testimonies brought by some
men, to prove that they did of older times, receive it standing, are true for
the act of taking, in those times and places, of which their Authors speak;
but not true of the act of receiving or communicating. That the Priest now
receives standing at the Altar, and not kneeling, as of old; I conceive to be
done for the fear of shedding. But it was not so before the Monster of
Transubstantiation, I am sure.

CAP. 29. The third Observation in the ancient practices of the Churches.
THe third observation is, that besides the Solemn Common Prayers, at which
they might not kneel, but only stand, in some of them inclinati, bowing
themselves, as at the Celebration. Both the Priest and people, had sometimes
their private devotions, at which they might, and did use to kneel, even on
those Station days, and such kneeling was not taken to be any breach of the
Canon made for standing on such days, in Prayer.

The Roman order aforesaid shows, how the Bishop, addressing himself to the
consecration, while the Quier sung. Glory be to the Father, etc. the hymme
which gives glory to the Trinity, Pontifex concelebrat secreto orationem ante
Altar inclinatus vsque ad repetitionem, the Bishop celebrateth a prayer in
private bowing himself at the Altar until the repetition: ^ot stans
inclinatus; but absolutely, Inclinatus bowing himself. And that the Priest
likewise immediately before his receiving did so, Non ex aliquo ordine sed ex
religiosorum traditione, not by appointment but by tradition, we have before
observed out of Micrologus, de Off. Miss. c. 18.

This is (as I take it) the thing aimed at in that Decree of Alexander the
third, who Poped Ann. 1159 somewhat before Innocent the third, or Honorius;
which Decree is pressed by Altar Damascenum, Alt. Damasc. page 786. Decret.
Greg. lib. 2 Tit. 9 cap. quoniam.
to prove that neither the Priest in consecrating, nor the people in receiving
were permitted, on those Festiualls to kneel. The Decree is this. Diebus
Dominicis and alijs praecipuis Festiuitatibus, inter Pascha and Pentecostem
genu-flexio nequaquam fieri debet, nisi aliquis ex Denotione velit facere in
secreto. In consecrationibus Episcoperum, and Clericoru^ ordinationibus,
consecrantes and consecratitantum genua flectere possunt, secundum quod
consecrationis modus requirit. Upon Lords days and other chief Festiuals,
kneeling ought not to be used: unless any dispose to do it privately. In the
consecrations of Bishops, and ordination of Ministers both the consecrators and
consecrated may kneel according to that which the manner of consecration
requires. You see (says the Altar of Damascus) that the consecrating and
consecrated, in Ordinations are excepted; but not, the Consecrator, nor
Recieuer of the mysteries, Exceptio firmat regudam in casibus non exceptis, an
exception establishes a rule in all cases not excepted. But this man's
earnestness suffered him not to see, that there is an exception made, in this
Decree, of kneeling our of Devotion in private, which might have, and I think
had respect to those kneelings both of Priest and people at the receiving of
the Sacrament, when they used private prayers; The Priest for himself, and
people every one for himself, as he received.

Ordo Rom Tom 8 Bibl. P^^. page ^99. (...). 2. li^. D.
And this kneeling could not be understood a breach of the Decree of the first
Nicen council, for standing on those days at prayer; for, that was understood
of their solemn public prayers, made when all the congregation, in (as it
were) profession of Christ's Resurrection, were enjoined to stand. For after
they once came to the delivery of the Sacrament, until it was all finished,
the Antheme (as they called it) i.e. their singing by turns, for the Communion
was continued. So as there was, for that time, no public office of prayer in
hand. And that the Decree of Alexander had respect unto such private
deuotionary prayers, is probable by the words of the Gloss in the title of the
Decree, which is this. In praecipuis Festis, and intra Pascha and Pentecostem
non fit solennis genu-flexio: In principal Festiuals and between Easter, and
Whitesuntide, De rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. 26. near the beginning.
there must be no solemn Kneeling* i.e. not of the whole congregation
together. And this is yet made more probable, if not more then probable, by the
words of Wall. Strabo, who says, Quibus horis and temporibus, what hours and
times, we must pray without kneeling, Jnter publica officia, Canones
ostendunt, in the public offices the Canons do show. In Dominicis Festis
maioribus and quinquagesima iuxta quos Canones public paenitentes semper genua
flectere debent: Upon more solemn Lords days and in the week before Lent,
according to the Canons, the Penitentiaries do always publickely kneel. Where
we see, for our purpose two things. 1. That the restraint of Kneeling in
prayer, is limited in publica officia, while they are performing public
offices. 2. That open Penitentiaries were by Canon to kneel even in those
days, because that this gesture of one, two, three, or a few, was not held a
breach of that other Canon which respects the assembly jointly. And if,
without breach of that Canon, the open Penitents might kneel then at the
solemn public prayers, how could the private kneeling of each Communicant in
his turn, be understood a breach thereof, when this was done while all the
public solemn prayers ceased, and hymns only were sung?

CAP. 30. The fourth Observation touching the same.
THe fourth Observation is, that howeuer in the time of Justin Martyr, An. 150.
at least in some places, the Communicants appear to have come up to the Table,
and taken every man his portion: yet An. 200. in Tertullians time, they took
it not, but ex Praesidentium manu, from the hand of the Pastors. And that ever
since, for ought appears, it has been delivered by the Minister only, or
by his hands the Deacons, though Altar Damascenum like it not: And, as has
been showed, was always delivered with a brief prayer forgoing it, which he
likes not neither.

CAP. 31. The fifth Observation.
THe fifth Observation is, That in many (if not most) Churches through the
world, they did celebrate the Communion, every day. Which as a thing undoubted
of, I forbear to prove.

CAP. 32. The last Observation together with Answers to the Objections made
against Kneeling.
Synod. Turon. cap. 37.
THe last Observation is, That on all other days, save the Lords days and
Pentecost, they were, by Order, to make all their prayers, fixis in torram
genibus, kneeling both in Tertullians time, and so along. Now, if by Order,
they then prayed kneeling, and a prayer was made for each Communicant at the
time of delivery; and he for himself, at the receiving had a short prayer; who
can persuade himself, that they did not on all those days receive it
kneeling? And if it be, (as Altar Damascenum says it is) most like that they
received it on those days; as they did, on the Lords days: Then say I, that
on the Lords days also, they did receive it kneeling; And, on the week days
were bound so to do, by that Decree which required them to kneel in all their
prayers, consequently. That there is not to be found any Decree for the
gesture of kneeling in the Act of receiving, no not in the Romane-Church,
before, or after the Real presence, nor yet in the Greek Church (where yet
they used to kneel) does manifest both the Antiquity and universality of this
Ceremony, which out of a common notion of all Christians (that in partaking of
the body and blood of the Son of God, it was comely for them to express,
reuerentiam singulariter debitam) did make it self a Law unto them, without
any Decree, as out of Tertullian I have showed before.

And therefore, against Altar Damasc. I say with Master Beza, that this
gesture of Adoration in receiving, was in use and state long before the Real
presence was hatched; and was taken up by the brewers of the Dream, and
pleaded as an Argument for the Real presence, as if the worship intended to
the person of Christ sitting in Heaven, had been always meant to him as
contained in the Bread and Wine, or shows thereof; which is so professedly
manifest in Algerus, Bibl. Patr. Colon Tom. 12. part. 1. page 435 colum 2. Vel
de Sacramento lib. 2. c. 2
who lived anno 1060, as nothing can be more. Cassa enim videtur tot hominum
huic Sacramento ministrantium, vel adorantium veneranda sedulitas, nisi ipsius
Sacramenti long mayor crederetur, quam videretur veritas et vtilitas; Cum ergo
exterius quasi nulla sint quibus tanta impenduntur venerationis obsequia, aut
insensati sumus, aut ad intima mittimus magna salutis mysteria: the venerable
diligence of so many both administering and adoring this Sacrament, seems
vain, unless the truth and profit of the Sacrament were not believed to be
far greater then can be seen with the eye: Seeing therefore those things
which appear outwardly, are almost nothing; either we are senseless in
bestowing so much adoration upon it, or else we do look upon some internal
mysteries of great salvation in it: which though it was no good argument, yet
it was an Argument for defect of a better.

I therefore conclude, that Kneeling in the act of receiving, was not brought
into the Church by Antichrist; nor ever was yet strengthened with any Papal
Decree; but has been made a foot-banke unto that Antichristian monster of
Transubstantiation, only by mis-interpretation of it, by such as sought out
all means, and laid hold on any colorable thing, that might suckle the
monster of their brain, when it was once borne. Beza therefore, and other
Churches which live pell-mell with the Popish, where Idolatry is openly in the
streets committed, in bowing to a piece of Bread, as if it were nothing else
but Christ himself shifted into a new suit of apparel, had reason enough to
forbear this gesture in their Churches: and to dissuade it, as a thing which
had been, and therefore may be dangerous. Beza Epist. 12 and adversus
Heshusium in Opusculis page 311. and quest. and respons. Quest. 243. Edit. 1570.
And therefore Beza does no where condemn the use of it as in it self
unlawful, but only defend the Churches which, in respect of the peril that
might ensue, or out of a desire to root the Bread-worship out of the minds of
men, do decline the use of this Ceremony.

And this (what ever that fiery, though learned man, which compiled Altar
Damascenum, say to the contrary) was the judgment of all those Divines, who,
in the name of the French and Dutch Churches, made certain observations upon
the Harmony of confessions set out at Geneua, in Beza his time, An. 1581. for
in their fourth Observation upon the confession of Bohemia. in Sect. 14.
Confess. de Caena; and on these words, Herm Confess (...) ^^nea. (...) Sect 14.
page 120.
Populus autem fidelium, vsitatissime in genua procumbeus hoc accipit, the
faithful most usually receive it kneeling on their knees; say thus: In hoc
etiam ritu suam cuique Ecclesiae libertatem saluam relinquendam arbitramur: non
quod per se hunc morem damnamus, (cum hac, cautione de qua modo diximus
obseruatione quarta) sed quoniam ad (...), ex animis euellendam, prestitit
plerisque. locis e^m ceremoniam aboleri, in ipsorum signorum sumptione, de qua
vid. supra obseruat. 1. ad Heluetiam priorem. In this rite also, we leave each
Church to her own liberty; not that we condemn it simply as evil in it
self (used with caution given in our fourth Observation) but for the rooting
of B^ead-worship our of men's minds, it is better that in most places it were
casherred, etc. Where is manifest that they judge this Ceremony, in it self
lawful; and therefore leave all Churches to their own liberty, only with
caution, that it be not used as any means to cherish the Bread-worship. For
which, both the Articles of our Religion, and the Declaration related before,
have put in good caution. As for the rest, they do rather make a good defense
for such Churches as do forbear it, then at all condemn any that use it.

And Dialection Eucharistiae printed and published with the second volume of
Beza his Works, and in his life time, at Geneua, Ann. 1570. says, Veteres
Eucharistiam cum summareuerentia and magno honor tutos tamen ab Jdololatria
fuisse, quod nobis etiam, antiqua disciplina reuocata, and catechismi forma
restituta, contingeret. The Ancients received the Eucharist with all reverence
and great honor (that is, as he says on the next page, adorantes, adoring
it) and yet were free from all Idolatry, which also we might do, by recalling
the ancient discipline, and restoring the form of catechism.

The Bread-worship was brought in by Antichrist indeed, and was as Cofter
(though to another purpose) says, the greatest idolatry that ever was in the
world, if the Bread be not turned into the true and natural body of Christ;
as, upon my soul, it is not.

This Ceremony was not brought in by him, but turned from the Creator by an
horrible blindness, to the creature; from which, if we return it to the true
owners of all religious Adoration, shall this be our sin, or theirs that
will needs condemn us? I lament to see the transport of Passion of such as
say, the Formalists seem to believe the Real presence in the Elements; which,
if it be true, God will judge us; if not, he that accuses falsely is guilty
of that which he objecteth as a slander; and by the law of God, to bear the
same punishment.

Object. There remains the last Objection, viz. That it is not lawful to
kneel before a consecrated creature; Ergo, not to kneel in receiving the
Communion.

Answ. The Antecedent is not simply true. The consequence will not hold, if the
Antecedent were absolutely true; therefore, the Argument fails. The humane
nature of Christ is a consecrated creature, and yet was it lawful to bow
before it, as the flesh of God.

The Ark of God, the Temple, the Holy Mountain, the Altar of God, were mere
creatures consecrated of God. So was the Bush, Cloud, the fire which came from
heaven, for that present use of them: yet the people of God (as has been
said) bowed before them, worshipping not the creature, but the Creator; and
that they did this lawfully (though it was not to commanded of God) we have
heard out of Altar Damascenum, and are well assured, out of the Scriptures,
Psalm. 99.6.8. etc. The terms therefore of bowing before must be stated in
some certain meaning to make the Antecedent true.

1. Bowing before, is sometimes, only bowing down, when a thing is before us
and is in sensu diuiso, in a divided sense; when the bowing has no intendment
to that thing which is before us. And thus, when ever we bow down, we must
needs bow before some creature; consecrated, or not, makes no difference in
this Notion.

2. Bowing before a creature, is in sensu conjuncto, in a coniunctiue sense;
and is twofold, first when the creature is respected only as obiectum a quo,
the object from which, not ad quod to which we take occasion to bow, by
occasion whereof we bow our selves not at all to the consecrated creature, but
unto God who has sanctified the creature to be a sign of his presence, or
special grace, of which sort are the instances given, and this is also lawful.

3. Bowing before, is also sometimes bowing to the creature, i.e. to determine
the Adoration in the creature, whether for it own sake, or in Relation to
something else, as the Papists mostly profess their bowing to be done to
their Images of Christ, etc. And to the very Species of bread and wine, as
united or conjoined to the person of Christ. Minutius Faetix in Oct. apud
Arnobium.
And thus to bow to any consecrated creature, or before it, is Idolatry; and so
it is, to bare the head, or kiss the hand, as the old Idolaters did when the
Image of Serapis passed by them. He that shall charge this Church so to bow to
the consecrated creature, either for it self, or for Christ's sake, shall
apparently slander it. See before the Churches public Declaration.

But suppose it were unlawful to bow before a consecrated Creature,
respectively to it as an occasional object only: and so make the Antecedent
thus; It is unlawful to bow down to God before any Consecrated creature,
respectively as an object, from whence we take occasion to bow: yet will not
the Consequence hold, that therefore it is unlawful to receive the Sacrament
kneeling. For it is not ordained, nor understood in this Church, that the
Kneeling has any respect unto the Consecrated Creature, so much as Obiectum a
quo, but only has a respect unto the Declaration of our humble acknowledging
the benefits internally communicated to the worthy Receiver. And therefore
there is no show of Adoration made before the Consecrated creatures, when they
stand on the Table before us, or at any time else; but only we kneel in the
act of receiving them. Nor does the Minister come always before, but more
usually on the one side of the Communicants disposed in their Seats. The Signs
therefore are but accidentally before the Communicants, when they receive; that
is, for the reason of the Distribution, and not of purpose brought before them,
to take up any Adoration by the sight of them unto God.

Altar Damascenum, taking it for granted, that We adore Christ before the
holy signs occasionally as before objects a quo, tells us, that this is all
one with that Image Worship, which some of the learned Papists, as Durandus and
Holcot, etc. do allow, who would not have the Adoration at all referred to the
Image, but to the Prototype: And, to maintain his slander, is content to say,
that their Images also are consecrated. Wherein, beside his mistaking of our
Kneeling, he commits two faults; one, when he equivocateth in the term
Consecrated, as it Gods consecration, and that which is merely of men, were
alike. A second, when he compares Images of Gods making and institution, with
Images made by the lust of men against Gods forbidding.

One man, at the Baptism of his Child, will make a Prince to be one of his
Witnesses, or as we say, Gossips; and without asking him leave, he sets out a
Deputy, and observes him with State in reference to the Prince. Another has
the Grant of the Prince of such a favor, the Prince designeth his Deputy to
represent his Person, that Person is served in State, as if he were a Prince,
not to honor him, but the Prince whom for that time he personates. Are these
two Cases alike warrantable, or alike blameable? Such is our Case: the Papists
without leave make a Crucifixe; and, to the honoring, not of the Crucifixe,
but of Christ crucified, do suite and service thereto, or before it
respectively to it as a type: we have the Image of Christ crucified in the
Supper, by his own appointment, we do our homage before them, not as
Creatures, but as his deputies, Sacraments; nor, at all to them as they are
Creatures, but by occasion of them, or by them to Christ whose they are. Is
this all one? This I speak ex Hypothesi, supposing, not granting that we do
perform any Adoration to them in relation to Christ himself in our kneeling.
Zanch. de us. ^^is externi (...). page 497. Edit. 1623
Hear Zanchius. Non inepte ex hoc Apostoli loco. (1 Cor. 11 27.) colligi
potest, Sacramenta enternis etiam honori and reuerentia signis esse efficiend^,
non propter ipsa, sed propter illorum institutorem Chrostum. Nam etiam dominus
in lege cum vetuit adorari imagines ab hominibus fabricatae, a contrario
docuit, suas imagines Sacramenta minirum rerum coelestium symbola non sine
aliqua reuerentia and honor esse perticipanda. Atque hoc obseruatum vidimus in
veteri Ecclesia, tum Israelitica tum Christiana. It may not unfitly be
collected from this place of the Apostle (1. Cor. 11.27.) that the Sacraments
ought to be honored with even external signs of honor and reverence, not
for themselves, but for their Institutor, Christ. For even in the Law when the
Lord forbad the adoring of Images of men's making, on the c^ntr^ary he taught
that his Images, the Sacraments, being symboles or signs of heavenly things,
should be participated not without some reverence and honor. And this we see
observed in the ancient Church, as well Israelitish as Christian.

Object. But God has not appointed the Sacraments to be Adored, (says he) or
himself to be Adored before them?

Answ. Indeed the Sacraments consisting as well of Actions ordained to be done
by us: as the Blessing, Breaking, Receiving* Eating and Drinking of the Bread,
etc. as of the Elements which are sanctified, cannot be said to be appointed
to be Ad^red, unless we shall Adore our action of eating the Bread, and
drinking of the Cup of our Lord, which is so a part of the Sacrament, that
without them it were no Sacrament to us. That Christ has not appointed us to
Adore him in the receiving of them, both Internally and Externally, is an
heretical doctrine, though the expression [ Externall] be not determined of
him.

O^ject. But, Veneration of the Sacraments, says Altar Damascenum we allow;
but not Adoration.

Answ. See now that all the strife shall be about words, which have (as I have
showed) no formal difference of signification, but only by the designement of
men in their use, nor in the particular, outward gestures; which, by divine
institution, shall difference the one from the other.

Object. But kneeling is only lawful in actions of Adoration, i.e. Divine?

Answ. This is not true, for it is confessed to be lawful in Civil use. And
I pray you, what action of Gods public service is there, which is not an
Action of Adoration, how ever the expression thereof be not in every action of
his worship necessarily or conveniently one and the same. Zanch de cultu Dei
externo l. 1. These 2. in fine p. 421. Edit. 619.
Visibilis externaque venetatio and Adoratio ad omnes ferme actiones diuini
cultus concurrit, visible and external veneration and Adoration concurres to
almost all actions of divine worship, says Zanchius.

Thus we kneel while the ten Commandments are read, party to express our
respect of that Law given by the voice of God himself on Mount Sinai, with
great state and terror, a Law fit to cast us down and humble us; partly, for
the prayer then subjoyned to every precept for Grace to observe it, and pardon
for our failings,

Object. Geniculando excipere verba ex ore Lectoris aut Concionatoris proflata
ratione sanctitatis, esset idololatria, Alt. Damasc. page 797.
to receive the word kneeling, as coming from the mouth of a Reader or Preacher
in respect of holiness were idolatry.

Answ. This case comes not home to that of receiving the Sacraments, which,
in that Action, we do not look at as creatures, but as diuina symbola,
signifying and sealing the Covenant of Grace to us. But yet the Opponent durst
not say it is idolatry to hear the word, kneeling; but, Externa reuerentia
est, vt post actionem sacram, (viz. of preaching) coram ministro versium
inclinantes deum adorent. Ex 4.24 and 12 28. Neh 8. Apoc. 3.9 Fenner. Theol
Edit. 1589. p. 88.
when it is done ratione sanctitatis in respect of holiness, which must needs
carry in to the person of the Preacher, and not unto God. When Moses and Aaron
brought the message to the Elders of Israel, Exodus 4.31. they bowed their
heads, no doubt before Moses and Aaron, and not at their backs, and
worshipped, not the Messengers of God, for their holiness, but God for sending
by them that gracious Message. When we shall profess to bow before, and to
the holy mysteries, for respect of their holiness, let us be branded and not
spared; till then it were fit that men spared to calumniate the Servants and
Churches of the living God.

CAP. 33. The Conclusion consisting of some private occurrents, and requests of
his Friend.
ANd thus Sir, to satisfy your desire, I have too largely Answered to the
objected Questions propounded in your letter; and almost within the time of
three weeks which you limited. If you meet with needless repetitions, and
find (as is like you may) many defaults, bear with me. For I have written
this, as Jerusalem was builded, in a troublous time, yea verily in the most
troublous time (all things considered) that ever yet came upon me, the very
hour of darkness and shadow of death.

In this time therefore I had cause to look about me, and to consider what I
had now in hand, which I also did. And if in all this time wherein I have been
soaked and laid to steep in so much tribulation, I had found any wavering or
doubtfulnesse in my mind about these matters, I have written of, assure your
self I should have desisted. But standing fully persuaded as in the sight of
the Lord, that I have the truth with me, and follow it. I did, as by starts
and fits I could, His private letter contained a requests: but because the
first of the three concerned only some private sad affairs of his own, and of
some of his near friends, that is here omitted, as not at all belonging to the
matter here debated.
proceed, knowing that the line of divine light ought to sway our judgments,
and not either the sunshine of peace, or shadows of the evening stretched out
upon us. Yea and in truth I took this task upon me as a Medicine, to
restrain (what I could) my troubled spirit from continual feeding upon that
very bitter herb which had troubled it.

Now I have two Requests unto you, one for the Church of God; the other for my
self.

For the Church of God, I beseech you by our Lord Jesus Christ, that if you
think as I do, that the Ceremonies in Question, howeuer they may seem to us
Inconvenient in some respects; yet, are not unlawful, but such as men (not
imprisoned with prejudice) may with good consciences observe, as matters of
external Order, imposed on us by lawful authority. Then sir, do your best
endeavor to hold those that stand wavering unto their colors. And do not yet
make so much way to any evil affected, or open enemies to our Religion, nor
weaken our party against the common Adversaries of our faith by disunion of
themselves. Let not, for these things in which the kingdom of God stands
not, those things in which it does stand, be abandoned. Let no man build upon
his former persuasion, which can excuse no longer then till it be better
informed. Let no man walk after the Tradition of men, though good and learned.
Nay let them consider that of grave and holy Zanchy, Epist. lib. p. 391.
who writing one Epistle to Queen Elizabeth for Abatement of these Ceremonies,
withal wrote another at the same time to that Reverend and holy Bishop Jewel
to persuade the Ministers not to leave their functions for those things, if the
Queen would not remove them, or slack the urging of them. Tell them Beza
opusc. in vitae Caluini ad Ann. 1538. p. 368.
how Calvin, though he disliked the reducing of wafer-bread into Geneua in the
time of his exile, yet at his return never liked to struggle for the change of
it. Remember them of that praise which Master Fox gave to that worthy Bishop
and Martyr Fox, Martyr. p. 13^1.
Hooper, how for the public service of the Church he bare and suffered
patiently the private contumely of his Conformity. And wish them to take heed
that they regard, not too much man's day; For he that shall judge us, is God. As
for you self, I hope there will be no need to bid you look upon the
wonderful blessing of God upon you and your Ministry, above many of us, while
you have used these things with a good conscience. Sirre up our brethren who
have some authority in the hearts of those godly people, who are unhappily
transported to an unutterable dislike of these things which they understand
not, and to file off that rough edge of their not so-much opinions, as
detestation. And do what you can to move all such as need it, to
consideration, whether it shall not be better, and upon their deathbed more
cordial, to bear (not being unlawful) the use of these things, rather then
to occasion the rending of the Church, the displeasure of our Governors, the
stopping of our mouths, the desolation (for ought we know) of our flocks,
the distress of our families, and withal (which is not the least) the
confirming of an error (by our if not doctrine, yet example) in the hearts of
all those, who are, or shall be led to condemn as intolerable, that which God
will justify as lawful in us; and so does, as I am fully persuaded, by his
Word.

Touching my self, I have these requests to you; that you would remit this
tract unto meet again, without giving any copy of it, that I may (which I now
could not) reuise, and amend it. And let me have your free judgment of it; and
if you take me to be deciued, set up some clear light before me, and pray
that mine eyes may be opened. And I shall give glory to God, who knows the
uprightness of my heart in this matter.

For the rest, commend me to my friends, more specially to my etc. Let me
yet, of the little patch of life remaining, have some relief of comfort in
your love continued. And above all, pray for me that the Lord who chastises,
would keep me in his love, burn out the dross that is in me, sanctify me
wholly to himself, and the service of his Church, and keep me (as I hope he
will) fast knit unto himself in Christ, and when the time comes; yea, and
till then, vouchsafe to honor his own name in my life and death. Farewell.

FINIS.

