THe Triple crowned Vicar, horned Lamb-like,
Pretends Christ's sovereign power over Kings and States.
These horns, but borrowed, prove Rams horns to strik^
Even Christ himself ruling in Potentates.
Strong spells, that come in Jesus name, and find
Blind credulous zeal, to captivate the mind.
Who might this Monster be? his speech bewrayes:
It Is like the Dragon's, who to Christ durst say,
All worldly power is mine, I rule, I raise
Whom pleases me, and my behests obey.
Such the Popes voice, such is his practice too,
Kings he vnkings that will not kiss his shoe.
How comes it then, that since the Papal power
Is from the Dragon, all men do not see
The Pope is Antichrist, to over^ower
All that is called God? By reason, he
Makes shows, by Lambs horns seeming innocence,
His power is from divine Omnipotence.
His Triple-crowne three Kingdoms notes; what three?
Pope reckons four; three are controversorie:
Heaven he despaires, for surety Earth must be
His heaven the while, usurped tho; Purgatory
He holds by blind belief; but never any
Questioned the fowrth due to him and his Meiny.
Lo underneath a Romish Prelate placed
With teh Popes Bull Romes Catholics absolving
From th'Oath of their Allegiance; but not embraced
By th'wiser, truer English; most, resolving
Clossely to cleave unto their sovereign head,
Least foreign tyranny might on them tread.
The noble Charles, with sword and scepter armed,
Ready to'ffend his foes, defend his friends,
Victorious proves, and Papal charms vncharmed,
While royal throne justice and truth defends.
How can that state but, undivided, stand,
In spite of foes, where love and laws command?
THE BAITING OF THE POPES BVLL. Or An unmasking of the Mystery of iniquity,
folded up in a most pernicious Breeue or Bull, sent from the Pope lately into
England, to cawse a Rent therein, for his Reentry. With an advertisement to the
Kings seduced subjects.



By H. B.

My Son, fear the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given
to chang.

Pro. 24. 21. Bernard ser. 3. in dedicatione Ecclesiae. ^avendum, ne quis
pusillanimitate deiectus, fugias a munitione, vbi trepidaus timore, vbi non est
^imor: vbi vero summum periculum, insana temeritate securus.

Imprinted at LONDON by W. I. for MICHAELL SPARK. 1627.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign.
I ACCOUNT it my greatest misery, that being to present Your Majesty with a
business of such consequence, so neerelie concerning the safety of Your sacred
Person and Crown: I am enforced to adventure so rich a freight in so brittle a
bark, so ticklish to be overturned with the least disgust, or blast of
displeasure; wherein yet I should be happy* if miscarying herein, I might but
perish alone. Mine own experience might be sufficient to teach me to fear.
For if the noble Queen Hester, so gracious in the Kings eyes, yet feared to
hazard her person into the Presence uncalled: how much more a poor Outcast?
yet between fear of the iron law, and hope of the golden scepter she pressed
in with this resolution, And if I perish, I perish; choosing death rather, then
not to discharge the duty she owed to Gods people, now destinated, and doomed
to destruction. Only this is my comfort, look what advantage that excellent
Queen had of my despicable person, as a Petitioner: no less have I of her, in
regard of the royal Person petitioned. She had to deal with a heathen King,
the Captiuer of Gods people, and who had already consigned their Massacre, and
that by a Decree irrevocable, according to the Law of the Medes and Persians,
(though, a it appeared, without his special knowledge, Haman having abused the
Kings hand and seal, to his own wicked purposes, as chap. 5. 7.) besides
(which might be, not the least discouragement) she was to pass the Pikes of a
most tyranni all and unkingly law, forbidding any, upon pain of death, to
enter into the Kings presence, uncalled, as Hester now had been for 30. days,
Haman in the mean time having the only Monopoly of the Kings care, who like
the vast lunary body, eclipsed the beams of his favor, especially from Gods
own people, whose cause the while lay a bleeding, and became the more
desperate, through the inaccessiblenesse of intercessors to move Kingly
compassion upon their just complaints; such were the difficulties, which the
noble Hester was to encounter with: yet poor I, live under a more benign
Climate, under a Christian Prince, a Protector of Gods people, Defender of the
faith, one, whose royal presence is not by any severe law locked up from the
free access of the poorest suitors, whose natural disposition also, like the
Sun vneclipsed, is freely to impart light and heat to the inferior
Creatures; yea whose own dear Person and crown is embarked in the same
adventure of Gods people and His, to rejoice or suffer together: all these
giving me encouragement, and as it were reaching forth the golden scepter,
while I humbly present to Your sacred Majesty, the dangerous condition, wherein
the royal scepter it self (by all the prognosticating signs of a Papal Bull
or Breeue, lately come into England) is like, without speedy preue^tiues, to be
involved. David, now desolate and disconsolate about Ziglag, was willing to
harken to a poor starueling Amalekite lad, giving him intelligence where his
enemies were. I acknowledge my self unworthy to do Your Majesty the least
seruise, and I could have wished this Task rather to any other: yet the
indeleble character of my fidelity, so often reimprinted in my heart by sacred
Oath in Your Highness service (besides the habitual affection of a loyal
subject) deeply engaged me (rather then it should be undone) in this
addressement. And God forbid, that by ouercautelous, or rather cowardly
silence, I should contract the guilt of Misprison, of no less then high
treason against Your Majesty's Crown and Scepter. Yea otherwise, I should be
also ungrateful to God, who of late has mercifully if not miraculouslie
preserved my life from a Iesuited Assassin. The causes, with the Circumstances,
I here omit to trouble Your Majesty withal Only I take occasion to mention
it, as not altogether unworthy of Your Majesty's knowledge. For what assured
confidence may not Your Majesty have in the protection of that God, whose eyes
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the
behalf of them, Chron. 16. 9.
whose heart is perfect toward him? If his divine vigilant eye watches over
the life of the poorest, yet faithful Ministers, to deliver them even in the
midst of danger: how much more over the more precious persons of Kings and
Princes, while, as Gods Vicegerents, they faithfully and diligently execute his
will by justice and judgment? It is for the Infidel Virginians, for fear of
the Devil, to adore and please him with their gifts, neglecting God, because he
is good: but faithful Christians, do by the true fear and worship of God,
secure themselves from all Devils, and Devils incarnate, as the bloody
Jesuits. His Promise is, which is specially made to Christian Princes, He
has given his Angels charge over thee, and they shall keep thee in all thy
ways; which (In all thy ways) teaches us, how necessary it is, to have the
wisdom of the Serpent combined with the Doves simplicity, in the use of due
means to prevent dangers. For if Jesuitical malice will not spare the lowly
shrubb: how much less the lofty Cedar? If a poor subject may be the object
of Popish revenge, for standing for the truth: much more a noble King, the
Defender of the Faith. Which has possessed me with the greater jealousy, and
fear for your Majesty's safety. Nor is it a Panicke, or causeless fear. If I
did but dream of any danger toward Your Majesty, how should I fear it
waking? But here is neither Dream, nor Divination, but plain demonstration of
imminent, if not rather present danger; such as is worthy to possess Your
Naiestie with a most prudent, and vigilant fear; such as the learned Bishop in
his Tortura, wished to abound in your royal Father of famous memory, and we
no less in Your Majesty. The cause (I say) of all is, the Popes Bull or
Breeue, even now persuading and straightly charging his Catholic Sons in
Enland, (as he calls them) upon no terms to take the Oath of Allegiance to
Your Majesty, as being not their King, but their enemy. Such Breeues never
come, but they betoken some notable mischief not far off. Like the Coote,
which flying to the shore crying, prognosticates a sharp storm at hand: or as
the Owl, which being seen in the City, portends destruction to it: or as a
prodigious Comete; presaging the fatal periods of Princes or States, specially
where they exercise their maliguant influence. Yet howsoever these may prove
uncertain, as being Signs only, but no causes of future events: yet the Popes
Bull, being not only a Sign, but a cawse conducing to, and producing
mischief, and that even exprofesso; ought not slightly to be regarded. Omne
malum a Breuibus, Breuia a Pontifice said the foresaid Bishop upon the same
occasion. A Breeue was sent from the Pope, to prepare the way for the Spanish
Invasion in 88. Another, for the Gunpowder Treason. Remarkable instances,
sufficeent, if any, to admonish England ever to look for a terrible
thunderclap, upon such a flash of Lightning Nor ever came Bull from Rome, more
cunningly couched, and fuller of subtle insinuations, then this, as being the
express Image and Model of the Mystery of iniquity. Formerly in the darker
night of ignorance, the Owl of Rome durst fly and flutter about, seasing
plu^me upon the prey: but here, where the Gospel shines, she is feign to
wink with her eyes and to retire her self in the reserved corners of her
ambiguous and twilight Equivocations. Such is the curious frame of this Breeue
being such, as Paul 5 said of his, written post l^ngam et grauem deliberasionem
de omnibus, quae in illis continentur, adhibitam. No doubt but this Beer was a
long time a licking into this form it has. But the sum is, the Breeue
contains nothing, but matter of high Treason against Your Majesty, inciting
Your Subjects to defection from You, and erecting their hopes for Trophies and
triumphs, which the Pope plentifully promises to them. I have adventured (the
weakest of ten thousand) to vnty this Gordian knot, unmasking the mystery
thereof in a convenient brevety: but all is of no force, without Your Majesty's
sword, like that of Alexanders, to hew it in sunder. The lesuits at this
present, like Sampsons foxes with their firebrands, are busy kindling
combustion every where in your Kingdom, using this Breeue as Bellows to blow
to the fire. A man would think, that seeing the foxes and woules are so rife,
the dogs should be muzzled and tied up. Or when thieves are so brief and
bold, the sword of Justice shouldly rusting in the sheath. But howsoever, we
are sure Your Majesty has not been wanting in publishing Proclamation upon
Proclamation, to banish them the Land. Only they learn thereby, to walk the
more invisible, hoping by Gyges his Ring, to obtain their desire. And when
they are taken, no ligatures of laws can long hold them, but Proteus like they
have their evasions. Something is the reason, that our Laws have lost their
sting, and become Drones: and the Jesuits prove the waspes to robb us of our
honey. It was wittily said of Polydor Virgil, Regnum Angliae Regnum Dei: his
meaning was, because none seemed to take care of England, but God. And true it
is, his divine Providence has from time to time, been a miraculous preserver
of it. Yet some means must be used. In 88 that Masculine Queen slept not. At
the Powderplot, Your royal Father, by commanding dililigent search, prevented
the blow. God gave a happy success to both. And no doubt, but he will be the
same God to defend Your Majesty, blessing Your pious zeal, in the rooting out
of his and Your enemies, whose prime Article of their faith is, treason to
Kingdoms and States. Prove. 6.
Solomon says, How shall a man carry fire in his bosom, and not be burned?
What should I need to propouud to Your Majesty, the examples of those noble and
religious Kings of Judah, who, setting themselves resolutely to reform the
decayed and disordered state of Gods worship, proved through Gods special
blessing, miraculously victorious over all their enemies. Your Majesty knows
them of a child; which imitating now being a Man, and a King, God shall be
with You, as he was with them, and You with him. King Ahashuerus, setting
apart but one night to more sad contemplations, and reading over the Chronicles
(a worthy Precedent, for a prince sometimes so to break his sleep) how was it
a means to cawse the light of Gods people, to break forth from obscure
darkness? We poor swains espying the storm coming, to whom should we
run, but to our Pilot? Or being sick, but to the Physician? Under God, Your
Majesty is the great Pilot of this Island, which like a goodly shipperides at
Anchor in the midst of the Sea, now in danger to be tossed with terrible
storms; which the leakes will hardly brook, if they be not the sooner stopped.
You, are under God, the great Physician, who only can cure (as the Kings
evil, so) the inveterate Gangrene of this body, whereof Your Majesty is the
head. Give us leave, dread Sovereign, in our extremity of danger, to cry out
to Your Majesty for help. We know, as God has dignified You with a Diadem:
so he has qualified Your Majesty with most excellent Princely indowments. For
instance, vouschsafe leave to Your poor old servant, to remember a most
Princely speech used often by Your Highness, HONESTY IS THE BEST POLICY. A
Motto for a King, and worthy to be engraven in the lasting Monuments of Your
Kingly Acts, even with Your own royal hands. I may not presume, least I
should offer both violence and wrong, with my unskillful pensil to limme out
more largely this most beautiful, and well proportioned Image of a Princes
virtuous mind. But I dare say (which I refer to the best judgment of Your
Majesty, ablest to judge of Your own noble sayings) it is an exquisite
Aphorism, or Abstract of that divine Rule prescribed to Kings by the Lord and
Judge of Kings: It shall be, when the King sits upon the throne of his
Kingdom, that he shall write him h copy of this Law in a Book, out of that
which is before the Priests and Levites: and it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to serve the
Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do
them; that his heart be not lift up above his brethren, and that he turn not
aside, from the Commandment, to the right hand, or to the left: to the end
that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his children in the
midst of Israel. Now what is the sum of all this, but, Honesty is the best
Policy? From this Root, to wit, Honesty, the heathen derived all the branches
of virtue. As, those four Cardinal virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance, the subject of those three books of Offices, Tully draws from
the force and nature of Honesty, as himself expresses. And those four also,
Iethro, Moses father in law, in his direction to his Son, requires to be in
all Magistrates, saying, Thou shall provide out of all the people, men of
Courage, such as fear God, men of truth, and hating Covetousness. Still the
sum total is, Honesty is the best Policy. Thus need we go no further,
then Your Majesty, to learn the rule of all good policy, whereof Honesty is
the ground, as containing all duties both to God and man, in Prince, or people.

Thus have I, though slenderly (for the which I most humbly crave Your
Majesty's general pardon) discharged my faithful duty, in discovering so
great a danger toward Your Majesty. It pertaines to the wisdom of Your
Majesty, to provide speedy means for the prevention; that Your Kingdoms may
not become a prey to the enemy, nor Your sacred Person exposed to the peril
of being forsaken by Your own Subjects, whom the Pope instigateth, by the
authority of his Bull, and by the incessant industry of his Jesuits, to stand
closse to his Holiness, against Your Majesty, when occasion serves. His
Breeue also mentions what As a little before the Powder-plott, the Jesuits
published a book entitled, The seven spark^, and it inciting the Romish
Catholics to pray for the good succes of the Catholic enterprise.
anxious prayers the Church of Rome now makes for her Catholic Sons in
England. There is some weighty cause in hand sure. We poor Ministers hope,
that Your Majesty will be pleased to call a general Fast, to frustrate all
Romes prayers. We have all fared the better for the last public Fast, which
Your Majesty proclaimed for the averting of unseasonable weather, against the
last harvest. And it is memorable, that on the same day wherein the Fast was
kept generally over all England, began the heavens to clear up their clowdy
countenance, and so continued, till they had brought us in a plentiful
harvest, in stead of a feared famine: Not that we place any virtue in a Fast:
but because a Fast with humble prayer prevails much with God, James 5.
not only as being commanded by him, and having a promise annexed: but for the
necessity of it to be joined with true repentance, and reformation, not only
of men's manners, and all reigning sins, public and private, but also of the
worship of God, being purged from all the pollutions of Idolatry and
superstition, which are an abomination in Gods sight, and especially a clearing
the Coast of all Romish Jesuits and Idolatrous Priests, whose religion is
treason against Your Majesty, and God himself. When the good King Hezechiah
had received the blasphemous letter of Senacherib King of Assyria, 2 Kings 19.
he went into the Temple of the Lord, humbled himself, and prayed, spreading
the Letter for the Lord to read and revenge all the blasphemies contained in
it, both against God, and the King, persuading his subjects to defection from
him. But lo here a letter sent into England from the King of the spiritual
Babylon, full of most impious blasphemies against Your Majesty, most
Antichristianly usurping a power over Your subjects, charging them to disavowe
their fidelity unto Your Majesty: shall not this justly provoke Your Majesty
with Hezechiah, to go into the Lords Temple, and there publicly entreat the
Lord to take revenge on such blasphemies, and to turn the mischief, which
Rome and her confederates now intend and machinate against Your Person and
Crown, upon their own head, as Ezechias obtained of the Lord? yea, Your
Majesty thus doing, all Gods faithful Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 15.
as so many Esayes to King Ezechiah, as so many Azariahs to King Asa, dare
promise Your Majesty, both certain victory over Your enemies, and a constant
peace with prosperity, while You constantly follow the worthy examples of those
religious Kings of Juda: which grace the Lord give unto Your Majesty in
abundance. Amen.

Your Majesty's most loyal subject, though unworthy servant: HENRY BVRTON.

TO THE LORD DVKE OF BVCKINGHAM his Grace.
Right Honorable
THE Dutiful zeal I bear to the safety of my dread Sovereign, and dear
Country, inforceth me, (otherwise loath to put my finger into the fire) in the
second place to solicit Your Grace, to be the more careful to prevent the
danger. When King Saul and Abner, with the whole guard were in a dead sleep,
so that David had the opportunity to take away the Kings spear, and Pot of
water by him, only to testify his fidelity to the King, he called alowd to
Abner, and awakening him said, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to
thee in Israel? wherefore have thou not kept thy Lord the King? surely ye are
worthy to dye, etc. But neither can I say so altogether, nor need I cry so
loud to your Grace, unless these many businesses, which will scarce suffer you
to sleep so soundly as did Abner, will neither suffer such a dwarf as my
self easily to be heard. But speaking for the King, I hope I shall not be
denied Audience. Nor are they good subjects, persecuted as David, of whom the
King is in danger: but such, as though they have small cause to complain of
persecution, yet are instigated to deny unto their Sovereign that loyalty and
Allegiance, which all true subjects owe unto their lawful Prince. Does not
your Grace erect your most earnest attention to this? But who dare thus
instigate the Kings subjects against him? No less then the Pope, and that by a
Breeue or Bull lately sent over into England, wherein he straightly charge his
Catholic Sons (as he terms them) upon no terms to take the Oath of
fidelity to the King, inciting and animating them, as against their Enemy, as
the Breeue can testify. Nor had I, I confess, been thus bold to meddle in
such a matter, if I had seen but some public Edict for the burning of the
Breeue, as also for the effectual banishing of all Jesuits, the only Factors
for the Pope in such Adventures, for Treason and Rebellion. But be like notice
has, not as yet been given thereof to your Grace. And that you may be not
the less sensible of the danger of a Papal Breeue, You may be pleased to
know, that such never appears, but as some prodigious Comet, not signifying
only, but designing and producing some sad fatality. Thus did the Pope in 88;
thus at the Gunpowder plott: Thus, now. This Romish Lightning may warn us of a
Crack not far off: God keep us from the Thunderbolt. If it were only a bare
prognosticating sign, it were the less; Sapiens dominabitur Astris: but being
an operative Instrument, wherein the Jesuits are Agents, to improve it to the
utmost of their Masters advantage, it is not so to be slited. Jesuits? why are
not all Jesuits packed away long since by Proclamation? Alas Sir, you may be
pleased to know, they are like cunning Iugglars, that can pass and repasse at
pleasure. They say, England is fuller of them at this day then ever. And now
while the Popes iron is in the fire, how do they sweat, in beating it to
perfection? But if they be caught, they are put in prison. Alas, they are
there, but as a bird tied to the nett, to call in other birds, which seeming to
come to releive the prisoner, they are more entangled themselves. But thence
they are quickly dismissed to be gone, and void the Land. Alas; they do but
play the cunning Duck, which sent out, does by her wily insinuation, toll and
train hundreds, and thousands into her Masters Nett. Thus cunningly can they
play at fast and loose. How then shall these Proteus-like Foxes be taken?
Certainly there is no other way, but to hunt them out with the Kings own
dogs. Your Grace is the great Iusticiarius Forestae. And anciently Justices in
Air were sent with Commission into sundry Counties, to hear such causes
especially, as were termed Plees of the Crown. Lo here a great plee of the
Crown, yea such, as where in the title of the Kings Crown is not only
questioned, but strongly usurped by the Claim of a foreign Power. What
English ears can with patience hear such an insolency? When King Ahashuerus
did but understand of the desperate estate of the Jews, wherein that wicked
Haman (as Hester told the King) had brought them: the good King by and by sent
forth his Edicts by Post into every Province, to encourage and arm the poor
people of God, to stand upon their guard, and so they prevented and overcame
the peril. Now who stand more deeply charged with the care, of the Kings
Crown, then your Grace? So that I need not (I trow) in such a case, use
spurs to your agility and readiness, for the putting of all dull courses in
speedy execution, for not only the apprehension, but the condign punishment
of such kind of Malefactors. Why, what Malefactors? such, as Jesuits are: not
only of factious, treacherous, traitorous spirits, as they are men, possessed
with the spirit of Iesuitisme: but even by virtue and force of their Order and
Profession, Traitors ex professo. They must be so, they are bound to be so,
else they are no Jesuits, else must they renounce their Holy Order of the
society of Jesus. And is it possible that such should roust in England? Nay
revel and riot? Nay, not only be professed traitors themselves; but drawing
Parties to their side continually, even to the dividing of the limbs, the
arms, and shoulders, legs and feet from the Head of this goodly Politic
body? It is the fashion indeed, in other neighbor Popish States publickely to
allow and auow such kind of Creatures in the State. But none have more reason
to uphold them then, the Spaniard, their good Master. For certainly in time, if
they be suffered to go on, they will bring all Christendom under the Spanish
yoke, God forbid. Yet if they should so do, I make a question, whether the
Spaniard would suffer such pragmatical spirits any longer in Christendom,
lest, as the restles sea, having wrought as far as it can one way, it work as
far as fast the contrary way. It is likly then; that he would send them into
the Turks Dominions; into Persia, and all those Eastern Empires to make
complete the Monarchy of Spain, that joining the two Indies together, and
circling in whole globe of the earth, his Motto may then be, Ne plus vltra. But
why do I roue so far, when our home is in such danger? What is to be done?
shall I shoot a fools bolt. Shall I be bold with your Grace? Why not? I have
heard men say, you are of a noble disposition, which will easily pardon a
fools bluntness. In brief then: Your Grace knows, the King wants money
extremely. You know again, that Treason is insufferable; to wink at it, to
conceal it, brings a man within Misprision of treason. You may be pleased all
to know, that all Jesuits, as by their profession, so in their practice, are
high Traitors to Kings and States. You know again, that all Judges and
Justices of peace in this land, are sworn to the King, to see the laws duly
executed, but especially upon fellons and traitors. You know, that all such, as
shall be found guilty of such Perjury, or Misprision of treason. are
punishable, not only in their persons, but in their purses and estates. Can
the King then lack money, so long as there are (as they say) so many Jesuits
in the land, which pass every where unpunished? O that your Grace would find
out the Delinquents in this kind? Nay let your Grace be assured, if you will
but take a round course with the Jesuits, in rooting them out, according to
their demerits, as it would bring safety and security to the Kings Person and
State, so being the faithful discharge of that trust reposed in you, what a
comfort will it be to your conscience, what a blessing from God might you
expect, yea, what love also from all the Kings loving subjects? Then would all
things proceed, succeed happily: whereas on the contrary, so long as Jesuits
with their factions and treasons are suffered in this land, what can we
expect, but that every thing we take in hand, should prove very unprosperous
and cross? For God is highly displeased with us, for suffering such miscreants
to practice their impieties on this his Church, to the great dishonor of his
Name, and Religion. And how shall we be worthy to enjoy such a King, such a
Country, such a Church, so many blessings of God, if we be so prodigal of
them? All the world admires the wonderful trust, that the King has reposed in
you: I pray God your Grace may answer it, in your faithful, prudent, and
vigilant care. I remember a speech, which his Highness, when he was Prince,
uttered among us, that were his servants: that when he had once committed any
business of trust, though of the highest nature, to a servant, he would never
conceive the least suspicion of his fidelity: adding, he had rather run the
hazard of his loyalty, then imbitter his generous trust with mixture of fear.
A strong obligation sure to a servant so entrusted. But some of his servants
trembling replied: what if he prove treacherous? has he not the more free and
secure opportunity to work his wicked ends? But (quoth his Highness) my care
shall be such in the Choice, as my trust shall be built upon a sure ground.
Pray God it be, so, said his servants. Now this we see verefied on the Kings
part toward your Grace. What a liberal trust has he reposed in you? such, as
not all the gold of Iudai should ever over balance. But we all beseech the
Lord, that his Majesty may not be deceived. And have we not cawse? Does not
the safty of the Kings Person and Crown, of this Church and State, of three
goodly Kingdoms, yea of the Gospel of Christ, and of true religion at home and
abroad, even over Christendom, and throughout the world, depend in a manner
upon this trust, committed to your Grace? King Achish would have made David
keeper of his Head for ever. But his Nobles thought it not safe least all their
own heads should have paid for it. But the trust committed to your Grace, is
not only of the Kings head but of all our heads, and of many millions more,
that never, saw your face. Have you not need then not only of David's true
heart toward his King but of Argus his 100 eyes, in watching over Io, committed
to his trust? Yet Argus for all his eyes, was so inchaunted with Mercuries
pipe, whom Jupiter had sent to steal her away: that falling all a sleep, Io
was taken away, and Argus had all his eyes pulled out, and put into the peacocks
train. But where are any such Mercuries to inchaunt your Grace? Where? Alas,
where are they not, specially where reatnes dwells, at ourt? Have we any need
of madd men, said the King of Gath? And may not the Court say, have we any need
of flatterers? These be the enchanting Mercuries. And of all other, none more
to be feared, then the Jesuits, whom the Jupiter of Rome sends into England,
to inchaunt and impose upon our most prudent, and vigilant Arguses, as the
learned Bishop has well observed in his Tortura Torti. Jesuits, a generation,
who as they are the most exquisite Artists in the science of flattery, so none
has more cause to beware and abhor them, then your Grace. But you know no
Jesuits. The greater is your danger, and ours. For they come in sheeps
clothing, in disguised habits, so bold, as they can no more blush then their
visards, lowly lowting, charming thechiefest with a counterfeit adoration, and
admiration of their I wot not what excellency. And were it not miraculous, if
the Court it self, especially your Graces house, should be free even from many
of such flies, which fliblowe the purest flesh with their flatteries? The
croaking Froggs of Egypt crawled up into the very Kings chambers: and are not
these compared by the Holy Ghost to Froggs, which go unto the Kings of the
earth, and by their crouching and croaking, and their Sardonian smiles, would
allure them to war against Christ and his gospel? It is good therefore your
Grace should make a speedy and diligent search in the Court, in your own
house, and in all the skirts of it round about, and so also throught the whole
land, what Jesuits are lurking any where, and to give them the reward of
Traitors. Shall we dally with such shall we think to win them with
complements? We know the fable of the snake fostered in the man's bosom: it is
but the Moral of a Jesuit, entertained with a Court-like Curtesy. Jesuits
are nettles, if gently handled, they sting: but if hard grasped, they hurt not.
Contrary to the Basil (the Emblem of the Throne established by mercy) which
being gently stroked on the hand, yields a pleasant smell, but crushed hard
upon it, unsavory. Your Grace taking this course, Parcere subjectis, et
debellare superbos, therein you truly discharge the trust committed unto you.
Whereas if the execution of good laws should be suspended, if treason and
traitors suffered, and If in this perilous season, our potent and professed
enemies should thus be armed against us, what can we expect, but confusion of
all? And how shall your Grace, in the ruin of this goodly state, escape
scotfree? shall your house stand notwithstanding? Nay, assure your self, if at
this time you do not bestirre your self, to reform things amiss, but that
they be suffered to run on headlong to destruction, I may apply that speech
of Mordecai to Hester, upon the like occasion: Think not with thy self, that
thou shall escape in the Kings house: for if thou altogether hold thy peace
at this time, then shall enlargement and deliverance arise to Gods people from
another place: but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed. Nor let this
my boldness seem strange to your Grace, though perhaps you be not much
acquainted with such, as will speak the down right truth. Of all Jobs
friends, he found but one Elihu, who said, Let me not, I pray you, accept any
man's person: neither let me give flattering titles unto men: For I know not to
give flattering titles; in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away. If Job
in his Misery found but one such: no marvel if your Grace find scarce one. As
for me, I am an Englishman, a free borne subject, a true lover of my King and
Country; yea I am also an unworthy Minister of Christ, a poor watchman of
Israel: and when I see my sovereign King, my Mother Country, the Glory of God,
the Gospel of Christ, the Church of England, yea the Church of Christ over the
world, in danger to be destroyed, and all brought under the tyranny of
Antichrist, and the Spanish yoke: shall I be silent? shall I not speak?
shall I not lift up my voice like a trumpet? shall I not thus free my soul,
whatsoever shall become of my body? Yea, for Sions sake I will not hold my
tongue, and for Ierusalems sake I cannot rest, until the righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Burning Lamp.
I fear neither prison, nor death it self, that I may discharge a good
conscience both toward my God, and my King, and Country. Nor fear I to be
censured as a Polypragmaticke. What have Ministers to do to meddle in
State-mysteries? Sir, let me speak boldly, it were happy, if, as in the
apostatized Kingdoms of Christendom, the Priests of Baals counsels, I mean,
Jesuits, and Priests (which must needs bring ruin to them) are followed: So
in this Kingdom of Judah, only the truth-telling Micaia's were heard. Good
King David could say, I am wiser then my teachers, then the aged, then mine
Enemies; for thy testimonies are my delight, and my Counselors? He that will
be a wise statesman, and politician indeed, let him take Gods word for his
card and compass. For even the foolishness of God (as says the Apostle, as
the world accounts foolishness) is wiser then men. But you want not those,
that are able to perform the office of good Chapleins. Yet if any, instead
thereof, shall not only be silent, and negligent, but on the other side, be
too officious to sow pillowes under your Elbowes, to applaud and approve you in
all your doings, yea to persuade and counsel you, wherein perhaps their
conscience tells them, it ought not to be so: woe be unto them. Only we hope
better things. But if any shall go about to find a knot in a Bullrush, by
picking some quarrel with this book, where he has noiust cawse (be his
pretense never so fair gilded over, or seem his reasons never so far
fetched, yea from his abstruse speculations in state-pollicy) and shall by hook
or crook labor the suppressing of it, or hinder your Grace from reading of
it, though so necessary to employ your saddest thoughts in, it so nearly
concerning the safety of your gracious Master our dread Sovereign, and of our
sweet Country, and even of your self and whole family: no doubt but your
Grace will take that man for no other, but a pestilent Traitor, and if he be
not a Jesuit, yet certainly possessed with a Jesuitical spirit, as seeking to
smoother such an important Ouerture, as this. Now the Lord Jesus Christ, who
sitts in his throne of Majesty, the great Protector of his Church, the most
potent and terrible auenger of all his adversaries, especially of Antichrist,
with all his Adherents and confederates to crush them with a rod of iron, and
to break them in pieces like a Potters vessel; who in heaven sitts, and sees,
and laughes all his Enemies to scorn; who therefore admonishes Princes and
Potentates, saying, Be wise now therefore o ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling;
kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him: the same Lord make your Grace so wise, so well instructed, as setting your
self to be a noble instrument of his glory, of the Kings safety, of your
Countries welfare, in seeing Gods truth maintained, the laws duly executed,
heresies suppressed, and their authors censured, Idolatries cashered, treasons
and treacheries discovered, and discumfited, Jesuits and Priests abandoned,
the Kings Liege subjects countenanced: your Grace may not only show your self
to all the world to be worthy of that high opinion, which so gracious a Master
has conceived of you, but may also procure to your self and your numerous
family the favor and blessing of the great King of heaven and earth, and may
merit also the hearty love and good will of this whole state, when in these
times of danger threatened to this land, and hastened by the Popes Breeue, they
shall behold your faithful vigilance, most honorably and generously to acquit
it self, in so fair an occasion offered once for all.

Your Grace's poor Orator HENRY BVRTON.

To the Reader.
CHristian Readers, Lo here I invite you all to a solemn Bullbaiting. But me
thinks some already begin to quarrel me (as is not unusual at such like
exercises) for that they see no such Bull, as the Baiting imports; the Title
seeming improper for the Book; as if I meant to feed the spectators with the
vain expectation of some New English joy. Indeed I must in some sort
acknowledge mine error, which I hope will not be made the greater, if I shall
ingenuously confess it to be purposly committed. I imagined with my self
(only I crave pardon, if I thought amiss) that we lived in a dull age, which
is hardly moved with the consideration of serious matters, such as most
concern either our own particular, or much less the general good; when not
the Drums orderly beaten, and Trumpetes, yealding a certain sound, yet will
easily awaken, or prepare us for the war; while not even the Silver Trumpets
sounding from Heaven in the mouths of divine Heralds, prevail any more with
the most, then as a pleasant Song, affecting the ear for the present, but not
the heart, for afterward, each running after his covetousnes, or ambition, or
voluptuousnes, or some darling Idol-sinne; and for as much as matters of
controversy (not in Lawsuits at Westminster Hall, but) about the Title of our
eternal Inheritance, are strongly cried down of many, as perturbers of
States, most men, out of a natural lasinesse, loathing to have their wits
exercised with a radical and sound knowledge, their stomachs being too queasie
to digest such strong and wholesome meats, preferring the Egyptian onYons
before the honey of Canaan, and willing to fall a sleep, are taken napping in a
deep apostasy from the truth: I thought therefore, that if I should have
published this little Book (though great in Bulk, if weighed, rather then
numbered) under some plain and vulgar Title, as, An answer to the Popes
Breeue; or the like: I might perhaps have had as few Readers of it, as hearers
of a Sermon, especially, when the Authors name should be found to be H. B.
Herein therefore, I thought good to imitate a certain Father (mentioned by
Cassianus, Cassianus lib. 5. cap. 31. Dialog. lib. 2. cap. 1.
and quoted by Sir Thomas More in his Dialogue of comfort against Tribulation)
who speaking of heaven and heavenly things so celestially, that much of his
audience with the sweet sound thereof, began to forget all the world, and fell
fast a sleeps the good Father dissembling their sleeping, and suddenly telling
them a loud, I shall tell you a merry tale: at this, they lifted up their
heads, and harkensd after that; and so their sleep being broaken, he continued
on his speech of the Joys of heaven; and thus were they reproved. Nor is this
Papal Bull, or Breeue, altogether unlike our English Bulls. For first, it is
the Character of the Beast Renel. 13. Besides, it comes bellowing in, like a
fierce and mad Bull, with a Board over the eyes and horns, betokening his
madness, but pretending no great harm; so full it is of Romish equivocations,
and Papal dissimulations, meaning most mischief, when it is most dissembled.

Another snaps at me on the other side, that such a poor Curre should dare so
much as to bark at such a Bull, as being sent from so great a Potentate, as
the Pope; much less so presumptuously to give an affront unto it: since such
high attempts are for the stoutest and strongest Molossus, is a Mastiue dog.
Molosss in this famous Isse. But I answer, that even the poor dog of the
flock, espying the Woulfe approaching, may and ought to bark, yea and pinch
him too, if he can, the while his Lord and Master is fast a sleep in his Tent.
And we know, that when but one small contemptuous Curre, smelling a thief,
falls a barking, though he can do little else, yet thus may he provoke all the
Dogs and Mastiues in the town with eagerness even to break their collart to
run to the rescue. I am indeed but a poor dog of the flock, in comparison,
but sacred, one among many, appointed to keep watch over the Capit^l and Tower
of Sion. Should I therefore be a dumb dog, such as the Esai. 58. 10, 11.
Prophet reproves, not to bark it danger? Or a dastardly Curre, which snaped,
dare not bark for fear of strokes? Or a lawning spanolizing Spaniell,
silenced with a fatt morsel, or a little spettle? Or an Irish mongrell, or
English, if ye will, that will not adventure his hide, but ever on the
stronger, not with the Iuster side? Or a maddrageing Curre, that without
difference barks at all, as well the true man as the thief? Worthy, if not (as
the old heathen Romans served such foolish dogs) to have his legs broken,
yet at least to be well basted for his pains, as whose dullness has been no
better disciplined, to put more difference between England and Rome.

Another yet pincheth me. And why? He knows not well, except it be for
making so many, so voluminous Epistles before such a poor Pamphlett, as this.
And is it altogether without reason? At so famous a Bull-baiting, had we not
need to make large, and well mounted Scaffolds, wherein all sorts of persons
may both the more easily, and safely behold it, having especially to deal with
such a madd Bull, as a thousand to one, but he will break loosse, and make
havocke, if he be not the more strongly tied, or the more cautelously avoided?

But why do I thus seek a knott in a Bulrush? Is there any doubt, but that
launching out my Bark into such a turbulent sea, I should so much the more
expose my self, and expect on all sides to be incountred with violent
storms? And so much the rather, while I carry a Jonas with me, being my self
a man, whom God has humbled into the very bottom of Temptations, the very
belly of Hell? But blessed be his Name, though he has chaftened me sore, yet
he has not given me over unto death. Though he has exposed me to contempt
without, to my humiliation: yet he has left me abundant cause of comfort
within, to my contentation, He has sent the messengers of Satan to buffet me:
but he has not denied me his sufficient Grace, to perfect his strength in my
weakness. He has of very faithfulness caused to be tronbled. He is the wise
husbandman, (...) to spread doung upon the face of the naturally barren soil,
to make it the more fruitful. He is the wise Phisician, that spares not by
sharp Corrosiues to eat out the dead flesh or carnal sloth and security in
his Patitrus. He is the wise Pilot, that can make use of baser earth for (...)
to pieze the vessel wherein the least pearl of grace is stowed, least it
might be in danger to be over thrown with the gusts of popular applawse,
filling the sails of vain glory. He is the wise Howse-keeper, that knows to
preserve his Provision from putrefaction, by sowcing it in brinish pickle. He
is both a just and merciful wise Judge, who can deliver up his servants so to
be condemned of the world, (...) they may not come to be Condemned with the
world. And as for me, wherein the world can for the least cawse most severely
condemn me justly: my best apology shall be, that I do infinitely more condemn
my self. And if through my exposing myself to malice, by taking up such a
(...) quarrel as this, I shall exasperate the tongue of detraction to suck
the pure blood of my innocence: I know it shall in the end but lick whole the
sacrified sore, which malignant teeth have envenomed. And if it should stand
between Gods glory, and mine ignominy, that the one must suffer: I choose much
rather, by running on my Christian course, to provoke all the Froggs of Egypt
to diue into the bottom of my whole lives rivulet, there to raise what mud
they find to the blundering of the stream of my good name in Christ: then by
my silence (becoming as a stagne or pond, not stirring, for fear of
discovering mine own filth, which would be contracted in more abundance,
through base and imbellious sloth) to betray Gods truth and glory to reproach.
And God forbid, but if in any thing, (as in many things I am, and have been
too prone) I have offended my God or my brother, that therefore I should fear
to stand up (though most unworthy) in Gods cawses yea rather am I not so much
the more bound (his mercy and grace not failing me) to strive to honor God, by
how much I have through supine negligence any way dishonored him? But if the
heretic have ought to say, let him hear Tertullian: Eximat et de ocule suo
trabem Haereticus, tunc in oculo Christiani, si quam putat stipulam, revincat.

But why do I all this while hold you, in suspense? Convert your eyes to the
danger before you, threatened by the Popes Bull or Breeue. Therein ye may
behold the great Antichrist, arming his Catholic sons (as he calls them)
against their Souerains Prince. My hope and prayer is, that none of them will
be so senseless, as forgetting themselves to be not only Rational
Creatures, but Englishmen, they will be led with the voice of that mystical
Beast (the The Hiena, a most subtle Beast, like a Wolf, with a Mane like a
horse, which by nightcommeth to the simple Shepherds Tents, where
counterfeiting man's voice, and by listening learning the Shepherds name calls
him forth, and so deuoures him Pliny. A right Emblem of the Pope. See Reu. 9.
8.
Hiena of Rome, which by a counterfeit speech, deceives and devoureth those
that believe him) to betray their King and Country to the Romish and Spanish
yoakes. Much more am I assured, that all true Protestant subjects, will now
rowse up themselves to double the Fil^s of their loyal affection and fidelity
to their Prince and Country, testified, as in all due respects, so especially
both by Ministers and People in the public assemblies in servent prayer, as
also by every private family apart in fasting and humiliation, for the life and
welfare of our gracious King, this Church and state, and of the Churches of
Christ in all Christendom, until it shall please God and the King to appoint a
general Fast over the whole land. For great is the confidence of Antichrist,
and his Adherents at this present, whatsoever the mischief is, clossely
intimated in this Breeue. But we know, that all the confidence of Antichrist,
is but an Egyptian Reed; only our safety and security is to cleave fast unto
our God by faith, to renew our Covenant with him by holy vows of reformation
and better obedience, and to make good the same by bringing forth the fruits
thereof: that so making our peace with God* Zeph. 2. 1.
before the Decree bring forth, we may not only prevent the evils which our
enemies intend us, and which our crying sins threaten to pull upon us, but also
procure and retain Gods incomparable mercies and blessings upon us, and our
Posterity, until the coming of Jesus Christ, Even so, Come Lord Jesus. Amen.

Thine in the same Lord Jesus: H. B.
Vrbanus Papa 8.
Dilectis filijs Catholicis Angliae
DIlecti filij, salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem. Non semper terrena
faelicitas est beneficium coeli, and Patrimonium pietatis; pacem enim
peccatorum videns ecclesia, non raro experta est potentiam mortalium esse
stipendium sceleris. Quare, catenas Martyrum anteferimus exuuijs triumphantium,
and Rex sempiternus principatus coelestes pollicetur, non ijs, qui superbo pede
jure proterunt, sed qui persecutionem patiuntur propter justitiam. Veritatem
hanc e thesauris diuinitatis deductam in terras, contemplans Apostolus, non
modo animum non despondebat, sed superabundabat gaudio in omni tribulatione
fidelium. Qui enim digni habentur pro nomine Jesus contumelias pati, ij tefferam
diuini amoris videntur possidere, and eo precio abundant, quo suntvaenalia
diademata aeternitatis. Mallerus equidem, humane imbecillitatis memores,
gloriam and diuitias esse in Tabernaculis Iustorum. At cum vestras contemplemur
miserias, dilecti filii, tantum vestrae virtuti and Christo propugnanti
fidimus, vt vobis audiamus gratulari segetem triumphorum. Sperauit quidem
Ecclesia fore, vt potentissimi Regis animus, qui e catholica conjuge procreare
optavit haeredes patrijs regnis imperaturos, delenitus suspirijs vxoriae
pictatis, peteretur regalis connubij dotem esse libertatem fidei; nunc autem
formidantur vota, and concilia inimicorum vestrorum; and cum religio orthodoxa
regali diademate in optima regina coronatur, istic tamen non desunt, qui filis
nostris audeant carcerem and supplicia minitari. Credimus esse inter vos, qui
mortificationem Jesus Christi proprio corpore circumfeire cupiunt, and
blanditias voluptatis, and ambitionis titulos posthabeant lanienae carnificum,
and vinculorum contumelijs: si qui tamen istic sunt, quos praesentis Ecclesiae
prosperitatis desiderium teneat, eos certiores fieri cupimus, de co salute
mirisice sollicitam esse Pontificiam charitatem. Nullum a Nobis relinqnitur
officium, quod ingruentis tempestatis menacem caliginem possit in optatam
consolationis aream conuertere: tamen si dilatet Infernus os suum, and Martyrum
sanguinem s^tiat impacata crudelitas, armari debetis scuto inexpugnabili bonae
voluntatis, and coelum in carcere, coronam in equuleo, immortalitatem in morte
cogitate. Inter Britannicos naufragantis religionis scopulos Crux Christi fuit
Tabula, quae vos perduxit in portum voluntatis vestrae. Hanc opus est
amplexari, cujus virtute dulcescit amarities paenarum. Cogitate dilecti filij,
in qua statione commoremini, and quorum oculis facti sitis spectaculum; vos
Angelicae Legiones circumvolitant, qui phialis aureis desideria fidelium
excipiunt. and ad sanctuarum ferunt Misericordiae Omnipotentis; patefactis
coeli foribus, spectator idem, and remunerator Christus vobis sacros ciuium
vestrorum triumphos ostendit, quos Anglia proprio sanguine purpuratos intulit
coelitum Concilijs. Anxiae preces suspirantis Ecclesiae vobis a Deo petunt
spiritum charitatis, and fortitudinis; vestram salutem current Consilia Senatus
Apostolici, and vota Christianitatis, in tanto coeli terrarumque theatro, quem
vobis constantiae vestrae rigorem, quam animi triumphantis sublimitatem inesse
decet? Fuerunt in consimili discrimine consilia Maiorum vestrorum, lumina
spiritus sancti and arma lucis sint vobis vestra oracula sapientia, sint
vestrae actiones exempla fortitudinis. Quod si cosque vis progrediatur, vt vos
ad noxium illud, and illicitum Anglicanae fidelitatis Iuramentum adigat,
mementote oratione vestram ab vniverso Angelorum spectaritium confessu audiri,
and adhaereat lingua vestra saucibus vestris, priusqua^ authoritatem B. Petri
ea Iurisiurandi formula imminutam detis. Non enim ibi id solum agitur, vt sides
Regi seruetur, sed vt sacrum vniuersae Ecclesiae sceptrum eripiatur Vicarijs
Dei Omnipotentis; quod faelicis recordationis Paulus 5. Predecessor noster in
tam graui deliberatione decreuit, id omnino tanquam Decretum veritatis servare
debeatis; dilecti filij, Tributum hoc Principi Apostolorum debitum nullae
hominum minae, aut blanditiae a vobis vnquam extoequeant; qui secus suadent, ij
visionem mendacem, and divinationem fraudule tam prophetant vobis. Citius enim
viro Christiano debet potentium gladius vitam eripere, quam fidem. Quod si
Angelus etiame coelo descendens vos aliter, quam veritas Apostolica, doceat,
Anathema sit. Nos interea Patrem luminum orabimus, ne excaecari patiatur cor
Regis Anglicani, qui certo discere debebit, quanta in ijs quae polliceri
potestis, fides habenda sit Catholicis subditis, qui ne se perjurio alligent,
malunt spiritum emittere, quam vocem. Vt autem virtus vestra inueniatur
pretiosior auro, quod igne probatur, docete regnum istud tantam non inesse vim
hostium saeuitiae, vt in cordibus vestris possit aeternum charitatis ignem
extinguere. Orate pro persequentibus vos; humilitas, patientia, concordia,
jeiunium, oration arma sunt, quae in saeua dimicatione debetis distringere, vt
palmae coelestium triumphorum floreant in manibus vectris. Cum enim ipsius
etiam Christi carnifices vetitus sit B. Petrus gladio vulnerare, hortamur vos,
presens ecclesiae bonum prae oculis habentes, vt cogitetis interea cogitationes
pacis, and Regietiam, dum mortalem vitam adimit, aeternam vitam expetatis. Ita
belligerare fas est milites Christi, sub vexillo Crucis confundetur os
loquentium iniqua, cum odisse nesciatis qui vos excruciant. Caeterum Dominus,
qui potest tristitiam vestram in gaudium vertere, erit a dextris vestris, ne
commoueamini, et illius Testamenti nunquam obliviscamini, quo haereditatem
regni coelestis imitatoribus suis legauit. Complectamur vos Apostolicae
charitatis brachijs dilecti filij, quibus paternum patrocinium pollicemur, and
benedictionem nostram peramanter impertimur, Dat. Romae S. Petri, sub Annulo
Piscatoris, die 30. Maij. 1626. Pontificatus nostri anno 3.

Pope Urban 8.
To his Beloved Sons, the Catholics of England.
BELOVED Sons, greeting and Apostolic benediction. Terrene felicity is not
always the benefit of heaven, and the patrimony of piety. For the Church,
seeing the Peace of sinners, has often found by proof, that the power of
Mortals is the stipend of impiety. Wherefore we prefer the chains of
Martyrs, before the spoils of the triumphant, and the King eternal promises
heavenly Principalities, not to them, that trample the Laws under their proud
foot, but to those, that suffer persecution for righteousness sake. This
truth derived out of the treasures of antiquity, into the earth, the Apostle
considering, did not only not cast away his hope, but was superabundantly
joyful in all the tribulation of the faithful; for they which are accounted
worthy to suffer reproaches for the name of Jesus, those seem to possess the
Bill of Exchange of Gods love, and abound with that price, wherewith they
purchase the Diadem of Eternity. Indeed we had rather (being mindful of
humane frailty) that glory and riches were in the tabernacles of the righteous:
but when we contemplate your miseries, Beloved Sons, we put so much
confidence in your virtue, and Christ's defense, that we dare congratulate unto
you plenty of triumphs. The Church well hoped indeed, that the mind of the
most potent King, who of a Catholic wife wished to beget heirs, that might
rule his Country Kingdoms, being mollified by the fighes of his Wives piety,
would permit the dowry of royal wedlock to be the liberty of faith: but now
the vows and counsels of your enemies are feared; and whereas the Orthodox
religion is crowned with a royal Diadome in that most excellent Queen: yet
there are not wanting those, which dare threaten imprisonments and punishments
to our sons. We believe there are among you those, who desire to carry about
in your own body the mortification of Jesus Christ, and would contemn the
blandishments of pleasure, and titles of ambition, in comparison of the
butcherie of hangmen, and ignominy of bonds: yet if any be there, who are
possessed with a desire of the prosperity of the present Church, we desire they
should take notice, that the Pontifician charity is wonderously sollicitous of
their safety, No one duty is of us omitted, which may convert the menacing
cloud of the growing tempest, into a wished calm of consolation: yet if Hell
enlarge her mouth, and mortal cruelty thirst after the blood of Martyrs, ye
ought to be armed with the invincible buckler of a good resolution, and
meditate of Heaven in the prison, of a Crown in the Rack, of immortality in
death. Among the British Rocks of their shipwreck religion, Christ's Cross
has been a Planke, and has brought you into the haven of your desire. This
Cross you must embrace, by the virtue whereof the bitterness of punishments
is sweetened. Consider beloved Sons in what station ye stand, and to whose
eyes you are made a spectacle; the Angelical Legions do flutter about you,
which receive in their golden violls the desires of the faithful, and present
them at the sanctnarie of the mercy of the Omnipotent; heaven gates being set
open, Christ not only a beholder, but a Rewarder, shows you the sacred
triumphs of your Citizens, whom purpled in their own blood, England has
brought into the heavenly assemblies. The anxious prayers of the mournful
Church desire of God for you the spirit of charity and fortitude. The Counsels
of the Apostolic Senate, and the prayers of Christendom, take care of your
safety in so large a theater of heaven and earth; what rigor of your
constancy, what sublimity of a triumphant mind becomes it you to have in you?
The Counsels of your Predecessers have been in the like ieopardy, the lights
of the holy Ghost, and the Armor of light be your wise Oracles, and your
actions the examples of fortitude. And if violence preceed so far, as it
compel you to that permitions and unlawful oath of Alleagiance of England;
remember, that your prayer is heard of the whole assembly of the Angels
beholding you, and let your tongue clean to your gummes, before you cause the
authority of blessed Peter to be diminished with that form of Oath. For that
is not all, that fidelity be kept unto the King: but that the sacred scepter of
the Catholic Church be wrung from the Vicars of God Almighty; that which our
Predecessor Paul 5. of blessed memory, in so grave a deliberation decreed, that
ought ye altogether to observe, as the Decree of truth. Beloved sons, this
Tribute, due to the Prince of the Apostles, no threats of men, or flatteries,
ought at any time to extort from you; they that persuade you otherwise, those
prophecy unto you a lying vision, and a fraudulent Divination. For sooner
ought the sword of the mighty to take away from a Christian man his life, tken
his faith. Yea if an Angel from heaven teach you otherwise, then the
Apostolic truth, let him be accursed. We in the mean time will entreat the
Father of lights, that he suffer not the heart of the English King to be
blinded, who shall certainly learn, how great credit is to be given to the
Catholic subjects, in those things, which you may promise; who least they
should make themselves liable to perjury, they had rather breath out their
spirit, then their voice. But that your virtue may be found more precious then
gold, which is tried in the fire: teach that kingdom, that there is not such
force in the cruelty of enemies, that it is able to extinguish the eternal
fire of charity in your hearts. Pray for them that persecute you; humility,
patience, concord, fasting, prayer, are your weapons, which in the cruel
conflict ye ought to draw forth, that the Palms of eclestiall triumphs may
flourish in your hands. For seeing Blessed Peter was forbidden to smite with
the sword, the cruel assailants of Christ: we exhort you, having the prejent
good of the Church before our eyes, that in the mean time you think the
thoughts of peace, and that ye pray for eternal life even for the King,
while he takes away your mortal life. So must the soldiers of Christ make
war under the banner of the Cross, the mouth of them, that speak wicked
things, shall be confounded, seeing ye know not to hate those, who torment
you. But the Lord, who is able to turn your sorrow into joy, shall be at your
right hand, that ye be not moved, and may not forget his Testament, wherein he
has be queathed the inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven to his imitatours.
Let us embrace you in the Arms of Apostolic Charity. Beloved sons, to
whom we promise the Fathers patrocinie, and most lovingly bestow our
benediction. Given at Gome: St. Peter's. under the signs of the Fisher. May 30.
1626. the third year of our Popedom.

THE BAITING OF THE POPES BVLL.
EVer bless your self, when you see the Popes Cross. This is the beasts
Mark, Revel. 13. 17. It usually stands in the forefront of mischief, Revel.
17. 5.
like Mystery in the Whores forehead. Under this standard, the Beast warreth
against the Lamb. Without this Mark, Revel. 13. 17.
none may buy, or sell; as by the Bull of Pope Martine 5. prohibiting Wickliffe
and Husse, and others of the same faith, this liberty of common commerce, or
trade. The like prohibition was in the Bull of Paul the third, against K. Henry
8. for shaking off the Popes yoke. And Innocent 3. in the Lateran Council,
grants a special Indulgence to all his Catholics thus signed, with the sign
of the Cross; as the special badge of difference, between Romes Catholics,
and Heretics; as if no Catholics, that want and do not avow this mark.
Also Pope Clement the 6. in his Bull willed, that all, thus signed, should have
power to deliver, two or three friends out of Purgatory. Wondrous feats does
the Pope with this mark; no less then Conjurers do with the name of Jesus.
And among others, this is not the least, that by the hanging out of this sign,
he blinds the peoples eyes, that they cannot so easily epsy, where the proud
Antichrist dwelle^h. Like as when a Spanish Pyrat hangs out an English flag. In
brief, this Mark notes that religion, whose mother is Ignorance. Ignorants
write their mark, in stead of their names. And to know whose Mark this is,
lo, here the name subscribed.

Pope Urban 8. POpe is a title signifying father, and being appropriated to the
Pontise or Bishop of Rome, who alone is so entitled, it notes the great
Antichrist. The Pope, as much to say, Math. 3. v. 9.
as the Antichrist. Christ says, Call no man father upon earth. The meaning
is, call no man on earth such a father, as the Pope challenges to himself,
namely, Papa, that father, who as supreme over all other fathers, will, and
must be honored, and obeyed. Yea he will be such a Papa, or Father, as unto
whose beck, is subordinated and limited that obedience, which all do owe to
our heavenly Father. They must no further obey God, then the Pope allows: for
even the sacred Scriptures themselves, the only rule of our obedience to our
heavenly Father, are so locked up in the Cabinet of the Popes breast, that they
may yield us no other sense, but what his key opens, as is intimated in the
Bull of Pius the 4. affixed to the Trent Council, super forma Iuramenti
professionis fidei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam. So that not our heavenly Fathers
own commands may be of force, where the Popes Counter-mand comes with a Non
obstante. This is that Pope forbidden by Christ, thus to be called our Father
upon earth. Yet ever since Boniface the 3. (who obtained of that Parricide
Phocas to be the sole universal Bishop, and was the Sea Platina Annot. in
Bonif. 3.
first that bore away the title of Pope from all other Patriarchs, and
Bishops, which ever since has been intailed to all his successors, as their
proper style quarto modo) has that Antichrist tyrannised under this name of
Pope, by virtue of his universal Father-hood. Hereof we cannot have a more
pregnant proof, then this present Bull as will appear in the further opening
of it.

This Pope, is Urban the 8. a new name customarily assumed with the Popedom.
And lightly they borrow such names, as are contrary to their natures. There
have not been more wicked Popes, then the Bonifaces; nor more cruel, then the
Clements; nor more impious, then the Piuses; nor more noxious, then the
Innocents; nor more turbulent then the Vrbans. As French history.
Urban the 6. for his implacable furiousness, was called of the people Turban,
a troubler. And such a Turban I fear we shall find of this Urban the 8. as we
may easily discern by the cloven foot of this Bull. The Popes Bull is a
prodigious or disastrous blazing star; it never appears, but it portendeth
and bodeth some approaching fatality, to Princes and States. Only the Comet is
but a sign, no cause of future events: but the Popes Bull is not only a
sign, but a cause procuring, and producing sad Accidents to ensue: To go no
further then home for instances. To prepare away for the Spanish Invasion in
88. as an harbinger to provide them lodging upon their arrival on the English
Coast, Pope Sixtus the 5 or if you will sice sinque, (as having already cast
the Dice for England) sends out his Balis declatatory, wherein he
excommunicateth the good Queen Elizabeth of ever grateful memory, and
absolueth her subjects of their allegiance, lauishing also, out of the
bottomless bag of his Church treasure, plenarie Indulgence to all foraine
States and Princes, that would join their helping hand against England. Enough
to set the whole Pontifician world about our ears, but that our heavenly
Father showed himself more potent in blessing us, then the Balaam of Rome in
cursing us. Also about the time of the Gunpowder plot, the Pope sent out his
Bulls, Clement the 8. by name, as here Urban the 8. they agree both in name and
number, God grant they agree not in the nature of their mischiefesment us; See
Tortura Torti. page 281*
or God grant them all the like events, that formerly. Clement the 8. (I say)
his Bull or Breeue, being in safe keeping with Father Garnet, and by him showed
to Catesby, Conspectis illis semel, fundauit se statim Catisbeus, atque super
illis omnes intentiones suas exedificauit ibid.
by whom this business began to be brewed; while as yet the powder was but a
soaking in the saltpeter tubs, he was so animated with the sight thereof, that
he built and founded all his (otherwise perplexed and tottering) inventions
upon those Breeues, wherein Garnet also was not wanting to obfirme him more and
more: whereupon the learned Bishop infers; Ita omne malam a Breuibus,
Breeuia a Pontifice, so that all mischief is from Breeues, and Breeues from
the Pope.

These two instances may induce us to take better heed to this new Bull now in
hand, and to consider, whether this Vrbanicall Breeue, may not bode at least
the like imminent mischiefs to this land, that those did: And so much the
rather, if we weigh all the concurring circumstances of the time. The Pope
knows best, how to make his own benefit of others homebred hurts; his forces
are the better united, and strengthened, by others divisions, and he well hopes
to lick himself whole again, by others putrefying sores. And so much the
more may the force of this Bull be feared, as not having so long horns, as
strong sinews clossely compacted, like those skales of Leuiathan. Or rather
(lest the impression of fear might be a prevention of their purpose) it comes
in, like the aspe presented to Cleopatra in a basket of figgs, lurking under
the green leaves, the biting whereof is not so sensible, as exceeding mortal.
The judicious Reader may therein discern notable artifice, in tempering strong
poison as it were in a pair of Italian or Spanish perfumed gloves. And were
there nothing else, but that it comes from Rome: can any good thing come from
Rome? from the Pope? Omne malum a Brenibus, Breuia a Pontifice. As when Julian
the Cardinal was much recommended to Sigismund King of Romans: he answered,
Tamen Romanus est, yet he is a Roman. And a pestilent one too, witness that
woeful overthrow at Varna, by Amurath, whereof Julian was the chief cause,
having persuaded Vladislaus unjustly to break the truce with the Turk. To say
nothing of a peace now offered (as they say) between the adverse parties, but
only this, that such a Treaty will very well suite, and serve this Breeue with
occasion, as a mild open season helps physic, to work the more
effectually. But we have not forgotten their Treaty upon 88. Nor are we so
foolish, or weary of our lives (I trust) as with Cleopatra wittingly and
willingly, to suffer our selves to be stung with the Popes Aspe, in green
leaves, whose womanish spirit, would otherwise have fainted to see her own
death. Yea rather we know the nature of such Basiliskes which a man espying
first, before she him, the Basiliske dies, the man is preserved. Thus such
prodigious Comets, may spend their malignant matter, and be frustrate of their
force, and influence, where wise men make right use of them. Sapiens
dominabitur astris: for as the learned Zanchy observes well; Comets cannot
cause, but may occasion only State-ruines, and changes; as when they inflame
the air, Anima sequitur temperaturam cortoris, vt corpus aeris.
the air men's bodies, the bodies distempered work upon the mind; and all
this, taking impression in the most delicate and tender bodies of Princes,
working upon their spirits, causes oftentimes such combustions, as hasten some
fatal periods; while in the mean time, sage, and moderate Princes can easily
prevent such importent operations; such, and no other is the malignant
influence of Papal Breeues, which cannot possess generous Princes with an
imbellious fear of such bruta fulmina, which cannot scare nor scratch any, but
Brutes. The sword of good Laws drawn forth, well burnished, and brandished,
to the cutting off but the maine pipes, by which these poisoned waters of
Marah, of working dissension between the head and the members, Prince and
subjects, are derived from the Papal spring to his Cotholique sons, will
through Gods grace give a special defeat to whatsoever Papal design this
Breeue clossely intends. As follows.

To his beloved Sons the Catholics of England. Having spoken of the father
Papa, now to his sons: a father and son are of nearest relation, and this
relation a strong combiner of affections, and ingager of mutual offices.
Sons are either by natural generation, or by legal adoption, or by common
appellation, or by spiritual generation; such here, in a spiritual meaning.
As for the Popes natural sons, those he calls his Nephews, Euphoniae
gratia as it were a degree once removed. His spiritual sons we shall better
discern of their kind, not only by their father, but by their mother, of
whom they are begotten; namely the Church of Rome, which if it be that great
Whore, described in the Revelation (as what more evident? he that runs may
read) hence it appears how legitimate they be. So that in a spiritual and
mystical sense, he may as well call these also his Nephews, as his sons. But
in naming them sons, it imposes on them that filial, or rather baby blind
obedience, which none but such a father as the Pope, can or will exact of his
children. This father if they obey not, above, contrary to God, they are none
of the Popes true bred sons. But to sweeten their rigid obedience, he styleth
them his beloved sons; Yet rather loving, then beloved: for in natural
affection, love rather descends then ascend: in this, contrary, therefore
unnatural: I dare swear such babes more dote upon their father in their blind
affection, then he upon them; all the world sees what be the grounds and ends
of the Popes love to his sons. But to pass by that, he calls them the
Catholics of England, all the rest then are Heretics. Page 303. Vincentius
Lyrinensis.
But Catholics they are not simply, but in the compound, Romane-Catholiques;
a right Babylonish word: And such are no true Catholics, as the learned
Bishop has proved in his Tortura: for he is a true Catholic, that holds the
Catholic faith, professed in all ages, according to the Scriptures: not he
that holds faith none otherwise, but with limitation to the private sense, and
meaning of the Church of Rome; such is a Romane-Catholique, no true Catholic.
But to proceed.

Beloved Sons, greeting, and Apostolic benediction. A Form of salutation,
far unlike that of the Apostles, far from Apostolic. The Apostles, as
Peter, and Paul, in all their Epistles write to Gods elect, to his Saints, by
calling, recommending unto them grace, and peace in Jesus Christ; that is a
right Apostolic salutation. But in the Popes salutation, nothing sounding to
that of the Apostles, but the bare word Apostolic, which puts the greater
difference; for Paul and Peter came in Christ's name, the Pope in his own name;
they salute the Saints with the the Grace, and Peace of Christ, he with his
own Apostolic benediction. An other note of Antichrist, that comes in his
own name: John 8. v. 43.
As Christ said to the rebellious Jews, If another come in his own name, him
will ye receive. Now he comes in his own name, that comes in his own usurped
authority, as here the Pope does, with his Apostolic benediction: Yea
although the Pope pretend, and claim never so much to be Christ Vicar, and so
may seem to come, not in his own, but Christ's; name: yet usurping that power,
which Christ never used, as contrary to the dispensation of his ministry; (The
Popes power being to erect, and support an earthly Monarchy, whereof he may
say, Dan. 4. v. 30.
as that proud King: Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for the
honor of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty?) he therefore comes in his own name. So here: His benediction is
of himself, who in this Breeue calls himself, that Apostolic one; such is
his Apostolic benediction, to wit, Antichrists benediction. Thus in stead of
Christ's grace, he has Apostolic greeting* in stead of Christ's peace,
Apostolic benediction: and to whom? not to the elect Saints in Christ Jesus,
but to the Popes sons; not to the faithful in Christ, but to the Popes
Catholics in England; such as his father-hood goes about to strip of all the
cognizances of Christ's faithful ones; who as they are truly faithful toward
God, so they express the same toward man; and as to Christ in the first
place; so in the next to the Lords anointed, their Liege Lord immediately
under Christ. It follows.

Terrene felicity is not always the benefit of heaven, and the patrimony of
piety; for the Church seeing the peace of sinners, has often found by proof,
that the power of mortals is the stipend of impiety: Wherefore we prefer the
chains of Martyrs, before the spoils of the triumphant; and the King eternal
promises heavenly principalities, not to them that trample the laws under
their prood foot, but to those that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake. Answer.

NOt to insist upon every particular, but noting by the way throughout, the
Popes egregious hypocrisy and profaneness, in perverting and abusing the
Scriptures, and the sacred name of God: we will touch only upon the
principals. Only by the way, how does the Pope come to put a difference
between terrene felicity, and the benefit of heaven? seeing that all the
benefit he either has, or can hope for of heaven, is his terrene felicity.
This is the Popes heaven upon earth; this is his Peter's patrimony, which in
his own papal sense, is far from the patrimony of piety. Or what has the
Church of Rome to do with peace? what peace, she see^h the peace of sinners:
A phrase borrowed from Ezechiel 13. 16. And it agrees well with the Pope; For
as those false Prophets saw visions of peace, where there was none: so the
Pope. Is he about to stir up rebillion, and speaks he of peace? Or what
peace can all popish doctrine, put together, give unto a poor sinner? None at
all. For either they puff a man up with pride, or possess his heart and
conscience with fearful perplexities. Peace it gives none, neither in life
nor death. But pass we by that too. The Pope here making mention of Martyrs
chains, cannot but put us in mind of Father Garnet, and that damned crew,
Romes Martyrs: and so may give us, (not without just cause) strongly to
suspect, there is some exploit toward, which his Holiness by subtle
insinuation animates, and arms his sons unto; whereby though they should at
the worst miscary, yet they should merit no less then the honor of Martyrs,
such as father Garnet, for abetting the Powder Treason, has attained to, in
Romes Catologue of holy Martyrs.

Again; speaking of those, that trample the laws under their proud foot:
here he subtly glanceth at Christian Magistrates, to aggrauate their
subjects hatred against them, as proud violators of the Laws. But what Laws?
Gods Laws, or man's Laws? God forbid. But it suffices if they trample upon
the Popes laws, to expose them to the just hatred of their people. But if the
Kingdom of heaven, and the Principalities thereof be promised, not to the
violaters of all laws: what part then has the Pope therein, who is the arch
contemner of all laws, can break them at his pleasure without check, can
dispense even against the Apostle? In a word, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who is (...), that exlex, or lawless one? Let him make much of his earthly
principality, for part of those heavenly (according to his own speech,
according to his own practice) he has none. Which no doubt is the reason,
that he so labors tooth and nail to have his heaven here, upon earth, turning
his Church militant into Triumphant; as in that S^xti de electione cap. 17.
lib. 1. vt vero circa regimen. etc.
irrefragable decree of Pope Nicholis the 3. verifying to an hair that of the
Revel. 18. verse 17. I fit a Queen etc. only militant against Christ and his
word, against Kings and Princes. This is that which he adds, But to those that
suffer persecution for righteousness sake. And who are they I pray you? namely
such as suffer for treason and rebillion against their Prince, such as seduce
the people of the land, Noble, and base, to acknowledge, and admit a foreign
power above their own Prince, as we shall see further anon: To suffer for
these nefarious impieties, is, with his Holiness of Rome, to suffer Though
Ga^net himself confessed under his hand to a private friend, lamenting his
wretched estate that not now for religion, but for treason, he must dye as a
theife or malefactor. Tortura Torti. page 289.
for righteousness sake. o blasphemous mouth! o whores forehead! that dares so
diabolically, and shamefully profane Christ's sacred words. Woe be to him, that
thus calls evil good, and good evil; that puts bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter; that turns the truth of God into a lie, putting rebellion
for righteousness; that dare thus make a mock of sacred Scriptures. Call you
this Christ's Vicar? Nay, tell me, is not this that scarlet colored Beast, full
of the names of blasphemy, Revel. 17. 3. for to fill up the measure of this
shameless blasphemy, he goes on.

This truth derived out of the treasures of antiquity, into the earth, the
Apostle considering, did not only not cast away his hope, but was super
abundantly joyful in all the tribulations of the faithful; for they which are
accounted worthy to suffer reproaches for the name of Jesus, those seem to
possess the Tesseram, It signifies also a token of Lead, (like that affixed
to the Popes Bull) given to such poor as are to receive the dole. But this
suites not so well with the Popes sense here, unless she mean his Leaden
Tessera tied to his Bull; for else he should make heavens Diadems not a matter
of Dole, to be received of favor for a leaden token, but of debt as purchased
with golden merits.
bill of exchange of Gods love, and abound with that price, wherewith they
purchase the diadem of eternity. Answer.

STill the Beast, full of names of blasphemy, all along; He adds the example
of the blessed Apostle, in rejoicing in his sufferings. This truth. What truth?
that to suffer for Treason, for rebellion, is to suffer for righteousness
sake? surely your Holiness must either egregiously equivocate, meaning by, for
righteousness sake, to suffer righteously, or justly for Treason, and the
like, as the penitent Theife confessed on the Cross: or else you go on most
shamelessely to blaspheme. But out of what Treasures of antiquity (I pray you)
it this truth of yours derived into the earth? From your Church treasure no
doubt, so well stored with works of supererogation in this kind, such as Gods
law never commanded, but contrarily has expressly forbidden. Reu. 8. 10. 11.
or when? when Terras Astraea reliquit; in that age, when truth forsook the
earth (Rome) and went into heaven, then succeeded this truth of yours in stead
thereof. Or when that great Star called Wormewoode (a true type of your
Luciferian Apostacy) fell from heaven, which so imbittered the waters of the
sanctuary, that many thousands have died thereof, after which followed a great
eclipse of the heavenly bodies, even to a third part of their light; which by
degrees at last (as in the next chapter; for so in that book is described the
graduall growth of the Mystery of Iniquity) through the smoke of hellish
doctrine, ascending out of the bottomless pit, were wholly darkened through
your Egiptian Church, as we see this day, the Sun shining only in Goshen by
the beams of the Gospel: then, then (I say) began this Roman Catholic
truth, to be derived into the earth, from no other treasues of Antiquity can
you derive it. We know what a treasure you have of Antiquities: but we have
upon better search espied your Gibeonitish iuggling, pretending unto us, you
come from far, with your old shoes, torn bottles, and mouldie bread. Or
tell us out of what Antiquities or Monuments, even among the heathen Grecians,
or Romans (with whose old superstitions notwithstanding, and idolatries you
fully symbolize, only you are more gross, and mad upon your Idols, then ever
were they) yea fetch us (if you can) some Antiquities out of the Turkish
Alcaron, that hold this Roman truth, that a subject playing the Rebel, and
Traitor against his Liege, and lawful King, and suffering death for the same,
did, as an holy Martyr, suffer for righteousness sake. No Heathen, but
abhors this cursed truth of Rome. Or if ye will needs plead antiquity for
it, take it then: we yield you, this truth came from the old serpent, who was
the first, that moved mankind to rebel against his King, in disobeying Gods
commandment: Here is antiquity for you. But will you hereupon infer, that
the punishment of the serpent is for righteousness sake? yet this antiquity
was but in fact: the old serpent durst never avouch it for a truth, but it lay
antiquated, and buried in the ashes of hell, until the Pope, and his society
of Jesuits of latter times, raked it up again, and with the force of
Apostolic power, armed with fiery arguments, have persuaded their (first
blind folded) vulgar, that this is a truth derived from the treasures of
antiquity, that to suffer (as Roman Martyrs do) for treason, and rebellion,
is (with the Apostles of Christ) to suffer persecution for righteousness sake.

But what is their reward for all this suffering? yes, says the Pope; for they
which are accounted worthy to suffer reproaches for the name of Jesus. Stay; A
man by this phrase (Accounted worthy) might take the Pope for a piece of a
good Gospeller, in the point of Justification unto eternal life: for this is
the holy Ghosts usual phrase, to say, They that shall be accounted worthy of
that life; not, They that shall be worthy thereof. But this account, here
mentioned, is not according to Gods account, but the Popes account: such as the
Pope accounts worthy to suffer reproaches for the name of Jesus, to wit, for his
Iesutish doctrines, teaching the lawfulness of rebellion against Princes. For
under this name of Jesus, does that society of the Jesuits the more easily play
the Iudasses, as he did with Hail Master; no man easily suspecting, that
there should be the least affinity between that sweet saving name of Jesus,
and the massacring Abaddon, or Appollyon. But the reward of such is, They seem
to possess only. The Pope dares not say, They do possess it, etc. for then
he should seem to grant the certainty of salvation, if men in this life were
in possession of it. But he must not overthrow that Canon of Trent, which
discharges a sulphurious Anathema, against the doctrine of the certainty of
remission of sins, as an Arch-enemy undermining the golden mines of his
Purgatory. Well, what seem they to have? The bill of exchange of Gods love,
and abound with that price, wherewith they purchase the Diadem of eternity.
Here the Pope falls down right upon his doctrine of self By this Tessera or
Bill of exchange, is clossely involued Romes merit ex condigno: for as the Bill
of exchange is reckoned of equal value with the sum, or debt to be received,
or by the proportion of condignitie, or equal worth on both sides: So Romes
merit of condignitie is such, as whereby they claim heaven as due debt, their
merits being condign, or of equal worth to it, as the price is to the
purchase as the Pope here expresses.
merits, so derogatory from, yea, so destructory of that most precious, and
pearlelesse ransom, paid for the purchase of those Diadems of glory: Although
the Church of Rome makes little difference between Christ's paying of our debts
himself, and his inabling us our selves to pay them; saving that they choose
rather to have the fingering of the money themselves, then to trust to Christ
for the payment of it: As here the Pope, they pretend Gods love, Christ's
merits; but all is to enable them by graces infused (their Bill of exchange) to
merit ex condigno the kingdom of heaven, or thereby to purchase the Diadems of
eternity. Well; But o ye Pontificians, do you not teach that those graces of
yours infused, may be altogether, and irreuocably lost? if then by the way as
you are travailing to make your purchase, and so to take possession of those
heavenly diadems, ye chance to meet with thieves, that rob you of your
treasure, and take your purse from you: what will become of your purchase then?
were it not therefore safer for you to follow Christ's counsel: Lay not up your
treasures on earth, where the moth, and canker corrupt, and where thieves
break through and steal: but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven,
where it is out of all danger? what is this, to lay up for your selves
treasures in heaven? Is not Christ our treasure? Is not he in heaven? is not
the laying up of this treasure for our selves in heaven, our laying hold on
Christ by faith? ask the ordinary Gloss In Goelo. 1. Omnem spem in calestibus
ponite, Gloss, Ordin.
lay up all your hope in heaven; fide gradientes, charitatem amplectantes,
walking by faith, embracing charity: or following the Apostles practice 2 Timothy
1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that, which I have committed unto him against that day. Ask Lyra the meaning.
Depositum meum etc. my pledge, that is, my reward, which by faith I have laid
up to be kept with him, against the day of my dissolution, when my soul shall
be glorified, and against the day of judgment, when my body shall be made
immortal. So the ordinary gloss excellently: quia potens est Dominus
Depositum meum seruare spe etc. the Apostle is secure in the hope and
magnificence of his Savior, because what he commits unto him, is in safety,
and that which he commits unto him, is his salvation. This was the ancient
Catholic doctrine of the Church to trust in Christ wholly for their salvation.
But now from this ancient faith the present Church of Rome is utterly fallen;
trusting her self for salvation, which being in her own custody, she
confesses, not without just cause, that she may come utterly to loose it. No
doubt of yt; yea they have altogether shut themselves out of the kingdom of
heaven already by this their doctrine of Justification, by their grace infused.
For between faith and justification, they make such a separation, as they
decree in their Trent Council, Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 15. and can. 28.
that though by every mortal sin, the grace of justification received, is
lost, although faith be not lost: calling it a Doctrine of Gods Law, which
excludes not only unbelievers, but the faithful also (such as they call
their fideles fornicarios, adulteros, molles, masculorum concubitores, fures,
etc.) out of the kingdom of God. This is that doctrine of Romes Apostasy from
the faith, shutting her self out of Gods kingdom, as having expressly
renounced, and abandoned that faith in Christ, the only purchase of our
salvation, as might more abundantly be showed. But this may suffice for the
present occasion, so punctually offered by the Pope in this place, and that in
his own express words, which no doubt were thoroughly scanned in his Conclaue,
between himself and his Cardinals, before they should come to see the light,
as Triplici nodo page 34.
Paul the fifth confessed of the contents of his Breeue sent hither, Anno 1607.
So that in nothing does the Pope vary from himself, but in all points shows
himself to be that great Apostate, that Antichrist, from top to toe.

But to conclude this clawse; if Treason, if rebellion, if disloyalty of
subjects against their Prince, whereat the Pope here aims, be so meritorious,
as to purchase the Diadems of Eternity: then let no malefactor, never so
notorious, fear hell or judgment, so he can but intile his villainies, as
committed for the Catholic cause. The old heathen Rome had her Culleus, a
leather sack, wherein the Parricide was sowed close up and cast into the sea,
as unworthy to touch any of the elements, that sought to destroy him, by whom
he received his being: so he deserves not to breath in the air, that seeks to
take away the breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord. Lam. 4. v. 20.
Culleus for Parracides, but Catholic Rome his Diadems: would not this
startle, and astond the very Indian, when he should be told, that the Kingdom
of heaven is full of such graceless vnnaturals, as for betraying their lawful
Sovereign, their native sweet Country, for blowing up the beauty and glory
of their Nation, yea of the whole world, at a blast, do now, reign in heaven,
wearing eternal Diadems? would not he make a solemn vow never to come there?
Nay more: would Jesus Christ, trow you, trust such Parricides and Traitors to
come near his person now in heaven, lest with Judas they should again betray
him, and with the Jews and Romans kill and crucify him afresh? for how could
he be persuaded, that such would spare his person in heaven, who accounted it
the special point of their religion, to Martyr and massacre him in his members
here on earth? or that they would yield obedience, and reverence to his Royail
Majesty in heaven, that stuck not to deface, and defile his image, imprinted
upon his anointed Vicegerents here below? Certainly that heavenly Jerusalem is
compassed with higher, and stronger walls, then to be scaled by such Gyant-like
assaylants. Lucifer was cast out of heaven for his rebillious pride: and shall
his sons think to gain heaven by the merit of their proud rebellions?
Suffice it Cain, when his very conscience gave him to be a vagabond and exile
from that city above, and justly for his bloody fratricide, he was the first,
that founded and built a city on earth for his habitation. Cain was a figure of
the Pope; and his city, of Rome, the Popes eternal habitation. And for the
Popes diadems of eternity, Revel. 9.
we read of a certain kind of Locusts arising out of the bottomless pit,
having a scorpion-like power to sting, yet whose power was limited, not to
hurt, but only those, which have not the seal of God in their foreheades;
which Locusts, like Like the Cardinals round red hatts, given them to ride
abroad in pomp, to put them in mind to shed blood for the defense of their
Roman Catholic faith. See Paeralcipomena to Vrspergensis, his Chronicon.
horses prepared to battle, had on their heads as it were Like the Cardinals
round red hatts, given them to ride abroad in pomp, to put them in mind to
shed blood for the defense of their Roman Catholic faith. See Paeralcipomena
to Vrspergensis, his Chronicon.
crowns of gold. Such Diadem; may the Pontifician priests merit to wear, who
not only resemble these Locusts, but are those very froggs spoken of, Reu. 16*
13, 14. which are unclean spirits, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; being
the spirits of Devils working miracles, and go forth unto the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great
day of God Almighty. But pass we to the next.

Indeed we had rather (being mindful of humane frailty) that glory and riches
were in the Tabernacles of the righteous: but when we contemplate your
miseries, Beloved Sons, we put so much confidence in your virtue, and Christ's
defense, that we dare gratulate unto you plenty of triumphs. Answer.

Indeed we cannot blame your father-hood, ^o wish all prosperity to your
Beloved Sons; and for your self, and your triumphall chair, we are not
ignorant how provident you have been in your Pontifical Decrees to estblish a
triumphant state, in that your palace at Rome, to be free from all incursions
and invasions, and that by your Apostolic irrefragable constitution. Only
we cannot but admire to see how in the midst of all your Pontificiall
pleasures, and pomp, you can reflect the bcames of your contemplation upon the
miseries of your afflicted Sons in England. But herein ye show the bowels
of a father: But you are sensible thereof only in your contemplation. If you
contemplate this out of some prophetical vision, foreseeing the calamities,
which your sons impieties through your fatherly instigation, may further pull
upon them, if they shall attempt some special service for your father-hood,
wherein they shall fail of their purpose: herein we desire, and heartily pray,
you may be as true a Prophet, as Balaam was, who though you would never so
feign, to obtain an housefull of gold, and silver, which you have formerly had
out of England, yet the curse in the end shall fall upon your own Moabites. But
if you contemplate and such great present calamity upon your sons among us,
we are given hereby to perceive, that your holiness may err; unless you
will excuse it, that you speak it by the figure Iroma: you are able to
contemplate more herein, then all we can discern with open eyes. Yea on the
contrary (whereof your holiness cannot be ignorant) your sons are so kindly
entreated among us, as, though we might think thereby to win them the more
to love us, and our religion: yet forasmuch as they are your holiness own
sons (we mean the Jesuits, and Priests especially) the truth is, we have
the more cause to fear them. We know of old what recompense to expect of the
snake, if we foster him in our bosoms. Thus do your sons recollect their
strength among us, and such virtue, wherein to repose your confidence. Hereupon
it is (in plain truth) that your holiness dare congratulate to your sons
such plenty of triumphs: you may be confident of it, so long as your frogs are
suffered to friske and range up, and down among us at pleasure, without
controwle, in defiance of Laws and Proclamations, to seduce the Kings Liege
people, to increase their number daily, to strengthen their party, to weaken
us by sowing their seeds of faction, that no less then a rich plenty of
triumphs must needs ensue. But herein we comfort our selves, that your Papal
confidence in your sons virtue, is preferred before Christ's defense you set
that in the first place; and surely if you had not more confidence in your
sons virtue, then in Christ's defense, it were very small: for we know, that
in Christ's defense you have no confidence at all: your own apostatized heart
can tell you so much. Except ye trust at all in Christ's defense, because our
sins have so much provoked God against us, and none more, then that your
sons have been too indulgently entreated among us, not only to the damage,
and murder of many souls, if the Lord be not the more merciful to give them
repentance, to return to the truth; but to the endangering of this noble
State, if the same our God no less mightily, then mercifully prevent it not.
You know too well the Kings of Israeil are merciful Kings: but we know
again, that many times pity, (though it is pity) yet being showed to Amileck
and Aramites, may redound to the Authors hurt; witness these * Kings of
Israel On the other side, we know what Elias did, and afterward what Jehu did
to the Prophets of Baal, and what a blessing came upon them from the Lord,
Iehues Sons sat upon the throne to the fourth generation, and had done
longer, if he had not cleaued to the sins of Jeroboam. And Jezabell, for all
her vengeable malice, and impotent fury, yet could not wreck it upon Elias,
though one single poor Prophet, no more then the Pope with all his
pontifical, and imperial power could prevent poor Luther of dying
peaceablely in his bed; so miraculously mighty is the Lord in preserving his
poorest servants, that are zealous for his cause. If we show the like zeal now
in this frozen age; we may with comfort hope for the like blessing, and
protection. Then put you never so much confidence in your sons virtue, our
confidence shall be in the defense of Christ, whose cause we defend: and so
we doubt not, but (through Gods never failing goodness to his people) all you
confidence, and daring promises of plentiful tryumphs will vanish into the
air, whereof they were engendered. It follows.

The Church well hoped indeed, that the mind of the most potent King, who of a
Catholic wife wished to beget heirs, that might rule his Country kingdoms;
being mollified by the sighs of his wives piety, would permit the dowry of
royal wedlock to be the liberty of faith; but now the vows, and counsels
of your enemies are feared, and whereas the oxthodox Religion is crowned with a
royal diadem in that most Excellent Queen; yet there are not wanting those,
which dare threaten imprisonment, and punishments to our sons. Answer.

YOu mean the Church of Rome; and what may it not hope? yet against your hope,
the prayers of Christ's Church are never wanting, for the frustrating of your
fairest hopes. Our Church in particular publicly prays. That it may please
God to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived.
And in another prayer, for the whole estate of Christ's Church, in the end of
our Communion book: We beseech thee o Lord to reduce all such, as be yet
ignorant, from the miserable captivity of blindness, and errors, to the pure
understanding, and knowledge of thy truth: that we all with one consent, and
unity of mind, may worship thee our only God, and Savior. And for our King,
blessed be God, his heart is established upon firmer grounds, then to be
removed from that true faith, wherein he was bred, and brought up, so easily
as you hoped: yea that piety, which with your solemn Cross you have so
crowned, our hope is, that his Majesty may in time by Gods grace so purify,
and persit, as that royal Queen shall account it the most rich dowry of her
wedlock, to be made partaker of the liberty of that faith, which her Royal
husband professes, See for his Monuments in Rich. 2.
that so they may long enjoy a sweet sociall conjunction, as in their
affections, so in their Religion. If that noble Lady Anne, Sister sometime to
Wenceslaus King of Behemia, being married here to Richard the 2. King of
England, and that in a deplored time, when the Kings of England were ouer-awed
by the Popes usurped power, being tyrannized over also with that spiritual
Egyptian servitude; if she (I say) by the means of this marriage, coming,
and living in England became so happy, as to be made acquainted with the
Gospel of Christ, which she had, written in the English tongue, namely, the
four Evangelists, with the Doctors upon them, in the reading thereof she was
daily exercised; and so by this means also many Bohemians coming hither into
England, coming to the sight and knowledge of Wickliffes works, conveyed the
same into Bohemia, whereby a good foundation was laid of planting, and so
establishing the true religion there: what hopes then may we perceive of this
our noble Queen, who being married to such a royal husband, who is not only
in title, but in realty, Defender of the faith, yea a Prince, who is
excellently able to work upon such a noble disposition, by infusing into her
the seeds of the true Christian faith? that so not only her self may become
a sound Protestant, but by the blessing of God, this religion may from so noble
a root, multiply and branch it self into those her fathers Countries also; so
that when they shall taste of the clusters of Chanaan, growing by the means of
this blessed vine, her fathers house may then bless the time, that ever she
was transplauted into so happy asoyle. The Lord bring these fair blossoms of
our hope to a timely maturity: as your Pontifician hope is herein already
(blessed be God) blasted in the bud.

And the same God, See for his Monuments in K. Edw. 4. p. 366.
that prevented that intended massacre of Religion in Bohemia, by the death of
the King Ladislaus, at whose intended marriage with Magdalene the French Kings
Daughter of Prague, where, and when the confluence of so many Pontifician
States should have been, the massacre should the more easily have been
effected: that God has, and will (we trust) ever preserve this his true
religion professed in England, and that by preserving the life of our gracious
Sovereign long amongst us to his glory, and his Churches good, maugre all
Pontifician hopes of the contrary.

But it should seem the Popes hopes are turned into fears: but now (says he)
the vows and counsels of your enemies are feared. Whom does he mean here by
enemies? Surely, by coherence with the premises, he must needs mean the most
Potent King, of whom he spoke in the former part of the sentence. And
certainly in nothing shall our noble King show himself more Posent, then by
rooting out of his Dominions all Popish Priests, and Jesuits, and by
establishing in unity of doctrine, that Religion, which for these many years
has been so happily mayntained therein. Herein, herein stands the potency and
security of our Most Potent King: The establishing of true religion, is the
establishing of the Kings Throne. It were happy if other Kings in
Christendom had their eyes opened to see their miserable thraldom under the
Popes yoke, and upon what a tottering foundation their Kindomesstand: where
Papal authority, and Jesuitical doctrines take place.

But here we may not pass over, that he faith, Your Enemies. Who? or whose
enemies? what? the King an enemy? to whom? to the Popes Sons here in England:
what? to the Priests, and Jesuits in England? There were some reason why the
King should show himself an enemy to these: for who are more mortal enemies
to the King and his Crown: then they? But it is plain by the sequel, that
he means chiefly here such Catholic sons of his, as are, or at least
ought to be true subjects to the King. Lo here then Pontifician malice. The
Pope does here most subtly insinuate, that the King is an enemy to all those
his subjects, who are Roman Catholics. Enough with such a brand, to kindle the
flames of hatred, and rebellion in such subjects against their King, while the
Pope thus blows the bellows. But wherein is the King an enemy? to their
persons? no: but to their religion, which is enmity against God, and the King.
But the Pope fears the Kings Counsels. Now the good Lord so direct the King,
and bless him in all his Counsels, that they may more, and more be matter as
of fear to the Pope, so of joy, and comfort to himself, and all his People.

But he fears also his enemies vows. What vows? For tolleration (forsooth)
of the Popes Orthodox religion, If Orthodox, then ought it not only to be
tolerated, but publicly embraced, professed, avowed. But if it be (as it is)
the Antichristian, Babylonian, Apostaticall, idolatrous religion of Rome, that
Where of Babylon: then no vows, ought either to be made, or much less kept,
for the tollerating of such a religion. It is against our vow in baptism,
wherein we disavow the Devil and all his works. and therefore all doctrines of
Devils. A precontract with our spouse Christ, disanulleth all after contracts
with Antichrist, with a harlot: Yea vows made against God and his word, are
ipso facto void, and become a mere nullity. And if the Pope at his pleasure
can dissolve all lawful vows, which being duly made obliege men inviolably
to keep them: has not God himself power to disanull all impious vows, which
are made to maintain the religion of Antichrist? Therefore, the Pope must give
us leave herein not to give credit to his Holiness complaint; which,
howsoever, we know to be most unjust. And whereas the Pope calls his
Religion orthodox: let the contents of this Bull witness. We need go no
further for proof. Ipse dixit. Yet you complain, that notwithstanding your
orthodox Religion (a forcible argument, if it were rightly applied) your sons
are threatened. You are sore hurt: you know full well that threatened folks live
long. But here we cannot but put your father-hood in mind of your
forgetfulness. A little before, you contemplate your sons miseries; and now
is all come but to a bare threatening? we looked for a storm, and behold but a
cloud; for fire, and lo, but a little smoke: only we may hence observe,
what punctual intelligence your vigilant sons give your father-hood out of
England. There stirs not a Mouse, but you hear of it: unless you have it by
some special revelation, reflected in the glass of your contemplation, as
your Saints know all is done here below, by the perspectiue Glass of
beatificall vision. Or else happily you have it by the spirit of Prophecy, as
conjecturing what afterclaps, or prognosticating what storms this Meteor of
your Papal Breeue might engender in this our Northern Clymate against your
Sons, when once they should be so possessed with the malignant influence
thereof, as refusing to take the oath of Allegiance, they should not only
incur a threatening, but of congruitie, yea condignitie merit both
imprisonment and punishments. But our hope is, that Non obstante your
peremptory Bull, they will show themselves such true hearted Englishmen, that
they will not deserve in that case, so much as a threatening. But you add.

We believe there are among you those, who desire to carry about in your own
body the mortification of Jesus Christ, and would contemn the blandishments of
pleasures, and titles of ambition, in comparison of the butcherie of hang-men,
and ignominy of bonds. Yet if any be there, who are possessed with a desire
of the prosperity of the present Church, we desire they would take notice,
that the Pontifician charity is wondrously sollicitous of their safety.
Answer.

PAuse a while. Here is some deep matter sure: here is some deepenesse of
Satan, for some Lyncean eyes to discover. No doubt his Holiness is great with
child, ready to be delivered of some Monstrous birth; only he wants some
masculine Midwife to help at a pinch. To which purpose, behold here a most
pernicious clause, closly, inciting such as are of a more Iesuited spirit, to
the attempting, of some facinorous, and audacious fact, worthy the butcherie of
the Hangman, or the ignominy of bonds. As the Poet spoke, but in a far better
sense, then the Pope: Aude aliquid breuibus Gyaris, and carcere dignum; he meant
it by daring to write of the touchy vices of the lawless times, wherein he
lived. Would to God Pontifician attempts were no worse then so. But whatsoever
shame or sorrow their attempts shall make them worthy to suffer; they are to
have a special respect unto the reward, to wit, the Pontifician charity,
which will make a full amends for all; his father-hood being so wonderously
sollicitous of their safety. What is the matter? some difficult enterprise,
full of danger (it seems) to the Actour. In regard whereof the Pope, is no
less sollicitious (I wis) then a natural father, whose son being about to
encounter some hideous monster, or to attempt some Herculian labor, is very
sollicitous, and anxious of the event, so full of danger to his beloved son:
Only here is the difference: a natural father in that case would use all his
power to dissuade his son, yea upon his blessing to enjoin him not to
hazard his life in such a desperate adventure: but the Pope on the contrary,
animateth, and inciteth his sons, by all perswasiue arguments, not only of
profound insinuation, but of professed approbation, to undertake some desperate
enterprise. And enterprises of that nature (be they at all adventure what they
will be) we may boldly abide by it, that howsoever they may endanger the life
of the attempter, certainly they do actually destroy the soul of the
atchieuer. But the Pope is so wondrously sollicitous of their safety, that
perhaps in case of extremity, if they should chance to dye in hot blood
unconfessed, he will, as Pope Clement in his Bull at his Iubilee, command the
Angels to take their souls out of their bodies absolved, and carry them
straight into the glory of Paradise, and not so much as one touch at Purgatory
by the way. Only here is one item more (by the way) what they do, it must be
as that of Judas, speedily done, intimated here by desire of the prosperity of
the present Church. Present it must be; and rather then the Pope will want
matter to animate some desperate son or sons hereunto, besides earnest
desire that they should take special notice of the pontifician charity, so
wondrously sollicitous of their safety: he prefixeth a most horrible
Pontifician blasphemy, comparing such his Martyrs to the blessed Apostle, whose
1 Cor. 4. v. 10
saying the Pope here usurps, and shamelesly peruerteth; and their just
sufferings (whether for treason, murder, or rebellion) to the mortification of
Jesus Christ. Now the Lord Jesus destroy thy blasphemous mouth, o Antichrist.
But he proceeds.

No one duty is of us omitted, which may convert the menacing cloud of the
growing tempest, into a wished calm of consolation: yet if hell enlarge her
mouth, and mortal cruelty thirst after the blood of Martyrs, ye ought to be
armed with the invincible buckler of a good resolution, and meditate of heaven
in the prison, of a crown in the Rack, of immortalitiain death. Answer

NO one duty is of us ommitted. The Pope here gives us to understand, for an
undoubted truth, but implicity, that his sons here in England at this
present (his Jesuits, and Priests) are wondrous busy and industrious,
laboring tooth and nail, with heave, and shooue, to advance forward their
mischeifeous plot in hand. For [By Vs] implies the Pope the Arch-Agent, and
with him all his active Instruments both at Rome and in England, which have
their motion from his hand, and are actuated by that their Head. So that this
testimony from Rome seems to confirm the common rumor here, that his most
white Sons sit in Counsel every day; that, what they conclude, is forthwith
put in execution; that, all the exorbitant motions we see in the world,
proceed from the wheel, which these Engineers secretly, and imsensibly turn
about. So that what Archimedes did by the clean strength of his ingenious Art,
no less admirable, then commendable for the defense of his City, and Country
against the Romans: that do this viperous brood by their Art infernal, no
less detestable then damnable (infused into them by that Roman Architect or
chief machinator of all mischief) to betray their own dear Mother Country
into the hands of Rome, into the paws of the Beast, and into the claws of the
Eagle; even into the merciless cruelty, and tyranny of the Pope, and his most
Catholic Son: so that in very truth, themselves are the men, that work
themselves daily into the fruition of the calm of their wished consolation:
and poor we on the other side abide expecting, till the menacing clowd break
forth into a tempest upon our heads. We as silly birds, like the Done without
heart, sit, and look on, till the fowler spread his net over us; or like the
foolish The Trout.
fish, which beaking her self near the bank, suffers the fisher to tickle,
and handle her lightly, till at length he gripes her fast, and flings her on
the Land: shall we thus suffer Romes Fishers to play, and dally with us, till
by their smooth flatteries, they have with a sudden unexpected jerke cast us
out of our fresh pleasant rivers, that they may presently vnbowell us, and put
us into their hot boiling pan, and so devour us? shall thus the theife be
so vigilant, Vt iugulent homines surgunt denocte l^trones: Vt teipsum seruos,
non expergisceris? See Morrisons Travels in the suruay of Rome.
rising by night to kill men: and shall not honest men awake, to preserve
themselves?

Hell no doubt enlarges her mouth, as waiting for the event of her Sons
deep designs, and machinations, that she may devour such a precious
morsel, as England is. This Hell is Rome, or rather the Popes Palace there,
from whence, through the Gate-Portusa, a fair way leads down to a place
called The valley of Hell, to which place a direct way leads from the Popes
Palace, near unto it.
the valley of Hell. It is a pregnant emblem of the Papal state. But the Pope
here, by his very mentioning of Hells mouth enlarging it self, does from hence
fetch fire, to inflame his sons with a more violent ardour of hostilitye,
telling them that they ought therefore to be armed with the invincible Buckler
of a good resolution. But that he should withal impute unto us mortal
cruelty, thirsting after the blood of Martyrs,: we cannot choose but take it
for a fine frumpe, or rather for the Sardenian laughter, a most bitter taunt.
We cruel? unless by showing mercy to the Popes white sons, we are therein
most cruel to our own selves, and so may prove our selves to be the
Martyrs, whose blood that purple whore so thirsts after. Or do we thirst
after the blood of Martyrs? does the Pope imagine so, because England never
since Queen Mary's days so much as tasted any such like drink, that now
after so long abstinence, it should be so thirsty? but what Martyrs? if he
mean Romish rebels, traitors, murderers, factious seducers, and the like:
cannot our just laws (which at first by such villainies were forced to be
made, and now by the like your Romish attempts are a fresh justly enough
provoked to be executed) punish such miscreants, but you must charge us with
mortal cruelty, as thirsting after the blood of Martyrs? such Martyrs of
yours, as justly suffered death, for their many treacheries, and treasons in
that good Queen ELIZABETH'S reign, against her Royal person, Crown, and
Realm: far unlike those Martyrs of Christ, which suffered fire and faggot in
Queen MARY'S days, for the Gospells sake. Or your late Martyrs, Garnet,
Catesby, Piercy, Se Dr. Carieton Bp of Chichester his thankful remembrance of
Gods mercy worthy to be put in better practice.
Digby, Tressam the two Winters, the two Wrigh^^^ Rookwoad, Grant, Koyes, and
Faux, those hellish Conspiratours in the Gunpowder-treason. These be your
Martyrs: yet call ye us cruel for executing but justice upon such
malefactors? We know you pretend, you exclaim, you suffer for religion, and
therefore Martyrs. So did the Donatists in Saint augustines time, who being
justly punished by Imperial Laws, for maintaining their schismatic
factions, and se ducements, complained they suffered Martyrdom: whom Saint
Augustine reproves. Hoc putant esse signum, etc. The Donatists account this to
be the mark of a true Christian, if he do not practice, but suffer
persecution: But let them (says he) ask of the Apostle, what Church Sara
figured, Aug. Bonifacio viro militari Epist. 50.
when she persecuted her bondmaid. Surely in Sara, the Apostle says, that the
heavenly Jerusalem, to wit, the true Church of God, was figured, which
afflicted the handmaid. Si autem melius discutiamus etc. And if we better
discuss the matter, the handmaid did more persecute Sara, by her insulting,
then Sarab her, by hampering: for Hagar did injury her Mistress, Sara
disciplined her for her pride. A pregnant parallel to this purpose. He that
is a Servant, that ought to be a dutiful, and peaceable subject, plays the
insolent rebel, denies obedience, and subjection to his rightful Sovereign:
the Sovereign by just Laws chastises such a rebel: whether of these is the
Persecutor? whether of these is the Martyr? for nor paena, sed causa facit
Martyrem, Aug.
not the punishment, but the cause makes the Martyr. But Pontificians suffer
for Religion: for what Religion? not that of Christ, but for that, which is
flat rebellion against Christ, and his Word, which straightly commands
loyalty, and subjection to Princes, and Magistrates. In that sense Popish
Traitors may be said to suffer for Religion, such a Religion, which is so
combined with rebellion, that they can neither be divided, nor yet
distinguished: so that not unfitly in this place (so much does the Pope
recommend and mention his Martyrs in this Breeus) may we rank them with
those Heretics called Martyriam, whom Saint Augustine joyneth with the
Satamani, in his 57. cap. de Haeres: These Martyriani were so called, for
honoring one of their sect put to death by Luppieianus a General, as a Martyr
of God, and Christian faith: with these consented the Satanici, or Satiniant,
who worshipped Satan, as the Moderator of all their actions, whose manners
Saint Jude describes. These also were consociated with the Euchitae, who
despising labor, were all for praying, from whom the whole rabble of Monks
derive their Order, But how far the Pontificians symbolize with these, let
their own doctrines, and practices witness.

But howsoever the great Vulcan of Rome here plyeth his Forge, he beats,
while the Iron is hot, to frame a complete Armor for his Sons, and an
invincible buckler of a good resolution, concluding this clause with a
rhetorical gradation, that neither the prison, the rack, nor death it self
should daunt them. But when you Pontificians begin to call to arm against
us, your pretended enemies: is it not high time for us to leave our dallying,
and in good earnest to buckle on our armor against your intended mischeifes?
It follows.

Among the british rocks of their shipwreck religion, Christ's cross has
been a planke, which has brought you into the Haven of your desire. This
Cross you must embrace, by the virtue whereof, the bitterness of punnishments
is sweetened.

Answer.

IF the Pope here did rightly apply Christ's Cross in that sense, whereof the
Scriptures spoke, namely as it is taken for the conformable sufferings of
Christ's members: then might we of the Church of England take up this speech,
and say, that by the Cross of persecution in Queen MARY'S days, we did
swim from the shipwrake to the shore in Queen ELIZABETH'S time; the blood of
Martyrs in that time being the seed, whereof this our Church, by the gracious
dew of heaven, and plentiful showers of preaching, is sprung up and increased
to a most fruitful harvest: and other shipwrake religion we know none, but
your Pontifician Religion, which is a total apostacy from the faith of
Christ, wherein you have too many confederates every where. Your own Apostate
Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatum, whose Italian spirit being
mixed with your Roman, would not suffer him long to abide in the truth, which
for a time he embraced among us: he can tell you of Romish Rocks, of Christian
shipwrake, from which in the name of the true Church of Christ, he admonished
all good Christians to keep aloof: he names 12. in number, as the most
perilous, wherein to make shipwrake of faith; as 1. the Papacy, which is that
great Idol-rocke: 2. Temporal power: 3. infolded faith: 4. Excommunication: 5.
the Commandments of the Church: 6. false union: 7. the Mass: 8. Auricular
confession: 9. Purgatory, together with satisfactions, and Indulgences: 10.
Invocation of Saints: 11. Images and Relics: 12. Merits. Against all these
he has so learnedly written, that you have no other confutation of his book,
but your usual argument, the fire. But we will not herein too much press his
authority, as having madly made shipwrake on those very rocks again, after he
had once swumme from them upon the plancke of such a repentance, as issued from
the light of his conscience, though not of a sound, and saving faith. He came
unto us, and he went out from us, because he was not of us: for had he been
of us, he would no doubt have continued with us.

But we have better testimony, then that of Marcus Antonius de Dominis, to
prove yours to be the shipwreck Religion; the most clear, and authentic
Scriptures of the Lord himself. Upon these Scriptures, as upon a most
impregnable Rock, our Church, and the doctrine thereof are built: our
religion, and faith is a sound ship in Gods harbor, which might there ride
safe, and secure enough, but that your pyraticall sons seek to rend it a
sunder, tearing out the planckes, that having made shipwrake of the faith of
Christ, they might swim to Antichrist.

But it seems you hope for some shipwreck to be made in this our Church, by
some rent in the ship through factious schisms, that so the brackish water
of your Romish Sea, may enter in the leake, and so cause our wrack. But as
long as we keep our ship tite in the unity of faith, safe and sound, we
fear not the force of all your Croyzadoes. And if our English Crosses of
Justice, were a little better put in ure against your ouerdaring sons,
according to their demerits: your Cross, you speak of, would prove but a
poor planke to bring them to the haven of her desires. Neither is this your
Crosses, Christ's Cross, but Antichrists Cross, an Idol of your own making:
your own words prove it. Ye say, by the virtue thereof the bitterness of
punishment is sweetened: so that you ascribe a divine virtue to your Cross.
Nor are we ignorant of your familiar blasphemies in this kind, in your
frequent Orizons, and prayers made to this Idol: your Idol I call it, for you
give the same worship of Latria to it, which you say is proper to God alone. It
is your God therefore. And says your Sum p. 3. q. 25. 4. e.
Thomas Aquinas, whatsoever matter the Cross is made off, wood, stone, Likely
Crosses for poor Christ crucified.
silver, Likely Crosses for poor Christ crucified.
gold, we so worship the Cross (says he) as the Image of Christ, which we
worship with the adoration of Latria. And this he will prove by force of
argument, saying; we give to that the worship of Latria, wherein we put our
hope of salvation but in the Cross of Christ we put our hope of salvation: for
the Church sings, Dominica in Passione Domini in hymno Aquin. ibid. Sed
contra est.
o Crux, aue spes vnica, etc. O Cross, hail thou our only hope, therefore
Christ's Cross is to be adored with the adoration of Latria: And as it is in
the Roman Breuiary, Per fignum Crucis de inimicis no stris libera nos Deius
noster, by the sign of the Cross deliver us O Lord from all our enemies. And
again, Lignum Crucis defendat me ab omnibus malis: let the wood of the Cross
defend me from all evil: yea and in the Part. 2 tit. de benedictione nouae
crucis.
Roman Pontifical, the Bishop in the benediction of the new Cross, says,
Quasumus etc. we pray thee (o Csrist) to receive this cross, as thou did
that, which thou embracedst with thy hands; and as by that, the world was
redeemed from guilt: so the most devout souls of thy servants here offering,
may by the merit of this Cross, be freed from all the sins they have
committed. This is that standard, under which, as the God of your hosts, ye
march, you sing, ecce signum Crucis, fugite parts aduersa: behold the ensign
of the Cross, fly ye adn erse parties. To the virtue of this Cross, you
ascribe all your bloody Massacres, as when Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, at
the beck of Pope Urban 6. carrying hence an Army into France, where winning a
Town, and putting all to the sword, man, woman, and child, it was said, sicque
Crucis beneficio factum, vt Crucis hosts it a deberentur, quod vnus ex eis non
remansit; such courage did the Popes absolution of all these his so signed
Soldiers put into them. Yet (not to make you too proud of this your God) you
may remember how often it has failed you. To give you but one instance: how
sped your Holiness, when against the Popes Liege Lord the Emperor Frederick
the 2. he sent his crossed Army, which the Emperor, for all their Crosses,
discomfited, and as many as he took alive, ripped off their crosses, as taking
first away their charm, and then hanged them up. Yea as Abbas Vrspergensis,
records (or rather in his Paraleipomera) Frederick marked them with crossed
wounds, cutting some of their heads acrosse, and the like: see Albert Crantzius
lib. 8. cap. 9. which example, with many more of the same nature considered,
might somewhat dampe, and disharten your Catholic sons, thus to embrace
your cross, and take it up in such a disloyal quarrel against their
rightful Sovereign, whose just cause, the Omnipotent God above, will ever
defend, maugre all such your superstitious Idols, wherein you trust, yea,
though attended with all your falsehoods and forces. And no less vain is the
necessary you impose upon your sons to embrace this Cross, as if by the
virtue thereof the bitterness of their just punishments should be sweetened.
Alas poor souls what blame of Gilead can heal those gasping wounds; or
assuage those griping torments of a guilty conscience, wounded with the ruefull
remorse of disloyalty, rebellion, treason? even Iezabell may teach you, Had
Zimri peace, that slew his Master? yea, what Traitor ever found peace of
conscience by any such means? But we hope your sons, at least those of the
Laity (whom your more sprightfull sons have notwithstanding too much abused,
in their ouer-credulous simplicity) as by avowing their fidelity to their
Prince, and not intermedling with. but rather seeking by all means to
frustrate, and put by all such wicked designs against their King, and
Country, not only themselves may prevent those fatal punishments, which
treasonable practices necessarily pull upon the actors thereof; but may with
their Prince, and common brethren, enjoy those blessings, and comforts, which
are the inseparable rewards of unity and peace. It follows.

Consider Beloved sons, in what station ye stand, and to whose eyes you are
made a spectacle: the Angelical Legiens do flutter about you, which receive
in their golden viols the desires of the faithful, and present them at the
sanctuary of the mercy of the Omnipotent; heaven gates being set open, Christ
not only a beholder, but a rewarder, shows you the sacred tryumphs of your
Citizens, whom purpled in their own blood, England has brought into the
heavenly assemblies. Answer.

THe Pope goes on in his martial style, and his Antichristian blasphemies,
that so throughout this whole Bull, he might show himself that blasphemous
Beast in the Revelation from horn to hoof. Lo here his sent are in their
several stations, marshelled by their Generals, and Captains, ready for the
fight, to which they are provoked by the consideration of those eyes, that
behold them. Who are they? the Angelical Legions, what are those? good or bad
Angels? if any, they should be rather the good Angels: for he attributes
unto them the office of presenting the prayers of the faithful in their golden
violls at the mercy seat. As if that were the office of the heavenly Angels,
which the Pope here seems absurdly to gather from that scripture Reu. 8.
which is plainly spoken of the Angels Gods Ministers, being the mouth of Gods
people, to offer the incense of prayer, and praise, and thanksgiving unto
Christ (in that place) for opening the Book of the Gospel to his Church,
which had bin closed up by the Church of Rome. Though here his Holiness would
insinuate unto his sons his Roman-Catholique practice, and doctrine of praying
to Angels, that which the Holy Ghost sets down expressly as a brand of
Apostasy from Christ. Col. 2. 18. 19. So that this Angel worship is an other
mark of the Beast, only he is a little shy of speaking broadly in a matter
so gross, especially to his sons in England, where the light of the Gospel
does easily detect and unmask such Popish trumperie; and as the Father here
deals tenderly in such tickle points: so his Priestly sons observe the same
rule here in England, among their disciples, with whom they must deal very
cautelously, smoothing over their rougher doctrines, and qualifying them with
sugar, lest they should prove too tart to those palates, which might happily
have had some taste of sundry doctrines in this Church. But after that their
Roman-Catholique disciples are once hardened, and their stomachs strong enough
to digest, then they dare load them with stronger meats, and reveal unto
them the more hydden mysteries of their Romish religion. This is observed unto
us by one, Dr. Sheldon in his survey of the miracles of Antichrist.
who once had been too well acquainted with such proceedings, when he was a
Popish Priest, till it pleased God by the light of his truth to bring him home
unto us, and make him a worthy member of our Church, and a pregnant instrument
to detect Antichrist, with his delusions.

But whereas your father-hood tells your sons of the Legions of Angels
fluttering about them, if you speak of the good Angels: herein we poor of
the Church of England comfort our selves against these your vain boastings,
and lying confidence. For we are sure those legions are ministering spirits,
Heb. 1.
sent forth to minister for them, which shall be heirs of salvation: those
Angels have a charge over Gods servants to keep them in all their ways: they
pitch their tents round about them that fear God, and deliver them. They are
as an army of fiery chariots, ready to defend one of Gods Prophets, against a
whole band of enemies. Therefore in these heavenly Legions, your Sons can
have no confidence at all for protection. For how can your sons be the heirs
of salvation, to whom you utterly deny the means of salvation, as is saving
faith in Christ? what charge can they have to protect your sons, whom you
cause to go out of their ways, by rebelling against God, and their King? yea
rather you, and your sons may justly fear, that those Angels shall stand
with their swords drawn to stop your course, and to cut you off, as that
Angel did to Balaam, because your ways are perverse before God. And know,
that if you persist in seeking the ruin of our Jerusalem, one of those Angels
is sufficient to smite, and slay a million of you in one night, when you dream
of no such thing. But if by those Legions, fluttering about your Sons, you
mean the Legions of Devils; these indeed no less delight in rebellions,
treasons, and massacres, then your Holiness does, and when you have done your
work, will be as ready to pay your wages.

But for Christ in heaven, although you most impiously blaspheme, in making him
an approuer of your damnable practices, and plots: yet rightly understood, true
it is, he sits in heaven, he beholds all your machinations, and will most
certainly be a severe rewarder of all Popish impieties against God, and his
Lieutenants here on earth: he sits, and sees, he will laugh, and deride you;
he will speak unto you in his wrath, Psalm. 2.
and vex you in his sore displeasure.

For the purpled Martyrs, whom England has sent into the heavenly assemblies:
true it is, being understood of the true Martyrs of Christ, whom in the days
of Queen MARY, the Antichristian cruelty of Rome, rather then England, sent
be purpled in their own innocent blood, into those heavenly assemblies, of
their fellow Martyrs and Saints. But those you here call Martyrs, who in
England have suffered just punishments, for their foul crimes, and abominable
treasons, those without repentance dying embrued in their own blood, were no
doubt sent thither, where not all your purgatory flames, though never so hot,
can purge away the least slain of such hellish guilt. So that between these
Romish Martyrs, and those our English, there is so great a gulf set, that
there is an impossibility of the least communion of society. But we deny
not, we envy not (but pity rather) that all such your Romish Martyrs go all
to one place, who as they are confederates in the same crimes, so it is just,
that they should be associates in the same place, and state of condemnation.
It follows.

The anxious prayers of the mournful Church desire of God for you the spirit
of Charity, and Fortitude. The counsels of the Apostolic senate, and the
prayers of Christendom, take care of your safety, in so large a theater of
heaven and earth; what rigor of year constancy, what sublimitie of a
tryumphant mind becomes it you to have in you? The counsels of your
predecessors have been in the like ieopardy, the lights of the holy Ghost, and
the armor of light be your wise oracles, and your actions the examples of
fortitude. Answer.

IN the former clause the Pope animates his sons, as being a spectacle of
Christ, and Angels: here he sets them in the large theater of Heaven and Earth.
No doubt they are to play some notable prize: Or rather he brings them forth
into the open field, where the maine battle is to be fought. He is now grown
to that confidence in his Pontifician forces, as he scorneth any more to go
to work by digging and delving, and close undermining; he will try it out by
dint of sword. To this end he calls mightily upon his sons for fortitude,
for rigid constancy, for sublimitie of a triumphant mind, for such bright
armor, for such brave actions, as may be the examples of fortitude. This whole
clause breathes nothing, but Arm, Arm. Now is Antichrist come to his full
height; he will now adventure his Kingdom in one maine battle: now is the
time in all appearance, for the fulfilling of that Prophecy Reu. 17. it would
be set down in Capital letters. THE TEN HORNS, TEN KINGS, HAVE ONE MIND,
GIVE THEIR POWER AND STRENGTH UNTO THE BEAST: THESE SHALL MAKE WAR WITH THE
LAMB, AND THE LAMB SHALL OVERCOME THEM: FOR HE IS LORD OF LORDS, AND KING OF
KINGS; AND THEY THAT ARE WITH HIM, ARE CALLED, AND CHOSEN, AND FAITHFVLL. The
preparation unto this war, (mark it, and mark it well, all ye on the
Lambs side) is set down in the former chap. upon the pouring out of the vyoll
of the 6. Angel (which notes this very last time, immediately foregoing the
seventh Angel, at the pouring forth of whose vyoll, is the final, and fatal
consummation all these earthly states) three unclean spirits like froggs came
out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and of the
mouth of the false Prophet: for they are the spirits of Devils, working
miracles, which go forth to the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world to
gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Lo here this
fulfilled before our eyes this day: when were there more swarms of Jesuits
(those unclean spirits, those frogs, those spirits of Devils, that seduce
with lies that teach doctrines of Devils) and that, as is to be doubted, in
England, where this battle is mainely intended to be fought, then at this
day? how does the Pope here animate and incite them, and how vigilant and
diligent are these froggs, to arm states, and kingdoms here, and else where,
yea, like those froggs of Egypt, crawling into Kings Chambers, by their Croking
and crowching, to gather them to this great battle of the great day of God
Almighty. Now, even now (I say) is this a doing; and for their better success,
and good speed in this battle, they have the anxious prayers of the
mournful Church. But blessed be God our comfort is, they be but the anxious
prayers of the malignant Church, not of the truly Militant. For the Pope
speaks of his own Roman Catholic Church, that Antichristian, Apostatized
Church, that whore of Babylon, that enemy of Christ, and his word; That Church,
whose prayers; are abomination to the Lord; for as much as they not only
proceed of infidelity, and want of true faith in God, which they have
altogether abandoned, and accurssed, as in their council of Trent: but because
also they are powered out for obtaining of their most wicked ends, and purposes,
as the dishonor of God, treasons, and rebellions, murders, and massacres, and
all mischiefs. God forbid, such prayers, for all their anxiety, should
prevail with God. Nay, God has forbid it, as he has forbid such abominable
prayers. What success had the Popes anxious prayers against poor Luther Hist.
Council. Tr^d Latin. editio. page 9.
wherein he solicited Christ, Peter, Paul, all the Gods, and Goddesses, the
whole Roman Catholic Church, militant, and triumphant. Or what success had
all his solemn processions, his new letanies to the Blessed Virgin in Spain,
and else where, in behalf of the invincible Armado? So little fear is there
of any such prayers, though never so anxious.

But alas! would to God our sins were not more prevalent to pull upon us the
plague of your spirit of Charity, and fortitude, then your prayers: which your
prayers if they prove to have any force at all against us, it is from the
impotent strength of our iniquities, not of any your piety. We fear not that
awful name of the Church, though never so mournful, which you arrogate to
your selves and appropriate to Rome; Although we know that the prayers of the
true Church, when she is most mournful, are most powerful with God. We
fear not the bead-rolles of your Babelling prayers, your Aue-Maries, your
Masses, your solemn Processions, and infinite such trumperies. We know that
your God, is not as our God, even your own consciences being witnesses, and so
manifold external evidences of his divine dealing in mercy for us, in
judgment against you, in all those former attempts of yours against us. And
know O Romish sinagogue, that in vain do ye machinate, and meditate the
ruin of this fair Church, and state, if we be true but to this our God, who
has ever been so true to us: your war against us shall not prevail, if we
labor to be at peace with him. Your prayers shall be of no force, where our
faithful and mournful prayers interpose themselves. If God, as ever
hitherto, be on our side, how shall you be against us: Do you not remember
how many times, how mightily, how miraculously our God has defended us, and
defeated you? how he frustrated your proud confidence in that your invinsible
Navy in 88. as he did the Aegiptians in the Red Sea? do ye not remember, how
in your Gunpowder plott, wherein you dug as deep as hell, presuming no eye
saw you, yet his all-seeing eye espied you, and descried all your counsels, to
cause the heads of those principal powers to be mounted as high above the
Parliament house, as they mined underneath it? Upon what confidence then dare
you now renew your old attempts? do you take our God for a changeling? But ye
presume we are become changelings, to make God our enemy. God forbid. We have
not yet forsaken our God, as ye have done: Yet we must needs confess to our
own shame, that we have not walked worthy of, nor answerably unto, all those
precious mercies, and blessings of God, which from his good hand upon us, we
have enjoyed for these many years, even to the astonishment, and swelling envy
of all our enemies. We have too much declined from our first love: we have
not rendered to the Lord in thankfulness, according to all his goodness
toward us: we have not been so zealous of his glory, in maintaining his truth
in the purity of it, and in suppressing over audacious heresy, and Idolatry
among us, affronting us to our face. The Lord be merciful to us herein. And
know, O ye Pontificians, that one public fast, of our Church solemnly, and
sincerely kept, in humiliation for our manifold and great sins shall quash,
and quell all your Dirges, and Masses, all your solemn prayers, and
Processions, all your hypocritical fasts, and crossings, and whatsoever
superstitious trumperies, ye can devise against us. Did ye not hear, did not
the fame thereof echo upon Romes gates, what a wonderful mercy the Lord
showed to this Land the last year, when upon the very day of our public fast
throughout the Land, being the second of August, (a day worthy to be put in the
Rubric of our perpetual thanksgiving) upon that very day (I say) God began
even miraculously to stop that sad and unseasonable influence of heaven,
wherewith our fields, now waxing white to the harvest, were so pitifully
drenched, that almost all hope of harvest, was drowned in our fear of a deluge
in stead thereof: yet even then began the heavens to clear, and cheer up
their clowdy, and angry countenance; when we began to weep, they began to
smile; and from that day forward continued so extraordinarily, and constantly
fair, without one days intermission, until by Gods favor, they brought us
in not only an harvest in season, but in an extraordinary abundance? has the
Lord done thus to us for temporal things upon such our humiliation, and will
not be also for spiritual much more when we truly set our selves to seek
his face and favor in the pardon of our sins? Assuredly he will. And as you
may remember our deliverance from your Gunpowder plott upon the fifth of
November: so ye may be pleased to recognize, how the same God sent a
fearful vengance, in bringing the same A house in the Black Friars in London,
where the Papists were assembled to hear a popish Sermon, by Gods just
judgment wonderful in our eyes, fell down suddenly upon them, and slew many
scores of them.
House down upon your heads, when there ye being solemnly assembled, began
to erect your Dagon cheek by joule by God's Ark, and to advance the Throne of
your Antichrist even in the face of Christ's Tribunal: and all this (remember,
and mark it well) upon your very fifth of November. Remember I say, and forget
it not, that it may teach you to tremble before that God of Ours: and ever may
we also remember it, for thankefullnesse to our God, for vindicating his own
cause, and glory against such proud, and insolent affronts. Well, consult (I
say) lay your heads, join you forces together, arm your selves with as much
might, as ye have malice against us, we fear you not, so long as we shall
oppose our religious, to your anxious prayers. We praying and humbling our
selves, as behoues us, ye shall no more prevail against us, then Amaleck did
against Israel, while Moses bands were held up. The Lord give all his people
grace to put on the true Armor of Light, even the whole Armor of God, whereby
we may stand fast in the evil day. Then shall we be sure, that not all your
spirit of charity, (which is nothing else, but the spirit of malignitie, and
confederacy against Christ) now your spirit of fortitude (which is the spirit
of all lawless daring against God and his Gospel) shall any whit avail you.

In the mean time, ye mightily triumph in your hopes, as if already ye had
the victory. So ye did in 88* so at the Gunpowder plot. Ye may now as well
as then, reckon before your Host. Yet it is good for us to take notice of this
your confidence of triumph. It may teach us, though not to fear your brags,
yet not to be secure, but to provide betimes to prevent your triumphs, and to
turn the examples of your fortitude, into the examples, and spectacles of
confusion, justly falling upon such Giant-like fighters, against God, and his
Word.

But beside your anxious prayers, you have your councels; yea councels of your
only Apostolic inerrabilitie, of your Apostolic Senate, Papa est lex
animata in terris Gloss. lib. 1. tit. 14. and iura omnia in pectore censetur
habere.
your Conclaue of Cardinals drawing all their counsels from your Holiness
breast. For that is the proper seat of all your Senatorian power and
counsels. Your predecessor Pope Nicholas the third, assumed to himself the
whole Senatorian power; he, by decree, shut out all other temporal regiment in
Rome and about, and subjected it all to his Apostolic Soueraintie. This now is
your Apostolic Senate. Thus you prove your self that Beast, bearing the
Image of the former; to wit, of the ancient secular Roman power: Revel. 13.
Thus you exercise the whole power thereof, being perpetual Dictator, having
Consular and Senatorian power, which joined with Apostolic, shows you to
be both the seventh and the eighth Head of that great Beast, and so insumme,
that Antichrist. Your Apostolic Senate is of no less power, then that
ancienter Roman Senate, to whom it belonged to admit into, or to reject from
the number of their Gods, whom they pleased. So that Tiberius the Emperor
could not prevail to have Christ sainted for a God, because the Senate
forsooth had not first allowed of it. And does not your Apostolic Senate the
same? You saint and defy whom you please, And Christ himself is no farther
God with you, but as you limit him, by dividing his Prerogatives among your
other petty Gods and Saints: yea his mother you set above him, and your own
Apostolic Senats above all, in Heaven and earth.

You told us before, you feared our Counsels. What need you? You have all
counsel in your Apostolic Conclaue. You can say to us, as once your
predecessor See Fox his Mon. page 243. This was the Pope Innocent, that first
ordained, that his Cardinals should wear red hats, when they rode abroad, not
only for conspicuousnes, but to put them in mind to be ready, to shed blood
for the safety of their Roman Catholic faith and christians.
Innocent the fourth, to Henry the third King of England, when he went about
to restrain Papal usurpation in this Kingdom: Rex Anglorum (in quis) qui jam
recalcitrat and Frederiz at, suum habet consilium: ego vero and meum habeo,
quod and sequur. The English King (says he) who now kicketh with the heel,
and plays the Frederick, has his Counsel: and I also have my Counsel
which I will follow. Of the two, we fear more your counsels, then your
prayers. But forasmuch as you spare not here to blaspheme also the Holy Ghost:
our trust is, he will befoole all your Counsels. Dare your father your impious
Counsels, and confederacies upon the Holy Ghost, that his Lights should be your
Oracles? Dare you ascribe your Counsels of darkness to the illuminations of
the Holy Ghost? Surely your Holiness is deceived. Is it not that spirit, which
(as some of the Cardinals with their Pope John the twenty two, Synodus
Lugdunensis.
sitting in a Counsel at Rome, praying for the presence of the Holy Ghost,
said) appeared in the likeness of an oughly Owl, Nic. Clemangis.
out staring the Pope in his face? This indeed is a lively emblem of that
Spirit, by whose Oracle your Apostolic counsels are directed. But never for
shame go about to persuade the world, that your counsels for treasons, and
rebellions, for absoluing subjects from their fidelity, and allegiance, are
the illuminations of the Holy Ghost. So was Mahomets Dove his Holy Ghost. So
his epilepsian or comitiall fit, but a trance, wherein he talked with his
Angel Gabriell. So might Baronius.
Eugenius the third, your predecessor, have two holy Ghosts at once attending
upon him, while, as he was saying Mass, two Doves miraculously ascended and
descended upon him. So Zedechiah the false Prophet might persuade he had the
Spirit entailed to him, as you to Peter's chair, when he said to Michaiah, When
went the spirit from me, to speak unto thee? So did Numa Pompilius your Roman
Lawgiver found and father his Laws upon his familiar conference with his
fained goddess Egeria. Such is your Holy Ghost. I quake to repeat the words of
your blasphemies. And for your Armor of light, what is it but Pistols,
Stellettoes, Poisons, your usual weapons, whereby you perpetrate those hellish
works of darkness, which who so puts not off, can never put on the Armor
of Light.

Yet notwithstanding all these blasphemies, which shall certainly hasten
confusion to Babels pride; notwithstanding their vain confidence in many
prayers, which for all their number, want weight: yet, forasmuch as at this
present, they set all their Counsels a work for the bringing to pass of some
damnable plot against this Church and State, which by all apparent signs, so
far as we may gather from the language of Babell in this Papal Bull
(wherein his Holiness is still up with Constancy, and Fortitude, animating his
sons to a sublimitie of a triumphant mind, and to be ready to undergo
imprisonment, the rack, death; whereof, for ought that we can see, there is
no such occasion given to speak, but rather the contrary, in regard of the
great mildness used toward them; and the large liberty they enjoy) cannot
be any other design, but some strong and sudden Invasion, whereby to
subiugate this poor Church, and State to Papal thraldom, and to the Iberian
(in plain English) Spanish cruelty: this may be a sufficient warning to
awaken us out of our sweet slumber, and to buckle on out Armor, to defend our
Religion, Country, Lives, Liberty, the noble England, against this proud
Antichrist, and all his Confederates. It follows.

ANd if violence proceed so far, as it compel you, to that pernicious, and
unlawful Oath of Alleagiance of England, remember that your prayer is heard of
the whole assemblies of the Angels beholding you; and let your tongues cleave
to your gummes, before you cause the authority of blessed Peter to be
diminished with that form of Oath. For that is not all, that fidelity be kept
to the King, but that the sacred Scepter of the Catholic Church be wrung from
the Vicars of God Almighty; that which our predecessor Paul the fifth of
blessed memory in so grave a deliberation decreed, that ought ye altogether
to observe, as the decree of truth. Beloved sons, this tribute due to the
Prince of the Apostles, no threats of men, or flatteries, ought at any time to
extort from you; they that persuade you otherwise, those prophecy to you a
lying vision, and a fraudulent divination. For sooner ought the sword of the
mighty, to take away from a Christian man his life, then his faith. Yea, if an
Angel from Heaven teach you otherwise, then the Apostolic truth, let him be
accursed. Answer.

After the skirmish all this while, at length his Holiness comes to the maine
battle, wherein the sinews of Pontifician strength consists, and wherein
Antichrist shows himself in his Colors displayed. Here he valiantly cuts in
sunder the Gordian knot of all civil society; not as Peter, cutting off only
the ear, but the whole head from the body. For the sum of this clause is, to
charge his sons by no means to suffer the Oath of Allegiance to be imposed
upon them either by flattery, or by force. But why should his Holiness be so
straight laced for the taking of the Oath, seeing he can with a wet finger,
absolve or dissolve it at his pleasure? Henry the third, King of England knew
this too well, when trusting still to the purchase of Papal absolutions, he
would not stick to swear, and seal to solemn covenants made with his Nobles
in Parliament, which to break at his pleasure, it was but sending to Rome. But
the case (it seems) stands now upon more tickle terms. Something is to be
done out of hand, which either will not admit of the Oath, as being a clogge to
resolution; or admitted; cannot tarry for an absolution from Rome, as being an
impediment to speedy execution. But come we to the words as they lie.

If violence proceeded so far, as to compel you to that pernicious, and
unlawful Oath of Allegiance of England, etc. Surely such oaths of fidelity,
as must be extorted from subjects to their lawful Prince, are scarce worthy
to be trusted; Slaves and not subjects require such violence. Yet indeed if an
Oath be pernicious, and unlawful, not violence it self should extor it. But
the Oath of Allegiance of England (says his Holiness of Rome) is pernicious,
and unlawful. Pernicious, to whom? To his Holiness: unlawful? By what law, by
none, But his Holiness own law. When (till the Pope broached it) was an Oath
of fidelity, between Subjects, and Prince, unlawful; let the Pope show this
(I say not, in the sacred, but) in any profane story, yea or in the Turks
Alcoran. But it is enough, if the Pope says it. But if violence, etc. Remember
that your prayer is heard of the whole assembly of the Angels beholding you.
Remember? Since when? Or whence know they this? The Pope tells them so. But why
the Angels? Were it not more comfort to be heard of God, then of the whole
assembly of the Angels? But what if the Angels be otherwise, other where
employed, as in remotest parts, of heaven, or earth, far from the sight of
England? What if the Popes sons do not pray loud enough, as to be heard of
the whole assembly of Angels? They had need cry a loud, as Elias told the
Priests of Baal. But least, as Elias, we provoke their Zeal too much, to
launch their flesh, we will pass over this; only noting again (being
occasioned a fresh) that this Angel service, so much esteemed; and commended
by the Pope to his sons, is a most infallible mark of that Antichrist and
great Apostate from Christ the Head, as Col. 2. 18. 19.

And let your tongue cleave to your gummes, before, etc. It was a part of
Isreal's song in Babylon: If I remember not thee. O Jerusalem, let my tongue
cleave to my gummes etc. And lo here the King of the spiritual Babylon,
usurps this Scripture, and would have his sons, conversing in Jury, rather
to suffer their tongues to cleave to their gummes, then suffer the honor of
Babylon, of Rome, to be impeached. Yea but the Pope says not so; but Rather
then you cause the authority of blessed Peter to be diminished with that
form of Oath. What is this to Babylon? Yes. For Peter from Babylon, writ his
Epistles. What is this to Rome? Yes says the Pope, Peter was now at Rome,
which he calls Babylon. A sound proof that Peter was at Rome. Rather shall
Rome be Babylon, then the Pope will want Proof, that Peter was at Rome. For
else how shall the Pope be Peter's successor? But admit Peter was at Rome: must
therefore the Pope be Peter's Successor: But Peter was Bishop of Rome. To
omit invinsible arguments against it, suppose that too. Yet the Pope can never
prove that Peter was Pope of Rome. Great difference between the Bishops of
Rome, and the Popes of Rome, yea the Pope of Rome, (...). The Bishops of Rome,
till Constantine the Great, were all, or most of them Martyrs: all of them were
of equal jurisdiction with other Patriarchs, only preceding them in order of
place, not of power, till Boniface the 3. usurped his Supremacy over all
Bishops, with his Papal Motto, Volumus and Jubemus, we will and command; after
this also, all were subject to the Emperor, till Gregory the 7. None of them
wore any such thing as a single Diadem, till Syluester, none the triple crown,
till Boniface the 8. Yet now forsooth all Papal power and Pomp must be
derived from blessed Peter, which (alas good man) he never had. But (to incist
in the present purpose) where or when, or whence had blessed Peter any such
Souerainety, and authority over Kings, and their Kingdoms? you have pregnant
proofs for it: as Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep: that is, says your
Bellarmine, Regi^ more Impera, Reign as Kings. But Peter was of another mind:
as where he teaches: Bishops not to be as Lords over Gods heritage, but as
examples to the flocks. And submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme. What says your
Holiness to this; we know you want not shifts, as here to accept, and exempt
Peter himself. What can ye not say, while ye can abuse the Scriptures
themselves, as you list? Peter's feeding of Christ's flocks, you can turn to
Kingly reign, and convert Peter's sheepehooke, into a papal Scepter. Christ
bid Peter, launch out into the deep: here (say you) the Pope has power given
him to fish all the world. Thus, ye need never want Scripture to prove your
Papal Paradoxes. But what say you to Peter's paying of Tribute to the Emperor
for Christ and himself, at Christ's appointment? Is not Tribute a token of
subjection? But from this very place, your Bellarmine can learnedly prove
Peter's Supremacy over all. But over Princes too? Yes by the bye, in directly,
at least in ordine ad spirituali, yea, the Pope Urban himself, no less
learnedly, then Papally, interprets that place of the Tribute in the fishes
mouth, saying, Causa. 23. q. 8. Tributum in Gratian.
that by the piece of money in the fishes mouth, is meant only the exterior
things of the Church, which she gives to Kings, to defend Her in peace, but
not the Pontifical Apex or Supremacy, which is supereminent in the mouth of
the head of the Church. So the Pope. Though Christ said, Pay that for Me and
Thee, speaking expressly of their persons, implying the subjection of
Ecclesiastical persons to Emperors, and Kings. And as the Gloss confesses,
Tributum est signum subiectionis: Tribute as a sign of subjection. And yet
more, rather then fail, Cardinal Baronius has taken in hand to prove the
Pop^s Supremacy, as well Papal, as Sacerdocall, from the very shadow of
Peter, Act. 5. 15. which shadow the Pope retaining in himself, makes him a
complete Lord Paramount. Thus by hook or by crook you will have it, though
all prove to be but a shadow. But will you, nill you, both Peter's practice,
and Peter's doctrine are flat contrary to yours, and crosses all your
Glosses; nor have you so much as a shadow for it.

Yet if your plea from Peter, as his Successor, will not hold water: ye add
ad corroborandum titulum; your plea from Christ's Vicarship. You say, that is
not all, that fidelity be kept unto the King, but that the sacred Scepter of
the Catholic Church be wrung from the Vicars of God Almighty. That you here
again slight our gracious King, not vouchsafing him the title of King of
England, or your sons King, we marvel not; we smell your secret
reservation, either that he is no King, that holds not his crown of your
holiness; or that the Kingdom of England in special, is none otherwise to
be holden, but as in King John's time, in see of the Pope. But great reason you
should have regard to your Catholic, or rather your Roman Catholic Church.
For sure the Catholic Church of Christ never had any such sacred Septer, as
you speak of, to which the disposal of Kings, and Kingdoms is subject. But
your Roman has, and therefore not Catholic. Whence then have you this sacred
Septer? by virtue of your Vicarship of God Almighty. Do not now equivocate
with us: or, go not about to found a new Vicarship: yet this is not the first
time, you and your Predecessors of late days have entitled your selves Gods
Vicars. As in that inscription or Dedication to Paul 5. Paulo V. vice Deo.
(whom by and by ye name) Paulo V. 5. V.
Vice Deo: to Paul V. vice God: whereof the numerall letters, 5. L.
as well in the Latin as in the English, 5. V.
make up the number of the beast, 5. V.
666. you were wont formerly to content your selves with the title of Christ's
Vicar: 100. C.
but now must ye be the Vicars of God, 500. D.
of God Almighty: that from thence you may derive an omnipotency to your
selves, as it was added to that former inscription: Paulo V. vice Deo, totius
orbis Christiani, Monarchae and Pontificiae omnipotentiae defensori acerrimo:
To Paul 5. vice God, the Monarch of the whole Christian world, and the most
stout defender of the Papal omnipotency. No marvel then, if you entitle your
selves, the Vicars of God Almighty, rather then of Christ.

But (you will say) all comes to one reckoning, since Christ is God Almighty;
and therefore it is all one to be the Vicar of Christ, and of God almighty. By
your favor, no: for although Christ be God almighty yet in this case of your
pretended Vicarship it is one thing to say Christ's Vicar: another, God
Almighties Vicar. Christ's Vicar here on earth we acknowledge none, but his
own and the Fathers holy Spirit; him, Christ sent to supply his stead, at his
ascension. This Spirit gouernes and directs his Church into all truth. This is
that other Comforter, the spirit of truth By this spirit Christ is present with
his Church to the end of the world. But for any one visible, and singular
Vicar, Christ has appointed none, the Church acknowledges none. As for any
Vicar general visible of God almighty, simply considered as God, and
governor, and judge of all here on earth, we acknowledge not any. Only all
lawful Magistrates, as Kings and Princes, are as so many Vicegerents of God
almighty, to govern and moderate their peculiar Dominions, in, for, and
according to God, and his word; these be Gods Lieutenants here on earth, and
therefore called Gods. Now give me leave to tell you, that the jurisdiction of
God almighty here on earth is distinct from that of Christ. Gods jurisdiction
is also in things temporal: Christ's jurisdiction as Mediator is in things
spiritual. These two jurisdictions are not compatible, not coincident, or
concurrent in their total extent in any one man. Only the outward polity of
the Church, both as touching persons, and causes Ecclesiastical, are
subordinated to God almighties Lieutenants here on earth, as all supreme
Magistrates: so that in this regard, those that are Christ's Vicegerents in
common, as all faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who are Christ's Legates, or
Ambassadors (2. Cor. 5. 28.) are for their persons, and outward estate subject
to God almighties Lieutenants, set over them.

So that if you will confine your self to the title of Christ's Vicar: first,
as no man is capable of that title, as you challenge it: so neither can you by
virtue thereof show you have any such power derived upon you from Christ; for
Christ left, or bequeathed no other kind of power to his Church, but such as
himself, as he was the Minister of the Gospel exercised in his Ministers here
on earth. Now Christ in that dispensation of his, exercised no such power or
jurisdiction over Kings, and Princes; yea, he practiced the contrary; he
submitted himself to pay tribute to Caesar; yea, to be judged at Caesar's
bar, from which the Pope has exempted himself, and Clergy, by his papal
decrees. And was it, because Christ wanted power to vindicate and defend
himself from Caesar's power? No surely. With the breath of his mouth his
apprehenders fell backward to the ground. He had twelve legions of Angels in
readiness to defend him.

Object. But had not Christ, as being God, sovereign power over Kings and
Princes, to dispose of their kingdoms, and the like, if it had pleased him?

Answ. Christ the Mediator (the office whereof he came to execute) is to be
considered, not simply as God, but as he was God-man. In that regard the power
of his dispensation, was limited by his Father, that sent, and appointed him.
So that Christ said, I came to do, not mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me. Not that Christ's will was contrary to his fathers, but
subordinate only, as Mediator, to do that which the father appointed him,
and no more. Christ would not, must not go beyond his Commission, received of
the father. Now the Father gave him no such commission of a temporal
jurisdiction, no not so much as in small causes. When those two brethren came
to him, entreating him to divide their inheritance between them: he refused,
saying, Who made me a Judge, Luke 12. v. 14.
or a diuider over you? He had no commission in such things from the Father.
And if not in smaller matters, as that was, how much less over Emperors and
Kings.

Object. But although Christ's power was limited, during his abode on earth in
the state of his humiliation: yet after* his resurrection, he received an
absolute, and unlimited power: as he says, All power is given me in heaven
and earth: from this power does the Pope, as Christ's Vicar challenge a
Supremacy over Kings and States, to depose, dispose, etc.

Answ. When Saint John in that vision saw the great where, that Beast full of
the names of blasphemy, he wondered with great admiration. But when we see
this blasphemous Beast not in a vision, but with open eyes, how can we choose
but greatly wonder? for this very speech of Christ, the Pope assumes as spoken
of himself, and that in as full, yea, more ample manner, then Christ applied
it to himself. For although by this speech Christ declared himself to his
Disciples, and so to his Church, to be the Son of God consecrated for ever
Lord over all, to the great comfort of his drooping Disciples, now at his
departure: yet herein does not Christ show any alteration in the dispensation
of his Ministry, deputed to his Disciples. He does not hereby inuest his
Ministers with a larger power and commission, then himself executed in his
own person, while he was with them; for what follows? All power is given me
in heaven, and earth: go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. He says not, Go ye therefore, and exercise this power of mine over the
Kings of the earth, and if they will not obey your Ministry, depose them, or
absolve their people from their allegiance, and dispose you of their Kingdoms
to whom you will. Much less said he any such thing to Peter alone: Go Thou
therefore, and have thou all power in heaven and earth, for thee, and for thy
successor in the Sea of Rome. No such thing. All the power that Christ
delegates to his Disciples, and that in common men, is for their Ministerial
function, to preach the Word* and administer the Sacraments. Herein Peter had
but his share with the rest of his fellows. They were joined in equal
Commission, none above another; much less above others in any Temporal
Jurisdiction. To this their function, Christ to animate and arm them, against
all difficulties, and discouragements, either in regard of their own
infirmities, and natural disabilities, or of the worlds malice and might in
opposing them: he tells them, All power is given me in heaven, and earth: Go
ye therefore, etc. Fear nothing, for I, who have all power given me in heaven
and earth, am with you, and will be with you to the end of the world. And it is
worth the noting, that this last charge, which Christ (now leaving the world,
and so his Disciples, as concerning his bodily presence) gave unto them, he
gave it in common to them all, without putting difference: which plainly
shows, that Christ left no Supremacy to Peter over the rest of his fellows,
as the Pope usurps, which otherwise no doubt he would have expressed, if it
had been such an Article of faith, whereupon depended the necessity of
salvation, as Pontificians teach.

Yet for all this, the Pope will needs (as Christ's Vicar) challenge these
words to himself, and be an equal sharet with him in them, All power is given
me in heaven and earth. For they say, De Council. author. l. 2. cap. 17.
Christ and the Pope have but one Consistory; and, says Bellarmine, Nomina
omnia, quae in scripture is tribuuntur Christo (vnde constat cum esse supra
Ecclesiam) eadem omnia tribuuntur Pontifici. All names, which are given to
Christ in the Scriptures) whereby he is declared to be over the Church) all
those same are attributed to the Pope. Thus in the Council of Latera they
called Pope Leo 10. the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; and many other names of
Blasphemy, which are spoken personally of Christ: Extrauag. com. vnam sanctam.
yea the Pope himself says (Boniface 8) That Christ, Peter, and his
Successor, are all one head of the same Church. Sexti de electione ca. 17.
fundamenta.
And Pope Nicolas 3. goes a little higher; Christ (says he) has placed the
mystery of the Apostolic function principally in blessed Peter, the chief of
all the Apostles, that from him, as from a certain head, he might diffuse his
gifts, as it were into all the body: for, taking him into the fellowship of the
individual unity, the Lord would have him named that, which he himself was,
saying, Tues Petrus, and super hanc Petram etc. In a word, the Popes triple
crown, is to signify his triple Dominion and jurisdiction in heaven, earth,
and purgatory, and those subterrestiall or infernal kingdoms, according to
that Phil. 2. v. 10. and Psalm. 8. 7. v. 8. which places they familiarly apply
to the Popes unlimited power in these places; understanding by the Beasts, men
on earth, by the Fishes, souls in hell, and purgatory; and by the Fowls, the
winged Angels; over all which, the Pope says, he has dominion. Thus all power
is given him in heaven and earth. Thus he runs away with Christ's power, but
leaves the charge of Christ to his Disciples, to preach the word, and
administer the Sacraments.

But in the mean time, all this arrogant, and blasphemous usurpation of the
Pope, what does it, but most clearly conclude him to be that Great Antichrist,
described in the Scripture? This is he, that exalis himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. This is he, that sits in, or upon the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God; to wit, invested in all the
power of God, and of Christ, in heaven, and earth, as the Vicar of God
almighty. Herein, he is not Christ's Vicar, who would not meddle in matters of
the world; Luke 4. v. 6.
but indeed his Vicar, that said to Christ, All this power will I give thee,
and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will,
I give it. The Dragon spoke this: and of Antichrist it is said, that he has
two horns like a Lamb, but speaks like the Dragon. The Pope speaks just
like the Dragon here. Hadrian. Epist. apud Auentin. lib. 6. 506. See also Fox
his Mon. page 184.
See this verified in the Pope to an hair, to a very letter. Pope Hadrian
says, Vnde habet Imperator Imperium, nisi a nobis, etc. From whence has the
Emperor his Empire, but from us? that which the Emperor has, he has it all
of us etc. Lo, it is in our power to give it, to whomsoever we will. As Ier.
1. 10.
Therefore we are appointed of God over Nations, and Kingdoms, that we
should destroy and pluck up. See how like the Sons voice is to the Syres.
He speaks just like the Dragon, only in a more lofty style, we, for I.
Also Pius 5. in his Bull against Queen Elizabeth, of happy memory, used the
like speech in Ier. 1. v. 10. So that the Pope, and his clients conclude, that
all Emperors and Kings hold their Empires, and Kingdoms but in fee of the
Pope. Thus Henry 1. King of England, was glad with much paying and praying to
obtain of Pope Alexander the 3. that he, and his successors should have the
title of the King of England. Platina.
This held till King John's time, when the P^pe again resumed the kingdom of
England into his own power, but was content at length to let King John have it
to farm. So Pope Celestine 3. crowned Henry 6. See Fox his Mon. p. 221.
Emperor, and his Empress with his holiness feet, and when he had done so,
struck it off again with his foot; to signify it was in the power of the
fame foot to take away his crown that had put it on. Thus we see Antichrist
exalting himself above all that is called God, and that in the highest degree.
So that it may be admired, that any man having but his eyes open to compare the
Pope with his own picture, 1. These. 2.
can doubt, that he is that Antichrist; unless such men be given up to a
strong delusion, because they received not the love of the truth. But it is
lamentable to see learned men so blind-folded, as not to see this Mystery of
iniquity. But more pernicious, that not seeing it themselves, they would
persuade the world also, that the Pope is not Antichrist. Is it time now to
make Apologies for the Pope not to be Antichrist, when he so egregiously plays
the Antichrist, even under our noses? when he goes about to seduce, and
withdraw the hearts of subjects from the King, from our gracious Sovereign? It
was Tortus his speech, noted by the learned Bishop, in his Tortura, to be Romes
Doctrine, Tortura Torti page 328.
that at the hissing of a slye, which is in Babylon, namely at Rome, the
subjects would revolt from the obedience of their Prince, and so by the window
treason immediately enters. The Pope is the fly of Babylon, who can make of
the Prince, no Prince, of the subject, no subject, and the no subject, against
the no Prince; what may he not attempt? But this is, in case the Prince be an
Heretic, or Schismaticke. And what is it for the Prince to be an Herticke:
forsooth, if he do not yield himself the Popes Vassal; which (says the
Bishop) is else to deny one of the prime Articles of the Christian faith. It
was the case of Philip le Bell. Thus the Bishop.

To proceed: the Pope mentions a grave Decree of his Predecessor Paul 5. no
doubt he means that Bull sent hither into England, inhibiting his sons the
oath of allegiance. The Pope calls it a Decree of truth, which must be
diligently observed. For a taste, I will insert one sentence of it, Tortura
Torti page 106.
cited by the learned Bishop: Vobis ex verbis ipsis (Iuramenti) perspicuum esse
debet, quod huiusmodi iuramentum, salua fide Catholica, and salute animarum
vestrarum, prestari non potest* From the very words of the oath, it ought to
be clear unto you* that says an oath cannot be undertaken with the safety
of the Catholic faith, and the salvation of your souls. If so, good reason
their tongues should rather cleave to their gums, then they take it; great
reason, that neither threats, nor flatteries extort it from them: rather part
with life, then faith: yea this they must be so undoubtedly resolved of, that
If an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, then this Apostolic truth, let him
be accursed. Here at last breaks forth the thunderbolt it self, which were
enough to blast the very Angels of heaven; if, for subjects to deny due
obedience to their lawful Princes, were an Apostolic truth. But can a
Christian ear hear such blasphemy without horror, with any patience? This an
Apostolic doctrine, an Apostolic truth: Papal it is, Diabolical it is,
raked out of the pit of hell. Apostolic it is not, neither from Paul, nor
Peter: from Paul 5. but not from Paul the Apostle. Paul teaches the contrary,
Romans 13. Peter the contrary, 1. Pet. 2. 13. how durst you, you blessed
Apostles, preach such a doctrine, as is contrary to the Apostolic truth of
Rome? either you must recant your doctrine, or lo a smoking Anathema is
breathed out against you.

But lest those holy Apostles, lest God himself, lest Jesus Christ, lest the
holy Ghost, lest the whole sacred word of God should come within the danger of
the Popes curse, and all for the mistaking of one word Apostolic, for
Apostaticke. We are rather to think, that as Manicheus writing himself
Apostle, hence he would conclude his damnable doctrines to be Apostolic: so
the Pope calling himself that Apostolic one, therefore all his lying Oracles
must be taken for Apostolic truths. And see here also how impiously the Pope
goes on to pervert, and profane the sacred Scripture. If an Angel from heaven
teach you otherwise, let him be anathema. This was the Apostles speech to the
Galathians, rightly applied. The Pope usurps the same words, but to his most
wicked purpose. Herein also he shows himself that great Antichrist, who was
of old noted to be an egregious falsifier, and peruerter of the Scriptures.
Take one example: Origin. in Mat. 24. Tract. 27.
Origin says, Omnis sermo qui profitetur, etc. Every speech that professes
the expositions of the Scriptures, and the faith of them, and has not the
truth, is justly to be understood to be Antichrist, coming in Christ's name,
and saying, I am Christ, lying, and not able to show the form of truth in
himself. How truly this is verified of the Pope, among infinite other
instances of his audacious perverting of Scripture, this one here, taken from
the Apostle, may sufficiently euince.

But the Oath is prejudicial to the Catholic faith: to what Catholic faith?
you must understand there is a twofold Catholic faith: the one, that of the
Scriptures, of the Old Testament, and the New, of Christ, and the Apostles and
Prophets, of the whole Church of God in all ages, in all places of the world,
which is therefore called the Catholic faith, because it is universal, and
this is the only true and proper Catholic faith. There is another faith, that
has the name of Catholic, but with an addition, either expressed or implied,
to wit, the Roman Catholic faith; and because Roman Catholic, therefore
indeed not Catholic, no true, but a bastard Catholic faith. The object of
this Roman Catholic faith, is together with the History of the Scriptures
(for the mystery of the Gospel contained therein to every true believers
salvation, they exclude from being so much, as a partial object of this their
faith, but in general only, as an History) the Apocryphal Books. Which
Saint Jerome says, are for instruction of manners, not for instruction of
faith, all their Traditions which they call Apostolical, all their Decretales
and Extrauagants, and above all, that which is the sum of all the rest, the
Oracle of the Popes own breast inerrable; and so whatsoever his Holiness
either has taught, or shall hereafter teach, as he sees to be most
commodious, for the present state of the Church: all these are the adequate
object of this Roman-Catholike faith. Among which Doctrines Apostolic this is
one, to deny fidelity to Kings and Princes, when the Pope commands. This is
an Article of the Roman Catholic faith, not to be violated upon pain of
damnation. So that to take the oath of Allegiance, and keep it, as it cannot
stand with the safety of Roman Catholic faith, so neither of their own
salvation. Why so? Un. Sanct.
By the irrefragible decree of Pope Boniface 8. Porro subesse Romano Pontifici,
etc. Finally, to be subject to the Pontifie or Pope of Rome, we declare,
determine, define, and pronounce, that every humane creature is bound upon
necessity of salvation. But by what authority? The gloss gives the reason,
from the very first word, Porro. Porro, id est, Certe, quia sic est: Decret.
Greg. de Transla. Epist. ca. 3. gloss.
Truly, because it is so. A most Papal reason: for as the Gloss says
sententiam, etc. that which is no sentence, he makes a sentence: injustice he
can make to be justice, yea of nothing something: quia in his qua vult, et est
pro ratione voluntas: In those things which he will, his will is for a reason.
Nor ought any to ask him a reason of his doings: sic volo, sic iubeo, is
sufficient, quia plenitudinem obtinet potestatis; Distinct. 40. si Papa. In
Gratian.
because he possesses plenitude of power: nor is he pure homo: and if he
shall carry with himself millions of souls into hell, there to be punished
cum prime Mancipio, with the great Devil of bell; yet let none presume to
blame, or judge him for it. So that, though he should deceive many here in
England, persuading them, that disloyalty to their Prince, that rebellion, and
treason are Apostolic doctrines, and so lead them with himself into hell,
they have their amends in their own hands, as the Pope has the Law in his. It
follows.

We in the mean time will entreat the father of lights, that he suffer not
the heart of the English King to be blinded, who shall certainly learn, how
great credit is to be given to Catholic subjects in those things, which you
may promise; who lest they should make themselves liable to perjury, they had
rather breath out their spirit, then their voice.

Answer.

How? after all these blasphemies against God, and his word, dare the Pope
entreat the Father of lights? upon what confidence? upon what hope to be heard?
Will the Father of lights hear the prayer of the man of Sin, of the Son of
Perdition, of the great Antichrist, the Beast full of blasphemies? yea rather,
as Christ forbad the devil to confess him, to usurp his name, to preach of
Jesus: so we entreat the Pope, not to entreat for our King the Lords Anointed:
he needs none of such prayers. He has daily thousands of good Christians,
of his loving, and faithful subjects, to entreat the Father of lights for him,
for his life, Crown, Kingdom happiness; which prayers no doubt will prevail
with God to defeat all Romes prayers and plots, and practices, against our
noble King, Church, and State. We know the Popes prayers to be merely
pharisaicall, in stead of praying, to prey upon us, under the color of many
Pater nosters, to devour our habitations. Against the Popes prayers here, our
most humble, and hearty prayers, and shall be to the Father of lights in the
name of his Son Jesus Christ, that he will not suffer the heart of our dread
Sovereign to be blinded with Popish bandishments, and fair promses, that so
he may not too dearly buy the certain knowledge; how great credit is to be
given to Romane-Catholikes, in those things which they may promise. For note
how his holiness in the very next words bewrays how little confidence is to
be given to such promises, as his Catholic Sons may make; for says he,
least they should make themseles liable to perjury. But it is something, that
the Pope had rather his Catholic Sons should by making fair promises,
hazard their fidelity therein, then by taking the Oath, incur the danger of
perjury. Although a good Christian makes conscience as much of his solemn
promise, as of an oath. But it seems, if his Catholic Sons should take the
oath, the Pope puts them in mind, they should thereby expose themselves to
perjury; so that if they do but promise fidelity, he teaches them the very
ready way to perfidiousnesse, and breach of promise: for if an oath cannot
preserve them from perjury, how shall a promise from breach thereof? seeing
both perjury and perfidiousnesse grow from the same root of Jesuitical
doctrine, Nulla fides seruanda cum hereticis: no faith to be kept with
heretics. Herein therefore the Pope is to be commended, that seeing he tells
us plainly, he will keep no faith with heretics, neither will he make any
faith with them. Only herein he is most unjust, that not only those, who are
the only true, and orthodox Catholics, he calls heretics, and those that are
his sons, and consequently the limbs of Antichrist, Apostates from the faith
of Christ, he calls Catholics: but more especially that he goes about to
persuade subjects, not to enter into covenant of fidelity by oath to their
rightful, and only Sovereign King over them upon earth, next under God;
which covenant they ought not only to make, being demanded, but between God
and their own heart religiously to vow, and before all the world faithfully
auow. He that shall persuade men from this natural bond of duty, is a
traitor, and usurper over God and man, even the great Antichrist. Howsoever, I
am persuaded the Pope has no one Catholic Son in England, so impious, if he
have but a true English heart in him vn-Iesuited, that he will refuse, but
rather most willingly take the oath, and be ready, whenever there shall be
occasion, to hazard his person, and all his power, against any Romish Spanish
Invasion. They cannot be so far blinded, and besotted with Popish spells, and
Jesuitical charms, but that they will ever put an infinite difference
between their English, and a Spanish King. But if any be otherwise minded,
having exchanged his English for a Spanish heart, if he may not trust himself
to take the oath, for fear of perjury: neither (I trust) will his bare
promise be taken, lest whenever the great fly should hiss out of Babylon,
he should forget his promise, and turn hornet or waspe, to set against the
Master Be of this hony-flowing hiue of England. But I trust (for all the Popes
charge here to the contrary) that no English Papist, will so far prefer his
breath, before his life, that rather then spend the one in taking the oath, he
will expire the other. It follows.

But that your virtue may be found more precious then gold, which is tried in
the fire: teach that Kingdom, that there is no such force in the cruelty of
enemies, that it is able to extinguish the eternal fire of charity in your
hearts. Pray for them, that persecute you, humility patience, concord,
fasting, prayer, are your weapons, which in the cruel conflict, ye ought to
draw forth, that the palms of celestial triumph may flourish in your hands:
for seeing blessed Peter was forbidden to smite with the sword the cruel
assailants of Christ: we exhort you, having the present good of the Church
before our eyes, that in the mean time you think the thoughts of peace, and
that ye pray for eternal life even for the King, while he takes away your
mortal life. So must the soldiers of Christ make war, under the banner of
the Cross; the mouth of them that speak wicked things, shall be confounded,
seeing ye know not, to hate those who torment you. But the Lord, who is able to
turn your sorrow into joy, shall be at your right hand, that ye be not moved,
and may not forget his testament, wherein he had bequeathed the inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven to his Imitatours. Answer.

We may say of this whole clause in general, Tortura Torti, page 287.
as the learned Bishop in his Tortura, upon the very like purpose; where
bringing in Tort^ his objection, that the holy Fathers ( Or at Rome, the Pope,
and his Cardinals.
the Jesuits, as Father Garnet, etc.) sent a good exhortation from the City,
to the Catholics in the Country) (here in England; he speaks it about the
powder treason) that they should contain themselves from all tumults: says,
Vetus ea techna est, saepe quidem detecta, and proin semper suspecta: vt non
alio magis tempore scribant inde Pontifices in eum finem, quam cum maleficium
maxim meditantur. Mulcere his volunt Argos nostros, vt sibi ipsis dicant, Pax
and tuta omnia, qua sic repentina clades irruat in eos, nil tale suspicantes.
Nan erat certe, cur monitionem illam nominares, que nobis nuncia est procellae,
certo tum semper imminentis. Quin and alia tum erat monitionis huius ratio. Tam
enim placuit, tam certe spes erat Negotium hoc de puluere, vt nollent illud
interturbari tumult^^ vllo, iuberent vero quiescere alios omnes, vt huic vni
locus esset, in quo reposita illis spes omnis. That is an old piece of craft,
often detected, and therefore always suspected: that at no time more the Popes
do write to such a purpose, then when most of all they intend mischief. Here
they would sweetly impose upon our sharpest wits, that they may say to
themselves, Peace and all safe, that so sudden destruction may take them tardy,
while they suspect no such thing. There was no cause why ye should mention
that admonition, which to us is the messenger of a storm, certainly then
always imminent. But there was also another reason of this admonition: for
this business of the powder plot was so pleasing, so certainly hopeful, that
they would not have it interrupted with any tumult, but should command all
others to be quiet, that this one business might take place, wherein all
their hope was lapped up.

Thus by the judgment of our grave and experienced Fathers, we may learn
what interpretation to make, what to expect, when Romes holy Fathers in their
Bulls exhort their Sons to be quiet, and to contain themselves from tumult,
as here the Pope does. If thus they did upon the Gunpowder-plot, all hushed,
till the sudden blast: does not this extraordinary sun-gleame foretoken some
such hideous storm, ready to fall upon us? Is not this a sprinkling of water
upon lime? or with oil to suppress the flame? The token which Judas gave to
the apprehenders of Christ, was a traitorous kiss, and Romes signal to her
treacherous attempts, is Peace, peace. But as the French say in their Proverb,
When the Spaniard comes to parle of peace, then double-bolt the doors: so I
hope, England will be so wise, as when they observe the Popes morning sunshine
of peace from under a cloud, they will provide for a rainie day. But to the
words, in more particular.

In the forefront of this clause, here is twice mention of fire. And how great
matter a little fire kindles? This very word in the Lord Mounteagles letter,
of fire, was that, which through Gods providence kindled in King James his
conceit a suspicion of such a like plot, as indeed it proved. Upon whose
judgments we may the more boldly suspect by the Popes twice mention of fire,
that without doubt some fiery trial is now in hand, even fire and sword. Here
again the Pope puts his Sons in mind of their virtue, and prowess; as also
of their enemies, the King and State: enough to blow the coals of their
hatred, and so to exercise the eternal fire of their unquenchable charity. A
fiery charity indeed, of the nature of wilde-fire, or as the stone Asbestos,
which once inflamed, cannot be quenched again. But cannot Pontifician charity
be lost? be quenched? This is against your Trent-doctrine, which teaches, that
charity, with other graces may be lost. But happily you mean, this your
unquenchable fire of charity toward us your enemies, is not a gift of grace,
but a Papal gloss, or such a charity as is of the eternal fire of hell,
such (if so good) as poor Dives his charity to his brethren in hell-flames;
such, or the like charity is this here. Whatsoever it is we do not greatly
affect or desire this your charity, but we pray God, that we never come to
feel the fiery vnquenchablenesse of it.

For your weapons of humility, fasting, prayer, and the like, would to God we
had no more cause to fear your poisons, and pistals, treasons, and
treacheries, falsehoods and flatTHeries, more then these. But if the armor of
your white sons patience were a little better scoured, and exercised among
us, we should as little fear these your pernicious weapons, as those your
superstitious devotions. But surely you must have other gates weapons, then all
these, to make good that cruel conflict you speak of, to win you those
celestial palms of triumph. And your fasting, prayers, and humiliation,
cannot but bode some notable enterprise now a preparing. What solemn
Processions had you upon 88? So that these your admonitions give us to prepare
for some cruel conflict indeed. Else, what means your exciting your sons
to patience? as if they were in the fiery trial; as if they were to undergo
a cruel conflict? you know it is ridiculous to mean it of the present state
of things. But if your sons be in any hazard of a cruel conflict; we cannot
conceive how it should be, unless upon the discovery of your Armadoes
approaching toward us, they should in the mean time (to make all fast in
unity at home) be urged to take the oath of fidelity to our King, which
refused, might bring condign punishments upon them. Although I am persuaded,
no English Papist is such an unnatural miscreant, yea so foolish and brutish,
as he would betray his own dear native Country to a sorraine Tyrant.

You exhort your sons to pray for the Kings eternal life. Why? alas! Is his
temporal in such danger? God forbid. But we pray also for his temporal life,
that after a long, happy, religious government, and reign here, he may at
length come to enjoy that eternal Crown of glory. But all your prayers, all
your patience, and peaceablenesse, you persuade your Sons to, is with
special reference to the present good of the Church; until the opportunity
and season serve to show your selves in open colors. For the Kings taking away
your Sons mortal life, it is ridiculous. But if your sons must pray for
the Kings eternal life, only while he takes from them their mortal: we may
make a question, whether ever they will pray for him; at leastwise, if they
reepe them quiet, and live like peaceable subjects, as you seem to persuade
them. For the rest of your words, as, of Christ's Soldiers, and so to the end
of the clause, we pass over them; as being weary of your blasphemies, and
false applications. What part have you, or yours in Christ's Testament? unless
your sons utterly renounce communion with your papal fatherhood, See Platina
in Coelestine 5. and Bonif. 8.
and fly to Christ and his word: unless you will as one of your Predecessors
did quite abandon your Popedom, for the salvation of your soul; whereof there
is small hope, while you go on in this manner. Memorable is that speech of
Pope Marcellus 2. who, Onuph. in Marcell. 2.
smiting his hand on the board, said, I do not see, how any, holding this high
place, can be saved. Look to it, O ye Popes and Papists, that adhere to such
an head. And if the inheritance thereof be promised to none, but Christ's
Imitators: what portion have you therein? for wherein do ye imitate Christ?
yea, wherein do ye not both teach and practice quite contrary unto him? But
your shameless blasphemies, and bold misapplying of the Scriptures are so
familiar with you, as we will give over admiting of them. Only we cannot
choose whether we will or no, but admire one thing, that you propound blessed
Peter for an example of not smiting with the sword: has any thing been more
familiar with Popes, then herein especially to show themselves Peter's
Successors, in smitting with the sword? saving only, that Peter drew his
sword against that rabble rout in defense of his Master: you draw your sword
against Christ himself in his Members, in Gods Vicegerents here on earth, the
Lords Anointed. All of you challenge the power of Peter's sword: and some of
you have in your own persons drawn in out in open field; as Pope Julius 2.
when marching against the Emperor, his Liege Lord, he in a rage threw Saint
Peter's Keys into Tyber, as too impotent to vindicate his quarrel, and
pontifically drew forth Paul's sword, saying, If Peter's Keys could not, Paul's
sword should. I could put you in mind of your Predecessiour Pope Urban 6. how
ciuilly he carried himself, yea what a racket he kept with his sword among
his own Cardinals, See Fren. hist. in Charles 7.
those especially, that of all the rest were the most learned and courageous:
exercising upon nine or ten of them the most barbarous examples of cruelty,
and beastiall immanitie, and Papal insolency that ever I read or heard of.

But the thing I admire in your example of blessed Peter, is this: that here
you use it to your sons, as a motive to peace, since Peter was forbid to
smite; and yet from this very example you derive the authority of your Papal
supremacy, Extrauag. Com^n San.
as founded upon Peter's sword. Memorable is that decree of Pope Boniface 8.
(he that in his great day of Iubile had two glittering swords borne before
him, with Ecce duo gladij hic) Certe qui in potestate Petri temporalem gladium
esse negat, male attendit verbum Domini proferentis, Convert gladium tuam
invaginam. Surely he that denies the temporal sword to be in the power of
Peter, does ill attend Christ's word, saying, put up thy sword into thy sheath.
And so also to prove both the swords to be in the power of Peter, to wit, the
spiritual, and the temporal, Euangelicis dictis instruimur, We are
instructed by the words of the Gospel; for the Apostles saying, behold two
swords here, in Ecclesia scilicet, doubtless in the Church: Non nimis esse sed
satis.
the Lord did not answer it was too much, but enough; therefore both the swords
are in the power of the Church. These be tall arguments for that Boniface, and
your Papal breast to devise for the maintaining of your Antichristian Tyranny
and usurpation.

But alas by these your distorted speeches, never think to impose upon our
simplicity so far, as when ye talk of putting up your sword, we should be
such fools, as not to look at least whether ours be rustie in the scabbert.
You promise the Palms of celestial triumphs. What? as a reward of your sons
peaceable patience here a while, for the present good of the Church? or rather
for the conquest of your Martial attempts you are now about? Is the field
already yours? May not ye reckon before your host? Let not him that puts on
his armor, boast as he that puts it off. But you fight under the standard of
the Cross. And we under Christ's standard. Even now ye are about to verify
that prophecy, Revel. 20. of Gog, and Magog, compassing the tents of the
Saints (your Heretics) round about. You think you have us enclosed in your
net: but our comfort is, fire shall come down from heaven to denoure you, with
your huge hoasts; the victory shall remain on the Lambs side, against whom
you do giantlike make war: for as you are that Lady, that say in your heart,
Revel. 18. 7.
I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow: therefore (as it
there follows) shall your plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine, and your Babylon shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the
Lord God, who judges her. Do ye believe this? surely your papal Atheism
will not suffer you. But we believe it, for strong is the Lord God that
judges you; and faithful is he that has promised deliverance to his Church.
It follows.

Let us embrace you in the arms of Apostolic charity, beloved Sons, to
whom we promise the Fathers patrocinie, and most lovingly bestow our
benediction. Answer.

Pape and Ape differ but a letter: but their charity to their Sons less.
This is that Father, whose charity to his Sons is so Apostolic, as though
he carry millions of his sons with him into hell, to be tormented of the
great Devil; yet no man may presume to blame him for it, as we noted before.
But all your impieties will pass for charity it self, so it go but vaild
under Apostolic. Apostolic is a great word with you, and serves at all
tumes: only still you mistake Apostolic for Apostaticke, which ye must be
remembered of. But you promise the Fathers patrocinie. What Fathers? the
heavenly Fathers ye cannot, for all your power in heaven and earth: your own
you may. But upon what security? what patrocinie can you promise to your
self, and yours from that Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Reu. 19.
19, 20. mark the place well, read also Reu. 14. 8. if any man worship the
Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand
(namely whosoever shall auow himself a sworn son, or rather slave to the
Pope: nothing is more plain, then that it is spoken of that Roman Beast) the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered out without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels (behold what a spectacle
Pontificians or Papists are made to the blessed Angels!) and in the presence of
the Lamb; and the smoke of their torments ascends up for ever and ever, and
they have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast, and his Image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name. This is the portion and patrimony
of that man of sin, that son of Perdition, that exalts himself above all
that is called God, as the Pope exprofesso does: from which, what Papal
patrocinie? what Apostolic benediction can give protection or security?

Or else not unlikely the promise of the paternall patrociny the Pope here
makes to his white sons, the Jesuits, that if they apply, and play their
parts well, as no doubt but they will do their best: and his Apostolic
benediction to his lay sons: for he is in some good hope that Peter's
Patrimony, or Pence, which now would be turned into so many pounds will be
recovered again to the Pope, out of England, if his enterprise now in hand
succeed to his hope, and expectation. Which is the maine vpshot of all the
Popes purposes, most artificially shaddowed, and mystically inuolued in this
Breeue.

Given at Rome, Saint Peter's, under the signet of the Fisher. May 30, 1626. the
third year of our Popedom. Answer.

At Rome. And can any good thing come from Rome? for what is Rome? Even that
mystical spiritual Babylon, described Revel. 17. Rome the present seat of
that Antichrist, now reigning there in his full height. How so? the Pope
himself is witness. For the Bull (wherein he professes himself the supreme
sovereign over Kings, and Kingdoms, to unking them at his pleasure, while he
would deprive them of their subjects allegiance) was dated at Rome, the prime
seat of the Pope. Saint John was told expressly, that Babylon the great, the
purpled whore, the seven hills City, the seven headed ten-horned Beast, was
Rome: The Woman which thou saw (says the Angel to John) is that great
City, Reu. 17. 18.
which reigns over the Kings of the earth. It reigned then Imperially: it
reigns now Papally: Papally in name, Imperially also in power: for the Pope
is a twofold head of that Beast, mystically typed in his two-topped Miter, in
the front whereof, was anciently written, Mysterium, that a man might point
with the finger, This is Antichrist. The Pope (I say) is a twofold Head, the
seventh Head as Pope, and also the eight Head, Crantz. in Saxon. l. 8. cap. 6.
as Emperor, though not in name, Boniface the eight showed it openly in his
great Iubilee, when the first day thereof he came forth in his Pontifical
robes, and the next day following in the Imperial habit, and Diadem, with a
naked sword carried before him, saying; Behold, here two swords. So that
Bellarmines own words of Antichrist fall pat upon the Pope, where he says,
Erit enim Antichristus supremum and vltimum caput impiorum; Bellar. de Pontif.
Romans l. 3. c. 15.
and est vltimus Rex, qui Imperium Romanum tenebit, tamen sine nomine Romani
Imperatoris: For Antichrist shall be the supreme, and last Head of the wicked;
and he is the last King, which shall hold the Roman Empire, yet without the
name of Roman Emperor. And is not this the Pope of Rome? Does not he wholly
possess the ancient Imperial dominion, and territories, in and about Rome,
far, and near? Does not he challenge supremacy of Imperial power of all
Christendom, yea over the world? The Emperor that now is, has not he his
election, and confirmation from the Pope? the seven Electors were made by the
Pope, they nominate, and elect the Emperor, but all this is of no force, but as
it receives approbation, and confirmation from the Pope: Nor is he called
Emperor of Rome. Hands off. That is for his holiness alone. So that, if, as
some Pontificians would shift it off, that that City, reigning over the Kings
of the earth, cannot be meant of Rome, as now it is, because Rome does not, as
formerly so reign: Let the Pope answer it, whether he have not, or at least
usurp not a greater power, then ever the Roman Emperor had. The Papal Rome
is called the Mistress, Lady Queen of the world. She says, I sit a Queen,
Reu. 18. 7.
and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. As Saint Jerome says, luxta
Apocalypsin Iohannis, in front purpuratae Meretricis scriptum est nomen
blasphomiae, Hieron. ad Alga^ in qu. 11.
1. Romae eternae. According to the Revelation of Saint John, in the forehead
of the purple whore, is written the name of blasphemy, to wit, of Rome
eternal. Take Romes own words, proving her to be that City, reigning over
all, and therefore the present seat of Antichrist, now tyrannizing. When Henry
the 7. was crowned at Rome, Romes words are recorded in Capital letters,
saying; Ego Coronarum Corona, confirmo Principi potestatem, sibique subijcio
Civitates Gentium nationes, tueantur Aquilae gloriam meam. Haec Roma. I, the
Crown of Crowns, do establish power to the Prince, and subject unto him
Cities, Countries, Nations, let the Eagles defend my glory. These things says
Rome; or this is Rome. This is that Rome here.

Yea, this Rome is so the feat of Antichrist, as this title could never find
rest, til it nestled it self in Rome. As, nothing rests out of the proper
place. John of Constantinople, for all his ambition, could not carry it. How
did Gregory cry it down? Nor Constantinople, though then the Imperial City,
though she had borrowed the name of Rome, being called Noua Roma, and Greece
about, Romania, though it could show her seven hil-tops, as Rome; yet it was
no place for Antichrist to roost in. Antichrist there, was but tanquam piscis
in arido; a fish out of his Element, on the dry land, where it is so putrified,
that Romes Saint Gregory could not endure the smell of it. Pregnant to this
purpose is the observation of the learned Bishop in his Tortura. His words are,
In Constantinopolitano cum fuit, Grrgories own words cited.
stultum, superbum, scelestum, peruersum, profanum, blasphemum fuit: idem autem
intra bionnij vnius spatium, in Romano, nihil horum est, etc. When the title of
Antichrist was in the Bishop of Constantinople, it was foolish, proud, impious,
perverse, profane, blasphemous: but within two years space the same being in
the Bishop of Rome, it was none of all these. And strange was the judgment of
Phocas, who judged (if we believe Gregory) that that impious and blasphemous
name was not fit for the Bishop of Constantinople; for it was proper to the
Bishops of Rome. Strange also was the mind of Boniface, who accepted it; Yea,
says Platina, importuned Phocas for it, Magna con^entione.
he would not have the Constantinopolitan to be supreme over all; for this
was due to him, and the Bishop of Rome. Although, he that should do this (by
Gregory's testimony) was therein the imitator of Lucifer, the forerunner of
Antichrist. And Gregory was a true Prophet, both ways. For he told the
Emperor concerning that word, that he who should carry it away, did thereby
advance himself above the honor of the Empire; and came it not so to pass?
He said to Anianus, that to consent in this wicked title, was no other, then to
loose the faith. And has faith suffered no loss, since Phocas consented to
that wicked Title? so that Gregory's Prophecy is true both ways; Et Imperio,
and Ecclesiae perniciosa, vox ista; and successor eius Bonifacius, quoad
Imperium Lucifer, quoad Ecclesiam Autichristus: that word was pernicious both
to the Empire, and to the Church; and his successor Boniface, as touching the
Empire was Lucifer, as touching the Church Antichrist. Thus far the Bishop in
his Tortura.

Rome then, not Constantinople, is the proper seat of Antichrist. Auentin. l. 6.
As Pope Adrian 4. said: Romae nostra seeds est: At Rome is our seat. This
Adrian, Breake-speare an English man, was he that said, To covet the Popedom,
is not to succeed Saint Peter in feeding the Sheep, but Romulus, in
committing Parricides, because a man cannot attain thereunto, without shedding
the blood of his brethren, that he may reign alone. Thus by the Popes own
voice, Rome and Antichrist are well met.

But says Onuphr. Annot. in vita Bonif. 3. Platina.
Onuphrius, though the Bishop of Rome be the sole universal head, yet he does
not, as other Patriarchs, use any proud titles, as to call himself
Occumenicus, as he of Constantinople does, but styles himself Seruus
seruorum Dei, Servant of the servants of God; only the people in their solemn
acclamations, give him high titles. Seruus seruorum. What is this, but the very
title of Chams curse? Genesis 9. 25. yea, what is it, but the mystery of
Antichrist, concerning all this superarrogant pride under this vale of
hypocrisy? For instance: The foresaid Adrian writing to that noble Frederick
the Emperor, in the forefront, Seruus seruorum, etc. yet how is the whole body
of the letter stuffed out with nothing, but Antichristian insolency? And how did
this lowly title suit with this his holiness extreme indignation, Helmold. in
histor. Scla. c. 81.
when this Emperor, coming to him to be crowned, did out of ignorance (as
unacquainted with such kind of service before) hold the Popes left stirrup,
instead of the right? For which one mortal error, this servant of servants
could not be appeased, but thereupon refused to give the Emperor the kiss of
peace.

Thus at Rome only Antichrist domineereth under the title of servant of
servants; as here it follows of Saint Peter's, under the signe^ of the fisher.
Poor Peter the fisher, what a successor has he gotten, who under the name of
Peter fisheth all the world? as See Bellar. de Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 20.
they expound that of Luke 5. 4. Launch out into the deep: that is, Peter and
the Pope fish all the world. So that not unfitly is that spiritual Babylon or
Rome said to sit upon many waters, Revel. 17. 1. very commodious for Romes
Peter-man. No fishing to this See. And all is fish that comes to Romes net.
Only all his fish must be of the same kind with that, which Peter took with
his Angle, having in his mouth a piece of 20.d. at least, Peter's tribute money,
not for the Emperor, but for the Pope himself. This fishers Signet or Ring is
that, where with the Pope marries to himself the Sea of the whole world, for
himself and his Peter-men to fish, as the Duke of Venice on every Ascension
day marries the Adriaticke Sea to Venice, with casting in a Ring into it,
which privilege Pope Alexander 3. first gave to the Prince of that state.

This Breeue was dated May 30. 1626. And as the Prophet told the King of
Israel: Strengthen thy self, and mark, and see what thou do, for when the
year is gone about, the King of Syria will come up against thee: so let me
say to our King of Israel, in the name of the Lord, Go, strengthen thy self,
and mark, and see what thou do; for when the year is gone about, by that
time the 30. of May 1627. comes about, the King of Babylon will give some
strange attempt upon England; as by all the prognosticating signs in this
Breeue, we are given more then to conjecture. The year wherein it was dated,
1626. having two sixes in it, are two figures of the Beasts number, very
ominous. But Deus omen auertat. Also in the third year of his Popedom. Popes
years are as precious, Seneca in Medea.
as that day, which Medea begged of King Creon before her banishment, wherein
her womanish malice so bestirred her self, that by (...) she consumed the
Kings house with fire, and made a cruel massacre of sundry Noble personages,
yea most unnaturally even of her own Sons. And what massacres may not this
present Pope, the head of that Antichristian Beast, yea of that Babylonish
woman, drunk with the blood of the Saints atchieue in three years and a
half, the time which the Antichristian Church (though most absurdly) limiteth
for Antichrists Tyranny; for whose blood-thirstie cruelty, neither the Kings
own house, no nor yet the Popes own, though most (...) (...) can secure
themselves. Let us conclude then with that prayer, as it was once entire in our
English Liturgy in King Edwards days of blessed memory. (...) seditions and
privy Conspiracy, from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable enormities, from false, and (...) opinions, from hardnessse of
heart, (...) and Commandments: Good Lord deliver us. And let all England say
Amen.

An Advertisement to those my Countrymen whom the Pope calls his Catholic
sons.
MY native brethren Countrymen, or (if you will) Roman Catholics ((...)
wherein you so much glory and and which not only distinguishes) but even
deuideth you from all true Catholics, such as Rome accounts Heretics)
although my desire to speak unto you be greater then my hope to be heard
(such is the veil of (...) obedience wherein they have shut up your ears, and
closed your eyes, that you should not hear or (...) more grievous Babylonian
or Egyptian Captivity spiritual than those temporal and typical were to Gods
people) yet (...) this present, necesssity enforced to assay at least what
common human prudence or English spirit is left in you, as not altogether
eaten out with that spirit of lethargy and benumbednesse, wherewith the Mystery
of iniquity has so wholly possessed many. And if at the worst, my purpose
herein shall prove frustrate, yet it shall (...), that we would have cured
Babylon but she would not be cured; and hereby I shall howsoever discharge the
duty of one that has obtained mercy to be faithful, delivering mine own
soul, whither ye will hear, or whether ye will forbear. Yet I will hope the
best, praying God to give a blessing. Yea, why should I not rather be most
confident herein, that all of you will be ready to harken to such a business
as this, which I am to propound unto you? Only (as I have premised in the
Inscription) I except and exclude the Jesuits from my least hope of persuading
them, because the Arguments and Motives, which may and ought strongly to
prevail with you, are directly contrary to the very principles and Grounds of
their Jesuitical Order. They have altogether cast off all hope of heaven, all
faith in Christ, and in steed thereof have made choice of that offer, which
Christ refused, namely: the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; men
they are of pragmaticall, and worse then (...) spirits, plotting either to
(...) all Kingdoms and States, (or which is as good) to subiugate them to the
Tyranny of Rome and Spain? Rome's fishers they are, who ever find it best
fishing in troubled waters, by stirring up co^motions, factions, rebellions,
treasons, arming and animating Subjects against their lawful Prince; this is
their doctrine, this their practice who so ignorant, as knows it not? so that
to go about to persuade them to embrace peace, loyalty, fidelity, to leave
off all their treasonable practices in undermining (...), were as much, as to
infer a new Article of faith, to believe a possibility, that a true Jesuit
should ever be converted to become a true Christian; such and vnreconsileable
(...) and (...) have they put between the order of Jesus, and the (...) of
Christ; and they that are once of the society of Jesus, should never come to
be of the blessed Communion of Christ* so that such is the reno^e of their
factious society, that no marvel if they set the Son against the father,
the subject against the Prince, when they have made Jesus to be at utter
defiance and enmity with Christ. Jesuitical doctrine is such a Dye as will
not easily give place to any other color, otherwise, then as Satan, who can
change himself into an Angel of light, in appearance only. The reason why so
few, or rather never any, specially English Jesuits, renounce their
diabolical professions, to embrace the Truth, is because they cannot enter
into that Profession, but with a kind of reluctance at the first, (before they
be hardened, and their consciences seared,) not only against the light of their
conscience but even against the light of reason, and nature it self, ceasing
to be reasonable men, to enter into a new order of Incarnate Devils, whose
order is to put out of order the whole course of Nature, ouerturning the very
foundations of all human societies, and all under the name of Jesus; as if
Jesus were no more a name to signify the (...) of his people, but were as much
as Revel. 9. 11.
Abaddon, or Apollion, in the Jesuits sense; so that a Jesuit being one,
whose faith and profession is an habitual and vowed wilful Rebellion against
God and Christ, against the very light of Nature, and of his own conscience,
becomes thereby so inuincibly obiurate, that (...) (...) were to judge whether
Satan or he were likelier to renounce their religion, saving only, that the
one is a Devil, the other a Man, or in man's shape at least. For we know,
Christ has said, that t he sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be
pardoned. And the reason is given by Divines, because it can never be repented
of, no more then that of the Devil, whose sin was that against the Holy
Ghost, when he first forsook the truth, to betake himself to that order,
wherein for his Antiquity, and pregnancie, he merited, long before the (...)
and last Saint Ignatius, to be the Grandfather and Founder of this new society.

Leave we these therefore, as Christ did the wilful blind Pharisees, to perish
together, of whom he said, Let them alone they be blind leaders of the blind,
and if the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the Pit; and let
me speak unto men, to English men, to wise men, such as have not so far
vowed themselves captives for Babylon in their blind obedience, as to disauow
their common sense and reason. Tell me if there be ever be among you all, so
far besotted and infatuated with Jesuitical Illusions, that treason or
rebellion against your Sovereign Prince should be so meritorious, as to merit
some better Kingdom then this of England? yet can your common sense and reason
be so far transported as to think you shall be in happier case under the
Spanish yoke, then under the gouernmnet of your own native King? What nations
or kingdoms so miserable as those under the Spaniards insolent and
intolerable tyranny? To say nothing of the West Indies, whose wretched slavery
has been the subject of large volumes, setting out the matchless examples of
spanish cruelties; enough to cause even those barbarous heathen to abhor
heaven it self, if it were (as the iugling Friars and Jesuits falsely informed
them) the reward of Spaniards, with whom they would be loath to go thither,
upon any terms: to speak as little of our neighbor Netherlands, once under
the Spaniard, but whose saluage and treacherous cruelty grew so intolerable,
that theu shook him quite besides the saddle; enough to prove him inexpert in
the Art of good Horse-manship, which consists rather (...) and moderating of
the (...), then in the rough and over imperious usage of the Rod and Spur: to
pass by also those goodly Countries in Italy, as of Naples, Millain and the
rest, how groan they under that Iberian yoke? how the people once conquerours
of the world now made slaves, their Nobility debased, their ancient Gentry
defaced, and all trampled under the Spaniards proud foot? Go no farther then
Spain it self: Ask that company, that came lately out of Spain,and took a
full view of the Spanish Regiment; they can tell you how unworthy it is to
become so much as a Pattern for the Noble State of England to follow. How base
and wretched is the whole Commonaltie of that Nation, though Natives! What
slaves under a Tyrant, rather then Subjects under a King? There no laws are in
force, but such as establish an absolute tyranny. There, every monyed man may
not be permitted to purchase lands, no, nor to buy himself good (...) but
according to his stinted pittance, a pound of Beef or so. There the common
(...) (for all their great Masters (...) of so many mines) are glad of copper
coin, instead of silver ( for who goes worse shod then the shoomakers wife?)
and if he chance to get any silver, purchased with his double commodities, he
must be sure to pay the King and the Priest in the purest coin; for if he
offer them the base, the King (...) (...), the Priest can find no hands to
recieue it, turning away his face, as though he cared not for money, and such
an offense is not absolved, nor expiated, without ^^ere silver. As for his base
coin, that he may lay out to have as base commodities for it, not half so
good penny-woorths, as our poor have at the Chandeler for their farthings. For
as near as they can, the seller shapes his price according to the stuff, or
metal, which the buyer brings: Their taxes are intolerable. Take but one
instance: the common meritorious Curtisans: that trade for three pence a turn,
must pay one penny of it to the King, and another to the Pope, and have but the
third penny to herself; though it be too much, unless she deserved it better.
To say nothing of the miserable captivity of the Spaniards, who sitting at
dinner, or so, if the Priests bell do but tinkle at the door, his Dame, be
she never so buxome or debonaire, lovely or dainty, away she must to private
shrifte, while the good man must be glad to bite upon the sower herbs of
choleric jealousy, leaving his dainty (Kates perforce alas!) to the Priest,
to feed upon. O poor Spaniards! yea some of them, informed by our English
then their Guests, how free we were in England from such bondage, deeply
sighed (as far as they durst) saying, England was happy, and enjoyed Heaven,
while themselves were tormented in Hell and Purgatory. And tell me now O ye
English Romain Catholics, do ye envy the happiness of the Spanish yoke? Is
it so sweet, trow you, to exchange for it your English liberty? Yet, though
you affect it never so much, though Jesuitical eloquence never so fairly
guilt over with a brainsick ambition of becoming great Magnificoes: yet soft a
while; you must not look (...) to go cheek by iowle with senior Spaniole, to
be used ^^^^gether so favorably, as your Don is: For he is a Native of
Spain: you Aliens, he is, for all his Masters yoke, poor and true to his
King, so poor, that he cannot choose but be true; for ye seldom or never
hear of rebellion, or treason in Spain by a Spaniard. Why? because the poor
shakes are kept so cold, that they want courage and strength to sting: but in
England it is otherwise. As king Henry 4, of England a wise Prince, who full
well knew the humor of the English (they are a Remains of wise speeches page
210.
grave authors words) in his admonition to his Son, at his death, said, of
English men, so long as the have wealth and riches, so long shall thou have
obeisance: but when they be poor, then are they ready to make insurrections at
every motion. Ibid. in Epigr.
For as Alfred of Beuerly sang of England in his Poem.

Libera gens, cui libera men's, and libera lingua,
Sed lingua melior, libera (...) (...).
A Nation free, whose mind, whose tongue if free:
But hand then tongue will better, freer be.
And what liberty do not even you yourselues here enjoy? wherein are you
restrained, unless a little in that wherein it were happy for you, that ye had
not the least communion at all, I mean your Romish Religion? But of that Anon.
But say, any should renounce the best native properties of English men, which
is fidelity and loyalty to their Prince and Country; and retain the worst,
to wit, an itching affection after novelty and change: Say, that the Jesuits
with their Circean Cup, should so transform our English, as Ulysses his men,
into Hoggs, as when the hungry Wolf or Fox should see me to present to their
smell some grateful commodity, they should inconsiderately with the snowt of
sensuality cast open the door of their own sty, and so let in the ravenous
Beasts to prey both upon themselves, and the whole litter, turning their
habitations into Dens of such wild Beasts. In plain terms, say, that if
the subtle and cruel Spaniard were now with a great Navy upon our narrow
Seas, seeking to arrive on our Coast, but could not (...) we kept our
Sinque-Ports and Forts well guarded, yea specially, so long as we were all fast
knit in unity among our selves, like true Englishmen; but that the Popes
Catholic sons should be persuaded, for the obtaining, (...) least of the
liberty of their consciences if not to plunge themselves into a further
thraldom) to rise up for the Catholic King* by which means he might happily
(...) footing in England (what think you then should become of you? Grandees
all of you would be.Yea Grand devils, and such as your new master of Spain
would never account worthy to be trusted, so much as to dig in his silver
Mines in the West Indies, who so unnaturally would not stick to betray your
dear native Country. Nay would he not spare that labor and cost to carry you
so far to be his slaves (though, as Mendoza answered Henry 3 of France, that
if his Master had conquered England in 88. the English should have had the
favor to be transported to dig in his Indian Mines) and by the way s^w you
up close in the old Roman Culleus, a leather sack, (the ancient reward of
(...)) casting you into the Sea, as unworthy to touch any Element, that would
unnaturally betray that sweet Country, wherein you first received your Being,
and breath? The Spaniard (...) his lesson ad vnguem, Amo proditionem, odi
Proditorem; I love the Treason, but hate the Traitor. Or say, that necessity
may enforce him for the present to allow you to breath still in England, to be
his Drudges and Vassals (as it was with (...) at the Captivity in Babylon) to
till the ground for him, to carry him in provision for the wars in his
conquest of the rest of Christendom, and to feed his hungry pround Spaniards,
sucking the sweet of your sw^^t continually* yet (...) whither you will account
this a condign recompense for such a foul treason; yea consider also, what ye
have now purchased in comparison of that, which ye were before, when ye lived
like free English men, every man under his own Vine and under his own Figtree.

But why do I so much as suppose or imagine the least probability of the
coming to pass of any such prodigious (...)? God forbid I assure my self,
none of you will ever (...) such unnatural Miscreants, to betray your native
Country to the Spaniard; neither if any would be so mad, will our good God ever
forsake this his inheritance, wherein he has so many thousands of his
faithful and vowed servants, who have not bowed the knee to B^^l, or kissed
(...) (...). And you cannot but know so much (as little acquaintance as is
allowed (...) to have with the Scriptures) that so long as but one (...) was in
wicked Sodom, even the power of the Omnipotent himself was suspended from
taking revenge upon it, till Lot was safely provided fir; and if but one
righteous had been found in the City, God had spared it for their sakes.
Therefore never let any Romish or Spanish hopes feed themselves with such a
vain conceit of Englands Conquest, unless the conniuence at your innumerable
(...) Idols may endanger (...) place your chief confidence (...), more zealous
then wise, and (...) allege the Catholic cause, and the liberty of
conscience, as preponderating all other mischiefs, the freedom of Religion,
and of the soul being to be preferred before the thraldom of the body, yea
and the betraying of your earthly Country not to be forborne, for the meriting
of an heavenly: this indeed may seem a weighty point, and therefore not
unworthy altogether in this place of our deepest considerations, for the
discussing of such a difficulty.

To begin then at the head-spring of this our discourse, it is no news unto
you, that the Pope of late has sent his Bull or Brieue into England,
recommended to all his Catholic sons of England, wherein he charge you by
no means to take the Oath of Allegiance or fidelity to your King, but rather
that you should account him for your Enemy; the sum is that you should be
armed with the spirit of rebellion against your King and Country, when occasion
of the Catholics cause should serve to show your valor in the open field, as
ye may all more plainly see in this brief^ unfolding of the Brieue.

How? to charge subjects to disauow their fidelity to their Prince? by what
authority? who has such power over men, to dispense, to dissolve, to absolve
from the bonds of duty and obedience, which natural subjects owe to their
King? By what law or example? God in his word has taught the contrary. But
Christ Vicar has this power: but Christ practiced the contrary. But the
Apostolic successor of Peter may do it: but Peter and Paul both, preached,
practiced the contrary: so all the Patriarckes and Prophets: Yet Christ's Vicar,
Peter's successor, are titles not lightly to be regarded; to which is added
also, Head of the Church, Oracle of the world, to whom is committed all power
in heaven and earth, who cannot err, to whom all must be subject under pain
of damnation, and much more then I can tell: Huge titles, enough to intoxicate
and infatuate silly and simple souls, yea and to dazzle the eyes even of the
acutest wits with their glorious luster, where they are attended or entertained
but with credulity.

But if there be any truth at all in these things, concerning the Pope, whence
(in the name of God) has he these titles? From what ground of truth? He dare
plead, from Scripture. From Scripture? Hold you there, we desire no better
evidence, or vmpire in this cause: you will grant then, that the Scripture is
of authority in it self to challenge our faith to rest upon it, as a most sure
rule. Yes, but with condition (as you are taught) if it have authority from the
Church: From what Church? What Church? Of Rome: From whose mouth? who must
pronounce the verdict? The Pope forsooth: if so then the Popes power is not
built primarily upon the Scriptures but upon himself, and so he is Judge in
his own cause. The Pope belike lends authority to the Scriptures, and they
again repay him with his own minted coin, by confirming his supremacy. This
is pretty. Just as Boniface confirmed Phocas in his usurped Empire, and Phocas
reciprocally settled him in his Papal supremacy. Or as the Sea Cicarillas in
vita Sixti 5. where this Pope having canonized the Anchorite Didacus for a
Saint makes his solemn prayer to God to be so favorable to his humility as
(says he) by the pious prayers of thy Saint Didacus, we may merit to be
exalted to eternal glory in heaven.

Contra neg^ntem Principia, non est disputandum.


Pope makes Saints, who by that means receiving a power and merit, are by
their Canonization qualified to become intercessors for their Canonizer, his
Holiness. What a coniuration-circle is here? but pitch we upon the center. If
the Pope give the authority to the Scriptures, prescribing and limiting them
their sense: whence then has the Pope this authority? From Christ as his
Vicar. How proves he that? From Scripture. But what authority has the
Scripture for this, till first it receive it from the Popes breast? Come, come;
let such popish jugglings impose upon fools; and such turnsicke windings cause
the brains of young children to run round, and to conceit that the whole
earth runs round, when it stands still unmoved. But let men be guided by
reason, understanding judgment. He that denies principles, is to be detested,
not disputed with. It is a Principle in Divinity that the Scripture is, and
ever has been the rule of Faith. Yes, say your Pontificians, a Partial rule
but not Total, the unwritten word is to be added. What is that? Apostolic
traditions. Apostolic? That sounds well. Well; let not Apostolic Traditions
cross Apostolic writings, and have with you. But otherwise look not that
your penny of Traditions should pass for current silver with us, for weight
and pureness, as the Scriptures, in point of rule of Faith, for all the Pope
stampeth them with the Image and Superscription of Apostolic. Abraham's wells
are now dug so deep, so large, as not all your Philistian rubbidge can stop
them up, not Apostolic, not all Romes holy Relics, or pieces of Christ's
Cross and the rest. But neither is Apostlicke Tradition enough to make up the
other moity of the partial rule parallel to Scripture, by Pontifician
confession; for neither will those serve the Popes turn. What then? How shall
the rule of Faith be eeked out to the entire perfection to please the Pope, in
case his Holiness would come within the compass of any rule? Yes: there is
(forsooth) the lively Oracle or voice of the Church, which being of an
unlimited latitude, does consummate the rule of Faith; and the Popes breast is
the fountain, whence these waters of Romes sanctuary flow. But the truth is
(if there were any truth in it) this rule is such, as will not endure
copartnership with Scriptures and Traditions, for all they be Apostolic, but
is the sole and supreme Rule whereby those must be squared and whereto they
must be conformed. Nor is this Rule of the Popes breast certain, but sometimes
it gives one sense of Scripture, and sometimes another, according as the
changeable and various condition of the Church requiteth. This is a Mystery
which perhaps many of you the Popes Catholic sons will hardly believe,
specially such as are endued with any judgment and enjoy the privilege to
have the free use of your reason without papal restraint; but if any doubt of
it, we have sufficient authentic records for it, the best that Rome can afford.

But come, do but strain courtesy a little with your Ghostly Father, and let
us enter in a little private sad conference, and let right reason be the
Moderatour. Tell me (as Paul asked Agrippa) Belieuest thou the Scriptures of
the Prophets and Apostles? I know you believe. Surely if ye do, you may
answer with Agrippa, Almost thou perswadest me to become an Orthodoxe
Christian, and true Catholic. And rest but upon the Scriptures, and I will
say, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. But to rest upon the voice of
the Pope, and not upon the express words of Scripture, what is it, but to
suffer him to pluck out both your eyes, that so he may the more easily lead
you blindfold into hell? Or what were this, but to make the Pope your God,
above God and Christ, and so to adore him, who thus aduanceth himself above
all that is called God? Fie for shame, as God has given you reason,
understanding and judgment, so in the name of God use it to his glory, that
gave it, and suffer no man to cheat you of it, least you prove more sottish
then those heathen, who worshipped the creature in stead of the Creator, who is
blessed for ever.

But you are persuaded of the Popes inerrability, as being Christ's Vicar,
Peter's successor, as having continued in the Sea of Rome ever since the
Apostles times, so as not any Bishops See in the world has done the like. What
then? all Bishops and Ministers of the Word may be said to be Christ's Vicars,
and Successors of the Apostles, while they execute their Ministry, as Christ
and the Apostles did. But never any man was Christ's sole Vicar over his Church.
This prerogative is peculiar to the Holy Ghost, that Other Comforter, who only
cannot err, leading Gods people into all truth. As for Peter's Vicarship, he
had it but in common with his fellow- Disciples, We pass by those places of
Scripture, which Pontificians have miserably perverted to this purpose. Do but
look in my answer to this Bull or Brieue. And for lineall vniterrupted
succession of the Bp. of Rome from the Apostles times: what is this to the
purpose, to prove the Popes Vicarship or his Successors-ship? Certainly it
makes wondrous much to fulfill all those Prophecies in Scripture, concerning
Antichrst, whose Seat is Rome. For may not the same Church of Rome (specially
if we measure it by the place where it is fixed) in so long a tract of time,
come exceedingly to differ from that it was once, in the more pure and primitue
age of it? Does not experience teach you, that the soundest, and solidest Oak
in time grows rotten, hollow, a nest for Owls, and such like night-birds,
unuseful for building, and at last, good for nothing but the fire? And yet the
while, it is called by the name of such an Oak still. The Church of Rome at
first was sound and Apostolical, while it kept the Apostolic Faith: but
might not time make it rotten, and yet be called Apostolic still? Bethel (as
much as the house of God) so called at first by Jacob who erected there an
Altar for Gods pure worship, yet retained that name still in Ieroboams time,
even when it was wholly polluted with the Idolatry of one of his golden Calves
erected there. Ancient goodly Channels have been in time so choked up with mud
and gravel, that the maine stream has been diuerted and driven another way,
and yet have retained the name of the old channel still. Yea that goodly City
Jerusalem, in Christ's time, when it crucified Christ was called the Holy
City; and for all that God has made that now a cursed heap, and the Country
about it a desolation, never to be repaired: yet your Pontificians especially
call it the Holy Land still; which notwithstanding is never a whit the holyer,
though by the Popes subtle instigation, so many thousands of souls have
perished about the pretended quarrel, out of a blind zeal of recoucring it
again; which whither regained, or no, the Pope was sure not to loose by the
bargain; for if he had regained it, it might have brought the greater income to
his coffers by the trade of superstitious Pilgrims at least; althoug he has
some footing there with the Turk: but he was sure during the quarrel, to
enlarge his Papal Dominions at home in Christendom, which he did: but this by
the way. You see then, that continuance of antiquity in name and title, may
notwithstanding stand with altering the property and true nature of the thing.
Did not the Prophet say of Jerusalem, How is the faithful City become an
harlot? It was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it; but now
murderers, etc. And may it not prove so with Rome, for all you still call it
the Apostolical See? And what will you say then? What if Apostolical, in
title be turned into Apostaticall, in truth? What if Tues Petrus, etc. and
tibi dabo claues, etc. and Orani pro te Petre, etc. and, Omnis mihi potestas
data etc. and Ecce duo gladij hic: satest: all prove, by the Popes peruertings,
to make up the Mystery of iniquity; and by fastening all to Rome, prove her the
Mistres, and Mother of whooredomes. For let me tell you, you cannot find me
out the exact and true natural Mystery of iniquity indeed, but under the veil
of such titles, borrowed from Scripture. None can be Antichrist, but he must
call himself the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of Peter, the only one upon
earth, that cannot err, and the like; translating the whole power of Christ
unto himself. To bring in the Turk for a Corriuall with the Pope for the
title of Antichrist, is to dream waking, and to bewray extreme ignorance in
those two great Mysteries the one of Godliness the other of iniquity. For all
the Turks Alcoran cannot make one compound of the Mystery of iniquity whereby
to deceive with strong illusion, if it were possible, the very elect, For take
but a brief survey of the Mystery of iniquity.

This Mystery began to take root in the Apostles time, as Saint Paul speaks,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
but was let to grow, by the Roman Empire (as the learndest Fathers have
interpreted, and experience has made it evident) and by manifold Persecutions
for the space of above 300. years. Then Constantine the great, like Noah's Dove
after the Deluge bringing an Olive branch of peace; and after a sad winter a
mild spring, and summer to the Church, setting a Coronet upon the head of
Syluester the 1. Bp. of Rome, then the imperial City, at what time there was a
voice heard from Heaven, Hodie venenum effusum est in ecclesiam, This day is
poison powered into the Church: from this time forward began the Root of this
Mystery to sprowt and spring, bud forth and blossom above ground, howsoever
nipt by sundry frosts, as an ouerforward shoot in the spring. For Rome, by
virtue of being the prime Imperial City, and the Bp. of Rome, by virtue of his
new Crown, began from henceforward to stickle for the supremacy over all other
Churches. Yet, at the first, his best Plea was, a counterfeit and foisted Decree
of the Nicen-Councel, by which he would claim the Presidency of the African
Council, whereof Saint Augustine was. But the whole Council cried it down,
having openly convinced the Bp. of Rome of forgery. For as yet, the Bp. of Rome
had not learned, how he might derive this stream of Supermacy to Rome from the
fountain of Scriptures. But still the Mystery fastened the root every day
more and more, and got ground, until Boniface 3. about the year 606. by
earnest suit and importunity, as their own Platina records, obtained of the
Parricide, Phocas, that the City of Rome should be the head, and Mother city
over all other. But what was this to the Papal Supremacy? yes: for upon the
Headship of Rome, the Pope now founds his own Headship over the Church, and
all Church men; that he might prove himself to be that man of sin, that Son
of Perdition, who exalts himself (mark it well) above all that is called God,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
sitting in, upon, or over the Temple of God. For Phocas his meaning was not;
when he granted the pre-eminence to Rome before other cities, whose emulous
corriuall Constantinople her younger sister had been, Phocas now stinting the
strife; that therefore the Bp. of Rome should have that absolute souerainty
over all, as even Boniface then began to arregate to himself, who of Bp. of
Rome (a title which he had had with other Patriarchs in common, only having
precedence of place, in regard of the prime Imperial city) now is turned Pope
of Rome, challenging the sovereign authority of sole Father of the Church, with
his See plantin^.
Volumus and Iubemus, we will and command; which Motto this first Pope of Rome
brought in with an innovation of the ancient custom of the Church, of assuming
the power of election and inuestiture of Bishops into his own hand; whereupon
his Papal word was, Volumus and Iubemus. So that thus this Boniface became the
first stem or eminent branch growing from the root of the Mystery of
iniquity. Here began Antichrist to display himself, whose immediate forerunner
(as Gregory Bp. of Rome but a little before called him) was John of
Constantinople, who taking upon him that blasphemous name of universal Bp. (as
Gregory terms it) was therefore the forerunner. A most true Prophecy; Now
Boniface, Gregory's next successor but one, is the Antichrist, whose forerunner
was John. All you that are versed in the storles of the Church, know all this
to be true. This branch henceforward spreads further and further, and mounts
higher and higher, till Hildebrand, Pope Gregory 7. who added another maine
branch to the former, to wit, domination over Kings and Princes, which the Pope
had striuen for before (the Mystery of iniquity still working, but Rome was not
built in one day) but could not obtain full possession of it, till this
Hildebrand, who begins Iupiterlike to thunder out his excommunications against
the Emperor. This Hildebrand sat about 1000. years from the destruction of
Jerusalem, fulfilling the prophecy, of letting loosse the Devil after 1000.
yeates; for Bead Benno Cardinalis, of his life. Also Abbas vrspergensis.
he was a Coniurer, got the Popedom by Satan's means, exercised the usurped
power of Satan over the Kingdoms of the world, and brought in that 1 Timothy 4.
doctrine of Devils, in forbidding marriage to Priests. He began to pervert the
Scripture to his wicked purposes, as the Devil did to Christ, which (says
Bruno in vrspergensis is a most gross kind of Idolatry. From this time
forward, this tree of the Mystery of iniquity did thrive and prosper
notoriously, having the two numerous Orders of Saint Dominick, and Saint
Francis to water it, instituted by Pope Innocent 3. at the Counsel of Lateran,
upon his Dream, that the Lateran, was like to fall, but that in came Dominick,
and supported it with his shoulders; whereupon the next morning the Pope
granted him his suit, which he was then in hot pursuit off, for the erecttion
and institution of his black Order. This Innocent 3. was the first that decreed
the Breaden God in his Transubstantiation, to be believed, and adored of all,
about the year 1215. And in the year 1300. began Pope Boniface 8. to
institute and celebrate Romes first Iubilee, marching forth the first day in
his pontificalibus, wearing, no longer the single, but the tripple Crown; and
the next day in his Imperial Robes, with two Swords carried before him, with
Exe duo gladij hic, Behold here are two Swords, the Spiritual and temporal.
Thus grew on still step by step this Mystery of iniquity, having many helps to
forward it, as first, the Emperors Court removed to Constantinople, and (...)
that which (...) the Antichrist was taken out of the way, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. the
loss of the Emperors footing in Italy in Augustulus: the quarrel about
Images, devised at first by Gregory only for Laymens books, yet wherein now
all Romaine-Catholicks, Lay, and learned, are proved such profound Proficients,
as by their often and over-studious diligent pooring therein, they have learned
such Divinity in them, as to adore them for their Gods: the rising up of Maomet
in the East: the translation of the Empire into the West: the long pretended-
holy wars for recovery (forsooth) of the holy Land, the Pope setting
Christian Princes to go fight for the Shadow, the while he got the Substance:
the rabble of Friars of all sorts: the School Rabbis: and profound ignorance
all along, all religion being confined to an unknown tongue, that men might
know it (that knew nothing) to be the language and religion of Babel, by the
confused sound, and little sense he could find in it. And yet all this while
was not Antichrist come to his full pitch, stature and strength, until the
Council of Trent, in which the Church of Rome shows her self to be quite
apostatized and fallen away from Christ, ceassing to be any longer a true
Church, as having solemnly renounced and accursed the saving faith of Christ,
without which is no salvation, no communion with him. During which Council,
also was first founded that diabolical Order of the Jesuits, the most active
instruments of Antichrist* and in a manner the only and last supporters of the
Babylonian tottering Tower. But this by the way. In the Council of Trent (I
say) is the whole Mystery of iniquity fully accomplished, and the Pope now
declared that Man of sin, that Antichrist, prophesied of in the Scriptures. I
can but name these things unto you at this present: nor do I say more, then I
am able more abundantly to demonstrate, if occasion served. For comparing the
Pope exactly to the description of Antichrist in the Scripture, we find him
in all points answerable, and that in a full measure, so that it is not
possible for a man to imagine, wherein Antichrist can go higher, then the Pope
has done. A scantling where of we may* take in this Papal Breeue or Bull,
wherein throughout, he shows himself that Antichrist. And if the Pope be
that Antichrist, as most demonstratiuely he is, which I dare undertake to
maintain against all the Jesuits in England: then consider, o ye
Romaine-Catholickes, in what a fearful condition you all stand, that adhere
to the Pope, as your Head. Certainly such are no other, then the limbs of
Antichrist, the members of the Beast, the children of that Father, who is the
son of perdition, who with all his, go into perdition. This is a hard
saying, you will say, but it is too true. Nor do I alone say, that in the
Church of Rome is no salvation to be found; Council. Trent. Sess. 6. Can. 12.
Ask the Council of Trent (which is the only rule of Romish faith) that will
tell you. To give you one instance for many; one of her Canons is: Si quis
dixerit, fidem iustificantem nihil aliud esse, quam fiduciam diuinae
misericordiae, peccata remittentis propter Christum, ibid. Can. 28.
vel eam fiduciam solam esse, qua iustificamur: anathema sit. That is: If any
shall say, that justifying faith is nothing else; James. 3.
but a confidence in Gods mercy, remitting sins for Christ's sake; or, that
confidence to be only that, whereby we are justified: let him be accursed.
What is then Romes justifying faith? Hear another Canon: which tells you,
that the faith of Rome may subsist, being separate from grace, and yet be a
true faith, though it be a dead faith. And this is no other faith, but that
which is in the very Devils, as Saint James says. For, as they confess, they
may with this their faith go into hell, and there be punished with the
Devils. As for the justifying and saving faith, they not only accurse it, but
him also, that shall say, Can. 14.
that none is truly justified, but he that believes that he is justified.
Thus they have quite excluded and exiled out of their Church, with Anathema,
the saving and instifying faith, without which there is no salvation, no
communion with Christ. Whence I conclude with this Argument.

That Church which denies, yea accurseth the saving faith of Jesus Christ,
unto instification, allowing only such a faith, which can never save a man,
but is a graceles faith, seperable from grace, and which a man may carry with
him into hell; that is an Apostatized Church, utterly fallen away from Christ,
wherein no salvation is to be found, or hoped for.

But the Church of Rome denies, yea accurseth the saving faith of Jesus
Christ, unto justification, allowing only such a faith, as can never save a
man, but is a graceless faith, separate from grace, and which a man may carry
with him into hell.

Therefore the Church of Rome is an apostatized Church, utterly fallen away
from Christ, wherein no salvation is to be found, or hoped for.

Both the propositions are proved out of the Council of Trents own Canons
already cited.

If any answer, that the Church of Rome denies not the true faith; forasmuch
as the faith, which she allows, she says is true, though dead; I rejoyne,
and say, that this is a Paralogisme. Romes dead faith is indeed for the kind of
it, a true dead faith, or a true faith of devils, as one may be said to be a
true liar. But I prove, that this faith of Rome is merely different in kind
from the true saving faith of Christ, thus.

That faith, which Christ commends for the only true saving faith, does so
justify a man, that he shall never come into condemnation, but pass from death
unto life.

But the only faith which the Church of Rome allows, does not so save or
justify a man, but that he way with it go into condemnation, and not pass
from death unto life.

Therefore the says of the Church of Rome, is not that faith, which Christ
commends for the only true saving faith.

And consequently, the Church of Rome denying the true saving faith of Christ,
whereby to be justified, is utterly void of all hope of salvation, and so has
quite abandoned Jesus Christ. Now for the Proposition, it is proved by Christ
himself Ioh. 5. 24. The Minor is confessed by the Council of Trent itself,
as has been proved.

Take one argument more.

That Church which cleaves to Antichrist as her Head whom she receives all
her spiritual life, has no salvation to be found or hoped for in it.

But the Church of Rome cleaves to Antichrist, as her Head from whom she
draws all her spiritual life.

Therefore the Church of Rome has no salvation to be found, or hoped for in
it.

The Proposition is granted of all. For Antichrist and all his members are
damned, and go into perditition, as the Apostle shows, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Revel.
14. 8, 9, 10, 11. (...). But for the Assumption, that the Church of Rome
eleventh to Antichrist, as her Head, from whom she draws all her spiritual
life: This is plainly proved, yea professed and avowed even by the Pope
himself, and by his Papal Decrees. First, the Pope is the Head of the Church
of Rome. Secondly, he is not simply a subordinate and Ministerial Head, but
the absolute, sovereign, supreme Head, whom (as Pope Nicolas 3. in his
Evangelical and irrefragable Decree, in Sexti, de Electione, cap. 17. tit. 6.
lib. 1. does peremptorily tell us) the Lord would have to be entitled into the
fellowship of the individual unity, that the structure of the eternal Temple
built by God, might by an admirable gift of the grace of God, consist in the
firmness of blessed Peter, and his Successor; that from him, as from a
certain Head he might diffuse his gifts, as into all his body. The like Decree
has Pope Boniface in his Commune Extrauga^^^^ 1. de Mayor. and obed. c. vnam
sanctam, making Peter and the Pope, one and the same Head with Christ lest
otherwise, says the Pope, the Church should be at a Monster with two Heads.
Thirdly, it cannot be denied, but that Antichrist is that Man of Sin,
described by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. who exalts himself above all that is
called God, who sits in, upon, for, or over the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Fourthly, the Pope himself preveth, that he is that
man of (...); for he exalts himself above all that is called God, namely
above all Kings and Princes, and Powers of the world, who (...) called Gods
Psalm. 82. 6. I have said, Ye are Gods. That he that exalts himself,
witness this present Breeue or Bull. (...) though Pope Boniface 3. with
importunate (...) (...) wicked Tyrant and Murderer Phocas, that Rome should be
the Head City over all, so that this supremacy might claim its foundation from
human Constitution Imperial: yet the Popes Personal supremacy over
Emperors and Kings came in by the By, by his own meet usurpation, which
though it might seem to be grounded upon the same foundation of the Cities
Supremacy, yet it was never the intent of Phocas the Founder, that the Bishop
of Rome should have a personal or real Supremacy over the Emperor, as we
have showed. This learn of the Beast grew out afterward in Hildebrand, Pope
Gregory. 7. who himself being a Conjurer, and getting the Popedom by the
Devils means, he now began to exercise the Dragons usurped power over
Emperors, Kings, and Kingdoms of the world, as the Dragon said to Christ, All
this power, and glory of the Kingdoms of the world, is delivered to me, and
to whomsoever I will, I give it; which very speech Pope Hadrian 4. used to the
Emperor Frederick. Thus does the Pope exalt himself above all that is called
God. To so little purpose is it to shift it off, by saying, he has this power
delivered to him, and therefore, he does not exalt himself. For so said the
Devil, All this power is given me; and yet was he not a most shameless
usurper? But more of this in the Answer to the Breeue. Again, does not the
Pope sit in, or upon, or for, or over the Temple of God? For all these the
Greek phrase, (...), signifies. And what other Temple of God does the Pope
allow, but the Church of Rome, whereof himself is the Head, the sum, and
only Oracle? Insomuch as he shows himself to be God, by assuming to
himself the whole unlimited power of God, as if he were the same with God and
Christ, as being assumpted into the individual unity with Christ; as Pope
Nicolas decreed. O all ye learned Papists, that do adhere to such a Head,
even to that man of sin, Antichrist, which while you do, what remains for
you, but according to the holy Ghost; own doom, even damnation and perdition
both of soul and body for evermore* In the name of Jesus Christ therefore open
your eyes, put off that Egyptian veil, which this Man of sin has cast over
you, that you should not set the truth* shake off those Babylonian chains,
wherewith you are so miserably captived by Antichrist, and quit your selves
like men. Hearken diligently to the voice of Christ in his word, who from
heaven cries unto you, saying, Come out of Babylon, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Revel: 18. 4.
This Babylon is the Church of Rome, so plainly described in the 17 chapter,
that the most learned Jesuits themselves know not how to shift it off. This
Babylon (chap. 18. 2.) is fallen: An Angel cries mightily, Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the bold of
every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean bird; etc. Is fallen, is
fallen? What is the meaning of this fall, twice repeated? Some fearful and
strange fall sure; even an vrtet apostasy and falling a way from the faith of
Christ. She shall one day fall externally, but in the mean time, she is
utterly fallen internally, and become the habitation of Devils, etc. where the
Devil now domineereth in that Antichrist in his full pride, and rebellion
against Christ. Let not these my words seem tart to your more tender palate. I
dare say, you abhor Antichrist, whosoever, and wheresoever he is. And do but
open your eyes, and you cannot but plainly discern even the Pope to be the
selfsame.

So that we need not further quarrel Rome about other points, as the rubbidge
of her infinite idolatries, and doctrins of Devils, whereof that Tower of
Babylon is built up; when as the very foundation of it is rotten, and the whole
body altogether Antichristian, from top to toe* when as from the Crown of the
Head to the sole of the foot, there is no whole part: yea, when as the Maine
Head of that body is Antichrist, and the faith of that Church, apostasy. No
more is to be said.

I will conclude therefore, not with a disswasiue from that damnable practice
of disavowing loyalty to your King; for I suppose, no true Englishman will be
either so unnaturally and degenerously impious, yea or so unreasonably sottish,
as to be ready to betray their sweet native country to Rome and Spain: but in
the name of Jesus Christ be exhorted, to abandon and, abhor such a Father as
the Pope, being that Antichrist, and so that lawless one, who leading with
himself Millions of souls into hell to be tormented with the great Devil, ye
none must presume to blame him for it; as it is in his own Decretalls; he,
who is the author and abettor of conspiracies and treasons, of treacheries and
rebellions, as in this Breeue he professes; he, who is that son of
perdition, and that head, whose members must necessarily perish, being damned,
for not receiving the love of the truth, but believing lies, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. and
fly with speed unto Jesus Christ, high you into the bosom of the Church of
England your Mother, who reaches unto you the pure milke-flowing breasts of
salvation in the Word and Sacramens. As for those, that wittingly and wilfully
adhere to the Pope as their Head, they shut themselves out of the Kingdom of
God, and of Christ. Nor let any English-Roman-Catholicke plead ignorance, while
they shut their eyes at the bright Sun before them. The poor people in Spain,
that are shut up from the light, may, if any, find some excuse: but not so in
England. He that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. Now the Lord open all your hearts, ears, and eyes, that hearing you
may see, and believe in Jesus Christ to your eternal salvation. Amen.

Your truly loving Countryman, H. B.

Errata.
Page 31. line 21. for describe, read ascribe. p. 40. l. 2. for Powers, r.
Pioners. p. 46. l. 6. r. proceed. p. 48. l. 18. r. ordine ad spititualia. p.
49. in the margent correct the numbers. page 52. l. 26. blot out men. page 53.
l. 19. r. Lateran. p. 56. l. 3. for says, r. such. page 61. l. 6. r. triumphs.
l. 23. r. Tortus. l. 30. r. hic. l. 35. r. certae spei. p. 63. l. 1. r.
judgment. p. 70. l. 12. r. it so putrifyed. page 71. l. 25. for concerning. r.
covering. page 72. l. 16. r. fish.

FINIS.

