THE THIRD PART OF THE DEFENSE of the Reformed Catholic:

Against DOCT. BISHOPS Second part of the Reformation of a Catholic, as the
same was first guilefully published under that name, containing only a large
and most malicious Preface to the Reader, and an Answer to M. PERKINS his
Advertisement to Roman Catholics, etc.

Whereunto is added An Advertisement for the time concerning the said DOCT.
BISHOPS Reproof, lately published against a little piece of the Answer to his
Epistle to the King, with an Answer to some few exceptions taken against the
same, by M. T. Higgons lately become a Proselyte of the Church of Rome.

By R. ABBOT Doctor of Divinity.

Cypr. l. 1. epist. 3. Haec est vere domentia, non cogitare nec scire quod
mendacia non diu fallant; noctem tamdiu esse quamdiu illucescat dies, etc.

LONDINI Impensis GEORGII BISHOP. 1609.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
GOOD Christian Reader, thou shall understand, that until the greater part of
this Book was printed, I thought I had given thee therein an answer to all
that Doct. Bishop had published under the name of his Second part. But being at
Southwell not long since to do my duty to the most Reverend Father, the L.
Archbishop of York, his Gr. being pleased to use speech to me concerning a
point in the said Second part, and showing me thereof the book it self, I
perceived a defect in that that I had answered, finding there handled the other
questions of the Reformed Catholic which he had left untouched in his former
book, and whereof in the book which I had received, there was contained
nothing. In turning the book I found a fault of the Print in the answer to the
Advertisement, corrected in the end of the questions, whereby I presently
perceived that he first printed his ungodly Preface here contained, and the
said answer, and for some cunning device (what it might be I leave to thee to
guess) did thus publish the beginning and end of the book, and left the
middle part to be added at his pleasure afterward. As it first came forth, so
I received it, enquiring after no more, because I thought I had received all,
and knowing of no more, I have written to no more, and had I known of the rest
before I had printed so much of this, I would have suppressed this till I had
confuted that as I have done this. And hereby thou understand the cause why
I have in diverse places of this book taxed M. Preface. sect. 22 page 190.
Aduert. sect. 1. page 193. etc.
Bishop for the omitting of those questions, because he himself had then
diuulged his book without them, neither had I heard that he had written any
thing of them: which taxations though now I cannot alter, yet by this Preface I
revoke, and do wish thee to pass them over, as if they were not there at all.
Albeit where I might alter them I have so done, and therefore recalled from the
Press the copy of my Preface and advertisement here adioyued, wherein I had
further noted that omission; by means whereof, and for the adding of an answer
to some few exceptions taken against me by M. Higgons, lately revolted from
us, so soon as I could get the sight thereof, this book has been somewhat
longer in coming forth than otherwise it should have been. To which, being,
though not by my default, thus maimed and imperfect, I have done some disgrace
by withdrawing from it the Dedication which I had intended; being
notwithstanding, good Reader, to entreat thy gentle patience to take this in
good part, till God shall give me opportunity hereafter to add the rest.
Hereafter I say, because it shall first be necessary for me to return a
Counterproofe to Doct. Bishops Reproof, lately published against a little
piece of my answer to his Epistle. Concerning which work of his, (being such
as I presume will in the end make him odious and hateful to all men that will
take knowledge of it) I have here added some advertisement for the time, and
given an answer to his Preface, wherein he has taken upon him to have said so
much as may suffice to discredit me with all indifferent men, that whereas it
will require some longer time to examine his Reproof in that sort as I intend
it, I may notwithstanding in the mean time somewhat abate the edge, and
remove the scandal of it, whilst by discovery of some of his iuglings (if at
least being so gross and palpable, they deserve to be called iuglings) the
Reader shall be able to conceive what he is in all the rest. I will here
amplify nothing further, but refer thee to those observations that I have
given thee thereof. God give his blessing both to my writing and to thy
reading, that we may both grow in hatred of Antichristian error, and in the
knowledge and love of the truth of God.

Thine in the Lord R. ABBOT.

THE ANSWER TO Doctor BISHOPS Preface to his second part of the Reformation of
a Catholic, etc.
1. W. BISHOP.
CHristian Reader, I suppose it shall please thee better, if I do entertain
thy studious mind with some serious discourse, than if I went about to court
it, with the ordinary complements of a curious preamble. Wherefore I purpose
(by thy gentle patience) to handle here a matter of marvelous great
importance, which M. PERK. toward the latter end of his book, lays out
against us in manner of a most grievous complaint: it is, that we Catholics,
among many other capital crimes by us (as he fableth) defended, do bolster
and uphold the most heinous sin of Atheism. The man is not a little troubled
to devise wherein we do maintain any such point of impiety: For, compelled
by the clear evidence of truth, he confessed that we do rightly acknowledge
the unity of the Godhead in the Trinity of persons: yet that he may seem
to say something therein against us, he flies unto the threed-bare rags of
their common slanders of man's merits and satisfactions, and such old stuff:
and stretching them on the tenter-hooks, yet one nail further then his
fellows, strives to draw out of them a certain strange kind of Atheism, in
this manner: The Roman religion makes the merit of the works of men, Romans 11.6.
to concur with the grace of God, therefore it overthrows the grace of God.
Item, they acknowledge the infinite justice and mercy of God, but by
consequence both are denied: for how can that be infinite justice, which may
any way be appeased by humane satisfaction? And how shall Gods mercy be
infinite, when we by our own satisfactions must add a supply to the
satisfaction of Christ? There needs apretie wit (I ween) to understand how
these points appertain to Atheism. For suppose that we defended, that the
merit of the works of man concurred with Gods grace, as two distinct agents,
which we do not; for we hold that no works of man have any merit, unless
they spring and proceed from the very grace of God: but let that be granted,
what kind of Atheism or denying of God were this? or how follows it
thereof, that the grace of God (which is the principal agent, and far more
potent than the other) must thereby needs be cast to the ground and foiled?
this is so silly and simple, that I know not what to term it: for he does
untruly slander our doctrine, and that to no end and purpose. To this second
cavil I answer in a word, that we teach (as he knows right well) the
infinite justice of God to be appeased no other way, than by the infinite
satisfaction of Christ's passion: And that our satisfactions are only to pay
for the temporal pains remaining yet due after the infinite are paid for by
Christ. Now whether any such temporal pa^ne remain or no, after the sin is
remitted, is a question between us: but to say (as M. PER. does) that we be
Atheists, and do deny God to be God, for that we hold some temporal
punishment of man to be due, after pardon granted of his greater pain, is most
apparently a very senseless assertion. As wide from all reason is his third
instance: That Gods mercy cannot be infinite, when by our own satisfactions
we add a supply to the satisfaction of Christ. For if Christ's most perfect
and full satisfaction, can well stand with Gods infinite mercy: far more
easily may man's satisfactions agree with it, which are infinitely less than
Christ's. But the infinite riches of Gods mercy appears especially, in that it
pleased him freely to give unto us (so mean creatures and wretched sinners)
his own only dear Son, to be our Redeemer and Savior; and both Christ's
satisfaction and ours are rather to be referred unto Gods justice, than to his
mercy: wherefore very unskillfully does M. PERK. compare them with Gods mercy.
Neither is it possible to distill any quintessence of Atheism out of it, more
than out of the former: nay, they both uprightly weighed, are so far off from
Atheism, or derogating any thing from Gods glory; that they do much magnify
and advance the same. For albeit we hold our good works to be both meritorious
and satisfactory: yet do we teach the virtue, value, and estimation of them,
to proceed wholly from the grace of God in us, whereby we be enabled and helped
to do them; and not any part of the dignity and worthiness of the works, to
issue from the natural faculty or industry of the man that does them. So
that when we maintain the merit or satisfaction of good works, we extol not
the nature of man, but do only defend and uphold the dignity and virtue of
Gods grace: which Protestants do greatly debase, extenuate, and vilify, not
allowing it to be sufficient to help the best minded man in the world, to do
any work that does not offend God mortally. Thus much concerning our supposed
Atheism against God: now of those that be (as he imagines) against Christ the
Son of God.

R. ABBOT.
MAster Bishop here promises us a serious discourse, but it proves in fine
to a lewd and slanderous libell; which, though he court it not, as he trimly
and finely tells us, with the ordinary complements of a curious preamble, yet
he foully corrupts with the ordinary Popish complements of foolish malice
and wilful fraud. A man may here see in him the true Image and picture of a
Popish Doctor, who seeing himself unable to contend further by sound argument,
to make his part good, betaketh himself to this impudency and importunity of
lying and slandering. Albeit in the first part thereof as touching his maine
drift I will not at all repugne him, the same serving to clear them of an
imputation of Atheism, charged upon them by M. Perkins, but indeed amiss, as
I cannot but ingeniously and freely confess, because it is conceived and
drawn from forced and impertinent grounds, and therefore breeds rather
cauillation against him, than accusation against them. The crime of Atheism
belongs properly to them with whom God is either not at all acknowledged,
Atheism in what sort to be imputed to Popery.
or not regarded, and either wholly denied to be, or accordingly esteemed as if
he were not. But where there is Romans 10.2.
the zeal of God though not according to knowledge, howsoever by want of
knowledge there may be misconceits of God and godliness, yet Atheism is not
to be vpbraided there. It is true indeed, as M. Perkins says, that Atheism is
either open or colored, but colored Atheism must be the same in the heart,
that professed Atheism is in the mouth, so to be affected as if there were no
God. And this covert and colored Atheism is it which the Scripture for the
most part speaks of, whereby Psalm. 14.1.
the fool says, not with his tongue, but in his heart, There is no God; it
being a thing very rare that any man so professes with the mouth, but very
common with men Tit. 1.16.
to profess that they know God, but by their deeds to deny him Cyprian. de
dupl. martyr. Quemadmodum bona opera profitentur deum; ita mala qu^dammodo
loquuntur Non est deus, nee est Scientia in excelso.
for naughty doings, as Cyprian teaches, do after a sort say, There is no
God, nor any knowledge in the most high. Now in Popery we cannot doubt but
that many there are who in simplicity professing the errors and superstitions
alleged by M. Perkins, have notwithstanding in that ignorance a zeal of God,
and an intendment of devotion to Jesus Christ, and are so far from denying God,
as that in dread of the Majesty of God, and in expectation of the judgment to
come, they are careful, according to their manner, religiously to serve him. To
these men then to impute Atheism, by a consequence so far fetched, as brings
all misdeeming of religion within the compass thereof, I confess, stood not
with that aduisednesse and due consideration which had been requisite in a
matter of so great moment and effect. Much rather should M. Perkins have sought
for Atheism in the practice and policy of them who have been and are the
maintainers of that Roman Hierarchy; who making gain and advantage of the
superstitions, wherewith they have entangled the souls of men, and resolving
by all means to uphold their trade, have in this emploiment quenched in
themselves all inward light and sense of religion, sometimes openly professing,
and sometimes covertly dissembling their denial and contempt of God, and
impious conceit of the nullity of all the service and devotion that is done
unto him. Whereof we have notable example in their See the Beehiue of the
Romish Church; the sixth book; the third Chapter.
Popes, of which diverse have openly showed themselves to be mere Atheists, as
Boniface the eight, and John the three and twentieth, who both denied the
immortality of the soul; as Clement the seventh, who lying at the point of
death confessed that all his life he had doubted of three things, whereof now
he should be resolved; whether there were a God; whether the soul be
immortal; and whether there be any life after this life: as Julius the third,
who commanded to bring him his Porke in despite of God: as Leo the tenth, who
made but a fable and a toy of all that we believe concerning Christ. Many other
of them have there been of the same stamp, most damnable villains, the very
monsters of mankind, utterly deuoid of all remorse and conscience of piety
toward God, and thereby given over to all dissoluteness and abomination of
wicked and finfull life. From them, and their appendants has this poison spread
it self, not only into the whole Court and City of Rome, but into all Italy,
insomuch that in the Italian tongue the name of Hespinian. de Origin
Monachatus lib. 6. c. 66.
a Christian is by custom grown to signify a fool. M. Bishop well knows
what the curse of the Wolf is, a most horrible blasphemy there used, not fit
for the mouth of any Christian to speak, or the pen of any Christian to write;
to which though the Pope for his credits sake, have of later time assigned some
kind of punishment, yet well he woteth that it is more general than that his
Law can work the restraint of it. Out of Italy, or at least from birds of the
Popes hatching, came the book De tribus mundi impostoribus, whereby Moses and
Christ as well as Mahomet, are made but deluders and deceivers of the world.
Out of Italy came Machiauels precepts, whereby he has taught men to cast off
all yoke of religion, and to vseit only to serve turn; which notwithstanding
according to that conceit that he had of religion could say, that Machiauel.
Disputat. de resubl. l. 1. c. 12. Nusquam m^nus vel pietatis vel religionis est
quam in ijs hominibus qui Romae vicin^ores habitant.
there was no where less faith or piety, than in them that dwell nearest to
Rome. Whose rules, as they are at this day the managing of the Papacy, and
familiar to all states that are confederated therewith, so specially are they
entertained and practiced by the Jesuits, who having taken away the honor from
Friar Dominick, of being the pillar of the Lateran Church, and being become the
special vpholders of the declining kingdom of Antichrist, are discovered by
the secular Priests, and namely by their Proctor Watson, to be very Atheists,
not regarding religion at all, but only for a cloak to hide their villainies,
and for the compassing of their wicked and ungodly designs. Thus Atheism,
albeit it be not contained in the positive Doctrine of the Roman Church, yet
becomes a sequel thereof whilst having no true grounds for the justifying of
it, and therefore being driven to support it self by carnal policy, it
begets in the Politicians that practice for it, a striving and fighting
against God, whereby religion is quite banished out of the heart, and only an
outward color remains for their maintenance of outward state. Now therefore
I will not question them of Atheism upon M. Perkins grounds, but leaving his
conclusion, will only examine so far as need requires M. Bishops defense of
the propositions, from which he draws that conclusion, there being nothing
here, but what either has been before, or must afterward be further spoken
of. First M. Popery overthrows the grace of God.
Perkins propounds that the Church of Rome making the merit of men's works, to
concur with the grace of God, overthrows the grace of God. Which to be true,
appears by the words of the Apostle; who mentioning Romans 11 6.
the election of grace, infers thus; If it be of grace, it is not of works;
otherwise grace is no grace: or if it be of works, it is not of grace,
otherwise work is no work: importing plainly that grace and work cannot be
so reconciled as that what is of grace may truly be said to be of works, or
what is of works, may truly be said to be of grace. For grace as Hierome
expounds it, imports Hieron. Romans ca. 11. Gratuitum munus appellatur.
a free gift; so that Iden epist^ad V^metriad. vli gratia, non operum
retributio, sed donatis est largitas.
where grace is, there is not rewarding of works, but largess and bounty of
gift: For Leo epist. 84. Quae vt^que nisi ^atis detur non est gratia sed
merces, retributi^o; merito^u^.
grace, says Leo bishop of Rome, except it be freely given, is not grace, but
the reward and recempense of merits or works; implying that if it be the
reward of merits, then it is not freely given, and therefore cannot be calied
grace. Therefore when the Apostle says, Romans 6.23.
Eternal life is the grace (or gift) of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, we
must understand it according to the words of the Psalm; Vulgat. Latin. Psalm.
55.7.
Pro^ihilo saluos facies illos; Thou will save them for nothing; ^^eion. ad
P^^^g lib 2. Hand (...) quio iustos qui nou propr^^^cr^to sed de: salu^ntur
clementia.
meaning the just, says Hierome who art not saved by their own merit, but by
the mercy of God. To this M. Bishop tells us that they do not make the merit
of man's work, and the grace of God two distinct agents, but hold that no works
of man have any merit unless they proceed and prin^ from the very grace of
God. Where, not to question what he means by giving the name of an agent to
the merit of man's work, answer him to the rest, that his answer is
vnsefficient and vain, because the Apostle knew well that we have no works
wherewith to move God, but only such as proceed from the grace of God; and yet
resolves that Gods election if it be of works cannot be said to be of grace.
Whencesoeuer the works proceed, this rule stands still most firm and sure,
that that cannot be said to be freely given and for nothing, that is repaied to
the merit of works. But whilst they will have only works of nature excluded
by the Apostles words, and not the works that are wrought by grace, they
necessarily fall into the heresy of the Pelagians that the election of grace
depends upon the foresight of those works which our free will should do by
the help of grace. Which if they will not grant, as I trow they will not, they
must perforce confess that the Apostle here excludes not only works of
nature but generally all works whatsoever. And the rather must they so
confess that they may not make the Apostle speak so idly as by that
construction he does; If it be of grace, then it is not of works done without
grace; and if it be of works done without grace, then it is not of grace; as
if the Apostle had had to do with men who thought that by works of nature
they had obtained the election of grace. Again that shift of theirs is so much
the worse, for that the works of which M. Bishop speaks are not totally the
effects of grace, but arise in part from the free will of man. For although he
tell us that grace is the principal and more potent, yet he will not grant us
that it is the whole agent, which not being so, look what is attributed to the
free will of man, falls out to be the impeachment of the grace of God, so
that eternal life being ascribed to our good works, shall not be ascribed
wholly to grace, because those good works proceed not wholly from grace but
partly from our own free will. Neither is he any whit helped by that whereon
he insisteth again in the end of this division, that albeit the works be
partly of our free will, yet the dignity and worthiness of the works arises
wholly of the grace of God; for howsoever he wholly refer the dignity of
works to grace going before, yet he thereby takes away the nature of grace
from that that follows after, because the latter grace cannot be said to be
freely given if it be due to the merit of any work that is gone before. Albeit
the vain man should see that hereby he quite overthrows all merit of man;
because if the value and worth of the work grow wholly and only on Gods
part, then can it not be that man may be said to merit or deserve any thing
thereby (for what should I deserve of God by that that is wholly Gods and none
of mine?) or if man do truly merit, then does not merit arise wholly from the
grace of God.

As touching the second point, whereas he says the infinite justice of God is
no other way appeased but by the infinite satisfaction of Christ, and yet that
there are temporal punishments due besides for which we are afterward to
satisfy by our selves, he ignorantly crosses himself, and by one part of his
speech gives check to the other. For by what other justice of God do these
temporal punishments fall upon us, but by his infinite justice? what are they
else in their own proper nature but the first fruits of his eternal wrath and
indignation against sin? And if there can no other be imagined but See here
of the question of satisfaction. sect. 3.
only his infinite justice from which they proceed, then it is not in us to pay
satisfaction to God for them, because by M. Bishops own confession, the
infinite justice of God is no other way to be appeased but by the infinite
satisfaction of the blood of Christ. Now if he will say that finite and
temporal effects cannot proceed from an infinite cause, he is controlled by
the whole course of this world; because all the proprieties of God which are
infinite as they are immanent in himself, yet in their transitiue and foren
effects are stinted and limited to the model and state of the creature wherein
the same effects are wrought.

In the third point it appears that he understood not what M. Perkins said.
Gods infinite mercy showed it self in providing for us an infinite
satisfaction in the person of Jesus Christ, whereby to exhaust and empt the
most bottomless depth of all our iniquity and sin. This the Scripture every
where names as the effect of Ioh. 3.16. Romans 5.8. Ephesians. 2.4.
the love and mercy of God; and therefore M. Perkins did not amiss to refer it
accordingly. Now M. Bishop, took it that M. Perkins had named Gods mercy, as
requiring satisfaction, not as providing and yielding the same to us in Christ:
and therefore for an answer sends us a dream: that if Christ's infinite
satisfaction may stand with the mercy of God, much more easily may ours. But
let him consider better of the matter, and tell us at more leisure how the
mercy of God can be said to be infinite in the satisfaction of Christ, if it
be so limited and restrained as that in respect of temporal punishments, the
same is wholly frustrate, and leaves us still to make satisfaction for our
selves. If the satisfaction of Christ be infinite, it must necessarily be
extended to all that is to be satisfied for. If it extend not to all that is to
be satisfied for, it cannot be called an infinite satisfaction. But of this
enough in the question of satisfaction.

He goes on and tells us that their doctrine of merits and satisfactions is
so far from Atheism, or derogating from Gods glory, as that it does much
magnify and advance the same. Of Atheism I will say nothing; but it is
untruth which he says that their doctrine does not derogate from the glory of
God: and a greater untruth, that it does magnify and advance the same. The
glory of God appears not in the pride of our merits, but in the forgiveness
of our sins. For howsoever he color the matter in saying that the value and
estimation, the dignity and worthiness of our merits and satisfactions arises
wholly from the grace of God; yet manifest it is that there is still somewhat
left for us to rejoice in, for that we by our freewill, as they teach, are the
doers of the work. Therefore the Apostle says, that Romans 3.27.
reioicing or glorying is excluded, not by the Law of works, wherein we have
our part, but by the Law of faith, whereby we believe that God does all,
according to his free promise for his own mercies sake. So in another place,
having said that Ephesians. 2.5.6.
we are saved by grace through faith, not of our selves, it is the gift of
God, he adds; not of works lest any man should boast: still importing that
boasting cannot be excluded so long as the title of salvation is assigned to
our works. Therefore God though he could have made us fully perfect, and
wholly free from sin, yet chose rather, as S. Austin well notes, August.
con. Julian. Pelag. l. 4. c 3 Ideo factum est in loco infirmitatis huius ne
superbe viueremus vt sub quotidiana peccatorum remissione viuamus.
that we should live under daily remission of sins, that we may not be
proud: Idem de spir. and lit. c. 36. vt etiam iustorum emus os obstruatur in
laud sua and non aperiatur nisi in laudem dei.
that every mouth of man may be stopped in their own praise, and may not be
opened but to the praise of God; Bernard. in Cant. ser. 50. sciemus in di^ illa
quia non e^ operibus iustitiae quae fecimus n^s, sed secundum miserecordiam
suam saluos nos fecit.
that we may know at that day, as Bernard says, that not for the works of
righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us. Why
will M. Bishop go about to rob God of this honor by such fantastical
speculations of the value and estimation, the dignity and worthiness of our
works? And if he say that this is all of God, does he any more than the
Pharisie did, who said, Luke 18.11.
I thank thee, O God, that I am not as other men are, etc. Hieron. adu. Pelag.
lib. 3. Ille agit gratias deo quia illius misericordia non sit sicut caeteri
homines.
He thanketh God, says Hierome, that by his mercy he is not like other men;
he acknowledges his righteousness to be the gift of God; but yet he is
rejected whilst with M. Bishop he flattereth himself in opinion of the value
and estimation, the dignity and worthiness of his works. Now the Protestants
indeed are not of that Pharisaicall humor thus to plead the reputation of their
own works, and do take M. Bishop therein to be a foolish vain man, and yet
they do not therefore debase and vilify the virtue of the grace of God, as he
obiecteth, as not allowing it to be sufficient to help the best minded man in
the world to do any work that does not mortally offend God; but do confess
and teach that the faithful by the grace of God do many good works very
highly pleasing unto God, whilst Psalm. 103.13.
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord is merciful to them that fear
him, remembering whereof we be made, and considering that we are but dust, and
being ready when he sees our willing endeavors to pardon the obliquities the
defects and deformities of our doings, the same being perfumed by faith with
the sweet incense of the obedience of Jesus Christ. So then according to rigor
of judgment the Protestants say, Esaias 64.6.
All our righteousness is as a defiled cloth; Dan. 9.7.
To thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but to us shame and confusion of
face. They subscribe that which Gregory says: Greg. Moral. l. 8. c. 9. Iustise
peritaeros absque ambiguitate praesciunt, firemota pietate iudicentur, quia hoc
ipsum, quo just videmur viuere culpa est, fi vitam nostram cu iudicat, hanc
apud se diuina misericordia non excusat.
The just know that without all doubt they shall perish if they be judged
without mercy, because even our just life, as it seems, is but sin if Gods
mercy do not excuse it, when he shall give judgment of it. But yet the
Protestants know also that by the mediation of Jesus Christ, Romans 12.1.
the giving up of our bodies to be a living and (...) sacrifice is accepble
unto God, and that 1. Pet. 2.5.
we are made aspirituall house and holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices which are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. In a word, the
Protestants know that the Saints of God Apoc. 4.10.
cast their crowns down before the throne of God, as arrogating no part
thereof to themselves, but ascribing all to God; and therefore cannot but
condemn M. Bishop and the Papists, though not of Atheism, yet of Pelagianisme
and heresy, for that they teach men to keep their crowns in part upon their
own heads, and to take some part of glory to themselves to the derogation of
the glory of God.

2. W. BISHOP.
First he argues thus. He that has not the Son, has not the Father: and he
that has neither Father nor Son, denies God: now the present Roman religion
has not the Son, that is Jesus Christ God and man: For they in effect
abolish his manhood, by teaching of him to have two kinds of existing; one
natural in heaven, whereby he is visible, touchable, and circumscribed: the
other against nature, whereby he is substantially according to his flesh in the
hands of every Priest, invisible and uncircumcised.

Answer. M. PER. and all Protestants know right well, that we believe Jesus
Christ to be perfect God, and perfect man, and therefore we have both the
Son and the Father; and his reason against it, is not worth arush: for we do
not destroy the nature of man, by teaching it to have two diverse manners of
existing or being in a place. When Christ was transfigured before his Apostles,
he had another manner of outward form and appearance, than he had before: yet
was not the nature of man in him thereby destroyed; and after his resurrection
he was (when it pleased him) visible to his Apostles, and at other times
invisible; and yet was not his manhood thereby abolished as M. PER. would make
us believe: no more is it when his body is in many places at once; or in one
place circumscribed, and in the other vncir cumscribed. For these external
relations of bodies unto their places, do no whit at all destroy their inward
and natural substances, as all Philosophy testifies: wherefore hence to
gather that we deny both the Father and the Son to be God, does savor (I
will not say of a silly wit) but of a froward will, peeuishly bent to cavil
and calumniate.

R. ABBOT.
As touching the existing of the body of Christ, we believe what the holy
Scripture has taught us, The body of Christ locally circumscribed.
and therein we rest, as the ancient godly fathers did; neither will we listen
to the frantic dreams of new devising heads, who for the maintenance of one
absurdity not sparing to undergo another, have broached a manner of the being
of the body of Christ according to the fancies of Marcion, Manicheus,
Apollinaris, Eutyches and such other like Heretics, who, howsoever they
admitted the name of a body, yet denied the truth thereof. What other is it but
a fantastical body which they affirm to be in their consecrated host, where
there is the savor and taste of bread, the color and appearance of bread, to
sense and feeling no other but bread, and yet there is no bread, but a body of
flesh and blood, as they tell us, or rather a body which has neither flesh nor
blood? M. Bishop colors the matter by telling us of a diverse manner of
existing or being in a place; but why do neither Scriptures nor Fathers tell
us of this diverse manner of existing or being? I know that to make some show of
antiquity they allege a few sentences of the Fathers far enough from the
purpose; but this matter could not have so passed with a by-sentence or two,
when there were so many and so great occasions fully to declare it and to
insist upon it, if it had been believed then as it is taught now. They
clearly and plainly taught, that Aug. in Joan. tract. 50. secundum carnem
quam verbum assumpsit, ascendit in coe um and non est hic.
Christ according to his body is ascended into heaven and is not here: and
against the Manichees; that Idem cont. faust. Mauich. l. 20. c. 11. sacundum
praesentiam corporalem, simul and in sole and in luna and in cruce esse non
posset.
Christ according to bodily presence could not at once be in the Sun and in
the Moon and upon the cross; that is, in many places, and that Idem in Joan.
er. 31. Cum ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco vnde venit non est.
When he is come to another place he is not in the place from whence he came,
and therefore; that Vigil. cont. Eutich. lib. 4. Quando in terra fuit (caro
Christi) non erat vti^ in coelo: and nunc quia in coelo est, non est vtique in
terra.
The body of Christ, when it was upon earth, was not in heaven; and now because
it is in heaven, it is not upon the earth: that Ambr. in Luc. l. 1. c. 24. Ergo
non supra terram nec interra nec secundum carnem ti quaerere debemus. si
volumus inuenire, etc. Stephanus tetigit quia quaesiuit in coele.
If we will find Christ, we must not seek him in the earth nor upon the earth
nor according to the flesh, but in heaven. They would never have spoken thus
without any limitation or exception, if they had believed that which M. Bishop
here would make us believe out of the doctrine of the church of Rome, that the
body of Christ may be in infinite places at once, that it may be together both
in heaven and earth, with form and without form, both visible and invisible,
both circumscribed and uncircumcised, that is to say by a plain
contradiction, both that that it is, and that that it is not. Surely they would
have said as we do; If it be visible, it cannot be invisible; or if it be
invisible, it cannot be visible: if it have form, then it is not without
form; or if it be without form, how should it be said to have any form? both
these cannot stand together. True says M. Bishop, in one and the same manner of
existence and being. And say I, if it be but one and the same body, it can at
once have but one manner of existing and being: for according to the same, or
totally, to be thus and not thus, cannot agree to one and the same thing. As
for his instances whereby he would take away the improbabilitie of this
fancy, they are altogether ridiculous. Christ, says he, when he was
transfigured, had another manner of outward form and appearance then he had
before; and after his resurrection when it pleased him he was visible to his
Apostles, and at other times invisible. And what then? Ergo Christ's body may be
in many places at once; it may together be both visible and invisible, and
whatsoever pleases them. But a man may even as well say: M. Bishop is
sometimes hot and sometimes cold, sometimes asleep, sometimes awake; sometimes
sober, sometimes merry; sometimes like a scholar, sometimes like a swaggerer;
sometimes at Rome, sometimes in England; ergo he may at one time be together
both asleep and awake, both visible and invisible, both at Rome and in
England, and in many places at once; so that though by Parsons procurement he
were fast laid up in prison, yet he might at the same time be personally
before the Pope to acquaint him with the appeal of the secular Priests and the
exorbitant dealing of the Jesuits against them. What, will he not call him a
dreaming Sophister that should conclude thus? Well then; let him for his pains
take his fellow to him, and learn to argue more wisely another time. But mark
here gentle Reader, that M. Bishop makes Philosophy a witness of this
matter. We have thought heretofore that they rested the same wholly and
merely upon the omnipotent power of God; and have observed how their
schoole-philosophers when they speak of relation of bodies to their places, do
except this matter of the real presence as a matter of irregularity, not
coming within compass of the rules of Philosophy, but far transcendent
above all their learning. Now M. Bishop will make us believe that it stands
with good Philosophy, and that all their Philosophers have all this while been
deceived; marry it is worth the while to note in what terms and how warily
he has set it down. The external relations of bodies unto their places, do
no whit at all destroy their inward and natural substances, as all Philosophy
testifies. You say well, M. Bishop, and very wisely. Indeed it is not relation
to a place, but the want of relation to a place that takes away the nature of
a body. For Aug. epist. 50. spatia locorum toll corporibus, nusquam erunt, and
quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt.
take from bodies space of place, says Austin, and they shall be no where;
and because they shall be no where, they shall not be at all. Cyril de Trinit.
lib. 2. si corpus, and in loco omnino, and in magnitudine and in quantitaete,
and si quanta facta esset, non effugeret cireumscriptionem.
If it be a body, says Cyrill, then verily it is in a place, and has
greatness and quantity, and if it have quantity, it cannot be but that it
must be circumscribed. Didym. de sp^sancto. l. 2. si spiritus veritatis iuxta
naturas corporum circumscriptus est certo spacio, alium deserens locum ad alium
commigrauit.
It is the nature of a body, says Didymus, to be circumscribed in a certain
space, and therefore by coming into one place, it must forsake another. You
therefore affirming the body of Christ uncircumcised, and having no
commensuration or space of place, and coming into one place without the
leaving of another, do thereby utterly destroy the nature of a body. Ibid.
Impossible est and impium, ista quae diximus in corporalibus credere.
It is impossible and a thing impious, says Didymus, to believe these things
concerning bodily substances. This was the Philosophy that these Fathers had
learned. They knew by Philosophy and by truth that a body must have extension
of parts, and one part different and distant from another, and place
correspondent to every part, so that where one part is, there another cannot
be, and the whole so limited to one place, as that without leaving that place,
it cannot be in another; but neither did Philosophy nor Divinity teach them
that uncircumcised body which M. Bishop speaks of.

3. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, Master PERKINS charge us with disgrading Christ of his offices:
saying, that for one Jesus Christ the only King, lawgiver and head of the
Church, they join unto him the Pope not only as a Vicar, but as a fellow, in
that they give unto him power to make laws: binding in conscience, to resolve
and determine infallibly the sense of holy Scripture: properly to pardon sin:
to have authority over the whole earth, and a part of hell: to depose Kings, to
whom under Christ every soul is subject: to absolve subjects from the oath of
allegiance, etc.

Answer. Here is a bed-role of many superfluous speeches: for not one of all
these things (if we admit them all to be true) does convince us to have
disgraded Christ of his offices, which are these: to appease Gods wrath toward
us: to pay the ransom for our sins: to conquer the Devil: to open the
Kingdom of heaven: to be supreme head of both men and Angels, and such like.
He may (without any derogation unto these his sovereign prerogatives) give
unto his servants; first, power to make laws to bind in conscience, as he
has done to all Princes, which the Protestants themselves dare not deny:
then, to determine infallibly of the true sense of holy Scripture, which the
Apostles could do, as all men confess; and yet do not make them Christ's
fellows, but his humble servants: to whom also he gave power properly to
pardon sins: Luc. 24. Joan. 20. Mar. 16. Matt. 28.
Whose sins you pardon on earth, shall be pardoned in heaven: and finally, to
them he also gave authority over the whole earth: go into the universal
world. Over part of hell no Pope has authority; and when he does good to any
soul in Purgatory, it is per modum suffragij, as a suppliant and entreater,
not as a commander. Whether he has any authority over Princes and their
subjects in temporal affairs, it is questioned by some: yet no man (not
wilfully blind) can doubt, but that Christ might have given him that
authority, without disgrading himself of it; as he has imparted to him and to
others also, faculties of greater authority and virtue, reserving
nevertheless the same unto himself, in a much more excellent manner. As a King
by substituting a Viceroy, or some such like deputy, to whom he gives most
large commission, does not thereby disgrade himself of his Kingly authority,
as all the world knows: no more did our Savior Christ Jesus bereave himself
of his power or dignity, when he bestowed some part thereof upon his
substitutes. He goes on multiplying a number of idle words to small purpose: as
that we for one Christ the only real Priest of the new Testament, join many
secondary Priests unto him, which offer Christ daily in the Mass. We indeed
hold the Apostles to have been made by Christ, not imputative or
fantastical, but real and true Priests: And by Christ his own order and
commandment, to have offered his body and blood daily in the sacrifice of the
Mass; what of that? see that question. Furthermore he says, for one Jesus the
all-sufficient mediator of intercession, they have added many fellows to him,
to make request for us: namely as many Saints as be in the Popes Calendar: yea
and many more too. For we hold that any of the faithful yet living, may be
also requested to pray for us: neither shall he in haste be able to prove,
that Christ only makes intercession for us, though he be the only mediator
that has redeemed us.

R. ABBOT.
Christ by his office is our Prophet, our Priest and our King. Christ degraded
by the Pope.
As a Prophet he has declared fully and finally the whole counsel and way of
God for the attainment of eternal life. As a Priest, he has offered a
sacrifice for our redemption, and by virtue of that sacrifice is our Mediator
to entreat mercy for us. As a King, he prescribes laws whereby to govern us,
and having Matt. 28.18.
All power given to him both in heaven and earth exercises the same to
safeguard and defend us. In all these offices, (of which M. Bishop speaks as
if he understood not what they mean) the Church of Rome offers most high
indignity to the Son of God. To take the points spoken of in order as they are;
first they are injurious to the kingdom of Christ, in that they give the Pope
authority to make laws to bind in conscience, which Christ only has authority
to do. See hereof part. 2. page 17.18.
To bind in conscience, is to tie the conscience and inward man to an opinion
of holiness and spiritual devotion in the thing which is done, so as to
account the same a worship of religion whereby God is truly served and
honored, yea and further, according to Romish fancies, the means of remission
of sins, and the merit of eternal life. This whosoever does, shows
himself a deceiuer and an Antichrist, and the Pope in so doing is found to be
he, of whom the Apostle prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
that he should sit as God in the temple of God, domineering in the hearts and
consciences of them of whom it is said, 2. Cor. 6.16.
Ye are the temple of the living God. If Princes attempt to make laws in this
sort, they are therein unjust and presumptuous against God. Otherwise to speak
of Princes laws, God himself binds the conscience to yield the outward man
in subjection to the Prince, when notwithstanding the conscience it self
remains free as touching the thing which the Prince commands. I know that
in outward things it is true which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.
All things are lawful for me, I may do all things; God has given me no
restraint. To eat or not to eat, to wear such a garment or not to wear it; to
do thus or thus it is all one with God: I am no whit the better the one way,
nor the worse the other way. Nevertheless if my Prince command me either way,
God requires me to abridge my self of the outward use of that liberty which
he otherwise has given me and to perform obedience to my Prince, yet still
retaining inwardly the same opinion and persuasion of the thing in it self
that I had before; and therefore content to tie my self outwardly to do thus,
because I know inwardly that it is indifferent to God either to do thus or
thus.

The second presumption of the Pope against Christ is in taking upon him
infallibly to determine the sense of holy Scripture. By which pretense he most
impudently carries himself, bringing all abominations into the Church, and
corrupting all religion and service of God, and yet affirming that he does
nothing contrary to the Scripture, because whatsoever the words of Scripture
are, yet the sense must be no other but what he list. But well might we be
thought to be without sense, if so senseles a tale should prevail with us; a
thing which in the ancient Church for so many hundreds of years amidst so many
questions and controversies was never dreamed of. What needed the fathers so
much to busy themselves, and out of their own exercise and experience
prescribe rules to others for finding out the true sense of Scripture, when as
a Pope with a wet finger could have helped them to the certain and infallible
truth thereof? Yea why have we so many Commentatours of the Church of Rome, so
various and diverse in their expositions and interpretations of Scripture; and
why does not the Pope rather by one commentary of his illuminated understanding
reconcile all differences, dispatch all doubts, and resolve at once infallibly
what is the certain meaning of every place? Are those holy fathers loath of
their labor, or are they so busied in other or greater affairs as that they
have no leisure to attend to such trifles? Satisfy us, M. Bishop, as touching
these matters; otherwise we must take this devise to be as indeed it is the
cover of your shame, the cloak of your apostasy, which can no otherwise be
shadowed but by this pretense: That the Popes sense is the very truth of
Scripture, being notwithstanding wholly repugnant and contrary to the words. In
a word, the Pope thrusts out the laws of Christ which are expressed in the
words of Christ, and by his sense sets up his own laws under the name of
Christ.

To give power to the Pope properly to forgive sins, as M. Bishop does, is a
wicked blasphemy and an Antichristian exalting of him into the place of
Christ. When the Scribes said within themselves, Mar. 2.7.
Who can forgive sins but God only? our Savior Christ did not contrary them
therein, but partly by discovering the thoughts of their hearts, and partly by
the miracle that he wrought, taught them to understand him to be God the Son
of God, and therefore that he had power to forgive sins. He has left it
therefore so to be conceived of us, that power to for give sins belongs to
God only. Cyprian de Lapsis. Nec remittere aut donare indulgentia sua seruus
potest quod in dominum delicto grauiore commissum est.
. The servant, sai he Cyprian, cannot for give that which by heinous traspasse
is committed against the Lord. Cyril. in Joan. lib. 2. cap. 56. Certe solius
reri dei est vt possit a ptceatis homines soluere: cui enim alij
praeuaricatores legis liberare a peccato licet nisi legis ipsius authori?
Surely it belongs only to the true God, says Cyrill, to be able to release
men from their sins; for who but the maker of the law, can free them from
offense that are trespassers of the law? As for that which M. Bishop obiecteth
that Christ said to his Apostles; John 20.23.
Whose sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained, it no more imports a power of forgiving sins,
then the ministers 1. Tim. 4.16.
Saving them that hear him, imports a power of saving. For as the minister
saves not properly by any power of saving, but only by teaching the way of
salvation; so he also forgiueth sins, not properly by any power thereof, but
by preaching the Gospel of remission of sins, and designing them to whom
belongs this remission. God has made us not Lords but 2. Cor. 3.9.
Ministers of the new Testament, and of the spirit, neither has he given us
the power but cap. 5.18.
The ministry of reconciliation; for God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing unto them their sins: to us he has committed
(only) the word of this reconciliation, namely whereby we preach and testify
in the name of Jesus Christ remission of sins and reconciliation to God to
all that repent and believe the Gospel. But this whole commission of forgiving
sins shall be the better understood by those instances by which Cyrill
exemplifieth the same, Cyril. vt supra. Erit autem id duobus vt arbitror modis,
primo baptismo. acinde penitentia. Nam aut credentes and vitae sanctimonia
probates homines ad baptismum inducunt; and indignos diligenter expellunt, etc.
First in baptism, and afterward in repentance. Them that believe and approve
themselves by holiness of life, the minister addmitteth to baptism; (this is
to forgive their sins) but carefully he repelleth and puts back them that
are unworthy (this is to retain them.) But of this forgiveness of sins in
baptism we must remember that which S. Austine says, if at least that book
be his; August. scal. Paradis. cap. 3. Officium baptizandi dominus concessit
multis, potestatem vero and authoritatem in baptismo remittendi peccata sibi
soli retinuit.
The Lord Jesus gave the office of baptizing to many, but the power and
authority to forgive sins in baptism, he reserved to himself only. For the
noting of which difference he rightly alleges the words of John Baptist: Ioh.
1.26.33.
I baptize with water, but he it is which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Now if
to baptize with water to the remission of sins be to remitte sins in that
sense which our Savior intends in that speech; and to baptize with water to
remission of sins imports no power for forgiving sins, but only a
ministry for publication and for the applying of Gods seal for exhibiting and
confirming thereof, it follows so far forth that those words of Christ do
not give to the minister any power properly to forgive sins. Therefore
Chrysostom though he term this ministry in some sort a power, yet to show in
what sort it is to be conceived, most notably says; Chrysostom in Joan. hom. 85.
Quid sacerdotes dico? Neque Angelus, neque Archangelus quicquam in his quae a
deo data sunt efficere potest, sed pater and filius and sp. sanctus omma facit:
sacerdos and linguam and manus praebet.
Not the Priest only but neither Angel nor Archangell works any thing in
those things that are given of God, but the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost does all; the Priest puts too but his tongue and his hand. The other
instance which Cyrill gives is, Cyril. vt supra. Aut ecclesia filijs
peccantibus quidem increpant, paenitentibus autem indulgent. 1. Cor. 5.5.
When the minister gives check to offenders, and to the penitent release.
Whereof he gives example in the incestuous Corinthian, whom for fornication
the Apostle delivered to Satan for destroying the flesh that the spirit might
be saved, and afterward received again that he might not be overwhelmed with
overmuch sorrow. here the Corinthians did forgive, and the Apostle himself did
2. Cor. 2.7.10.
forgive, and thus the term of forgiving has always his place and use, but
this forgiveness is disciplinary for reconcilement to the Church: it is not
forgiveness of sins spiritually and properly so called, though by the
ordinance of Christ it must be to the peritent a necessary introduction to the
assurance and comfort thereof, as See the Answer to the epistle dedicatory
sect. 28
before has been declared. I conclude this point with that which Hierome
writes upon the words of Christ to Peter Matt. 16.19.
whatsoever thou bindest in earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou
loosest on earth shall be loosed in heaven, for declaration whereof he says,
that Hieron. in Matt. 16. Quemodo ibs sacerdos leprosum facit mundum
velimmundum (non quo sacerdotes leprosos faciant and immundos sed quo habeant
notitiam leprosi vel non leprosi, and possint discernere qui mundus quiue
immundus fit) sic and hic alligat vel soluit episcopus Et Presbyter, non eos
qui insontes sunt vel noxij; sed pro officio suo cum peccatorum audierit
varietates scit qui ligandus sit, qui soluendus.
as the Priest in Moses law did make the Leper clean or unclean not for that
he did so (properly and indeed) but only took notice who was a leper, and who
was not, and did discern betwixt the clean and the unclean, so here the
Bishop or Priest does bind or loose, not bind them which be innocent, or loose
the guilty, but when according to his office he hears the variety of sins,
he knows who is to be bound and who to be loosed. Not so then as that in
propriety of speech he either remitteth or retains sins, but only
discerns and notifieth who is to be taken for bound with God, and who for
loosed; whose sins must be holden either to be remitted or retained Idem in
Mat. 18. vt sciant qui a talibus condemnantur sententiam humanam diuina
sententia roborari.
. Which sentence of man they who are thus condemned, as Hierome again says,
must know to be strengthened and made good by the sentence of God himself;
namely when it proceeds according to those rules and directions which God
has prescribed in this behalf; for otherwise, Idem in Mat. 16. Cum apud deum
non sententia sacerdotis, sed reorum vita quaeratur.
it is not the sentence of the Priest but the life of the parties that is
inquired of with God. Here then the Pope is a manifest usurper, first against
God in that he takes upon him a power properly to forgive sins, and thereby
seateth himself in the throne of Jesus Christ; secondly against the Church of
God in challenging to himself a propriety of that which was spoken Gregor. in
1. Reg. l 6. cap. 3. universally ecclesiae dicitur, Quodcunque ligaueris, etc.
to the universal Church, and wherein every one that is a successor of the
Apostles has as great power and authority as he.

Christ, says he, gave his Apostles authority over the whole earth; Go into
the universal world. But by this, Christ gave no more authority to one of
them, then he did to another, and whatsoever he gave them what is it to the
Pope, that he should thereby challenge Deecret. Greg. de foro competenti, cap.
Licet. and de Appellat. ca. vt debitus. in glossa Papa vnusomnium hominum
ordinarius.
the whole world to be his diocese, and should define that Extrau. de mayor.
and obed. c. vnam santam subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae creaturae
pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis.
it concerns every humane creature upon peril of damnation to be subject
unto him? And what authority did Christ give them hereby other then S. Matthew
expresses; Mat. 28.19.
Go, teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe al things whatsoever I have
commanded you. This was their authority; they had no power to command but what
Christ had commanded them. Let the Pope conform himself to the tenor of this
commission, and he will then renounce his Popedom, and we shall acknowledge
him the disciple and servant of Jesus Christ.

Over a part of hell he says no Pope has authority, signifying thereby,
according to their partition, the hell of the damned. But how then did Clement
the sixth not doubt to say in one of his Bulls, Bale in Clem. 6. Nolumus quod
paena inferni sibi aliquatenus infligatur.
we will that the punishment of hell in no sort be laid or inflicted upon him;
and how was it that Gregory delivered the soul of Traian out hell, as See
Bellarm. de purgatorio. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Damascen has reported, and sundry authors of the Church of Rome as
Bellarmine acknowledges have steadfastly believed? If M. Bishop tell us that
Gregory did that only by way of entreaty and request, he himself grants the
Pope to have no other over Purgatory, and therefore over hell and Purgatory he
has authority both alike. When he does good to any soul in Purgatory it is
per modum suffragij, as a suppliant and intreater, not as a commander, says
he. But how then did the same Clement the sixth say, concerning them who should
die by the way as they were coming to his Iubilee at Rome; Bale. vt supra
Nihilominus prorsus mandamus angelis Paradisi quatenus animam a Purgatory
pentius absolu tam in Paradisi gloriam introducant.
We command the Angels of Paradise that they bring the soul of such a one into
Paradise being fully freed from Purgatory pains. And what; is all this power
no more now but to supplicate and entreat? Have they mocked the world all this
while, and made men believe that the Pope not only has power to deliver souls
out of Purgatory himself, but can also impart the same to others, and is all
come now to supplication and entreaty? Why, M. Bishop can supplicate and
entreat as well as the Pope, and what reason have we but to think that God is
as ready to hear his prayer as the Popes, and so by that means he shall have
as great power over Purgatory as the Pope. Such are the mockeries of Popery;
such are their doctrines of religion; they themselves can not well tell what to
make of them.

Further he says, Whether the Pope has any authority over Princes and their
subjects in temporal affairs, it is questioned by some. The more shame is it,
M. Bishop, for them by whom it is questioned. Tertullian reports the mind of
the ancient Church in this behalf, Tertul. ad scapul. Colimus im^eratorem vt
hominem a deo secundum and quicquid est a deo consecutum solo deo minorem.
We honor the Emperor as the man next to God, and as having received of God
whatsoever he is, being inferior to God only. And is it now come to be
questioned whether the Pope even in temporal affairs have authority over
Princes, who in their kingdoms respectively are the same that the Emperor
then was? But is it questioned only M. Bishop and not determined? We may
indeed admire their impudency therein, that they, who so much pretend
antiquity, should resolve a matter so contrary to the doctrine and example of
all antiquity; but yet they have so resolved, that either directly or
indirectly the Pope has superiority over Princes even intemporall affairs.
Treatise tending to Mitigation, etc. in the Preface to the Reader. sect. 22.
The Canonists do commonly defend the first part, says the Mitigatour, that
is, directly: but Catholic Divines for the most part the second (that is
indirectly and by consequence) but both parts fully agree that there is such an
authority left by Christ in his Church. They agree in deed, but it is like
Herod and Pilate against Christ. Accordingly as they carry themselves in this
point, so they deserve to be credited in all the rest. But M. Bishop tells us
that Christ might have given him that authority without degrading himself.
And I answer him that the question is not what Christ might have done, but what
he has done. Therefore his instance of a King substituting a Viceroy will not
serve his turn; for he that without any commission from the King takes upon
him to be a Viceroy, and under pretense thereof impugneth his Princes laws,
and makes construction of them at his own pleasure, and to serve his own
turn, howsoever he seem to do all in his Princes name, yet is indeed a
traitor and a rebel to his Prince. This is the Popes case, and therefore
under the name of the Vicar of Christ, he is no other but a traitor and a
rebel against Jesus Christ. As for those faculties of greater authority and
virtue, because we read nothing thereof in the Gospel, no not in S. Peter
himself thove faculties which they attribute to the Pope, therefore we hold
them and that justly, to be the Popes own presumptions, the flatteries of
Parasites, the devises of ill disposed men, Tit. 1.11.
who speak things which they ought not for filthy lucers sake.

The Popish Priesthood is not true and real, but merely fantastical: for a
true and real Priesthood, such as they boast of, requires a true and real
sacrifice for sin, which they have not. For after the sacrifice which
purchases forgiveness of sins, Heb. 10.18.
there is no more offering for sin. But in the death of Christ is a full
purchase of the forgiveness of sins. Therefore after Christ's death there is
no more offering for sin. We say then of Priesthood as Cyrill has taught us
to say; Cyril. epist. 10 ad Nestor. Nec praeter ipsum alteri cuipiam homini
sieve sacerdotij nomen sieve rem ipsam ascribimus.
We ascribe not the name of Priesthood or the thing it self to any other but
to Christ only. See that question, says M. Bishop. But where? for he himself
has said nothing of it, and whatsoever he would say, it is already prevented
in Sect. 27.
answer of his Epistle to the King.

To the last objection that for one Jesus the all-sufficient Mediator of
intercession, they have made as many as be in the Popes Calendar; he answers,
yea and many more to. What M. Bishop, so many Mediators, when the Apostle
says plainly, 1. Tim. 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, even the man Jesus
Christ? We hold, says he, that any of the faithful yet living, may be also
requested to pray for us. True M. Bishop, yet not as Mediators, as if we may
plead any thing that they have done or can do for us for our own access to
God, but only as fellow members of one body affected in compassion one toward
an other, pleading for our selves, and each for other that which Christ has
done for all. Wherefore as the greater prays for the less so does the less
also for the greater; not only S. Paul for the Romans, the Ephesians, the
Collossians, but also the Romans 15.30.
Romans, the Ephesians. 6.19.
Ephesians, the Col. 4.3.
Colossians for S. Paul. And although we thus request the prayers one of
another, yet do we not pray to God that he will hear us for their sakes whom
we request to pray for us, but all expect mercy only for Christ's sake. But
Popish prayers are of a far other nature: The golden Letany.
By the holy name of Marie have mercy upon us: by the intercession and merits
of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John the Evangelist and other of thine Apostles have
mercy upon us; by the virtues and merits of the holy fathers, S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose and all other have mercy upon us. This is
one of the abominations of Popery, that they do not only idly entreat the
Saints to pray for them, but do also allege to God their merits and
intercessions by virtue thereof to obtain mercy at Gods hands. But he says
it shall be hard for us to prove that Christ only makes intercession for us.
Yea M. Bishop: but why then does S. Austen say, that Aug. in Psalm, 64. solus
ibi ex his qui carnem gustauerunt interpellat pro nobis.
in heaven of all that have been partakers of flesh Christ only makes
intercession for us? Did he speak more then he could prove? Deceive not
your self M. Bishop; he could prove this matter well enough, but you cannot
prove that which so injuriously to Christ the only Mediator you affirm and
teach that Mediation of intercession belongs to the Saints; it being a thing
unreasonable and absurd to think that Mediators for us stand in need of a
Mediator for themselves.

4. W. BISHOP.
Lastly says M. PERKINS for the only merits of Christ, in whom alone the
Father is well pleased, (what was he not well pleased with his Apostles?) they
have devised a treasury of the Churches, containing besides the merits of
Christ, the overplus of the merits of Saints, to be dispensed to men at the
discretion of the Pope, and thus we see that Christ and his merits be
abolished.

Answer. The good man is somewhat mistaken, for we hold not any overplus of
merits in Saints, the which we acknowledge to be by God fully rewarded in
heaven: but we affirm that some Saints and blessed Martyrs have suffered more
pains in this life, then the temporal punishment of their own sins deserved:
Who therefore might truly say with that just man Job, Job. 6.1.
would to God my sins, whereby I have deserved wrath, were weighed with the
calamity that I suffer, even as the sands of the sea, this should be the
heavier. Now part of these sufferings of Gods Saints (as being needless for
their own satisfaction) are reserved in the Churches storehouse, and may by
the high steward of the Church (to whom the dispensation of her treasure
belongs) be communicated to others, as very reason teaches us; for who is
fitter to dispose of any man's goods, then he to whom the charge thereof is
given by his testament? And thus I hope every reasonable man does find us
Catholics to be far off from transforming Christ into an Idol of man's
conceit, as M. PERKINS dreameth: only we see a misconceited man, laboring in
vain to deface Christ's benefits toward us, to calumniate his chief servants,
and to skirmish against his own fantasies, then against any doctrine of ^^rs.

R. ABBOT.
Whether M. Bishop or M. Perkins do mistake, The Popes storehouse merits
lately built.
let the Reader judge. The Pope says that Extrauag. de poenit. and remiss.
cap. Vnigenitus. Ad cutus thesauri cumulum beata dei genetricis and omnium
electorum a primo vsque ad vltimum merita adminiculum praestare noscuntur.
the merits of the holy Virgin, and of all the elect from the first to the last
are known to yield supply or help to the store of his treasury: M. Bishop
says that they do not hold any overplus of merits in Saints, and therefore
denies any merits to be laid up in that storehouse. If M. Bishop say true,
then the Pope lies: If the Pope say true, then M. Bishop lies: And if there
be no overplus of merits in Saints, we desire to know what reason they have
then to crave mercy of God by the merits of the Saints, as we have already
seen in the former section. But M. Bishop does not love to be demanded a
reason of all matters; he will have us to take his time though it be without
reason. Well, though there be no merits, yet what else may we think is laid up
in that storehouse of the Pope? forsooth some Saints and Martyrs have suffered
more pains then the temporal punishment of their sins deserved. Full wisely
spoken; the temporal punishment of their sins deserved pains. But let that
pass; and what I pray of those pains? forsooth the sufferings of the Saints
which were needless for their own satisfaction, are reserved in the Churches
storehouse, and are to be dispensed by the Pope. And therefore Job is brought
us for an example, who complains that Job 6.3.
his calamity was heavier then his sins. Indeed the holy man Job considering
the course of Gods judgments in this world, and knowing the cleerenesse of his
conscience, and the uprightness and innocence of his life, might well and
truly answer his friends that his strange fall and so unspeakable calamity
was more grievous then could be expected out of that condition of life which he
had lived. God had another end in the afflicting of Job which Job himself
understood not, and therefore wondered at that which befell unto him.
Whatsoever he suffered, he is therein set before us for an example of patience;
but as touching matter of satisfaction we read nothing. Nay as Paul in that
respect said of himself, so must it be said of Job also, 1. Cor. 1.13.
Was Job crucified for you? Albeit we would gladly know of M. Bishop what
became of the overplus of Jobs satisfactions for so long a time? for the
storehouse, of which M. Bishop speaks, was of far later time. The matter of
it was prepared by Heretics, the Pope gave it ground, and the Scholemen built
it. Where then was the superabundance of Jobs sufferings and of others all that
while reserved to the Popes use? yea or how may it appear that the disposing
thereof is committed to the Pope? Who is fitter, says M. Bishop, to dispose of
any man's goods then he to whom the charge thereof is committed by his
testament? Alas good man, and do ye now appeal to the Testament of Christ?
Bring us forth the Testament, M. Bishop; and show us where it is that Christ
has made the Pope supervisour of any such goods. He is a lewd man that belieth
and falsifieth the Testament of another man; what are you then that thus belie
the Testament of Christ? Of this blasphemous fancy enough has been said
before in the question of Sect. 4. and 7.
satisfaction. His parenthesis, what, was not the father well pleased with his
Apostles? such a wise one as it is, is answered also Of Merits. sect. 2.
before. He was well pleased with his Apostles, but it was Christ alone in whom
he was well pleased toward his apostles, and is well pleased toward us. Greg.
in Ezechiel. hom. 8. In solo sibi redemptore nostro complacuit pater quia in
solo non inuenit cu^pam, etc.
In Christ only, says Gregory, the father was well pleased, because in him
only he found no sin.

5. W. BISHOP.
He lays lastly a third kind of Atheism against us, for worshipping of God
not with such respect as is suitable to his nature. For (says he) our worship
is mere will worship for the most part, without any allowance or commandment
of God, as Durand in his Rationale in effect acknowledges: it is a carnal
service standing of innumerable bodily rites and ceremonies, borrowed partly
from the Jews, and partly from the Heathens: it is divided between God and
some of his creatures, in that they are worshipped both with one kind of
worship, let them paint it as they can, etc.

Answer. Ipse dixit: Pythagoras has pronounced his sentence; yet you need not
believe him, unless you list, because he fableth so formally: does Durand
acknowledge that all our worship is mere will worship, and that it has no
allowance of God? O egregious and impudent deceiuer! For that learned devout
Author Durand, does nothing else in all that Book, then set out the Majesty,
and declared the meaning of the worship of God, used daily in our service
throughout the whole year: And therefore does entitle his book Rationale
Diuinorum, the reasons of divine service. And as for bodily rites, we use but
few, and those very decent, full of reverence, and most fit to stir up and
cherish devotion. We be not spirits, and therefore must serve God by bodily
ceremonies, although the life and virtue of them proceed from the spirit,
employing all parts of the body, in his worship, and to his honor that made
it: neither be they borrowed of Jews nor of the Heathens; albeit they might
perhaps (the one by the commandment of God, the other by the light of nature
(use some such like: but ours were devised by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, (the heavenly guide and directer of the Catholic Church) to move us to
serve God more devoutly, and with greater reverence. Now to say that we give
the same worship to any Saint that we give to God, is a stale jest, that has
long sithence lost al his grace, being found to be nothing else, but a notorious
untruth very often confuted; as by others else where, so by me more then once
in this book: where also these other slanders here cast upon us, are more at
large in their several places discussed: this therefore may serve in this
place for an answer to those imputations of Atheismes, which Master PERKINS
obiecteth against us.

R. ABBOT.
It is not the majesty of Gods worship that Durand sets forth, but the
foolery and absurdity of Popish superstition. Popish worship of God is but
carnal service.
Of how many idle ceremonies does he imforme us, and what great mysteries does
he make of them? for which when he brings no allowance or commandment of
God, does he not acknowledge in effect that they are Col. 2.22.23.
wilworships, according to the doctrines and commandments, of men? Which being
so, God asks thereof, Esaias 1.12.
who required these things at your hands? and by the Prophet complains; Esa.
29.13.
Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. His excuse of these
carnal rites and ceremonies is false, for contrary to that that he says, they
are infinite in number, and a great number of them apish and rediculous in use,
not fit to stir up and cherish devotion, but rather to busy and entangle the
senses of the body, and thereby to sequester and extinguish the devotion of the
mind. S. Austine complained in his time that Aug. ep 119. Tam multis
praesumptionib. sic plena sunt omnia etc. Quamuis nequ^ hoc inueniri possit
quomodo contra fidem veniant, ipsam tamen religionem quam paucissimis and
manifestissimis celebrationum sacramentis miserecordia dei liberam esse voluit
seruilibus oneribus premunt, vt tolerabilior sit conditio Iudaeorum qui etiamsi
tempus libertatis non agnouerint, tamen legalibus sarcinis, non humanis
praesumptionibus subijciuntur.
all was so full of humane presumptions; and that albeit it could not be found
how they were against the faith, yet the religion which the mercy of God would
have free with a very few and those most manifest mysteries and Sacraments, was
thereby clogged with servile burdens, so that the condition of the Jews was
more tolerable, who though they knew not the time of liberty, yet were subject
not to the presumptions of men but to the burdens of Gods law. What would he
say if he were now alive to see Durands Rationale diuinorum, and those infinite
presumptions wherewith Popish superstition has clogged and oppressed the
Church. Of which some are preposterous imitations of the Leuiticall and Jewish
ceremonies, other taken from the abominations of heathenish Idoll-seruice; a
thing so plain as that M. Bishop denies not, but that they used some such
like, indeed the same, only he sets upon them a false color of being
devised by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, not knowing Chrysostomes rule,
that Chrysostom. de sanct. and orando spiritu. Ex quo non legit haec scripta sed
ex se ipso loquitur manifestum est quod non habet sp. sanct.
because they read not these things written but speak of themselves, it is
manifest that they have not the holy Ghost. We be no spirits, he says, but yet
he should know, that the true worshippers leaving Gal. 4.9.
beggarly rudiments and Heb 9.10.
carnal rites should Ioh. 4.24.
worship the Father inspirit and truth. Whereas he alleges that the life and
virtue of bodily ceremonies proceeds from the spirit, he says nothing but
what was true, and necessarily required in the Jewish service, and therefore
may as well be pleaded for the continuance of their ceremonies, as for the
excusing of others devised in steed of them. To that that M. Perkins says that
they give the same worship to Saints that they do to God, he answers that
that is a stale jest which long since has lost all his grace, but he should
have told us that they themselves have long since lost all grace by mainteining
such filtherie and abomination in the Church. Bodin tells us that Bodin.
method. h. c. 5. A plerisque in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi ardentiore voto,
certe maiore metu colitur D. Antonius quam deus immort^lis.
in Italy and a part of France that which is called Narbonensis, S. Antony is
commonly worshipped with greater devotion and fear then almighty God. Lud.
Vi^es says that Lud. Viues. in Aug. de ciu. dei. l. 8. ca. 27. Multi
Christiani diuos diuasque non aliter venerantur quam deum; nec video in multis
quod sit dis^i^men inter eor^ ^opinionem de sanctis and id q^od gentiles
putabant de suis dijs.
many Christians (he was loath to say how many) do no otherwise worship the
Saints then as God himself; and in many says he I see not what difference
there is between their opinion of the Saints and that which the heathens
deemed of their Gods, Yea Bellarmine confesses that Bellarm. de sanct.
beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 12. Omnes fere. actus exteriores communes sunt omni
adorationi.
in a manner all their outward worshippes (he might have said their inward also)
are common both to the one and to the other. And so we see they pray to the
one, they pray to the other: they kneel to the one, they kneel to the other:
they offer, they vow, they fast, they build Churches and Altars, they keep
holy days, they profess trust and confidence both to the one and to the
other, only forsooth we must think that they retain Ibid. Latria inclinatio
voluntatis cum apprehensione dei, etc. Dulia inclinatio voluntatis cum
apprehensione excellentiae plus quam humanae and minus quam diuinae.
an apprehensiue and intellectual difference betwixt the one and the other. As
if aman giving the crown and royal honor of the king to a subject, should
think to discharge himself by saying that in his mind, for all that, he
retained a far higher opinion of the king then of the subject. Which if it
acquit not with men, surely we should know that the infinite excellency of God
above all his creatures should be a reason to withhold us from daring to join
any creature in any part of communion or fellowship with him. Your idolatry, M.
Bishop, in this behalf is so stale as that it is grown extremely sower, and
the time will come when you shall see it will be taken for no jest. As for your
confutations and your answers, you should have made them good before you had
boasted of them. A wise man would not have written a latter book before he had
made it appear that he could defend the former.

6. W. BISHOP.
And for that this crime of Atheism is the most heinous that can be, as
contrariwise, the true opinion of the Godhead and the sincere worship thereof,
is the most sweet and beautiful flower of religion: let us therefore, here (
to hold due correspondence with Master PERKINS) examine the Protestants
dostrine, concerning the nature of God, and their worship of him; that the
indifferent Reader, comparing iudiciously our two opinions thereof together,
may embrace that for most pure and true, that carries the most reverent and
holy conceit thereof. For out of all doubt, there can be no greater motive to
any devout soul, to like of a religion, then to see that it does deliver a
most sacred doctrine of the Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, and does
withal most religiously adore and serve him: Whereas on the other side, there
is not a more forcible persuasion to forsake a religion before professed, then
to be given to understand, that the Masters of that religion, teach many
absurd things concerning the Godhead it self, and do as coldly and as
slightly worship God almighty, as may be. Mark therefore, I beseech thee
(gentle Reader) for thy own souls sake, what evidence I shall deliver in
against the Protestants, touching this point of Atheism, and following the
same method that M. PER. observes, I will first touch their errors against the
most blessed Trinity and Deity: secondly, such as are against our Lord Jesus
God and man: lastly, I will speak one word or two about their service and
worshipping of God: All which shall be performed in a much more temperate
manner, then the gravity of such a matter requires; that it may be less
offensive, Concerning the sacred Trinity, it is by the doctrine of certain
principal pillars of their new Gospel brought into great question. Lib. 1. In
stit. ca. 13. ss. 23.25. Con. rations Camp. p. 152.
For John Calvin in diverse places teaches, that the second and third persons
of the Trinity, do not receive the Godhead from the first, but have it of
themselves, even as the first person has. And in this he is defended by M.
Whitaker, and preferred before all the learned Fathers of the first Counsel of
Nice. Out of which position it follows, that there is neither Father nor
Son in the Godhead: for according unto common sense, and the uniform consent
of all the learned, he only is a true natural Son, that by generation does
receive his nature and substance from his Father. We are called the Sons of
God, but that is by adoption and grace: but he only is the true natural Son
of God, that by eternal generation received his substance: that is, the
Godhead from him. If therefore the second person did not receive the Godhead
from the first, but had it of himself as they do affirm: then certainly he is
no true Son of the first, and consequently the first person is no true Father.
For (as al men confess) Father and Son be correlatiues, so that the one cannot
be without the other. Thus their doctrine is found to be faulty in the highest
degree of Atheism. For it overthrows both Father and Son in the Trinity.
And further, if it were true, then does the holy Ghost proceed neither from the
Father, nor from the Son: for it receives not the Godhead from them at all, as
they hold; but has it of himself, and so proceeds no more from them, then
they do from him, and consequently is not the third person: Wherefore finally
they do euerthrow the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost.

R. ABBOT.
We are now come to the beginning of M. Bishops libell, for introduction
whereof he tells his Reader a goodly smooth tale of the important weight of
the true opinion of the Godhead and the true worship thereof, Calvin truly
teaches the Godhead of Christ.
and what a motive it is to like of that religion that delivers sacred and
sound doctrine concerning the same, faring as if he had bloody enditements in
this behalf against us, calling the Jury, putting in his evidence, and in the
end all comes to nothing; Parturit Oceanus, prodit de gurgite squilla. In the
very first accusation he shows abundance of malice, but great want of wit,
for that he is found a liar even in the very place which he himself cites. He
charge Calvin to have taught that the second and third persons of the Trinity
do not receive the Godhead from the first, but have it of themselves as the
first person has. He cites Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 13. ss. 23.25. which no
man would think that he would so precisely set down but that he read the
place. Now in the latter of those two sections Calvin says thus: Calvin.
Instit. lib. 1. c. 13. sect. 25. Deitatem ergo absolute ex seipsa esse dicimus;
Vndc and filium quatenus deus est, fatemur ex seipso esse sublato personae
respectu; quatenus vero filius est, dicimus esse ex patre: ita essentia eius
principio caret, personae vero principium est ipse deus.
we say then that the Godhead absolutely is of it self; and therefore that the
Son as he is God, setting a side the respect of the person, is of himself;
but as he is the Son, we say, that he is of the Father. So then the essence
of the Son is without beginning; but the beginning of his person is God the
Father; which he shows in the other section alleged to be Ibid. sect. 23.
Cum filio essentiam communicauit. R^s^at vt tota and in so^idum patris and
filij sit co^munis.
by the Fathers communicating his whole essence to the Son. What can be more
plainly or more truly spoken? He affirms that the Godhead whereby Christ is
God, is of it self, that is to say, not of any other; but yet that Christ as
he is the second person in Trinity is not God, of himself, but of the Father.
In the former meaning he terms Christ to be God of himself, understanding
the name of God absolutely, that is, that he is that one God who is God of
himself and not of any other, but that the second person in Trinity receives
not the Godhead from the first, Calvin never wrote it, never thought it, and
most lewdly does M. Bishop deal so falsely to charge him with it. Yea
Bellarmine himself though he will seem to condemn Calvin for the manner of
his speech in stiling Christ, (...), God of himself, yet indeed fully and
wholly does acquit him; for he tells us that Bell de Christo l. 2. c. 19.
Causa fuit quia Valentinus Gentilis perpetuo iaes abat soium patrem esse (...)
and per hoc nomen intelligebat solum patrem habere essentiam vere diuinam and
increatam: silium autem and sp. sanctum habere aliam essentiam productam a
patre and ideo quoad essentiam eos non esse autotheos. Calu. igitur occurrere
volens Valentino contrarium asseruit, nempe filium esse autotheon quoad
essentiam, id est, in eo sensu quo id a Valentino negabatur.
the cause which moved Calvin so to write, was because Valentinus Gentilis (a
new Arian heretic) was still prating that the Father only was (...) and meant
thereby that the Father only had the essence truly divine and uncreated, and
that the Son and the holy Ghost had another essence produced of the Father,
and therefore that as touching essence neither of them was (...). Calvin
therefore willing, says he, to meet with Valentine, avouches the contrary,
namely that the Son is (...), God of himself as touching the essence, that
is, in that sense wherein Valentine denied the same. Accordingly of his
arguments he says: Idem. Respondeo hoc argume^tum been concludere contra
Gentilem, etc.
This argument concludes well against Gentilis; this argument also concludes
well against Gentilis. How grossly then are these men blinded with malice, who
acknowledging Caluins words to be spoken only in a certain meaning against his
adversary, and that in that meaning they are true, and that his arguments do
conclude rightly and strongly to that purpose, do notwithstanding cavil
against him by wresting his words to another meaning then by their own
confession he intended in speaking of them? He took occasion of so speaking by
his adversary. And is there any man who having to deal against an adversary
will not use his adversaries own words to dispute against him? And is there
any fault herein, when in the very place he expounds himself, and takes
away al occasion of misco^struction, saying: Calvin opusc. Explicat. perfidiae
Valent. Gent. ex Actis. Quead essentiam sermo est deus absque principio: in
persona autem filij habet principium a patre.
As touching the essence, the word is God without beginning, but in the person
of the Son he has his beginning from the Father? for what will they say? is
(...) a name wholly unlawful to be attributed unto Christ the Son of God?
Why more then by Elias Cretensis he is called Elias Cret. in Gregor. Nazian.
Orat. 5.
(...) and (...), and by Origin Origin. in Joan. tom. 32.
(...) and (...) which being of the same composition, must then be subject to
the same blame? Nay Bellarmine himself confesses that Christ may in some
sense be called Bellarm. vt supra ex Epiphan. haer. 69.
(...), and by Epiphanius is so called as to signify that he is God himself,
most verily and truly God. And could not his wisdom see that Calvin in effect
meant no other but only so? for because Christ could not be verily and truly
God unless he were (...) in that meaning wherein Valentinus spoke, therefore
Calvin to avouch the true Godhead of Christ, affirmed him to be (...), the
very true God, God of himself that is, by that one only essence which is of it
self, and whereby God, speaking absolutely, is of himself and is truly God,
and not as Valentinus wickedly taught, by another inferior essence made and
produced of the Father as a superior God, whereby it should come to pass that
he were not God at all. And when he saw that by Caluins own words he that is
called God of himself is also affirmed to be God of God, the Son of God, why
could he not excuse that manner of speaking in him as well as in S. Austin, who
in the like sort says that Christ is August. Orat. contra Iud. Pagan. and
Arian. cap. 6. Fi^^us and de se and (...) patre splendens.
the Son of God shining both of himself and of the Father? To shine of
himself what is it but to be God of himself? As he shines of himself, so he
is God of himself: that is, according to his essence as he is absolutely God;
according to his person he shines of the father and so he is God of God, the
Son of God. In this therefore justly does M. Whitakers defend Calvin, not
praeferring him before all the learned Fathers of the first Council of Nice,
as M. Bishop fondly cauilleth, but ioining with him to maintain the same true
Godhead of Christ against new Arians, which the Fathers of that Council
professed and taught against Arius of old. This matter then being cleared, and
it being apparent that neither Calvin nor any of us says any thing to the
contrary, nay we steadfastly believe and teach that the second person of the
Trinity receives his Godhead from the first, and that the holy Ghost
proceeds both from the Father and the son, there is nothing here more to
be spoken of; and therefore as touching Atheism we will leave M. Bishop in his
chair to consider more wisely of his taleagainst the next time.

7. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, they may be truly styled Atheists, who think any one to be God,
that has not in him all singular perfections, in the most perfect sort that
can be, but either wants some of them, or else has them in a meaner degree
then any other: they therefore that teach our Savior Christ, in his Godhead to
be inferior unto his Father, stand justly charged with Atheism. Such a one is
Epist. ad Polo. p. 940. and seq. In cap. 26. Matt. 24. con. Stancar. in locis,
cap. de Con. Harding, art. 17. in confuta. of the Papists slanders.
Calvin who informall terms does avouch and say, that Christ according to his
Godhead, is less then his Father. And else where he affirms, the Father to
hold the first rank of honor and power, and the Son to obtain the second,
which he might have learned of his great master Melancthon, who taught that
the Son according to his divinity, is his Fathers subject and minister.
Further, that in Christ there was something of the nature of God; some other
thing then, belike, was wanting. Again. that the Godhead of Christ was
obedient unto his Father: with whom our contrymen Jewel and Fulke do iumpe,
who affirm that the divine nature of Christ offered sacrifice unto his Father.
Briefly, all Protestants who hold Christ according to his divine nature, to
have been a mediator) make his Godhead inferior to God his Father. For to be
(as a mediator must needs be) a suppliant unto another: to pray and offer
sacrifice to him, is to acknowledge him to be his better, and that something
lies in his power to do, which the other of himself cannot do, but by suit
must obtain of him. Join heereunto that they do expound most of the textes
of holy Scripture, used by the ancient Fathers to prove the blessed and sacred
Trinity, even as the old Arrians did, reproving the ancient Fathers exposition;
which cannot but argue, that they in their hearts (though they be yet ashamed
to confess it) decline apace from those holy Fathers steps, to favor
Arrianisme. This little therefore may suffice to demonstrate, how the chief
pillars of the Protestants religion, do shake the very foundations of the
Christian faith, by their strange glosses and speeches about the sacred
Trinity, and by their diverse derogations to Christ's divinity.

R. ABBOT.
How vain this second imputation is, it plainly appears by that that has
been said of the former. For seeing both Calvin and all our writers acknowledge
the eternal generation of the Son of God to be as before was said the
Fathers communicating of the whole essence of the godhead to the Son, they
must consequently of necessity be understood to acknowledge the whole
perfection and majesty of the Godhead in the Son of God, because in the whole
essence of God there can be nothing unequal or inferior unto God. This is
argument enough, neither needs there any more to approve in this behalf the
integrity of our faith; because to attribute to the Son the whole essence of
the Godhead, and yet to make him unequal to the Father, are things
incompatible, Christ as God how equal and how inforior to the Father.
and can by no means stand together. Well, yet M. Bishop tells us that
Calvin in an Epistle to the Polonians in formal terms avouches that Christ
according to his Godhead is less than his father. But how untrue this is may
easily be esteemed, for that the Polonians to signify their agreement in faith
with Calvin and with other Protestant Churches, thereby to clear themselves of
some jealousy that was had of them, did in their Synod by Faelix Cruciger
write thus to him and others: Foelix Crucig. inter epist. Calvin. 311. Credimus
patrem omnipotentem; filium ei per omnia aequalem quoad naturam essentiam vel
deitatem: minorem eo tantum quod cum in forma Dei esset seipsum exinaniuit, seu
vt vno verbo complectamur ratione officij mediationis.
We believe the Father to be almighty; the Son also as touching his nature,
essence, or godhead to be in all respects equal to the Father; but inferior
only in that when he was in the form of God, he humbled himself, or in a word
to speak it, in respect of his office of mediation. Now if this were Caluins
belief, and in his Epistle to the Polonians he profess no other but this, as
indeed Calvin epist. ad Polonos interopuscula. Inscite ex Mediatoru titulo
infertur Christum patre esse minorem quando haec optime inter se cohaerent
vnigenitum dei filium eundem and vnius cum patre essentiae fuisse deum and
tamen fuisse quasi inter deum and creaturas, etc.
he does not, shall we not think M. Bishop a man very formal in telling an
untruth, who makes Calvin simply thus to say, that Christ according to his
Godhead is less than his Father? But yet by his Master Bellarmine, we guess
what the bone is whereupon he gnaweth, who mentions one Bellar. in prefat. ad
controv. 2. general. de Christo, etc.
Stanislaus Sanricius for a patron of Arianisme, for that he said that in
respect of the office of mediation Christ even in his divine nature is inferior
to the Father. From which assertion how the Jesuit should gather Arianisme, it
is very hard to say, inasmuch as Arianisme imports the Son to be
intrinsecally and essentially inferior to the Father, whereas his wisdom and
learning if he would have used it, might discern that there is no meaning here
of any intrinsecall and real minority, but only of an extrinsecall, a
dispensatiue and voluntary demeaning of himself, whereby he is in some sort
inferior to himself also, reconciling us in the person of a Mediator to
himself as he is absolutely God. And could he not conceive this to be as
tolerable and true a speech in us as in Maldonatus his fellow Jesuit, who in
the same terms affirms Maldonat. in Joan. c. 14. Minor non quoad diuinitatis
inequalitatem, sed quoad munus and voluntatem redemptionis.
the Son to be inferior to the Father, not as touching any inequality of
Godhead, but as touching the office and will of our redemption? The same
Maldonatus tells us also another respect wherein Christ is said as touching
his Godhead to be inferior to the Father, Ibid. Non quoad naturam substantiae
sed quoad relationem originis.
not as touching nature of substance, but relation of original and beginning.
Wherein he is not alone, but the Greek Fathers who most vehemently impugned
Arius the Heretic, yet take part with him, as Sixth. Senens. biblioth sanct.
lib. 6. annot. 1705. Obseruandum est Graecos patres non reformidare hanc
locutionem qua filius patre minor asseritur, non substantia quidem sed origin:
iuxta quam rationem frequentissime apud Grecos Theologos pater dicitur
principij dignitate authoritate and maiestate antecellere filium.
Sixtus Senensis testifies, and cites to that purpose Origin, Cyrill,
Chrysostom and Basil, and of the Latin Fathers Hilary, some of these, and
beside them Athanas. con. Arian. orat. 2. pater mayor non magnitudine aut
aetate, sed quia filius ex illo ortum habebat.
Athanasius and Tertul. adu. prax. pater filio mayor dumalius quigenerat, alius
qui generatur, etc.
Tertullian in that sense expounding of the divine nature the words of Christ,
John 14.28.
The Father is greater than I. Now if in this meaning Calvin should have said
as is secondly alleged, that the Father holds the first rank of honor and
power, and the Son the second; in which sort Tertullian also says, that
Tertul. vt suprae. vt tertium gradum ostenderet in Paracleto, sicut and nos
secundum in filio propter (...) obseruationem.
the Son has the second degree, and the holy Ghost the third, not meaning it
of any disparity of essence, but of the order of the persons, would M. Bishop
be no wiser but through Caluins side to wound so learned a Jesuit as
Maldonatus, yea and so many Fathers both Greek and Latin, and at once to bring
them all within the compass of Atheism? But thou must understand gentle
Reader, that M. Bishop very perfidiously abuses thee in this citation; the
words of Calvin being spoken of the manhood of Christ being advanced to sit at
the right hand of God. Calvin. in Mat. cap. 26. ver. 64. Dicitur Christus ad
dexteram patris sedere quia rex summus constitutus qui eius nomine mundum
gubernet, quasi secundam ab eo honoris and imperijs sedem obtinet.
Christ says he, is said to sit at the right hand of the Father, because being
constituted the highest king, in his name to govern the world, he obtains a
seat of honor and power as it were second or next to God. M. Bishop I trow
understands the Articles of the Creed, and thereby knows who it is that is
said to sit at the right hand of God. There follows next Melancton, who
disputing against Stancarus, for that he held Christ according to his manhood
only to be our Mediator, though he use not expressy the words which M. Christ
our ^^diator as he is both God and man.
Bishop has set down, yet acknowledges and defends that Christ according to
his divine nature was sent of the Father, and submitted himself in obedience
to the Father to perform the office of Mediation betwixt God and man, but yet
so as that he excepteth out of Cyril, that Melanct. Respon^. a^l contro. stanc.
M ssio and obedientia non tollunt equalitatem potentiae, ^^ut express Cyrilius
inquit.
this sending and obeying do not take away from the Son equality of power with
the Father, because they are not matters concerning state of nature, but only
arbitrary designement of will. Surely amongst men in society and equality a man
may be sent and may yield himself to be sent and employed by the rest without
derogation to his equality with the rest. As Peter and John were Acts ^.14.
sent by the Apostles to Samaria, and yet M. Bishop will not admit that
therefore Peter was inferior to the rest of the Apostles. And if he will not
grant that the Son of God, the second person in Trinity did in some sort submit
himself to do service to the Father, let him tell us how he is called in
Scripture according to his divine nature, Genesis 6.7.13 I^d. 13.3.22.
The Angel of the Lord. Surely to be an Angel, that is to say, a Messenger,
is in some sort to be a subject or minister. Seeing Christ therefore the second
person of the Godhead has taken upon him to be the Lords Angel to declare the
messages of God to men, let him show us how it may be avoided but that he has
in some sort taken upon him subjection or service to the Father. Nay let him
tell us how it stands that the Syrmian Council says, that H^lar. desynod. ex
contil. syrmiens. st quis Christum filium dei obsecutum patr^m creatione omnium
non confitetur, ana^^em. ^sit. Et pauio post Non exaequamus patri filium sed
subi^ctum inte^iginius.
the Son in the creating of all things did obey the Father; and that we do
not equal the Sin to the Father, but understand him to be subject, and that
Hi^arie says, Hila. ibid Non coaequatur filius patridum su^ditus per
obedientiae obsequelam est.
that by yielding obedience he is subject to the Father, who notwithstanding
spoke these things amidst their definitions and resolutions against the Arian
Heretics. Yea let him tell us how Christ says; Ioh. 6.38
I came down from Heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of the Father
that has sent me: not speaking as in the nature of man, as Tertul. de Tri.
Descendit dei verbum quod ihi fuit, etc. veniendo inde vnde homo venire non
potuit, deum se ostendit venisse.
Tertullian rightly argues, but as in the person of the son of God,
according to which it was that he was sent and came down from heaven, and
abased himself to do his Fathers will in taking upon him the nature of man.
And hereupon Maldonatus the Jesuit aforesaid, truly observes, Maldonat. in
Mat cap. 6. fecit quidem Christus non suam sed patris voluntatem, sed idipsum
sponte and volunt (...) sua fecit: itaque non sequitur eum esse ^^norem patre.
that Christ indeed did not his own will, but the will of his Father; but he
did it voluntarily and willingly, not by constraint; and therefore that it
follows not that he was inferior to the Father. As he did his Fathers will,
so and no otherwise was he subject and obedient to the Father. But that doing
of his Fathers will being voluntarily undertaken, argues no essential
minority or subjection in the Son. Therefore neither does the same follow of
his being so far forth subject and obedient to the Father. And so Hilary
briefly resolves; Hilar. d^ syn. pietatis subiect^o non est essentiae
diminutione^ religionis officium degenerem facit naturam and patri and obsequio
subiectus and nomine: ita tamen vt subiectio nominis proprietatem naturalis
atque indisserentis testetur essentiae.
subjection of piety is no diminution of essence, neither does office of
devotion put nature out of kind. He is subject to the Father both by service
and by name, but yet so, as that subjection of name testifies a propriety of
natural and no way different essence. And this point the Apostle S. Paul
manifests when he says, that Phil 2 6.
Christ being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with
God, yet abased himself and took on him the form of a servant, and was made
like unto men. Where when he thus expresses who it was that abased himself,
he that was in the form of God, and whereto he abased himself, to take upon
him the form of a servant, he signifies plainly that in the form of God he,
as it were, Tert. de Trin. Authoritas diu^m verbi ad sus^piendum h^minem
interim conquiescens ne^ se suis viril us exercens deijcit se ad tempus atque
deponit du^a hominem sert quem suscepit.
stooped down voluntarily to take the nature of man, thereby to do the office
of mediation betwixt God and man, not forgoing or impeaching the form of God,
but content in that wherein he owed no service to become a servant and to do
that service unto God. And to this purpose Cyrill urges those other words of
the same Apostle, that 2. Cor. 8.9.
Christ being rich, for our sakes became poor, for how shall we understand it
that Christ became poor? Shall we say of Christ as man, that of rich he became
poor? That cannot be, because the manhood of Christ was rather enriched and
infinitely dignified and honored by being joined unto God. Shall we say that
the Godhead of Christ became poor simply in it self? Neither may we say so,
because the Godhead in it self is immutable and not subject to any change. It
remains therefore as Cyril concludes, that Cyril. resp. ad Theodoret.
anathem. 10. Quoinodo pauper factus est? Quia cum esset deus natura and filius
de^ac patris sactus est homo, etc. seruilemque mensuram subijt, hoc est,
humanam, is qui in forma dei and patris est.
Christ as God, the Son of the Father, became poor in being made man and
undergoing the condition of a servant, that is, of a man. Now then, as Christ
according to his Godhead became poor, not simply as God, but as God incarnate
and made man, so he became also subject and obedient, a minister and servant to
the Father as God in man, the body and manhood of Christ being Athana apud
Cyril, vt supra anat. 11. si videamus eum quasi per instrumentum sut corporis
diuino modo operantem vel dicentem, cognoscamus quod deus existens omnia
operetur.
the instrument, as Athanasius calls it, wherein and whereby God the Son of
God wrought whatsoever was needful to reconcile us unto God. And thus does the
Apostle say, that Act. 20.28.
God purchased the Church with his own blood, that 2. Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not as by communication
of proprieties, to affirm of one nature that which simply belongs to the
other, but to note the act of the whole person in the offering of that sacred
blood for the redemption of mankind. Therefore M. Jewel and M. Fulke and we all
do rightly affirm, that Christ neither as God only nor as man only, but as
God and man, offered sacrifice both to himself, as Cyrill speaks, and to the
Father. Otherwise how should the Apostle say, that Heb. 9.14.
by his eternal spirit he offered himself to God? If by his eternal spirit,
then it was not the act of the manhood only; or if it were done only by the
manhood, it could not be said to be done by his eternal spirit. But this
matter is briefly resolved by Cyrill, who amongst other propositions, set
down against the Nestorian Heretics and their favorites, sets down this:
Ibid. Pontificem and Apostolum confessionis nostrae factum esse Christum diuina
dicit scriptura obtulisseque se pro nobis in odorem suauitatis deo ac patri,
siquis igitur Pontificem and Apostolu^ nostrum factum dicit non ipsum quod ex
des est verbum and caro and homo nobis similis est factum, sed vt alium ab ipso
proprie (seorsim) hominem ex muliere, etc. anathema sit.
The holy Scripture teaches that the high Priest and Cyril. vt supra anathem.
10. Non alteri celebrat immolatienis modum sed magis sibi and patri.
Apostle of our profession offered himself for a sweet smelling savor unto
God: if any man therefore say that the word which is of God being made flesh
and man for us, is not our high Priest and Apostle, but as it were another from
him properly or severally the man borne of woman, accursed be he. And again;
Ibid anath. 12. si quis non confitetur verbum dei carne esse passum, carne
crucifixum, and mortem carne gustasse, primogenitum ex mortuis factum
quemadmodum vita est and viuificans sicut deus, anathema sit.
If any man do not confess that the word suffered in the flesh, was crucified
in the flesh, tasted death in the flesh, was made the first borne of the dead,
according as he is life, and gives life as God, accursed be he. Whereby he
gives to understand, that the person of Christ in the work of our redemption
is not to be divided, but what we believe concerning Christ in the flesh, we
are to believe that God did and suffered the same in the flesh; not as hereby
to attribute to the word in it self either suffering or death, but to signify
that it was the act of whole Christ both God and man to offer himself by
suffering in that nature wherein he was capable of suffering. And surely by
that whole disputation of Cyrill approved by the Ephesine Council, and
inserted into it, it most plainly appears that that parting of the Godhead
and the manhood whereby Christ is made our high priest and Mediator only
according to his manhood, sauoureth more strongly of the heresy of Nestorius
than they would have it seem that are the defenders of it. Certain it is that
Bellarmine in that point affirms nothing that was not acknowledged by
Theodoret and those other party-Nestorians against whom Cyrill there disputes,
and his arguments and reasons make as much against him and the Council as they
do against us. And as for those things which M. Bishop here urges, that to be
a Mediator is to be a suppliant, and that to pray and to offer sacrifice is to
acknowledge him to whom he so does, to be his better, and that something lies
in his power to do, which the other of himself cannot do, but by suit must
obtain of him, these are in effect but the weapons of those Nestorians, and of
the Arians, the one seeking thereby to dissolve the union of the person of
Christ, the other to destroy the Godhead of Christ. But let him take the
answers that Cyril gives to such objections: Cyril. vt supra Anath. 11. Dicet
quispiam parum and indignum esse deo verbo plorare, mortem timere, poculum
deprecari, pontificem esse. Vtique sic dix er^m and ego ipse quod eminentiae
diuinae naturae ac gloriae parua sunt haec sed in his contemplabimur
paupertatem quam pro nobis sponte tulit. Quando tibi molesta videtur
ignobilitas ista exinanitionis, admirare magis dilectionem filij erga nos. Quod
tu parum esse dixisti, hoc sp^nte fecit propter te.
Some man will say, it is base and unworthy of God to weep or cry, to be
afraid of death, to pray that the cup may pass from him, to be a Priest.
Verily so say I also that these things are base to the excellency of the divine
nature and glory, but in these things we will behold the poverty which of his
own accord he took upon him for our sakes. If this baseness of humbling
himself seem amiss to thee, wonder the rather at the love of the Son
toward us. For that which thou say is base, that did he for thy sake. And
again, Ibid. Incongruum esse dicis deo verbo humanitus sacrficium
ministrarepro ^er personam Ergo aufer personam, nega constanter factam
incarnationem verbi propter quam nominatus est etiam pontif^x.
Thou say it is unfitting for God the Word according to man to offer
sacrifice as touching the person. Then take away the person; deny flatly that
there is any incarnation of the Word by means whereof he is also named the
high Priest. To be short, be questioneth with his adversary in this sort:
Ibid. Quomodo vnitum dicis ei qui exs^mine David est ex deo verbum sisol^ qui
ex sentine D^uid est Pontificatum attribuis? si vera est unto, non duo vtique
sunt sed vnas and solus ex am^obus intelligitur Christus.
How do thou say that the Word which is of God is united unto him that is of
the seed of David, if thou attribute Priesthood to him only who is of the seed
of David? If there be true union, says he, then there are not two, but Christ
of both is understood only one: leaving it to be consequent which he
afterward concludes, that Ibid. in fine: Ipsion^ma tribuimus tanqu^m rni.
we are to attribute all to Christ as one, not making him our high Priest, as
man only and not as God, but acknowledging the whole person God and man, to be
our high Priest and mediator unto God. The Arians also as I have said,
labored by the same objections to overthrow the Godhead of Christ. That the
Son was inferior to the Father they would prove for that Christ says of
himself, that he came to do the will of his Father. But Athanasius
answers, that Athanas. de co. essentia patris and fi ij, etc.
God fulfilleth the willer desire of them that fear him, and yet this is no
abasing of him. The same they inferred because Christ is brought in o asking or
requesting of the Father. Ibid. Affirmat haereticus minorem esse potentem
datore, si igitur patrem petentem inuerias, quid hic respenacas? Et nunc Israel
quid dominus tuus a te petit, etc.
The heretic affirms, says Athanasius, that he that requesteth, is
inferior to him that gives. What will thou answer then, says he, if God
request? Deuteronomy. 10.12.
And now O Israel, says Moses, what does the Lord thy God The Hebrew word is
the same as Psalm. 2.8.
ask or request of thee, but that thou fear him. He leaves it to be
understood, that God notwithstanding does not thereby become inferior to us.
Sundry other like examples might be alleged: but in brief I answer as before,
that the things which in this behalf we affirm concerning Christ, do no more
bereave him of equality with God, then a King by vouchsafying of his Princely
grace to do some act of special office to a subject, does thereby diuest
himself of the majesty of a king. And this the ancient Fathers saw well, who
though they make the manhood of Christ the subject and matter wherein and
whereby this mediation is performed, and in that respect do sometimes refer
it only to the manhood, yet do otherwise acknowledge that the acting and
effecting thereof, belongs to the whole person both God and man. Therefore
Ambrose says, that Ambros. in 1. Tim. ca. 2. vt ex vtroque esset mediator.
on both parts he is a mediator; that Idem in Heb. 7. In aeternum diuinitate
and humanitate mediator inter deum and homines semper viuens est etc.
both by his Godhead and by his manhood, he is the mediator betwixt God and
man. So says Austin, that Aug. Orat. cont. Iudaeos, Pagan and Arian. c. 8.
Nobis mediator sactus est homo totus and deus, verbum, amma, cara, vnus
Christus.
whole Christ both God and man, the word, the soul and the flesh being one
Christ is made our mediator. Yea and out of the very nature of a Mediator it
follows that he must be so understood, not only as man, but as God also. For
Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. hom. 7. Id mediatoris est proprium vtrorumque participem
fieri quorum suerit mediator. etc. Quia duarum naturarum medius suit Christus,
ambarum oportuit esse participem.
it belongs to a Mediator, says Chrysostom, to be partaker of them both,
betwixt whom he is a mediator: therefore because Christ was a mediator
betwixt two natures, he was to be partaker of them both. Theophylact in 1. Tim.
c. 2. Nequaquam purus est deus; neque enim homines hunc excepissent qui esset
intercessor futurus: nec simplex homo quippe qui deum esset allocuturus.
He is not only God, says Theophylact, for then men could not have admitted
him to be intercessour for them; neither is he only man, because he was to
deal with God. Hence therefore does he take an argument, to prove that Christ
is God, Ibid. Quod deus sit filius liquet ex eo quia and conciliator fit and
mediator effectus.
because he is made an intercessour or mediator. And in the same sort
Theodoret reasons against Arius the heretic: Theodoret. in 1. Tim. cap. 2.
si vt vult Arius filius patris substantiae non est particeps, quomodo est
intercessor?
If Christ be not partaker of the substance of his Father, how is he then a
mediator? Now if a mediator, as a mediator must be God, why does M. Bishop
with his fellows bear us in hand that Christ as he is God is not a mediator?
Why are they so fond to make our assertion an inducement of Arianisme, when
they see the Fathers to have made it a ground to dispute against Arius? for the
auouching of the Godhead of Christ in this person of a mediator did Melancthon
use those other words (if at least he did use them, for I find them not) which
M. Bishop taxes; There must needs be in him somewhat of the divine nature.
Where because he says somewhat, M. Bishop infers; some other thing then
belike was wanting. Full wisely I warrant you. But I pray let us ask him, when
Thomas Aquinas said that Tho. Aquin. in 1 Timothy cap. 2. lect. 2. Christus
mediator est similis vtrique extremo, scilicet deo and homini inquantum deus
and homo, quia medium debet habere aliquid de vtroque extremorum and haec sunt
homo and deus.
Christ the Mediator was like to God and man in respect that he was both God
and man because the Mediator must have somewhat of both the extremes which
are God and man, did he mean thereby that Christ had a part of the Godhead,
and wanted a another part; or a part of the nature of man and not the whole? If
not, how little does M. Bishops head serve him to conceive there a partition
meant of the essence of God where there is only intended a distinction of two
natures in one Christ? Melancthons meaning is plain, that as Christ had
somewhat whereby he was truly man, so he had somewhat also whereby he was truly
God; even the perfect nature and substance both of God and man. As for his last
cavil, that we expound the texts of Scripture used by the Fathers against the
Arians in the same sort as the Arians did, because it names no man, it
deserves no answer. His master Bellarmine from whose dunghill it is that he
gathers al his mucke, accuses Erasmus in that respect, but I hope M. Bishop
will not say that Erasmus was a Protestant. Whatsoever he was, or howsoever he
faulted therein, so little is he approved or followed by the Protestants, as
that Beza in See Beza. Annotat. in Coloss. 1.15. Philip. 2.6. 1. Tim. 3.16 Tit.
2.13.
sundry places professedly disputes against him, and rechargeth against the
Arians those places from which he seems to discharge them.

8. W. BISHOP.
But this shall appear yet much more perspiciously, if we do well weigh what
they teach touching the very nature of the Godhead it self. Whosoever denies
God to be almighty, or presumes to limite the infinite power of God, within the
compass of man's weak understanding, he in effect makes him no God at all, but
some mean creature of a limited strength and power: such be all Protestants,
who affirm that God cannot set a body in the world, without a circumscribed
place; Oecolamp. de verbis Domini. Beza in Neoph. simil. cont. And page 15.
nor any one body in many places at once, with such like: the which (because
they cannot, out of the dullness of their wit, or will not of frowardness,
conceive to be in nature possible) they flatly deny God to be able to do:
yea, some of them were so blind In a conference at Paris.
and bold, as to avouch God, not to be able to conceive or understand, how that
is possible; which notwithstanding very natural Philosophy teaches to have
no repugnance in it self, as in his place I have proved.

R. ABBOT. How some things are affirmed impossible to God.

To say that there are some things which God cannot do, or that are impossible
to God, is not to argue in God any impotency or defect, but to commend his
perfection and power. 2. Tim. 2.13.
God cannot deny himself: Heb. 6.18.
it is impossible that God should lie. Ambros. epist. 37. Impossible istud non
infirmitatis est sed virtutis and maiestatis etc. Quid ei impossible? Non quod
virtuti arduum, sed quod naturae eius est contrarium.
This impossibility says Ambrose, is not a matter of infirmity but of might
and majesty. What is impossible to God, says he? Not any thing that is hard to
be done by power, but that which is contrary to his nature. Idem in. Psalm. 118.
ser. 20. Quid non potest quiomnia potest nisi quod posse nolit?
What cannot he do who can do all things, but what he will not have possible
for him to do? To the same purpose S. Austen says that Aug. de ciu. dei lib.
5. c. 10. Recte deus dicitur ommpotens qui tamen mori fallique no^ potest.
Dicitur enim omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult, quod si
ei accederet, nequaquam esset omnipotens: vnde propterea quaedam non potest
quia est emnipotens.
God is rightly called omnipotent, who yet can not die, can not be deceived.
For he is called omnipotent, says he, for doing what he will, not for
suffering what he wills not, which if he should, he were not almighty. God
therefore cannot some things, for that very cause because he is almighty. Thus
God cannot be any other but God, he cannot of the Creator make himself a
creature, he cannot according to his Godhead be a body, he cannot make a
creature the same that he himself is, not because he is not almighty, but
because his almightinesse is a thing positive in respect of the creature, not
privative to himself. Thomas Aquinas M. Bishops own Doctor, goes further in
this matter, and tells us that T. Aqui. 1. q. 25. art. 3. in corp. Deus
dicitur omnipotens quia potest omnia possi^i ia absolute. Duitur autem aliquid
possibile vel impossible absolute ex habitudine terminorum: possibile, quia
praeditatum non repugnat subiecto: impossible absolute, quia predicatum
repugnat subiecto: vt hominem ^sse asiou^ etc. Quicquid potest habere rationem
entis continetur sub possibilibus absolutis, etc. Nihil autem opponitur rationi
entis nisi non ens. Hoc igitur repugnat rationi possibilis absoluti quod
implicat in se esse and non ^ssesimul, etc. Ea quae contradictione^ implicant
sub diuina omnipotentia non continentur etc. Co^uenie^tius dicitur quod ea no^
possunt fieri quam quod deus ea non possit facere.
God is called almighty, because he can do all things that are absolutely
possible, not the things that are absolutely impossible. Absolutely possible is
when the things affirmed each of other are not one repugnant to the other; but
where the thing affirmed is repugnant to that whereof it is affirmed, as for a
man to be a man and yet to be an ass, this is absolutely impossible.
Whatsoever may have the condition of a thing being, is absolutely possible. Not
being is opposite to being. That therefore which implies in it at once both to
be and not to be, is repugnant to the condition of a thing absolutely possible,
which is the subject of Gods omnipotency. His resolution in a word is, that
those things which imply contradiction are not comprehended under Gods
omnipotency because they cannot have the condition of things possible to be,
and therefore it is more conveniently said that they cannot be, than that God
cannot do them. He uses for examples hereof that Ib. ar. 6.
God cannot make the number of four to be but four and yet to be more than
four; that he cannot make a thing essentially better than it is and to be still
the same thing; Ib. ar. 4.
that he cannot make those things not to have been which have been. Thus
Hierome says; that Hier. ad Eustath. Cum omnia possit deus, suscitare v^rginem
nen potest post ruinam.
whereas God can do all things, yet he cannot make a virgin not to have been
corrupted when she has been corrupted. S. Austen bringing in one, saying; Aug.
cont. faust. Manich. l. 26. cap. 5 Quis. quis dicit, si omnipotens est deus,
faciat vt quae facta sunt, facta non fuerint; non videt hoc se dicere, si
omnipotens est deus, faciat ^t ea quae vera sunt eo ipso quo verasunt, faisa
sint etc. Hanc sententiam (qua di^imus aliquid suisse) deus falsum facere non
potest quia non est contrarius veritati.
If God be almighty, let him make those things not to have been which have
been, answers thus; The man sees not that in effect he says: If God be
almighty, let him make those things that are true even in that they are true,
to be notwithstanding false. But this sentence (that the thing has been which
indeed has been) God cannot make false because he is not contrary to the
truth. In all these things then, and such like, to say God cannot do this or
that, Tho. Aqu. ibid. vt supra. Hoc omnipotentiae non stibditur non propter
defectum diuinae potentiae, sed quia non potest habere rationem factibilis vel
possibilis.
is not for any defect of power in God, as Thomas says, but because the same
is not capable of the condition of a thing possible to be. I speak hereof with
trembling and fear, abhorring the words that may carry any appearance or show
to be irreverently uttered of the majesty of God; but yet the truth of God must
be justified against the headstrong importunity of malicious and wilful men.
If then any of ours have used any speeches to that purpose, that God cannot do
that, that is the impeaching of his eternal wisdom and truth, and have hence
inferred that therefore he cannot set a body in the world without a
circumscribed place or any one body continuing but one in many places at once,
they have not hereby denied the omnipotency of God, but only challenged the
power of God from being made a cloak or shrowding place for men's presumptuous
fancies against God. To take away the essential condition of a thing, and yet
to leave it the same that it was, is a mere contradiction, and imports a
thing absolutely impossible in it self. Now it is the essential condition and
property of a body to be circumscribed and bounded within a place, so as not to
remove to another place without leaving that, and to take away this property
is to destroy the nature and condition of a body. Therefore to say that a body
may be without a circumscribed place, is to say that it may be at once both a
body and not a body, circumscribed and not circumscribed, which being a thing
repugnant to the truth of God, to say that a thing is and yet it is not; it is
that which it is not, and it is not that which it is, the denial thereof is
not a denial of Gods omnipotency, but a reproof of men's folly, who to uphold
their own devises, stick not to broach paradoxes and strange opinions
injurious unto almighty God. They who affirm the vbiquity of the body of
Christ, they likewise pretend for their defense the omnipotency of God. And
what will M. Bishop, I marvel, answer them thereof? Is not their allegation of
Gods almighty power as strong against him as his is against us? And will he be
taken to deny the omnipotency of God because he subscribeth it not to be a
matter of Gods omnipotency to make a finite creature of like infinity with
himself! If not, let him yield the same measure to us that he does to
himself; and acknowledge his own temerity and rashness in charging us that we
limit the infinite power of God within the compass of man's weak understanding,
and in effect make him no God at all, only because we will not betray Gods
omnipotency to be the relief of their fancy. He tells us of some who were so
blind and bold as to avouch God not to be able to conceive or understand how
that is possible which he has spoken of, and this he notes to have been in a
conference at Paris; but who they were, or when this conference was, he tells
us nothing: and for my part I take it that he does therein but use his liberty
(he knows what I mean) as he is wont to do. Albeit I doubt not but some man
in some form of words might allude to that which Thomas Aquinas says, who
having affirmed the impossibility of Gods doing those things which absolutely
in themselves are impossible, adds; Tho. Aqu. vt supra Nesp hoc est contra
verbu^ angeli dicentis, Non erit impossible deo omne virtue Id enim quod
contra^ictionem implicat, verbum esse non potest, quia nullus intellectus
potest illud concipere.
Neither is this contrary to the word of the Angel, saying, No word shall be
impossible to God; for that which implies contradiction, can be no word, says
he, because no understanding (speaking universally) is able to conceive it. Yet
M. Bishop tells us that very natural Philosophy teaches that that which
they say, has no repugnancy in it self, as in his place, says he, I have
proved; but where that place is we do not yet find. As for the Philosophy
which they teach their naturals, we do not well know what it is, but we well
think that never any wise Philosopher was so unreasonable a natural as to
hold it a matter of natural reason, that a body should be without
circumscription and yet remain a body or be in many places at once being but
one and the same body; and that the ancient Fathers were of another reason I
have Sect. 2.
before showed. And if by natural Philosophy it may be made good, why does he
a little before blame man's weak understanding as unable to conceive it? why
do their writers of natural Philosophy always pass it over as a matter
beyond their element and without the compass of their rules? yea why do they
all rest it upon so extraordinary an act of Gods omnipotency, if there be
nothing but what the light of natural Philosophy can enable us to comprehend?
To conclude this point, before M. Bishop any more question Gods power in this
matter, we wish him to resolve us of Gods will; and if he can approve to us
the will of God, we will doubt no farther of his power. If he cannot so do, he
does but reason as Praxeas the Heretic did; Tertul. adu. praxcam. Ergo
inquiunt difficile non fuit deo ipsum se and patrem and fiiium facere etc. sed
si tam abrupte in praesumptionibus nostris hac sententia vtamur, quiduis de deo
confingere poterimus quasi fecerit quia facere potuerit.
It was not hard or impossible to God to make himself both the Father and the
Son, his heresy standing in the confounding of the persons, and making them
all one. But, says Turtullian, if in our own presumptions we so abruptly use
that sentence (that nothing is impossible to God) we may feign of God what we
list, and say that he has done it because he could do it: M. Bishop then must
not marvel that in his presumptions we likewise resist him. As Tertullian
required the Heretics, so do we him to prove to us Ibid. Probare debebis ex
scripturis, etc.
by Scripture that which he affirms to be believed upon the power of God.

9. W. BISHOP.
If they were enemies to Gods omnipotency alone, it might be somewhat excused,
because that might seem to proceed rather from the weakness of their
understanding, then out of any ill affection toward God: but if they do
further oppose themselves against the goodness, mercy, and justice of God;
that must needs discover very great impiety to lie festring in their bowels.
Who sees not, that it does highly attaint the inestimable goodness of God,
and his tender love toward mankind, to impute the reprobation of man, and his
eternal damnation, not unto man's own wickedness and deserts, but unto the
mere will and pleasure of God himself: and yet this is too too common an
assertion amongst the Protestants. In colloq. Monpelgar. page 522.
Let Beza one of their brauest champions, speak for the rest: God (says he)
in his secret counsel, has set down an vnremooueable decree, that he will
not have the greater part of men saved, nor to believe in Christ, and come to
the knowledge of truth; but has created, ordained, and predestined them to
everlasting damnation. Page 336.
To whom M. PERKINS in this book draws near, affirming it to proceed from
the very will of God, that he shows mercy to some, and forsakes others.
Mercy (indeed) God of his mere goodness does power out upon us abundantly:
but to imagine that he of his own will and prime choice, without any
foresight of our sins, does forsake us, and appoint us to hell fire, is
heinous impiety, most contrary unto the very nature of God; whose goodness is
so pure and sincere, that it does good to all things, and wishes evil to
none; unless they do first greatly deserve it. What an ungodly opinion then
is it, to hold that he of his own free choice ordained man (a creature made
to his own Image and likeness) to most grievous and endless torments,
without foresight of any offense of his? As though he should take a singular
pleasure, to see a principal work of his own hands, fry in hell fire.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop going about to discover impiety in us, bewraieth exceeding
great ignorance in himself, not having yet learned to put a difference betwixt
reprobation and damnation. We say and we therein say the truth, that there is
no cause of damnation but only sin, and yet we say as truly, that there is no
cause of reprobation, The will of God the true cause of reprobation.
but only the will and pleasure of almighty God. Damnation is Gods sentence of
judgment whereby he assigns the reprobate to eternal punishment for sin.
Reprobation is the counsel and decree of God whereby he leaves men in the
state of sin wherein he found them that they may justly be condemned.
Bernard. de aduent. dom. ser. 1. Omnes in Adam peccauimus, and in eo sententiam
damnationis accepimus omnes.
We have all sinned in Adam, says Bernard, and in him we have all received the
sentence of damnation. From this state of damnation God freeth some, the rest
he leaves and forsakes. What is the cause hereof, M. Bishop, we would gladly
hear it of you? If you look to sin, both sorts are sinners alike: there is
no more cause to condemn the one, than to condemn the other, no more cause to
save the one, than to save the other. Tell us M. Bishop what it is whereby God
is moved to make so great difference betwixt them, betwixt whom according to
themselves there is no difference at all? Surely we in our learning can find no
other reason hereof but that which the Apostle sets down, Romans 9.18.
so then he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. And
what? did M. Bishop never read these words of the Apostle? If not, how came he
I marvel to be a doctor of Divinity? If he ever read them why then does he
here blame M. Perkins for speaking so directly according to those words that it
proceeedeth from the very will of God that he shows mercy to some and
forsakes others? But let him yet further hear the Apostle more fully clearing
this matter by example, as namely of Jacob and Esau, two brethren, borne of the
same parents, begotten at the same time, brought forth at one birth: verse. 11.
Before the children were borne, when they had yet done neither good nor evil,
that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of
him that calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the younger: I have loved
Jacob and hated Esau. Look to them in nature, they are both men; look to them
in condition, they are both sinners. Whence arises the difference? If M.
Bishop will say that God dealt herein according to foresight of the works that
they should do, the one good, the other bad, S. Austen derideth him saying,
Aug. ep. 105. Quisistum acutissimum sensum defuisse Apostolo non miretur?
Who would not wonder that this sharp conceit should be wanting to the
Apostle? Nay Idem Enchir. c. 98. Qua in re si futura opera, vel bona huius, vel
mala illius, quae vtique deus praesciebat vellet intelligi, nequaquam diceret,
Non ex operibus, sed diceret, Ex futuris operibus, eoque modoistam solueret
quaestionem, immo nullam quam solui opus esset faceret quaestionem.
if the Apostle would have had us to understand future works, either the good
of the one, or the evil of the other, he would not have said, Not of works,
but would have said, because of their works to come, and thus would he have
cleared the question, or rather have made no question that should need
clearing. It remains then that there is no other reason to be given, as Bell.
de Amiss. great. and stat. percati. l. 2. c. 12. Huius discretionis nulla causa
assignari potest nisi dei voluntas.
Bellarmine also confesses, but only the pleasure of him who shows mercy to
whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth, that is Aug. de praed. and great. c.
6. quasi diceretur, cui vult donat, and a quo vuit a debitum po^^it.
remitteth the debt to whom he list, and where he list, requires it. And
surely if this matter of election and reprobation were to be decided out of the
difference of works, there were no cause for the Apostle to stick upon the
difficulty thereof, whereas now to humane judgment he stutteth and
stammereth, and knows not what to say to give reason of that he says. He is
content to rest upon this, that Romans 9.14.
there is no iniquity with God. To them that will not be satisfied herewith,
but go forward contentiously to wrangle, he answers, verse. 20.
O man, who art thou which pleadest against God? shall the thing formed, say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? In the end of all that
discourse, as it were a man amassed, he cries out; Romans 11.33.
O the deepnesse of the riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God; how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? What needs
all this a-doe if all might so easily be dispatched, as M. Bishop pretends,
by allegation of the free will and works of men? But the Apostle well
understood that this would not serve the turn: he saw a depth which he could
not diue into; a secret which he could not search, and therefore by checking
and admiring, he represseth the curiosity and presumption of them whom by
answering he cannot satisfy. Yet in a word this is enough to stop the mouths
of all men that all being in Adam lost and cast away, it was free for God to
save out of this condemned multitude whom it pleased him, and to leave the rest
at his will to be disposed to other use. Albeit if M. Beza and some other do
rest this point of reprobation upon a prime and absolute decree of God, to
which the fall of Adam is not in order precedent but subsequent, will M. Bishop
dare to say that the justice of God is hereby impeached or attainted? will he
say that God deals unjustly therein if that be supposed to be true? Surely S.
Austin was of another mind, and acknowledges in this behalf Gods absolute
sovereignty over his Creature to do therewith whatsoever it pleases him. Aug.
de praedsi and great. c. 16. humanum genus quod creatum primitus constat ex
nihilo non cum debita mortis et peccati origin nasceretur, and tamen ex eis
creator omnipotens in aeternum no^nullos damnare vellet interitum, quis
omnipotenti creatori diceret, Quare fecisti sic? Qui enim cum non essent, esse
donauerat, quo fine essent habuit potestatem: nec dicerent caeteri, cur paribus
omnium meritis diuinum discreparet arbitrium, quia potestatem habet figulus
luti ex eadem massa facere aliud quidem vas in honorem, aliud veroin
contumeliam.
If mankind, says he, created at first of nothing, were borne without the debt
and due original of death and sin, and yet the almighty creator would of
them condemn some to everlasting destruction, who would say to him, why have
thou so done? for he who when they were not, gave them to be, had it in his
power for what end they should be, neither might the rest ask, why the merits
of all being alike, the judgment of God should differ, because the potter has
power over the clay to make of the same lump one vessel to honor and another
to dishonor. So does Oecumenius bring in Photius chalenging upon the same
ground the same prerogative unto almighty God. Phoc. apud Oecumen. in Romans 8.
Dato quod deus ita te formauerit neque ita iustum est deo contradicere illumque
accusare. Nam etsi nihil aliud praerogatiuae illi tribuere velis, qui supra
omnem est and mentem and sermonem, at saltem quod omnibus commune est figulis
quomodocunque rem effingentibus admodum absurdum est et impium ab eo tollere.
Quid igitur illud est? Quod nullum figmentum suum plasten accusat, aut
redarguit, sed liberam habet voluntatem quisque opifex operari prout libuerit
and fingere and accusatione racat, potissimum autem apud ea quae finxit, itaque
and tu etiamsi vt dicis, formatus sis, non debes indignari aut contradicere
iuxta communem figmentorum legem ac modum.
Grant, says he, that God has made thee thus, yet is it not just for thee to
speak against God, or to accuse him. For albeit thou will yield no greater
prerogative to him who is above all understanding and speech, yet were it
absurd and impious that thou should take from him that that is common to all
workmen who in any sort frame or fashion any thing, namely that no work
accuses or reprooueth the maker, but every workman is at his liberty to work
and fashion as he will, and is not blamed, specially by the things which he
has made. Therefore although thou be so made as thou say, yet according to
the common rule and condition of things made, thou art not to repine or gainsay
thy maker. Thus did these fathers see in the Apostles words how to free the
majesty of God from all attainder of injustice even in the supposall of that
whence M. Bishop deriueth the same attainder. Beza then and his followers may
have their reasons for that they say, and yet so as to leave the justice of God
without impreachment or challenge. Yet we for our parts do not therein assent
to them nor see in their reasons any such weight as that we should be moved
thereby to vary from the common received judgment of the ancient Church. Gods
foresight of man's fall precedent in order to his decree of reprobation.
We therefore resolve as most consonant and agreeable to the course of
Scripture, that God purposing to do a work for the setting forth of his own
glory, did consequently determine the manner thereof in the creation of Angels
and men, whom he would leave in the hand of their own counsel, and suffer
them, the one in part, the other wholly, both by their own default, to fall
from the state of their original. Yet for mankind, he thought it most fit in
respect of the end whereat he aimed, to provide a Redeemer and Savior, and for
that end purposed the incarnation and death of Jesus Christ his only begotten
Son, in whom and for whose sake he elected out of the generations of men a
remnant toward whom he would make the riches of his mercy most abundantly to
appear and be glorified in them; the rest he deputed to be vessels of his
wrath, and instruments to serve his purposes both for the executing of his
judgments, one of them upon another, and for the use and benifit of his elect.
These counsels and purposes we understand to be without difference of time with
him who at one sight beholds all things from the beginning to the end, but
the natural process and subordination thereof we hold to be in this sort most
rightly described, even in the same manner as God has executed and manifested
the same unto us. Neither do we conceive how it can stand good to have this
connection framed otherwise, for it is absurd to think that God would decree
what to do with man before he had decreed to create man; and how should he
elect if they were not first in his purpose out of whom he should elect?
Election makes men Romans 9.23.
the vessels of mercy, and L^rnard. de conuers. ad Cleric. ca. 10.
Misericordiae prepria seeds miseria est.
the proper seat of mercy is misery, as S. Bernard says. How then should God
elect men to be vessels of mercy, but that we must first presuppose misery in
respect whereof he would show mercy? In a word, how should we be said to be Ephesians.
1.4.6.
elected in Christ and accepted in Christ, if Gods purpose of our election be
by order of causes antecedent to Christ's mediation? Now if Gods purpose of the
creation and redemption of man be in order precedent to election, we must
conceive the like of reprobation that it presupposes the fall of man, whereby
the justice of God is acquitted, God finding mankind in state wherein he might
justly condemn all, and it being his only mere mercy that he saves some.
Albeit whether way soever we determine this point, God is alike made subject to
those profane wranglings which M. Bishop has here expressed, and froward men
vnstring their tongues to quarrel and question with him, why he should suffer
Adam to fall when it was in his power to hold him up? why they should be
condemned in Adam who in themselves have done nothing against him? why he
should give men over to lie frying in hell fire for that which they could not
help, nor had any means for the avoiding of it? But against all such
exceptions we answer with the former words of the Apostle, There is no
unrighteousness with God, and O man who art thou that disputest against God?
As for Gods inestimable goodness and mercy, which M. Bishop withal alleges
it is not to be measured by his vain fancy but by the rule of God himself,
who though he be good and merciful in some sort generally to all, yet of his
special mercy has made a limitation saying, Exo. 33.10. Romans 9.15.
I will show mercy to whom I will show mercy, and will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion. For the rest, let him take that which the Scripture
pronounces of them, that Romans 9.22.
they are vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, 1. Pet. 2.8.
ordained to this self same thing, 2. Pet. 2.12.
made to be taken and destroyed, Jude verse. 4.
written of old to this condemnation. Let him hear what Solomon says; Pro.
16.4.
The Lord has created all things for himself, even the wicked against the day
of evil. If he like not these things, let him enter his action against God;
let him not repine at us who do no more but report them from the mouth of God.

10. W. BISHOP.
Another opinion some of them hold, which is yet much more blasphemous then the
other, to wit: that God, who has been always by good men esteemed the author
of all good, and so merely good in his own nature and will, that he cannot
possibly do or think any evil: that this Ocean (I say) of goodness, is
become the author, plotter, promoter, and worker of all the wickedness and
mischief, that is, or has been committed in the world. De prouid. dei. page
365.
This is the doctrine of Zwinglius a great Rabin among the new gospellers, who
avouches that when we commit either adultery, murder, or any such like crime,
that it is the work of God, he being the author, moving and pushing us on to
do it. Again, that the thief by Gods motion and persuasion, murthereth, and
is oftentimes compelled to sin. In cap. 1. ad Romans
With him agrees Bucer sometimes a professer of divinity in the University of
Cambridge; censuring him to deny God flatly, who does not firmly believe, that
God does work in man, as well all evil, as all good. Of the same accursed
crew was Melancthon, who upon the 8. chapter to the Romans, says: Even as we
confess Paul's vocation to have been Gods proper work: so do we acknowledge
these to be the proper works of God, which are either indifferent, as is to
eat and drink; or that are evil, as the adultery of David, and such like.
For it is evident out of the first to the Romans, that God does all things
mightily (as Augustine speaks) and not permissiuely: so that the treason of
Judas is as properly the work of God, as the calling of Paul. Lib. 1. Inst. c.
18. ss. 1.
But the principal proctor and promoter of this blasphemy is Calvin, who of
set purpose bestows a whole chapter of his Institutions, to hell, to prove
and persuade it. There he avouches boldly, that the blinding and madness of
Achab, was the will and decree of God: that Absolon indeed defiling his fathers
bed with incestuous adultery, committed detestable wickedness; yet this was
Gods own work: briefly, that nothing is more plain then that God blinds
the eyes of men, strikes them with giddiness, makes them drunk, casts
them into madness, and hardneth their hearts. And whereas the poor Papists were
wont to interpret such textes of Scripture, as seem to attribute these things
to God, by saying, that God does indeed justly permit and suffer such things to
be done, but is not the author of them: this, Calvin will not in any wise admit
of, but in the same place confutes it; saying. These things many refer to
sufferance, as if in forsaking the reprobate, he suffered them to be blinded by
Satan: but that solution (says he) is too fond: and so goes on, proouing that
God does not only suffer, but actually effect and work all the evil that any
man commiteth: yea, he adds that which is more horrible: that God does work
this evil in man, Ibid. sess. 17.1.
by Satan's service as a mean; yet so as God is the principal worker of it,
and the Devil but his instrument. Is not this blasphemy in the highest degree,
to make God a more principal author, and worker of all wickedness, done in
the world, then the Devil himself? this is much wrose then flat Atheism: for
it is the lesser impiety of two to hold that there is no God at all, then to
believe that God works more effectually all mischief, then the infernal
spirits do. But some of our Protestants will perhaps say, that they hold not
this opinion: be it so, for I think better of many of them: yet, be not these
men that so teach, as it were the founders of the new Gospel, and men of
chiefest mark among them? Now what force such principal authors (as they take
Melancthon, Zwinglius, Bucer, and Calvin to be) may have, to carry the rest
away into the same errors, I know not. Sure I am, that Caluins Institutions
(wherein this matter is so vehemently urged) is translated into English, and in
the Preface commended to all students of Christian divinity, as one of the most
profitable (the holy Scriptures excepted) for the sound declarations of truth
in articles of religion.

R. ABBOT.
This matter of horrible blasphemy and impiety, God not made by us the author
of sin.
M. Bishop has formerly charged us with in his epistle Dedicatorie to the
King, and in the Answer to the epistle. sect. 14.
answer to the same epistle it is fully cleared. Now he being enraged and
mad in his mind, that he cannot tell how to gainsay that that is there
answered, and yet being loath to loose the advantage of such a slander, renueth
it here again; and to give it some better color, brings the names of
diverse principal writers of our part, Zuinglius, Bucer, Melancthon, and
Calvin, whom he affirms to have been authors and mainteiners of this
accursed and damnable heresy. And herein his master Bellarmine as well as he,
egregiously plaieth the Sycophant, taking upon him by a more then
Alchimisticall extraction to draw out of some sentences of the forenamed
authors, that God Bell. de Amiss. great. and statu peccats. li. 2. cap. 4.5.6.7.
is the author of sin, that God truly and properly sins, yea, that it is
God only which sins and not man, and that sin is but a matter of false
opinion; from which wicked assertions, those worthy men were as far, as the
Jesuit was far from honesty, as he was far indeed, in the obiecting of
them. They say nothing but what S. Austin of old resolved against the Pelagian
heretics; their words, their phrases, their sentences are in effect the same,
and with the answers wherewith he shifteth off the sayings of Austin: he may
also put off the words of Calvin and the rest, and say, that indeed they make
nothing against him. Yea, and it is worthy to be noted, that what these men
now object against us, the very same did the Pelagians object against S.
Austin, Aug. ad artic. sibi falso impositos. art. 5. Quod peccatorum nostrorum
author sit deus. and quod malam hominum faciat voluntatem.
that by his doctrine God was made the author of our sins, and did make the
will of men evil. As he was free from any cause of such calumniation, so are
we also, and so much the more resolute are we in our defense, for that we see
that Bellarmine laboring to be contrary unto us, yet by the very evidence of
truth, whilst he answers our arguments, is forced in a manner to
acknowledge as much as we say. We all teach with one consent, that man's sin
is wholly of himself by corruption of nanature, and that from his own heart
as from a poisoned root proceeds all the wickedness of his life: to God we
attribute no more but that he voluntarily permits, and wisely orders, and
justly uses to his purposes the sin of man. He caused not Adam to fall; he
did nothing either within him or without him, whereby to supplant him or to
overthrow him; but knowing that being thus created though it were in his power
to stand, yet he would certainly fall, it was his will and decree to suffer him
so to do, because Aug de corrept. and great. ca. 10. sciuit. magis ad
omnipotentissimam bonitatem suam pertinere etiam de malis benefacere quam malae
esse non sinere.
he knew that it did appertain to his almighty goodness, rather out of evil
to do good, than not to suffer evil to be at all. Was it not fit that God by
his decree should determine whatsoever is just and good? Gre. Moral. l. 11. c.
2. Omnipotens deus quod fieri prohibet iustum est vt fieri sinat.
It is just, says Gregory, that the almighty God suffer that to be done which
notwithstanding he forbids to be done; and Aug. Enchir. c. 96. vt non solum
bona, sed etiam sint and mala bonu^ est.
it is good, says Austen, that there be not good only, but also evil; not in
respect of the evil it self (which God hates and detesteth, and Greg. Moral.
lib. 16. cap. 23. Inultum abire non sinit iniustum quod just fieri permisit.
suffers not that injustice to go unrevenged which he justly suffered to be
done) but because out of evil there is much good wrought which could not be
without evil. And by this means Ibid. l. 6. c. 12. Miro modo sit v^ and quod
sine voluntate dei agitur, eius voluntati contra. rium non sit, quia dum in
bonum vsum mala facta vertuntur, eius consilio militant etiam quae cius
cousilio repugnant.
it comes strangely to pass says Gregory again, that that which is done
without the will of God, yet is not against his will, because whilst evil deeds
are turned to good use, those things serve the counsel and will of God which
notwithstanding are repugnant unto it. For that all sin and wickedness is
contrary to the will of God we know undoubtedly, and yet we also know and are
assured that in the world Aug Enchir. c. 96. Non fit aliquid nisi omnipotens
fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat vel ipse faciendo.
nothing is done unless the almighty will have it done, either himself doing
it or suffering it to be done. But it is one thing to speak of Gods will in
respect of his approbation and liking whereby he wills only that that is
good; another thing to speak of his will in respect of his providence, whereby
all things are subject to his power and government, and nothing can be if he
say nay to the being of it. It is one thing to say what God wills properly
for it self, another thing to say what he wills accidentally for the good
use that he can make of it. In regard of which use though he suffer evil to be
in the world, yet he suffers no confusion of evil, but Greg. Moral. l. 18.
ca. 17 Ab iniquis factane inordinate eueniant, ipse disponens.
disposes the doings of wicked men that they may not befall unorderly, because
Aug. Enchir. c. 11. Illud quod malum dicitur ordinatum and suo loco positum
eminentius commendat bona.
evil being ordered and put in his due place, does the more eminently grace
and set forth the things that are good. Idem. de praedest. sanct. c. 16. Est
ergo in malorum potestate peccare, vt autem peccando he vel hoc illa malitia
faciant, non est in eoru^ potestate sed dei diuidentis tenebras and ordinatis
eas, vt hinc etiam quod faciunt contra voluntatem dei non impleatur nisi
voluntas dei.
It is then in the power of evil men to sin, as S. Austen says, but in
sinning to do by their wickedness this or that, is not in their power but in
the power of God, who seuereth the darkness from the light, and orders the
same, so that by that which they do against the will of God they do nothing
but what God will. The wickedness then issues wholly out of man's heart, but
God by his secret hand guides it to go this way rather than another: he
obiecteth to it the persons that it shall work upon; he ministers occasions
to it to show it self now more then at another time, and here rather then
otherwhere. By means whereof the thing that is done is diversely to be
considered, and the author thereof is diversely reputed. For if we consider the
act of sin in it self, it is properly and only the work of man: but if we
consider it in the circumstance and order, it is rightly called the work of
God. And so the man by whom the sin is committed, if he be considered in the
thing it self which he has done, he is thereby a sinful man: but if he be
considered according to the order and direction of Gods ouerruling hand,
disposing him this way rather than another he is therein as Nebuchadnezzar,
though unwittingly Ier. 25.9. and 27.6.
the Lords servant, as a tool wherewith he works, and as a staff wherewith
he strikes. To which purpose we may observe how the evil spirit which vexed
King Saul is termed 1. Sam. 16.14.15. and 18.10.
an evil spirit of the Lord, the evil spirit of God. A man may demand, if it
were an evil spirit, how could it be a spirit of God; or if it were a spirit
of God, how should it be an evil spirit? Gregory answers rightly: Greg.
Moral l. 2 ca. 6. vnus idemque spiritus et domini appeltur and malus: domini
per licentiam potestatis iustae, malus per defiderium volllntatis iniustae.
It was a spirit of the Lord by leave and license of just power, but an evil
spirit by desire of unjust will. It is true which the same Gregory elsewhere
says; Ibid. lib. 18. ca. 3. Omnis diaboli voluntas iniusta est, and tamen
permittente deo, omnis potestas iusta.
that the will of the Devil is altogether unjust, but his power, which of Gods
permission only he has, is altogether just. He is desirous always to do
mischief, but is not at his own liberty to do all that he desires: to God
it belongs to moderate and determine the course and effect of his desire. Th.
Aquin. p. 1. q. 114. art. 1. in corp. Impugnatio ipsa ex daemonum malitia
procedit, etc. sed ordo impugnationis ipsius est a deo.
The devils impugning of men, says Aquinas, is of the malice of the devils
themselves, but the order of their impugning is of God. His power then being
directed and limited to whom, and in what, and how far it shall extend is of
God, and according to these circumstances in all that he does, he does the will
of God: but the evil it self which he does by the power thus given him, is of
himself, and no part thereof is to be ascribed unto God. Even so it is with all
the wickedness of man; his sin is only of himself, and God has no part in
it; but to God notwithstanding belongs the ordering and disposing of it. By
which order as sometimes he restrains it and lets it lie as it were a
sleep, so sometimes also he gives it way, exciteth it and provoke it, and
without working any wickedness in him makes it to appear what before lay hid
in the wicked heart of man. For as the beams of the sun do draw from the
filthy cation a noisome stincke, whereof the sun cannot be said to be the
cause, which with the same beams causes from the violet and the rose a
pleasing and delightsome smell, but the whole matter thereof arises from the
dead carkesse it self: even so God, by the secret operation of his
unsearchable power, finds means to draw forth the sin and wickedness of
man, which yet he in no sort works in him, but the whole contagion and filth
thereof arises from the corruption of man himself. And this we conceive that
God does three manner of ways, by motion, by occasion, and by destitution, in
all which he yet still remains pure and clear. Thomas Aquinas says very
rightly, that, Th. Aquin. 1. 2 q. 79. art. 2. in (...) Deus est causa omnis
actionis quatenus est actio and q 80. art. 1. ad 3. Deus est universal
principium omnis interioris motus humans.
God is the cause of every astion as it is an action, and the universal
beginning of every inward motion of man. In sin therefore whatsoever
belongs to motion or action, God is truly affirmed to be the cause thereof.
But as in the halting of a lame leg we are to distinguish betwixt the act of
the soul whereby it moves, and the defect of the leg whereby it halteth, so
are we also in sin to sever by understanding the work of God whereby man
moves, and the default of man himself in the same motion whereby he
sins. Which notwithstanding albeit in mind and consideration they be
severed, yet in the subject go together; and as the motive faculty of the
soul exercising it self, the leg forthwith by halting bewraieth it own
lamenesse and imperfection, even so it comes to pass by corruption of nature
in the whole man, that whilst God moves nature, man acts sin, whilst God
cherishes nature, man cherishes sin, and of Gods giving strength of nature,
man gathers strength of sin. And thus the more God ministers unto men
either health and strength and vigor of body, or dexterity and sharpness of
memory and mind and understanding, so much the more does he discover the
poison that is within them, without any default of his, but to the just
condemnation of man himself that so disgraceth and abuses the work of God.
Neither is it to be objected that God being, the cause of the cause, must
needs be also the cause of the effect, because as lamenesse and halting is not
an effect of going, but a defect; nor is to be imputed to the motive faculty
of the soul as the cause of it, but to the default and debility of the leg; so
neither is sin the effect of the act and motion which God works, nor is he
the cause of it, but it is the prauity and obliquity of man who is the subject
of that motion. Now as by maintaining and moving of nature, so also by
ministering occasions, God lays stumbling blocks before the wicked whereat
they fall and purchase further damnation to themselves: Occasions I say, not as
if they did give occasion, or were of themselves inducements to evil, but
because the iniquity of men even of good takes occasion of evil, and turns
the righteousness of God to it own sin. Thus Aquinas well observes that
Tho. Aquin. in Romans c. 9. sect. 3. Ad malum dicitur inclinare occasionaliter,
inquantum scilicet deus homini aliquid proponit, vel interius vel exterius,
quod quantum est de se est inductiuum ad bonum, sed homo propter suam malitiam
perverse vtitur ad malum.
God is said to incline men to evil by way of occasion in that he sets
before man somewhat either inwardly or outwardly which of it self tends to
good, but man by his wickedness crosly uses it to evil. He strengthens in
Pharao the care of the benefit of his people, and Pharao turns it to the
oppressing of Gods people and to the resisting of the message which from God
was sent unto him. August. in Psalm. 104. Non cor illorum malum faciendo, sed
populo suo benefaciendo cor illoru^ sponte malum conuertit ad odium.
By doing good to the Israelits Psalm. 105.25.
he turned the heart of the Egyptians against them, so that they hated his
people and dealt untruly with his servants. Thus God sends the preaching of
the Gospel to unbelievers, and it becomes to them 2. Cor. 2.16.
the Savor of death unto death. So Psalm. 69.22.
their table (where God gives them plenty and abundance) becomes a snare
unto them and their prosperity is their ruin, or as we commonly read it, the
things that should have been for their wealth, become unto them an occasion of
falling. But of this see what has been said in the place before named, the
fourteenth section of the answer of the epistle to the King. By destitution God
draws forth man's sin whilst he forsakes him and leaves him to himself
and to the power and tyrany of Satan to be holden of him at his will. For as in
the departure of the soul the corrupt body grows to more putrefaction and
corruption, so when God withdraws himself from sinful man, his sin
increases more and more: and as a house, the pillars whereof are taken away
falls with violence, so does he run headlong and without any stay to all
excess and obstinacy of sin. Yea and as a man being left naked and forlorn
amidest his cruel enemies becomes a prey and a spoil unto them, so here
being forsaken of God, Satan and his angels presently seize upon him, they
blind him, they bind him as it were hand and foot, and carry him up and down
whethersoeuer it pleases them. We must understand that God, though in the
beginning he suffered man to fall away from him and thereby to deface in
himself the glorious image of God according to which he was created, yet
vouchsafed of his goodness so far to uphold in him both light of understanding
and touch of conscience as might serve to direct him in some sort for moral
and civil life for the preservation and maintenance of society amongst men.
This direction of our life, God increases and strengthens much by education
and instruction, more by the knowledge and understanding of true religion, most
of all by the grace of spiritual regeneration. Were it not that God in mercy
had set these bounds and banks to restrain and hold in the rage and fury of
unlawful and wicked lust, the fall of man had carried him into all importunity
and extremity of wickedness and abomination, and the state of men had been
much worse then the state of bruit beasts. When God therefore takes away these
props and stays both of grace and nature, and leaves lust to it own
unbridled and unruly passage, and to the spurs of Satan's malicious
prouocations, what must needs follow, but that as the water upon the rupture of
the banks breaks forth with all force, and violently bears down all that
comes in the way, so man setting a side all respect of conscience, of modesty
and honesty, most wretchedly demeaneth himself; and the further God goes from
him, so much the more betaketh himself to all most ungodly and reprobate
courses. When God left 2. Sam. 11.4.14.
David a while to himself, how fearfully, how beyond all expectation did he
fall? The like we see in Solomon, in Ezechias, in Peter, and other holy men and
servants of God. Now Luke 23.31.
if these things befall in the green, what shall be done in the dry? If it have
been thus with them who have been near to God, what shall be expected of
them who are strangers to God and have no part in the spirit of grace? What
other ways and means God has for that purpose Aug. cont. Julian Pelag. l 5.
cap. 3. sieve deserendo sieve alio quocunque vel explicabili vel inexplicabili
modo quo facit haec sum bonus and ineffabiliter iustus.
either explicable, as Saint Austin speaks, or unspeakable, we know not;
only this we know, that he carries a most potent and mighty hand both inwardly
and outwardly in moving and directing the wickedness both of infernal spirits
and men, continuing himself both most perfectly good and unspeakably just.
Now the ends and uses whereto God orders and disposes sin, are partly
reduced to mercy, and partly to judgment. In the former respect Saint Austin
says, that Idem de not. and great. cap. 27. Etiam necessarium fuisse homini ad
auferendam superbiae vel gloriae occasionem vt absque peccato esse non posset.
it was necessary for man, for taking away occasion of pride and vaineglory,
that he should not be in case to be without sin, and Idem de ciu. des. l. 14.
ca. 13. Audeo dicere superbis esse vtile cadere in aliquod apertum
manifestumque peccatu^ vnde sibi displiceant qui iam sibi placendo ceciderant.
that it is profitable for the proud to fall into some open and manifest sin,
that they may be displeased at themselves who by too well liking of themselves
did fall. So says Basil, that Basil. sermon. Quod deus non sit author malorum.
Ille sapiens and prouidentissimus rerum humanarum dispensator diaboli vtitur ad
nost^am exercitationem malignitate, qu^mad modum medicus viperae veneno ad
salutarem medicamentorum praeparationem.
as Physicians use the poison of the Serpent to make thereof a healthful
medicine, so God the most wise and provident disposer of humane things uses
the malignity of the devil for the exercising of us: Ambros. de paenitent.
lib. 1 ca. 13. Malitiam eius nobis ad gratiam conuertit.
he turns his malice, says Ambrose, to be a furtherance of grace unto us.
And thus Saint Austin again says, that August. de praedest. and great. ca. 20.
Probatur deum vti cord^bus etiam ^nalorum ad laudem and adiumentum bonorum, sic
vsus est Judah tradente Christom; sic vsus est Iudais crucifigentibus Christum,
and quanta inde bona praestitit populis credituris?
God uses the hearts of evil men to the praise and to the help of good men,
as he used Judas to betray Christ, as he used the Jews to crucify Christ; and
what great benefits did he thereby perform to them that should believe in
him? Idem in Psalm. 93. Illi qui mar. tyres persecuti sunt, persequendo in
terra, in caelum mittehant, and scientes quidem praesentis vitae damnum
inferebant sed nescientes futurae vitae lucrum conferebant.
They which persecuted the Martyrs, says he, by persecuting them upon earth,
sent them to heaven: they knew that they caused them the loss of this present
life, but they knew not that they yielded them the gain of the life to come.
For execution of judgment, he makes use of sin both in that he punishes
the sin of one by the sin of another, and in that he punishes a man
himself by his own sin, former by latter and greater sins. Greg. Moral.
lib. 2. cap. 6. Deo ad vsum iusti iudicij and iniusta diaboli voluntas seruit.
The unjust will of the devil, says Gregory, serves God for the use of just
judgment. The wicked, in holy scripture, are called Esa. 10.5.15.
the rod of Gods wrath, his axe, his saw, his stafe, Ier. 51.21.
his hammer and weapons of war, because he uses their malice and fury to
chasten his people for their sins, and to bring destruction upon other that
are his enemies, until having finished his work which he has intended to do
by them, he gives way to the malice of others to be revenged upon them also.
And here it is duly to be observed that in these uses of sin, the act that is
committed thereby is not always sin in it self, but becomes sin to him
that does it only by the mind wherewith he does it. When the murderer kills
a man, as touching the act he does nothing but what in due course may lawfully
be done. Does not the magistrate put a man to death and is guiltless therein?
Did not the Israelits without offense slay the Canaanites, and Samuel slay
Agag the King of the Amalechites? The murderer of a cruel mind practices
the death of another man. God has just cause why to deliver the same man to
death, and therefore gives way to the others cruelty against him. God is
herein free, but man is guilty: and albeit he do the thing which God intended,
yet his wicked and cruel mind remains justly to be punished. Aug. in Psalm.
93. si traditio Christi and non tradentis animus considerandus est hoc fecit
Judas quod fecit deus pater, etc. quod fecit ipse dominus etc. and Ep. 48. Cur
in hac traditione deus est pius and homo reus nisi quia in re vna quam fecerunt
causa non vna est ob quam fecerunt.
If the delivering of Christ, says Austin, and not the mind of the deliverer
be to be considered, Judas did the same that the father did, and that Christ
himself did. Why then in all this is God just, and man guilty, but because in
one thing which they both did, it was not one cause for which they did it? Thus
in many other cases God uses man's sin, and yet justly condemns him when he
has so done. But that is the most admirable judgment of God and most
dreadful of all other, when Greg. Moral. l. 25. ca 9. Agitur hoc vt culpae
culpis seriantur quatenus supplicia peccantium fiunt ipsa incrementa vitiurum.
Et paulo prius: Quod agitur dispositione superius ordinata sed inserius
iniquitate confusa vt ex praecedens culpa causa sit subsequentis and rursum
culpa causa sit subsequens paena sit praecedentis.
he takes course that sin is stricken with sin, so as that the increase of
sin is the punishment of the sinner, it being ordered by disposition above,
but yet by reason of the confusion of iniquity beneath both that the former
sin is the cause of the latter, and the latter the punishment of the former.
This judgment Saint Paul notes to have befallen to them Romans 1.21.24. etc.
who when they knew God, did not glorify him as God, nor were thankful but
turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man. Therefore God gave them up, says he, to their own hearts
lusts, unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between themselves; for
this cause God gave them up to vile affections. As they regarded not to know
God, even so God delivered them up to a reprobate mind to do those things
which are not convenient: they received in themselves such recompense of their
error as was meet. A heavy Aug cont. aduers. leg. and prophet. l. 1.24. Ira
dei qua non patitur quod acriter dolet sed facit quod turpiter libet.
wrath of God, as says Saint Austin, whereby a man suffers not any thing
painefully to grieve him, (so to move him to repent) but does that that
filthily likes him, whereby he is hardened the more to go forward in it. Of
this judgment God speaks concerning the Israelites. Psalm. 81.12.
My people would not hear my voice, Israel would not obey me; so I gave them
up, or left them to their own hearts lust: they walked in their own counsels.
Thus God requiteth the wilfulness of men who shut their eyes and will not see,
and stop their ears that they may not hear, and harden their hearts as not
willing to understand; he surpriseth them in their own error and obstinacy
that they may not open their eyes again which they have shut, nor make use of
their ears which they have stopped, nor relent with their hearts which they
have hardened, that so Psalm. 69.28.
they may fall from one wickedness to another and not come into his
righteousness. In all which notwithstanding God works no sin in man, but
that which God in just judgment does by means either explicable or
unspeakable as I said before out of Austin proves in man to the increase of
sin; it being so, that as sore eyes are offended and become more fore by the
most comfortable shining of the sun: and as contraries per antiperistasin do
one strengthen themselves against the other, the heat against the cold, and
the cold against the heat, even so the very light of God and that that is pure
and holy in him provoke the sores of man's wicked heart more and more to
fester and corrupt, and his sin to strengthen it self more and more in
rebellion against God. Now here again this increase of sin must undergo a
double consideration. If we consider it as sin, then is it man's only work
arising wholly of that that is his own. But if we consider it as a punishment,
it is of God who by just judgment provoked it, from whom all punishment is
just, because it is justly deserved by him upon whom it is inflicted. And so
generally consider sin in it self, it is of man: but consider it in his use,
and there God has a hand in it. Thus have I truly declared the doctrine of
our Churches concerning this point: and without the compass of that that I
have said there has nothing been delivered by any writers of our side, and in
all this God is fully acquitted and cleared, and the blame of sin rests
wholly either upon man, or upon him by whose procurement man first committed
sin. Now then to come to those particulars which by M. Bishop are objected,
we will first begin with Calvin, whom he names for the principal proctour and
promoter of that blasphemy. He pretends proof hereof out of his
Institutions, calling the same by the name of his Institutions to hell, the
wretch not knowing himself to be under the power of darkness and in the
bonds of hell, by serving him who is the agent for the Prince of hell, and for
that cause has set it down for a law that Did. 40. si Papa suae and
fraternae salutis negligens, etc. innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit
primo mancipio Gehennae cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum vapulaturus, huius
culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus, etc.
though he carry with him innumerable souls to hell, yet no man may presume to
reprove him for so doing. But what says Calvin in his Institutions? Forsooth
he avouches boldly, that the blinding and madness of Ahab, was the will and
decree of God. And did he so? And what? Did M. Bishop read the story, and did
he doubt whether the blinding and madness of Ahab were the will and decree of
God? There was a Canon of Florence, who being asked whether he read the Bible
or not, answered, that Sphynx Philosoph. cap. 1. semel perlegi librum istum and
nunquam collocaui peius vllum tempus.
he had read it over once, and that he had never bestowed any time worse. M.
Bishop happily has been of the same mind, and thought it but time lost that is
bestowed upon the reading of such paltry and fruitless books. He never read
the story, and therefore out of his own mother wit he thought it to be a
blasphemy that Calvin should speak so. Mark I pray thee gentle Reader, the
narration of this matter, as it is set down by the holy Ghost. The Prophet
Michaiah is brought in saying thus; 1. Kin. 22.19.
I saw the Lord sit on his throne, and all the host of heaven stood about him
on his right hand and on his left hand, and the Lord said, Who shall entise (or
deceive) Ahab, that he may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead? Here is the original
and beginning of all, where God being highly offended at Ahabs wilful
rebellion and obstinacy in sin is brought in resolving to take course to
have him further blinded and deceived, that so he might go a way, wherein just
destruction should light upon him. Which resolution is hereby most clear, for
that God is set forth as of himself, making inquiry for one who might do
that that he had determined to be done. What, does God ask Who will deceive
him, and yet was it not his will and decree, that he should be so deceived?
Well, the text goes on and tells, that while one said one thing, and
another another thing, there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord and
said, I will entise him. And the Lord said unto him, wherewith? And the spirit
said, I will go out and be a false or lying spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets. Then the Lord said; Thou shall entise him, and shall also prevail;
go forth and do so. Here needs no declaration at all. God enquireth for
one to deceive Ahab. The spirit offers himself, and tells which way he
will effect it. God assenteth, and assures him to prevail; he bids him go
and do as he has said. And what, will M. Bishop say, that God is hereby
made the author of sin? God indeed orders and uses the sin of the devil
to punish the sin of Ahab, but here is nothing whereby it may appear that
God wrought any sin in Ahab or in the devil. The devil is always forward
to deceive men, but being under the check of the power and providence of God,
he can do nothing but when and where it pleases God to give him leave. When
God then being provoked by the contempts and despights of men, lets Satan
loose, and in just fury and wrath directs him to do to such a one that
which he so much desires to do: shall we hereupon draw an enditement
against God, and take upon us to arraigne him as guilty of trespass and sin?
If the text it self be not sufficient to inform M. Bishops conceit in this
behalf, let him take S. Austins observation upon it, who urging it against the
Pelagians as we do against the Papists, says thereupon to Julian: Aug^ont.
Julian li. 5. cap. 3. Quid ad ista dict ^rus es? Nempe re^ ipse peccauit falsis
credend^ Prophetis. At haec ipsa erat and poena peccati, deo iudicante, deo
m^ttente angelum malum, vt intelligeremus apertius quomodo in Psalmo dictum
est, misisse iram indignationu sua per angelos ma^^s, sed nunquid errando? nun.
quid imuste quicquam vel temcre fa^iendo vel i^di^aodo? Absit, sed non frustra
illi dictum est; Iudicia tua sicut abyss^s multa.
What will thou say to this? surely king Ahab sinned in believing the false
Prophets, and yet this was also the punishment of sin, God judging him, God
sending the evil angel, that we might understand how it was said in the
Psalm, that he sent the wrath of his indignation by evil angels. But did he
thus by error, or by judging or doing any thing unjustly or rashly? God forbid.
But it was not for naught said unto him, Thy judgments are like the great
deep. And again, Ibid paulo post. Quis enim d^cat non p^ccasse s^^ritui
credendo mendaci? Quis dicat he peccatu^ poen^m non suisse pec^ati,
vententemde iudi^io dei, ad quam legit spiritum mendacem sieve missum, sieve
permissum?
Who will say that Ahab sinned not in believing the lying spirit? and who will
say that this sin was not a punishment of sin, coming of the judgment of
God, for which he made choice of the lying spirit, whether sent (as he himself
said) or permitted and suffered (as Julian said)? Behold M. Bishop; God sent
the evil angel; God made choice of the lying spirit, it came of the judgment
of God that Ahab was seduced, and therein sinned to his own destruction. In
another place also, nolesse plainly he says, Idem. in Psalm. 77. Quem
fallaciae spiritus ex dei voluntate seduxit vt caderet in bello.
that by the will of God it was that the lying spirit deceived Ahab that he
might fall in the battle. But happily he will not be tried by S. Austin in this
matter, because he wrote against the Pelagians the very natural brethren of
the Papists, and herein wholly consorted with them. Well, be it so; yet we
hope he will haere their own Angelical doctor Thomas Aquinas. Th. Aquin p.
1. q. 114. art 1. ad 1. Mali angeli impugnant homines dupliciter. Vno modo
instigando ad peccatum, and sic non mittuntur a deo ad impugnandum, sed
aliquando permittuntur secundum dei iusta iudicia. Aliquando autem impugnant
homines puniendo and sic ^^ttuntur a deo. sicut missus est spiritus mendax ad
puniendum Ahab regem Israel. Poena enim refertur in deu^ sicut in primum
actorem. Et tamen daemones ad puniendum missi alta intention pun unt quam
mittuntur. Nam ipsi puniunt ex odio vel muidia; mittuntur autem a deo propter
iustitiam eius.
The evil angels impugn men two manner of ways; one way, by provoking to
sin, and so they are not sent of God to impugn, but sometimes they are
permitted according to the just judgment of God. But sometimes they impugn
men in punishing, and so they are sent of God, as the lying spirit was sent to
punish Ahab the King of Israel, for punishment is referred to God as the first
author. And yet the devils punish with another intent then they are sent; for
they punish of hatred or envy, but they are sent of God because of his
righteousness. If all punishment be of God, and the lying spirits were sent of
God by way of punishment to entise and to deceive Ahab that he might madly go
a course to his own confusion, why does it offend M. Bishop that Calvin should
say that the blinding and madness of Ahab was by the will and decree of God?
The like folly he commits in the next point by him mentioned, that Absolon
defiling his fathers bed with incestuous adultery committed detestable
wickedness, yet this was Gods own work. The words of Calvin are; yet this
does God pronounce to be his work. Let us then see whether he do so or not.
The words of God, as Calvin alleges, are these; 2. Sam. 12.12.
Thou have done it secretly but I will do it openly and before this sun.
When God says, I will do it, does he not pronounce that it is his doing? does
he not make it his own work? Why does M. Bishop quarrel with Calvin? Why
does he not look into the words of the text, I will do it? If God himself
say that it is his work, will M. Bishop say that it is not so? If he be afraid
that God is hereby made the author of sin, it is but his want of
understanding that causes him that fear. Let him remember what before has
been said and the matter is very clear. Absolon was of himself viciously and
licentiously disposed; and this lewd disposition of his, God uses to punish
David. If we respect here the sin, it is of Absolon himself; but if we
respect the ordering of the sin whereby David was made the object of it, this
as Calvin well notes, God pronounces to be his work. And this is all that
Calvin intends, who says that Ca^uin. Instit. l. 1. c. 17. sect. 5. Coucedo
sures et homicidas and ali^s ma^est^oss diuinae esse pro^^dentiae instruin^uta
qu^^us d^minus ipse ad ex^quenda quae apua se constita^t^^^^ c^a vtitu^. Atq^i
eoru^ malu vllam inde excusationem deberi nego. Quid enim? an ve^eadem s^cum
iniquitate deum inuoluent vel suam prauitatem illues iustitia operient? neutru^
p^ssunt: Quominis se purgent, propr^a conscientia redarguuntur: quominus deum
insimulent totum in se malum deprehendunt; penes ipsum nounisi leg^timum
malitiae suae vsum.
thieves and murderers and other malefactors, are the instruments of Gods
providence which he uses for the executing of those judgments which he has
decreed with himslfe. But I deny, says he, that thereby any excuse belongs
to their sins. For what? will they wrap God in the same iniquity with them,
or will they by his righteousness cover their own naughtiness? They can do
neither. That they may not clear themselves they are reproved by their own
conscience: that they may not accuse God, they find the evil wholly in
themselves, but with God no other but the lawful use of their wickedness. I
will end this matter with that which Saint Ambrose notes of it, who expounding
Ambros. in Psalm. 37. Manum dei virtutem intelligimus puntendi, etc. Hanc manum
David in seipso exp^rtus and liberis, alterius incestum, alterius parricidium
deplorauit. etc. sed forte aliqui^ dit^^ Quomodo in paricidio vel in incestu
manus dei fuerit um opusillud inimicisit. Cognoscamus igitur quoni^m et vb^
diabolus vulnerat, sagittae domini vulnerare dicantur, etc. Cum diabelu^
vulnerat domini sunt sagitiaequs vulnerandi permisit d^^olo potestatem. Denique
si mandes vt t^^s^ seru^us verberetur, nonne etiamsi ab alio astante cadatur, a
te dicitur verberatu^?
the hand of God to be his power in punishing, and saying, that of this hand
David had experience when he bewailed the incest of one of his sons and the
others murder and paricide, he brings in one asking, How was the hand of God
in murder and incest, seeing that is the work of the enemy? But let us know,
says he, that where the devil wounds, the arrows of the Lord are said to
wound. He gives example hereof in Job, from whom also he borrows that
phrase, and by and by concludes, when the devil wounds, the arrows are the
Lords who gave the devil power to wound. And if, says he, a man give charge
to have his servant beaten, is not he said to beat him albeit he be stricken by
another stander by? In which words he plainly teaches that albeit incest and
murder and such like be the works of the Devil and of wicked and ungodly men
that are led by him, yet that in their acting and committing of these
wickednesses God has his hand so as that neither devils nor men effect the
same at their own pleasure, but by his secret providence even as it were by a
charge expressly given them are guided therein as it shall seem good to him
either to punish sinners by them or to exercise and try Godly and faithful
men. Further M. Bishop obiecteth that Calvin says, that nothing is more plain
then that God blinds the eyes of men, strikes them with giddiness, makes
them drunk, casts them into madness, and hardens their hearts. But did
not M. Bishop know that these are scripture phrases? that the holy Ghost
himself speaks in that sort? Deutr. 28.28.
The Lord, says Moses, shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
with astonying of heart. Exodus 4.21.
I, says God, will harden Pharaohs heart. Esaias 19.14.
The Lord, says the Prophet, has mingled amongst them the spirit of errors.
Romans 11.8.
God, says the Apostle, has given them the spirit of slumber, even as the
Prophet had said before, Esaias 29.10.
The Lord has covered you with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your
eyes. God says, Esaias 63.6.
I will make them drunk in mine indignation; Iere. 51.57.
I will make drunk her Princes and her Wisemen, her Dukes, and her Nobles. The
Apostle again says, 2. These. 2.11
God shall send them strength of illusion that they may believe lies. Infinite
other such places of scripture there are; and although M. Bishop himself be
little acquainted with the text, yet the very place of Calvin which he
impugneth might have given him occasion to take advertisement thereof. Well, he
will seem so to have done, but what does he say to such speeches? The poor
Papists, says he, were wont to interpret such textes of Scripture by saying
that God does indeed justly permit and suffer such things to be done, but is
not the author of them. Indeed it seems that the Papists are very poor in
interpreting the Scriptures, who in so clear a light cannot see that albeit
God be not the author of any sin, which the Protestants believe and confess
as fully and faithfully as they do, yet that God does more than barely permit
and suffer it to be done. When Ioshuah says of the Canaanites going forth to
battle against the Israelites that Ios. 11.20.
it came of the Lord to harden their hearts to go against Israel in battle to
the intent that they should utterly destroy them: and when God says of the
Assyrians going with all malicious fury against the same people, Esaias 10.6.
I will send him, I will give him a charge against the people of my wrath to
take the spoil and to tread them down as clay in the streets: and when David
says; 2. Sam. 16.10.11.
The Lord has bidden Shimei to curse David, will M. Bishop in these and many
other such like places understand nothing but bare permission? The Pelagian
heretics of old used the same shift against the evidence of scripture, and
Saint Austin then rejected it, and will the Papists now have us to admit it for
a truth? When Julian the Pelagian said, Aug. cont. Julian li. 5. cap. 3. Ditis
cum destderijs suis traditi dicuntur, relicti per diuinam patientiam
intelligendi sunt, non per potentiam in peccata compulsi, quasi non simul
posuerit haec duo idem Apostolus, and patientiam and potentiam vbi ait, si
autem volens deus estendere iram. etc.
when men are said to be delivered over to their own lusts they must be
understood to be left by Gods sufferance and permission, not by his power to be
forced into sin, Saint Austin answers, As though the Apostle had not set
down both these together, both Gods sufferance and his power, where he says,
If God would, to show his wrath and to make his power known, suffer with long
patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. But he goes yet
further: Idid. Quid tamen horum dicis esse quod scriptum est, Et prophetasi
errauerit, etc. patientia est an potentia? An and hic dicturus es quod, Ego
dominus seduxi Prophetam illu^, intelligendum est, deserui vt pro eius merit^s
seductus erraret.
Whether of these will thou say it is which is written, Ezec. 14 9.
If that Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have
deceived that Prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and I will
destroy him out of the midst of my people Israel, is this Gods permission or
his power? Will thou here say, that, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet,
must be understood, I have forsaken him, that according to his deserts being
deceived he might err? Saint Austin thinks it strange that where God says,
I The Lord have deceived that Prophet, Julian should construe it, I have
forsaken that Prophet and suffered him to be deceived; and why then does M.
Bishop tax Calvin for rejecting the same construction? Caluins words fully
accord with the words of Austin. Calvin. Instutut. lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 2.
Haee etiam ad permissionem multi reijciunt atsi d^screndo reprobes a satana
excaecari sincret; sed cum diserte exprimat spiritus iusto dei iudicio i^fligi
caecitatem and amentiam nimis friuola est illa solutio.
These things many refer to sufferance, as if by forsaking the reprobate he
suffered them to be blinded of Satan: but seeing the holy Ghost plainly
expresses, that blindness and madness is inflicted by the just judgment of
God, that solution is too fond. In the censuring of which words M. Bishop
through Caluins side wounds Saint Austin, and the whole Church which took
part with him against the Pelagian heretics. But here it is to be noted how
guilefully Master Bishop suppresseth the reason which M. Calvin alleges for
the rejecting of that solution, and whereby he makes good that it is to be
rejected. For Gods judgments are not matters of permission left to the devil
or to men to do if they will, but pass from God by sentence and decree that
thus or thus it shall be. And therefore Saint Austin expresses this judgment
by such terms as go far beyond the words of permission or desertion. As where
the Apostle says of idolaters, Romans 1.27.
They received in themselves such recompense of their error as was meet, Aug.
cont. Julian. lib. 5. ca. 3. Dicit vtique damnatos vt tanta operarentur mala
and tamen ista damnatio reatus est quo grauius implicantur.
he means, says he, that they were condemned to the working of so great
sins, and this damnation notwithstanding is a guilt wherewith they are more
grievously entangled. Surely to be condemned to the committing of sin, is a
far greater matter even in all men's cies then to be only permitted and suffered
to sin. But he notes it as a thing Ibid. Et quod est mirabilius, etiam
oportuisse dicit eos istam mutuam mercedem recipere.
more strange that the Apostle says, it was behoouefull or meet that they
should receive this recompense one of them by another. This is much against
Master Bishops mind that God did not only condemn them to sin, but therein
did that that was meet and behoueful to be done. Yea he says afterward of
Ahab: Ibid Inius^tu^ erat qui non crediderat deo vero, deciperetur a falso.
It stood not with justice but that he who believed not the true God, should be
deceived by a false devil. Again, sundry places he alleges to such purpose
as have been before cited and says thereof: Ibid. In quibus liquido apparet
occulto dei iudicio fieri peruersitatem cordis ^t non audiatur verum quod
dicitur and inde pe^cetur, and sit ipsum peccatum praecedentis etiam poena
peccati. Nam credere mendacio and now credere veritati vtique peccatum est,
venit tamen ab ea caecitate cordis quae occulto iudicio dei sed tamen iusto
etiam peccati paena monstratur.
By these, manifestly it appears that by the secret judgment of God there is
wrought a perverseness of heart not to hear the truth and thereby to sin, and
this sin is the punishment of former sin. For it is sin, says he, to
believe lies, and not to believe the truth, and yet this comes of that
blindness of heart which by the secret, but just judgment of God is declared
to be the punishment of sin. So again elsewhere he says, that Idem de great.
and lib. arbitr. c. 21. Quis non ista iudicia diuina contremiscat quibus agit
deus in cordibus etiam malorum hominum quicquid vult, reddens eis tamen
secundum merita ipsorum. Et Paulo post: Agit omnipotens in cordibus hominum
etiam motum voluntatu ecrum vt per eos agat quod per eos agere ipse voluerit
qui omnino unjust aliquid velle non nouit.
God works in the hearts of evil men whatsoever he will, rendering to them
notwithstanding according to their deserts: that he stirs in their hearts
the motion of their will to do by them what he will do by them, who unjustly
can will nothing. He goes on, and for proof hereof alleges sundry texts of
scripture, and in the end concludes: Ibid. His and talibus testimonijs satis,
quantum opinor, manifestatur operari deum in cordibus hominum ad inclinandas
eorum voluntates quocunque voluerit, sieve ad bona pre sea misericordia sieve ad
mala pro meritis eorum, iudicio vtique suo, aliquando aperto aliquando occulto,
semper autemiusto.
It is hereby manifest enough, as I suppose, that God works in the hearts of
men to incline their wills whithersoeuer he will, either to good for his own
mercy sake, or to evil for men's own merits, and that by his judgment
sometimes manifest and apparent, sometimes secret, but always just. And thus
had he said before, of that it is said, that the Lord spoke to Shimei to curse
David, that Ibid. cap. 20. Non iubendo dixit vbi obedientia laudaretur, sed
quod voluntatem eius proprio suo vitio malam in hoc peccatum iudicio suo iusto
and occult^ inclinauit, ideo dictum est; Dixit ci Dominus.
he did not speak to him by (vocal) bidding him so to do as that his
obedience therein should be commended, but because by his just and secret
judgment he inclined his will to this sin, which will was evil by it own
default, therefore is it said, The Lord has spoken to him. In all which places
it is to be noted, what phrases Saint Austin uses to set forth Gods power and
work in the sins of men, and how much different from Master Bishops devise
of permission and sufferance, when he says that God works in their hearts,
stirs the motion of their will, causes in them frowardness of heart not to
believe the truth, inclines their wills to evil: which yet God does not
directly and properly, but though indirectly and accidentally, yet he does it,
Idem. cont Julian. vt supra. facit haec mitis and ineffabilibus modis qui nouit
iudicia sua non solum in corporibus hominum sed and inipsu cordibus operari
by wonderful and unspeakable means and ways as Austen says, and his
judgment therein is to be feared and trembled at. Now to some of these
testimonies of Austen, Bellarmine gives no answer, because they are such as he
could not well devise what to say to them; to the rest as to some texts of
Scripture he so answers as that in effect he justifies all that we say. He
affirms that Bellar. de Amiss great. etc. l. 2. c. 13. praesidet ipsis
voluntatibus malis, easque regit and gubernat torquet and flectit inuisibiliter
in eis operando, vt licet proprio vitio malae sint tamen a diuina prouidentia
ad vnum potius malum quam ad aliud non positive sed permissiue ordinentur.
God has a moderation and presidency over the evil wills of men, that he
rules and governs them, wresteth and boweth them by working inuisibly in
them, so that albeit they be evil by their own corruption, yet by Gods
providence they are ordered rather to one evil than to another, not by the
position of the evil it self, but by the permission of it. The explication
hereof he borrows from Hugo de S. Victore who amongst other words has these:
Ibidem ex Hugone. Voluntati malae vitium est ex ipsa quo mala est, ordo autem
ex deo est quo per velle sieve ad het sieve ad illud est. In voluntate ergo
vitium est and ipsum malum est, and ex ipso voluntas mala est. In velle autem
and vitium est, inquantum velle ex mala voluntate est, and ordo est inquantum
ad hoc vel hoc ex dispone^te est. Et cum ipsum velle ad hoc aliquid est, malum
est quod ad hoe est quia mala voluntate est: quod autem ad hoc potius quam ad
illud est, bonum est quia ordo est and ex been disponente est.
The evil will of man has of it self the corruption whereby it is evil, but
the order whereby in willing it tends either to this or that, is of God. In
the will then is the corruption and that is evil, and thereby the will is
evil: but in the act of willing there is both the corruption, for that it
proceeds from the will being evil, and there is order, for that of him that
disposes it, it comes that it tends to this or that. And when the act of
willing is to this certain thing, it is evil as it is to this, because it
comes of an evil will, but that it is to this rather than to that it is good,
because this is order, and comes of him that well disposes it. Which words
of Hugo do notably illustrate and confirm that which has been before said of
a difference always to be made of the sin it self which is of man only, and
the circumstance and order of it which may not be denied to be of God.
Furthermore Bellarmine in the same place approoueth that which before has been
alleged out of Thomas Aquinas, that God inclines to evil Bellar. vt supra.
Non solum permittendo, etc. sed etiam positive, etc. non quidem per se and
physice mouendo, sed occasionaliter vt S. Thomas loquitur etc.
positiuely by way of occasion, whilst he offers to the inward or outward man
those things, which being good, yet man by his corruption turns to sin. So
much also he confesses in the next Chapter, and there denies not but that God
Ibid. ca. 14. Occasion talium rerum dicitur deus ex ecare vel indurare per
accident.
is said accidentally to blind men and harden them by such occasions. In
another place he says rightly, and we say the same, that Ibid. cap. 16. Neque
enim deus fens est vnde turbulenti scelerum torrentes manant, sed artifex est
mirabilis qui ad vsum suum torrentes illes per se fluentes contorquet, and
ordinat ad bonum aliquod perficien^um.
God is not a fountain whence the troubled streams of wicked acts do flow,
but he is a workman of admirable skill, who can force and turn to his own use
those streams flowing of themselves, and orders them to the doing of some
good. And in the same Chapter he says further, Ibid. Deus non solum deserit
peccatores cum eas tradit d^siderijs cordis little, sed coru^ malas voluntates
etc. ita mirabiliter torquet, regit, ordinat, vt ex eis bonum eliciat and
faciat vt etiam inuitae and nolentes. sibiseruiu^t and hoc ipso quod libenter
faciunt, iusto dei iudicio grauissime puniantur. Et mox Mirabili potentia regit
corda etia^ impioru^ and impedit ne aliud perficiant, conentur, vel nt,
cogitent, qua^ quod ipse permittit, ipsamque culpa^ eu vertit in paena^ and ad
multa bona, malis little voluntatibus ipse sum^ e potens summeque bonus vtitur.
that God does not only forsake sinners when he gives them up to their own
lusts, but does so wonderfully turn and wind, govern and order their evil
wills, as that out of them he draws some good, and causes them perforce and
against their wills to serve him, and by the just judgment of God they are
grievously punished for that which in the mean time they willingly do; that
by his wonderful power he rules the hearts even of wicked men, and hinders
them that they may not do, endeavor, will or think any thing but what he
permits and suffers, and turns their sin to be their punishment, and
being most mighty and most highly good, uses their evil wills to many good
purposes. I need not allege any thing from him to show that God concurreth to
all the actions and motions of men, for that is a thing confessed on all sides;
only he excepteth that whereas God concurreth only Ibi. cap. 5. Deus non
solum^t causa vniuersalu, sed etia^ vt particularu ex doctrina Caluini and
Bezae co^currit ad actiones malas.
as a cause universal, we make him in respect of sin a cause particular,
whereas the blind Jesuit if he had not been blind might easily have seen that
we make God in wicked and sinful actions only a cause universal in respect of
the sin, though in respect of the order and use thereof we make him a cause
particular, as who does particulate and determine the same to this or that, as
by the words of Hugo Victorinus has been before said. And does not the Jesuit
himself confess as much in the words which I have alleged? For if God do
wrest and turn the wills of sinful and wicked men to his use; if he hinder
them from doing or thinking any thing but what he will permit them to do or
think; if he so govern and rule them as that he makes them even against
their wills to serve him, then he leaves not the particulating of sinful
actions as touching their order, to men themselves, but he directs them in
particular to serve the counsel of his will. He then that will weigh these
speeches of Bellarmine, and compare them with that that has been before
discoursed of our assertion in this point, will plainly see that the very
evidence of the truth made him subscribe that doctrine, against which he
professes to dispute; and that he did but maliciously wrest the speeches of
our writers, to make to himself matter of controversy, where by plain
dealing he could find none. This is the triumph and glory of truth, that she
aduanceth her self, and displaieth her banners even amidest the tents of them
that are in arms to fight against her. M. Bishop is a true scholar of his, and
out of the very same malice says further, that Calvin goes on proouing that
God does not only suffer, but actually effect and work all the evil that any
man commits, where he puts those words, actually effect and work all the
evil in a distinct letter as if they were Caluins words, whereas Calvin in
that that follows has no such words. The like treachery and falsehood he
uses in the recital of the other words, that God does work this evil in
man, by satan's service as a mean, yet so as God is the principal worker of
it, and sat an but his instrument, whereas the words of Calvin truly reported
are these. Call. Inst. l. 1. c. 18. s. 2. fateor interposita satanae opera deum
saepe agere in reprobis, etc. Dicitur vero ipse dare homines in reprobum sensum
quia iustae suae vindictae praecipuus est author, satan vero tantum minister.
That God by satan's service does often work in the reprobate, but yet (as by
and by it follows) that God is said to give men over to a reprobate sense,
and to cast them into filthy lusts, because he is the chief author of his
just revenge or punishment, and satan only the minister or instrument thereof.
In which words, what is it whereat M. Bishop is offended? Surely Saint Austin
attributes to God Aug. de great. and l. arbit. c 21. pote^s est five per
angeles, vel bonos vel malos sieve quocunque alio modo operari etiam in cordibus
malorum pro meritis eorum.
a power to work in the hearts of wicked men, according to their deserts,
either by good or evil angels, and says, that Idem in Psalm. 77. Deus vtitur
angelis ma^is ad puniendos malos sicut in istis ^mnibus, etc. Et post: Eu
tribue re sine dubitatione p^ssumus obduration^m cordu illorum.
God uses evil angels to punish evil men, as he did to punish the Egyptians
by hardening their hearts, and therefore calls them, Ibid per illes velut
militiae caelestis carnifices.
the hangmen or executioners of the warfare of heaven. So where in another
Psalm, God is said Psalm. 105.25.
to have turned the hearts of the Egyptians so that they hated his people,
Ibid. Been creditur deus fecisse per illos angelos malos, etc.
we may well belee^e, says he, that God did this by the evil angels. Now then
why does M. Bishop doubt but that satan and his angels are rightly termed the
ministers and instruments of Gods vengeance, the hang-men and executioners of
his wrath against wicked and ungodly men? Is he offended to hear that God is
the chief author of this vengeance? But that we have heard before out of
Thomas Aquinas, whom I trow he will not gainesay, Tho. Aquin. supra. poena
refertur in deum sicut in primumactorem.
that punishment is referred to God, as the chief author of it. The truth is,
that if he had reported Caluins words aright, he had had nothing to say
against them, but leudly and unhonestly he falsifyeth them, that he may seem
to have some color for this slanderous imputation, where indeed he has none.
Now to go on with the rest in the same order as I have begun from the last to
the first, there follows Melanctho^. Of the same cursed crew was Melancthon,
says he; whereas he himself rather here carries the mark of an accursed
wretch, in that he so wilfully belieth and slandereth Melancthon. He cites
him upon the 8. to the Romans, where no such are: and upon the 9. of the same
Epistle there are words words directly contrary to that forwhich he cites
them. Melanct. ad Romans c. 9. Etsi deus impertit vitam malis, tamen deus non est
causa peccati sed voluntas ipsa in malis, in diabolo and homine transferens
agitationem ad obiectum prohibitum a deo est causa peccati. Haec sententia and
tuta and ^era est ac sacris literis consentanea. Quod autem in scripturis
legitur, Ego indurabo, etc. and Tradidit eos etc. and similia, haec figura
sermonis facile potest explicari siquis obseruet naturam Hebraici sermonis.
Certum est enim, has figuras habere quandam significationem permittendi.
Tradidit, etc. non significat positive deum efficaciter seu proprio quodam motu
rapere animos ad explendas cupiditates sed significat desertionem. Deus deserit
impios and sinit eos surere; non cohibet eorum furorem. Ego indurabo, etc. id
est, sinam indurari; non flectam genuinam impij cordis duritiam. Cum autem
buius desertionis mentionem facit, poenam significat qua punit impi^s. Haec est
vera Grammatica interpretatio and nihil habet absurdi.
Though God, says he, give life to the wicked, yet God is not the cause of
sin, but the will it self in the evil, whether the devil or man,
transferring the cogitation to an object forbidden of God, is the cause of
sin. This opinion is safe and true, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures. And
whereas, says he, it is read in the Scriptures; I will harden Pharaoh his
heart, and, He gave them over to their own lusts, and such like; this figure
of speech may easily be expounded, if a man observe the nature of the Hebrew
tongue. For certain it is, that these figurative speeches have a signification
of permission. God gave them over, etc. does not signify positiuely that God
efficiently or by proper motion draws men's minds to fulfill their lusts, but
it signifies the forsaking of them. God forsakes the wicked, and suffers
them to rage; he does not restrain their fury. I will harden, etc. that is,
I will suffer to be hardened; I will not bow the natural hardness of the
wicked heart. Now when the Scripture makes mention of this desertion, it
signifies a punishment wherewith he punishes the wicked. This, says he, is
the true Grammatical interpretation, and has nothing absurd in it. This I
have set down at large, that the Reader may see, that Melancthon was so far
from speaking, as M. Bishop charge him, as that contrariwise he expounds
those places of Scripture which import how far God interposeth himself in
the sinful actions of men, much more mildly then Bellarmine himself does,
being forced by evidence of truth, as we have before seen, to admit more then
Melancthon says. Bucer indeed says, that Bucer. in Romans cap. 1. Nisi fateamur
eum omnia in nobis efficere deum esse negamus.
unless we confess that God works all things in all men, we deny him to be
God: but he speaks of motions and actions, and not of the sin that cleaves
unto them, and very perfidiously does M. Bishop add, as well all evil as all
good. Which appears by that that he says in the same place; Ibid. Verba
domini haec duo simul testantur, siquid peccamus culpam nostram esse non dei;
cui perhibet testimonium and nostra ipsorum conscientia, tum a deo omne bonum
venire vt quod ille non dederit impossible sit a quoquam vel cogitari nedum
fieri.
The words of God do testify these two things, that if we sin, the fault is
ours, not Gods, whereto our own conscience bears witness; and then that all
goodness comes of God, so as that what he gives not, it is impossible for
any man to do or think. The words of Zwinglius are; Zwingl. de prouid. dei.
ca. 6. Vnumatque idem fa^mus puta adulterium aut homicidium quantum dei est
author^s, motoris ac impulsoris opus est, crimen non est; quantum autem hominis
est, crimen ac se^us est.
One and the same deed, as adultery or murder, so far as it is of God, the
author, moouer, and pusher forward thereof, it is a work, and not a sin, but
so far as it is of man it is sin and wickedness. Where we see that for
the act it self, merely as an act or work, he ascribes it to God, who is
the true author of all motions and actions; but the sin thereof he ascribes
only to man, to whom only it does belong. The latter words which he cites I
do not find, and I doubt not but he has played a part of his little
honesty in them, as we see in the former he has done.

11. W. BISHOP.
But to proceed on with this discourse: the Protestants do not only impugn
the power and goodness of God* but they do also pervert his justice. For to
omit their last p^sition, that God is the worker of all sin in us, compelling
( as Calvin speaks) the reprobate to obedience; and therefore cannot in
justice punish the poor wretches, for being obedient unto his own will and
working: and not to urge their former assertion, that God of his own will and
decree, has predestined the greater part of men to hell, without any
foresight of their evil deserts: which if it were true, should it not be
intclerable wrong, to torment so rigorously innocents, that never offended
him? To let pass these points (I say) how can they defend the justice of God,
who hold that he has tied us to such laws, as are impossible to be kept by
any man? For Christ (as he testified himself) will condemn men to hell fire
for transgressing of these laws, by working of iniquity: Matt. 7.23.
depart from me you that work iniquity: and what equity should there be in
that sentence, if it had never been possible for these men to have done
otherwise? For no reasonable Judge condemns any man for not doing of that,
which he knew well, lay not any way in his power to be done. So that nothing is
more plain and evident, then that the Protestants doctrine trotteth apace
toward open Atheism, by impugning the power of God: by defacing his
goodness, mercy, and justice, which in our understanding are the chief
properties of his divine substance: and by calling into question the blessed
Trinity it self, which their offspring and progeny the Trinitarians in Poland
do already deny flatly. Thus much of their Atheismes against God.

R. ABBOT.
Whether we make God the worker of all sin in us, appears by that that has
been already said. As touching the phrase of Co^pelling the reprobate to
obedience, the words of Calvin are, Call. Instit. l. 1. cap. 18. sect. 2.
that the providence of God does not only show his power in the elect, but
also, Reprobos in obsequium cogit. Which M. Bishop should have rather
translated, he forces or compels the reprobate to serve him, to do what he
will. The word obsequium does not always import obedience, but notes sometimes
a man's doing of that which another would have done though the dooer have no
meaning to obey him therein. Obedience is a voluntary submission, and a man
cannot be said to be compelled to that that voluntarily he does; and Caluins
meaning only is, that reprobates amidst all their fury and rage and rebellion
against God, yet are so holden in, and guided, by the bridle of his providence,
that they can do nothing but what he according to his good pleasure thinks
fit and convenient to be done. Because then this service is only intended as
touching the thing done, not for any mind or will that they have to obey or
serve God in the doing of it, therefore they are by M. Bishop absurdly termed,
obedient to Gods will and working. As for Calvin, he speaks no otherwise in
this behalf then Gregory Bishop of Rome does, when he says of Joseph's
brethren: Greg. Moral. l. 6. ca. 22 Inde coacti sunt dei voluntatem peragere
vnde hanc moliti sunt astute commutaere.
Thereby were they compelled to do the will of God whereby they subtelly
thought to defeat the same, and of the Jews Ibid. Cum se aestimant eius
miracula persequendo abscindere, haec nimirum compulsi sunt nesciendo dilatare.
that by persecuting they thought to cut off the miracles of Christ, but were
compelled unwittingly to spread the same further. yea and by the word obsequium
he says, that Ibid. Hoc ad pietatis suae obsequium redigit quod contra illum
humana crudelitas exarsit.
God forces that ad pietatis suae obsequium, to the service of his piety
wherein humane cruelty burns or rages against him. In a word, Ibid. Cui
cognitae debet nostra actio deuote famulari ne ei etiam nolens seruiat si hanc
superbieus declinat.
our action, says he, even against our will serves the heavenly will of God,
when in our pride it shunneth the same. And thus Bellarmine says, as we have
seen before, that Bellar. de Amiss great. etc. c. 16. supra sect. 10
God so governs the wills of wicked men as that he makes them perforce and
against their will to serve him. And whereas M. Bishop infers so learnedly
that therefore God cannot in justice punish the poor wretches for being
obedient, as he dreameth, to his will and working, Bellarmine answers that
Ibid.
by the just judgment of God they are grievously punished for that which in
the mean while they willingly do. For albeit God by his wisdom and power
do turn their evil to his good purpose and use, yet they do it not as with
any purpose therein to serve God, but to follow the sinful lust of their own
wicked hearts, and therefore are justly punished for the doing of it. Now, are
those speeches tolerable and true in Gregory and Bellarmine, and does Calvin
offend in the using of them? We should greatly condemn M. Bishop heerin, but
that we know he must do as his master teaches him, who is wont one-where, to
make absurdities of those things, which he is forced otherwhere to approve. As
touching the other point of Gods predestinating men to hell, it is here very
idly repeated, and I have before sufficiently answered him thereof. But
letting these things pass, The Commandments how affirmed possible or
impossible.
he comes in here with another question: How we can defend the justice of
God, who hold, that he has tied us to such laws as are impossible to be kept?
where I answer him briefly, that we do not hold that God has tied us to
such laws as are impossible to be kept, and yet we do hold, that it is
impossible for us in that state as we are, to keep those laws which are
possible to be kept. For as we hold that it is not impossible to see the Sun,
and yet it is impossible for a blind man to see the sun, even so we hold that
it is not impossible to keep the commandments of God, and yet it is a thing
impossible for sinful man to keep them. Job 14.4.
Who can make him clean, says Job, that is conceived of unclean seed? Ier.
13.23.
Can a black-Moore change his skin, says Jeremy, or a leopard his spots? No
more can ye do good that are accustomed to do evil. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, says Saint Paul, for it is
not subject unto the law of God, neither indeed can be. Do you hear it, M.
Bishop? the wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the Law of God, and
therefore it is impossible that it should keep the commandments of God. But
yet he will say that by the grace of God it is not impossible to keep them. And
so say we that when the grace of God shall have his perfect work we shall
perfectly and fully keep the commandments of God; and in the mean time all
that are partakers of the beginnings of grace, do begin to keep them, which
shows that they are not impossible to be kept. Yet nevertheless so long as
we have received Romans 8.23.
but the first fruits of the spirit of grace, and Gal. 5.17.
the flesh yet remains lusting against the spirit, so that we cannot do the
things that we would, So long it shall be impossible for us perfectly to keep
the commandments of God, which yet are possible to be kept. And what? will M.
Bishop say the contrary? If he do, we will insult and triumph over him,
because his own conscience shall condemn him. As for that which he further
says, that Christ shall condemn men for transgressing his laws, and what
justice shall that be if it were not possible for them to do otherwise? I
answer him that the justice of Christ needs none of his lies for the defense
of it. Christ shall justly condemn the transgressors of his laws, because
the impossibility of keeping those laws arises not from the laws, but wholly
from themselves. Again, their own thoughts shall accuse them, that they have
left many things undone, which they might have done, and have done many things
which they might have forborne to do. To drive out one nail with another, let
us ask M. Bishop how he makes it good in the justice of God, that an infant
dying unbaptized, in whose power it lies not to help it self, should be
condemned everlastingly to hell fire? Let him resolve us how this is just with
God, and we shall easily answer him for the rest. As for us, we say in all
these things that Job 33.13.
God gives not account of all his matters, that Aug. ep. 99. Aliter se habet
sensus humanus, aliter iustitia creatoris.
the conceit of man it one thing, and the justice of God another, and Lactant.
Insti. l. 1. c. 1. Nihil inter deum hominemque distaret, si consilia and
dispositiones illius maiestatis aeternae cogitatio assequeretur humana.
there should be no difference betwixt God and man, if the understanding of man
could reach to the counsels and dispositions of his eternal majesty. But of
these things enough has been said Answer to the Epistle. sect. 19. Of free
will. sect. 17.18. Of Iustificatition. sect. 38.39. etc.
before, and M. Bishop if he would not yield, should rather have applied
himself to answer that that has been there said, then thus simply to sing
over the same song again. Now of misconstruction follows an idle conclusion,
consisting of vain repetition, serving to lengthen his book, but in no sort
touching us.

12. W. BISHOP.
Now to those that be against our Savior Christ Jesus: I have before touched
their errors concerning his Godhead; here I will speak of those that be
against his Manhood and Mediatorship. First, it must needs argue in them a
great want of good affection toward our Savior, that they are so backward in
his blessed Mother the holy Virgins praises, not hearing, with patience, any
body that would so much as salute her with the Hail MARY, Luke 1.
which notwithstanding is recorded in the Gospel: and are besides so ready
upon every little occasion, to speak in her dispraise, that we may with good
reason reprove them, as men either wanting judgment (which they will not
endure of any thing) or else void of due respest unto the Son, who are such
adversaries to the Mother: whom if they would not reverence for her own
virtues, which were most rare and singular; yet for her Sons sake (who loved
her so tenderly) they should show themselves better affected toward her, The
virginmother ho^ worshipped in Popery.
and more forward in her praises, if they did indeed love and honor her
Son, as they pretend to do.

R. ABBOT.
Our affection toward our Savior Christ, consists not in the approouing of
old wives dreams, but in the keeping of his word. We find not that any of the
Apostles or Evangelists, either used themselves or instructed others to salute
the Virgin Mother with the Hail Mary. It is recorded in the Gospel indeed,
that an Angel sent from heaven did so salute her upon the earth; but it is not
recorded in the Gospel that we on earth, should so salute her being now in
heaven. As for that which M. Bishop says of our dispraising her, it is untrue;
we dispraise her not; we Luke 1.48.
call her blessed, as we are taught to do; we acknowledge her a fingular
instrument of Gods mercy toward us in the incarnation of Jesus Christ; we
mention her as becomes us, with due remembrance of the virtues and graces
that God has bestowed upon her, but yet we will make no Leo 10. apud Pet.
Bembum. ep. l. 8. epist. 17. Ne Deam ipsam inani lignorum inutilium donatione
lusisse videamini.
Goddess of her, as the Pope has done, nor commit Idolatry to do her undue
honor, as the Collyridian heretics did of old, and as the Papists now do.
Christ loved her tenderly, but yet he meant not to put her in place of
himself, nor appointed us to seek at her hands that blessing and grace which
God has given us in him alone. And therefore we will not be partakers with the
Church of Rome in those sacriledges and blasphemies wherein they call her Joan.
Michae. Enchir. quotidian. exercit. page 120. O nostra singularis matter and
Aduocata; suscipe nos in maternam tuamcustodiam e^ directionem, adopta in
filios tibi deuotissimos, purga et praeserua ab omnibus vitijs; ex orna tua
humilitate, castitate, charitate, obedientia, caeterisque virtutibus.
their mother and advocate, praying to her that she will receive them into her
motherly custody and direction, to adopt them to be her devout children, to
purge them and preserve them from all vices: to adorn them with her humility,
chastity, charity, obedience and other virtues; Cap 7. p. 346. suscipe etia^
per idem cor filij tu^ vniuersum n^strae seruitutis obsequium, and tuis meritis
illud adiungen^ supple, emenda, perfice et offer.
that for her sons sake, or as they speak, by the heart of her son, she
will receive all the duty of their service, and adioining it to her merits,
will supply it, amend it, perfect and offer it; Cap. 4. pa. 158. per te
accessum habeamus ad filium vt per te nos suscipiat, purget, sane and liberet,
etc. Excuset apud ipsum tua puritas and integritas culpam nostrae impuritatis
and corruptionis, humilitas tua nostrae veniam impetret vanitate, sobrietas
gulositati, etc. copiosa tua charitas nostrorum cooperiat multitudinem
peccatorum. Domina nostra, Mediatrix nostra, Aduocata nostra, tuo filio nos
commenda, tuo filio nos repraesenta, tuo filio nos reconcilia and incorpora.
that by her they may have access to her son, that by her he may receive
them, purge, heal and deliver them: that her purity and integrity may with him
excuse the fault of their impurity and eorruption, her humility may obtain
pardon for their vanity, her sobriety for their gluttony, that her abundant
love may cover the multitude of their sins. O our Lady, say they, our
Mediatresse, our Advocate, commend us to thy son, represent us to thy son,
reconcile us and incorporate us to him. Thus what Christ came to do for us
toward God, because none could do it but he, that have they set up the Virgin
Mary to do for us toward Christ, who notwithstanding needed Christ as well as
we. But because we tender the honor of Jesus Christ, and for the love wherewith
he has loved us. do hold our selves bound in love to yield him entirely the
glory of that that he has done for us, therefore we renounce all such
devotions, which indeed are no devotions but impieties and prophanations of the
faith and religion of Christ, whereby the mediation of Christ is either
excluded as needless, or impeached as insufficient to do that for which he
was appointed and sent of God. But as touching this point of M. Bishops blind
and doting superstition, I refer thee, gentle reader, to the examination of his
answer to M. Perkins epistle dedicatory, the last part thereof.

13. W. BISHOP.
But let us come to Christ's own person. Whereas the first Adam was (at the
first instance of his creation) replenished with perfect knowledge: Ioh. 1. In
cap. 2. Luc. v. 52. Col. 2. v. 4.
and it is also in holy writ said of the second, that the word was made flesh,
full of grace and truth: Yet they commonly teach, that our Saviors soul was
subject to ignorance, even as other men's souls are: and that he was in his
youth ignorant of many things. But what and they spare him not (in whom all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge were hidden) when he came to ripe years,
and began now to preach? let us for a taste, hear some of Caluins sweet
observations upon the text of the Gospel; Ex Calvin. Turcismo. lib. 7. cap.
13. Luc. 16. Matthew. 7. John 1. In cap. 7. Luc. v. 29.
because the purer brethren complain much, that M. Caluins works are in no
greater request. Christ (says he) * speaks improperly, Matthew. 6. verse. 18.
he uses harsh and far-fetched similitudes: he wresteth the Prophets words
into a strange sense: he uses triuiall and vulgar proverbs, as probable
conjectures, not as sound arguments, which he wills us to bear in mind, as
a thing often practiced by our Savior, in Matthew. cap. 12. verse. 25. Luc: 11.
verse. 17. he speaks after the manner of men, not out of his heavenly cabinet,
Mat. 11. verse. 21. which is no less in plain English, then that he spoke
untruly as men do. Matthew. 26.39.
And very suitable to this he notes else where, that Christ could not get any
other to be his Distiples, then some certain poor fellows of the refuse and
dregs of the people. Seem not these execrable notes to issue from the pen of
some malicious Jew, or rank Atheist? yet are they but fleabitings in
comparison of those which follow. In his commentary upon these words of our
Savior: Father, if it be possible, let this chalice or cup pass from me. He
obserneth first, that this prayer of Christ was unadvisedly made: secondly,
that he overcome with grief, had forgotten the heavenly decree, not remembering
for the time, that he was sent to be the redeemer of mankind: thirdly, that he
withstood as much as in him lay, and refused to execute the office of a
mediator. See Calvin also upon these words of Christ: Ioh. 12.27.
Father save me from this hour: where he says, that Christ was so stricken
with fear, and so pinched on every side with perplexed pensiveness, that he
was forced through these boisterous waves of temptation, to waver and fleet too
and fro in his prayers and petitions. Is not this pitiful impiety? Whereas our
most loving redeemer, of set purpose took that fear upon him, and most
willingly both suffered, and caused that bloody agony and conflict, by
representing unto himself, both the shame and pain of his dolorous passion,
and the causes thereof (which were the innumerable most grievous sins of the
world) that he might in every part both of mind and body, endure what he
possibly could, for the time; and spoke nothing rashly, but repeated that his
prayer over three sever all times, as is set down in the text it self; to
show us how naturally he (as all other men) did abhor such a cruel and
ignominious death: and yet withal to instruct us, that we should be content
with it, and pray to God for strength to bear it, if it were his blessed will
to put us to the like. This wholesome doctrine, and Godly instructions, are by
the ancient holy Fathers gathered out of that prayer of Christ: what a venomous
spider then was Calvin, to suck such poison out of it? If Christ so wauered,
where was his constancy? If he were so frighted ( as Calvin falsely imagines)
where was his fortitude? If he strugled so against his Fathers decree, where
was his obedience? If he refused to redeem us, what was become of his charity
toward mankind? If the first motions to evil be deadly sins in us ( as the
Protestants hold) what will they make of such tumultuous, and unbridled
passions in him, that had a greater command over them, then we have?

R. ABBOT.
We doubt not but that Adam so far as the condition and state of humane nature
required, Christ as man ignorant of some things.
was replenished with perfect knowledge, and yet little did he know what the
serpent went about in tempting the woman, or what the end would be of the
woman's tempting him. It is true also that the second Adam was full of grace and
truth, so as that nothing came from him but grace and truth; so as that he
fully effected to us the grace of God, and exhibited the truth of all that God
had promised, and yet it follows not that therefore nothing from his infancy
was unknown to him. The Romans also are said Romans 15.14.
to be filled with all knowledge, and yet it was not known to them, I warrant
you, how wise and honest a man M. Bishop should show himself in the writing of
this book. The holy Ghost teaches us that, Heb. 4.15. Heb. 2.17.
sin excepted, Christ was in all things like unto us. The Papists out of
their fancy say, except sin and ignorance: but why do they add an exception
of their own heads which the holy Ghost has not added? The holy Ghost says
in all things except sin; by what authority do they add ignorance where
ignorance may be without sin? Surely the ancient father Cyrill gathers
thereof, that Christ as man was ignorant of some things, as namely that Cyril.
Thesau. l. 9. cap. 4. Quod diem and horam illam ignoraret: vere ab illo dicitur
vt ab homine; fratribus enim in omnibus similis fuit sec^i dum Paulum.
he knew not the day and hour of his second coming, wherefore he says in the
Gospel, Mark. 13.32.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
neither the son himself, but the father only. Ibid. Infirmitates nostras
omnes accepits hac de causa ignerasse sedixit.
He took upon him all our infirmities, says he, for this cause he said he
knew it not. Yea he teaches us herein Ibid. Misericordiam eius admirari
oportet quod non recusauerit propter nos ad tantam humilitatem descendere vt
omnia nostra and ipsam etiam ignorantiam humanam susciperet.
to admire the mercy of Christ, for that he would so much abase himself for
our sakes, as to take upon him, as all the rest, so namely the ignorance of
humane nature. He alleges against the heretics, that it is no more
prejudice to Christ to say according to his manhood, that he knew not that day,
Ibid. Interrogandi sunt haehetici quid facient quando saluator dicitur
esurijsse, siti^sse, etc. situt ergo voluit tanquam h^mo fame ac
siticaeterisque huiusmodi laborare, sic e^^am vt honodiem illum ignorant.
then to say that he hungered, thirsted, slept, was weary, and such like. He
says again, that when Jesus being come to Bethany and finding Lazarus dead,
asked of Mary, Ioh. 11.34.
Where have ye laid him? Ibid. Locum ignorabat vbi corpus Lazarierat. vt homo
ign^rauit.
he knew not as man, in what place the body of Lazarus was. His conclusion is,
that Ibid, i^ fine. perspicuum est vniuersa sciri a filio dei non minus quam a
patre, quamuis dispensatiue vt homo multa se ignorare dicat.
Christ though as the son of God he knew all things no less then the father,
yet as man, by way of dipensation, said himself to be ignorant of many things.
And what? shall Cyrill now be an heretic with M. Bishop who so long ago in
behalf of the Catholic faith disputed these things against heretics? The
like Origin gathers out of the words of the Gospel, Luke 2.52.
And Jesus in^reased in wisdom, and stature and in favor with God and men.
Origin. in Ierem. hom. 1. Jesus necdum vir, sed adhuc infans quia se exinaniuit
formam serui excipiens proficiebat. Nemo autem proficit qui est perfectus, sed
illo proficit qui indiget profectu etc. Quid indignum est rera de eo esse quae
dicta sunt; priusquam cognoscat puer bonum aut malum.
Jesus not being a man, but as yet an infant, because he humbled himself to
take the form of a servant. did grow. But none does grow, says he, or
increase who is already perfect, but he grows that wants grouth. Why then
is it unlikely to be truly said of him: Before the child knew good or evil.
He applies to Christ those words of the Prophet Esaias, as diverse other writers
do, though perhaps amisses, but hence, as from the other words, he gathers
that Christ for the time was subject to that ignorance and infirmity, which by
the condition of humane nature belongs to that tender age. And out of the
same words of the Evangelist he observes as touching Christ's not knowing the
day and hour of the end of the world Idem. in Math. tract. 30 Proficiens
proficiebat quidem super omnes scientia est sapientia, non tamen vt iam veniret
quod perfectum est, priusquam propriam dispe^sationem impleret. Nihil ergo
mirum si hec nesciuit. etc.
that Christ grew in wisdom and knowledge above all other, but yet so as that
that which is perfect should not come till he had fulfilled the dispensation
that belonged to him, and therefore that it was no marvel if he knew it not.
Now these things touch not only the infancy of Christ, but also his riper
years, and therefore take away that exception which M. Bishop will seem to
ground upon that distinction. And albeit the Apostle do now set forth Christ
unto us as Col. 2.4. Sundry cauillations against Calvin declared.
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (which words
nowithstanding belong to other purpose then M. Bishop here produces them) yet
this nothing hinders but that something might be hidden to the manhood of
Christ, till the time should come that the divine nature should fully explicate
and lay open the glorious perfection of those endowments, which by union and
fellowship therewith should redound unto it. But to come to his sweet
observations which he notes out of Calvin, he cites for the collectour of
them his fellow Gifford, in his Caluinc-Turcismus, a sweet youth, and a master
very fi^ for such a scholar; yet he thinks himself to have this advantage
heerby, that if there be any knauerie or foolerie in these collections, the
blame thereof shall light upon Gifford and not upon him. And first it is
alleged, that Calvin in one place says, that Christ Calvin in Math. ca. 6.18.
speaks improperly. A high point in a low house: as if it were any strange
matter to note in many places of the scripture some impropriety of speech.
Saint Austin says, that August. de doct. Christ. l. 3. cap. 29. sciant
literati modis omnibus locutionis quos Gra^matici tropos vocant authors
nostros vsos esse.
the writers of the scriptures have used al manner of tropes and figures, and
what are tropes and figures, but the excusing and saluing of such
improprieties? Of that which Saint Paul says, The flesh lusts against the
spirit, Cyprian speaks as Calvin does, Cyprian. de cardinal. Christi operib.
in prolog Quod caro aduersus spiritum, etc. contendere dicitur, improprie
arbitror dictum.
I think it to be improperly spoken: and will Master Bishop make
Cypriano-Turcismus of this, as Gifford does a Caluino-Turcismus of the other?
The next matter is, that Christ uses harsh and far-fetched similitudes. The
words are spoken by occasion of the parable of the unrighteous steward,
concerning which, Calvin aduertiseth that Calvin. in Luc. 16.1.
Christ thereby admonishes to deal friendly and kindly with our neighbors,
that when we shall come to the tribunal seat of God, the fruit of our
liberality may return to us. Hereupon he adds: Quanquam autem dura and
long petita videtur similitudo, clausula tamen ostendit non aliud fuisse
Christi consiliu^.
And albeit the similitude seem to be hard and far-fetched, yet the conclusion
shows that the purpose of Christ was no other. Where we may see what a
special skill these fellows have in multiplication. Calvin says, this
similitude seems to be harsh and far-fetched, and they turn it to, he uses
harsh and far-fetched similitudes. But Hierome says of Saint Paul, Hieron.
Apolog. pro lib. adu. Iouiniam. ad Pammach. Videntur eius quaedam verba
simplicia and quasi innocentis h^minis and rurusticani; sed quocunque (...)
eris, sulm^^^ sunt.
some of his words seem to be but simple, and as the words of a silly country
man, who neither has skill to snare another, nor to avoid the snare himself:
and yet he did not hold them to be so indeed, for he adds, yet whithersoeuer
thou look they are very thunder. Where Calvin then says, that the
similitude seems to be hard and far fetched, will M. Bishop straight ways
conclude that he says it is so? And what; does it not so much as seem to be
hard and far fetched, that by the similitude of an unjust steward, who to
provide for himself, used his wit to deceive and rob his master? Christ
should teach us liberality and almesdeeds? S. Austin saw it to be such, as
that he gave it for a special caveat, that Aug. q Euang. l. 2. q. 34. In
villico quem dominus eijciebat, etc. non omnia debe^^ (...) du^ sumere, etc. et
paulo post: E co^trario dicu^tur stae similitudine; vt intelligamus (...) ille
a domino qui fraude^ faciebat, quanto amplius placent dom. deo qui secun^u^
(...) illa faciunt.
We are not to take all things here to imitate, and that it is to be taken by
way of contrariety, that if he were commended of his master that deceived,
much more does he please God, who according to his commandment does such
things. And that commending of the unjust steward, Origin interprets, Grigen.
apud Th. Aquin. Caten Euang Luc. 16. Non secundum veram co^mendationem se^
abusi^e dictum est.
not to be spoken as touching any true commendation, but by abuse of speech. It
should seem therefore that all things are not here so current, but that the
similitude may at least seem to be hard and far-fetched. And does M. Bishop
think that there are no similitudes in the Scriptures that are hard and far
fetched? If there be none, then we hope that he is able very easily to give
reason of them all. Which if he say he can do, we shall think him scant a
wise man; and if he say he cannot, we shall think him as wise that will
reprove that for a lie in Calvin, which he himself must confess to be a
truth. Again he obiecteth to Calvin, that he says, that Christ wresteth the
Prophets words, into a strange sense. The place is noted in the margent, to be
upon the seventh of Matthew, but it is upon the eight chapter. The words which
he means, are the words of the Prophet Esaias there cited: Esaias 53.4.
He took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Of which, Calvin there
says thus; Call. in Math. 8.17. videtur parum appesite citari, immo in alienum
sensum torquerthoc vaticinium.
This prophecy seems to be amiss or unfitly cited, yea to be wrested to a
wrong meaning, or to a strange sense. Which words he uses not as of his own
opinion, but propounds them by way of objection, and adds a reason of some
doubt made as touching the application of the Prophecy. He presently
answers; Ibid. solutio non difficil^ est modo expendant lectores no^ tantum
exponi quid Christus contulerit aegrotis, sed in quem finem sanaueris ocrum
morbos.
The solution is easy, so that the Readers do weigh that it is not here
declared only, what Christ did to the sick, but to what end he cured their
sicknesses. What M. Bishop? no more truth, no more honesty, but to cite
Caluins objection, as if it were his resolution, when he himself answers it
in the same place? Well, yet again Calvin says, that Idem in Mat. 12.25.
Memoria tenendum est vulgo receptis prouerlijs ita vsum Christum vt tantum
essent probabiles coniecturae, non autem vt solid probareut.
Christ uses triuiall and vulgar proverbs, as probable conjectures, not as
sound arguments. And what if he say so? What, does M. Bishop think the
contrary? Will he imagine, that sound arguments may be drawn from triuiall
proverbs? We take it for a memorable observation which Calvin gives anon
after upon the same chapter, that Ibid. ver. 34. Prouerbiales sententias non
exigi debere ad perpetuam normam quia tantum docent quid accidere vt plurimum
soleat.
Prouerbiall sentences must not be drawn to a perpetual rule; but do only
teach what for the most part falls out. A prouerbiall speech it is as he
there alleges, uttered by our Savior Christ, Matt. 12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and yet we know, that
some there are Psalm. 62.4.
Who give good words with their mouth, and curse with their heart. It has
been a Proverb amongst us, a Friar, a liar, but will M. Bishop hereby prove
as by an infallible argument, that every Friar is a liar? It has been
commonly said concerning the church of Rome, The nearer the church, the farther
from God; and does he hold it a good argument, that therefore the Pope is in
the high way to the devil, because he is so near the church? Shall every
slanderous rumor be holden for a conviction, because it is commonly used for a
Proverb, that there is no smoke, but there is some fire? If not, then let him
acknowledge according to Caluins rule, that Prouerbiall sentences are good
inducements to that which a man will persuade by them, but necessary probations
they are not. And in that nature were they used by our Savior Christ, who
would draw on the Jews by such dictates, commonly received and approved
amongst them, to consider the better of those things which otherwise by firm
arguments of truth he made good unto them. Another matter is, that where Christ
says to Corazin and Bethsaida, and to Capernaum, that Matt. 11, 21.23.
if the miracles that were done in them, had been done in Tire and Sidon, yea
in Sodom, they had repented in sackcloth and ashes, and Sodom had still
remained. Calvin says, that he speaks after the manner of men, not out of his
heavenly cabinet, which, says M. Bishop, is no less in plain English, then
that he spoke untruly as men do. Just, for so the Apostle S. Paul when he
said to the Romans, Romans 6.19.
I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh, did
thereby mean to tell them that he did lie, that he spoke untruly as men do.
Caluins words upon the former verse concerning Corazin and Bethsaida are these;
Call. in Math. 11.21. Ne quis spinosas de arcanis dei iudi^ijs quaestiones
moneat, tenendum est ad communem humanae mentis captum accommodari hunc domini
sermonem. Comparans ciues Bethsaid a and eorum vicinos cum Tyrijs and Sidonijs
non disputat quid Deus praeuiderit futurum de ijs vel il^is, sed quid facturi
fuerint alteri quatenus ex re ipsa per^^pi poterat.
That no man may here move any curious questions, touching the secret
judgments of God, we are here to resolve, that the speech of Christ is
applied to the common conceit of men's minds: for comparing the Citizens of
Bethsaida and their neighbors with the Tyrians and Sidonians, he does not
dispute what God did foresee should be either in the one or the other, but what
the other would have done so far as by the very thing it self might be
esteemed. Afterward coming to the other verse concerning Capernaum, he says
again; Ibid. ver. 23. supra admonuimus Christum humano more loqui, non autem ex
caelesti adyto proferre quid deus praeuiderit futurum si Sodomitis prophetam
aliquem mississet.
We have before admonished, that Christ here speaks after the manner of men,
and does not out of the heavenly sanctuary declare what God did foresee would
have come to pass if he had sent a prophet to the Sodomites. Caluins mind is
plain, that when he says, that Christ spoke after the manner of men, he
means that he spoke as men might morally esteem the signs and wonders that
he had done in these cities, being so admirable and strange, as that no man
might probably imagine the Tyrians and Sidonians, yea the very Sodomites to be
so barbarous and graceless, but that at the sight thereof they would have
repented; no less then the Ninevites did at the preaching of Jonas. And that
M. Bishops own Latin interpreter took this to be the true meaning of the
words, appears plainly by that he translateth as touching the Sodomites;
Forte mansissent vsque in hanc diem.
Perhaps they had continued till this day. He would not have said, perhaps, if
he had spoken out of the counsel of God, but because he spoke out of the
conceit of men, therefore he says perhaps. Why then does he pick a quarrel
against Calvin in that, wherein by their own authentical text, he is forced
to subscribe that which Calvin says? But if he will needs understand these
words, as spoken out of the secret of the counsel of God, foreseeing what
would have followed if such means had been used, then let him herein
acknowledge the secret of Gods decree of reprobation, of far other nature
then he has before delivered it, that August. Quibusaa^ quos nonit acturos
poenitentiam non exhibet patientiam.
to some who he knows (if means be used) that they will repent, yet he does
not yield patience that they may repent, as S. Austin gathers according to
that construction: and because he will not grant them to believe, therefore
denies them that whereby they should believe. Let him leave the Rhetorical
expostulations of humane wisdom, why God being just and good should abject
men to hell without foresight of their evil works, because he sees that God
abiecteth men notwithstanding the foresight of the good works which they would
have done, if he would have vouchsafed them the means thereof. I speak not
this as approouing that construction, but only to whip M. Bishop with his own
rod, and to show that he cares not what he says, so that it serve his
present turn, howsouer it cross him otherwhere. Yet further Calvin notes
elsewhere, that Christ could not get any other to be his disciples, then some
certain poor fellows of the refuse and dregs of the people. Mark the
text, gentle Reader, upon which Calvin gives that observation; Luke 7.29.
Then all the people that heard, and the Publicanes justified God being
baptized with the baptism of John; but the Pharisees and the interpreters of
the law despised the counsel of God against themselves, and were not baptized
of him. Hereupon he says; Calu. ibid. Hoc quidem primo aspectu Euangelij
gloriam valde obscurat, immo deformat quod discipulos Christus no^ nisi ex
faece populi and quisquilijs colligere potuit: qui autem sanctitate vel
doctrina praestabant, ipsum repudiabant, sed dominus hoc initio specimen edere
voluit ne vel illius aetatis homines vel posters Euangelium aestimarent humana
probatione.
This at first sight obscureth the glory of the Gospel, yea disgraceth it,
that Christ could get no other disciples but of the dregs and refuse of the
people, and that they, who excelled in learning and holiness, did refuse him.
But God by this beginning would give token that neither they then, nor others
afterward should esteem the Gospel by humane approbation. Now why does M.
Bishop dislike of this observation? What? does he find that Christ had Popes
to be his Disciciples, or that like a Pope he had Cardinals, fellows to Kings
and Emperors, to attend him? The Pharisees could say by way of prejudice
against him, Ioh. 7.48.
Does any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believe in him; but this people
which know not the law (contemptuously pointing at them which Idem de bono
persevere. ca. 14. Quoniam vt crederent non erat eis datum etiam vnde crederent
est negatum.
followed him) are cursed. Yea our Savior Christ himself says to his father,
Matt. 11.25.
I thank thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise, and prudent of this world, and have opened them to babes.
See here, the wise, the Prudent, the Rulers, the Pharisees, they all refuse
Christ, but the people, the poor babes, sinners, Matt. 9.10. and 21.32.
publicans and harlots, they are noted to receive him. And is M. Bishop
offended that these are termed dregs and refuse? or whatsoever they were,
does not his wit serve him to understand that Calvin speaks comparatively
according to the conceit of the world, which held these to be but refuse and
dregs in comparison of the other? Had he never read the words of the Apostle,
1. Cor. 1.26.
Brethren, ye see your calling, that not many wisemen after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and vile things of the world, and things which
are despised has God chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught
things that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence? Harken here, M.
Bishop; foolish things, weak, vile, despised, things that are not, what are
these in account but dregs and refuse? God having so disposed, that it might
appear that the calling of his grace is not afforded according to any degrees
of worldly titles. What shall we then hold it, but a pange of a distempered
brain which M. Bishop shows in his censure following: seem not these
execrable notes, to issue from the pen of some malicious Jew, or rank Atheist?
Yea but these he tells us are but flea-bitings in comparison of those that
fellow. And what are those? forsooth upon the words of our Savior, Matt. 26.39.
Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, Calvin observes, first
that this prayer of Christ was unadvisedly made. But that is first, according
to M. Bishops wont, a mere untruth. Prayer unadvisedly made is a matter
oferrour and sin; but this Calvin calls, Calvin. ibid. Votum abruptum
fuisse fatemur. Votum illud subito elapsum castigat ac reuocat.
a desire abruptly conceived, which by and by more plainly he terms, a
desire sodeinely passing from Christ, which may be without sin, and so was in
Christ, being drawn out of his pure and undefiled soul, only by horror of
his passion, and extreme importunity of his grief. Mat. 26 37.
He began, faith Saint Matthew, to be sorrowful, and grievously perplexed; Mar.
14.33.
He was afraid, says Mark, and in great heaviness, and said, My soul is
very heavy, even unto death. Now being thus infinitely surcharged with grief
even unto deaths door, his agony being such, and so crushing the whole power
of nature, as that Luke 22 44.
his sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground, he prays,
as Saint Mark speaks, that if it were possible that hour might pass from
him: Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee, take away this cup from
me. O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass away from me: thus by
instinct of uncorrupted nature shrinking back from the feeling and experience
of that, to which notwithstanding by voluntary obedience he both before, and
then present, did submit himself, saying, Nevertheless not as I will but as
thou will, be done. Calvin. ibid. Eadem vehementia praesentem coelestis decreti
memoriam illi abstulit, vt non reputaret in ipso momento se hac lege missum
esse generis humani redemptorem.
The same vehemence of grief, says Calvin, took away from him the present
remembrance of the heavenly decree, so that in the very moment he did not
weighwith himself that upon this condition (namely with condition of drinking
this cup) he was sent to be the Redeemer of mankind. By which words Calvin
does not import that Christ had habitually forgotten Gods decree, but that by
means of the excess of his grief, he did not for the present actually fix
his mind upon it, Ibid. sicut saepegrauis anxietas caliginem oculis obducit ne
simul in mentem veniant omnia.
as, says he, great heaviness does often cast a mist before the eyes, so that
all things come not to mind at once. Now M. Bishop reports these words, as
if Calvin had said that Christ absolutely had forgotten the decree; then which
he intended nothing less; and not contented therewith, he adds another
falsification, that he remembered not for the time, that he was sent to be the
Redeemer of mankind, whereas Calvin adds, with this condition, namely, with
condition of undergoing that heavy burden. So far was Christ here from
forgetting that he was sent to be the Redeemer of mankind, as that his words
may well be taken to imply the contrary, sounding as Origin expounds them,
Origin in Mat. tract. 35. si possibile est vt sine passione mea illa omnia bona
proueniant que per passione^ meam prouentura sunt, transeat a me passio ista.
If it be possible that those benefits which shall come by my passion, may be
effected without it, let this cup pass from me. But if Christ had at that
instant actually and fully weighed the vnremoueablenesse of Gods decree in this
behalf, and that it was impossible that it should be otherwise, how is it
likely that he should pray in this sort; If it be possible, let this cup pass
from me? Which is the same as to make him say, I know well that it is not
possible that this cup should pass from me, but if it be possible let it
pass, so to make an if of that which at once he knows to be absolute without
if or and. It remains therefore true which Calvin says, that oppression of
grief according to sense of nature wrested this if from our Savor Christ, not
attending, for the instant, to the irreuocable decree of God, that thus it
should be and no otherwise. Now in the third point M. Bishop deals yet more
grossly, because he alleges that for an assertion, which Calvin sets
down by way of objection. He moves the question, if the affections of Christ
were well and orderly carried, how then he corrects himself; and subdueth his
desire to the obedience of God, as if he had gone beyond compass? Surely says
he, there appears not in the first request, that moderation which we have
spoken of, because so much as in him lies he refuses and shunneth to do the
office of a Mediator. Now having answered the first part of this objection,
he repeateth the latter again, and answers it; Calu. vt supra siquis
excipiat primum motum quem sranari oportuit antequam longius excurreret non
fuisse temperatum ^t decebat, respendemus non posse in hac naturae nostrae
corruptione perspici affectuum feruorem cum temperie qualis in Christo fuit,
sed hunc dandu^ honorem filio dei ne eum aestimemus ex nobis. Nam sic in nobis
aeftuant omnes carnis affectus vt prosiliant in contumaciam, aut saltem aliquid
faecis admixtum habeant; sic autem and metus and doloris seruore aestuauit
Christ^s ^se tamen continuerit in sua mensura. Immo sicuti varij cautus and
inter se discrepantes ade^ (...) dissonum habent vt potius concinnam suauemque
harmoniam conficiant, ita in Christo insigne extitie symmetriae exemplar inter
dei and hominis voluntates vt absque conflictu est repugnantis inter se
differant.
If any man except that the first motion which was to be restrained before it
went any further, was not of that temper and moderation as it ought to be; I
answer, that in this corruption of nature, we cannot see the heat of affection
with the due temper thereof as it was in Christ, but that we are to give this
honor to the son of God, that we do not esteem him by our selves. For all
affections of the flesh do so boil in us, as that they break forth to
rebellion, or at least have some dregs mingled therewith: but Christ was so
affected with the fervor both of fear and grief, as that notwithstanding, he
contained himself within his bounds. Yea, as notes of song being sundry, and
different each from other, yet have no dissonancie or discord, but do make a
goodly and pleasant harmony; so was there in Christ a notable pattern of
concord betwixt the wills of God and man, so as that they differed without any
conflict or repugnancie betwixt the one and the other. In which words when we
see how holily Calvin accords those differences which through agony and
anguish seemed to be in Christ, so as that though they seemed by his prayer to
draw back from that whereto the Father had sent him, yet indeed there was
nothing in him repugnant to the will of God: what evil spirit may we think it
was, that led M. Bishop to report out of the same Caluins objection, that he
affirms that Christ withstood, so much as in him lay, and refused to execute
the office of a mediator? By this that has been said, we may discern what
cause there was for Calvin to say that which M. Bishop alleges out of the
other place; that Christ was so stricken with fear, and so pinched on every
side with perplexed pensiveness, that he was forced through these boisterous
waves of temptations to wave and fleet too and fro in his prayers and
petitions. He corrupts Caluins words, for Calvin says nothing of forcing,
but acknowledges the contrary, that Christ Calu. in Joan. 12.27. fuerunt
voluntarij isti in eo affectus, quia non coaclus timuit, sed timori sponte
subiccerat.
did not fear as being forced to it, but because voluntarily he did submit
himself unto it, and so that other affections were voluntary in him. Neither
does he make Christ to waver, as an unsettled man, doubtful what to do, but
describes him though by sense of nature tending one way, yet by firm and
constant obedience subduing all passions of nature, and yielding himself
another way. And do not M. Bishops eyes see him in this sort, fleeting too and
fro? By sense and affection of nature he says, Father, save me from this
hour, and yet by obedience he adds; But therefore came I into this hour. By
sense of nature he says, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me;
but by obedience he yields, Nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou will be done. Now though this be as clear as the light, yet this wisard like
the dog barking at the Moon, cries out, Is not this pitiful impiety? and
so bewraying his own pitiful folly, he goes on to tell us how all this
agony came to pass. And first he tells us that Christ of set purpose took
that fear upon him, and most willingly suffered that bloody agony. But this
is none of M. Bishops note, he borrowed it of Calvin; for Calvin says as much,
as we have seen before: only let it be remembered, that here he
acknowledges that Christ did fear. Then he tells us, that Christ caused to
himself that bloody agony and conflict, by representing unto himself the
shame and pain of his dolorous passion. But when we see the martyrs with so
admirable patience and resolution, to have endured so exquisit tortures, and
far beyond the bodily sufferings of Christ, can we imagine that the very
conceit of his passions could drive Christ himself into so great anguish and
perplexity as in the Gospel is described? And what? did Christ never before
represent unto himself the dolours of his passion? not when he so often
forewarned his Disciples thereof? not when Luk 9.31.
Moses and Elias talked with him of his departure which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem? If he did, how came it then to pass that he was not feized with
the same sorrows? We doubt not but the bodily passions of Christ were exceeding
great, and yet we doubt not but that M. Bishop therein alleges too slender a
cause of so great an agony. Well, somewhat to enlarge this, he adds, that
he represented to himself the causes of his passion, which were the innumeral
le most grievous sins of the world. But I ask again, is it likely that
Christ Ioh. 2.25.
who knew what was in man, did never before represent to himself the sins of
men? Or shall we think that the bare representing of men's sins to himself
could cause him so great affliction and distress? Yea and we would gladly know
how to this representation of men's sins he will fit the prayer that Christ
uses, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me. He says, that
hereby Christ would in every part both of mind and body endure what he
possibly could for the time. But what a vain dream is he in, that will talk
of so great a passion in Christ, and yet make the ground thereof to be only
imagination? Yea, but he tells us further, that Christ would show how
naturally he (as all other men) did abhor such a cruel and ignominious
death. What, and was the cause of his agony then no other but what other men
might have as well as he? And did Christ so greatly shrink back from death,
who knew that within three days he should rise again? Surely S. Austin though
he express not the true cause thereof, yet wholly disclaimeth this, willing
them, to whom he spoke, August in Psalm. 21. Nist sort tutatis fratres quiae
quando dixit dominus, pater, etc. mori timebat. Non est fortior miles quam
Imperator, sufficit seruo vt sit sicut dominus eius. Paulus dicit miles regis
Chrisli; concupiscentiam habens dissolui, etc. Ille optat mortem vt sit cum
Chrisio, and Chrisius ipse timet mortem?
not to think that Christ was afraid to die when he said, Let this cup pass
from me. The soldier, says he, is not of greater courage then the captain.
It suffices the servant to be as his master is. Paul says, I desire to be
loosed, and to be with Christ. He wishes to die, that he may be with Christ;
and is Christ himself afraid of death? No, no, a greater matter it was, that
when no bodily violence was yet offered to him, did so oppress his soul to
the very gates of death, and drew from him blood in steed of sweat, and made
him so earnestly again and again to pray that he might escape drinking of
that cruelly distastefull and bitter cup. It was not death, but the wrath of
God in death; not the conceit of our sins, but Esa. 53 12.
the bearing thereof, and 2. Cor. 5.21.
being made sin for us, that caused the Son of God that great agony and
fear. But of this shall be spoken further in the next section, where it shall
appear, God willing, that the ancient holy fathers gathered out of the Gospel
this selfsame for wholesome doctrine, and godly instruction, and therefore that
Calvin did not play the venomous Spider to suck poison from thence, unless M.
Bishop mean poison to poison, as Christ was a Serpent to the serpent; and as a
poison to him that poisoued us: for as the spider, they say, is poison to the
toad, and kills him, so the says and religion of Christ which Calvin has
taught out of the Gospel, has been and shall be a poison to the poison of the
church of Rome, to bring it to naught, as hitherto it has done. He goes on
with diverse idle questions, only to find his Printer work, but to do his
adversary no harm. If Christ so wauered, where was his constancy? I answer
him, Christ wauered not, but by invincible constancy of obedience overcame
that drawing back which the pure affection of undefiled nature motioned unto
him. If he were so frighted, where was his fortitude? But the greater his fear
was, the greater his fortitude appears in ouercomming that fear, because
great fortitude is not moved with small fears, but passes them with
contempt: and M. Bishop should know that virtue consists not in being void of
passions as Stoickes held, but in the subduing and conquering of them. And does
not he himself tell us before, that Christ took upon him fear? If he think
that Christ did so indeed, why does he not put the same in question to
himself? where then was his fortitude? If he think this fear to be some
light matter, what place leaves he for those words of the Apostle, Heb. 5.7.
who in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears to him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard in that which he feared? He will say that we translate amiss, in that
which he feared. Yet Gregory Nazianzen so understood it, reckoning out of this
place Greg. N^zi. de filio orat 2. Ad hanc considerationen pertinet quo
obedientiam ex ijs didicit quae passus est; item clam^r, lachrymae,
supplicationes, exauditiones, metus, etc.
Christ's crying, his tears, his supplications, the hearing of him and his
fear. But leaving that to his selfewit and will, the text it self does
otherwise sufficiently confirm what we say, because they must needs be even
whole armies of terrors and fears that must wrest from him those prayers with
strong crying and tears. Yea and when it is said that in those prayers he
looked unto God, as able to save him from death, manifest it is, that out of
horror and fear it was that he so prayed. Fear, I say still, as a passion of
nature, not any distrust of unbelief, not whereby he was dismayed, but yet
whereby he was in the highest degree affected with that dreadful sight, which
his eyes then were bent upon. Again he says; If he strugled against his
Fathers decree, where was his obedience? His obedience was in this, that
Ambros. in Heb 5. Qui non venit facere voluntatem suam sed eius qui misit
illum, voluntatem paternae dispensatienis praetulit voluntati carnis suae.
Whereas he came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him,
he preferred the will of his fat hers ordinance before the will of his own
flesh. By the will of his own flesh then he willed somewhat otherwise then his
father had decreed, else why does he say, Not what I will? yet he does not by
this will of his flesh, struggle against his fathers decree, but submits
this will with all patience to his fathers will. And hereby appears what a
frivolous question he moves in the next words, if he refused to redeem us,
what was become of his charity toward mankind? for he never refused to
redeem us, and therefore never failed in his love toward mankind. But in the
last question he most of all plaieth the wretch, and under color of an
imputation to us, utters a wicked blasphemy of his own. If the first
motions to evil be deadly sins in us, as the Protestants hold, what will
they make of such tumultuous and unbridled passions in him who had a greater
command over them then we have? The Protestants do hold indeed, that the
first motions to evil are deadly sins, if God weigh them in judgment as they
are; but the Protestants do not hold in Christ any first motions to evil, and
much less any such passions as are worse then those motions, that this absurd
man should thus argue as from the less to the greater, from evil motions in
us to tumultuous and unbridled passions in him. We acknowledge a difference of
will in Christ, testified by most passionate and effectual words, and we
acknowledge it as the Fathers did out of the same words, against the heretics
the Monothelites, but in this difference we deny any thing to have been
tumultuous or unbridled, but all duly composed and ordered; so that the
discord was a concord, and the difference made no other but harmony and
conformity as before was said.

14. W. BISHOP.
But we are not yet come unto the height of his blasphemies, which he powers
forth more abundantly upon those our Saviors words, Matt. 27.46.
My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me! saying: when this kind of
temptation was proposed to Christ (as though God being auerted from him, he had
been appointed to utter destruction) he was seized with horror. Li. 2.
Instit. c. 16. sess. 11.
And in his Institutes treating of the same subject, says, Christ feared to
have been swallowed up of death as a sinner: And there can be no more
dreadful bottomless gulf, then for a man to feel himself forsaken and
estranged from God, and not to be heard, when he calls upon him, even as if
God had conspired his destruction: even thither we see that Christ was thrown
down, so that by enforcement of distress he was compelled to cry out, my
GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me. In the Paragraffe before, he speaks
more plainly, that Christ did hand in hand wrestle with the armies of hell, and
the horror of eternal death: finally, that in his soul he suffered the
torments of the damned, and all those punishments that are due to wicked men in
hell: He then (belike) was the traitor Judas companion: for the while he was
in the Devils hands to be tormented he dispaired and fared, as men do in these
hellish torments. What greater blasphemy can be invented, then to condemn the
King of heaven, that came to redeem us all from hell, even to the very pit of
hell it self? Beza not willing to come behind his master Calvin in this kind
of impiety, whereas Calvin craftily admitted only, that Christ then despaired,
In cap. 5. ad Heb. verse. 7.
he affirms plainly: that from Christ (stroocken with the horror of Gods
curse) escaped the word of desperation. And elsewhere, that Christ was (with
the huge heavy burden of Gods wrath, overwhelmed and adjudged to the flames of
hell: yea, In c. 27. Mata and 22. Luc.
buried and drowned in the bottom of the infernal gulf: This man (you see)
desires to lodge Christ low enough, that would have him drowned in the very
bottom of hell. This their pestilent venime, they might have sucked out of
their good grandsire Luthers writings, who upon the very same words, does
make this goodly commentary. What shall we therefore say? In Psalm. 22. v. 1.
Christ to have been together both the most just, and greatest sinner: both the
most notorious lier, and truest teacher: at the same instant, both the most
highly glorying, and deeply despairing: both happy in the highest degree, and
most miserably damned. Unless we say this, I see not (says this Oracle of the
new Gospel) how Christ was forsaken of God. See him also upon the third chapter
to the Galatians, where he utters yet more detestable speeches of Christ, to
wit: that all the Prophets did in the spirit foresee him to be the greatest
thief, robber, murderer, adulterer, sacrilegious person and blasphemer, that
ever lived. I could cite you diverse others of the same opinion, but I had
rather note their extreme blindness, who neglecting the ancient Fathers
learned expositions of the holy Scriptures, were led away with such horrible
extrauagant conceits of our Savior, upon so small occasion. For he at that
very time hanging on the Cross, declared himself to be most far off from
all such hellish torments: yea, he showed all possible signs of a most quiet
and peaceable mind, praying for the salvation even of his persecutors (he was
not then belike in doubt of his own) promising also to the good thief that
the same day he should be with him in Paradise; wherefore he doubted nothing
of being there himself: recommending his Mother unto his beloved Disciple, and
him likewise to her; and to fulfill the Scriptures, both saying I thurst, and
citing even those very words, that they are scandalized at, out of one of the
Psalms of David: And finally, advisedly considering all things belonging to
his passion to be accomplished, commended his spirit unto his Fathers hands; so
that there could not possibly be more calm settled judgment, more valiant
constancy and resolution, then there was. But what meant he then to say, My
GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? Forsooth nothing else, but to signify,
that in all these torments which he suffered, he had not any comfort or
consolation at that time from God, who is wont to give extraordinary aid and
comfort to all those, that suffer for his names sake: but that Christ might (as
he himself desired) be put to suffer all kind of extremity, all manner of
inward consolation was wholly withheld from him; which it pleased him then
to express by manner of complaint in those most pitiful words: Christ
suffered for us both in body and soul.
My GOD, my GOD, etc. the more to move us to compassion. Thus much of their
impieties against Christ's person: now to those that they teach against the
office of his mediatorship.

R. ABBOT.
Theodoret cites it as a memorable sentence out of Irenaeus, that Theodoret.
dialog. 3. ex Iren. adu. haer. lib. 5. C^^^ergo proprio sanguine nos Christus
redemerit and anima^ suam pro animis nostris dederit and carnem suam pro nostru
carnibus, etc.
Christ gave his soul for our souls, and his body for our bodies. So do we
hold that by Christian faith we are bound to believe, that Hieron. in Esai. 53.
li. 14. Ex quo perspicuum est sicut corpus flagellatum and laceratum signa
in^uriae in vibicibus and liuore portabat, ^ta and animam vere doluisse pro
no^is ne exparte veritas, ex part mendacium credatur in Christo.
as the scourged and rent body of Christ did carry the marks of wrong done to
him by stripes and blewnesse of wounds, as Hierome says, so that his soul did
verily endure grief for us, lest partly a truth, and partly a lie, should be
believed in Christ. If we say that Christ suffered for us in body only, it
shall be a lie to say of Christ as touching his soul, that he suffered for us:
but therefore do we believe, that both in body and soul he suffered that it
may be wholly a truth which we believe, and Christ may be acknowledged to be a
perfect Redeemer both of body and foul. Now it is true indeed that the soul
suffers by the body, because the body of it self has no sense or feeling
whereby to suffer: but when we speak of Christ's suffering in soul, we mean
not that which the soul suffers by the body, but whereby it suffers
properly and immediately in it self. For inasmuch as it was a part of
punishment due to our sins to suffer in this sort, therefore we believe that
Christ taking upon him to suffer for us, did suffer in the same fort, Because
Hieron. vt supra. Quod nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere, ille pro
nobis passus est.
he suffered for us what we ought tesuffer for our own sins. And accordingly
does the Prophet say of him, Esa. 53.10.
He shall give his soul an offering for sin, which he verifieth in the
Gospel, when yet there was no passion but of the soul; Matt. 26.38.
My soul is heavy, even unto the death. We believe therefore that not in body
only, but in soul also, Christ 2. Cor. 5.21.
was made sin for us; that not in body only, but also in soul, Gal. 3.13.
he was made a curse for us, to deliver us from the curse; Ambros. in Orat.
con. Auxent. ep. li. 5. Non maledictus ille sed in te maledictus.
not accursed himself, but accursed in us, as says Saint Ambrose, blessed in
August. cont. Faust. Manith. l. 14. c. 6. Benedictus in sua iustitia,
maledictus aute^ propter peccata nostra, and cap. 7. Maledictum eum dixit ex
co^diti: ne poenae nostrae ex qua in ligno suspensus est.
his own righteosnesse, but accursed for our sins, and by condition of our
punishment whereby he was hanged upon the tree. Now in that he, according to his
humane spirit and soul, Amb. vt supr. Maledista nostra suscepit.
took upon him our maledictions, and curses, it follows that the effects of
those maledictions took place in his soul, horror, anguish, vexation,
astonishment, wrestling with despair, with hell, death, damnation, and the
whole power of darkness, and whatsoever else may be reckoned in the unknown
sorrows of Christ, as the Greeks termed them in their Litany. For putting
himself into our place and condition, he stood liable to all that was due to
us, and therefore Hilar. in Psalm. 68 Vsque ad mortis profundae descendit and
omnis in eum terror desaeuientis in nos tempestatis inculuit.
he descended into the depths of death, and all the terror of that tempest
that raged against us lighted upon him. Therefore does Saint Peter attribute
unto his passion, Act. 2.24.
the sorrows of death, that is to say, the sorrows that appertain to death;
of which David by Prophecy brings him in complaining, Psalm. 18.4.
The pains of hell came about me, the snares of death ouertooke me. Psalm.
69.1.
Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul; I stick fast
in the deep mire, where no ground is, I am come into deep waters, and the
streams run over me. Whereof he prays anon after, ve. 15.
Let not the water flood drowneme, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let
not the pit shut his mouth upon me. What are these floods, this deep, this
pit, whereat he stands thus, as it were amated, as fearing thereby to be
swallowed up? Surely the Prophet foresaw herein more then bodily passion, even
a sea of spiritual afflictions, hell and destruction opening her mouth wide at
him, and threatening to devour him; the wrath of God and his indignation
furiously marching against him, to require of him, as who had undertaken it,
the full recompense and satisfaction for our sins. In respect whereof the
Prophet says; Esaias 53.10.
The Lord would break him; v. 6.
the Lord has laid our iniquities upon him: as to note that we are not to
consider only what was done by men, but to behold God himself also wreaking
his anger upon him, braying him as it were in a mortar, and beating him in
pieces as the Hebrew word imports. Therefore Athanasius says, that the
Prophet David in another Psalm says Athanasale interpret. Psalm. Dicit ex
persona eius, In me constitutus est furor tuus etc. Iram contra nos conteptam
ob praeuaricationem in se sustinuit.
in the person of Christ, Thy wrath is bent against me; because, says he, he
did bear in himself the wrath that was conceived against us for sin. We
read the words, Psalm. 88.6. vulgat. 87.
Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms. Which Hierome in like sort applies to Christ in this sort; Hieron in
Psalm. 87. Iram and procellam macellationis suroris tui quas in gentibus
effusurus eras super me induxisti qui peccata little suscepi.
Thou have brought upon me the wrath and storm of thy fury, which thou
should have powered forth upon the nations, because I have taken upon me
their sins. Again, in the Psalm it follows; Lord why reiectest thou my
soul, and hidest thou thy face from me? Thine indignations go over me, and
the fear of thee has undone me; They come about me daily like water, and
compass me together on every side; that is, as Lyra says, Lyra in eund.
Psalm. sicut aqua tangit intrantem ipsam Circumquaque, ita punitiones tuae
tegiterunt me in anima and corpore.
As the water on every side touches him that enters into it; so thy
punishments have touched me both in soul and body. Now these things duly
considered which are hitherto set down, it will easily appear that the
speeches of Calvin, and the rest here mentioned, truly reported, are so far
from blasphemy, as that they lay before us a most firm and sure foundation of
Christian hope. In the first place Calvin having affirmed, that Christ did not
only give his body to be a price of our atonement with God, but that in his
soul also he suffered the punishments due to us: and that they are too
sottish, who setting a side this part of our redemption, do stand only upon
the outward punishment of the flesh, because it behooved that Christ to the end
he might make satisfaction for us, should stand as guilty before Gods tribunal
seat, and that there is nothing more horrible then to feel God as a judge,
whose anger goes beyond all manner of deaths, he adds hereupon; Calu. in
Mat. 27 46. Ergo cum species teutationis Christo obiecta esset quasi deo
ailuerso iam esset exitio deuotus herrore correptus est, quo centies cuncti
mortales absorpti fuissent, ipse autem mirifica spiritus virtute victor emersit.
When therefore an appearance or show of temptation was objected to him as, if
God being against him he were now devoted to destruction, he was stricken with
horror, such as wherewithal mortal men would have been swallowed up a
hundred times, but he by the wonderful power of his spirit, became the
victour and conqueror of it. The very repeating of Caluins words is sufficient
to acquit them from the silly cauiling of this idle-headed wrangler. For what
does he dislike in them? Does he dislike that Calvin should say that a
semblance or appearance of such a temptation was objected to Christ? But who
doubts thereof when Christ himself says, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Is it amiss with him that he should say that Christ was stricken
with horror? Why more, then that Arnob. Hier. Cassiodor. in Psalm. 87.
Arnobius, Hierome, Cassiodorus and others expounding the Psalm before
mentioned of Christ, should make him to say as the vulgar Latin has it,
Terrores tui conturbauerunt me; Thy terrors have troubled me? Will he here
put a difference betwixt terror and horror? will he tell us that Christ might
well be troubled with terrors, but he could not be taken with horror? Indeed
it may well become a Romish wit to babble so, because many shifts they have as
rediculous as that; but what will he say then to that which we read in another
Psame; Psalm. 55.4.5. which to be a prophecy of Christ, see verse. 13. compared
with Psalm. 41.9. and is so taken by Austin, Hierome, Basil, Theodoret, etc.
My heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me;
fear and trembling are come upon me, and So translated by Arias Montanus.
horror has covered me? Here is Christ himself, confessing himself (...)
be covered with horror: and why then does M. Bishop dislike Calvin for using
the same phrase? In the next words of Calvin he deals as honestly as he has
done in these. Calu. Institut. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 11 Christus cum lachrymis and
clamore valido orans a metu suo exauditur, non vt a morte sit immunis, sed ne
absorbeatur vt peccator, quia illie personam nostram gerebas.
Christ praying with strong crying and tears, says Calvin, is heard out of
his fear; not so as to be free from death, but not to be swallowed up as a
sinner, because there he bare our person. M. Bishop concealeth that that he
says, of bearing our person, because if he had expressed that, his cauilling
would have been discerned. He himself in likely hood did not doubt but that
without absurdity, yea truly it might be said, that to Christ, bearing our
person, the horror of that temptation might be objected of being swallowed up
as a sinner. Which if he acknowledge for a truth, why does he blame Calvin? If
he will not acknowledge it, yet the former words of the Prophet, uttered in
the person of Christ, wherein that horror is expressed, shall serve to stop his
mouth; Psalm. 68.16.
Let not the water floods drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Calvin goes on further saying, Ibid.
Et certe nulla fingi potest magis formid abilis abyssus quam sentire se a deo
derelictum and alienatum and cum inuocaueris non exaudiri, perinde a^si in tuam
porniciem ipse conspirasset. Eo Christum videmus fuisse deiectum vt coactus
fuerit, vegente angustia exclama^e, Deus meus, etc.
And verily there cannot be imagined a more dreadful bottomless gulf, then
for a man to feel himself forsaken and estranged from God, and not to be
heard when he calls upon him, as if he had conspired to his destruction. And
to that pass we see that Christ was thrown down, that anguish urging him, he
was constrained to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. In
which words, if M. Bishops discretion had been as great as his malice, he
would have conceived nothing to find fault with. But now his squint eyes see
nothing aright, and therefore he imagines a knot in every rush, and thinks
nothing well spoken because he is offended with the speaker. To the proposition
we know his quarrel is not, but only to the application. But if Christ, to
sense and feeling were not forsaken and estranged from God, why does he so cry
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? To sense and feeling, I say,
but not to faith, for by faith he still says, My God, my God. If to sense and
feeling it did not seem to him as if God did not here him when he prayed, why
is he brought in saying in the next words of the Psalm, Psalm. 22.1.
Why art thou so far from my health (or from saving me) and from the words of
my complaint? O my God, I cry in the day, and thou hear not, and in the
night, and I cease not. And in another Psalm; Psalm. 69.3.
I am weary of crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail whilst I wait for
my God. And what is all this to sense and feeling but as if God had conspired
his destruction? He says only, as if it were so; he says not that Christ
himself esteemed it so to be. Does it trouble him that Calvin says, that
Christ by enforcement of grief was compelled so to cry out? But why does he
doubt but that as Christ by hunger was compelled to eat, by thirst to drink,
by weariness to sleep: so by pain and grief he was also compelled and
forced to complain and seek for ease? Did not Christ undergo all the
necessities and enforements of our nature? It was voluntarily indeed that he
did so, but yet so he did: and though he were able by his divine power to save
himself, yet putting himself into that condition, that Cyril. de rect. fide
ad Reg. lib. post. Opus habere alterius manu vt seruetur.
he needed the hand of another to be saved, as Cyril speaks, he was forced by
anguish and extremity to cry and call to him that should save him. The next
point is, that Calvin. vt supra. Oportuit eum cum inferorum copijs, aeterneque
mortu horrore quasi consertis manibus luctari.
Christ did hand in hand wrestle with the armies of hell and the horror of
eternal death. We profess so much, and deny it not, because there is no
conquest without battle, and therefore Christ having Col. 2.15.
spoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed over them, must needs be
supposed to have had encounter and combat with them. There follows in
Caluins next words the sentence of the Prophet, that Esaias 53.5.
the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, that he was wounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our iniquities. Hereby, he says, is given to
understand, that he was put in the place and steed of wicked men, as a surety
or a hostage, yea and as if he had been himself a party guilty, to make good
and to pay all the punishments that were to be required of them; this only
excepted, that he could not be holden of the sorrows of death. By and by after
he says, that we are to know that not only the body of Christ was given for
a price of redemption, but that it was a greater and more excellent price that
he suffered in soul the cruel tortures that belong to man, damned and cast
away. In which words, if we consider what has been before said, we shall
peceiue that there is nothing said amiss. For what is there in damnation it
self, greater then the undergoing of Gods curse? what are all the torments
thereof but the effects of the same curse? and if Christ have borne the curse
that was due to us; if the wrath of God that should have been powered upon us,
were laid upon him; if he have suffered for us that that we should have
suffered for our selves, as has been before said out of Athanasius, Ambrose
and Hierome, why does it seem strange that Christ should be said to suffer for
us the tortures of damnation? If Athanas. de passione and cruce dom.
Amaritiemirae ex praeuaricationem legis obortam in quae omnes detinebat
accipiens absumpsit and euacuauit.
he took the bitterness of the wrath that rose by the transgression of the
Law, and made it void, as Athanasius again says; if all the terror thereof
did fall upon him, that should have befallen to us, as Hilary before has said,
then Calvin has said nothing but truth, that he made good, and paid all the
penalties and punishments that were to be required of us. I say not, that he
suffered all precisely in quality and kind, but in quantity and measure I
say with Calvin all that should have been required of us. And therefore albeit
we affirm that Christ suffered the very anguish of hell, yet we do not
thereby condemn him to the very pit of hell it self, as M. Bishop wrangleth;
because it was the suffering it self, not the place of suffering whereby
satisfaction was to be made to God. Now then taking it as we say, it is no
blasphemy to say that he that came to redeem us from hell, did suffer for us
the pains of hell, because he was therefore to suffer the same for us, that
he might redeem us therefrom. Yea what a silly collection of blasphemy he
has here made will plainly appear, by a little change of words, because it
is all one, as if he should have said; What greater blasphemy can be invented,
then to condemn the Lord of life, that came to redeem us from death, even to
the very suffering of death it self? As for that which he says of Christ's
being hereby made the companion of Judas the traitor, I pass it by as the
speech of a wicked wretch, who out of the poison of a malicious and wicked
heart, dares of his own wretched collection to say what he list,
dishonorable to the Son of God. From Calvin he comes to Beza, albeit in the
first point he mistaketh Beza for Calvin; for Beza in the place by him cited,
has not the words which he alleges. Calvin has them indeed: but so, as that
M. Bishop I trow will blush, if at least he can blush, when he shall hear in
what sort he has them. He makes a question or objection in these words; Calu.
in Mat. 27.46. sed absurdum videtur Christo elapsam esse desperationis vocem,
solutio facilis est quanquam sensus carnis exitium apprehenderet, fixam tame^
sletisse fidem in cius cord, qua deum praesente^ intuitus est de cuius
absentia conqueritur.
But it seems absurd that from Christ should slip or escape a speech of
despair. Hereto he says, The answer is easy, that albeit the sense and
feeling of the flesh apprehended destrustion, yet his faith abode steadfast in
his heart, whereby he beheld God present with him of whose absence he
complains. By and by he says again; Ibid. In hoc diro cruciatu illaesa fuit
eius fides; ita vt relictum se deplorans, propinquo tamen dei auxilio
confideret. Cum desperatione luclatus est, non fuit tamen victus: neque enim
qui desperati sunt, possunt deum app^llare suum. Cum dicit Deus meus, triumphum
agit de tentatione.
In all this cruel torture his faith was untouched, so as that crying out that
he was forsaken, yet he trusted to Gods help as hard at hand. He wrestled with
despair, but was not overcome: for they who are desperate, can not call God
their God. When he says, My God, he triumphs over that temptation. Mark I
pray thee gentle Reader, how whilst he tendereth thee an objection in steed
of a resolution, he seeks to abuse thee with a shameful untruth, affirming
of Calvin though under Beza his name, that he says, that Christ despaired,
whereas Caluins words are expressy to the contrary, that his faith was still
inuiolate, and continued firm and steadfast in his heart. And even as
impudently does he behave himself in the next words; for Beza has no such as
he allegeth, no, not in any of the places by him cited, that Christ was
overwhelmed or adjudged to the flames of hell: He does not say, that Christ was
buried and drowned in the bottom of the infernal gulf. His words are, that
Beza. Annot. noui Testam. Heb. 5.7. Quum i^^ se derelictum vociferatur,
cogitemus animum noniam in cogitatione and metu impendentis mali prorsus
eccupatum, sed in profundo summae calamitatis gurgite sepultum, qui ad
emergendum maxima cum difficultate luctetur,
when Christ cries out that he is forsaken, we are to conceive his mind, not
now occupied with the conceit or fear of evil at hand, Christ how termed a
sinner.
but even buried in the deep gulf of extreme calamity, so as that with great
difficulty he wrestieth or strives to swim out. Where are the flames of
hell, M. Bishop? where is the infernal gulf? for shame, man, leave this
lying, this gross lying, lest the liers meed befall you, that no man believe
you when you say truth. Luthers words have their christian and godly meaning if
a maleuolent mind have not the construing of them. I have before showed how
the Fathers stick not sometimes to term Christ See hereof the question of
Justification, sect. 5.11.
a sinner, yea as Oecumenius speaks, Oetumen. in Heb. 9. vehementer peccator
erat. etc. vt supra.
a very great sinner, for that, as he expounds it, he took upon him the
sins of the whole world, and made them proper to himself. Thus does Luther
say, that Luther. in Gal c. 3. Et quidem omnes prophetae vide. runt hoc in
spiritu quod Christus futurus esset omntum maximus latro, homicida, adulter,
fur, sacrilegus, etc. quo nullus mayor vnquam in mu^do fuerit, quia existens
hostia pro peccatis totius mundi iam non est persona innocens and sine
peccatis, non est natus de virgin dei filius, sed peccator, qui habet and
portat peccatum Pauli etc. and Petri etc. and omnia emnium peccata in corpore
suo, non quod ipse co^miserit ea, sed quod ea a nobis commissa susceperit in
corpus sou^.
Chrst was the greatest sinner, because he bare all our sins: the greatest
liar, because he bare the person of all men, of whom it is said, All men are
liars: that the Prophets did in the spirit foresee him to be the greatest
thief, robber, murderer, etc. that ever lived, because he did take upon him
the thefts, robberies, murders, adulteries and all other sins of all men
living. He speaks thus to set forth the more effectually the imputation of
our sins to Christ, and that which the scripture says, that 2. Cor. 5.21.
he was made sin for us, Esa 53.6.
that the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all: and though we forbear
thus to speak for avoiding offense, as I have formerly said, yet in this sense
what can Momus himself pick out to speak against it? As for that which he
says of Christ deeply despairing, and most miserably damned, M. Bishops wit
might have served him to conceive that it was not absolutely meant, because he
makes Christ withal most highly gloriing and happy in the highest degree: His
meaning then was, as has been before expressed, that to sense of flesh and
present feeling he was in state of despair and damnation; albeit by faith and
hope he still gloried in God as his God, and remained the heir and Lord of
blissful peace. It appears then, that in all those allegations of his,
there are no horrible extrauagant conceits, nor any other but what the ancient
fathers of whom he speaks, have gathered out of the holy scriptures, as well
as we. As for that which he gathers out of sundry particulars by him set
down, that Christ in the midst of his passions retained a calm settled
judgment and most valiant constancy and resolution, Christ's affections in his
passion kept within compass and measure.
I answer him, that he says nothing therein but what he has learned of us who
acknowledge, as has been before declared, that notwithstanding all these
extremities, yet all his affections were kept within compass and measure, and
are not to be esteemed by those exorbitancies and outrages which we in our
passions are wont disorderly to run into. Yea by settled judgment did he
rightly weigh the heavy burden that lav upon him, and accordingly complained
thereof, and with valiant constancy and resolution he waded through the midst
of that horrible tempest until he was retired into safe harbor. Of us also
has M. Bishop learned that a great aggrauation of the griefs and sorrows of
Christ, was by the fathers withholding from him all inward comfort and
consolation, but yet together with us he should learn out of the word of God,
that it was not only a privation of spiritual comfort, without which we see
what tortures men even of obstinacy and vainglory do oftentimes with
invincible courage undergo, but it was a position of spiritual anguish and
distress that drew from Christ those effects which hitherto we have spoken of,
as by the discourse thereof sufficiently does appear.

15. W. BISHOP.
They hold first, that whatsoever our Savior did, Molineus in harmonia, part.
51.
or suffered before his passion, was of small value for our redemption. For as a
noble Protestant said, the Monks, Priests, and Papisticall Doctors did err,
when they urged Christ's incarnation and nativity: for all these things profited
us nothing; could do nothing: but only the death of Christ, which alone was
accepted of God for our sins. Secondly, Calvin goes further, and doubts
not to say, Lib. 2. Instit. ca. 16. c. 16 ses. 10.
that Christ's passion and corporal death would not serve the turn, and had
profited us nothing at all, had he not in his soul suffered the very pains
of the damned in hell. This doctrine of theirs is not only contrary to an
hundred places of express Scripture, that do assign our redemption unto the
bloodshedding and passion of Christ: but it also derogateth very much from the
dignity of our Mediator. For not that which he suffered, made the merit of our
redemption: but it was his exceeding charity, with which he suffered it, and
principally the very dignity of his divine person, which gave that value,
price, and estimation to his sufferinges, that the very least thing that ever
he suffered in his life, was of infinite value; and therefore sufficient to pay
the ransom of all mankind: yea, to have redeemed a thousand worlds. But let
us proceed on with the Protestants opinion: did Christ's sufferings of the
torments of hell deserve of God in justice, theredemption of man? not so, if we
may believe one of Foxes Martirs, Acts and Monuments, pa 487.
who held (as he records) that Christ with all his works could not merit
heaven for us. But for that little credit is to be given to such a Martyr, and
such a Martyr-monger, let us hear what some of the learned amongst them say.
I truly confess (says Calvin) that if a man will set Christ singly and by
himself, against the judgments of God, there will be no room for merit. And
after: Christ could not deserve any thing, Lib. 2. Insti. cap. 17. ss. 1. In
abster. calumni. Heshu.
but by the good pleasure of God, which is defended by his disciple Beza,
against Heshusius: so that briefly, all Christ's sufferinges in hell and out of
hell, in true Protestant reckoning, amount to no higher a value, then that by
the good pleasure and acceptance of God, they deserved our redemption;
therefore in rigor of justice they were not of sufficient worth to redeem us,
but were only of grace, by God accepted for such. Is not here a fair
reckning? so might any other man endued with grace, have redeemed all mankind
as well as Christ, if it had pleased God to have so accepted it; seeing no
equal recompense was to be expected. But to help him here by the way, that
could not understand how we were saved by the mercy of God, if Christ's merits
did in justice deserve our salvation, it is to be noted that both be true, if
they be duly considered. For we are saved by Christ's merits in rigor of
justice, he satisfying of God as far-forth fully, as we offended him: and yet
we be saved freely by the mercy of God too; both because he has of his mere
mercy without any desert of ours, given us Christ his Son to be our Savior:
and also for that he has (out of the same his mercy) freely applied unto every
one in particular that is saved, the merits of Christ, through which he is
saved.

R. ABBOT.
The value of our redemption is not to be rated by the wilful conceits of men,
Christ's other sufferings not sufficient without his final suffering and death.
but by the estimation and ordinance of God himself, who does nothing
superfluously, nothing idly and without cause, and therefore would not have
decreed the death of Christ, but that Luke 24.46.
it behooued Christ to suffer (death) and to rise again from the dead the
third day that repentance and remission of sins might be preached in his name.
As the Apostle says, Gal. 2.21.
If righteousness be by the law, then Christ died in vain: so may we also
conclude, If the least thing that Christ suffered in his life, were sufficient
to redeem us, as M. Bishop dreameth, surely then Christ died in vain. It is
not for man to take upon him to be wiser then God, nor for us to say that this
or that had been sufficient to redeem us when we see what God has decreed
and done in that behalf. It is true in deed that the dignity of Christ's person
gave worth to his sufferings, but we are to learn of the wisdom of God what
it was convenient those sufferings should be to which the dignity of his person
should give that worth, so that not the dignity of his person howsoever, but
the dignity of his person in such and such sufferings, certainly before
determined of God, was to be the merit and purchase of our redemption and
salvation. So then necessary it was that Christ should die for our redemption,
though his death had been no sufficient price therefore, but by the
infiniteness of his person. Molineus therefore might very justly and truly
say, not that the incarnation and birth of Christ profited us nothing, or could
do nothing, but that without the death of Christ they had profited us nothing,
or could have done nothing for us, because it was by his death, that God had
appointed to redeem us, even as M. Bishop against himslfe confesses, though
his eyes were not open to see it, that an hundred places of express scripture
do assign our redemption to the bloudshedding and passion of Christ. The
Papisticall Doctoures then, their Monks and Priests are to be condemned, who
urge Christ's incarnation and birth only as a sufficient price for us, or do
stint the same as did Campian, that Campian. Rot. 8. Cutus cruoris vna quaeuis
guttula propter dignitatem bostiae mill mundos redimere potuisset. Christ
suffered for us in soul also.
one drop of his blood had sufficed to redeem a thousand worlds; not but that
his incarnation and birth were profitable to us, but because whatsoever Christ
did or suffered otherwise, all concurred in his death as being preparations
thereunto, and in his death the fruit and effect thereof does redound unto us:
not that we deny the value of any drop of the blood of Christ, but because we
hold no less needful to redeem us, then God deemed needful that he should
shead, for us. The words of Calvin, which he translateth at randon are these;
Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. se. 10. Nihil actum erat si corporea tantum morte
defunctus fuisset Christus, sed operae simul pretium erat vt diuinae vltionis
seueritatem sentiret quo and irae ipsius intercederet and satisfaceret iusto
iudicio.
It had been to no effect if Christ had died only a corporal or bodily
death, but it was withal needful that he should feel the scuerity of Gods
revenge, that so he might appease his wrath, and satisfy his just judgment.
For disproofe of which assertion he uses the words a little before mentioned,
that an hundred places of express Scripture do assign our redemption to the
passion of Christ. Full wisely I warrant you, as if the scripture when it
assigns our redemption to the passion of Christ, did not assign it to those
spiritual sufferings which Calvin there intends, when as it describes those
sufferings to be a part of the same passion, and the same are by Calvin so
understood to be. If he will say that his meaning is, that the scripture
assigns our redemption to the death of Christ, let him understand death in
his true nature as he ought to do with the complements and furniture thereof,
that is, the wrath and curse of God, and sorrows of death, as has been
before said, and then we answer as the truth is, that the Scripture in
assigning our redemption to the death of Christ does consequently assign the
same to those spiritual anguishes and sufferings, because those spiritual
agonies are also a part of the same death. Now seeing the Father sent his Son
Esaias 53.10.
to give his soul an offering for sin, as the Prophet teaches us, and is
before declared, surely Calvin rightly concludes, that if he had died only a
bodily death he had done nothing for us, because he had not done that that the
father had required; nay he had not done that which the work of redemption did
require: for Athanas. de incarnat. Christi. Neque potuit aliud pro alio in
redemptionem praestari sed corpus pro corpore, anima pro anima, and integriu^
aliquid pro integro homine. etc.
one thing, says Aathanasius, might not for redemption be paid for another,
but the body was to be given for the body, and the soul for the soul, and
the whole for the whole man. From hence he proceeds and tells us of one of
Foxes martyrs, as he terms them, Who held that Christ, with all his works
could not merit heaven for us. Thus like a mad dog, he runs up and down
snapping at one and biting at another, and seeking in this man and that man, to
fasten his venomous tooth of slander and reproach. Who this was, he names no:
tand whereas he cites Acts and monuments page 487. I find not in the edition
that I have, which is the last, any matter tending to that purpose. Wheresoever
it is that he means, I doubt not but he has played his part in it with like
fidelity as he is wont to do. As for the Martyrs and the Martyr-monger of whom
he speaks, let him not doubt but the Prophets words are verified in them;
Esaias 57.2.
peace shall come; they shall rest in their beds, every one that walks before
him; and therefore that of him and his fellows that deride them the words
following have their just construction, But you witches children, come hither,
the seed of the adulterer and of the whore; On whom have ye iested; upon
whom have ye gaped and thrust out your tongues? are ye not all rebellious
children, and a false seed? But from these he goes to some of the learned
amongst us, citing Calvin and Beza. Christ truly and properly merited for us
by Caluins doctrine.
I truly confess, says Calvin, that if a man will set Christ singly and by
himself against the judgment of God, there will be room for merit. Where
that thou may see, gentle Reader, that it was not without cause that I
suspected him for the former citation, I pray thee first to observe that the
very argument of the chapter whence he alleges these words, is thus set
dowee; Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 2. Recte et proprte dici Christum nobis
promeritum esse gratiam dei and salutem.
That it is rightly and properly said that Christ has deserved for us the
grace of God and salvation, which he purposely disputes against some Sect. 1.
sunt quidam perperam arguti qui etsi fatentur salutem nos per Christum
consequi, nomen tamen meriti audire non sustinent quo putant obscurari de^
gratiam.
who although they confess that we attain salvation by Christ, yet cannot
endure to hear the name of merit, because they think the grace of God to be
obscured thereby. Secondly, albeit he set down Caluins terms of
qualification, Ibid. Equide^ fateor siquis Christum simpliciter and per se
opponere vellet iudicio dei, non fore merito locum, quia non reperietur in
homine dignitas quae possit deum promereri.
simply and by himself, yet very treacherously he leaves out the end of the
sentence whereby those terms are to be understood, which is this; because
there can be found no worthiness in man that can deserve at Gods hands. For
hereby it is manifest that Calvin in those words respects Christ as man,
and only in that respect denies merit; if Christ merely as man be opposed
against the judgment of God. And this further appears by that which he
adds to his purpose out of Austin, which M. Bishop dissembleth, because he
thought he could not so honestly cavil against Austin, as he might against
Calvin. August. de praedest. sanct. cap. 15. Est etra^ praeclarissimum lumen
praedestinationis and gratiae ipse saluator, ipse mediator dei and homin^^,
homo Christus Jesus, qui vt hoc esset quibus tandem suis vel operum, vel fidei
praecedentibus meritis natura humana quae in illo est comparauit? Respendeatur
quaeso, ille hon^o^t a verb patri coaeterno in vnitatem personae assumptus
filius dei vnigenitus esset vnde he meruerit?
There is, says Austin, a most notable and clear light of Predestination and
grace, even the man Christ Jesus, the Savior, the Mediator betwixt God and
men; who to be so, by what former merits of his, either of works or of faith,
did the nature of man in him atteine unto? Tell me, I pray, says he, that
that man taken into unity of person with the word coeternall to the Father,
should be the only begotten Son of God? whereby did he merit or deserve it?
By which words S. Austin gives us plainly to understand, that the man Christ
Jesus did not by merits atteine to become our Savior, to become the Mediator
betwixt God and man, but it was by Gods predestination and grace, by his decree
and ordinance, that it so came to pass. Hereupon then Calvin infers, that
Calu. vt supr. Cum ergo de Christi merito agitur non statuitur in eo
principium, sed conscendimus ad dei ordinatione^ quae prima causa est quia mero
beneplacito modiatorem statuit qui nobis salutem acquireret.
when we speak of the merit of Christ, we are not to place it as the first
beginning, but we ascend to the ordinance of God, which is the first cause,
because he merely of his own good pleasure appointed him the Mediator to
purchase salvation for us. In which words he acknowledges that Christ did
verily and indeed purchase salvation for us, but yet that it came of the good
pleasure of God, and his mere grace and mercy, to give him unto us for a
Mediator to merit and purchase our salvation. His drift is not in any sort to
impeach the merit of Christ, but only to show that the merit of Christ is no
impeachment of the free mercy of God, because of that free mercy it is that we
have him to merit for us. And to that purpose it is that he says, Ibid. Nam
Christus nonnisi ex dei beneplacito quicquam mereri potuit: sed quia ad hoc
destinatus erat vt iram dei sacrificio suo placaret, suaque obedientia deleret
transgressiones nostras.
that Christ could not merit any thing but by the good pleasure of God, because
but by the good pleasure of God, he could not be Christ, he could not be man,
he could not be the Mediator betwixt God and man. In a word, hence it came
that he merited for us, as it is added in the next words, because he was
destinated and appointed that by his sacrifie he should appease the wrath of
God, and blot out our transgressions by his obedience. To the same effect it is
also added, which M. Bishop thirdly mentions, Ibid. Ex sola dei gratia (quae
hunc nobis constituit salutis modum) dependet meritum Christi.
that the merit of Christ depends upon the only grace of God, which, says
he, has appointed for us this means of salvation. Not so then, but that Christ
did indeed merit salvation for us, but it was the grace of God that gave him to
merit for us, and so to be the means of our salvation, which is the thing
that Beza also defends against Heshushius. And what is there in all this for
M. Bishop to dislike? He will not say that Christ as a mere man could have
merited at Gods hands; because he has before confessed, that the value and
dignity of Christ's works arose from the dignity of his person, in that he
was the Son of God. He will not deny that it was the good pleasure and
grace of God, that gave Christ to merit in our behalf, for that the texts of
Scripture cited by Calvin for proof thereof, do manifestly show; Ioh 3.16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
every one that believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life;
1. Ioh. 4.10.
Not that we loved God, but that he loved us first, and sent his Son to be
the atonement for our sins: by which it appears, that the sending and
giving of Christ is derived from the love of God, as from a precedent and
former cause. What is the matter then of M. Bishops quarrel? Marry, whereas
Calvin and Beza by the good pleasure and grace of God, do mean in that sort a
precedent cause of the giving of Christ to merit for us, and do express it by
other terms of the ordinance of God, of his appointing Christ to be our
mediator; of appointing unto us this means of salvation, and such like, M.
Bishop maliciously wresteth the same to a posterior cause of the acceptance of
the merit of Christ; as if they had said that God of his good pleasure and
grace had accepted for merit that which Christ did, when indeed there was no
merit, and so falls to his terms of a fair reckoning, and that so any other
man endued with grace might have redeemed all mankind as well as Christ;
woonderfully bestirring himself with his wooden dagger, and though he fight
but with his own shadow, yet being strongly persuaded that he has killed a
man. And yet to see the arrogancy of this vainglorious wisdom, he takes
upon him here by the way to help Calvin, that could not understand how we were
saved by the mercies of God, if the merits of Christ in justice deserve our
salvation; whereas Calvin purposely there disputes against them who could not
understand that accord betwixt the mercies of God and the merits of Christ, and
tells them that which this silly Sophister will seem to teach him, that
Ibid. Inscite opponitur meritum Christi misericordiae dei. Regulaenim vulgaris
est, quae subalterna sunt non pugnare; ideoque nihil obstat quominus gratuita
sit hominum iustificatio ex mera dei misericordia and simul interueniat Christi
meritum quod misericordiae dei subijcitur.
it is ignorantly done to oppose the merit of Christ to the mercy of God; for
it is a common rule, says he, that things subordinate are not repugnant one to
the other, and therefore nothing hinders but that the justification of men
may be free by the mere mercy of God, and yet the merit of Christ may come
between, as being contained under the mercy of God. Learn more wit M.
Bishop; though you will not learn more honesty, yet learn more wit; for there
is none of your own fellows that shall examine these things, but must needs
take you for a lewd man, but that Bernard. de Consider. lib. 1. vitiosas
conscientias vitiosoru^ non refugit, and vbi omnes sordent, vnius faetor mimme
se^titur.
naught cares not to be known of naught, and where all stink alike, no one
man's stink is discerned from other.

16. W. BISHOP.
To return to our purpose, and to discover yet more of the Protestants
disgraces offered to our Saviors mediation. Con. Hesh p. 39. Sup. Ioh. pa. 39.
In locis. fol 361. 1. Ioh. 2. v. 2.
Did Christ suffer his passion for the redemption of all mankind, or did he
die only for some few of the elect? let Calvin answer you. Christ's flesh was
not crucified for the ungodly, neither was the blood of Christ shed to cleanse
their sins. With him agrees brother Bucer: Christ by his death did only
redeem the sins of the elect. Musculus will bear a part in that consort:
Christ's death is a satisfaction only for the sins of the elect; all as
contrary to the plain text of Scripture, as can be. Christ is a propitiation
for our sins, (where he spoke in the person of the elect) and not for ours
only, but also for the whole worlds. Let us go on yet one step further.
What effect does the blood of Christ work in the small number of these elected
brethren? Does it cleanse their souls from all filth of sin; and power into
them the manifold gifts of the holy Ghost, whereby they may afterward resist
sin, and serve God in holiness of life? nothing less. Page 31.
For in the Regenerat as M. PERKINS with all the rest of them does teach) there
remains original sin, which infecteth every work of man, and makes it a
mortal sin. So that inwardly in their souls these clected Protestants be
void of justice, and full of all manner of iniquity: marry, they have created
in them the rare instrument of a new devised faith, by which they lay hold on
Christ's justice, and so by real imputation ( to use M. PERKINS words) of
Christ's justice to them, they on the sudden become exceeding just: therefore
Friar Luther had some reason to say, that whosoever was borne again of this
Evangelical faith, was equal in grace unto both Peter and Paul; and unto the
Virgin MARY Mother of God; Supra 1. Pet. 1. In actis disput. Tigur. Fox Act.
fol. 1335 and 1138.
Nay it seems that Luther came to short, and Zwinglius stroke home when he
said: that God the Father did no less favor all the faithful, then he did
Christ his own Son. And out of the confidence of the same liuely-feeling
faith, proceeded these speeches of our new Gospellers in England. And we have
as much right to heaven, as Christ has; we cannot be damned, unless Christ be
damned: neither can Christ be saved, unless we be saved. Christ (belike) could
not live in bliss without their holy company. What audacious companions, and
saucy Gospellers were these? Yet their reason seems sound in the way of their
own religion: for if they were most assured of the benefit of Christ's own
justice to be imputed unto them, they could not be less assured of their own
salvation, then they were of Christ's own. To conclude this point, consider
(good reader) how the Protestants (who would be thought to magnify Christ's
sufferings exceedingly) do in very deed extremely debase them. For (as you
have heard) they esteem very little of all the rest of his life, besides his
passion: secondly, they make his passion without suffering of hell torments,
not sufficient to redeem us: thirdly, that all those sufferings put together,
do not in justice merit the remission of our sins, but only that of grace
and courtesy God does accept them for such: fourthly, that when all is done,
they deserve favor only for a few of the elect, and that not to purge those
few, neither from all their sins, but only to purchase them an imputation of
justice, to be apprehended by a strong imagination or rather presumption,
falsely by them termed faith. Is not here a huge great mill-post, fairly
thwited into a poor pudding prick (as they say) by them, who after so high
exaltations of the all sufficiency of Christ's suffering, do in fine conclude,
that in a very few persons it works only an imputation or shadow of justice:
How Christ died for all.
but it agrees very well and hangs handsomely together, that by the merits
of Christ's sufferings in hell, (which are mere fantastical) these men should
have created in them a fantastical faith, never heard of before their days,
to lay hold upon a vain shadow of an imputative and fantastical justice.

R. ABBOT.
None of our writers deny, but that Christ in his death intended a price
sufficient for all, the power whereof in the ministry of the Gospel should
extend to all; but as touching the effect of his death, we say truly that which
M. Bishop here obiecteth, that Christ intended to die for the elect only. For
Aug. ad Artic. sibi falso impositos. art. 1. Christi mers non impensa est
humano generi^ vt ad mortem eius etiam qui regenerandi non erant pertinerent.
Christ did not bestow his death upon mankind, says S. Austen, that they who
were not to be partakers of regeneration, should appertain to his redemption:
Idem. in Psalm. 87. solis praedestinatis ad aeternam salutem, non autem omnibus
hominibus cius bona opera profuerunt.
the things which he wrought were not beneficial to all men, but to them only
that were predestinate to eternal salvation. The words of S. John which he
alleges as contrary to our assertion, make nothing against us. John did not
say, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
He is the propitiation for our sins, as speaking in the person of all the
elect that then were, but of himself and the elect to whom he writes; and by
the other words he joined to them all the rest of the elect that then were or
after should be throughout the whole world; Not for our sins only, but for
the sins of the whole world. In the same sort has he left the same words by
occasion to be used of us, the former part of them to whom or amongst whom they
shall be spoken; the other of the rest of the members of the body that are or
shall be wheresoever throughout the world. Thus does Saint Austin understand
them, Aug. epist. 48. Christus propitiator est peccatorum nostrorum, non solum
nostrorum sed totius mundi propter triticu^ quod est per totu^ mundum.
that Christ is the propitiatio^ of the sins of the whole world, because of the
wheat that is through the whole world, so writing upon that epist. of S. John
he expounds it to be, Idem. in 1. Joan tract. 1. Ecce habes Ecclesiam per
totu^ mundum, etc. totius mundi quem suo sanguine comparauit.
the church throughout the whole world, the whole world which he has gotten by
his blood. And thus where Christ says, Ioh. 3.17.
God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved: and the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.9
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, he restrains the name
of Aug. Collat. 3. cum D^natist. Mundi no ^en in ^ono; vt salnetur mundus, etc.
Non saluabitur nisi Ecclesia in mundo, etc. vide mundum in bono omnes fideles
et spem vitae aeternae gerentes per vniuersas gentes: Deus erat in Christo,
inquit, mundum reconcilians sibi fi reconciliari potest deo detestatus ille mun
^us iudicent qui loquuntur.
the world to the Church of God in the world, to all the faithful and such as
bear the hope of eternal life throughout all nations, because the Church only
shall be saved in the world, and the detested or detestable world cannot be
reconciled unto God. Thus he distinguishes Idem in Joan. tract. 110. Mu^dus
non permanens in^micus qualis est mundus damnationi prae ^estinatus, sed ex
inimico amicus effectus propter quem deus erat in Christo, etc.
the world that abides an enemy to God which is predestined to damnation,
from the world that does not abide an enemy, but of an enemy is made a friend,
for which says he, god was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. In
like sort therefore Saint John says, that Christ is the propitiation for the
finnes of the world, that is Ibid. tr. 111. Mundus reconciliatus ex inimico
liberabitur mundo.
of the reconciled world, of all the faithful over the whole world, that have
been from the beginning, and shall be to the worlds end. But of this point I
refer the Reader to see more before in the question of justification, the
fifteenth section. M. Bishop here will go one step further, and we must follow
him in his step. What effect, says he, does the blood of Christ work in the
small number of these elected brethren? But what, does he jest at the smalnesse
of the number of these elected brethren? What, did he never read in the
Gospel, Matthew. 22.14.
Many are called, but few elected? Has he not heard Christ comforting this
Luke 12.32.
small number, fear not, little flock, for it is your fathers will to give
you a kingdom? Does he glory in the multitude of his consorts without
remembering that fearful sentence of Christ, Matthew. 7.13. The effect of
Christ's blood to cleanse us from sin.
Wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat: but strait is the gate and narrow is the way that
leads unto life and few there be that find it? Well, let us leave him to his
greater number; but as touching the effect of the blood of Christ, I answer him
that it does cleanse our souls from the filth of sin, and shall fully cleanse
them from all filth of sin. It gives unto us now Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit, whereby we fight against sin, and serve God in
holiness of life: and it shall give us the full measure off the spirit,
whereby we shall utterly overcome and put of the body of sin, and shall serve
God in most full and perfect holiness for ever. In the mean time there
remains in the regenerate a blot of original sin, by reason whereof every
faithful man complains as the Apostle does; Romans 7.14.23.
I am carnal, sold under sin, holden captive to the law of sin, which is
in my members. This blot of sin defiles and infecteth all our doings, so
that Greg Moral. li. 35. c. 16. Mala nostra pura mala sunt, and bona quae nos
habere credimus pura bona esse nequaquam possunt.
our good works cannot be merely or purely good, and therefore being stained
and blemished they should be utterly rejected, if God in rigor of judgment
should esteem of them. But our belief and comfort is this, that God Romans 3.25.
having set forth Christ to be our atonement through faith in his blood, does
therein vouchsafe to wash away all our blots and stains, and for his sake
through the imputation of his merits does accept for just both us to life, and
our works to reward; and notwithstanding those imperfections, gives the
crown of righteousness to all them that fear him. Is not this, M. Bishop, a
most gracious and glorious effect of the blood of Christ? Can you say any thing
to magnify the power of Christ's death further then we do? If you will say
truth, M. Bishop, you can say nothing: for as for that which you do say, that
the blood of Christ does now in baptism fully cleanse our souls from all the
filth of original sin, your own heart tells you that it is a very lie.
And because that is a lie, therefore for justice and rigteousnesse before God,
you must betake your self to that which now in mockery you call, because you
know it not, the rare instrument of a new devised faith; and to the real
imputation of the righteousness of Christ, who really communicates unto us
whatsoever he has done for us. And impious it is to think Romans 4.3.5.6.
the imputation of righteousness, which the Scripture expressly teaches, to be
as you seem to imagine it only mental and fantastical. But of all these
points here girded at by M. Bishop, Answer to D. Bishops Epistle sect. 7.17.
Of original sin. per tot.
of the remainder of original sin, Answer to the Epistle sect. 19. Of
Justification. sect. 44.
of the stain and imperfection of our works, Of the certainty of Salvation.
sect. 2.3. etc. Of Justification. s. 15.16. etc.
of the nature of faith, Of Justification. sect. 3.4. etc. Luther affirms not
equality of grace.
of the imputation of righteousness, so much has been said before, as that
it shall be but tedious both to the Reader and me to go over the same again.
And surely we can take all this speech of his to be no other but wild and
careless babbling, so long as we see him unable to defend that which to the
same purpose he wrote before. But upon that mention of faith and imputed
justice he quarelleth at Luther, for saying as he reports, that whosoever is
borne again of this Evangelical faith is equal in grace both to Peter and
Paul, and to the Virgin Mary. But he therein belieth Luther who in the very
place confesses difference of faith, and therefore cannot be said to affirm
equality of grace. His words are; Luther. in 1. Pet. c. 1. vnam Christiani
omnes fraternitatem babemus. etc. See the whole place Answer to the
Advertisement. sect. 15.
All we that are christians have one brotherhood, which we have attained in
baptism, of which no saint has more then thou and I. For with what price he
was redeemed, with the same was I redeemed also. It cost God no less for my
sake, then for any the greatest saint, save that he has perhaps better
embraced this treasure, that is, has stronger faith then I. This Luther spoke
rightly of the common condition and calling of Christianity, wherein no man
has more interest then other, which yet hinders not but that in particular
gifts of grace according to diverse measures of faith one man may far excel
another. But what conscience he uses in these citations it may easily appear,
for that whereas here he cites this place of Luther to charge him with
affirming equality of grace in this world, he alleges the very same in Sect
15. Hod God is said to favor us no less then his Son Christ.
the treatise following, to charge him with affirming equality of glory in the
world to come. From Luther he goes to Zwinglius, albeit the words, which he
biteth at, be not the words of Zwinglius, but of Conradus Fabritius another
Minister of that Church: which yet contain nothing amiss, but that a venomous
spider has the sucking of them. Act. Disput. 2. Tigur. apud Zwinglium. Deus
pater omnibus Christianis qui vera spe, fide and charitate Christo nituntur non
minus sauet necminus propitius est quam Christo filio suo proprio: fidelem
huiusmodi non minus quam filium suum tuebitur; nec minus quam filium suum ab
aeterna morte eundem liberabit: non minus ab aeterno incendio illum eripiet:
non minus caelum illi patere faciet etc. Quid n^u it is? aeternam vitam non minus
illi quam filio suo largietur. Testimonium nobis huius certitudinis est
locupletissim^m, quod est ipse Christus aeterna veritas. etc.
God the Father, says Fabritius, no less favors all Christians who rest
upon Christ by true faith, hope and charity, nor is less gracious to them
then to Christ his own Son. No less will he defend such a faithful man
then his own Son: no less will he save him from everlasting death: no
less will he deliver him from everlasting fire: no less will he cause
heaven to be open vnvnto him then to his only begotten son. What should I
use many words? He will no less give him everlasting life then he will to his
son. He adds further: We have a most abundant testimony of this assurance,
which is Christ himself the eternal truth, etc. By which words it plainly
appears, that that which he says, no less, no less, is not referred to
intension and quantity, but to assurance and certainty. He no less favors
the one then he does the other; that is, he as certainly favors the one as
he does the other; no less will he give eternal life to the one then to the
other, that is, he will give it as certainly to the one as to the other. And
what is this other in effect then that which Christ himself says of the
elect, to his father; John 17.23.
Thou have loved them as thou have loved me? which manner of speech as Saint
Austin notes, August in ^an. tract. 110. Neque enim semper aequalitatem
significat qui dicit, si^ut illud, ita and illud; sed aliquando tantum quia est
illud, est et illud, aut quia est illud vt fit et illud.
does not always signify equality, but sometimes signifies only, because
the one is, the other also is; or that the one is that the other also may be.
In the same sort and no otherwise are the words of Fabritius to be understood,
as M. Bishop himself knows, but shift he must to say somewhat. The words
which he cites as of some of our Martyrs out of M. Fox I cannot find by his
quotation. I remember that long since I have red some such kind of words, but
he is so false that I dare not presume that he has reported them altogether
truly as they are. The meaning of him that spoke the words, was this, that we
have the same right to heaven that Christ has, because Christ has given us
his right. It is written of Saint Bernard, that being in a time of sickness much
urged with Satan's accusations, he answered for himself; Vita Be^nardi l. 1.
cap. 12. fateor non sum dignus ego, nec proprijs possum meritis regnum obtinere
caelorum; caeterum dupliet iure illud obtinens dominus meus, haereditate
scilicet patris and merito passionis, aeltero ipse contentus alterum mihi
donat, ex cuius dono iure illud mihi vendicans non confundor.
I confess I am not worthy, neither can I by mine own merits obtain the
kingdom of heaven: but my Lord Jesus having obtained it by double right, both
by inheritance from the father, and by the merit of his passion, being himself
contented with the one, he gives me the other, by whose gift I am not ashamed
to challenge it for my right. In the same manner did the godly martyr speak of
right, not to distinguish a right in himself from the right of Christ, but to
signify that Christ has made over his right to us, and thereby we hold as
fast as Christ himself can hold. From hence the other words are derived by
imitatio^ of that which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15.16.
If the dead rise not again, then is Christ not risen again; by which he
signifies, that there is that strait and inseparable bond betwixt Christ and
his members, as that to deny to them any thing which Christ has wrought and
purchased for them, is to deny the same to Christ himself; to affirm the
failing of any thing to them, is to affirm the failing of it to him also. And
as by allusion to that place of the Apostle Tertullian says; Tertull. de
Resurrect carnis. securae estote caro and sanguis, vsurpastis and caelum and
dei regnum in Christo, aut si negent vos in Christo, negent and in caelo
Christum qui vobis caelum negauerunt.
Care not, flesh and blood, ye have in Christ taken possession of heaven, and
of the kingdom of God; or if they deny you to be in heaven in Christ, let them
also deny Christ himself to be in heaven, who have denied heaven to you. What,
will M. Bishop here term Tertullian, and Bernard, together with the Apostle
himself audacious and saucy Gospellers? Because the Apostle denies Christ
himself to be risen unless the faithful also rise again, will he return
him a scornful jest, as here he does; Christ belike could not live in bliss
without their holy company? But their reason says he, seems good in the way
of their own religion. Well, if it be so, it is sufficient; for the way of
their religion has been so far approved, as that neither M. Bishop, nor
any other adversaries have been able to disprooue it. And because he cannot
disprooue it, therefore let him confess, as the truth is, that the firm and
steadfast apprehension of the merits of Christ, and of being by faith made one
with him, does minister unto the faithful this sacred resolution, that so long
as Christ perishes not, they cannot perish, and therefore shall be preserved
for ever. That that follows is but an idle repetition of the same matters,
only set out with a bold face and big looks, and some inkehorne terms, and
therefore I pass it over, not maruelling that any thing on our part seem
fantastical to so vain a man, whose intellectual parts serve him not to
prove any thing substantially for his own.

17. W. BISHOP.
But to return to Christ's mediatorship and merits. Is it not moreover a great
disparagement unto them, to maintain (as the Protestants do) that his best
beloved spouse the Church, should continue but a small time, at least in any
sight, and should be penned up in corners: yea, and during that time too, it
should not be free from many foul gross errors, in the very foundation of
faith? Furthermore, that he left his holy word (the only rule and square (as
they hold) of Christian religion) to be understood of every man as his own
knowledge and spirit should direct him? and if any doubtful question did arise
thereabout (as he fore-sawe thousands should do) yet he took no other order
for the deciding and ending of them, but that every one should repair unto the
same his word, and doing his diligence to understand it, might afterward be his
own judge. As this later opinion would argue our blessed Savior, who was the
wisdom of God, to be the weakest and most improuident lawmakers that ever
was: so the former does mightily blemish the inestimable price of his most
precious blood, making it not of sufficient value, to purchase unto him an
everlasting inheritance, free from all errors in matter of faith, and
abounding in all good works.

R. ABBOT.
The Protestants do not maintain, that the Church, the beloved spouse of
Christ should continue but a small time, but do all absolutely affirm the
continuance thereof from the beginning to the end. The Church how it is visible
or invisible.
As for the visibilitie and sight of the Church, we speak diversely thereof, as
we speak diversely of the Church it self. Where the Church is a matter of
faith, there it is not subject to sight, for Greg. Dialog. l. 4. c. 4. Hoc
reraciter dicitur credi quod non potest viders; nam quod iam videri potest,
credi non potest.
that is truly said to be believed, says Gregory, which cannot be seen, and
that which may now be seen cannot be said to be belecued. The Church then
which we profess to believe in the articles of our faith, is invisible,
because as Aug in Psalm. 56. Caput separatum est a visione.
the head is invisible 1. Pet 1.8.
we believe in him, but we see him not, so is the body also, Greg. in Psalm.
poenitential. 5. Tota Ecclesia sieve quae adhuc versatur in terris, sieve quae
cum eo iam regnat in coelis, etc.
one part thereof reigning in heaven with the head, another part yet unborn,
Aug. vt supra. pertinentibus ad eam etiam his qui fuerunt ante nos, and his qui
futnri sunt ^ost nos, vsque ad finem seculi.
because to it belong they also that shall be after us to the worlds end; the
third part though visible as they are men, yet invisible according to that they
are members of this Church, because Luke 17.21.
the kingdom of God is within, and Aug de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 28.
Mamfe. stu^ est id quod in ecclesia dicitur intus and foris, in cord non in
corpore cogi tandum.
to be in the Church, is not to be conceived in the body but in the heart, 1.
King. 8.39. 2 Timothy 2.19.
which God only knows, and therefore only knows who are within, according
to that seal as the Apostle calls it of the foundation of God, i The Lord
knows who are his. To speak of the Church accordingly as men take notice and
knowledge of it, it is said to be visible two manner of ways; either as
touching the persons professing the service and worship of God; or as touching
the congregating and assembling of the persons for the performance of that
service. The Church may be visible the former way, when it is not visible the
latter, because it may be seen and knownen that there are many persons of such
devotion though they be not seen in any assembly for the practice of their
devotion. In this sort there have been always some either few or more, either
one where or other, who to the world though with peril and loss of their
lives have given testimony of the truth of God. If we will understand visible
the latter way, we must consider that the church it self may be spoken of
diuersely: either as touching the title of outward vocation and calling; or as
touching the sincerity and truth of profession and faith. There may be a
church as touching outward calling visible to the world, which yet does not
preserve that integrity, truth of faith whereby it first became a church. There
may be a people tied by covenant unto God and by Sacraments professing in their
assemblies to serve him, who yet unfaithfully pervert the service of God, and
depart from that way of religion which he has taught them. In this outward
state and condition of the Church it is to be remembered which our Savior
Christ says, Math. 22.14.
Many are called but few are chosen, the multitude generally taking upon them
to be called the people of God, when few of them are so indeed, in so much that
the Prophet Esaias cried out concerning the Church of Israel, Esaias 10.21. Romans
9.27.
Though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet
but a remnant shall be saved. For even in the profession of true religion, and
where the word of God has public maintenance and state, yet how few are
there commonly who care to bring forth the fruits thereof in holy
conversation? Albeit it falls out further also many times that this outward
face of the church is beraied with the filth of manifold superstitions and
idolatries, that true doctrine is rejected, and in place thereof humane
traditions and inventions are set up and magnified, whilst men neglect and
forget the covenant of God and will needs use their own wits for serving him.
Yea so far they proceed in the admiration and liking of their own doings as
that they hate the truth, and become persecutours of them who continue constant
therein, and refuse to join with them to be partakers of their sin. Thus it
came to pass in Israel by the sin of Jeroboam, and much more by the sin of
Ahab, and in Judah by the Apostasy of Manasses, who brought abomination into
the temple of God, and set up idols there to be worshipped instead of God. At
which time the case so stood as that Israel and Judah having both cast off the
yoke of the law of God, and broken the bounds that he appointed them, there
was no public state of true religion throughout the whole world. The public
state and government of the same church of the Jews, the only visible church
refused the preaching of Christ, preferred their own traditions before Gods
commandment, and pronunced sentence of death against the Son of God. They
only were the people of God, the Church of God, but perfidiously they rebelled
against God and refused to be guided by his word. But yet amidst all this
Apostasy and defection of the church the calling of God did not become vain,
neither was his covenant of circumcision without effect, but still he had a
remnant in whom he was glorified, 1. King. 19.18.
seven thousand in Israel, though unknown to Elias, who had not bowed their
knee unto Baal, in Judah many who continued steadfast in the testimony of God,
in the pursuit of whom Manasses is said 2. King. 21.16.
to have shed innocent blood exceeding much, and to have replenished Jerusalem
therewith from corner to corner. In a word, at the coming of Christ amongst a
huge heap of chafe there were some grains of wheat; some few faithful that
Luk 2.38. and 23.51.
waited for redemption and for the kingdom of God. Now then where the church
imports them only that are professors of Gods true religion, there the
church is sometimes visible and sometimes invisible, visible one where, another
where invisible. For true religion sometimes has public state and
maintenance, and the assemblies and congregations for exercise thereof are
apparent to all men's eyes that whosoever will may resort unto them. But
sometimes hypocrisy gets the upper hand, and under the name of the Church
challenges to it self the places of public assembly, driving out from
thence synceritie and truth, and suffering nothing to be done there but for it
own behoof. Here then the professors of truth are feign 1. King. 18.4. Heb.
11.37.38.
to hide their heads and to keep themselves in corners, and by stealth only
to assemble and meet together. It falls out here many times that they are
forced with Elias 1. Kin. 19.3.
to fly for their lives, and because they are watched and waited for to be
drawn to death, therefore do betake themselves to places where so near as
may be, they may, save each to other, neither be known nor seen. In this case
therefore the church, that is, the professors of the true faith and religion
of the Church are said to be invisible, not for that they are merely to men's
eyes invisible, as is the Church in the first sense before named, but because
it is not to be seen in public state and assembly, in free and open
profession, as in times of peace and liberty it is wont to be. For that
otherwise they are visible appears plainly in that they live continually
subject to the malignity of their adversaries, to indignity and reproach, to
bonds and imprisonment, to cruel massacrees, tortures and death, all which
they should avoid if they were wholly out of sight. But this inuisibility of
the church, is not to be considered only in the church persecuting the church,
the worse part thereof the better, August. de doct. Christ. l. 3. cap. 32.
Corpus domini verum atque simulatum.
the counterfeit body of Christ, as Saint Austin calls it, the true, but also
when by foreiners and strangers attempt is made against the whole church. For
so it is sometimes that the whole name of the church of God is impugned, and
the adversary uses all his might utterly to extinguish the memorial thereof,
God by this means making trial of his, and exercising their faith and
patience, and bringing just revenge upon hypocrites, who abuse his calling and
grace to the doing of their own will. Here then God giving way to the enemy
the outward state of the church is wholly overthrown, the public exercise of
religion is altogether interrupted and broken off, and the members of the
church though they be seen and knownen as such a people, yet are not seen in
the condition of the church, that is, assembling themselves together to
perform religion and service to their God. This was the state of the church in
the captivity of Babylon, when Jerusalem was burnt to the ground, the temple
destroyed, the people of God carried away into strange lands and here and
there dispersed amongst the heathen nations. The like befell them by the
tyranny of Antiochus even in their own land, their temple being defiled, their
religion interdicted, and every one commanded to be slain that would not
renounce the law of God. Now to apply all these things to the state of the
church of Christ, it was first oppugned by professed enemies, who sought wholly
to root out the name of Christians, and to abandon the faith of Christ utterly
out of the world. Thus did the Jews first, and after them the Heathens,
persecute the whole profession of Christianity, and by the importunity of their
cruelty did many times so obscure and darken the face of the church, as that
for the most part it was hardly to be seen. Whosoever were found to give open
testimony to the name of Christ were martyred and slain; the rest for fear of
the like danger either fled into wildernesses and solitary places, or else had
their meetings very covertly and secretly that they might not be espied. Yea
their savage and barbarous fury so far prevailed as that they seemed to
themselves to have gotten a perpetual victory over the name of Christ, and did
set up pillars of marble as trophies thereof, whereof it is said that some
monuments are yet remaining until this day. Thus albeit many thousands there
were who here and there dispersed and scattered continued steadfast in the
faith of Christ, and in many places covertly gathered themselves together for
the exercise of their faith, yet the Church to the sight of the enemies thereof
was invisible, neither could they in a manner take knowledge of any against
whom their malice might any further proceed. But when by the providence and
mercy of God the sword of those tyrants was wrested out of their hands, this
invisible church soon came to light again, and began to enioie outward state
and honor, and the Saints who seemed to have been dead and buried in
everlasting reproach and shame, became renowned and glorious in the world, and
as they were indeed, so began they in the opinion of men to be exalted unto
heaven. From thencefoorth we affirm, that the church has never ceased to be
eminently and apparently visibly to all the world, so far are we from saying
that which Bellarmine as the master, and M. Bishop here as the scholar do
impute unto us B^llarm. de notis eccl. cap 9. Ecclesiam visibilem a multis
seculis perijsse etc. docent omnes.
that the visible church for many ages was quite perished out of the world. How
can we be taken to say that the church was perished for many ages, who do hold
that for those many ages whereof we speak, Antichrist according to that that
was prophesied of him did 2 Thessalonians. 2.4
sit as God in the Temple, that is to say, the church of God? If we say that
Antichrist sat, that is, dominated and tyrannized in the church, the visible
church, then surely we deny it not to be the visible church wherein Antichrist
did sit. We confess that the church in all that time has been apparent to
the eyes of all men, the whole world saw it: Turks and Saracens fought against
it, and did their uttermost to root it out, that the name of Christians might
no more have been heard of amongst men. But we say withal; that the visible
church by the usurpation of Antichrist was become for the most part as the
temple of God in the days of 2. King. 2^ 4.7.
Manasses replenished with idolatries and abominations, or as the church of
the Jews at the coming of Christ, even Mat. 9.36.
like sheep without a shepherd, burdened with humane traditions and wanting
the free air of the word of God whereby he ministers the breath of
everlasting life. As Ierem. 3.20.
the wife that is rebellious and unfaithful to her husband, Prou. 2.17.
which forsakes the guide of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God;
so was the state of the Church, shamefully polluting her self with manifold
fornications whiles she proftituted herself to the embracings of the Roman
adulterer, and yielded to him the obedience and service which she should have
reserved unto Jesus Christ. She was the mother indeed by whom God through
baptism brought forth children to himself; but being though by nature a
mother, yet by affection a stepmother, when she had brought them forth she
poisoned them, or else hated and put them from her, if any refused to drink of
her cup, and to approve those adulteries and sorceries wherewith their father
her husband and Lord was dishonored by her. And many such were there through
the whole decourse of the desolations of Antichrist, whose eyes God opened,
some more, some less, to see the filthiness of their mother, who though
happily by education they were not wholly without some aspersion of the errors
and superstitions of their times, yet abhorred those Idolatries and
abominations whereby the Church had broken her faith to God, and made way, so
much as in her lay, for her full divorce and separation from him. For God
forbid that we should think that the spirit of truth was wholly departed from
the Church, or that the covenant of Baptism was void on Gods behalf, sealing
none unto him, but that amidst those ruins he had still his remnant, which not
in name only, but in truth were the Church of Christ. For as in a common
pestilence, though it rage never so sore, yet it infecteth not all, and many
whom it does infect, yet are not deadly infected, but many by preservatives
escape, and others by strength of nature expel the venime in botches and sores,
so as that life is still preserved: even so in that general pestilence and
infection which the breath of Antichrist had blown abroad through the church,
howsoever it were universally dispersed, yet it tainted not all, and many that
were touched with it, yet drunk not so deep of the whore of Babylons cup as
to surfeit and die thereof, and albeit they might seem in a manner to be
drowned in common errors, yet retained that fundamental doctrine of true
faith in Christ whereby they keept the head above water to receive the breath
of life, and through the fire of repentance by hearty prayer unto God for
remission of all their sins and ignorances whether known to them in their
end, or remaining unknown, passed unto eternal life. See Simon Goulart.
Catalog. test. veritatis.
Many such there were in the bosom of their church, even in their monasteries
and religious houses to whom God revealed the light of his truth, Who Ezech.
9.4.
mourned and cried for all the abominations that were done in the midst
thereof, who imparted to other what they themselves saw; and lived and died in
the comfort of that faith which we now maintain against the Church of Rome.
But many there were who did professedly separate themselves from the assemblies
of the church because of the abominations that were exercised therein, being
careful according to the knowledge which God had given them to keep
themselves undefiled, that with pure conscience they might serve him. Yea
sometimes and in some places there wanted not public profession and exercise
of Gods truth, and whole countries and towns and cities, followed the religion
of Christ, with express renouncing of the abominations of the church of Rome.
Which seuering of themselves notwithstanding not being absolute and universal,
but only respective, because of the intolerable enormities and corruptions
prevailing in the church, made not them that thus divided themselves a new, or
another church, but only freed them from the default of the church whereof
they were members. For to use the former comparison, as when the pestilence
rages in a city they that for avoiding the infection do forbear the common
assemblies and meetings do not thereby deprive themselves of their interest in
that corporation and state, but do still continue citizens and members
thereof; even so they who for manifest idolatries and abominations did forbear
the communion and fellowship of their own or other churches, did not thereby
disable or impeach their right and title of being members of the church, but
rather maintained the same so much the more by eschuing the corruptions whereby
the church was in danger to be cut off and to become no church. But upon al
these the eye of malice was continually cast, and Antichrist pretending Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, li. 20. c. 19. In templum dei sedet, tanquam ipse sit templum dei
quod est ecclesia, etc. Ad eum pertinentem hominum multitudinem simul cum ipso
intelligi volunt, etc.
himself and his only to be the church of God, waited and took all occasions
and opportunities for the destruction of them. By the stories it is plain how
they were hated and persecuted in England, France, Italy, Germany, Bohemia,
Poland and other countries under the names of Waldenses, Albigenses,
Wicleuistes, Hussites, Taborites, Carmelites, Leonistes, Lollardes, and such
like. It is memorable which Bellar. de notis eccl. cap. 18.
Bellarmine reports out of Paulus Aemelius the French Chronicler, that of
them there were a hundred thousand slain at one time in France, which was done
by the procurement of Hospinian. de Origin Monach. l 6. c. 4.
Friar Dominicke, who having long time labored in the country of the Earl of
Toulouse to bring them to the obedience of the sea of Rome, when bringing
nothing out of Gods word to persuade them, he could not prevail, played the
butcherly wretch, and caused so great a number of poor innocent souls, by an
army sent in amongst them miserably to be slain. In like sort by Matthew Paris
it appears, reporting the matter according to the conceit and report of that
time, that in Spain and Germany, there were Math. Paris. in Henrico 3. anno
1234. peremptus est infidelium haereticorum (Albigensium) numerus infinitus.
an infinite number of them murdered, some of them, he says, for rebellion,
but indeed all for conscience sake. Such tragedies they acted in diverse and
sundry places from time to time, for the space of three hundred years and
more; they proscribed, they killed and burned the professors of our religion;
the earth was died with their blood and strawed with their ashes; their stories
mention them, their registers name them, their writers of heresies do testify
what their opinions were, (albeit in some points thereof it appears by some
of them that the rest lie, fathering upon them, as Idem ibid. Asserebant
constanter fidem Christianam et praecipue incarnationis mysterium friuolum esse
and penitus abrogandum.
Matthew Paris does, things impious and absurd which they never dreamed of) and
yet with impudent faces they ask of us, where our church, where our religion
was before Luthers time, as if the same had never been heard of in the world
before. As touching the persons then, our church was manifest enough to them by
whom it was thus persecuted, which yet were not another church, but children of
one mother, and members of one church with them that persecuted them; I mean
not of the church of Rome, but of the Catholic visible church, which for the
most part the church of Rome had brought in subjection to it self. Their
mother had played the harlot, and with the whore of Babylon had prostituted
herself to Antichrist, and because they would not approve her fornications,
therefore she condemned them; therefore Esaias 66.5.
their brethren who said, Let the Lord be glorified, yet did cast them out for
the names sake of the Lord, and they had occasion to complain as does the
Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 1.5.
The children of mine own Mother are risen up against me. But if these
persecutours glory that the churches and places of assembly were in their
hands, they do no more but what the Arians of old did when they had gotten
into their possession the churches thorowout the whole world, and we answer as
Hilary did to them; Hilar. cont. Auxent. Male vos parietum amor cepit: male
ecclesiam dei in tectis aedificijsque veneramini. Anne ambiguum est in his
Antichristum esse sessurum? Montes mihi and syluae and lacus and carceres and
voragines sunt tutiores: in his enim prophetae aut manentes aut demersi dei
spiritu prophetabant.
You do amiss to be in love with walls: ill do you honor and admire the
Church of God in houses and buildings. Is there any doubt but that Antichrist
shall sit in them? Mountains and woods, and lakes, and prisons, and caves are
safer to me; for in them the Prophets abiding or sticking did Prophecy by the
spirit of God. The case is alike: Arianisme had then ouerspred the whole face
of the Church, and the heretics had the Churches in their hands, the true
professors of the faith were driven into corners: yet Hilary thought this to be
no prejudice unto them; nay, he held it to be the right picture of the true
Church. Even so Popery since has prevailed and gotten the upper hand; what
prejudice is it to the professors of true religion, that in the mean time
they have undergone the same condition that the Prophets and other faithful in
former times have done? Yea S. Austin expressly testifies, that Aust. epist. 80
Ecclesia non apparebit impijs tunc persecutoribus vltra modum saeuientibus.
the Church in the time of Antichrist shall be invisible, because wicked
persecutors shall then practice their cruelty beyond measure. Let it be the
question then, whether Antichrist be come; but that the Church according to the
true members thereof, shall be invisible in the time of Antichrist, it is
without question. Now that the Bishop of Rome has been and is that very
Antichrist of whom the Scripture has foretold, and the Church of Rome the
whore of Babylon, has been otherwhere plentifully showed, and in some part
has been also handled formerly in the second part of this work. The time
then has been already for the Church to be invisible by the means of the
fury of Antichrist, maliciously and cruelly persecuting all that came to
light, that refused to drink of his poisoned cup. Now having thus at large
instructed M. Bishop what our doctrine is of the visibility of the Church, I
will answer him briefly as touching the other point of this cavil, The Church
subject to error.
that by the ancient monuments of the Church it plainly appears, that many
foul errors entered into the Church soon after the Apostles times; that
whilst Matt. 13.25.
the watchmen and husbandmen were sometimes sleepie, the enemy came and sowed
tares amongst the wheat; that the builders built much 1. Cor. 3.12.
hay and wood and stubble; but yet so, as that for the most part they retained
the only true foundation, which is Jesus Christ; so as that by the foundation
they themselves are saved, but the fire of the Lord shall consume that trash
which they have builded thereon. I have Answer to the Epistle sect. 13. ex
Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 3. c. 29.
before showed out of Eusebius, how Egesippus limited the Virginity of the
Church to the age of the Apostles, and that generation which with their own
ears heard the preaching of truth from them. I have there showed how the
shifts and subtilties of Satan for corrupting of the truth which he began to
practice even in their days, though they were then checked by their
authority, yet prevailed mightily when they were gone. The errors which then
were, how far they extended, and whether they were in other places the same
that we find them to have been in some, it is not apparent to us; but
manifest it is, that so cunningly and effectually Satan conveyed that poison
into the Church, as that it has never since perfectly recovered those wounds
that it received then: Yea Antichrist the man of sin, the master of
abominations, finding many of those corruptions in the Church, has bound them
together as it were in a bundle, and by his edicts and laws, has obtruded and
forced them to be received as articles of true faith. But this, says M.
Bishop, does mightily blemish the inestimable price of the most precious blood
of Christ. And why so? Forsooth it makes it not to be of sufficient value to
purchase unto him an everlasting inheritance free from all errors in matters
of faith, and abounding in all good works. But the effect of Christ's purchase
is to be determined by the will of Christ himself, and not by M. Bishops
wilful and witless dreams, by which it may as well be proved, that man is
wholly without sin, as that the Church is without error. But I answer him
briefly out of his own words, that as the Church which Christ has purchased
does not so abound in all good works, but that it is subject to many sins, so
neither does the same Church so abound in knowledge and truth, but that it is
subject to many errors. Christ intended not by his mediation to bring his
Church in this life to full perfection: So long as she continues a pilgrim
from her bridegroom and Lord, she shall still carry the marks of mortality and
corruption. The Church in this world is like unto the Moon, which is never so
clear but that some fret or spot of darkness is to be seen in it, and
howsoever it seem bright in one part, yet is obscured in another. But it is
worth the while to see to what issue M. Bishop will bring this conceit of his,
if he be urged to reveal the secret of it. For let us question with him: If
the Church cannot err, how is it that the Church of Ephesus has erred and
quite fallen away, Act. 20.28.
which God purchased with his own blood, and of which it was immediately that
the Apostle said, that 1. Tim. 3.15
it was the pillar and ground of truth? Did not the Church of Gal. 1.6.
Galatia err? The Churches of Corinth, of Philippi, of Thessalonica, of
Colossa, of Pergamus, Thyatira and the rest, have they not all gone astray?
Yes, will he say, these particular Churches may err, but the whole Church
universal cannot err. But if every part of the Church may err, then surely
the whole Church may err, because all the parts make the whole, which can be
no other than the parts are. We have hereof example in the Exodus 32.1.
Israelites, when the whole Church erred in setting up the golden calfe, and in
the Christian Church, which was in a manner Vincent. Lirinens. Arianoru^ venenum
non iam portiunculam quandam sed pene orbem totum contaminauerat.
wholly corrupted with the heresy of Arius; Hieron. adu. Lucifer. Ingemuit
totus orbis and se esse Arianum miratus est.
the whole world groaning, as Hierome says, and woondering that it was become
Arian. Well, he will say that the Church severed and sundred in the parts
thereof may err, but being assembled together by her Pastors and Bishops in a
general Council it cannot err. But this the former instances disprooue; for
the whole Church of the Israelites was gathered together to Aaron, and the
Christian Church was assembled together by her Pastors and Bishops in the
Council of Ariminum to the number of four hundred, who were more than before
had been in the Council of Nice, and yet decreed for the Arian heresy. So
was there a second general Council holden at Ephesus, which affirmed and
approved the heresy of Eutyches, as there were also sundry other, of which M.
Bishop will not say but that they did err. True, says he, general Councels
may err if they be not congregated by the authority of the Pope, but being the
Popes Councels they cannot err. But the Councels of Constance and Basil were
both assembled by the Popes call, and both these Councels decreed that the
Councelis of greater authority than the Pope, and the Pope subject thereto,
which M. Bishop for the Popes sake will say is an error, and by the Popes
procurement the contrary has been since determined in other Councels. He will
answer us, that the Council though it be assembled by the Pope, yet may go
awry if it become divided from the Pope, but being assisted and directed by
him, it cannot conclude amiss, because the Pope cannot err. But we bring
examples of diverse Popes that have erred, as Liberius by the herisie of the
Arians, Honorius by the heresy of the Monothelites, and such like. Well, the
Pope then, says he, as he is a private man may err, but as Pope, and in his
consistory and judicial sentence he cannot err. But what, is the church now
become an ass to carry a privilege for the Pope only? To return upon
himself the skiruie term that he has used in the former section, Is not
here a huge great mill-post fairly thwited into a poor pudding prick, that
whereas we are told that it was the effect of the inestimable price of Christ's
blood to purchase a church free from all errors in matter of faith, The word
of God the rule and square of Christian religion.
we have this great prerogative of the Church resolved finally into a drunken
dream concerning the Pope, that it is he only that cannot err? This is the
vpshot of all, and to this issue the matter comes, that the church may err,
the general council may err, be the persons never so learned, never so
faithful, never so holy; only the Pope though he be an ignorant beast, a
very he hound and incarnate devil, yet sitting down in his chair of
Pestilence to decree a sentence, receives presently like the Prophets of
Apollo some Enthusiasticall impression, whereby he pronounces infallibly a
truth, howsoever he himself in his own private opinion be persuaded
otherwise. Which being a ridiculous presumption, a mere nouelty, most
impudently devised by sycophants and parasites, a matter which has no shadow
of defense from the belief or practice of the ancient church, deserves rather
to be rejected with scorn, than to have any question made of it. As for that
other matter which he adioineth concerning the word of God, and interpretation
thereof, he says rightly that we hold, for so we do, the holy word of God to
be the only rule and square of Christian religion. Iren adu. haeres. lib 3.
cap. 1. Euangelium per dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum.
For it was the will of God that the Apostles should commit the Gospel to
writing, To be the pillar and foundation of our faith, and Aug. in epist. Joan.
tract. 3. contra insidiosos errores ponere voluit deus firmamentum in
Scripturis sanctis.
in the scriptures to appoint us a fortress against deceitful errors; so as
that Chrysostom. op. imperfect. hom. 49. Christiani qui sunt in Christianitate
volentes accipere firmitatem fidei ad nullam rem aliam fugiant nisi tantummodo
ad scripturas.
Christians being desirous to receive assurance of their faith are no whither
else to fly but only to the Scriptures. But whereas he affirms, that we say
that Christ has left his holy word to be understood of every man as his own
knowledge and spirit shall direct him, and that in doubtful questions arising
he has taken no order for the deciding of them, but that every one may be his
own Judge, they are but silly devices of objection against us, to color the
novelties and absurdities which we in the same behalf justly condemn in them.
We every man understand the Scriptures as his own knowledge and spirit does
direct him; and why? Because we reject that course of understanding the
Scripture, which they factiously and partiallie have of late devised for the
serving of their own turn. Hosius de expresso dei verb: Siquis habeat
interpretatisnem ecclesiae Romanae de loco aliquo scripturae, etiamsi nec sciat
nec intelligat an and quomodo cum scripturae verbis conueniat, tamen habet
ipsissimum verbum dei.
If a man forsooth, have the interpretation of the church of Rome concerning
any place of Scripture, albeit he sees not how it accords with the words,
yet he has the very word of God. We leave every man in doubtful questions to
be his own Judge; but why? Because we refuse the trial of a Judge
presumptuously advanced and authorized by them. Forsooth the Pope being accused
of heinous abominations and sacrilege against God, must sit as Judge whether
he be guilty or not, and whether they do justly that have accused him. But
what Scripture, what Council, what Father or story, or practice of the Church
has tied the interpretation of the Scriptures to the church of Rome, or the
deciding of controversies to the Bishop of Rome? And whereas their course in
this behalf has no manner of justification from the ancient Church, I
challenge him on the other side to allege any course entertained by the same
Church for the interpretation of Scriptures, and judgment of controversies,
which is not approved and practiced by us. Which because he cannot do, he does
but waste his wit by trifling in this sort, and renewing idle cauils, which Of
Traditions. sect. 21.22.
before have been trodden under foot, being not able to relieve them with any
further defense or strength.

18. W. BISHOP.
To fold up this part, let me entreat thee (courteous reader) to be an upright
Judge between the Protestants doctrine and ours, in this most weighty matter
of Christ's dignity, virtues, and mediation; and if thou see most evidently,
that ours does more advance them, why should thou not give sentence on our
side? They make Christ ignorant many years of his life: we hold him from the
first instant of his conception, to have been replenished with most perfect
knowledge. They, that he spoke and taught now and then, as other men did; and
was subject to disordinate passions: We, that he was most free from all such,
and that he taught always most divinely. They make his very death not
sufficient to redeem us: we hold that the least thing that ever he suffered in
his life, deserved the redemption of many worlds. They, that he died only for
the elect: we, that he died for all, though many through their own fault, do
not receive any benefit by his death. They, that thereby we are not purged from
our sins, but by imputation: we, that all are by the virtue thereof inwardly
cleansed. They, that Christ purchased a Church consisting of few, not to
continue long, and subject to many errors: we, that he established a Church,
that should be spread over all the world, and that should continue to the end
of the world: visibly, and always free from any error in any matter of faith.
Finally, they hold that Christ left his holy word to the disputation of men,
not taking any certain order for the ending of controversies, that should
arise about it: we teach, that he has established a most assured means, to
decide all doubts in religion, and to hold all obedient Christians inperfect
uniformity, of both faith and manners. And because I am entered into these
comparisons, give me leave to persist yet a little longer in them. Consider
also (I pray you) who go nearer to Atheism, either we, that think and speak
of the most sacred Trinity, as the blessed Fathers in the first Council of
Nice taught: or they, who directly cross them, and by the nouelty of their
phrases, do breed new, or rather revive old heresies against it. Again, who
carry a more holy conceit of God, either they, who upon light occasion do
rashly deny God to be able to do that, which they do not conceive possible:
or we, that teach him to be able to do ten thousand things, that pass our
understanding. Whether they, that affirm God of his own free choice, to cast
away the greater part of men: or we, that defend him to desire the salvation of
all men, and not to be wiling that any one perish, unless it be through his
own default. Either they, that hold him to be the author of all evil done in
the world, and the Devil to be but his Minister therein: or we that maintain
him to be so purely good, that he cannot possibly either concur to any evil,
or so much as once to think to do any evil. Finally, whose opinion of him is
better, either ours, that hold him to have been so reasonable in framing of
his laws, that he does by his grace make themeasie to a willing mind: or
theirs, that avouch him to have given laws impossible for the best men to
keep? If some Protestants do say, we do not maintain diverse of these
positions. I answer, that it is, because they do yet in part hold with us, and
are not so far gone, as they do wholly follow their new masters: For if they
did, then should they embrace all the aforesaid damnable positions, being so
plainly taught by their principal preachers and teachers. These therefore are
to warn my dear Countrymen to look to it in time; and then (no doubt) but
that all such as have a sufficient care of their salvation, considering
maturely whether the current and stream of the new Gospel carries them, will
speedily disbarke themselves thence, lest at length they be driven by it, into
the bottomless gulf of flat Atheism.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop entreats the courteous Reader to be Judge in a most weighty
matter, Every man required to judge for his own assurance in matters of faith.
who in the former section has given him a check for taking upon him to be
his own Judge. His teeth sometimes bite his tongue, and put him in mind to
tell truth, which commonly he is very loath to do. Indeed it concerns every
man so far as touches his own salvation, to be a Judge in these matters, and
by knowledge and understanding to satisfy himself concerning his faith and
hope toward God, and not be led, as in Popery they are accustomed, like dumb
beasts wholly at the will and discretion of them by whom they are led, not able
to judge of that which they do whether it be right or wrong. The holy Ghost
commends it as a thing pertinent to all the faithful Phil. 19.10
to abound in knowledge and in alliudgement, that they may discern things
different (from the truth,) 1. These. 5.21.
to try all things, and to hold that that is good: 1 Ioh. 4.1.
to try the spirits whether they be of God or not: Heb. 5.14.
to have their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. Which ability
how it is atteined unto, Saint Ambrose declares; Ambros. in Heb. 5. Quomodo
poterunt sensus nostri exercitati esse? vtique ex vsu and frequenti lectione
scripturaru^; vnde beatum virum Psalmista dicit, qui in lege domini meditabitur
die ac nocte: sic Primas. ibid.
How may our wits be thus exercised? Marry by use and often reading of the holy
scriptures; whence the Psalmist calls the man blessed, who day and night
meditateth in the law of the Lord. Even so it is, howsoever there seem
difficulty at the first, yet use of reading and often meditation of the
Scriptures, with a religious and careful heart, makes a man able to judge of
truth so far as is needful for himself unto eternal life. Now the matters
whereof M. Bishop will have his Reader to be Judge are no other but what have
been handled hitherto, whereof for the enlarging of his preface, and to make
the Printer some more work, he makes here a long and needless repetition. I
list not to follow him in his idle vein, but refer thee, gentle Reader, to
the several examinations of all his objections, in which thou shall see him
one where leudly belying and slandering us, another where wilfully
misconstruing, another where ignorantly condemning those things which he is not
able to disprooue. Only to show the great discretion of the man, thou may
note in his first cauil how he delivers their opinion, that Christ from the
first instant of his conception was replenished with most perfect knowledge,
whereas, if he had had his own head at hand he would have remembered that
that which was of Christ from the first instant of his conception, was not as
yet endued with the reasonable soul, and therefore was not as yet capable of
knowledge at all. Thus in the very first point he gives his Reader occasion to
preiudicate him in all the rest, and to account him too silly a man to give
aduertisment, as in the end of this section he does to others, who in the
beginning shows so little skill to look to himself. As for his countrymen,
to whom specially he directs his warning, they are much to be pitied in that
so simply they commit themselves to such blind guides by whom and with whom
they must needs fall into the ditch. Albeit if he were blind in this case,
his sin were the less; but because wittingly and willingly he lies and
charge upon our principal Preachers and Teachers, some of his damnable
positions, whereto they in the very places by him cited have justified the
contrarry, as in the process of our answer has appeared, therefore as he is
branded in conscience with God, so he deserves with men also to be branded in
the face with the stigme of a perfidious calumniatour that all men may know
that there is no trust to be given to him.

19. W. BISHOP.
And is it any great marvel, that the common sort of the Protestants fall into
so many foul absurdities touching religion, when as the very fountains, out
of which they pretend to take their religion, be so pitifully corrupted? I
mean the sacred word of God. Master Gregory Martin a Catholic man, very
skillful in the learned languages, has discovered about two hundredth of their
corruptions of the very text of Gods word: and after him one Master Broughton a
man of their own (esteemed to be singularly seen in the Hebrew and Greek
tongue) has advertised them of more then eight hundredth faults therein. And
the matter is so evident, that the Kings Majesty, in that public conference
holden at Hampton Court, in the first of his reign, confesses himself not to
have seen one true translation of the Bible in English; and that of Geneua,
which they were wont to esteem most, to be the woorst of all others: and
therefore commanded them to go in hand with a new translation; about which,
fifty of the most learned amongst them in both Universities (as it is
credibly reported) have this three years travailed, and cannot yet hitte
upon, or else not agree upon, a new sincere and true translation. Here is a
large field offered me to exclaim against such corrupters and deprauers of
Gods sacred word: but I will leave that to some other time, because I have
been too long already. But what a lamentable case is this! they hold for the
most assured pillar of their faith, that all matters of salvation must be
fished out of the Scriptures, and cry upon all men to search the Scriptures:
and yet are the same Scriptures by themselves so peruersly mangled, that their
own pew-fellowes cry out shame upon them therefore: whereunto (if it please
you) join, that the Protestants have no assured means to be resolved of such
doubts and difficulties, as they shall find in the same word of God. For they
must neither trust ancient Father, nor rely upon the determination, either of
national or general Council; but every faithful man (by himself)
examining the circumstances of the text, and conferring other like places unto
it together, shall find out the right meaning of all obscure sentences, as
they most childishly bear their fellows in hand. Briefly to conclude this
point, a great number of them having Gods word corrupted, for the lantcrne to
their feet; and their own dimne sight, for their best guide: no marvel,
though they stumble at many difficulties in these high mysteries, and fall into
very absurd opinions, concerning the principal parts of them.

R. ABBOT.
It is a true note that Tertullian gave of heretics, that they Tertul. de
resurrect. carnis. Haeretici scripturarum lucifagae.
shun and fly the light of the Scriptures, and like Battes and Owls,
because the Sun discovers them to be uncouth and ugly creatures, delight
altogether in the dark. Amongst the rest, the Papists are specially of this
humor, Our translations of the Scriptures unjustly blamed.
detesting nothing more than that the people should be at liberty to read the
Scriptures. Now because they want means, thanks be to God, to pull the books
out of their hands as heretofore they have done, therefore they betake
themselves to other shifts, and by diverse pretenses and colorable devices,
they seek to discourage and terrify so many as they can from the use thereof,
but one thing specially they have labored above others, to breed in them a
jealousy and suspicion of our translations of the Scriptures, as if the
Scriptures themselves meant nothing less than by our translations they seem
to do. Now as the young fox learneth of the old, so does M. Bishop learn of
his good masters to take this up as a special weapon to fight against us, and
here tells his Reader, that it is no marvel that Protestants fall into
many scule absurdities, because the very fountains out of which they take
their religion, are pitifully corrupted. Pitifully corrupted, says he; but how
does he know so much? for we are out of doubt that he himself never made
trial of it. Forsooth Gregory Martin a Catholic man has told him so. O
pitiful proof! Iannes has told Iambres, that Moses does but delude and
deceive the people. Gregory Martin, says he, a man very skillful in the
learned languages has discovered about two hundred of their corruptions of the
very text of Gods word. We doubt not but Gregory Martin with them was a learned
man if he did write for them; but yet he must give me leave to tell him that
Gregory Martins discovery was so discovered, as that neither he himself nor
any other for him, had ever any joy to meddle with it again. His presumptions
and ignorances, and trifling childish follies were so laid open, though I know
much more might have been done than was done, as that his learning failed him
to make that good which he would needs have to be taken for a discovery of our
evil. Which I do not speak as if there were no faults justly to be found in our
translations, but the faults that are to be found are Grammatical, not
Doctrinal; such as wherein the translatours have erred sometimes by not giving
exactly and duly the signification of words, not whereby they have brought in
any new points of faith; such as translatours themselves find in the new
perusing of their translations, as our Iunius has done, and yet see no cause
of altering their religion in the amending of those faults. Such were the
faults of which M. Broughton spoke, who as M. Bishop well knows, never found
any cause by those faults to depart from us, or to join with them; a man as he
says, singularly seen in the Hebrew and Greek tongues: but it had been to
be wished, that he had used that learning rather humbly and profitably to do
good to the Church, than curiously and proudly to gain opinion to himself.
They are much distressed we see in the finding of faults, when they are feign
to seek testimony thereof from him whose reprehensions are matters of
disadvantage to us, but no benefit at all to them. And no other was his
Majesty's intention, when out of his high and Princely understanding, he
censured our translations in the conference at Hampton Court. It is true that
his Majesty there Sum of the Conference, pa. 46.
professed that he had never seen a Bible well translated in English, and the
worst of all he thought the Geneua translation to be, and therefore wished that
by the best learned in both the Universities, some special pains should be
taken that one uniform translation might be had. But why did not his Majesty
think our Bibles well translated? Was it because he thought that if they were
well translated, we should acknowledge some points of Popery which now we
reject, or should alter some points of our own religion which now we hold?
Surely nothing less, and therefore M. Bishop does but vainly spend his breath
to talk of that which is no advantage to him. And yet much ado do these
wranglers make hereof, and babble of it no less than as if a new translation
should be the very copy of the Council of Trent, and with it the Pope with
all his trinkets were to be brought into the church. Especially a Sophister of
the Jesuits, a notable dawber, taking upon him so far as his own and his
fellows learning would serve him to answer M. Bells challenge, for the
preparing of his Reader in his preface insisteth upon this matter, where having
mentioned the order taken for a new translation, he speaks to his Countrymen
in this sort; What goodness can there be in that faith which is builded of an
evil foundation as by your own judgments your Bibles hitherto have been?
Yea what faith at all can there be in this mean time whilst the old Bibles
are condemned as naught, and a new not yet made? If these Ministers had once
deceived you in a money matter, you would beware how you trusted them again,
and will you believe them still, they having by their own confession hitherto
deceived you, both in your Church service and Bible, commending the one to you
as divine service, and the other as Gods pure word, and now condemning them
both? Which words of his, do carry some color to blind the ignorant, but he
himself well knew that he did but play the Sicophant, and made only a show of
great matter against us, wherein in truth there is no weight at all. For would
the sorry fellow have argued thus against the faith of the whole church that
had been for the space almost of four hundred years when Hierome took in
hand to translate the Bible anew, and to reform the defects and imperfections
both of the Septuagint, and of other translations which the Church had used
till that time? It appears by Hierome that Hier. ad Paulam and Eustoch.
Praefat. in Esaiae translat. Qui scit me ob hoc in peregrinae linguae
eruditione sudasse ne Iudaei de falsitate scripturarum ecclesiis e^us diutius
insultarent.
the Jews insulted over the Christian Church for their false translations of
the Scriptures, for the avoiding whereof he protests it was that he took
that pains to learn the Hebrew tongue, that he might himself more perfectly
translate them, and so Idem. Praefat. in Iosue. Dolere Iudaeosquod calumniandi
eis and irridendi Christianos sit ablata occasio.
take from them all occasion to calumniate and mock the Christians. Will our
Iudaizing Jesuit hereupon say, of all the time before, that there could be no
goodness in their faith, that it was built upon an evil foundation, that
their Bibles were naught, because there were so great defaults in their
translations? What, had so many Churches believed in vain; so many Martyrs and
Confessors suffered persecution and death for a faith of which they had no
certain or assured ground? But to come somewhat nearer to him, when Hierom had
more perfectly translated the Scriptures, his translation grew in the Latin
Church to be much respected, and has been since in special name above any
other. The Council of Trent has decreed that that translation (if at least it
be that which now carries his name, whereof there is just cause to doubt)
Council. Trident. sess. 4. c. 2.
shall stand for authentical and good in all public lectures, disputations,
preachings, expoundings, and that no man upon any pretense shall presume to
reject it. Yet of that translation it is confessed by See D. Rainolds These. 5.
30. where he cites Budaeus, Valla, sir T. Moore, acknowledging so much in the
new Testament; Pagnine, Galatinus, and Masius in the old; Isidorus Clarius,
Andradius and Arias Montanus in both.
sundry the most learned of his side, that there are many defaults and slippes
wherein the interpreter has swarued both from the words and from the right and
true meaning of the holy Ghost. Yea into that translation there were also crept
by neglect many gross corruptions acknowledged by themselves, and therefore
Biblia excusa Romae anno domini 1590.92.93.
reformed first by Sixtus Quintus, and afterward by Clement the eighth, such as
whereby the meaning of the text in many places was wholly altered. And will
this cauilling Sophister give us leave to conclude hereof, that there has
been all the while that those errors and corruptions have continued, no
goodness in the faith of their church of Rome, that their Bibles by themselves
have been condemned for naught, that their religion has been built upon an
evil foundation, because there have been errors and imperfections in their
translations of the Scriptures? If he think that this is no argument against
them, we must needs think him to be that that he is, that would go about to
blind simple men by such a cauillation against us. For thy better satisfaction
gentle Reader, thou may consider, that translations of the Scriptures are
the same to the Church, as are glasse-windowes to a house. The glass never
yields the light altogether so clear as it comes immediately from the Sun,
and the interleadding of it hinders that there is not fully and thorowout a
perfect transparence of the light, and yet it gives light so as serves
abundantly for the discerning of every thing, and for the directing and doing
all the business of the house. Even so translations can never so clearly and
fully express the things that are translated, as they are to be seen
immediately in the original from whence they are derived. By the imperfect
apprehension of the translatours it comes to pass that they have their
ouersights, as it were traces and bars of lead, through which the light of the
original text perfectly shines not, which notwithstanding do compact and
hold together the body of the text, as it were the glass through which the
Sun of righteousness most comfortably shines unto us, and by which we have
undoubted and certain direction for the whole work and service of the house
of God. There is in every language some special propriety, the grace and
significancy whereof, no other language by any industry of the translator can
atteine unto. There are in the originals, but specially in the Hebrew tongue,
many words of doubtful and diverse significations, of which it is very hard
many times to say which best fitteth to express the meaning of the place.
Sometimes though the signification of the words be known, yet the phrase and
composition breeds ambiguitie of translation. By this means the words being
subject to diverse constructions, one interprets them one way, another another
way, and neither can control other, because it is hard to say which is the
truest way. Yea S. Aust. doubteh not to say, that Aug. de dect. Christ. li. 3.
cap. 27. Certe dei spiritus etiam ipsam (alteram sententiam) occursura^ lectori
vel auditorisine dubitatione praeuidit, imo vt occurreret quia and ipsa est
veritate subnixa prouidit. Nam quid in diuinis eloquijs potuit largius and
wherius prouideri quam vt eadem verba pluribus intelligantur modis, etc.
the holy Ghost for more large and plentiful instruction, did not only
foresee but provide, that of the same words diverse meanings might be made,
which notwithstanding both or all should be agreeable to the truth. But there
are furthermore many allusions, many allegories, many prouerbiall and
figurative speeches, the reasons whereof are not always easily discerned, and
therefore they are coniectured diverse ways. Sometimes it falls out, that the
words of themselves seem to the translatour to lean one way, and the
expositour sees that by the drift and intendement of the text they are to go
another. By these and other occasions, translatours according to the gifts that
God has given them, use their judgments diversely, one seeing that which
another sees not; one coming nearer to the truth in one place, and another in
another; one having greater understanding in the original tongue; another
greater felicity and dexterity to express his conceit in the tongue into
which he does translate; another having greater knowledge in the liberal
Sciences, in Histories and Antiquities, in natural and moral Philosophy,
whereby he is able to judge of some things more probably or certainly than
others can. And herein the incomprehensible wisdom of God most lively
appears, that he has so disposed and ordered the Scriptures, as that this
variety of translations enforces no difformity of religon, but all tend to the
maintaining of one and the same faith, contained manifestly in those places of
Scripture wherein all translations agree, and which without manifest and
wilful impiety cannot be translated otherwise. Whereby we see in our own
experience and continual exercise of the Scriptures, that though the exact
meaning of a place be mistaken, yet commonly it contains nothing in matter
but what is warranted by another place rightly translated, and therefore in
that place can be taken for no other but the true word of God. Or if any
wickedly minded do upon advantage of ambiguity translate them somewhere
partially in favor of error and against the truth, yet is he circumuented in
his purpose by the evidence of other texts, which every man discerns to make
plainly for the justification of the truth. By means whereof it has come to
pass, that those translations which have been made of the old Testament by
Samaritans and Jews, Aquila, Symmachus and Theodotion, who all carried a sting
against the Christian faith, yet Hier. Praefat. in Job. Iudaeus, Aquila and
Iudaiza^tes haeretici, Symmachus and Theodotio sunt recepti, qui multa mysteria
saluatoris subdola interpretatione celarunt, and tamen in (...) habentur apud
ecclesias and explanantur ab ecclesiasticis viris Idem praefat. in Esdram and
Nehem. ad Domn. and Rogat.
were received and used as helpful and profitable to the Church, because by
their industry they cleared many things, and made that truth good in other
places which they concealed in some. And worthy it is in this case to be
remembered how the heretics of old notwithstanding their mangling and Tert. de
praescript. adu. haer. Ista haeresis non recipit quasda^ scripturas, and siquas
recipit, adiectionibus and detractionibus ad dispositionem instituti sui
interuertit. Et cont. Marcion. lib. 4. Emendauit quod corruptum existimauit.
etc. Cotidie reformant illud (Euangelium) prout a nobis cotidie reuincuntur.
dismembring of the Scriptures, and either altering or racing what they saw to
be against them, as Tertullian declares; yet could not prevail, but that they
were still put to their shifts from day to day, and forced still to be changing
somewhat, because there was still somewhat left for their conviction and
reproof. The grand signors of the students at Rhemes thinking good in their
traitorous policy not long since to put forth for the time a translation of
the new testament, albeit under a most hypocritical pretense of religious care
not to swerve from their copy, they sought by strange words and phrases, and by
dismembered sentences, to obscure and darken the text the uttermost that they
could, yet in those places which for shame they could not otherwise translate,
have left the same so apparent to justify our doctrine, as that they dare not
suffer it to go freely abroad without the poison of their annotations; and
commonly they that do read the annotations must by no means presume to touch
the text. And hereby it appears what the cause is of their quarrel against
our translations, not for that they think them so faulty, as they pretend, but
only because they cannot abide the vulgar reading of the Scriptures. Or if
that be not the cause, why do they not put forth a true translation of their
own, if ours be false, that all men having free use thereof may plainly
discern what the truth is? But the Reader understanding but the Latin tongue
shall easily satisfy himself in this behalf if he compare our English
translations with those which some of their own men, Pagnine, Arias Montanus,
and others have published in Latin, because he shall plainly discern that
there is only sycophancy, and not any solidity or weight, in those
cauillations whereby they show themselves agrieued at our Bibles. As for the
objection of uncertainty of faith which the Jesuit urges by reason of many
translations, experience conuinceth the folly thereof, because we have had
sundry translations by Tindall, by Couerdale, by the Geneuians, by the Bishops,
and yet by them all we have maintained but one faith. Even so in the primitive
church there were many translations in Greek, and the Latin translations, as
Austin testifies, Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 11 Qui scripturas ex Hebraea
in Graecam verterunt linguam numerari possunt; Latini autem interpretes nullo
modo.
were without number, even Hier. praefat. in Iosue: Apud Latinos tot
exemplaria, quot codices.
as many, says Hierome, as there were books; and yet we suppose that the
Jesuit will say that by them all there was taught but one Christian faith. Yea
there is a benefit to be made of many translations; if we rightly deem
thereof, because they are a great confirmation to a man in that wherein they
all agree, and Aug. vt supra cap. 12. Quae quidem res plus auiuuat
intelligentiam quam impedit. si modo legentes non sint negligentes; Nam
nonnullas obscuriores sente^tias saepe pluru^ codicum manifestauit inspectio.
the looking upon many books, says Austin, often cleereth many obscure
sentences wherein they differ. When therefore our new translation shall come
forth, the doctrine of faith shall continue the same by the new, as it has
been hitherto by the old: and thou shall see, gentle Reader, that the old
Bibles are not thereby condemned as naught, as this Friar leudly suggesteth,
but as they have been commended unto thee for the sacred word of God, so thou
shall have cause to acknowledge them still, and shall find that a new
translation, is not the making of a new Bible, as he maliciously terms it,
but a justifying and clearing of the old. As for the condemning of our divine
service it belongs not to this place to speak thereof. It is true indeed,
that some of our Ministers, by misconstruction of things have indiscreetly
found great faults where they needed not. But yet to stop the mouth of this
vpstart Jesuit, let him remember, that Pope Pius the fifth reformed their
Missall, their Breuiary and other offices, and generally all their divine
service, acknowledging the same Summar. Co^stitut. praefix. Offic. Beat. Mariae
reformat. Omnia fere huiusmodi officiae reserta esse vanis erroribus
superstitio^um.
to have been stuffed with vain errors of superstitions. Lindan and
Espenceus confess, that Linda^ de opt. genesis interpret. scrip l. 3. ca. p 3.
Espenc. Digres. in 1. epist. ad Timoth. lib. 1. cap. 11. apud Rainold. These. 5.
there are many Apocryphal things thrust thereinto out of the Gopell of
Nicodemus and other toies; that there is a false beginning shamefully and
ignorantly set before the lecture of the Gospel; that the canon of the Mass
and the secrets are beraied with most foul faults; that there are the
festiuals of some saints whose names happily are scantly well warranted. And
what; do they now condemn the divine service which they have commended to the
people, and have set forth for holy and good for so many former ages? Of their
Bibles we have heard before, and shall I now say to them to whom he spoke
before, If these Popes and Popish Bishops and doctors had once deceived you in
a money matter, you would beware how you trusted them again; and will you
believe them still, they having by their own confession so long deceived you,
both in your Church-seruice and in your Bible, commending the one to you as
divine service, and the other as Gods pure word, and since condemning them
both? If he will think us fools to argue in this sort, let him put his hand
to his own nose and return the imputation of this folly to himself,
remembering that it is an ill bird that beraieth his own nest: and that he
should first have looked at home before he had made this wise reason against
us. This only by the way, as being impertinent to this place, but by that that
has been said of translations we may beforehand perceive how faint and
spiritlesse M. Bishops voice will be when the time shall come, which so
manfully he threatens, that he shall exclaim against us as corruptours and
deprauers of Gods sacred word. At the most, it will be but as the cry of a
gander amongst the geese, which thrusts out the neck and hisseth, and
happily shakes a man by the gown, and back again he runs with a great
noise, and is applauded by all the flock as if he had done some valiant and
worthy act. It will then appear further that it is rather for form than for
matter that he thus bableth of, peruersly mangling the Scriptures, Of
expounding Scriptures and resolving doubts.
and of our own pew-fellowes crying out shame upon us. Of resolving doubts and
difficulties I have answered him the section last save one. I will not say, as
there, only of the ancient church, but setting aside the foolish and idle
dream of a privilege resting in the Pope, which is no other but an ambitious
usurpation, and a mere Antichristian tyranny subiecting the whole faith of
the church to the will and fancy of one wicked man, what means has the Church
of Rome for resolving of doubts, but that we have in any respect as good as
they? Yea there are not so many difficulties or doubts in very material points
unresolved amongst us as at this day remain questioned and undecided in the
Church of Rome. As for ancient Fathers and Councels they are more truly
regarded with us than they are with them. With us they are made to yield only
to God and to his word; but with them they must give place to all their
sacrilegious and abominable devices. Let the Fathers and Councels say what they
will, yet Bellar. de Sacram. li 2. c. 25. Omnium conciliorum veterum and omnium
dogmatum firmitas ab authoritate praesentis ecclesiae dependet.
the authority of them all, and the certainty of all Doctrines must depend upon
the authority of their church. As touching that which he says, that we bear
our followers in hand that every faithful man by himself examining the
circumstances of the text and comparing other like places, shall find out the
right meaning of al obscure sentences, how impudent a lie it is hereby
appears, for that we do not attribute so much to the industry or learning of
any mortal man. We say with Aust. that Aug l^b. 83. quaest. 69 solet
circumstantia scripturae illuminare sententiam.
the circumstance of the scripture is wont to give light of the meaning of it:
and with Hilary, that Hilar. de Trinit. li. 9. Dictorum intelligentia aut ex
praepositis aut ex consequentibus expectatur.
the understanding of the sayings (of Scripture) is to be expected either from
that that is gone before, or that that follows after. We say with Origin, that
Origin. cont. Cells. l 4. Ex ipsius Scripturae locis inter se collatis verum
sensum elicimus.
by comparing places of Scripture together, we gather the right sense. But yet
neither do we make these the only necessary means for understanding of
Scripture, neither do attribute to every faithful man the ability of doing
these things; neither do we affirm of any man whatsoever, that by these or
any other means he can attain to the understanding of all obscure sentences.
And yet we say, that a vulgar faithful man having by plain and evident texts
learned the substance of true faith, exercising himself in the reading of the
Scriptures, and being assisted by the ministry of the word, may by comparing
of places, and examining of circumstances, much further himself for the
increase of his knowledge, to his comfort and souls health. Many are there of
that great number of which M. Bishop speaks, who by such exercise of
Scripture, are able to stop his mouth, and to give him good instruction in
the mystery of true faith. Ps. 119.105.
The word of God is indeed the lantern to their feet, and the light to their
steps, and so far are they from stumbling and falling thereby, as that they
verse. 104.
gain by it understanding to hate and abhor all wicked ways.

20. W. BISHOP.
Now to make up an even reckoning with M. PER. Atheism, I must come unto their
divine service and worship of God, the third point that I promised to handle;
because he spared not to speak his pleasure of ours. First then, whereas a
true, real, and external sacrifice, is among all external works, the most
excellent service that can be done to the divine Majesty, as shall be proved
in the question of the sacrifice; which also has ever since the beginning of
the world, been by the best men practiced, to acknowledge and testify, as well
the sovereign dominion that God has over us, as our dutiful subjection unto
his almighty goodness: the Protestants to make known unto the wiser sort,
that they are not Gods true loy all people, will not vouchsafe to perform to
him any such special service, as to sacrifice in his honor: nay they are
fallen so far out with this principal part of Gods true worship, that they
do in despite of it, power out most vile reproaches against the daily sacrifice
of the Catholic Church, which contains the blessed body and most precious
blood of our redeemer JESUS Christ. Secondly, of seven Sacraments (instituted
by our Savior, both to exhibit honor to God, and to sanctify our souls)
they do flatly reject five of them: And do further (as much as in them lies)
extinguish the virtue and efficacy of the other two. For they hold Baptism not
to be the true instrument all cause of remission of our sins, and of the
infusion of grace in our souls; but only to be the sign and seal thereof.
And in stead of Christ's sacred body, really given to all Catholics in the
Sacrament of the Altar, to their exceeding comfort and dignity, the Protestants
must be content to take up with a bitte of bread, and with a sup of wine: a
most pitiful exchange, for so heavenly a banquet. They do daily feel (and I
would to God they had grace to understand) what a want they have of the
Sacrament of Confession, which is the most sovereign salve of the world, to
cure all the deadly and dangerous wounds of the soul. Ah how carelessly do
they daily heap sin upon sin, and suffer them to lie festring in their
breasts even till death, for lack of launcing them inseason by true and due
confession! Besides, at the point of death, when the Devil is most busy to
assault us, laboring then to make us his own for ever, there is amongst them
no anointing of the sick with holy oil in the name of our Lord, (as S. Cap.
5. verse. 14.
James prescribes) joined with the Priests prayer, which should save the
sick, and by means whereof his sins should be forgiven, and he lifted up by
our Lord, and inwardly both greatly comforted and strengthened: these heavenly
helps (I say) and many others, which our Catholic religion affords unto all
persons, and by which rightly administered, God is highly magnified, are quite
banished out of the Protestant territories, and consequently their religion for
want of them, is mightily maimed. They have yet remaining some poor short
prayers to be said twice a week: for fearing (belike) to make their Ministers
surfeit of over much praying, they will not tie them to any daily prayers:
Mattins, Euensong, and other set hours they leave to the Priests, saving that
on the Sabboath they solemnly meet together at the Church, to say their
service, which is a certain mingle-mangle, translated out of the old portaise,
and Mass book, patched up together with some few of their own invention. And
though it be but short, yet it is (the Lord he knows) performed by most of
them so slightly, that an indifferent beholder, would rather judge them to come
thither to gaze one upon another, or to common of worldly business, than
reverently there to serve God. Now as concerning the place where their divine
service is said: if goodly stately Churches had not been by men of our
religion built to their hands, in what simple cotes (trow you) would their
key-cold devotion have been content to serve their Lord? if one Church or
great steeple, by any mishap fall into utter ruin, a collection throughout all
England for many years together, will not serve to build it up again: which
makes men of judgment to perceive, that their religion is exceeding cold in
the setting forward of good works, and that it rather tends to destruction,
than to edification. Again, whereas our Churches are furnished with many
goodly Altars, trimmed up decently, and garnished with sundry fair and
religious pictures, to strike into the beholders a reverent respect of that
place, and to draw them to heavenly meditations: theirs have ordinarily bare
walls, hanged with cob-webs, except some of the better sort, which are daubed
like Alehouses, which some broken sentences of Scripture. Besides, the ancient
custom of Christa^s being to pray with their faces toward the Sunne-rising, to
show the hope they have of a good resurrection, and that by tradition received
even from the Apostles, as witnesses Saint Basil: their Ministers in their
highest mysteries, De Spiritu sancto. 27.
look over their Communiontable into the South: to signify (perhaps) that
their spiritual estate is now at the highest, and that in their religion there
is no hope of rising toward heaven, but assurance of declining.

R. ABBOT.
Our Divine service and worship of God is not such as the Church of Rome and
the followers thereof would have it, but it is sufficient for us, that it is
such as God himself has commanded. Of true, real and external sacrifice, I
have answered him before, both in the confutation of his Sect. 27.
Epistle more at large, and briefly here in the Sect. 3.
answer of this Preface. Here I answer him again in a word, with the words of
Justin Martyr, that Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum Tryph. (...).
prayers and thanksgiuings are the only perfect and acceptable sacrifices to
God, and that Christians have learned to do these only, even in the memorial
of their dry and moist food, (the bread of the Eucharist, and the cup of the
Eucharist, as he has before called it) in which is the remembrance of the
passion, which God by God himself suffered for us. So then we do not deny
all sacrifice, but we say as we have been taught by the Apostle S. Peter,
according to the ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome, 1. Pet. 2 5.
We are made a spiritual house, a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices (the sacrifice Psalm. 4.5.
of righteousness, the sacrifice Ps. 50.14.23. Heb. 13.15.
of praise and thanksgiving, the sacrifice Psalm. 51.17.
of a broken and contrite heart, the sacrifice Phil. 4.18.
of alms, the sacrifice Romans 12.1.
of our own bodies) acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. By these sacrifices we
do all loialtie and service to God, and we do not doubt but that we please
God therein. If we please not that wiser sort of which M. Bishop speaks, the
reason is, because they take upon them to be wiser than God. For that
propitiatory sacrifice which he drives at, is beyond Gods device; God never
taught it, Christ never ordained it, the Primitive Church never intended it,
there is no reason at al for it, because the blood of Christ once shed for us,
is a sufficient propitiation and atonement for all our sins. And because by
Heb. 1.3. and 10.14.
once offering of himself, he has purged our sins, and made us perfect for
ever, therefore it is no despite to Gods true worship, but a just assertion
thereof, to hold that the pretense of any further sacrifice for sin, is an
impious and blasphemous derogation to the cross of Christ. As for his seven
Sacraments, Seven Sacraments a late device.
if he can prove them to be, as he says, instituted by our Savior, we are
very ready to acknowledge the same. But it is worthy to be noted, that
Bellarm. de effect. sacram. cap. 25.
Bellarmine standing upon the proof thereof, cannot bring so much as one man
within the compass of eleven hundred years after Christ, that ever reduced
the Sacraments to that number. And shall not we well deserve to be written
upon the backe-side of the book of Wisdom, if we shall take that for a
principle of Christian religion, which came first out of their school, and for
the space of more then a 1000. years was never so known in the church of
Christ? The Apostle 1. Cor. 10.1.2. etc.
when he will show the Church of the Israelites to have been equal to us in
grace of Sacraments, instanceth the same only in our two sacraments, because he
knew no more. And no more did the ancient Fathers know, who universally holding
the same mystery of the creation of the woman out of the side of Adam being
asleep; namely, that Aug. in Psalm. 56. Dormienti Christo in cruce facta est
coniux de latere: percussum est enim latus pendent is de lancea et pr^fluxerunt
Ecclesiae Sacramenta: and in Joan. tract 15.
thereby was figured the framing of the Church by Sacraments out of the side of
Christ being dead, when being pierced, there issued out of it Ioh. 19.34. 1.
Ioh. 5.6.
water and blood, do name those Sacraments as we do, Aug. de symbol ad
Catechu^. lib. 2. c. 6. Sanguis and aqua quae sunt Ecclesiae gemina sacramenta.
Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 84. Theophy. in Joan. 19. Cyprian. de passione Christi.
Of the effects of the Sacraments.
two only and no more. Whereas he says that we extinguish the virtue and
efficacy of those two sacraments, it is only his blind conceit. We deny not
but that the Sacraments are instruments of grace and of remission of sins,
and yet we deny them to be so in that sort as is affirmed by the church of
Rome, namely, as to give grace ex opere operato, for the very work wrought, as
the Schoolmen speak. It is worthily observed by Saint Austin, that Aug. in
Joan. tract. 80. A^cedat verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum, etiam ipsum
tanquam visibile verbu^.
a Sacrament is as it were a visible word, because by it in way of
signification, God as it were speaks the same to the eye and other senses,
which by the word he sounds to the ear. Yea he affirms that the outward
element of it self is nothing, but it is by the word that it has whatsoever
power it has. Ibid. Quare non ait, Nunc mundi estis propter baptismum quo loti
estis, sed ait, propter verbum quod locutus sum vobis, nisi quia and in aqua
verbum mundat. Detrahe verbum and quid est aqua nisi aqua? and mox^ Vnde ista
tanta virtus aquae vt corpus tangat and cor abluat nifi saciente verbo? Non
quia dicitur, sed quia creditur.
Why does not Christ say. Now are ye clean by the baptism wherewith yea are
washed, but by the word which I have speken to you, but because in the water it
is the word that cleanses? Take away the word, and what is water but water?
Whence is it that the water has so great power to touch the body and to wash
the heart, but that the word does it? and that, not because it is spoken, but
because it is believed? Now if the Sacrament have all his virtue and efficacy
from the word, and the word have his power, not for that it is spoken, but for
that it is believed, we must conceive the same of the Sacrament also, that the
effect thereof stands not in being applied by the hand of the minister, but
in being believed by the faith of the receiver, God both by the one and by the
other ministering and increasing faith, and the holy Ghost accompanying both the
one and the other to do that that is believed. Thus is baptism a sign of
representation to the understanding, and seal of confirmation to faith,
effectually delivering to the believer through the holy Ghost the grace of God
and the remission of all his sins. And why does it trouble M. Bishop that we
make baptism in this sort only a sign and a seal, when as though signs and
seals be not the things themselves, yet by signs and seals men are wont to
be entitled and invested to the things signified and sealed? And has not the
Apostle himself taught us thus to speak? Gregory Bishop of Rome says, that
Greg. Moral. lib. 4. c. 3. Quod apud nos vales aqua Baptismatis, hoc egit apud
veteres vel pro paruulis sola fides, vel pro maioribus virtus Sacrificij, vel
pro his qui ex stirpe Abrahae prodierant mysterium circumcisionis.
what the water of baptism does with us, the same did the mystery of
circumcision with the seed of Abraham. But of circumcision the Apostle says
thus, Romans 4.11. The real eating of Christ a gross fancy.
Abraham received the sign of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of
faith. Baptism therefore must be to us, the sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith. Their doctrine of real eating the body of Christ
imports no matter of comfort and dignity, but a carnal, rude and profane
fancy. Cyril. ad Euopt. cont. reprehens. Theodor. anath. 11. Number hominis
comestionem nostrum ho^ sacramentu^ pronuntias, and irreligiose ad crassas
cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt mentem, and attentas humanis
cogitationibus tractare quae sola pura and inexquisita fide accipiuntur?
Do thou, says Cyril, pronounce our Sacrament to be the eating of a man,
and irreligiously urge the minds of them that believe to gross imaginations,
and assay to handle by humane conceits those things which are to be received
by only pure and undoubted faith? Christ indeed is not the food of the belly,
but of the mind, and therefore, Cyprian de caena dom. Haec quoties agimus non
dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide syncerae panem sanctum frangim us and
partimur.
we do not whet our teeth to bite, but with sincere faith we break and divide
the sacred bread, says Cyprian; because August in Joan. tract. 26. Credere in
Christum, hoc est menducare paenem viuum.
to believe in Christ, says Austin, that is to eat the bread of life; and
John 6.54.56.
he that thus eats the flesh of Christ and eternal life, and Christ shall
raise him up at the last day. And because we thus teach that spritually and by
faith we eat the very body of Christ and drink his blood, as always, so
specially in that special help of faith which God has ministered unto us in
the supper of the Lord, and that thereby we grow more and more into communion
and fellowship with him to become partakers of the riches of his grace to
immortality and everlasting life; therefore we do not take up with a bit of
bread and asuppe of wine, as this tauerne-companion profanely speaks, but
very truly and faithfully we deliver the fruit and effect of this heavenly
banquet. Which is not a heavenly banquet, as he teaches it, but a gross
Capernaitish error and earthly fancy, nor any matter of comfort to us, because
it is no comfort to have Christ in our bellies but in our hearts, nor any
dignity to us, but a horrible indignity to Christ himself, who by this means
is made subject to be eaten of dogs and swine and mice and other vile
creatures, as they most damnably affirm, as has been Answer to the epistle.
sect. 14. Auricular confession a mere superstition.
before declared. Confusion of our sins we make daily to God, and we teach
men in trouble of conscience to ease their wounds by opening them, as to other
men when occasion requires, so specially to the minister of Gods word, to
receive instruction and comfort toward God. As for their Popish confession
devised by the Schoolmen, requiring a necessary and particular enumeration of
all sins, it is merely superstitious, and serves either to snare and halter
the consciences of men, or to nourish and harden them in sin. M. Bishop
magnifieth the effect thereof, but indeed plaieth the hypocrite therein,
because he well knows that there is no where less piety and devotion, no
where more profaneness and filthiness than in Spain and Italy, where
confession is most strictly and severely required. What fruits it brings
forth amongst them he must give us leave to think, though we are loath to
speak, only I say with the words of the Apostle; Ephesians. 5.12. Extreme unction
devised by heretics.
It is a shame even to name the things that are done of them in secret. Their
extreme unction, which he mentions next, was the device of the Valentinian
heretics and Aug. haer. 16. feruntur suos morientes nouo modo quasi redimere,
per oleum, balsamum and aquam; and inuocationes quas Hebraicis verbis dicunt
super capita eorum. Epiphan. haer. 36. vt qui has inuocationes in vitae exitu
accipiunt, cum aqua and oleo aut vnguento permixtis incomprehensibiles fiant
and inuisibiles supernis potestatibus and principatibus.
Heracleonites, who took upon them in the like sort by anointing at the point
of death, to give men expiation of their sins, and to arm them against the
adversary powers. He alleges Saint James for the proof of it, whereas the
unction of which Saint James speaks, was the restoring of the party to health
by 1. Cor. 12.9.
the gift of healing, accordingly as is said of the Apostles, Mark. 6.13.
They anointed many that were sick with oil, and healed them. But their
unction has no intendment of healing, being only administered when no other is
expected but certain death. Let them show us what warrant they have to apply
that to one end that was appointed to another. It was a miraculous gift proper
to that time, and idly should we retain the sign when we have no power to
do the thing. Next he comes to our prayers, in derogation whereof,
considering their own prayers, he would have been ashamed to say any thing,
Our prayers and service more holy than the Papists.
but that it is a shame with them to be ashamed. Our prayers are so disposed
as is most convenient for public order in the Church. We pray in our own
tongue, as the 1. Cor. 14.15.
Apostle teaches us, that we may understand what we pray. We know that God
respects not the length of our prayers but our devotion and faith; and
therefore our prayers are many and short, like those of Aug. ep. 121. cap. 10.
Dicunterfratres in A^g^pto crel^^at qu^d^m habere oralio^ n^^ sed eas tamen
^^uissimas and (...) quodammodo ^aculata^ ^^per productiores moras euanescat
atque hebetetur intentio.
the Christian Moonkes in Egypt which Saint Austin mentions, wherein were few
words, but abundance of spirit; and these are intermingled with reading of the
word of God, in such sort as may best serve for the continuance of our
intention and affection. As for Popish prayers they are in a tongue which the
people understands not; they sit present at them mute and brute; they hear a
sound, but they know not whether he that speaks do bless or curse; whether
he speak to God or the devil; and because they ask nothing of God, they
depart empty as they come. Their Mattins, their Euensong, and other set hours,
they merit ex opere operato; whether they have devotion, or no devotion, God is
beholding to them for their very pains. They pray to Saints in stead of God,
and make them their Mediators, and have more hope to prevail by them than by
the true Mediator Jesus Christ. Such praying we are content indeed to leave
to their Priests, and what they win thereby they shall have our good will to
wear. Whereas he says that our service is a mingle-mangle translated out of
the old Portaise and Masse-booke, he forgot to use his words aright. For the
Portesse and the Masse-booke are in truth the mingle-mangle; wherein they have
packed together religion and superstition, piety and idolatry, and with the
ancient service of the primitive Church have blended many absurdities and
abominations of their own device. Therefore the composers of our Church
service, because they minded not to set up a new Church, but only to reform
the Church, did take a course accordingly, not to set forth another Service,
but to reform that that was, and to expunge those corruptions which the
abomination of desolation had brought into it. They gathered the pearls out of
the mucke whereinto they were thrown: what was consonant to the word of God
and agreeable to the example of the purest antiquity, that they made choice of,
and have translated it into our book, the other filth they left for swine,
that will needs so be, to wallow in. The performance of our Service, I doubt
not, wants much of that devotion and thankfulness which we should yield to
God, who so graciously has vouchsafed us the light of his truth; but yet ill
does it beseem a cripple to vpbraide another with a lame leg. Let Platina tell
us with what reverence and devotion divine service is done in the Church of
Rome. Plat. de vit. Pont in Stephano. 3. Nune adeo refrixit pietas and religio,
non dico nudu pedibus, sed caligati and cothurnati vix supplicare dignantur.
Non Flent inter eundum vel dum satrificatur, sed rident, and quidem impudenter:
de his etiam loquor quos purpura insigniores facit. Non hymnos canunt, id enim
servile videtur, sed iocos and fabulas ad risum concitandum inter se narrant.
Quid plura? quo quis dicacior est and petulantior, eo maiorem in tam corruptis
moribus laudem meretur, seueros et graves viros reformidat hic noster clerus.
Now is piety and religion waxen very cold, I will not say barefooted, but
having on their hose and buskins they scant vouchsafe to kneel down to pray.
They weep not as they go, or whilst the Sacrifie is in hand, but they laugh,
and that impudently; even of them I speak whom their purple robes make more
eminent than others. They sing not the hymns; for that seems too base a
matter, but they tell jests and tales to make one another laugh. What should I
say any more? the more prattling and wanton a man is, so much the more
commendation has he in this corruption of manners. This Clergy of ours is
afraid of staid and grave men. Now if the Clergy of Rome be such, M. Bishop, I
trow, of his courtesy will bear with us, if some such ungracious and
retchlesse people be found amongst us. The best is, he is not present to see
any such matter, and therefore upon his own surmise may be likly to tell a lie.
If he were present in our co^gregations, specially in towns and cities, I
doubt not but he should see examples enough of them, who say of the Church as
Jacob did of Bethel; Genesis 28.16.17.
How fearful is this place! this is no other but the house of God, and this
is the gate of heaven: surely the Lord is in this place; and therefore address
themselves as Cornelius did when he was to hear the preaching of Peter; Act.
10.33.
We are all heerepresent before God, to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God. Concerning the place where our divine service is said, he asks;
If goodly stately Churches had not been built to their hands by men of our
religion, in what simple cotes, trow you, would their key-cold denotion have
been content to serve their Lord? And why their Lord? What, M. Bishop, is he
not your Lord as well as ours? But it is true indeed that you have another
Lord, whom you have styled, Extrauag. Joan. 22. Cum inter. in glossa. Dominus
deus noster papa.
Our Lord God the Pope, and must we think that your service is done to him?
But if we had had no other but simple cotes wherein to serve God, we suppose
our devotion should have been as well accepted as in goodly and stately
Churches. The time was when the Apostles and first Christians did serve God in
simple cotes, and in the times of Arnob. cont. gent. lib. 6. Origin. contra
Cel. l. 3. and 7.
Arnobius and Origin, the Pagans vpbraided them with the want of stately
Churches, and yet M. Bishop I think will not say but that they served God as
religiously as now they do in the church of Rome. Stately Temples, as they are
sometimes the fruits of true devotion, so they are sometimes matters of
ambitious ostentation, and sometimes the dotages of abominable superstition.
Herod the King, even he that would have murdered our Savior when he was but
newborn, to show his roialty and magnificence, and to gain favor of the
Jews builded Joseph. Antiquit. Iuda^. li. 15. c. 14.
the Temple of Jerusalem most gloriously, and far more nearly to the pattern
of Salomons Temple, than when after the captivity they restored it the second
time, so as that we see the Disciples in the Gospel admiring Mar. 13.1. Luke
21 5.
the goodly stones and buildings of it. Origin mentions, Origin. cont. Cells.
li. 3. Splendida sana cum lucis and templa cum vestibulis and porticibus eximia
magnitudine atque pulchritudine mirandis: introgressus autem videbit adorari
felem aut simiam, etc.
the goodly Chapels and Temples of the Egyptians with their entries and
porches, admirable for their marvelous greatness and fairness, into which
when ye were come, ye should see them worship a cat, or an ape, or a
crocodile, or a goat, or a dog. The Temple Act. 19.27.
of Diana was a most goodly thing and renowned through the whole world. And
surely what M. Bishop now says to us, the same might the Pagans have said to
our forefathers when they were first Christians. They might have asked them in
what simple cotes they would have served Christ, if men of their religion had
not builded to their hands goodly Temples, which by Greg li. 9. ep. 71. Fana
idolorum in eadem gente aestrui minin e debent etc. si fana eadem been
constructa sunt, necesse est vt a cultu dae monum in obsequium very dei debeant
commutari.
Gregory's advice were turned to Christian Churches, as in other places also
Lib. 2. indict. 11. ep. 19. Loca quondam execrandu erroribus deputata in
Catholicae religionis reuerentiam dedicare.
he signifies they did the like. Now if Pagans in this respect were not
inferior to Papists, then it is not to be a question by whom Churches were
built, but by whom they are rightly used. By whomsoever they were built, we now
use them for the exercise of true religion to the glory of God; neither is our
religion so cold in the setting forward of good works, but that whether by
collections or otherwise we maintain and uphold both Church and steeple,
thanks be to God, to that use, and we hope shall so do to their grief and
sorrow until the worlds end. Neither is it any disgrace to our times that
collections are now generally made to such ends and purposes, but rather a
commendation that so many are now found so ready to contribute to such acts of
piety, which M. Bishop will have us think were done in former times only by
some few. The widows Mar 12.42.
two mites were more with God than the great offerings of the rich men; and we
hope that the small helps which we severally give according to our ability for
the maintenance of Gods service, are as well accepted with God, as the
magnificence of them, who out of their abundance and superfluity have performed
so great acts themselves alone. These mites being put together do that,
thanks be to God, that is necessary to be done: and I think it is more than
M. Bishop can justify, that they did not in those times whereof he speaks,
use such general collections for the doing of the like things. Whether they did
or not, it skilleth not; we know that Exo. 35.5.21.
the Tabernacle of God was built in effect by such collections, and God
promised to dwell in it; and we doubt not but he is also present with us in our
Tabernacles which by such means are maintained to serve him. To be short, that
they by whom churches were built since the faith of Christ here received were
all of their religion, is but a vain presumption of M. Bishop, and a mere
untruth, as in part has been declared Answer to the Epistle. sect. 31.36.
before, and hereafter, if God will, upon another occasion shall appear
further. As for his other quarrel, that we have in our churches neither Altars
nor Images, it pleases us the better, for that we find the same also objected
to the first Christians by Celsus apud Origin. cont. Cells. l. 7. Non ferunt
templa and aras and statuas inspicere. and lib. 8. Celsus ait, nos ararum,
statuaru^, templorumque dedicationes fugere.
Celsus the Pagan. We like well to be unlike to the Church of Rome, so that we
may be like to them. For M. Bishop we know him to be a man much delighted with
babies, a trim gilded Rood, and a goodly fair Lady, they are the joy of his
heart. Let God say what he will, that Esaias 44 10.
the Image is profitable for nothing, and that Ierem. 10.8.
the stock is a doctrine of vanity, yet he will not be persuaded but that the
sight of these goodly Idols is the only way to procure heavenly meditation. As
for sentences of Scripture to be set up upon the Church walls, that is but
dawbing; it is but Alehouse fashion, and no heavenly meditation grows
thereof. But may we not think that he came from the Alehouse when he wrote
this, and that he is indeed fitter for an Alehouse than for the Church? What,
must we think that the looking upon a dumb and dead stock is fitter to move
heavenly meditation than the lively word of God? But we see his meaning well
enough; it is this Scripture that troubles him; his stomach can by no means
brook this Scripture; to have Gods commandment written upon the church walls,
as by order it is appointed: Exodus 20.4.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, etc. Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them, etc. This is it that galleth him to the soul;
this is it that vexes him in behalf of his fair and religious pictures, that
no bowing down, no holy and religious worship may be done to them. But it is
nothing to us that we offend him. God himself, who said of his Commandments,
Deuteronomy. 6.9.
Thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates, did
not think it Alehouse fashion to have them written upon Church-walles: but
that we should set up Altars and Images in our Churches, we do not find any
warrant to have come from him. His last exception is very idle. It was the
ancient custom of Christians to pray with their faces toward the East. So is
it ours also, as appears usually in all our Churches. Yea but our Ministers
in their highest mysteries look into the South. Well, and so is it alleged by
Bishop Jewel, that Bish Jewel. Reply. art. 3. Diuis. 26.
at this day in the great Churches at Millaine, Naples, Lions, Mentz and Rome,
and in the Church of Saint Laurence in Forence, the Priest in his service
stands toward the West, having his face full upon the people, and that
hereupon Durand says, that in such places the Priest needs not to turn
himself round when he says, Dominus vobiscum, and saluteth the people, as
otherwise he is wont to do. And why not our Ministers toward the South, as
well as theirs toward the West? Will he have us to conclude hereof, that
their religion is now declining and going down? If not, let him acknowledge
then the folly of his own collection, that our spiritual state is now at the
highest, and that in our religion there is no hope of rising toward heaven,
but assurance of declining. Albeit I must advertise him briefly, that true
religion, whereby the Sun of righteousness shines unto us, and whereby we
rise to heaven, has been subject to such condition, to be sometimes rising,
sometimes at the height, and sometimes declining again, yea sometimes
woonderfully eclipsed and hidden in a manner quite out of sight; yet
notwithstanding it never had such a fall, but that, as the sun, it has had a
time to rise again. But the whore of Babylon, the persecutour of true
religion, albeit she have flattered herself in the security of her state, and
said of herself, Revel. 18.7.
I sit like a Queen and am no widow, and shall see no mourning; yet she has
begun to fall, and notwithstanding the props and stays that her lovers use to
hold her up, shall fall daily more and more, never to rise again, God having
so foretold us, that Verse. 21.
as a millstone, she shall be cast with violence into the sea, thencefoorth to be
found no more.

21. W. BISHOP.
I may not here omit, that of late years they have caused the Kings arms to
be set up in the place, where Christ's arms the Crucifix was wont to stand: the
which I confess would have graced their Church better, if it had been
elsewhere placed. But I hope they will give me leave to ask them, how they
durst set up any such Images in their Churches, as be in that arms. For they
have taught hitherto, that it is expressly against the second commandment, and
a kind of Idolatry, not only to worship Images; but also to set them up in
Churches: and yet now (as it were) clean for getting themselves, they fall
into that fault themselves, that they have so much blamed in others. Neither
will it help them to say, that they reproved only the setting up of holy
pictures, but not of others. For the second commandment (as they expound it)
is as well against the one as the other, forbidding generally the making of any
kind of Image. And is it not a pitiful blindness to think, that the
pictures of Lions; and Liberts, do better become the house of God, than the
Image of his own Son, and of his faithful servants? And may not simple people
think, when they see Christ's arms cast down, and the Princes set up in their
place, that there dwell men, who make more account of their Princes honor,
then they do of Christ's? And that their meeting in that place (call it what
you will) is rather to serve their Prince, than to serve Christ. But I have
been longer in their place of prayer than I thought.

R. ABBOT.
The King is a great mote in M. Bishops eye, and therefore he could not here
pass by without a quarrel to the Kings arms. The Kings arms lawfully set up
in our Churches, and not popish images.
We have placed, he says, the Kings arms where Christ's arms the Crucifixe
was wont to stand. But who made M. Bishop a herald to assign arms to
Christ, and that without any priuity or liking of Christ himself? Did Christ
ever tell him or any man else that he meant to give a Crucifixe for his arms?
This is a fantastical imagination, neither did Christ take course by a picture
but by the word of the Gospel, to be Gal. 3.1.
described before our eyes as crucified amongst us. But if the Crucifix be but
Christ's arms, why do they worship the Crucifix, See of Images, sect. 14.
as Christ himself? Were it not a thing absurd, for a man to give the Kings
honor to the Kings arms? We have therefore pulled down the Crucifix, as
being made an Idol and worshipped in stead of Christ, and in place thereof for
the ornament of our Churches we have set up the Kings arms, as being the
defender of the faith of Christ. But we have taught that it is against Gods
commandment to set up in Churches any such Images as are in the Kings arms.
But therein he says untruly, for we have always taught, that the
commandments of the first table concern matter of religion and devotion, and
require the same to be performed to God only. The second commandment therefore
condemns all Images that are made or set up for exercise of religion; but
historical and civil use of Images it condemns not, neither does he find
any one of us so to expound it, as generally to forbid the making of any Image,
as he has before understood by our consent set down by M. Perkins in the
beginning of that question. Further, he questioneth out of his sweet womanly
devotion, is it not a pitiful blindness to think that the pictures of Lions
and Libberts do better become the house of God, than the Image of his own
Son and of his faithful servants? But does his wisdom think that Solomon
was blind when he made in the Temple of God the pictures and Images of Lions
and Bulls, of Flowers and Palme-trees, and made no Images of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and other holy men that were before him? It was never seen, but in
times notoriously condemned See of Images sect. 17.
for Idolatry, that ever the Image of any man was set up in the Temple of God:
and is not this poor man in a pitiful case, that holds all those just and
righteous Fathers that lived in those times to have been but blind men,
because they would not be partakers of his folly? They are therefore such wise
men as he himself is that make the collection that he does: but as for us we
yield such honor and service to our Prince as God requires us to do, not
setting up our Prince in the place of God as they do the Pope, but obeying him
under God and for Gods sake, whom God has placed over us, and who seeks no
otherwise to govern us but by the word of God.

22. W. BISHOP.
I come now to the men that are elected to serve the Lord there. Be not many of
them (for the whole corpse I will not touch) such as Jeroboam was glad to
choose, when he made a Schism in Israel: to wit, de extremis populi, qui non
erant de filijs Leui: not lawful successors of the true Priests, but others of
the baser sort of the people, and them commonly that are notable, either for
ignorance or some other odd quality? and must they not also fill their good
patrons hands with some feeling commodity, before they can get a benefice? And
so beginning with simonie, linked with perjury (for the poor fellows must
nevertheless swear, that they come freely to their benefice) are they not
like to proceed on holily? As for the vow of chastity, the daily service and
often fasting, which Catholic Priests are bound unto; they by the sweet
liberty of the new Gospel, do exchange into solacing themselves with their
yoke-fellowes: this of the common sort of their Ministers. With their preachers
I will not meddle for fear of offense* yet if any desire to know how they
behave themselves in other countries, they may read the censure of a zealous
learned preacher, one of their own companions; who amongst many other things
writes thus of them. Menno l. de Christ fide. titul. de fide mulieris Cananeae.
When you come to preachers, who brag that they have the word of God, you
shall find certain of them manifest liars, others drunkards, some usurers and
foule-mouthed slanderers, some persecutours and betraiers of harmless
persons. How some of them behave themselves, and by what means they get their
wives, and what kind of wives they have, that I leave to the Lord and them.
They live an idle, slothful and voluptuous life: by fraud and flattery they
feed themselves of the spoils of Antichrist (he means the benefices taken
from the Papists) and do Preach just as the earthly and carnal Magistrate
desires to hear, and will permit, etc. So much, and not a little more,
speaks one great Master of the late refermation, concerning his Evangelical
brethren. Are not these goodly lamps of the new Gospel, and likely persons to
be chosen by Christ, to give light to others, and to reform the world^ But
peradventure they have in some secret corners, certain devout religious
souls, who in an austere retired life, do with continual tears bewail the
sins of the rest, and make incessant suit unto the Almighty, for a general
pardon of the whole. Would to God they had, but I fear me that they be of
their invisible congregati^o, or rather none such to be found amongst them. For
those neligious houses, which our Ancesters had built for such godlyrand
virtuous people, who (forsaking both father, mother, all their kin and
acquaintance, and flying from all the pleasures and preferments, which this
transitory world could yield them) gave themselves wholly to the holy
exercises of humility, chastity, poverty, and all sorts of mortification:
these Monasteries (I say) and all that professed in them a retired religious
life, the Protestants have beaten down and banished, and have not in their
places erected any other, for the singular godly men or women of their
religion; Which does most evidently argue, that there is in them small zeal,
and rare practice, of any such extraordinary piety and devotion. Surely it must
needs be a strange Christian congregation, that holds them for no tolerable
members of their commonweal, whom Christ specially chooses to serve him day
and night; and by whose holy example and most fervent prayers, all other
Christians do find themselves much edified, and mightily protected. So that
briefly, whether you consider the persons that serve God, or the place where
he is served, or the manner of his divine sernice, the Catholic religion does
in every point surpass the Protestant by many degrees. Thus much in answer
unto Master PERKINS objection of Atheism against us, the which I esteemed
fittest for this Preface, being a matter of so great moment, and therefore most
worthy to be examined and considered of apart, with mature judgment. Now to
the rest of his questions, according to his own order.

R. ABBOT.
There has been an old fable of Plutarth. de curiositate.
Lamia a Witch, who always when she was at home put up her eyes in a box, and
remained blind, but when she was to go abroad, she would always put her eyes
in her head, that she might see all things. M. Bishop is very like to that
ill-fauoured witch, Comparison of the English and Romish Clergy.
having his eyes open abroad with us, to see every default, but being blind
at home, and not discerning the abominable filthiness and beastly sluttery of
the house wherein he himself dwells. I doubt not, but he is a man of a
naughty mind, to speak contrary to that that he thinks; but I do not hold
him so very a fool, as that he thinks any part of the Clergy of the church
of Rome worthy to be compared to the Clergy of the Church of England.
Somewhat happily he means to that purpose when he says, The whole corpse I
will not touch, thereby importing that he takes his advantage of some
insufficient and evil disposed men, and by them seeks to cast some aspersion
of infamy upon all the rest. But we know, that 2. Tim. 2.20.
in a great house are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood
and of stone, some to honor and some to dishonor: and that not only in other
callings, but in the ministry it self, as Matthew 10.4.
Judas amongst the twelve apostles, as Act. 6.5. Reu. 2.15.
Nicolas amongst the seven Deacons, as the Act. 20.30.
sect-makers which the Apostle foretold should arise from amongst the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus; as in all times there have been not only true Pastors
which feed the sheep, but also Ioh. 10.12.
hirelings, which Romans 16.18.
serve their own bellies, and Ezec. 34.2.
feed themselves; and Ioh. 10.1.10.
thieves, who enter into the sheepefold, not by the door, but by the window;
and Esaias 56.10.
blind watchmen, Matt. 15.14.
blind guides, who lead the blind into the ditch. It is no marvel therefore
if amongst us there be some, even de extremis populi, of the very basest of the
people, who by stealth and sinister practice, through either the negligence or
corruption of some, to whom the care thereof is committed, contrary to laws
and orders in that behalf provided, do creep into the Ministry of the
church, and make that their refuge for a living, because being idle beasts and
slow bellies, they have no other means thereof, and therefore having the curse
of the sons of Eli lying upon them, are ready 1. Sa. 2.36.
to bow down for a piece of silver, and for a morsel of bread, and for forty
shillings a year to take upon them the service of a Church. These are likely
men for simoniacall patrons and cheaters of churches to deal withal, being most
likely to fill their hands, as M. Bishop says, with feeling commodity for the
obteining of benefices, which by merit and desert they cannot atteine unto. Yea
and of Preachers also, with whom, he says, he will not meddle for fear of
offense, yet we know and confess that there are not wanting some, who have
more learning than conscience, and do dishonor the calling by which they
receive honor, 1. Sam. 2.30.
whom God will despise, because they have despised him. Menno therefore, whom he
cites, might see some cause to complain of certain or some preachers,
accordingly as of old the Prophets taxed the enormities and abuses ^sa.
56.10.11. Ier. 2.8.
of the Priests and Prophets; albeit who or whence he was I know not, or what
occasion there was of speaking that which he does; he was of another country,
and that that he says, appertains not to us. But what are all these things
to the botches and sores of the Church of Rome? how spotless is our Clergy in
comparison of theirs? He that would pull their Popes out of their kennels, and
lead them along in show, should set forth such a generation of mo^sters, as
the world, save them, has never seen the like. Their Cardinals were such as
that Clemangis says of them, that Clemang. de corrupto eccl. statu. Si artifex
quisque vellet superbiae simulachru^ effingere, nulla congruentius ratione id
facere posset, quam Cardinalis effigiem oculis intuentium obiectando, etc. Quis
immensam and inextricabilem voraginem ipsorum concupiscentiae verbis aequare
valeat, etc. Beneficia possident non quidem duo vel tria, december vel viginti,
sed centena, and ducentena, and interdum vsque ad quadringenta vel quingenta
aut amplius, nec perua vel tenuia, sed omnium pinguissima and optima, etc.
Quantumcunque ad numerum ^ue summam venerint, ad ampliorem festinant.
if a man would set forth a picture of pride, he could not more fitly do it,
than by the picture of a Cardinal; that no man could by words express the
unmeasurable and bottomless gulf of their covetous desire, not being
contented with two or three benefices, or ten or twenty, but having a hundred,
two hundred, yea four or five hundred and above, and those not small ones, but
the fattest and best, and how many soever they had, yet gaping still for more.
Which insatiable covetousness of theirs, was so gross and infamous, as that
the Pope himself, Benedict the twelfth, being moved to make more Cardinals,
answered, Illyric. Catalog. test. verit. p. 447. Libenter se^d facturum si modo
nouum mundum creare posset; nam hunc qui iam existat vix praesentibus
Cardinalibus sufficere.
that he would so do if he could make another world; but that this world was
scant enough for the Cardinals that were made already. Clemangis further
notes, how Clemang. vt supra. Quis nesciat sectionis schismaticae horrendam
pestem per nequitiam Cardinalium in ecclesiae gremium iniectam, etc. Transeo
S^moniacas apud papam inter^essiones; patrocinia venalia; corruptiones aut
promotiones turpissimas and damnatissimas, quae omnes fere istis authoribus and
suasoribus fiebant, etc. Nec enumerare volo little adulteria, stupra,
fornicationes, quibus Romana^ curiam etiam nunc incestant, etc. Necrefero
vsuras, etc. qua ex causa nummularios supremae tabulae non incongruenter eos
quidam vocant.
by their wickedness horrible chisme was brought into the Church; he
mentions their Simoniacall intercessions to the Pope; their selling of their
favors for money; their most shameful and damnable corruptions, the
adulteries, whoredoms and fornications, wherewith they defiled the court of
Rome; their usury in the highest degree. As touching their Bishops he
reports, that Ibid. in s^q. Nalli eruditi virs, nulli probi, iusti, virtu^si
ad suprema dign: tatum fafiigia venieba^t, se^ ambitiosi quique, adulatores,
histrionici, ommbus vitijs imbuts. Quotusquisque body est ad Pontificale
culmen ^uectus qui sacras velperfunctorie literas legerit, audierit, didicerit,
imo qui sacru^ codicem nisi tegumento tenui vnquam attigerit, cum tamen
iureiurando illas in sua institutione se nosse co^firment.
no learned men, none good, just, virtuous, atteined to that high dignity, but
ambitious persons, flatterers, stageplaiers, and men defiled with all vices;
that there was scant a man preferred to be a Bishop that had but even lightly
read, heard, or learned the holy Scriptures, yea, that had so much as touched
that holy book, save only the cover, albeit they took their oath at their
institution that they had knowledge of them. Bernard also mentions, that even
in his time Bernard epist. 42. Scholares pueri and impuberes adolescentuli ob
sanguinis dignitatem promouentur ad ecclesiasticas dignitates, and de sub
ferula transferuntur ad principandum presbyteris; laetieres interim quod virgas
tuaserint, quam quod meruerint principatum; nec tam illis blanditur adeptum,
quam ademp^u^ magisterum.
Schoole-boies, and beardlesse youths, were promoted to ecclesiastical
dignities, and from the ferula were exalted to bear rule over Priests; such as
were more glad that they had escaped the rod, than that they had obtained their
preferment; and ioied more that they were come from being under masters, than
that they themselves were become masters. The behavior of these Bishops
Clemangis further describes, that Clemang. vt supra. Non quidem ammarum sed
crumenarum potius quaestum vbique explorant etc. Nihil omnino agunt, nisi quod
ad colligendam quacunque ex oceasione pecuniam suffragan posse crediderint,
etc. Multo aequanimius laturi ^acturam december millium animaru^ quam dece^ aut
duodecim solidorum, etc. Nullus ad cler^^atum vel ad sacrum ordinem, vel ad
quemcunque gradum ecclesiasticum nisi mercede accedit. Omnes quotquot
aduenerint nullo aut paruo admodum discrimine ad eos quos petierint titulos
admittunt, nisi forte siqui adeo egestate premuntur vt soluendo non sint Nulla
de anteacta vita percunctatio est, etc. De literis vero and doctrina quid loqui
attinet, cum omnes fere Pre^byteros sine aliquo captu aut rerum aut vocabulorum
morose syllabatimque vix legere videamus, etc. Si aliqua beneficia suae sint
dispositions deuoluta pro quaestu ea conferunt, vel fuis ea spur^s and
histrionibus donant.
they every where sought the gaining not of souls but of money; doing nothing
but what might serve their turn to gather money, taking in much better part the
loss of ten thousand souls, than of ten or twelve shillings, admitting none
to sacred orders or to any degree of the church, but only for money; refusing
none in a manner, but only such as were so poor, that they could not pay
money: (no question of their life, no question of their learning; so that their
Priests for the most part could very hardly read, having no understanding at
all, either of the things which they read, or of the words:) bestowing for
money their benefices which they had to bestow, or upon their bastards and
^tage-plaiers. Specul. eccles. Pontif. ex Aluaro Pelag. de Planctu ecclesiae.
Vix credo, maxim in Hispania, quod de centum episcopis sit vnus qui non sit
Simoniacus in ordinibus and beneficijs conferendu.
I scant think, faith Aluarus Pelagius, that of a hundred Bishops, there is
one that does not practice simonie in bestowing of orders and benefices. And
whereas M. Bishop twiteth our Ministers with solacing themselves with their
Yoke-fellowes, Clemangis again tells, that Clemang. ibid. Rectores
parochiarum in plerisque dioecesibus ex cer^o and condicto cum suis praelatis
pretio passim and public concubinas tenent.
their Bishops for a certain fee did give license to their parish Priests
every where and openly to keep Concubines: which Sleidan. Comment. ii. 4 Scire
se Germaniae Episcoporum hunc esse morem, vt accepta pecu^ia scortationem suis
permittant.
Cardinal Campegius also confessed, that the Bishops of Germany were
accustomed to do: that Clemang. Passim and inuerecunde prolem ex meretricio
susceptam, and scorta vice coniugum domi tenent.
their Canons and Chaplains openly and shamelesly kept their bastards and
harlots in house with them. Yea Theodoric de Niem says further, that Theodor.
de Niem. In eisdem etiam partibus Hiberniae and Norwegiae iuxta consuetudines
patriae licet Episcopis and Presbyteris tenere public concubinas, and eisdem
visitantibus bis in anno subditos sibi Presbyteros etc. suam dilectam ducere
secum ad domes and hospitia corundem subditorum presbyterorum; nec ipsa dilecta
permittit episcopum ^masium visitare sine ipsa, etc. Et pene idem modus quoad
luxuriant circa Presbyteros Gasconiae, Hispaniae ac Portugaliae, etc. in
omnibus obseruatur.
in Ireland and Norway, as also in Gascoine, Spain, Portugal, and other
countries, it was lawful by the custom of their country for Bishops and
Priests openly to keep concubines; and when the Bishops twice in a year did
visit the Priests and Clergy of their jurisdiction, they led their minions
about with them, who would not suffer their paramour Bishops to go in
visitation without them, because they would be partakers of their good cheer,
and provide that they should not fall in love with other to their wrong. The
gloss of the Canon law says, that Did. 81. Maximianus. in glossa. Pauci sine
illo vitio inueniuntur.
there were few Priests found without the sin of fornication: so as that not
without cause Gerson the Chancelour of Paris wished it to be enquired of, as a
matter worthy of reformation, Specul. eccle. Pontif. ex Io. Gerson. Scrutemini
si alicubi sacerdotes in consuetudinem duxerunt sub praetextu antillarum habere
concubinas.
Whether that Priests any where had drawn it into custom under pretense of
maide-seruants to keep concubines: pointing at a thing which all men saw to be
common every where. Such was in a word the continency of those Romish Bishops
and Priests, as that Aluarus Pelagius, before mentioned, says, that Ibid ex
Alu. Pelag. In pauco maiori numero sunt filij laicorum quam Clericorum.
in Spain and otherwhere their bastards were almost as many as the children of
lay men; Ibi. ex Theod. de Niem. Vnde quodammodo plures innaturales ex foedo
complexu nati quam filij, legitimi ac naturales in ecclesiasticis titulis
co^cedendis praeferuntur, and plures legitimis apertissime promouentur.
so as that in all those parts, says Niem, speaking as before of Ireland,
Norway, Spain, Gascoine, Portugal and other countries, there were more such
bastards preferred to ecclesiastical dignities than there were of them that
were lawfully begotten. Albeit they rested not here, but Bernard. ser. in
Synodo Remensi. Episcopi and Sacerdotes traditi in reprobum sensum faciunt quae
non conueniunt: quae enim in occulto fiunt ab Episcopis, turpe est dicere, etc.
Masculi in masculos turpitudinem operantes, etc. Vide eund. de Conuers. ad
Clericos. ca. 29.
being given over to a reprobate sense, says Bernard, they do the things
which are not conuement; for it is a shame, says he, to name the things which
are done in secret even by the Bishops; men with men working filthiness, and
receiving the recompense of their own error. Of this holy Clergy, Clemangis,
to be short, says, that he was Ibid. Nonest apud me dubiu^ plures nunc
latrones in ecclesia repertum iri quam veros pastores. Et postea: Sacrorum
eloquiorum studia cum suis professoribus in risum atque l^^r brium omnibus
versa sunt and praesertim pontificibus, qui suas traditiones diuinis long man
datis anteponunt. Iam illud egregium and praeclarissimum praedicandi officium
solis quo^dam pastoribus attributum eisque maxim debitum, ita apud eos viluit,
vt nihil magis indign^^ aut magis suae dignitatierubescendum existiment. Et
post. Siquis body desidiosus est, siquis a labor abhorrens, siquis in otio
luxuriari volens, ad sacerdotium conuolat, etc.
out of doubt, that there were more thieves than true pastors; that the
studies of sacred Scriptures, together with the professors thereof, were with
them become a matter of laughter and mockery, specially with their Popes or
Bishops, who prefer their own traditions far before Gods commandments; that
the most excellent duty of Preaching, which was wont only to belong unto the
Pastors, was become so vile and base with them, as that they thought nothing
more unworthy, nothing whereof they were to be more ashamed; that if there were
a lasie fellow that would not work, and did desire to live idly and
riotously, he became a Priest, and being so, joined himself to the other
voluptuous Priests, who living rather after the rule of Epicurus than of
Christ, and diligently frequenting Alehouses and Tauernes did spend their time
in drinking, in feasting and banqueting, in playing at tables and tennise; and
being full gorged and drunk, did fight and brawle and tumult, and with foul
mouths blaspheme the names of God and his Saints, and thus ordered did come
from their harlots company to the altar of God. Thus Clemangis, two hundred
years ago, described the state of the Popish Clergy: and it were infinite to
set down what others also have written to the same effect: and may we not
justly return M. Bishops words upon himself; Are not these goodly lamps of
the old religion, as they call it, and likely men to be chosen by Christ to
give light to others? As for devout religious souls, we need not doubt to
affirm that they are far more with us than either Clergy or Cloister ever
bred with them; far more removed from the world, not by place, but by affection
and conversation, wherein is that true retired life which Christ has commended
unto us. And for their Monkish life, we are not desirous to be followers or
partakers of it. The filthiness thereof was such, as that it might well be
said of their religious, which of old was said of the Canaanites: Leu. 18.25.
The Land was defiled by them; therefore God visited their wickedness upon
them, and the land spued them out. Clemangis notes of their Monks, that
Clemang. vt supra. Quanto magis inter caeteros ecclesiae filios ex votis suae
religi^nis perfecti esse debebant, etc. tanto ab his omnibus rebus licet eos
videre magis alienos, magis videlicet tenaces, ^agis auaros, magis seculari rei
versis retrorsum animis immixt^s; magis insuper lubricos, indisciplinatos,
dissolutes, inquietos, etc. nihil illis aeque odiosum quam cella and claustrum,
lectio and oration, regula and religio. Quocirca monachi sunt exteriori habitu,
sed vita, sed operibus, sed internae conscientiae spurcitia a perfectione
longissime disiuncti.
whereas by the vows of their religion they should have been more perfect
than other, more withdrawn from the world, more continent, more obedient, they
were so much the further off from all these things, more holding, more
covetous, more given to the world, as having their minds turned quite
backward, more wanton, unmannerly, dissolute, unquiet: nothing so hateful to
them as their cell and cloister, as reading and praying, as their rule and
religion; being Monks in outward habit, but in life, in works, by inward
filthiness of conscience far distant from perfection. He says anon after,
that Ibid. De monialibus plura dicere verecundia prohibet, ne non de coetu
virginum deo dicataru^, sed magis de lupanaribus, de dolis and procacia
meretricum, de stupris and incestuosis operibus prolixe sermonem trahamus. Nam
quid obsecro aliud sunt hoc tempore puellarum monasteria, nisi quaedam, non
dico dei sanctuaria, sed veneris execranda pros^ibula, sed l^sciuorum and
impudicorum iuuenum ad explendas libidines receptacula? vt idem sit hodie
virginem velare, quod and public ad scortandum exponere.
of their Nuns he was a shamed to speak, lest he should make long speech,
not of companies of virgins dedicated to God, but rather of stews and brothell
houses, of the wiles and bold impudency of harlots, of whoredom and incest.
For what else are the Monasteries of virgins, says he, but the accursed stews
of Venus, receptacles of wanton and unchaste young men for the fulfilling of
their lusts, so as that it is all one at this day to veil a virgin, as to set
her forth to be a common whore? Specul. eccle. Pont. ex Theodorico de N^em.
Fornicantur quamplures huiusm^di Monialium cum eisdem suis Pralatis ac
Monachis, and in ijsdem Monasterijs plures parturiunt filios and filias, quos
ab eisdem Praelatis and Monachis incestuoso coitu conceperunt.
They play the harlots, says Niem, with their Prelates and Monks, and bring
forth in their Monasteries or Nunneries, many sons and daughters, which are
incestuously by them begotten. But let me give over and not strive too long
where there is such a filthy stink. If this be the extraordinary piety and
devotion which M. Bishop commends, let him take it to him and his, we will
content our selves with that ordinary course and condition wherein Christ and
his Apostles and the first Christians did live. And in conforming our selves to
them, we doubt not but that we are to God a true Christian congregation,
howsoever to M. Bishop we seem strange, who should rather think strange of
his own dream, that Christ has specially chosen them of whom he never spoke,
and whose life has been and is no other but the dishonor of the name of
Christ; whose example is pernicious unto men, and whose prayers proceeding from
so unclean thoughts, cannot but be loathsome unto God. Whether therefore we
consider the persons that serve God, or the place where he is served, or the
manner of his Divine service, M. Bishop shows himself to be a man of a leaud
and dishonest tongue, that will make any comparison of the Church of Rome to
our Church. And thus we are come to an end of his long preface: wherein, what
mature judgment he has showed concerning a matter of so great moment, it
remains for the Reader to judge: for my part I judge he did very ill bestow
his time in blotting so many papers with so much folly and untruth. But his
transition is worthy to be noted; Now to the rest of his questions, says he,
according to his own ^^^der; whereas of twelve questions, consequently handled
by M. Perkins, he speaks not a word, but only passes to an advertisement in
the end, where he thought least harm might befall to him. Here is some want
of plain dealing, which may justly cause his Reader to be suspicious and
doubtful of him.

A confutation to D. BISHOPS answer to Master PERKINS his Advertisement.
W. PERKINS.
An advertisement to all favorers of the Roman religion, showing (as he
weeneth) that the said Religion is against the Catholic principles of the
Catechism, that has been agreed upon ever since the days of the Apostles,
by all Churches: Which principles be four. The Apostles Creed: the ten
Commandments: the Lords prayer: the institution of two Sacraments, Baptism
and the Lords Supper. 1. COR. 11. v. 23.

1. W. BISHOP.
I Had once determined to have wholly omitted this goodly postscript, because
it contains (in manner) nothing else, but an irksome repetition of that,
which has been (I will not say twice before, but more than twenty times)
handled over and over, in this former small treatise: notwithstanding,
considering both how ready many are, when they see any thing omitted, to say
that it could not be answered; and also for that these points here
reiterated, are the most odious that he could cull out of all the rest to urge
against us: I finally resolved to give them a short answer; And further, also
by proving their new religion, to be very opposite unto those old grounds of
the true religion, to requite him with the like, that I die not in his debt.
Thus he begins.

The Roman religion established by the Council of Trent, is in the principal
points thereof, against the very grounds of the Catechism: the Creed: the
ten Commandments: the Lords prayer: the two Sacraments.
THe Catholic religion embraced and defended by the Church of Rome, was
planted and established there by the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
fifteen hundred years before the Council of Trent, and has been ever
sithence, by the Bishops of Rome their lawful successors, constantly
retained, and most sincerely observed and maintained: some articles thereof,
called into question by the Heretics of this latter age, were in that most
learned general Council of Trent, declared and defined. And great marvel it
were, if the principal points thereof, should be against the grounds of the
Catechism, which is in every point most substantially expounded by the decree
and order of the very same Council. Or is it credible, that the Church of Rome
(with which all other ancient Churches and holy Fathers, did desire to agree;
and which has been ever most diligent to observe all Apostolical traditions)
should in the principal points of faith, cross and destroy the very
principles of that religion, that has been agreed upon by all Churches ever
since the Apostle days, as he says? Is it not much more likely and probable,
that the Protestants, who slander all Churches, ever since the time of the
Apostles, with some kind of corruption or other, and who hold no kind of
Apostolical tradition to be necessary: is not not (I say) more credible, that
they should shake those grounds of faith, which come by tradition from the
Apostles, and have been ever since by all Churches agreed upon? I suppose that
few men of any indifferent judgment, can think the contrary.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop is desirous to seem to have omitted nothing, because many, says
he, are ready when they see any thing omitted to say, that it could not be
answered; and yet he has cunningly omitted the handling of twelve questions,
as I have already noted, which are more than the third part of the book which
he undertook to answer. In that which here he has sent us, he takes upon
him, as to answer M. Our religion, and not Popery, is the old religion.
Perkins, so by way of requital, to prove that our new religion, (as he
calls it) is very opposite unto the old grounds of the true religion. But if
his eyes were open, he would easily see that that new religion, and the true
religion are all one; our new religon, as to him it seems, being indeed no
other but that only true religion whereby all the faithful have been saved
from the beginning, and so shall be to the worlds end. And if he will have our
religion to be taken for a new religion, he must first impeach those grounds of
antiquity whereby we have hitherto justified the same against his vain and
wilful cauilations. As for that which he says, that the religion now defended
by the Church of Rome was planted and established there by the Apostles Saint
Peter and Saint Paul: it is the begging of the question, a fond presumption, an
idle headed dream: who but fools and mad men believe it, when they see the
writings of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and therein find no mention of the
religion that is now at Rome, neither of the Pope, nor of Purgatory, nor
Pardons, nor Iubilies, nor Mass, nor Images, nor any other of that filth? If
the successors of that See had constantly retained the faith that by the
Apostles was delivered, we should now have that religion at Rome which is
taught in the Epistle to the Romans, which now is our religion, and was then
the religion of the church of Rome. Of that religion those heretics (whom no
otherwise he so names, but according to the Act. 24.14.
Jewish phrase) called nothing into question; they only questioned and impugned
those additions and alterations wherewith the church of Rome has defiled and
disgraced that religion. The Council of Trent a mockery of the world.
The Council of Trent, which declared and defined against them, was neither
learned nor general. It was a base and a vile collusion, and mere mockery of
the world, partially assembled by the Pope, guilefully managed by his Agents,
directed wholly by his intelligence, nothing there to be concluded, but what
he first approved, and yet all in sine left at his will, by that damnable
clause never heard of in any former Council; Conc. Trid. sess. 7. in princip.
and sess. 25. cap. 21. de reformat. Salua semper in omnibus authoritate sedis
Apostolicae.
Saving always and in all things the authority of the Sea Apostolic. Some
Divines there were of quality and worth, who gave their assistance in that
business: but as for the Bishops, of which the greatest number were Italians,
they deserved for the most part rather to be accounted a heard of swine, than
a Council of learned men. His reason that the principal points of Popery
cannot be against the grounds of the Catechism, because the same is expounded
by the decree and order of that Council, makes as much for us as it does for
them. For the Catechism is by order expounded and taught by us: we open to
the people the Creed, the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the doctrine of
Sacraments. M. Bishop therefore does amiss to say that our religion is
opposite to those old grounds of true religion. If this argument avail not for
us, then neither shall it avail for him, but we are still at liberty to
conceive, that notwithstanding their expounding of those grounds, they teach
points of doctrine contrary thereunto. And indeed that expounding of theirs was
no otherwise begun but in emulation of our doings in that kind: for until it
pleased God to stir up the spirits of some of our men to endeavor the
reformation of the Church, and to that end to bring the people, so much as in
them lay, out of the thraldom of blindness and ignorance, wherein they were
then holden, the use of Catechism was quite abolished out of the Church; the
people knew neither the Creed nor the Lords prayer, but only that they spoke
them like a charm in a strange and unknown tongue. But when they saw us
recalling them to the ancient order of Catechizing, and thereby training them
to the knowledge of God, and of faith toward him, they held it necessary for
the satisfaction of the world, that they themselves should make some show of
doing the like, and thereupon in the Council of Trent, took order for a
Catechism to be published, though they never meant to make any great use of
it, but only where necessity should enforce them for the countermining of our
labors, and the staying of many, whom otherwise the desire of learning and of
the knowledge of God, would have carried away from them. Into that Catechism
and the rest of theirs, how they have foisted in matters of faith and doctrine,
which the old expositours of the Catechism never knew nor have delivered, we
shall somewhat perceive by examining the process and particulars of this
book. In the mean time we answer M. Bishop, that it is very credible, and
ready enough to be believed of them that are careful to understand it. that
the church of Rome, albeit while it continued sound in the faith, all ancient
Churches and holy Fathers, did desire to agree with it; yet since, being gone
out of her The church of Rome has swaiued from the tradition of the Apostles.
ancient way, does indeed cross and destroy those principles of religion,
which formerly have been agreed upon by all Churches. For whereas he says,
that that church has been ever most diligent to observe all Apostolical
traditions, it is a stale jest, and Bellarmine himself perforce acknowledges
it to be a lie. For it being manifest by the testimony of Anacletus an
ancient Bishop of Rome, that De consecrat. did. 2. cap. Peracta. Peracta
consecratione communicent omnes qui nolin^ eccleasisticis carere liminibus: sic
enim Apostoli statuerunt and sancta Romana tenet ecclesia.
the Apostles decreed and the church of Rome then observed, that they should be
excommunicate whosoever were present after consecration, and did not receive
the Communion; Bellarmine in the behalf of the now-church of Rome, rejects
the same as a thing Bellarm. de Missa. lib. 2. ca. 10. Cortum est decreta ista
quae sine dubio non diuini sed humani iuris erant, si ad populum pertinebant,
progressis temporis abrogata fuisse.
in process of time abrogated by the church, and being but a matter of humane
only constitution and decree. So likewise we see in the Council of Co^stance
acknowledging that Council. Constable. sess. 13. Licet Christus post coenam
instituerit and discipulis suis administranerit sub vtraque specie panis and
vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc non obstante, etc. Et similiter,
quod licet in primitiua ecclesia huiusmodi Sacramentum a fidelibus reciperetur
sub vtraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo ad euitandum aliqua scandala and
pericula est rationabiliter introducta quod a laicis tantummodo sub specie
panis suscipiatur, etc. vnde pro lege habenda est, etc.
Christ administered the holy Sacrament to his disciples under both kinds, and
that in the Primitive Church it was so received of the faithful; and yet this
notwithstanding they decree it for a law, that lay men shall receiuc only in
one kind. Now when thus with our eyes we see, and they themselves tell us the
contrary, will M. Bishop notwithstanding tell us that the Church of Rome has
been ever most diligent to observe all Apostolical traditions? Surely if they
had failed but in these two, they had not observed al; but now how many other
things are there, wherein they have apparently swarued from the example of the
Apostles! How then can we believe M. Bishop any further, who doubts not here
to affirm so gross and manifest untruth? And to this untruth he adds
another, when he says, that we slander all churches since the time of the
Apostles with some corruption or other. It is true, that we note the
corruptions of some churches, and of some men, accordingly as the history of
the Church and the monuments of antiquity do lay the same forth unto us: but
we cannot say that al Churches, or all the Fathers of those times were guilty
of those corruptions. For many Churches were there, and many Bishops and
Pastors of Churches, of whom no memorial is come unto us; many whom we find
otherwise reported of than was true, by the corrupting of those writings which
they left unto the Church, and suborning other counterfets in their stead;
many, who have delivered some exorbitant opinions, of which notwithstanding it
appears not that they had public approbation in the Church; many, who have
left so little in record as touching points of faith, as that it is hard by
them to esteem what the doctrine of the Church was. As for the corruptions
whereof we speak, there are many of them such, as that I do not think M.
Bishop to be so impudent but that he will acknowledge the same as well as we;
there are none of them, but that either by the word of God, or by like warrant
of antiquity we prove them to be such as we report them. His other tale, that
we hold no kind of Apostolical traditions to be necessary, he himself
knows to be untrue, because he knows that we receive the Creed as
necessary, which he says came by tradition from the Apostles. It has been
also Of Traditions sect 4.
before given him to understand, that we reject not Apostolical traditions,
which appear certainly so to be; and yet woorthily we reject those unwritten
doctrines and counterfeit traditions of the Papists, which are falsely fathered
upon the Apostles. It is by these unwritten doctrines and counterfeit
traditions, that the grounds of our faith are impeached and shaken. We
therefore cannot be said to shake the grounds of faith, who retain the mere
simplicity of those grounds, and refuse all other strange and bastard stuff:
but they shake the grounds of faith, who become patrons of such tradition,
colored with the names of the Apostles, when notwithstanding they plainly
cross the written doctrine of the Apostles.

2. W. BISHOP.
But let us descend to the particulars, wherein the truth will appear more
plainly. Thus begins Master PERKINS with the Creed.

First of all it must be considered, that some of the principal doctrines
believed in the Church of Rome, are, that the Bishop of Rome is the Vicar of
Christ, and head of the Catholic Church: that there is a fire of Purgatory:
that Images of God and Saints, are to be placed in the Church, and worshipped:
that Prayer is to be made to Saints departed: that there is a propitiatory
sacrifice daily offered in the Mass, for the sins of the quick and the
dead. These points are of that moment, that without them the Roman religion
cannot stand, etc. And yet mark the Apostles Creed, which has been thought
to contain all necessary points of religion to be believed, and has therefore
been called the key and rule of faith: This Creed (I say) has not any of
these points, nor the expositions made thereof by the ancient Fathers, nor any
other Creed or confession of faith made by any Council or Church, for the
space of many hundred years. This is a plain proof to any indifferent man,
that these be new articles of faith, never known in the Apostolic Church:
and that the Fathers and Councels could not find any such articles of faith in
the books of the old and new Testament. Answer is made, that all these points
of doctrine are believed under the article, (I believe the Catholic Church:)
the meaning whereof they will have to be this, I believe all things which the
Catholic Church holds and teaches to be believed. If this be as they say,
we must believe in the Church: that is, put our confidence in the Church, for
the manifestation and the certainety of all doctrine necessary to salvation.
And thus the eternal truth of God the Creator, shall depend upon the
determination of the creature: And the written word of God in this respect is
made insufficient, as though it had not plainly revealed all points of
doctrine pertaining to salvation. And the ancient Churches have been far
ouer-secene, that did not propound the former points to be believed as articles
of faith, but left them to these latter times. Thus far Master PERKINS:
Wherein are hudled up many things confusedly: I will answer briefly and
distinctly to every point.

The first is, that in the Apostles Creed are contained all points of religion
necessary to be believed: which is most apparently false, as the Protestants
themselves must needs confess; or else grant, that it is not necessary to
believe the King to be Supreame-head of the Church: or that the Church is to be
governed by Bishops: or that we are justified by Christ's justice imputed to us:
or that there be but two Sacraments: or that the Church service must be said in
the vulgar tongue: or that all things necessary to be believed to salvation,
are contained in the Scriptures. To be short, not one article of their religion
(which is contrary to ours) is contained in this Creed, of the Apostles:
therefore to affirm as he does, all necessary points of religion to be
contained in this Creed, is to cast their own religion flat to the ground:
and to teach, that not one point of it is to be believed: this Creed may
nevertheless be called the key and rule of faith, because it contains the
principal points of the Christian religion, and does open (as it were) the
door unto all the rest, and guide a man certainly unto the knowledge of them,
by teaching us to believe the Catholic Church, which being the pillar and
ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. Ioh. 16.13.
directed and guided by the spirit of truth, will always instruct her obedient
children, in all truth necessary to salvation.

Then, says M. PERKINS: The eternal truth of God, the Creator, shall depend
on the determination of the creature.

Nothing less: for Gods truth is most sincere and certain in it self, before
any declaration of the church: but we poor creatures that are subject to
mistaking and error, should not so certainly understand and know that truth of
God, unless he had ordained and appointed such a skillful and faithful
Mistress and interpreter, to assure us, both what is his word, and what is the
true meaning of it. Like as pure gold is not made perfect in it self by the
Gold-smithes touchstone; but other men are thereby assured, that it is true
and pure gold: even so the word of God does not borrow his truth from the
Church; but the true children of God are by the holy Church assured, which is
the same his word. If we did hold (as we do not) that the written word
contains all points of doctrine necessary to salvation: yet were it most
necessary to rely upon the Catholic churches declaration, both to be assured
which books of scriptures be Canonical, which not; (whereupon Saint Augustine
(a man of far better judgment than any of these days) said, Con. Epist. Iud.
cap. 5.
that he would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the church
moved him thereunto:) as also to understand them truly; because the words of
holy Scripture, without the true meaning and sense of them, do but deceive men
and lead them into error; and to that end have always been, and yet are, by
Heretics abused, to draw others after them into destruction.

The like may be said of other ancient Creeds, and confessions of faith, which
holding the Apostles Creed, did add some few points unto it; namely, such as
were in those days called into question by Heretics of greater fame, and who
were followed of many, not touching in particular diverse other articles
generally believed of all true Christians, or else by so^e few and obscure men
only questioned. Wherefore, to argue that no other points of faith are to be
believed, but such as are expressed in ancient Creeds, is to cut off a great
part of our faith.

Lastly, it is most untrue to say that those ancient Fathers and Councels knew
not of these articles of faith by him mentioned: for they have most plainly
taught them in their writings: yea, and expressly condemned of heresy, most of
the contrary positions, now again revived and holden by the Protestants; as in
those several questions I have before proved.

R. ABBOT.
How M. Pirkins understood that all necessary points in religion to be believed
are contained in the Creed, I do not well conceive: for my part I rather
admit, that the Creed is therefore called the key and rule of faith, The Creed
how the key and rule of faith.
for that it is a summary Brief, containing the principal and fundamental
points of Christian faith, which do as it weere open the door to all the
rest, and by which all preaching and doctrine of faith is to be esteemed, so as
nothing may be admitted but what holds correspondence with this rule,
according to those uses which the Scripture teaches us to make of every part
thereof. Which the scripture, I say, teaches us to make; for if we draw any
article of our faith to the maintenance of any doctrine which has no warrant
or testimony of the Scripture, we are corrupters of the faith, and do but
abuse the name thereof to the cloaking of our own device. Thus M. Bishop and
his fellows corrupt the faith as touching the holy catholic church, first in
wresting the name of the catholic church to the particular church of Rome: and
secondly, in challenging a certain and undoubted credit to be yielded to that
church for the infallible resolution of all points of faith. For as touching
the first, where has the Scripture given us any inckling, that the name of the
Catholic Church should in any peculiar manner be understood of the Church of
Rome? We regard not their claim; we know they have tongue at will to speak
for themselves; but let them give us one word of God, whereby it may appear
that by the name of the Church, we are directed in special manner to that
church. We are not ignorant that amongst most ancient writers the name of
Catholic church is sometimes given to the church of Rome: but we know withal,
that it was no otherwise given to the church of Rome, than to any other church,
every Church being called a Catholic church, as has been Answer to the
Epistle. sect. 3.
before showed, that communicated in true faith with the church dispersed
through the whole world. And therefore, as Leo wrote himself Leo epist. 12. Leo
papa ecclesiae Catholicae vrbis Romae.
Bishop of the catholic church of the city of Rome; so does Constantine the
Emperor write, Socrat hist. li. 1. ca. 6. Constantinus Catholicae
Alexandrinorum ecclesiae.
to the catholic church of Alexandria; and Athanasius accordingly is entitled
by his Clergy, Athanas Apolog. 2. Theognio. etc. Presbyteri and diaconi sub
reuerendissimo episcopo Athanasio Catholicae ecclesiae Alexandrinae.
Bishop of the catholic church of Alexandria; and Austin names August. cont.
Crescon. li. 3. ca. 13. Omnis Aphricana Catholica ecclesia.
the catholic church of Africa; and Aurelius writes himself Collat. cum
Donat. cognit. 1. ca. 16 Aurelius episcopus ecclesiae Catholicae Carthaginensis.
Bishop of the catholic church of Carthage; and another Aurelius, Ibid. ca.
201. Aurelius episcopus ecclesiae Catholicae Macomadiensits: and cap. 204.
Nouatus episcopus ecclesiae Catholicae Sitifensis.
Bishop of the catholic church of Macomodia and; Nouatus, Bishop of the
catholic church of Sitif. So in the fifth council at Constantinople we read,
the holy Council. Constantinop. 5. act. 1. Supplicati^ a Clericis and Monachis
Apostolici thront Antiochenae magnae ^uitatis Catholicae sanctae ecclesiae
catholic church of Antioch; and in the subscriptions of the Council, Dei.
Act. 8. in subscript. Sextiltanus in sericordia Dei episcopus ecclesiae
Catholicae Tumensiu Megethius gratia Dei episcopus sanctae dei Catholicae
ecclesiae ciuitatis Heracleae, etc.
Sextilianus Bishop of the catholic church of Tunis; and Megethius Bishop of
the holy catholic church of the city of Heracela; and Pompeianus Bishop of the
holy catholic church of the city of Victoria, and sundry other the like. By
all which and many other examples it may appear with how little discretion
Dureus the Jesuit has affirmed that Duraeus cont. Whitak. li. 3. In nullum
plane aliam Catholicae nomen ecclesiae, and quaerunque de Christiecclesia
Prophetae praedixerunt, quam in Romanam conuenire possunt.
the name of the catholic church, and those things which the Prophets have
forespoken of the church of Christ, can agree to no other but to the church of
Rome. And with this mad and witless fancy they are all carried away, so that
there can be no naming of the church or catholic church, but it sounds in
their ears undoubtedly to have reference to the Church of Rome. According to
this fancy it is that M. Bishop here would have his Reader to imagine, that by
the belief of the Catholic church he is taught to believe the church of Rome.
And by the same illusion he wresteth to his purpose the words of the Apostle,
that the church is the pillar and ground of truth; and the promise that Christ
makes unto his, of his spirit to direct and guide them into all truth, as if
therein were some special privilege meant to the Roman church. The Church how
the pillar and ground of truth.
But for the first place, if any one church might challenge a prerogative
thereby, it should be the church of Ephesus. For Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus,
wished by the Apostle 1. Tim. 1.3.
to abide still there, as specially to take upon him the charge of that place.
He writes to him purposely to instruct him how to carry himself in that
charge; cap. 3.15.
That thou may know, says he, how thou ought to behave thy self in the
house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth. The house of God then, wherein Timothy was to converse, and which he was
to govern, was the church of Ephesus; and as the church in general, so this
church for it own part in particular is called the church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of truth. Yea these two go hand in hand, to be the house
of God, the church of the living God, and, to be the pillar and ground of
truth. Now of every church of the faithful it is said, 1. Pet. 2.5.
Ye as lively stones are made a spiritual house; 2. Cor. 6.16.
ye are the Temple of the living God, Ephesians. 2.22.
ye are built together in Christ to be Gods habitation. Which way then, I
marvel, is it now brought about, that to be the pillar and ground of truth
should be a peculiar dignity of the church of Rome more than of the church of
Ephesus, or of any other particular church? To be the pillar and ground of
truth imports the office and duty of the whole church and every part thereof,
and not a special prerogative of any one church, as to be always found so in
act and execution. The church is the pillar and ground of truth, as the Priest
is Mal. 2.7.
the messenger of the Lord of hosts. The Priest, though he be by calling the
messenger of the Lord, yet sometimes neglects his calling, and forbeareth to
do the message wherewith he is sent: and so the church, though by duty it be
the pillar and ground of truth, appointed to uphold and maintain the same; yet
sometimes forgets this duery and follows lies in stead of truth. For as
the church is now, so has it ever been from the beginning, the pillar and
ground of truth; and yet we find that very often the church of the Jews, in
the time of the Judges, and under the wicked Kings of Judah and Israel, did
forsake Mal. 2.6.
the law of truth, which God had given unto them, went a whooring after strange
and false gods, and many ways provoked him by their abominations. For no
longer does the church continue to be as it ought to be, the pillar and ground
of truth, than it continues built upon the foundations of truth, Ephesians. 2.20.
upon the foundations of the Apostles and Prophets, as Saint Paul speaks,
Ambros. in Ephesians. 2. Hoc est, supra nouum and vetus teslamentum collocati.
that is, upon the new and old Testament, as Ambrose expounds it. If it once
go awry from those foundations, truth falls to the ground, and it becomes a
pillar and fortress of error and untruth. Thus has it come to pass in M.
Bishops church of Rome, which in her pride has cast off the yoke which she at
first took upon her, and has magnified herself to be a Queen to give laws
of her own in stead of the laws of Jesus Christ. She is indeed by duty, as
all other churches are, a pillar and ground of truth; but being become the
minion of Antichrist, and prostituted to his adulterous desires, she has
learned for his sake and for her own sake by him 1. Tim. 4.2.
to speak lies in hypocrisy, and 2. Pet. 2.3.
through covetousness with feined words to make merchandise of Reu. 18.13.
the souls of men. All which hypocrisy and feined words she fairly gloseth
and commends to men with this persuasion, that she can not err, because she
has a promise of Christ to be always directed and guided by his spirit into
all truth. But where has Christ made any such promise to the Church of Rome?
Whom and how the spirit of Christ leads into all truth.
We read that Christ said to his Apostles, Ioh. 16.13.
When he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all
truth: and we believe, that what he spoke to his Apostles, he intended to
the whole Church, and to all the faithful: but neither do we read, nor have
any cause to believe, that Christ therein intended any thing in special to the
church of Rome, neither did ever any ancient Father or Council gather any such
thing out of those words. And surely no otherwise do they allege this
Scripture for themselves, than the Manichees did for themselves, and the
Montanists for themselves. For as the Manichees alleging these words to color
their heresies against the Scripture, appropriated the spirit of truth here
spoken of, to their Patriarch August. cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 32. cap. 17.
Dicere soletis, Ipse vos inducet in omnem veritatem, etc. de vestro Manichao
esse praedictum.
Manicheus; and the Montanistes in like sort to Tertull. de Veland. virginib.
sub initio.
Montanus, as if in them, and by them the spirit should direct the Church into
all truth: Even so the Papists, howsoever they talk of the Church directed by
the spirit, yet do indeed put over the Church to the Pope, placing the
residence of the spirit in him, that he may be to the Church the infallible
oracle of all truth. In which fancy, if they will expect to have more credit
than those heretics had, they must bring better warrant for themselves than
those heretics did. But because they can bring us none, therefore we reject
them all alike, as coseners and deceivers of the Church, pretending the spirit
of truth, for the maintenance of lies; and claiming that credit to be given to
an usurping wretch, which our Savior reserueth as proper to the holy Ghost.
The promise of the spirit, as I said before, belongs to all the faithful;
and of them all, S. John says, 1 Ioh. 2.27.
The anointing which ye have received of him; that is, says Austin, August.
in 1. Joan. tract. 4. Eadem vnctio, id est, ipse spiritus domini.
the spirit of the Lord, teaches you of all things. Albeit when it is said,
all things, and all truth, we are not to understand absolutely all: for the
spirit does not teach us to know Idem. in actis cum Felice Manich. lib. 1. cap.
10. Si hanc doctrinam putas ad illam veritatem pertinere, etc. interrogo te
qunt sint stellae. Ibid. Ego tibi possum dicere ea quae pertinent ad doctrinam
Christianam.
how many stars there be, as Austin opposes to Felix the Manichee, but he
teaches all things belonging to the doctrine of Christ, as the same Austin
there expounds. Yea, and yet further he excepteth by the words of the
Apostle, Idem. cap. 11. Dicebat Apostolus, Ex part scimus, etc. quia in is it a
vita homo cum est, non potest assequi omnia; sed ex part assequitur in hac
vita; ipse autem spiritus qui ex part docet in hac vita, post hanc vitam
introducet in omnem veritatem. Vide eund. in Joan. tract. 96.
We know in part, and we prophecy in part, that whilst a man is in this life,
he cannot attain to all things, but attaineth only in part; but the holy
Ghost, says he, which in this life teaches in part, shall after this life
bring us into all truth. He therefore gives us to understand, that
notwithstanding this promise of the spirit of truth, it is incident to them to
whom the same appertains, to be ignorant in this life of many truths, to be
subject to mistaking and error, albeit the same spirit fails not to
enlighten them to that necessary truth which serves for introduction finally
to all truth. And herein the Apostle comfort us, that Phil. 3.15.
that if any man be otherwise minded (than is right) God will reveal the same
to him, so long as in that whereunto we are come, we proceed by one rule, that
we may mind one thing. But we are specially to note the reason which our
Savior adds to the words alleged; When he is come which is the spirit of
truth, he will lead you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself,
but whatsoever he shall bear, shall he speak: meaning thereby the same that
he has before said; Ioh. 14.26.
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance that I
have told you: and which he says presently after; cap. 16.14.
He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. For hereby it is manifest, that the holy Ghost which shall lead us into
all truth, because he shall speak nothing of himself, shall therefore
Thophylact. in Joan. 16. Nihil docturus est extra ea quae Christus docuit.
speak nothing but what Christ has before spoken. As therefore when Christ
says of himself, Ioh. 14.10.
I speak not of my self, he would import that he spoke nothing but what the
father had before spoken in the Scriptures of the Law and the Prophets, as
Chrysostom. de sanct. and orando spiritu. Quia seductor est habitus, dicit; Ego a
meipso non loquor, sed de lege, de Prophet is
Chrysostom expounds it, even so when he says of the holy Ghost, that he
shall speak nothing of himself, we are likewise to conceive, that the holy
Ghost shall teach nothing but what Christ himself has first taught in the
Scriptures of the Evangelists and Apostles. Whereupon we conclude as
Chrysostom does, Ibid. Siquem videritis dicentem, spiritum sanctum habee, and
non loquentem Euangelica sed propria, is a seipso loquitur, and non est
spiritus sanctus in ipso. Et paulo post: Siquis eorum qui dicuntur habere
spiritum sanctum, dicat aliquid a seipso, and non ex Euangelijs, ne credit,
etc. Ex quo non legit haec scripta, sed ex seipso loquitur, manifestum est quod
non habet spiritum sanctum.
If ye see a man saying, I have the holy. Ghost, and not speaking the things
of the Gospel, but matters of his own, he speaks of himself, and the holy
Ghost is not in him. If any of them who are said to have the holy Ghost do
speak any thing of himself, and not out of the Gospel, believe him not. For
that he reads not those things which he says in the Scriptures, it is
manifest that he has not the holy Ghost. Now therefore seeing M. Bishops
church, contrary to the ordinance of God, seuereth Esaias 59.21.
the spirit of truth from Ephesians. 1 13. Col. 1.5.
the word of truth, and speaks many things of her-felfe, whereof Christ has
said nothing, whereof we read nothing in the Scriptures, it is manifest that
they play the Sycophants as other heretics have done, pretending to speak by
the spirit of Christ, when they speak wholly either by their own or by a
worse spirit. But M. Bishop not content with one corruption, in substituting
his church of Rome in the place of the Catholic Church of Christ, adds
another, in saying, that that article of our Creed does teach us to believe
the Catholic church. Which words, although being truly meant, they express
the same in English, which we say in Greek and Latin, yet being by the drift
of his speech carried to a very partial and false construction, do show him
to be a leaud peruerter of our Christian faith. For whereas we say, Credo
sanctam ecclesiam Catholicam, in the accusative case, the meaning is, I believe
that there is a holy Catholic church; namely, that God the Father in all ages
and at all times, and amidst all the defections and corruptions of the world
has still had and shall have his number of elect and chosen people, to whom
the benefit of Christ's death and resurrection on stands effectual and good
by the sanctification of the holy Ghost, and the same now not of one nation or
people only, but of all nations and peoples thorowout the whole world. But M.
Bishop by the current of his speech turns the accusative case into the
dative, as if it were said in our Creed, Credo ecclesiae sanctae Catholicae; I
give credit to the holy Catholic church; I believe it to be true whatsoever is
taught me by the holy Catholic church, that so his Reader thinkeing himself
bound to believe the Catholic church, and taking this Catholic church to be
meant of the church of Rome, may hold himself bound by the articles of his
Creed in all things to believe the church of Rome. Thus he and his fellows
most treacherously and leaudly against their own knowledge and conscience
delude simple and ignorant souls, and make them slaves to their impious and
wicked devices, by bearing them in hand that they are bound thus to obey the
Catholic church. Now hereof Master PERKINS justly infers, that the
eternal truth of God the Creator is hereby made to depend upon the
determination of the creature. For let God say what he will, we shall not
stand bound to take it for truth if the church shall say the contrary, or
unless that which he says be approoned by the Church. Verily as Tertullian
vpbraided of old the Senate of Rome, that Tertul. Apologet. cap. 5. Apud vos de
humano arbitratu diuinitas pensitatur: nisi homini deus placuerit deus non erit.
with them Godhead stood at the discretion of men, and unless God did please
man, he should be no God; so may it well be said now of the church of Rome,
that with them the religion of God stands at their discretion, and that only
shall be religion that pleases them. For the Bishop of Rome whilst he takes
upon him to make declaration of Christian faith, makes what he list of
Christian faith, and has verified of himself that which Hierome said of
Antichrist, that Hieron. in Daniel. 7. Eleuatur supra omne quod dicitur deu^,
cunctam religionem suae subijciens potestati.
he should subject all religion to his own power. For the coloring of which
iniquity, M. Bishop according to their manner uses guilefull words of notable
hypocrisy, and with a fair tale gloseth a gross indignity and damnable
presumption against God. He tells us that Gods truth is sincere and certain
in it self before any declaration of the Church. Well, and what has the
church then to do with this sincere and certain truth? Forsooth, we poor
creatures are subject to mistaking and error, and do not so certainly
understand that truth of God. But who are those poor creatures, of whom he
speaks? Marry M. Bishop, and such other petites, who are but dij minorum
gentium, they are poor creatures; but the Pope and his Cardinals, and the
Bishops that comply to him, they are rich creatures, they are the Church, they
are exempted from mistaking and error; we must think all perfection of wit to
be lodged in their brains; and that they certainly understand and know the
truth of God. But what assurance can they give us in this behalf? Surely, the
Scribes and Pharisees, the high Priests and Elders of the jews had as much to
say for themselves, and a great deal more than they. They could plead for
themselves: Ioh. 8.33.
We are the seed of Abraham; cap. 9.28.
We be Moses disciples; verse. 41.
We see; Ier. 8 8.
We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us; ca. 18.18.
The law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the
word from the Prophet; and yet they persecuted Christ the son of God, who
only is the Truth. How then may we now be assured that the Church of Rome is
not the same to the church of Christ, as they then were to Christ himself? How
may we poor creatures certainly understand, that those rich creatures are not
subject to error and mistaking as well as we? Well, if we will not believe it,
we may choose; but assurance M. Bishop can yield none. He can tell us a
discourse what Christ said to Peter: but that Christ ever spoke either of Pope
or Cardinal, he can show us nothing. And yet as if this matter were clear, he
tells us of this church of theirs, that whereas we are subject to mistaking
and error, God has ordained and appointed the same to be a skillful and
faithful mistress and interpreter, to assure us both what is his word, and
what is the true meaning of it. But again we ask him, where has God so
ordained and appointed? in what Scripture has he written it, or by what words
has he expressed it, that the church which he means should be our mistress
to tell us what is Gods word, and what is the true meaning of it? If he have
evidence and authority for it, let him show it; if he have not, what shall we
think of him that dares thus to belly the majesty of God? But if he considered
the matter aright, he would conceive, that those rich creatures of his, have no
other or better means to assure what is Gods word, and what is the meaning of
it, than other poor creatures have. By what touchstone they can make trial
thereof, by the same can we also as well as they. Which comparison of the
goldsmiths and the touchstone, which he himself uses, if it be rightly
explicated, serves notably to set forth the fraud and falsehood of that
church, for which he pleads. True it is, that the church in this behalf may
rightly be compared to the Goldsmith. Now the Goldsmiths for the discerning of
true and perfect gold, does not take his own fingers ends, but goes to the
touchstone, and no otherwise can he either make trial himself, or give
assurance thereof to other men. In like sort therefore the church, which is the
Goldsmiths, must use a touchstone, for the assuring of that which it
propounds to be received and believed. Now then whereas M. Bishop says,
that we must rely upon the churches declaration, to be assured which books of
Scripture be Canonical; I answer him, that we cannot be assured thereof by the
churches declaration, unless the church declare it and manifest it by the
touchstone. The touchstone whereby we are to take assurance hereof, is the
constant and perpetual tradition and testimony of the former church. And this
testimony we first derive from the church of the Jews, Romans 3.2.
to whom the words of God were committed, and to whose Scriptures, Luke 24.44.
the law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms (and to no other) Aug. cont.
Gaudent. lib. 2. cap. 23. quibus dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus
suis.
Christ himself has given testimony as witnesses of himself, reckoning them
for Luke 24.27.
all the Scriptures, and whereof the Jews in their dispersion give
acknowledgment until this day; God so providing, that Aust. in Psa. 58. Per
omnes gentes dispersi sunt ludaei testes iniquitatis suae and veritatis
nostrae: ipsi habent codices de quibus prophetatus est Chrislus, and in Ps. 56.
Codicem portat Iudaeus, vnde credat Christianus.
Christian faith should be proved out of those books which are acknowledged
for true by them that are enemies thereto. This testimony the Christian church
received of the Apostles, and has continued the same, together with the
acknowledgment of those other books of the new testament, which by the
Apostles and Evangelists were added to the former. What books then have had
this general and undoubted auerment and witness of the church continued from
time to time, those and no other are to be holden for Canonical books, and
this is the true touchstone for trial of certain and undoubted scriptures. By
which touchstone the church of Rome is found to be not a faithful Mistress
but a false harlot bringing her bastards into the Church, and forcing men to
take them for lawfully begotten. And whereas it is the tradition and
declaration of the former church which has been from the beginning, by which
both they and we are to be instructed as touching the true books of Canonical
Scripture, they force upon us the tradition of their own church now delivered
upon their own word, howsoever contrary to that which the church formerly has
declared. If we follow the declaration of the ancient church, then are no other
books to be taken for Canonical, but what are now accknowledged and approved
in our Church, the same only being testified concerning the old testament by
the Church of the Jews, concerning both new and old by the whole Christian
church, both the Greek and Latin, the Eastern and Western churches, as Of
Traditions, sect. 17.
before has been declared. But the church of Rome, perceiving the authorizing
of some other writings to be likely to gain credit to some broken wares whence
her thrift and gain arises, has taken upon her very presumptuously, as a
Mistress or rather a goddess, to give divine authority to those books,
rejecting the testimony of that church, which in this behalf should be
mistress both to her and us. In a word, whatsoever is to be attributed to the
church in this respect, it is idly by M. Bishop referred to the church of
Rome, as if all other churches must rely upon her declaration, we our selves
being able by the touchstone to make trial of true Scriptures, as well as the
church of Rome, and therefore there being no cause why we should rely upon them
more than they upon us. And as vainly does he apply to his purpose the saying
of Saint Austin, that he should not believe the Gospel except the authority of
the church moved him thereunto; there being nothing therein meant but what may
be applied to the church England as well as to the church of Rome; Saint
Austin speaking generally of the universal church thorowout the world, without
any manner special intendment of the church of Rome. But how leudly they abuse
those words of Austin wholly against his meaning and purpose, I have Of
Traditions, sect. 22.
before sufficiently declared and need not here to repeat again. As for the
churches declaration for understanding the Scripture, that is also to be tried
and made good by the touchstone, because no exposition or sense of Scripture is
to be admitted, the doctrine whereof is not to be justified by other Scripture;
and they that bring other senses and meanings do but deceive men and lead them
into error, as other heretics formerly have done, and as the Papists now do,
abusing the Scriptures to draw others after them into destruction. Hereof also
enough has been said Of Traditions, sect. 21.
before, whereof I wish the Reader duly to consider for his satisfaction in
this point. That which he says of other ancient Creeds and Confessions of
faith, that they contain not all points of Christian doctrine, I eaily admit:
but yet let him understand, that it is a maine prejudice against them, that
neither any ancient Creed, nor any exposition of the Creed, or confession of
faith contains sundry points, which they now make to be matters of the
meaning of the Creed. Let him show that ever any ancient Creed or expositour
of the Creed did understand or deliver, that the name of the Catholic church
in the Creed has any special reference to the Church of Rome; that the
Catholic church is to be defined as they now define it, by being subject to
the bishop of Rome; that the certain declaration of the Canonical books, and
of the true sense of Scripture, is always infallibly to be expected from the
sentence of that Church; that all Christians are fully to believe and wholly to
rely upon that Church for resolution of all points of faith necessary to
salvation. Which, and such other points, made by them matters of the Creed,
because never any ancient writer has found to be contained or intended in the
Creed, therefore we justly affirm them to be new Creed-makers, coiners of new
articles of faith, and thereby peruerters and corrupters of the true Christian
faith. As concerning the Articles mentioned by M. Perkins now holden by the
Romish Church, that the Pope is Christ's Vicar and head of the Catholic Church;
that there is a purgatory fire after this life, that images of God and of
Saints are to be worshipped; that prayer is to be made to Saints departed, and
their intercession to be required; that there is a propitiatory sacrifice
daily offered in the Mass for the sins of quick and dead; M. Bishop
answers, that the Fathers have most plainly taught them in their writings,
and expressly condemned of heresy most of the contrary positions. But what
Fathers are they, and in what writings have they so done? Surely, if the Bishop
of Rome in the ancient Church had been taken to be the Vicar of Christ, and
head of the Catholic church, it cannot be but that we should have very current
and frequent and memorable testimony thereof, as a matter universally
received, and every where practiced. But now let M. Bishop show us one; let him
show so much as one that for diverse hundreds of years after Christ, did ever
dream of any such thing. Which though indeed he cannot do, yet he tells us
of that and the rest, that in those several questions he has before proved
what he says; whereas he has not spoken of any more of these points, save
only one, and in that one point, cannot be said to have proved any thing,
because whatsoever he has said, stands hitherto reproved. And surely if he
have no better proofs than hitherto he has brought in all the questions that
he has handled, the Protestants will but scorn him as a very vnproouing
disputer, and advise him to bestow his time a while longer in the Schools, to
know what it is to prove.

3. W. BISHOP.
Touching believing in the Church, which he thrusts in by the way, we use not
that phrase, as the very Creed shows; following therein S. Augustine with
others, who hold, that to believe in a thing, is to make it our Creator, by
giving our whole heart unto it; in which sense we believe not in Saints, nor in
the Church: albeit some other ancient Doctors, take the words to believe in,
not so precisely, but say that we may believe in the Church and in Saints: that
is, believe certainly that the Catholic church is the only true company of
Christians; and that to the lawful governors thereof, it appe^taineth to
declare both which books be Canonical, and what is the true meaning of all
doubtful places in them: so we believe the Saints in heaven to hear our
prayers, to be careful to pray for us, and to be able to obtain by entreaty
much at Gods hands, in whose high favor they live. Thus much in answer unto
that which M. PERKINS obiecteth in general. Now to that he says in particular.

R. ABBOT.
Greg. Nazia. de sp. sancto. orat 6. S^^reatu^ est, quo pacto in ipsum eredimu?
etc. Non enim idem est in aliquem credere, and de eo credere: nam illud diuimt
atis est; hoc cuiusuis rei.
It is one thing, says Gregory Nazianzene, to believe in any one, another to
believe of or concerning him; the one belongs to the Godhead, the other is
used of every thing. And hereby he proves that the holy Ghost is God
because we believe in the holy Ghost. By which argument our Savior Christ
also teaches us to acknowledge him to be God, when he says; Ioh. 14.1.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me; where Hilar. de Trin. lib. 9. Vniens
se fidei dei and naturae eius vniuit, etc. deumse per id docens cum in eum
credendum sit ab his qui in deum credant.
uniting himself to the belief of God, says Hilarie, he unites himself
also to his nature; thereby teaching, that he himself is God for that they who
believe in God must believe in him. I might further enlarge this point by the
testimonies and expositions of Aug. in Joan. tract 29. and de ciu. dei. l. 18.
ca. 54. Eusebius. Emissen. Ruffin. Venant. in symbol. Apost.
Austin, Eusebius, Emissenus, Ruffinus, Venantius, and others, who all
acknowledge, that that phrase belongs to God, and is not to be applied to
any creature. But it shall not need, because the Elucidatour of the Roman
Catechism, according to the doctrine of the Catechism it self, as he
pretends, though quite contrary both to their doctrine and practice
otherwise, does tell us, that Elucidat. Catech. Roman. c. 9. q. 5. Cum dicimus
nos credere in deum patrem, in filium, in sp. sanctum, phrasis haec loquendi
significat nos ita credere deum patrem, filium and spiritu sanctu^, vt etiam in
eis omnem fiduciam nostram collocemus, quam in deo solo, non autem in creaturis
ponere possumus, ex quibus tamen ecclesia composita est.
when we say we believe in God the Father, in the Son, in the holy Ghost,
this phrase of speaking does signify that we so believe God the Father, the
Son and the holy Ghost, as that also we place all our confidence in them,
which we are to put in God only, and not increatures, of which notwithstanding
the Church consists. Which exposition we acknowledge contains the very
truth, agreeable to Gods word, and do wish that they would always continue
constant therein. But they do herein as their usual manner is, what by
evidence of truth they are forced to say in one place, for the maintenance of
their own traditions and superstitions, they unsay it or qualify it in
another. And in this sort M. Bishop here deals, who first inclining somewhat
to that construction already mentioned, and telling us that to believe in a
thing, is to make it our Creator, by giving our whole heart unto it, alleges
notwithstanding, that some ancient Doctors take the words (to believe in) not
so precisely, but say that we may believe in the church and in Saints; hereby
to make way to his absurd conceits, which none of the ancient Doctors dreamed
of. it is true indeed that Epiphanius and Cyril have used that manner of speech,
by adding the preposition, in, to the rest of the articles; I believe in one
holy Catholic church, in one Baptism, in the remission of sins, in the
resurrection of the body, in the life eternal; but yet making thereof no other
construction than we do, as if the article were away. To believe in the church,
was with them, as M. Bishop says, to believe certainly in the Catholic
church, to be the only true company of Christians, and thereof we contend not;
we believe the same as well as they, though not in M. Bishops meaning, which
never was any part of their meaning, that the Catholic church should be meant
in any special manner of the church of Rome. But whereas he adds, it is
another part of their construction, that to the lawful governors thereof,
that is, as he intends, to the Pope and his Cardinals and Bishops, it
appertains to declare both which books be Canonical, and what is the true
meaning of all doubtful places in them; he very shamefully abuses the
ancient Doctors, of whom there is not one that has noted any such matter to
be contained in the Creed. If he know any, let him acquaint us therewith; if
he know none, let him confess to his Reader, as he must, that he has sought
to deceive him with a lie. The same I say of believing in Saints; for which of
the ancient Doctors has taught us out of our Creed, that we are to believe in
them? He tells us what they meant by it, that we believe the Saints in
heaven to hear our prayers, to be careful to pray for us, and to be able to
obtain by entreaty much at Gods hands. But what a strange man is he that will
tell us what men meant by words which they never spoke? Surely, to believe in
Saints is no antiquity, but nouelty, and the device of him, who by believing
in Saints seeks to draw men away from belief in God. The Apostle tells us,
that Romans 10 17.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Thereupon Basil gathers
thus: Basil. Ethit. reg. 80. Si quicquid ex fide non est peccatum est, fides
vero ex auditu, auditus autem p^r verbum Dei est; ergo quicquid extra diuinam
Scripturam est, cum ex fide non sit peccatum est.
If whatsoever is not of faith be sin, and faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, surely whatsoever is beside the Scripture of God,
because it is not of faith, is sin. Let M. Bishop then show us some word of
God, some warrant of Scripture, that it is one point of faith to believe in
Saints; or if he cannot so do, we must rest persuaded as we are, that to
believe in Saints is to sin against God. And if we may not believe in Saints,
then neither may we pray unto them, for Romans 10.14.
how shall they call upon him, says the Apostle, in whom they have not
believed? And seeing prayer is Grego. Moral. lib. 22. cap. 13. Vera postulatio
non in oris est vocibus sed in cogitationibus cordis.
not a matter of the lips, but of the heart, how can we believe that the
Saints in heaven hear our prayers, when as the word of God tells us, that 1.
King. 8.39.
it is God only which knows the hearts of all the children of men? Again,
seeing God has himself named unto us the Mediator by whose intrety, and Mat.
3.17. Ephe. 3.12.
for whose sake he will accept us, and in whom he will be John 14.13.
glorified for the granting of our requests, who Romans 8.34.
sits at the right hand of God, and Heb. 7.25.
ever lives to make intercession for us; how can we call it faith, and not
rather impudent presumption, that we of our own heads should set up every
Saint in heaven to be a Master of requests, and disturb that order which God
himself has appointed for our access to him? Admit that in generality they
pray for the consummation of their brethren; they pray in fellowship of love,
not by authority of mediation; as joined in affection with us, not as by
specialtie of favor appointed to be patrons for us; for in that respect it is
true which Saint Austin tells us, that August. in Psam. 64. Solus ibi ex his
qui carnem gustaverunt interpellat pro nobis.
of all that have been partakers of flesh, it is Christ only in heaven that
makes intercession for us. To conclude, we have heard before out of the
Catechism, that our believing in God requires all our confidence and trust to
be placed in God only. Accordingly Cyprian says, that Cyprian. de dupl.
martyr. Non credit in deum, qui non in eo solo collocat totius felicitatis suae
fidutiam.
he believes not in God that places not the confidence of all his happiness
in God only. But believing in Saints cannot be understood but to import
putting of trust and confidence in them. Therefore we cannot believe in Saints,
but with the overthrow of our belief and trust in God. And that the Popish
believing in Saints, imports the putting of their trust and confidence in
them, it plainly appears as by other their offices of devotion, so specially
by their Ladies Psalter wherein they blasphemously use to the Virgin Marie
those words whereby David professed his trust in God: Psalter. Mariae. Psalm. 7.
Domina in te speraui; de inimicis meis libera animam meam. and Psalm. 10. In
domina confido propter dulcedinem misericordiae nominis sui. and psalm. 21. Quia
ego speraui in gratia tua, sempiternum a me opprobrium abstulisti. and Psalm.
45. Domina refugium nostrum tu es in omni necessitate nostra. and Psalm. 53
Domina in nomine tuo saluum me fac.
O Lady, in thee have I hoped, deliver my soul from mine enemies; I trust in
our Lady for the sweetness of the mercy of her name; Because I have trusted in
thy grace, thou have taken away from me everlasting reproach: O our Lady, thou
art our refuge in all our necessity; O Lady save me by thy name. And whereas
M. Bishop says, that our believing in God is the giving of our whole heart
unto him, they yield the same to our Lady, also saying; I confess unto thee
Ibid. Psalm. 9. Confitebor tibi Domina in toto cord meo. and Psalm. 102. Omnia
praecordia mea glorificate nomen eius.
O Lady, with my whole heart, let all my hartstrings glorifiy her name. By
these and infinite other such speeches it appears that by their believing in
Saints they commit idolatry, and do give that honor to the Saints which
belongs to God only.

4. W. BISHOP.
He charge us first, with the breach of the third article, Conceived by the
holy Ghost: Which (says he) is ouerturned by the transubstantiation of bread
and wine in the Mass, into the body and blood of Christ: for here we are
taught to confess the true and perpetual incarnation of Christ, beginning in
his conception, and never ending afterward.

Answ. Here is a strange exposition of the Creed. Is Christ's incarnation
perpetual, and not yet ended? then it is true to say, that Christ is not yet
incarnate; as we may say truly, that a man is not borne, until his birth be
accomplished and ended. But to the present purpose: because Christ's incarnation
began at his conception, cannot bread be turned afterward into his body? how
hangs this together? Belike he means that Christ's body was but once
conceived, and that was by the holy Ghost in his mothers womb: therefore it
cannot afterward be made of any other thing. This to be his meaning, he
declares in the question of the Sacrament; but it is too too simple and
childish. For we hold him not to be so conceived by bread, as he was by the
holy Ghost, who was the efficient cause of his conception: but that the same
body that was conceived by the holy Ghost, is made really present in the
Sacrament, by transubstantiation of bread into it, which has no opposition at
all with this article, as I have more largely proved in the for said question.
And whereas he says farther, clean besides the purpose of this article, that
Christ's body has the essential properties of a true body, standing of flesh
and bone: we grant the same; but when he adds, that local circumscription
cannot be severed from a body, he is deceived: for the greatest body of all
others, (which is the highest heaven) is not circumscribed by any place;
because there is no other body without it, whose extremities might compass in,
and circumscribe that body of the highest heaven. And when he says, that to be
circumscribed in place, is an essential property of every quantity; and that
quantity is the common essence of every body: he makes himself but a common
mocking-stocke unto every simple Legician, who knows that no accident ( such
as every quantity is) can be of the essence and nature of a substance, such as
Christ's body is. Neither would any man say, (that cared what he said) that to
be circumscribed in a place is essential to every quantity, when all numbers
that be quantities, have no relation unto any place: neither is it of the
essence of any quantity to be actually circumscribed by a place; but it is a
property flowing out of the essence of one only kind of quantity, to be apt,
and fit to be circumscribed and compassed about with a place. And naturally all
bodies (except the highest heaven) have one place, out of which they pass ( as
Saint Austin said) when they come into another: but by the omnipotent power of
God, any body may be separated from his place, or be in as many places at once,
as it shall please God to seat it: because to be circumscribed with a place
actually, is a mere accident unto a substantial body, and without the nature
of quantity; and God may not without blasphemy be disabled to separate a
substance from an accident.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop, save that he was disposed to cavil, knew well enough what M.
PERKINS meant by the perpetual incarnation of Christ; The truth of Christ's
body destroyed by Popish transubstantiation.
that whereby he took flesh once for all and to continue man for eu^r. Now it
is true, that because Christ has but one only body, and that body was perfect
by that incarnation, therefore bread, which has his being after, cannot be
said to be turned into the body which was before. For when one thing is turned
into another, the latter is not, till it be produced of the former, neither
has the one beginning, but by the ending of the other. Aarons rod was turned
into a serpent, but the serpent was not till of the rod there became a serpent.
Our Savior Christ turned water into wine, but the wine was not till of water
there became wine. And absurd it is, that one and the same thing being fully
and perfectly made already, should yet be said to be made of any other thing.
As for M. Bishops exception, it is childish and impertinent, because we do not
charge them to hold, that the body of Christ is so conceived by bread as it was
conceived by the holy Ghost, who was the efficient cause of his conception: but
we say, that since the body of Christ by the power of the holy Ghost was
conceived and made of the substance of the Virgin Mary, and thereby became a
consummate and perfect body, it is therefore absurd to affirm that the same
body is now to be made of any other thing. But this is not the thing that M.
PER. aimed at; it is the condition and nature of a true body whereof he
argues, which we profess to believe that Christ took in his conception and
incarnation, but is overthrown by Popish transubstantiation. He says, that
Christ's body has all things in it which by order of creation belong to a body,
which he namely specifieth in local circumscription, which he says, can no
way be severed from a body, it remaining a body; implying, that the Papists
affirming the body of Christ without local circumscription, do thereby
destro^ the truth of his body. M. Bishop answers, that M. PER. herein is
deceived; For, says he, the greatest body of all other, which is the highest
heaven, is not circumscribed by any place, because there is no body without it
to circumscribe it. Well, but yet it has dimension and position and distance
of parts, and motion accordingly; and therefore quantum inse, it is locally
circumscribed; the only defect is, that it has not a body without it to be
circumscribed thereby. Yea we may truly say, that it has a kind of local
circumscription by the superficial clausure and determination of it own
substance. In as much therefore as in it self it has every way the condition
of local circumscription, it is no instance against M. PER. rule, that local
circumscription cannot be severed from a true body. But because he takes
local circumscription so nicely as we see he does, I would gladly have him to
resolve us one question thereof, and his answer shall show the nullity of his
own exception. He has told us Preface to the Reader, sect. 2.
before that the body of Christ is in one place circumscribed, and in another
uncircumcised: circumscribed in heaven, and in the Sacrament uncircumcised.
Now let him tell us how the body of Christ in heaven has local
circumscription? To speak of Physical and material heavens, it is true of
Christ which the Apostle says, Ephe. 4.10.
He is ascended far above all heavens, and therefore above that highest heaven,
which M. Bishop names to us, beyond which there is neither vacuum nor locus
properly so called, but the incomprehensible habitation of divine light, which
our thoughts are in no sortable to conceive. How then is the body of Christ
locally circumscribed, where yet there is no Physical or natural place? Let
him give us answer hereof, and then we will answer him, that look what gives
local circumscription to the body of Christ in heaven, the same also gives
local circumscription to the highest heaven. Understand the highest heaven,
gentle Reader, as M. Bishop does, for the uttermost sphere of the material
globe of this visible world, beyond which is that heaven into which we believe
our Lord Jesus to have ascended, and where we hope to dwell with him. This
exception being frustrate, let us see the rest, where M. Bishop standing nicely
and precisely upon terms of schools, tells us, that M. PERKINS makes
himself a common mocking-stocke to every simple Logician, of whom
notwithstanding I dare boldly say, that he was as good a Logician as Doctor
Bishop is, though writing to the people he used his words accordingly. He says
that quantity is the common essence of every body, and who knows not, says
M. Bishop, that no accident, as every quantity is, can be of the essence of a
substance as Christ's body is. Well Sir, but yet quantity gives existence to
every body, which is enough to M. PER. purpose, and to be the subject of
quantity, or endued with quantity, is the common and true essence of a body. If
he will say, nay; we desire him of his courtesy to take the pains to send us
without quantity the true definition of a body. Albeit his reading might serve
him to understand, that there are few learned men, or none at all, so strict in
terms, but that they call by the name of essential properties whatsoever does
immediately and necessarily issue from the essence of a thing, though according
to Logic rules it be no part of the essence thereof. And thus M. PERK. says
again, that to be circumscribed in place is an essential property of every
quantity: which says M. Bishop, no man would say that cared what he said. And
why? Because all numbers, says he, which be quantities, have no relation unto
any place. But he might easily have conceived that M. PER. as I said before,
spoke according to vulgar use, which for the most part understands quantity
of the magnitude and greatness of bodies, in which meaning it is a property
flowing out of the essence of every quantity, not only to be apt to be
circumscribed with a place, but to be circumscribed and determined locally
according to that meaning of local circumscription which I have before
expressed. Therefore in this sort it is not a mere accident to a substantial
body to be circumscribed, but it is proprium quarto modo, agreeing always to
every body, and to nothing but a body, necessarily arising of the dimensions of
the length, breadth and thickness of a body, and the denial whereof is the
taking away of the nature of a body. As for his allegation of the almighty
power of God how idle it is, it has been Preface to the Reader. sect. 8.
before declared. For God does not by his omnipotency contradict himself,
neither does his power serve to make good the fantastical dreams of giddy
headed men to be said to destroy the nature of a thing, and yet to leave it
still continuing the selfsame thing. But it is worth the noting how M.
Bishop here plaieth the micher and steals by two allegations used by M.
Perkins, very pertinent to the matter here in hand. It is for the illocality
of the body of Christ that M. Bishop pleads the omnipotency of God: but M.
Perkins brings in Leo Bishop of Rome, saying that Leo. epist. 70. Nulla
ratione extranostri est corporis veritatem.
the body of Christ is in no sort without the truth of our body. This he
passes by without any mention of it, as if he had not seen any such thing.
The words of Saint Austin he vouchsafed to take some knowledge of, but applies
them generally to all bodies, whereas Saint Austin also spoke of the body of
Christ; making a difference betwixt Christ, as God and man. August. in Joan.
tract. 31. In terra loquebatur, and tamen in caelose esse dicebat: sic venit vt
inde non abscederet: sic redijt vt nos non derelinqueret. Quid miramin^? Deus
hoc facit. Homo enim secundu;m corpus in loco est and de loco migrat, and cum
ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco vnde venit non est: Deus autem implet omnia,
and vbique totus est, non secundum spatia tenetur locis.
Christ, says he, spoke upon earth, and yet said he was in heaven; the son
of man which is in heaven. He so came, as that he departed not from thence; he
so returned, as that he did not forsake us. Why do ye wonder heereat, says he?
God does this. For man according to his body is in a place, and departs from
the place, and when he is come into another place, is not in that place from
whence he came: but God fills all things, and is whole every where, and is
not contained in ^ace of place. Thus does Saint Austin distinguish the Godhead
and manhood of Christ, making the body of Christ of the same condition with
our bodies, so as that it leaves one place whenever it comes to another.
The church of Rome therefore affirming a body of Christ without extention or
space of place, that is, a ghost in stead of a body, impugneth the article of
our faith, whereby we believe that he was conceived and borne of the substance
of the Virgin Mary according to the truth and condition of our bodies.

5. W. BISHOP.
By this is confuted also his second instance: Christ is ascended into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God the Father, therefore his body is not
really and locally in the Sacrament. This follows not, Chrysostom. lib. de
sacerd.
because it is in both places at once, as Saint Chrysostom in express terms
teaches. O miracle! O goodness of God! he that sits above with his Father,
at the very same instant is touched with the hands of all men, Real presence
denied by our belief of Christ's ascension.
and gives himself to them that will receive and embrace him! See more of
this in the question of the blessed Sacrament, where M. PER. cites the very
same authorities, which he here repeateth; see my answer to to them there.

R. ABBOT.
It is a true argument and very consequent, Christ is ascended into heaven, and
there sits at the right hand of God the father: therefore he is not really
and locally in the sacrament. The connection is Saint Austins: August. in Joan
tract. 50. Conuersatus est secundum corporis praesentiam quadraginta diebus cum
discipulis suis, and eis deducentibus videndo non sequendo ascend it in caelu^,
and non est hic.
He is ascended into heaven, and is not here, as touching the presence of his
body. Saint Austin says, that because he is ascended, therefore as touching
his body he is not here. M. Bishop says, that notwithstanding his ascension
he is still here according to his body. Whether now may we think is more
likely of these two to be believed? But M. Bishop to save himself, will set
Chrysostom and Austin together by the ears. Forsooth, Chrysostom reports
it as a miracle, that he who sits above with his father, at the very same
instant is touched with the hands of all men, and gives himself to them that
will receive and embrace him. What Chrysostomes mind was in this behalf,
appears by that which otherwhere he says, that Chrysostom. op. imperf. hom.
11. In vasis sanctifacatis non est verum corpus Christi sed mysterium corporis
eius continetur.
in the holy vessels, not the true body of Christ, but the mystery of his body
is contained. And by this mystery of his body, Saint Austin says, that August.
epist. 23. Secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi
est.
after a certain manner it is the body of Christ; and Cyprian says, that
Cyprian. de resurrect. Christi. Quod videtur nonane and virtute Christ's corpus
censetur.
in name and power it is accounted the body of Christ. As therefore Saint
Austin says, that August. in Psalm. 33. conc. 2. Ipse se portabat quodammodo
cum diceret, Hoc est corpus meum.
Christ did in some sort bear himself in his own hands, when he said, This
is my body, in some sort, he says, or after a sort, not verily and indeed: so
Chrysostom intends, that he who sits at the right hand of God is after a
sort touched in the Sacrament, with the hands of all the partakers thereof; not
as touching the reality, but as touching the mystery of his body, yet so
(wherein consists the miracle which Chrysostom mentions) as that he indeed
gives himself spiritually and by faith to all them that are truly willing to
receive him. And in what meaning Chrysostme spoke those words, we may easily
conceive by other words which he uses in the very same place: Chrysostom. de
sacerd. lib. 3. Dum conspicis dominum immolatum, Sacerdotem sacrificio
incumbentem ac preces fundentem, tum vero turbam circumfusam pretioso illo
sanguine intingi ac rubefieri, etiamne te inter mortales versari atque in terra
confistere censes? annon potius evestigio ad caelum transferris? annon omnem ca
ni^c^gitationem abijcre^s mente ^ura circumspie^^quae in ce^^ sunt? O miraiu
um; O d^^ bemgintatem; q^^ cum patre sursum sedet, in illo ipsotemporis
articulo on nium manibus pertractatur, a^ s^^p^^ tradit w^^tibus ipsum excipere
acc^m^lecti, fit autem id nullis praestigijs, sed apertis ac^^reumsp^tientibus
circumsistentium omnium occutis.
When thou see the Lord offered, the Priest leaning to the Sacrifice and
pouring forth prayer, and the people round about died and made red with that
precious blood, do thou think that thou art amongst mortal men, or
standing upon the earth? Art thou not forthwith lift up to heaven? Do thou
not cast away all carnal cogitation, and with pure mind behold those things
which are in heaven above? Then using the words which M. Bishop has alleged
he adds: And this is done, not by collusion, but so as that the standers by
with open eyes behold all that is done. Let M. Bishop now tell us: do the
standers by with open eyes see Christ offered? Are they made red with the blood
of Christ? Must they think that they are indeed carried up to heaven, and are
not upon the earth? If he cannot deny, but that these words are used by excess
and vehemency of speech, to draw the minds of his hearers, to divine and
heavenly meditation of the mysteries then in hand: can he deny but that we
have just cause to understand the other words in the very same sort? The other
testimonies cited by M. PER. out of Vigilius, Fulgentius, Austin, do make the
same good, because they show, that Christ according to his manhood, is not
really upon the earth. M. Bishop bids us see his answers to those
authorities: but as yet we do not see them; and if ever we do see them, we
shall see him as wise, or rather as wilful, in them as he has been in all
the rest.

6. W. BISHOP.
Thirdly, he reasons thus: The Church as it is believed is not seen.
In that we believe the Catholic Church, it follows that it is invisible,
because things seen, are not believed.

We answer: that the persons in the Catholic Church are and ever were visible,
even to Jews and Heathens who persecuted them; but the inward indowments of
those persons: that is, their faith, hope, and charity: their assistance by
Gods spirit, and such like Christian qualities, are invisible and to be
believed. And even as a man is truly said to be visible, though he consist
as well of an invisible soul, as of a visible body: so the Church is visible,
for the vsible persons, visible teaching and administering of Sacraments in it:
albeit the inward qualities of it be not visible.

R. ABBOT.
Origin. in Cant. hom. 1. Ecclesiam coetum omnium aduerte sancto^um Et hom. 2.
Ecclesia ante constitutionem mundi: sic enim dicit Paulus: sicut elegit nos in
Christo. etc.
The holy Chatholike church is the company of Gods saints, whom he has elected
in Christ before the foundations of the world, and Gregor. in Cantic. cap. 3.
Secundum praescientiae suae gratiam Christus sanctam ecclesiam de in aeternum
permansurissanctis construxit.
whom he has by the grace of his foreknowledge appointed to continue with him
for ever. It is Ephe. 1.23.
the body and Revel. 21 9.
Spouse of Christ: Revel. 5 9.
redeemed and 1. Pet. 1.2.
sprinkled with his blood, Romans 8 11.
quickened by his spirit, Rom 5.19.
justified by his obedience, 2 Cor. 1.22. Eh^. 1.13.14. 2. Tim. 2.19.
sealed to the remssion of sins and everlasting life. That God has such a
people, we believe it, we see it not, neither can our eyes discern who they
are that appertain to this number, it being one of the proper emblemes of Gods
honor, j The Lord knows who are his. In this sort do we in the articles of
our Creed profess to believe the holy Catholic church. That there is a
church also visible no man denies, no man doubts: nay we affirm, that it is
amidst that church which we see that God gathers unto himself that church
which we cannot see. And to speak of this visible church also, we cannot see
it to be Gods church, or that it is Gods word that there is preached, or that
they are the Sacraments of Christ which are there administered, or that there is
any fruit or benefit to be reaped thereby. We see these things done, but the
estimation of them is a matter of faith and not of fight: we see the persons,
but we do not by our eyes perceive them to be that that they take upon them to
be. But being by faith instructed that these things are of God, or professing
so to be believe, we discerue by hearing and seeing who they are to whom we are
to adioine our selves for the exercise of our faith. So then the church is both
visible and invisible: visible as touching the persons, visible as touching
open assemblies and exercises; but not visible to be the church of God: for
then Jews and heathens would see so much, and would leave to persecute, which
now they do not, because they have no faith, and the church is no otherwise
known so to be, but only by faith. Now what says M. Bishop to hurt any thing
that we say? The persons, says he, in the Catholic church are visible, but
their indowments are invisible. Well, and men are not true members of the true
church by being such and such persons: but by having such and such inward
indowments: and therefore though they be visible as touching their persons, yet
they are not visible as true members of the church. The church therefore which
we profess to believe, which consists in them that are the true members of
the visible church, must needs be granted to be invisible. Yea I say further,
that men are not at all members of the visible church by being such and such
persons, but by profession of the faith and name of Christ and participation of
his Sacraments. And therefore M. Bishop does much amiss to compare visible
persons and inward qualities with the body and the soul, because to be a
visible person is not to be in part a member of the church, as the body is part
of a man, for then every Turk and Infidel might be said to be in part a
member of the church, because he is a man: but outward acceptance of the faith
and visible communion with the church, makes a man outwardly a member thereof,
and is as it were the body: the life and soul whereof is the inward grace of
the spirit: whereby he is indeed to the eyes of God, that which outwarly he
seems to be to the eyes of men. But a further difference also there is, for
that the soul though in it self it be invisible, yet is certainly perceived
and discerned by the actions and motions of the body, and therefore well may a
man be said to be visible as a man, though as touching the soul it self he be
invisible; whereas there are no such actions or motions of a member of the
visible church whereby the eye of man can certainly see that he has life
within, or is spiritually the same to God, that outwardly he gives semblance
to men to be. Because therefore the true members of the church are not to be
discerned with the eye, it follows that the church properly so called,
consisting of those true members is visible to God only.

7. W. BISHOP.
His last objection against us out of the Creed, is: That the articles of
remission of sins: resurrection of the body: and life everlasting, contain a
confession of special faith. For the meaning of them is thus much: I believe
the remission of mine own sins, and the resurrectition of mine own body to
life everlasting.

Answer. That is not the meaning, unless you add some conditions: to wit, I
believe the remission of my sins, if I have duly used the means ordained by
our Savior for the remission of them; which is after Baptism, the Sacrament
of Penance. Item, I believe I shall have life everlasting, if I keep (as
Christ willed the yong-man to keep) Gods commandments, or (at the least) if I
do die with true repentance. Now whether I have done or shall do these things
required of me, I am not so well assured, as that I can believe it: for I may be
deceived therein; but I have or may have a very goood hope, by the grace of God
to perform them. Neither is there any more to be gathered out of Saint
Augustine, as some of the words by himself here alleged do convince. For he
requires besides faith, that we turn from our sins, conform our will to
Gods will, and abide in the lap of the Catholic church; and so at length we
shall be healed. See the question of certainty of salvation. Note also by the
way, the uncertainty of of M. PER. doctrine, concerning this point: for he
holds that it is not necessary to have a certain persuasion of our own
salvation, Page 2^0. and. 275.
but that it is sufficient to have a desire to have it: and that doctrine he
puts there (as he says himself) to expound the Chatechismes, that propound
faith at so high: reach, as few can attain unto: yet here and elsewhere, the
goodman forgetting himself, charge us to cross the Creed, because we do
not wrest faith up to so high a strain: and so in heat of quarelling, often
expounds this contrary to his own rule. Now for proof of S. Augustines
opinion herein (whom he only cites) take these two sentences for the two
points be speaks of. For the first, that we be certain by ordinary faith of
our salvation, let this serve. Of life everlasting, which God (that cannot lie)
has promised to his children, De bono persevere. cap. 22. De correct. and great.
cap. 13.
no man can be secure (and out of danger) before his life be ended, which is a
tentation upon earth. Secondly, that a man once truly justified may afterward
fall: We must believe (says this holy father) that certain of the children of
perdition do live in faith, that works by charity, and so do for a time
live faithfully and justly (they were then truly justified) and yet afterward
do fall, and that finally; because be calls them the children of perdition.
Thus much in answer unto that, which M. PER. obiecteth against our religion
out of the Creed, which (as you have seen) consists wholly upon his own
forced exposition, and vain illations.

R. ABBOT.
That our profession of says in the Creed, imports a particular application
of those things which we believe, Romission of sins is believed, not wrought.
has been sufficiently declared Sect. 3.
before in the question of the certainty of salvation. M. Bishop refers his
Reader to that question, as having there justified what he says here: but
with what face can he so do, before he has made it appear that he is able to
defend what he has said there? What exceptions he has used there, the same he
uses here; he gives them no further strength, he cleereth them not from
those answers whereby has been showed the inualidity of them; but goes on
with his cuckowes note, saying over and over still one and the same thing. But
his adding of conditions is the destroying of the nature of true faith, which
when it professes to believe the remission of sins does thereby disclaim the
working of it, resting upon Gods promise, Agust. in Psalm. 88. Non s^cundi^m
merita nostra, sed secundum miserecordiam eius, firma est promissio.
which as S. Austin says, is sure, not according to our merits, but according
to his own mercy; Iere. 31.34.
I will forgive their iniquities, and their sins will I remember no more. His
sacrament of penance we know not, because Christ has not taught it; but the
true Sacraments which Christ has ordained are to the faithful repentant, not
works of merit whereby they purchase, but seals and confirmations of Gods
gift, whereby he freely bestows the remission of sins. As for the keeping
of Gods commandments, we say with S. John; He that says he knows him, that
is, as Gregory Bishop of Rome expounds it, Gregor. in Ezechiel. hom. 22. De
fide and operatione Ioannes fatetur dicens; Qui dicit se nosse deum. etc.
he that says he believes in him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
liar, and there is no truth in him. Romans 7.12.
The commandment is holy and just and good, and Heb. 12.14.
without holiness no man shall see God. But the keeping of Gods commandments
is one thing according to the condition of the law, another according to the
precept and exhortation of the Gospel. The Gospel favorably commends unto
us the keeping thereof as a fruit of faith; the law strictly requires it as
the condition of eternal life. The Gospel admits forgiveness of that that
by humane frailty is left undone: the law is never satisfied unless Gal. 3.10.
all be done. Therefore if the belief of out obteining eternal life must rest
upon our works according to the law, we can never have assurance of faith,
because we can never find sufficiency and contentment in our own works. It
follows therefore, that to build the faith of the Gospel upon the works of
the Law, is to confound the Law and the Gospel, and to destroy the truth of
faith. Romans 4.14.
If they which are of the law be heirs, says the Apostle, then faith is made
void, and the promise is made of none effect. But v. 16.
therefore it is of faith, that it may be of grace (and therefore Romans 11.6.
not of works) and the promise may be sure to all the seed, that is, to all
that believe according to the example of Abraham's faith. Now then whereas M.
Bishop says, that he believes to have life everlasting if he keep the
commandments, that is no belief at all, because he cannot keep the
commandments, as is required for covenant of eternal life. Whereas he tells
us, that he may have a very good hope by Gods grace to perform them, his own
heart tells him that he says untruly, because he knows himself debarred
from that hope by God himself, by whose words we are taught, that Eccles. 7.22.
there is not a man just in the earth, that does good and sins not, and that
James 3.2.
in many things we offend all, and that Psalm. 143.2.
in Gods sight no man living shall be found righteous. Therefore amidst all
our keeping of Gods commandments, amidst all our fightings and wrastlings
against sin, we still hold fast that confession, that the just (even the just)
shall live by faith; because all our justice in this life is maimed and
halting, and August de ciu. det, lib. 19. cap. 27. Ipsa iustitia nostra tanta
est in hac vita, vt potius remissione peccatoru^, constet quam prefectione
virtutum.
consists rather in forgiveness of sins than in perfection of virtues. It
remains therefore, that true faith is the apprehension and particular
application of the promise of God, expecting the effect and participation
thereof, not for any works of ours, but for his own mercies sake. Of which
faith it follows indeed, that we turn from our sins, and conform our will
to Gods will, and abide in the lap of the Catholic church, but these are
effects and not causes of that state of salvation which we attain by faith
only. Saint Austin therefore requiring these things, does not shake his own
assertion of particular faith, whereby he teaches a man, as M. Perkins
shows, to believe as touching himself, the remission of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and everlasting life. As for the contradiction which
M. Bishop notes in M. PER. words, it is more in his conceit than it is indeed.
He says here, that the act of faith is particularly to apply: he says
elsewhere, that faith notwithstanding does not always attain to a distinct
application by formal proposition, but that it is sometimes inuolued and
inlapped in sighs and groans, in desires and prayers to God, which cannot be
without an expectance of Gods goodness and mercy, and yet a perplexed and
trouled mind by questioning it self cannot see so much in it self. He says
again, that some define faith generally to be a certain and full persuasion,
which he calls, so high a reach as few can attain unto, because as there is
strong faith to persuade certainly and fully, so there is also weak faith
which apprehends and persuades comfortably, but yet not with fullness and
undoubted certainty. He says nothing here contrary to this, because whether
it be strong faith to apply strongly, or weak faith to apply weakly, yet both
serve in their degree particularly to apply. It is then M. Bishops want of
understanding here that makes him to mistake, not M. PER. heat of
quarrelling that makes him to forget. But now to show what Saint Austins
opinion is concerning these matters of belief, he brings us two sentences,
the one to show that by ordinary faith a man cannot be certain of his
salvation; the other, that a man once truly justified may afterward finally
fall away; both tending to this, that a man cannot be said by the articles of
the Creed, to believe the remission of his own sins unto everlasting life.
The first, as he alleges, is thus: August. de bono persevere. cap. 22. De vita
aeterna quam filijs promissionu promi sit non mendax deus ante tempora a terna,
nemo potest esse secu^usmisicum ^o^summata fuerit ista vita, quae tentatio est
super terram; sed faciet nos perseuerare in se vsque in huius vitae ^nem, cui
quotidie dicin us; Ne nos inferas in tentationem.
Of life everlasting, which God that cannot lie has from everlasting promised
to the children of promise, no man can be secure before his life be ended,
which is a temptation upon earth. But what, M. Bishop; did your breath fail
you that you could go no further? did you not think the end of the sentence
as worthy to be repeated as the beginning? Go on man, tell out your tale; for
Saint Austin adds further: But he will make us to persevere in him unto the
end of this life; to whom we daily say, Lead us not into temptation. What could
Saint Austin devise to speak more agreeable to our assertion, than this is? We
say, that respecting our selves we have no security; we are continually beset
with danger and fear; many occasions we have of distrust and despair; and
with these temptations we have to wrestle the whole course of this life; but
amidst all our distractions and fears this is still the support of our faith,
that he will make us to persevere in him to the end of our life, to whom we
daily say, Lead us not into temptation. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
Faithful is he, says the Apostle, who has called you, who will also do it.
In the other place Saint Austin says, that ^e corrept. and gratia. cap 13.
Credenau^ est, qu^sdam de filijs perditionis non accepto do. no perseuerantiae
vsque in finem, in fide quae per dilectionem operatur incipe re viuere, and
aliquandiu fideliter aciuste viuere, and postea cadere etc.
we are to believe, that some of the children of perdition, not having received
the gift of perseuering to the end, do begin to live in faith, that works by
love, and for a while do live faithfully and justly, and afterward doefall
away. But this Saint Austin speaks according to men, and as seems to the
eyes of men, and of that profession of faith, which by outward fruits carries
for the time the semblance of true faith. For to the eyes of God, I have Of the
certainty of salvation. sect. 10.
before showed out of Austin, that reprobates are never effectually called,
never justified, never partakers of that healthful and spiritual repentance,
whereby man in Christ is reconciled unto God. Therefore Gregory Bishop of Rome
faith, that Gregor. Moral. l. 25. c. 8. Specie tenus credunt quotquot certum
est electorum numerum summamque transire. Ad fidem specie tenus regni veniunt,
qui a numero regnicaelestis excluduntur.
they who are not of the number of the elect, do believe but only in show; do
in show only come to the faith of the kingdom; Ibid. lib. 34. cap. 13. Aurum
quod prauis eius persuasionibus quasi lutum sternipotuerit, aurum ante dei
oculos nunquam fu^t. Qui enim seduci quandoque non reuersuri possunt quasi
habitam sanctitatem ante oculos hominum videntor amittere, sed eam ante oculos
dei nunquam habuerunt.
that the gold which by Satan's wicked suggestions comes to be trodden under
feet like dirt, was never gold in Gods sight; that they who can be seduced,
never to return again, seem to lose the holiness which they had after a
sort before the eyes of men, but indeed they never had it in the sight of God.
Behold here M. Bishop, one of your own Bishops of Rome, either a correctour,
if you will so have it, or as we will rather say, an expounder of Saint Austins
words, but wholly adverse and contrary to you, denying unto reprobates that
faith and holiness which you so confidently attribute unto them. So that in
fine we see, that M. PERK, not by forced exposition or vain illations, but
directly and according to truth has charged you with impious violation of the
first principles of the faith.

8. W. BISHOP.
Hence he proceeds to the ten Commandments. But before I follow him
thither, I may not omit here to declare how the Protestant Doctors do foully
mangle, and in manner ouerturne the greatest part of the Creed. Observe first,
that according to their common doctrine, it is not necessary to believe this
Creed at all, because it is no part of the written word: secondly, that Calvin
doubts whether it were made by the Apostles or no; being then no part of the
written word, Call. lib. 2. Instit. cap. 16. sess. 18.
not made by the Apostles, it must by their doctrine be wholly rejected. Now to
the particulars.

1. Concerning the first article, I believe in God the Father almighty, maker
of heaven and earth; they do err many ways. First, they do destroy the most
simple unity of the Godhead, Confess. fidei gener.
by teaching the divine essence to be really distinguished into three persons.
If the divine nature be really distinguished into three, there must needs be
three divine essences or natures: ergo, three Gods. Calvin also says, In actis
Serueti. page 872.
that the Son of God has a distinct substance from his Father. Melancthon,
that there be as well three divine natures, as three persons, in locis de
Christo.

Secondly, they overthrow the Father in the Godhead, by denying the Son of
God, to have received the divine nature from his Father: as Calvin, Beza, and
Whitakers do, See the Preface.

Thirdly, how is God almighty, if he cannot do all things that have no manifest
repugnance in them? But he cannot after the opinion of diverse of them, make a
body to be without local circumscription, or to be in two places at once;
which notwithstanding some others of them hold to be possible, In colloq.
Marpurg. art. 29. Li. 1. cont. Scargum, cap. 14. Dialog. de corpore Christi.
page 94. De consil. part. 2.276.
as Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Andreas Volanus, etc.

Fourthly, though we believe God to be maker of heaven and earth; yet never
none but blasphemous Heretics, held him to be true author and proper worker
of all evil done upon earth by men. Such nevertheless be Bucer, Zwinglius,
Calvin, and others of greatest estimation among the Protestants. See the
Preface.

2. And in JESUS Christ his only Son our Lord. They must needs hold Christ
not to be Gods true natural Son, which deny him to have received the divine
nature from the Father: again, thy make him according to his Godhead
inferior to his Father. See the Preface.

3. Borne of the Virgin MARY. Many of them teach, that Christ was borne as
other children are, with breach of his Mothers virginity, as Bucer, and
Molineus in Union Euangelij part. 3. and Calvin signifies no less in harmo.
sup. 2. Math. verse. 13.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified, dead, and buried. Friar Luther
(with a great band of his followers) does toughly defend, that the Godhead it
self suffered; which to be blasphemy, Musculus does prove in his book of the
errors of Luthers Scholars: yet Beza with all them that hold Christ to have
been our Mediator, according to his divine nature, can hardly save themselves
from the same blasphemy. For the chiefest ast of Christ's mediation consists
in his death: if then the Godhead did not suffer that death, it had no part in
the principal point of Christ's mediation. Hither also appertain all these
their blasphemies, to wit: that Christ was so frighted with the apprehension of
death, that he forgot himself to be our Mediator, yea refused (as much as in
him lay) to be our redeemer: Item, that he thought himself forsaken of God,
and finally despaired. Se the Preface. Calvin denies not the Creed to be
Apostolic.


R. ABBOT.
Whether M. Bishop deal honestly with Calvin as touching his opinion of the
Creed, let it appear by the very words of Calvin in the very place alleged.
Where having named it, the Apostles Creed, he takes occasion thereupon thus to
say: Calvin Institut. lib. 2. cap. 16. sect. 18. Apostolicum autem nuncupo, de
authore interim minime solicitus. Apostolis certe magno veterum Scriptorum
consensu ascribitur, sieve quod ab illis in commune conscriptum and editum
existimabant, sieve quod compendium istud ex doctrina per little manus tradita
bona fide collectum tali elogi^ confirmandum censuerunt. Neque vero mihi dubium
est quina prima flatim ecclesiae origin ad ecque ab ipso Apostolorum seculo
instar publicae and omnium calculis receptae confessionis obtinuerit,
vndecunque undem initio fuerit profectum. Nec ab vno aliquo priuatim fuisse
conscriptum verisimile est, ^^m ab vltima vsque memoria sacrosanctae inter pios
omnes authoritatu fu^sse constet. Quod vnice curandum est, id extra omnem
controuersi^m positum habemus, totam in eo fidei nostrae historier saccincte,
distinct^qu^ ordine recenseri; nihil autent contineri quod solidis Scripturae
testimocijs m^ sit consignatum. Quo intel^ecto de anth^re vel anxie laborare
vel cum alique digladiari nihil attinet.
I call it Apostolic, not making any great scruple who was the author of it.
Surely by the general consent of the ancient writers it is ascribed to the
Apostles, either for that they thought it in common written, and set forth by
them, or for that they thought good by such a title to confirm this Brief,
which is faithfully gathered out of the doctrine delivered by their hands.
Neither do I doubt whencesoeuer it first began, but that from the first
original of the Christian Church and from the very time of the Apostles it
took place, as a public and generally approved confession. Neither is it
likely to have been written in private by any one, because it is certain that
from the very beginning it has been of sacred authority amongst all godly
men. That which we are entirely to regard, is without all controversy or
doubt, that the whole story of our faith is therein briefly and distinctly set
down, and nothing contained in it but what is confirmed by sound testimonies
of the Scripture. Which understood and known, it is bootlesse for a man either
much to trouble himself, or to contend with any other concerning the author
of it. Which words of Calvin containing both his own judgment and ours
concerning the authority of the Creed, do sufficiently refell the malicious
cauils of this vain and absurd wrangler. By our doctrine, he says, it is not
necessary to believe the Creed, yea it is wholly to be rejected, because it is
no part of the written word. Indeed formally it is no part of the written word,
because it is not a part of the very text of Scripture there set down in that
frame of words wherein we use it: but do we any where say, that whatsoever is
not so a part of the written word is wholly to be rejected, or not necessary to
be believed? Nay we are so far from saying or thinking so, as that we hold
many things in M. Bishops books necessary to be believed, which
notwithstanding are so far from being a part of the written word, as that for
the manifold vain cauillations and impudent falsehoods therein contained they
deserve rather to go for wall paper, than to be read for learned books. As
touching the matter and doctrine of the Creed, Calvin affirms that it is
taken out of the doctrine of the Apostles, set down in the written word, and
therefore it is no more to be rejected than the word it self from whence it is
taken. He denies not but that the Apostles might be and were the authors of
it, though he cannot certainly affirm that they were so. He acknowledges the
consent of ancient writers that it was composed by the Apostles. He confesses
the antiquity thereof even from their very time. He holds it unlikely to have
been published by any private man, and therefore leaves it most likely to be
done by them. By whomsoever it was done, because it is consonant to the
Apostolic spirit and doctrine, he acknowledges all sacreed authority and
opinion as heretofore, so now to be attributed unto it. What is there here
that malice it self could blame, but that Popish malice above other is blind
and cannot see it own shame? Let us now go along with him to the particulars,
and see what wise work he makes to prove that which he says, the Protestant
Doctors do foully mangle and in manner ouerturne the greatest part of the
Creed. Concerning the first article he says, we err many ways. But how I
pray you? first, says he, they do destroy the most simple unity of the
Godhead, by teaching the divine essence to be really distinguished into three
persons. But how does that follow? One essence of God distinguished really into
three persons.
for if unity of essence in this distinction be terminus a quo; and triality
of persons, be terminus ad quem; and the reality of distinction be understood
not in the essence for it self but only in the persons, how shall it destroy
the simple unity of the God head, to say that one divine essence is really
distinguished into three persons. What, will M. Bishop say that the distinction
of the persons is intellectual only and not real? Let him then set up a
school for Sabellius and Praxeas, the heretics, and teach as they did, that
August. de haeres. ad Quod vultd. c. 41. Dicunt eundem ipsum esse patrem and
filium and sp. sanctum.
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are but one and the same person,
only termed diversely. But if for avoiding thereof he will say, as all learned
divines say, that the persons of the Trinity are really distinguished, then let
him understand that he says no more than we say, nor knows more than we
know, who know how to speak as well as he. Our Divines do sometimes indeed
say, that the one essence of God is distinguished really into three persons,
but meaning it no otherwise than according to the definition of Thomas Aquinas,
that Tho. Aquin. sum. p. 1. q. 28. art 3. in corp. Oportet quod sit in deo
distinctio realts non secundum rem absolutam quae est essentia, in qua est
summa vnitas and simplicitas, sed secundu^ r^m relatiuam.
there is in God a real distinction, not according to that that is absolute,
which is the essence, but according to that that is relative, which is the
diverse subsistence of the persons. Or rather they mean it according to that
which Saint Austin says: August. de fide a^ Pet. diacon. c. 1. Vna est patris
and filij and sp sancti essentia, in qua non est aliud pater, aliud filus, a^ad
sp. sanctus, quan ^is person^tliter sit alius p^ter, alius filius, alius
spsanctus.
There is one essence of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
wherein the Father is not one thing, the Son another thing, and the holy
Ghost another thing: and yet personally the Father is one, the Son another,
and the holy Ghost another. What is it but the same to say, either, that in one
essence there are (really) three persons, or that one essence is really
distinguished into three persons? He says, that if the divine nature be
really distinguished into three, there must needs be three divine esserces or
natures. If, says he, it be distinguished into three: but three what? for if
he had added as he should, into three persons, then his folly had appeared to
argue in that sort, The son how understood to have a distinct substance from
the Father.
that if one essence be really distinguished into three persons, there must
needs be three essences. That which he adds out of Calvin, that the Son of
God has a distinct substance from the Father, Calvin speaks not of himself,
but of Tertullian; nor by his own phrase, but by Tertullians phrase, who
though he differ from latter times in manner of speech, yet defends the truth
of the Godhead in three persons as other godly Fathers have always done.
Praxeas the heretic denied the Trinity, affirming that the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, were but only names given in diverse respects to one and
the same person. Tertullian writes against him, and coming to the word, the
second person in Trinity, he disputes that the same is, Tertul. adu. Praxed.
Ergo, inquis, das aliquam substantiam esse sermonem? Plane. Nouimus enim eum
substantiuum habere in re per substantiae proprietatem, vt res. and persona
quae. dam videri possit. etc. Nihil dico de deo maene and vacuum prodire
potuisse etc. nec carere substantia quod de tanta substantia processit. etc.
Quod ex ipsius substantia missum est, sine substantia non erit. Quaecunque ergo
substantia sermonis fuit, illam dico personam, and illi; filij nomen vindico;
and dum filium agnosco, secundum a patre defendo.
not an empty or idle name, but imports some substantial thing by propriety
of substance; that it cannot be without substance that proceeded from such a
substance, and was sent of the substance of the Father. But yet he presently
expounds himself; Whatsoever the substance of the word is, that I call the
person, and challenge to it the name of the Son; and whilst I acknowledge
him the Son, I defend him to be a second to the Father. By substance
therefore with Tertullian, is not meant (...) the essence, but (...), that is,
the personal and individual existence, wherein each person distinctly has
the one true and perfect substance, that is, essence of one Godhead, the word
being purposely intended to cross the heretical conceit of Praxeas, of void
and empty terms. Even as Hilary reports, that a Council of Antioch against
the same heresy, challenges to every person Hilar. de Synod adu. Arianos His
nominibus significantibus diligenter propriam vniuscuiusque nominatorum sul
stantiam and ordinem and gloriam vt sint quidem per substantiam tria, per
consonantiam vero vnum. Ex^^cil. Antiocheno.
his proper substance, and says, that they are three in substance, but in
accord one, Ibid. paulo post. Tres subst iutias esse dixerunt, subsistentium
personas per substantias edocentes, non substantiam patris and f^^ij and
spiritus sancti diuersitate dissimulu essentiae separantes.
meaning, says he, by substances the persons subsistent, not separating the
substance of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, by diversity of unlike
essence. The blasphemy of Praxeas and of the Sabellians was in these latter
times revived by Seruetus. Against him Calvin disputes, and brings in
Tertullian in his own language oppugning that damnable fancy, and in that
whole discourse with all integrity he maintains our belief of one substance
in three persons: and is not M. Bishop ashamed thus by advantage of another
words only by him alleged, and in the authors meaning used, so ill to
requite him, and to charge him with that whereto he purposely defends the
contrary in the same place? But why do I speak of shame; for what are those
men ashamed of? And therefore he sticks not here again very grossly to belie
Melancthon also, charging him to say, that there be as well three divine
natures as there be three persons, whereas neither in the place by him quoted
nor any otherwhere ever any such matter proceeded from Melancthon. Upon his
second point I will not stand, because it is before handled in the sixth section
of the Preface. So is the third point handled there also in the eight section,
and the fourth in the tenth, and that which he says as touching the second
article, in the sixth and seven. His objection as touching the third article is
a very leaud and dishonest slander. None of us affirms that Christ was borne
with the breach of his Mothers virginity, Christ borne without breach of his
mothers virginity.
because her virginity stood in being free from the company of man, not in that
she had not her womb opened when she bare Christ. For if the opening of her
womb in her childbirth were the breach of her virginity, then the Evangelist
shall be said to impeach her virginity in applying to the birth of Christ that
saying of the law: Luke 2.23. Exodus 13.2.
Every man-child that first opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord.
Which words diverse of the ancient fathers, Tertull. de carne Christi. prope
finem. Origin. in Luc. hom 14. Ambros. in Luc. 2. lib. 2. Hierom. cont. Pelag.
l. 2.
Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Hierome, hold to be most properly verified in the
birth of Christ, who opened the womb that was not opened before, whereas for
all other the womb is first opened by carnal copulation. Hereupon Tertullian
says, that Tertul. vt supra. Virgo and non virgo: virgo quantum a viro: non
virgo quantum a partu.
the virgin Mary was both a virgin, and not a virgin: a virgin as touching man,
not a virgin as touching childbearing; that is, a virgin as free from having
the womb opened by man; not a virgin as free from having the womb opened by
birth of child. So Saint Austin says, that August. de fide cont. Manich. cap.
22. Maria non incongrue propter partum dicitur mulier, virgo vero quod virilem
nescierit conuentionem, neque pariendo virginitas eius corruptasit. Christ as
God our M^diator, yet the God. head it self suffers not.
she may not unfitly be called a woman in respect of her childbirth, and a
virgin for that she know not the company of man, neither was her virginity
corrupted by bearing child. What, will M. Bishop now say that all these were
heretics, and did deny that the mother of Christ continued a virgin? Let him
say what he will, but we will hold him for a sorry fellow that concludes
breach of virginity of that opening of the womb. As touching the fourth
article, that Luther affirmed the Godhead it self to suffer, it is a lie.
These are but devices of Gifford, and Knogler and such other base hungry
staruelings, who to gain favor make collections and conclusions of their
own, and then affirm them of our men. That Christ according to his divine
nature also is our Mediator, even whole Christ both God and man, has been
before justified in answer to the seventh section of his preface to the Reader.
But to infer, that therefore the Godhead it self suffers, is as good a
reason as to say, that because the man dies, therefore the soul is mortal.
But says M. Bishop, the chiefest act of Christ's mediation consists in his
death. True, and what then? If then, says he, the Godhead of Christ do not
suffer that death, it has no part in the principal act of Christ's mediation.
As if he should say; the chiefest act of a faithful and good subject is to die
for his Prince and country: if then the soul it self do not suffer that
death, it has no part in the chiefest act of a faithful and good subject.
Would he take it patiently to hear another man to reason in this sort? If he
would not, why does he himself thus play the wiseman, and mock simple men
that are not able to perceive his fraud? It is the man that dies, though he
die not in the soul, but in the body; and it is Christ God and man, that
suffers, though he suffer not in the God head but in the manhood. Vigil.
cont. Eutych. lib. 2. Passus est deus in union personae, non est passus in
proprietate naturae; siquidem possionis iniurias etiam diuinitas pertulit, sed
passionem sola etus caro persensit.
God suffered by union of person, says Vigilius, but in propriety of nature he
suffered not; the Godhead did bear the injuries of the passion, but the flesh
only did feel the same. Though the soul it self die not, yet it is the
soul that exposes the body unto death; and though the Godhead suffered not,
yet it was the Godhead that yielded the manhood to suffering and death, Heb.
9.14.
offering himself without spot unto God by his eternal spirit; as the Apostle
speaks. The rest of his quarrels being most impudent and shameless fictions,
are already handled in the thirteenth and fourteenth sections of the answer to
the preface.

9. W. BISHOP.
5. Descended into hell, the third day he arose again from the dead. It is
worth a man's labor, to behold their goodly variety of expositions about
Christ's descending into hell. Beza followed of Corliel our Countryman, 2.
Apolog. ad Sanct.
thinks this to have crept into the Creed by negligence; and so the French
Hugonots, and Flemish Gues have cast it clean out of their Creed: but they are
misliked of many others, who had rather admit the words, because they be found
in Athanasius Creed, and also in the old Roman Creed expounded by Ruffinus: but
they do most peruersly expound them. Calvin says, that Christ's suffering of
the pains of hell on the Cross, is signified by these words: but he pleases
not some others of them; because Christ's suffering and death also, goes before
his descending into hell, and the words must be taken orderly as they lie.
Thirdly, diverse of them will have it to signify, the laying of Christ's body in
the grave; but that is signified plainly by the word, buried. Wherefore some
others of them expound it to signify, the lying of his body in the grave three
days, which M. PER. approves as the best; but it is as wide from the proper
and literal signification of the words, as can be. For what likeness is there
between lying in the grave, and descending into hell? Besides, Calvin their
great Rabbin misliketh this exposition, as much as any of the rest, Lib. 2.
Instit. cap. 16. sess. 8.
and calls it an Idle fancy. Fourthly, Luther, Smideline, and others cited by
Beza, art. 2. do say, that Christ's soul after his death went to hell, where
the Devils are, there to be punished for our sins, thereby to purchase us a
fuller redemption; which is so blasphemous that it needs not any refutation.
As ridiculous is another, received of most Protestants; that Christ's soul went
into Paradise, which well understood is true. For his soul in hell, had the
joys of Paradise; but to make that an exposition of Christ's descending into
hell, is to expound a thing by the flat contrary of it. All these and some
other expositions also, the Protestants have devised, to leads their followers
from the ancient, and only true interpretation of it: to wit, that Christ in
soul descended unto those lower parts of the earth, where all the souls
departed from the beginning of the world, were detained by the just judgment
of God, till Christ had paid their ransom; and were not admitted into the
kingdom of heaven, before Christ had opened them the way thither.

R. ABBOT.
We hold, Of Christ's descending into hell.
that all the articles of our Creed are so to be understood, as that our faith
may make use thereof concerning our selves, and not only concerning others. It
is a very barren and cold construction which M. Bishop makes of the descending
of Christ into hell; that his soul descended into the lowest parts of the
earth, to bring from thence the souls that were detained there by the just
judgment of God till Christ had paid their ransom. But mark how wisely he
sets down the matter. All the souls, says he, departed from the beginning
of the world. What; all the souls without exception? the soul of Cain, of
Esau, of Ismael, and of other such infidels and reprobates? Well, though he
write he knows not what; we must take his meaning by that that his fellows
say, Greg Marti. Discovery chap. 7. sect. 6.
that the Patriarchs and other just men of the old Testament, were in some
third place of rest, called Abraham's bosom, or Limbus patrum till our Savior
Christ descended thither and delivered them from thence. So then, not all
souls, but the souls of the just were delivered by Christ's descending into
hell. But what? is it the meaning of Christ's descending into hell, that he
descended into a place of rest? Surely M. Bishop will have but very bad rest,
if he have no better then is any where to be found in hell. He vpbraideth us
with the improbability of diverse expositions made of this article; but surely
this is above all other a mad exposition, to say that Christ descended into
hell, that is, into Abraham's bosom, into a place of rest. Let him not press
us with the authority of men's names for the justification of it; Saint Austin
knew their names as well as he, and they could not so much prevail with him,
but that he freely professed, that August. epist. 99. Ne ipsos quidem inferos
vspiam scripturarum locis in bonum app^llatos potuti reperire. Quod si nusquam
in diuinis authoritatibus legitur, non vtique sinus ille Abrahae, id est,
secretae cuiusdam quietis habitatio, aliqua pars inferorum credenda est. etc.
si in illum Abrahae sinum Christum mortuum venisse sancta scriptura dixisset,
non nominato inferuo eiusq^; doloribus, miror si quisquam ad inferos eum
descendisse asserere auderet.
he could no where in Scripture find hell spoken of or named in good part; and
says, that because it is not so read in any divine authority, therefore
Abraham's bosom, which is an habitation of quiet rest, is not to be believed to
be any part of hell. And if the Scripture had said that Christ being dead went
into Abraham's bosom, not mentioning bell or the sorrows thereof, I wonder if
any man would dare thereupon to say that he descended into hell. So in another
place he says; Idem de Genes. ad lit. l. 12. c. 33. Illud me nondum invenisse
confitetor, inferos appellatos vbi iustorum anima requies^^nt. etc. Et ideo
quomodo apud inferos eum (Abrahae sinum) credamus esse non video.
I do not find it any where called hell, where the souls of just men do
rest; and I do not see how we may believe that Abraham's bosom is in hell. And
this he observes out of the story of the Gospel, where it is that we read of
Abraham's bosom; Ibid. Videmus inferorum mentionem non esse factam in requie
pauperis, sed in supplicio di^itis.
We see that there is no mention made of hell in the rest of the poor man, but
in the punishment of the rich. Thus strange it seemed to Saint Austin and
improbable, which now forsooth we must take to be a very Catholic
construction, that Christ descended into hell, that is to say, into a place of
rest. But this placing of Abraham's bosom to be a part of hell, was the device
of Marcion the heretic, who borrowed it from the Poets dream of the Elysian
fields; Tertullian therewith vpbraiding him, that Tertull. cont. Marc. lib. 3.
Vester Christus posi decursum vitae pocticetur apud inferos in sinu Abrahae
refrigerium. Et lib. 4. Mercedem refrigerij apud inferos determinat eis positam
qui legi and prophetis obedierint.
their Christ promised to the Jews after life ended, rest in hell, in Abraham's
bosom; and did determine a reward of rest in hell for them that obeyed the law
and the Prophets. So does Origin bring in the Marcionite heretic alleging,
that Origin. de recta in deum fide dialog. 2. Ait in inferno Abraham fuisse non
in regno caelorum. Ex eo quod illi cum diuite colloquium intercesserat simul
fuisse intelligitur.
Abraham was in hell, not in the kingdom of heaven; For by that they talked
one to the other, it is understood, says he, that they were together. But
Origin answers him, that Ibid. Ingentem hiatum qui nominatur non attendisti;
Medium enim illud inter caelum and terram hiatum vocat.
he listeneth not to the great gulf that is there said to be betwixt them;
which he expounds to be the middle space betwixt heaven and earth, as
importing that Abraham was in heaven. He observes also, that the rich man is
said, Ibid. Erigens oculos suos: tollere vero oculos in caelum visitatum est.
to lift up his eyes: and men use, says he, to lift up their eyes to heaven.
The very same reasons Tertullian also uses to show, that Tertul. vt supra lib.
4. Aliud inferi vt puto, aliud quoque Abrahae sinus. Nam and magnum ^it
intercedere inter istas regiones profundum and transitum vtrinque prohibere.
sed nec alleuasset di^e^ oculos, and quidem de longinquo, nisi in superiora.
Hell is one thing, and Abraham's bosom is another, because it is said, that a
great depthis betwixt those places, and no passage betwixt the one and the
either, and the rich man would not have lifted up his eyes, being far off, but
to a higher place. He expounds it therefore to be the receptacle of the
souls of the faithful now departing, where they enjoy rest and peace till the
time of the resurrection; not in heaven as he thinks, but yet higher than to
be any part of hell. Amiss indeed in that he excludes it from being a part of
heaven, but yet destroying that Popish fancy whereby it is made a part of hell.
For we believe that the souls of the faithful go immediately to heaven; and
because in their departure they are said to go to Abraham's bosom, therefore
we believe that Abraham's bosom is in heaven, nothing being thereby imported,
but what Christ says in the Gospel, Mat. 8.11.
They shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from
the South, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of God. So says Origin, that Origin. in Genes. hom. 11. Omnes sancti
qui de quatuor terraepartibus veniunt in sinum Abrahae portantur ab Angelis.
all the Saints which come from the four parts of the world, are carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom. In like sort Saint Austin says of Nebridius, a
faithful man deceased; August. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 3. Et nuncille viuit in
sinu Abraham.
He now lives in Abraham's bosom. Now then we are come to this, that because
Abraham's bosom is in heaven, and Christ's descending to hell was no other but
his going to Abraham's bosom; therefore the meaning of Christ's descending into
hell is, that he ascended up to heaven. It were well that they should first
clear these matters for themselves and make good their own assertion, before
they should take in hand to question ours. Whatsoever the meaning be of
Christ's desecending into hell, we are sure that that which they bring is vain
and false. Now the article of Christ's descending into hell, being according to
their exposition impertinent and idle, and no use to be made thereof in the
Creed, some in respect thereof have thought the same to have crept into it of
latter time, and not to have been there from the beginning; and some, it may
be (for I know it not, neither dare I take M. Bishops word for it) have quite
omitted it in the Creed. Neither do they want inducements heereunto from the
ancient church, in which there are many Creedes and confessions of faith, in
which there is no mention of Christ's descending into hell. And herein we are
to note Doct. Bishop to be a man singularly impudent, who alleges the article
to be in the old Roman Creed expounded by Ruffinus, whereas the words of
Ruffinus himself do expressly affirm the contrary. Ruffin. in exposit.
symb. Apost. Sciendum sane est quod in ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non habetur
additum, Descenditad inferna, sed neque in Orientis ecclesiis habetur hic sermo.
We are to know, says he, that in the Creed of the Roman church it is not
added that he descended into hell, neither are those words used by the Eastern
churches. The Nicene Creed says nothing of it, which in likelihood would not
have omitted it if it had been found in the ancienter Creed of the Apostles.
Saint Austin has Tom. 9. de symb. vel reg. fidei ad Catechumenos.
four expositions of the Creed in one place, and Tom. 3. de fide and symbolo.
one in another, and in none of these expositions is it found that Christ
descended into hell. Tertullian has Tertul. de praescript. and adu. Praxean,
and de veland. virginib.
three declarations of the rule of faith, and this point is not found in any of
them. Neither does Ireneus mention it, where Iren. adu. here is. lib. 1. c. 2.
and. lib. 3. cap. 4.
twice he expresses the Apostolic faith. There is a confession of faith set
down by Synod. Roma. tom. 1. Council.
a Synod at Rome in the time of Julius the first, another in the Council.
Constantin. 1 cap. 7.
first Council of Constantinople, another in a Council at Synod Aleuand. apud.
Cyril. and in Concitio Ephesians.
Alexandria, confirmed by the Council of Ephesus, and many other more, wherein
there is nothing said of Christ's descending into hell. Thus from many examples
and authorities of the ancient church, those men parhaps think that they have
warrant to leave out that article without being culpable of any violation of
Christian faith. And although Athanasius and sundry other in their writings
have delivered this as a point of faith, yet they hold that those acts and
instruments of public recognition, which are very frequent to this purpose,
do ouerwaigh private judgments, and are sufficient to excuse or defend that
that is done by them. But for our parts we see no sufficient reason to move us
to follow them herein. We see diverse phrases of Scripture tending to the
assertion of this article of our belief. We read our Savior Christ professing
his rejoicing to his Father, Acts. 2.27. Psalm. 16.10.
for that he would not leave his soul in hell, which is vainly spoken if the
soul of Christ were not at all in hell. Therefore we admit the article, and in
the confession of our faith we always recite it, neither does any man make
question to do otherwise. But M. Bishop excepteth against the variety of
expositions that are found amongst us concerning the same. And what; is there
no variety of expositions thereof to be found amongst them? Do they all so
accord in one, as that we can observe no difference of one from another? first,
that learned devout Author Durand, as M. Bishop Preface to the Reader. sect. 5.
before has styled him, does hold that Durand apud Bellarm. de Christianima.
cap. 15.
Christ descended not into hell at all by real presence, but only by effect
and power. Tho. Aquin. sum. p. 3. q. 52. art. 2. in concl. Christus secundum
effectum in omnem infer^^ locum descendit, secundum vero substantialem
praesenti^m non descendit nisi ad locum iustorum.
Thomas Aquinas determines, that by real presence he went only to Limbus
Patrum, but to the other parts of hell he descended by virtue and power.
Bellarmine sets it down for Bellarm. de Christianima. c. 16. Probabile est
profecto animam Christi ad omnia inferni lo^a descendisse.
probable, that the soul of Christ did verily descend to all the places of
hell. Thomas Aquinas resolves, that Tho. Aqui. vt supra art. 4. in concl.
Animam Christi tamdiu fuisse in inferno credendum est, quamdin corpus fuit in
sepulchro.
the soul of Christ was so long in hell as his body was in the grave; and so
they commonly hold, as did Vigilius of old, Vig. ^o. Eutyc. lib. 2. Anima
(Christi) per illud triduum in inferno.
that for those three days space, the soul of Christ was in hell. But S.
Austin holds it, a thing impious to be affirmed, Augst. cont. Felic. Arian.
ca. 15. Si mortuo corpore ad paradisum anima (latronis) mox vocatur, quenquamne
adhuc tam impium credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima saluatoris nostri
triduo illo corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae mancipetur?
that the soul of the thief being forthwith called to Paradise, the soul of
our Savior should for the three days space of his bodily death be in custody
in hell. Thomas Aquinas is of opinion, that Thom. Aquin. sum. pa. 3. qu. 52.
art. 1. in corp. Conueniens fuit Christen ad infernum descendere, quia ipse
venerat portare poenas nostras vt nos a poena eriperet: ex peccat^ autem homo
incurrerat non solum mortem corporis, sed etiam descensum ad inseros.
it behooued that Christ should go to hell, because he came to bear our
punishments, so to deliver us from the same; and we by sin had incurred, not
only bodily death, but also going to hell. But Bonauenture says, and to him
Bellarmine inclines, that Bellerm. de Christi anima, cap. 16. ex Bonauentura.
Dicit Christi animam dum esset in inferno fuisse in loco p^^^ae, sed sine poena.
the soul of Christ when it was in hell was in a place of punishment, but yet
without punishment. It should seem then by these, that there is not so great
agreement amongst them concerning this article, as that M. Bishop should have
any great heart to object disagreement amongst us. As for the expositions which
he cites on our part, setting aside the fourth, they all contain truth
according to the Scripture, though happily they do not fitly express the
meaning of this article; yea they all are anouched by some of his own side.
That Christ endured the agonies and anguishes of soul, that belong to our
damnation in hell, Calvin affirms to be the meaning of this article. The
thing it self is affirmed for a truth by their own Cardinal Cusanus, that
Nicol. Causan. Excitat. lib. 10. ex sermon in iliud; Qui per sp. sanctum se
metipsum obtulit. Passio Christi (qua mayor nulla potest esse) suit vt
damnatorum, qui ^agis damnari nequeunt, scilicet vsque ad poenam infernalem.
Etibid. Illam poenam sensus conf^rnem daemnatis in inferno pati voluit in
gloriam der patris sui.
the passion and suffering of Christ, than which none can be greater, was the
like as of the damned, which cannot be more condemned, even unto the pains of
hell; and that Christ would suffer that pain of sense and feeling,
correspondent to the damned in hell, to the glory of his father. The like in
effect does their Friar Ferus. in Math. 27. Poenam and meritum peccatorum (quae
sunt Frigus, calor, efuries, sitis, timor, tr^pidatio, horror mortis, horor
inferni, desperatio, mors, infernus ipse) in se transferens. and.
Ferus discourse at large, writing upon those words of Christ upon the cross,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That this, taken in no other meaning
than they speak it is a truth, I have before showed in Sect. 13.14.
answer to the Preface: but that it must necessarily be taken to be the meaning
of this article, I will not contend, because it may be contained in the other
article of the cross and suffering of Christ. So neither will I say, that it
is the intent of this article, that Christ was buried in the grave, albeit that
he was so, is a truth of Scripture; and they that affirm that there is nothing
else meant by his descending into hell, may so much the more be confirmed
therein, for that Andradius, one of their own greatest Scholars, and a chosen
defender of the Council of Trent resolves, that in Andrad. Defens. fidei
Trident. lib. 2. Animaduerta. mus infernum hoc loco (solutis doloribus inferni.
Act. 2) pro morte atque sepulchro Hebraeorum dicendi more vsurpari, vt Psa. 15.
is quem mox Petrus citat, Quoniam non dere^^quisti an man in inferno. etc.
some of the chief places, whereby Christ's descent to hell is proved, there
is nothing meant by hell but death and the grave only. The third exposition
adds nothing to the second, but only a circumstance of continuance and
abiding in the state of death and of the grave; which in like sort is true,
though we may well refuse it, as touching the meaning of this article. The
fourth exposition which he alleges out of Luther, Smideline and others,
whether truly or not I cannot tell, namely, that Christ after death went to
hell, in soul there to be punished for our sins, swarueth indeed from the
truth; but yet Suarez the Jesuit out of Medina confesses, that Suarez in Thom.
Aqui. p. 3. q. 52. art. 8. disp. 43.. 1. Me lina dicit a iquos Catholicos
sensisse Chriflu^passu^ esse aliquas extrinsecas poenas da^na^^^^ in inferno.
some Catholics, as he calls them, have thought the same, namely, that
Christ suffered some extrinsecall pains of the damned in hell: and how nearly
Thomas Aquinas comes thereto, we have seen before. The last construction,
which above all other he names ridiculous, is their very own, and he leaudly
belieth the Protestants, in that he attributes it to the most of them,
namely, that Christ's going to Paradise, is meant by his descending into hell.
They say, that the soul of Christ went immediately to Abraham's bosom, as being
a part of hell, there to continue till his resurrection. But yet he says to
the thief, Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. It must needs be therefore by
their opinion, that Abraham's bosom must be Paradise, and so that Christ's
descending into hell imports, that he went to Paradise, which if it be to
expound a thing by the flat contrary of it, let him thank his own for the
folly of it: as for us we have nothing to do with it. There remains after
all these the common received opinion of our church, that the soul of Christ
being departed from the body, as the letter of the text imports, went to
hell, as a King into the prison, not to be holden in it, but to declare his
power and command over it; to bid Satan defiance in his own kingdom, and upon
his own ground, and in himself to carry away, by way of spoil, all them
whose person and cause he had undertaken, and whom he had, by the grace of his
foreknowledge and election, made members of himself.

10. W. BISHOP.
6. Concerning Christ's resurrection, they do also err. For whereas a
resurrection is the rising up of the very same body that died, with all his
natural parts: they deny Christ to have taken again the same blood, which he
shed in his passion; Call. in 27. Math. Perkins page 194. In. ca. 24. Lucae,
and yet is the blood one notable part of the body. Calvin also affirms it to
be an old wives dream, to think that in Christ's hands and feet there remain
the print of nails, and the wound in his side, notwithstanding that Christ
showed them to his Disciples, and offered them to be touched of Saint Thomas.

7. About Christ's ascension into heaven, they do somewhat dissent from the
truth. For some of them say, that Christ's body did not pearce through the
heavens by virtue of a glorious body (lest they should thereby be compelled to
grant, that two natural bodies may be together in one place, and therefore as
well one true body in two places at once) but that broad gappes were made in
the lower heavens, to make him way to the highest, which is very ridiculous,
and more against true Philosophy: they say also, 1 Cor. 15. verse. 21. Coll.
1.18. Beza. inc. 2. Actorum L. 1. ar. 25. de concor. Caluinist.
that he was not the first man that entered into the possession of heaven; which
is flat against the Scriptures, that call Christ the first fruits and first
begotten of the dead. Thirdly, they lock Christ so closely up in heaven, that
they hold it impossible for him to remove thence at any time before the last
judgment (for fear they should otherwise be enforced to confess, that his
body may be in two places at once) which is to make him not Lord of the place,
but some poor prisoner therein. And as for Christ's sitting one the right hand
of his Father, they are not yet agreed what it signifies. See Conrad. L. 2.
Insti. c. 14 ss. 3.
Calvin plainly says, that after the latter judgment he shall sit there no
longer. That God shall then render to every man according to his works (as
holy Scripture very often does testify) all the pack of them does utterly
deny.

R. ABBOT.
I do not know any of our writers that denies, Christ in his resurrection
resumed his blood again.
but that Christ in his resurrection by his almighty power, resumed his blood
again. He quoteth M. Calvin and M. Perkins, affirming the contrary, but I
could not find that which he mentions of them. For my part I resolve; that
if any of them, or any other have said so, they have erred therein, because I
believe that it is true, both of the whole and every part of the body of
Christ, which David says; Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Saint Austin resolves,
that Aug. de. ciu. Dei. lib. 22. ca. 19. Non quod existime^ corpori cuiquam
periturum quod naturaliter inerat.
of our bodies there shall nothing perish that is naturally belonging thereto,
and groundeth upon the words of Christ, that Ibid. cap. 14. and 20 Luke 21.18.
not a hair of our head shall perish. If then it be so in our bodies, much
more are we so to conceive of the body of Christ, that nothing at all
perished, that did belong to the substance of it. As for the now remaining of
the print of the nails, in the hands and feet of Christ, and of the wound in
his side, M. Bishop can give no reason why Calvin might not well account it an
old wives dream. For whereas he alleges, that Christ after his resurrection
did show the same to his Disciples, it may well be answered, that so Christ
after his resurrection, did eat and drink with his Disciples, and yet it does
not follow, that therefore now Christ does eat and drink. Both these Saint
Austin holds to be of like use, to give to his Disciples assurance of his
resurrection; whereas now there is no such use, and therefore no reason of the
remaining of them. August. de. ciui dei. lib. 22. cap. 19. Quando ille a suis
ita deberet attendi vt p^ss^t agnosci Quo pertinuit etiam vt contrectantibus
ostenderet suorum vulnerum cicatrices, vt etiam cibum potumque sumeret; non
alimentorum indigentia, sed ea qua et hoc poterat potestate.
He was so to be seen of them, says he, as that he might be known. Thereto
it served, that to them handling him, he showed the skarres of his wounds, as
also, that he did eat and drink, not for want of food, but by that power
whereby he could so do at his own pleasure. But of Christ ascending he says;
August. in Psalm. 23. Contrecta cicatrices and senties reparatas and
immortalitati redditam humanam infirmitatem. The heavens gave way to Christ's
body in his ascension.
Handle his skarres, and thou shall perceive them to be repaired, and that
humane infirmity is restored to immortality. That in the ascension of Christ,
the heavens opened way and passage to his body we believe, and that necessarily
it was so, because Christ had a true body, which was glorified in taking
possession of heaven, where is the place of glory; albeit in the glorifying of
it, August epi. 57. Cui profecto immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulit.
he gave it immortality, but took not from it the nature of a body, so that,
Ibid. sub finem. In aliquo cali loco propter very corporis modum.
it is in some certain place of heaven, because of the condition of a true
body. Thus Saint Austin says that he ascended, Idem in Psalm. 23. Patefactis
sibi caelestibus.
the heavens being made open for him. So where the Psalm says, Lift up your
heads, O ye gates; Saint Hierome says, that Hieron. in Psalm. 23. Ipse dominus
nunc regna caelestia repetens nunciatur. etc. Tollite portas. etc. Hoc est,
reserate caelestes aditus, pateat aeternalis ingressus.
thereby is set forth Christ ascending to heaven and expounds the words thus;
Open ye the entrances of heaven, let the everlasting entry be set open. As for
M. Bishops foolish Philosophy we regard it not in this case; we would know of
him by his Philosophy how Saint Steven said, Act. 7.56.
Behold I see the heavens open, and the Son of man slanding at the right hand
of God. We wish him to remember, that in the measuring of matters of faith by
rules of Philosophy, Tertullian says, that Tertul. adu. Hermog. Philosophi
haereticorum patriarch.
Philosophers were the Patriarchs of heretics; the Apostle therefore giving
warning, Col. 2.18.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, through
the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not
according to Christ. We ask him again, how it stands with his Philosophy,
that 2. Kin. 2.11.
Elias in a whirlewind ascended into heaven. We believe that the heavens
yielded him way to go through; and M. Bishop will not say that he had as yet a
glorified body to go otherwise. What he will affirm otherwise, The souls of
the faithful in heaven before Christ's incarnation.
let him prove it, or else he shall not find us very hasty to believe it. Now
that Elias ascended into heaven, the text plainly affirms, as I have
alleged, and therefore we believe undoubtedly that he did so. The same Elias
with Moses, Luke 9.31.
appeared unto Christ in glory, and to his Disciples, which glory they could
not bring with them from the Popish Limbus patrum, and therefore we cannot
doubt but they brought it with them from heaven. We cannot doubt therefore, but
that the souls of the faithful that died before the incarnation of Christ
were received into heaven. For as by the faith of Christ's death and
resurrection, they were acquitted from hell, even so do we believe, that by the
faith of Christ's ascension, they were received to heaven. And of faith the
Apostle tells us, that Heb. 11.1.
it is the subsistence of things hoped for, the demonstration or evidence of
things which are not seen, to which in effect and after a sort, the things
are, which yet indeed are not. By faith Abraham so long before John 8.56.
saw the day of Christ, and was glad thereof. To faith Christ was Revel. 13.8.
the lamb slain from the beginning of the world. To faith therefore Christ
from the beginning of the world was ascended into heaven, because they so
believed in him as if he were already ascended. In effect then, Christ was the
first that ascended into heaven, because no other ascended, but by the faith of
his ascension. As for the places cited by M. Bishop, they make nothing to the
contrary, as which belong properly to the question of the resurrection of the
dead, to signify, that Christ is the first that Romans 6.9.
rose from death, to die no more, and in whom all the rest shall so rise again:
but as touching the state of the souls departed, it proves nothing. As
touching the being of Christ in heaven, Christ until his second coming
abides in heaven only.
we teach nothing but what he himself has taught. If M. Bishop will call it,
a locking of him in heaven, it is not we that lock him, but he himself has
locked himself, who has told us, that John 12 8.
we shall not have him always with us; that Acts 3.21.
heaven must contain him until the time that all things be fulfilled, which
God has spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began; Heb.
10.12.13.
that he is at the right hand of God, henceforth expecting or waiting till his
foes be made his footestoole. To affirm then, that Christ is in heaven only,
and not upon the earth; and that he so abides until the time that he shall
come again to judge the quick and the dead, is not to lock up Christ in
heaven, but to justify the words of Christ. They may rather be said to lock
up Christ, who of their own heads, so tie him by the words of the Priest, as
it were by a charm, to their consecrated host, as that See the Answer to the
Epest. sect. 14.
so long as the form of bread continues, he may by no means be released,
though he pass by the stomach into the draught, though he be eaten by mice,
or dogs, or swine, though he be cast into the dirt, and teach it to be
heresy to affirm the contrary. Of the meaning of Christ's sitting at the right
hand of his father, I know no difference at all, but that all acknowledge it to
import the exaltation of the humane nature of Christ to the communion and
fellowship of the majesty and glory of God, so as that all creatures both in
heaven and earth are made subject unto him. He refers us to Conrad, some
wizard or other; but if that which Conrad says, be not worth his reporting,
we hold it not worth our seeking, nor list to look after every fool which
will suck fancies out of his fingers ends, and then make us the authors of
them. As for that which Calvin says, How Christ shall continue or cease to sit
at the right hand of God.
that after the last judgment, Christ shall no longer sit at the right hand of
God, in that meaning wherein he speaks it, it is very true, not for that
there shall be absolutely any end of his kingdom, which the Angel says Luke
1.33.
shall continue for ever, and shall have no end, but he shall thenceforth
reign only in personal union with the Godhead, who now reigns by delegated
office, John 5.22.27.
having all judgment committed unto him, in that he is the Son of man. For
we must understand, that God who rules and governs the world, yet does it
not now immediately by himself, but uses thereto the ministry and service of
men and Angels, and performs all things by means. But for the execution of
this government, he has specially exalted his son, even the man Jesus
Christ, in whose obedience and humbling of himself, he took that delight, as
that as it were in hew thereof, he would set him up, according to his humane
nature, Ephe. 1.21.
far above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might, and Dominion, and above
every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that that is to come,
Mat. 28.18.
giving unto him, in special manner, all power both in heaven and in earth;
that as he had purchased the church with his precious blood, so for the behoof
of the church, he might have a sovereignty and dominion over all creatures to
limit their power, to determine their courses, to command, or compel their
service, to do by them and with them, whatsoever is to be done, till he fully
and for ever accomplish the perfection thereof. Which being done, and the end
come, and all rule and authority and power abolished, there shall be a
cessation of that commission, because there shall be no further use thereof; 1.
Cor. 15.24.
he shall deliver up the kingdom to God the father, and with us according to
his manhood, shall be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that
God may be all in all. Not for that he is not now according to his manhood
subject to the father, but he is now in such sort subject, as that for the
father in his manhood, he exercises a kingdom of power for the confusion of
his enemies, and preserving of his from the force of them. Not for that he
shall not then also reign for ever God and man, but he shall not reign in
that sort as man, because all adversary power being utterly abolished and for
ever, there shall be no need of such a kingdom, his reigning being
thencefoorth the enjoying of them, whom he has redeemed and purchased; not the
rescuing or defending of them. And thus does Saint Austin set down from some
ancients, a stinting of the kingdom of Christ as now he reigns; August. lib.
83. q 69. Oportet eum regnare donceponat omnes inimicos suos sub peaibus suis,
qu^a talis regni quale habent principes armatorum nulla exit causa, host ita
subiecto vt rebellare non possit. Nam vtique dictum est in Euangelio, Et regni
cius non erit finis, secundum quod regnat in aeternum; secundum autem^d quod
aduersus diabolum sub eo militatur, tamdiu erit vtique ista militia donec
ponat, etc. postea vero non erit, cum pace perpetua perfruemur.
He must reign till he put all his enemies under his feet, because there shall
be no cause of such a kingdom, as have Princes or Captains of armed men,
when the enemy shall be so subdued as that he cannot rebel; for it is said
indeed in the Gospel, Of his kingdom there shall be no end, according to that
he reigns for ever; but according to that we war under him against the
devil, so long shall this warfare be, till he put all his enemies under his
feet; afterward it shall not be, when as we shall enjoy everlasting peace.
Thus and no otherwise does Calvin say, that Christ's sitting at the right hand
of God is but for a time, because the end of his sitting is for the subduing of
his enemies, which thencefoorth shall be none; and for the bringing of us to
God, who then shall perfectly and immediately be joined unto God, 1. Cor. 13.12.
to see face to face, and to know even as we are known, August. de Trin. lib.
1. ca. 10. Vt iam non interpellet pro nobis Mediator and Sacerdos noster filius
Dei and filius hominis, sed and ipse in quantum Sacerin est, assumpta propter
nos serui forma, subiectus sit ei qui illi subiecit omnia vt in quant is Deus
^^t cum illo nos subiectos habeat; in quantum Sacerdos nobiscum illi subiectus
sit.
so as that our Mediator and Priest, the son of God, and the son of man,
shall no further make intercession for us, says S. Austin, but he also as our
Priest, having taken for us the form of a servant, shall be subject to him,
who has subdued to him all things, that as he is God, he may have us subject
together with himself (as man,) and as our Priest, may with us be subject to
himself (as God;) the kingdom thencefoorth to abide, not in the manhood of
Christ, as now it does, but in the Godhead, that God, as the Apostle says, may
be all in all. For conclusion of this section, M. Bishop adds; That God shall
then render unto every man according to his works, all the pack of them does
utterly deny. But M. Bishop, you should for example have named one; you should
have quoted some place, where either in common or private judgment this
denial is set down. Gods rendering according to works proves no merit.
If you can bring none, what a shame is it, for a man of your degree and
profession, thus wilfully to lie, and to wrong them that have done no wrong to
you? The Scripture indeed has taught it, as he alleges, and we believe, and
so preach to all men, that Romans 2.6.
God shall render unto every man according to his works. We give warning with
the Apostle, Gal. 6.7.
that no man deceive himself; for whatsoever a man sows, the same shall he
reap. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit re^pe everlasting life. We teach
by the word of Christ, that John 5.28.
the hour shall come when all that are in their graves shall hear his voice,
and shall come forth; they that have done good, to the resurrection of life;
and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. And yet we
teach withal, that we are Romans 3.24.25.
justified freely by the grace of God, throuh faith in the blood of Christ; and
that God does save us, not for any merits of ours, but only for his mercies
sake. Can he not tell how these two may stand to gether? Let him learn then of
Gregory Bishop of Rome, who propounds the question, and answers it; Gregor.
in Psalm. paenitent. 7. Si illa sanctorum foelicitas misericordia est and non
meritis acquiritur, vbi erit quod scriptum est, Et tu reddes vnicuique secundum
opera sua? si secundum opera redditur, quomodo misericordia aestimabitur? sed
aliud est secundum opera reddere, aliud propter ipsa opera reddere. In eo enim
quod secundum opera dicitur ipsa operum qualitas intelligitur, vt cuius
apparuerint hona op^r^, eius sit and retributio glori^sai^^ namque heatae vitae
in qua cum deo and de deo v^^i ur nullus potest aequari labor, nulla opera
compara^i, praesertim cum Apostolus dicat, Non sunt condignae passiones, etc.
If the bliss of the Saints be mercy, and be not purchased or gotten by
merits, how shall that stand which is written; Thou shall render unto every one
according to his works? If it be rendered according to works, how shall it be
esteemed mercy? But it is one thing, says he, to render according to works;
another thing to render for the works sake. For when it is said, according to
works, the quality it self of the works is considered, that whose works
appear good, his reward may be glorious. For to that blessed life where we are
to live with God, and of God himself, no labor or pains can be equalled, no
works may be compared, for that the Apostle says, that the sufferings of this
time are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed upon us.
Notwithstanding then that God do render to every many cccording to his works,
yet the doctrine of merits, which M. Bishop would build thereupon is excluded;
because our good works, though they be sufficient as marks to distinguish us
from others, yet they are not sufficient to obtain salvation for us; yea, as
Of Justification sect. 49.
elsewhere has been declared out of Gregory, if God should in strict
judgment examine the defects and blemishes of them, they should therein be
sufficient to condemn us. Whatsoever they are, they are not our own but Gods
works in us, and August. de great. and. lib arbit. cap 7. Si dei dona sunt bona
merita tua, non deus cororat merita tua tanquam merita tua, sed tanqua^ dona
sua.
when he shall crown them, he shall crown them, not as our merits, but as his
own gifts, as S. Austin says.

11. W. BISHOP.
8. I believe in the holy Ghost. First, Calvin and his followers (who hold the
holy Ghost to have the Godhead of himself, and not to have received it from
the Father and the Son) must consequently deny the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father and the Son, In the Preface. In cap. 6. and. 17. Isa. and in
16. Marc.
as has been elsewhere proved. Secondly, they make him much inferior unto
the other persons: for they teach in their French Catechismes, that the Father
alone is to be adored in the name of the Son. And Calvin against Gentil
says, that the title of creator belongs only to the Father: and elsewhere,
that the Father is the first degree and cause of life, and the Son the
second. And that the In 26. Math. v. 64.
Father holds the first rank of honor and government, and the Son the
second; where the holy Ghost is either quite excluded from part with the Father
and the Son, or at most, must be content with the third degree of honor.

R. ABBOT.
As touching the Frst point, he refers his Reader to the Preface, and there
it is already answered. That which Calvin says, is namely concerning the
second person in Trinity, the Son of God. M. Bishop by consequence draws it
to the third person, the holy Ghost. The objection then, or rather the slander,
being cleared, as touching the Son, is consequently cleared concerning the
holy Ghost. His second cavil is, The holy Ghost not made inferior to the
Father and the Son.
that we make the holy Ghost much inferior to the other persons. And how may
that appear? Marry in their French Catechismes they teach, says he, that the
Father alone is to be adored in the name of his son. But what? because they
say, the Father alone, must they needs be taken to exclude the holy Ghost?
Has he not so much divinity as to know that the name of the Father, is
sometimes used for distinction of persons, sometimes indefinitely of God,
without any such distinction? When our Savior says, Matt. 23.9.
One is your Father, who is in heaven, does not the name of Father there,
extend to God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost? Does it not so also,
where the Apostel says, Ephesians. 4 6.
There is one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all. Does M. Bishop otherwise understand it, when he says, Our Father
which art in heaven? Surely the French Catechism may say as he rereporteth,
(who yet seldom reports truth) and yet import nothing thereby, but what
Origin says Christians of old did, namely Origin. cont. Cells. ^.8. Christiani
soli Deo per Iesum preces offerentes.
to offer prayers to God only by Jesus, or in the name of Jesus. The next cauil
against Calum is of the same kind, that the title of Creator belongs only to
the Father. Which M. Bishop might well have understood, in the distinction of
the persons by their several attributes, as Calu. Opus in Explicat. perfidiae
Valent. G^ntil. Certe vn^ consensu fatemur Christum improprie vocari creatorem
coeli and terrae quoad personae distinctionem. Neque enim dubium est quin
seriptura patri nomen Creatoris vendicans personas distinguat.
Calvin sets it down to be very true; and the rather, for that in the very
articles of the Creed he finds it so applied; I believe in God, the Father
almighty, maker of heaven and earth. For although it be true, which S. Austin
oftentimes delivers, that August de praedest. sanctor. cap. 8. Inseparabilia
dicimus ^sse opera Trinitatis.
the works of the Trinity are inseparable, and in the act of any of the
persons is the concurrence of all; yet they so concur, as that they retain
therein their several proprieties, so as that of several actions arise
several denominations; which in common phrase of speech are used as in some
specialty belonging to one person rather than another. As therefore we
attribute it to the son alone to have redeemed us, and to the holy Ghost
alone to sanctify us, albeit both the Father and the holy Ghost, had their
work in our redemption; and the Father and the Son have their work also in
sanctifying us; even so to the Father alone, the title of Creator is applied,
not but that the Son and the holy Ghost have their work in the creation, but
because, Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 8. Dicimus immediatum opifice^ esse fi^um dei
verbum. etc. Ver^ aut^m patrem, curus mandato mundu^ sit per ipsum filium
conditus, esse primarium opincem.
the Father is the primary or principal worker, as Origin says, at whose
commandment the world was created by the Son, and Hilar. de Synod adu. Aria.
Si suis vnum dicens deum, Christum autem deum ante secula filium dei obsecutum
patri in creatione omnium non confitetur, anathema sit.
wherein, as the Syrmian Council says, and Hilary approoueth, the Son did
obedience to the Father. As for the rest that he here quarelleth at, that the
Father is called the first degree and cause of life, and the Son the second;
and again, that the father holds the first rank of honor and government,
and the son the second; not to question the truth of his allegations, I would
in a word ask his wisdom, does he that says, that the Father is the first
person in Trinity, and the Son the second, deny thereby the holy Ghost to be
the third? or does he hereby exclude the holy Ghost from having part with the
Father and the Son? Does the Apostle when in his epistles he says, Romans 1 7.
1. Cor. 1.3. et in reliq.
Grace and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ; does he,
I say, exclude hereby the holy Ghost from being the author of grace and
peace, or from having part with the Father and the Son? Or when he says; 2.
Cor. 1.3. Ephe 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, does he deny the
Son and the holy Ghost to be blessed and praised together with the Father? If
he do not, why then does this idle headed Sophister thus take exception, where
there is nothing for him justly to except against? Forsooth at most, says he,
the holy Ghost must be content with the third degree of honor. But what, M.
Bishop; do not you also place the holy Ghost in the third degree, when you
name him the third person? Does not your head serve you to understand degree of
order only, without imparity or minority, as all Divines in this case are wont
to do? But why do I thus contend with a blind buzzard, a wilful and ignorant
wrangler, and not rather reject him as a man worthy to be altogether contemned
and derided? He has Preface to the Reader. sect. 7.
before cited the latter of these words, to show that Calvin made the Son of
God inferior to the Father, but how leaudly he deals in the alleging of it,
and to how small purpose, it is there declared, and there is no cause here to
speak thereof.

12. W. BISHOP.
9. one.
I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints. First, where as
there is but on Catholic church, as the Council of Nice expressly defines
following sundry texts of the word of God; they commonly teach that there be
two churches: one invisible of the elect; another visible of both good and bad.
holy.
Secondly, they imagine it to be holy, by the imputation of Christ's holiness
to the elected Brethren, and not by the infusion of the holy Ghost into the
hearts of all the faithful. Catholic.
Thirdly, they cannot abide the name Catholic in the true sense of it: that
is, they will not believe the true Church, to have been always visibly extant
since the Apostles time, and to have been generally spread into all countries;
otherwise they must needs forsake their own church, which began with Friar
Luther, and is not received generally in the greatest part of the Christian
world. Finally, they believe no Church, no not their own in all points of
faith: but hold that the true Church may err in some principal points of
faith. How then can any man safely rely his salvation, upon the credit of
such an uncertain ground and erring guide? may they not then as well say that
they do not believe the one Catholic Church: because they do as well not
believe it, as believe it? And as for the communion of Saints, their learned
Masters do commonly cassier it out of the Creed, and that not without cause.
For by the Saints understanding (as the Apostles did) all good Christans
whether alive or departed this world, they that deny prayer to Saints, and for
the souls in Purgatory, have reason to reject the common society and enter
course that is between the Saints, and the mutual honor and help which such
good Christian souls do yield and afford one to another.

R. ABBOT.
The holy Catholic church which we believe in the Creed, being the communion
of Saints, is only one, The Catholic Church only one.
which is the body of Christ, whereof all the faithful are members, being
joined into this society by one spirit. Visible and Invisible, being but
circumstances, cannot argue any multiplication of the church, because the
invisible church imports all them, and them only, who are the true members in
their time of the visible church. For in the visible church, the name of the
church properly belongs to them only, who live by faith and by the spirit of
Christ; the rest are not members, but August. in 1 Joan. epist. tract. 3. Sic
sunt in corpore Christi quomodo humores mali.
as evil humors in the body, which wait their time to be purged out. In the
mean time, because all profess to seek Christ and to serve him, and our eyes
cannot distinguish betwixt them that truly do so, and them that do not,
therefore visibly and to us all go together under the name of the church,
though many there be hypocrites and time seruers, who with God and to his sight
are no part thereof. So then the church visible and invisible, in substance are
the same, they differ only in respect; and M. Bishop knows that respects
change not the natures of things; and therefore those different respects do
nothing hinder, but that the church in nature is always one. As touching the
holiness of the church, M. Bishop. in the delivering of our opinion keeps
his wont. He says, The holiness of the church imputative and real.
that we imagine it to be holy, by the imputation of Christ's holiness to the
elected brethren, and not by the infusion of the holy Ghost into the hearts of
all the faithful: Whereas we do not imagine only, but by the word of God
believe and know, that the church, and all the members thereof are holy, not
only iudicially, by the imputation of Christ's holiness, but also really by the
infusion of the holy Ghost, begun in this life by Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit, and fully to be perefected when the promise of
Christ shall be fullfilled; Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be
satisfied. Again, he excepteth against us, that we cannot abide the name
Catholic in the true sense of it. Of the true sense of the name Catholic.
But what is that true sense? That is, says he, they will not believe the
true church to have been always visibly extant since the time of the
Apostles. But what ancient father did ever set this down for the true sense of
the name Catholic? If any, let him be brought forth. If none, why does he
contrary to his own prescription introduce a new exposition of an article of
our belief? Cyril in his Catechism, brings in all the meanings of the name
Catholic that he could learn, that the church is so called, for that Cyril.
Hierosci. Catechis. 18. Illuminat. Catholica vocatur quia per vntuersum sit
or^em terrarum diffusa etc. Et quia doret Catholice, hoc est, vniuersaliter and
sine vllo defectu vel differentia omnia dogmata quae deberent venire in
cognitionem, etc Et quod omne genus hominum ipe subiugat; et quia in vniuersum
curat omne genus peccatorum etc. hab turque in illa omne genus virtutis. etc.
it is universally spread through the whole world; for that it teaches
universally all doctrines that are to be known; for that it subiecteth to it
alkinde of men for that it heals all kind of sins; for that it has in it
all kind of virtues: but of M. Bishops meaning, that it should be always
visibly extant, he had learned nothing. Surely S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Hexaem
lib. 3. cap. 2. Ecclesia habet tempora sua persecutionis and pacis. videtur
sicut luna deficere, sed non deficit; obumbrari potest, deficere non potest.
The church has her times of persecution and peace, it seems as the Moon to
fail, but it fails not; it may be ouershadowed, but utterly fail it cannot.
If the church may be as the Moon, so ouershadowed by persecution, as not to be
seen, then it is not necessary to be always visibly extant; and if that be
not necessary, then M. Bishop has played here the false merchant to tell us,
that the church is therefore called Catholic, because it is always visibly
extant. Albeit there is somewhat also to be observed concerning the name of the
true church, that we may speak to that time of the visibility of the church
which M. Bishop specially intends. For if we call that the true Church which
truly has the outward vocation and calling of the church, then we deny not
but that the church, in the time of Antichrist must be and has been always
visibly extant, because Antichrist was to possess and has possessed the
visible state of the church. But if by the true church, we mean those members
of the church which are truly correspondent to the vocation and calling of the
church in faith and obedience unto God, then the true church is not always
visible, because the greater part being the worse does many times oppress the
better and weaker part, and proudly carrying it self in the opinion and
confidence of it self, persecuteth and drives into corners all them that
gainesay their traditions and wilworships, which by their own authority they
establish to delude thereby and frustrate the word of God. And thus we say,
that the true church, in the time of the exaltation of Antichrist was in a sort
invisible, the public state of the church yielding it self in thraldom to
his tyranny, and persecuting the true members of the church, who disclaiming
his obedience sought to keep themselves entire, and faithful unto God.
Whereas he further adds for the notation of the name Catholic, that the
church was so called as being generally spread into all countries, we willingly
acknowledge the same, as being before acknowledged by the ancient church, and
defended against the Donatists, who by other expositions sought to draw the
name unto themselves, as the Papists now do. Only we add that caution which
Bellarmine himself has delivered, as necessary for himself, that Beliarm. de
notis eccles. cap. 7. Si solae vna prouincia retineret veram fidem, adhuc vere
and proprie diceretur ecclesia Catholica, dummodo clare ostenderetur eam esse
vnam and eandem cum illa quae fuit aliquo tempore vel diuersis in toto mundo.
if one only country should retain the true faith, yet the same should truly
and properly be called the Catholic church, so that it might clearly be
showed to be one and the same, with that which has been at any time or times
over the whole world. For by this rule nothing hinders but that our church,
though now it be not received generally in the greatest part of the Christian
world, yea if it were but in one only country, yet may truly and properly be
called the Catholic church, if it be proved to be one and the same with the
church, which at any time heretofore was spread over all the world. But that
our church is the same with that, which at the first was spread thorowout the
world, it is very evident, as Tertullian teaches us to prescribe Tert. de
praescript. adu. haeret. In eadem fide conspirantes non minus Apostolicae
deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae.
by consanguinity or agreement of our doctrine, with the doctrine of that
church. For by the Gospel which the Apostles preached, the church was founded
thorowout the whole world. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Quod quidem tunc
praeconiauerunt, postea per dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum.
The gospel which the Apostles preached they afterward by the will of God
delivered to us in the Scriptures to be the foundation and pillar of our faith.
The same Gospel delivered to us in the Scriptures we receive; we add nothing
to it, we take nothing from it; as we find it, so we teach it. Our faith
therefore is the same with the faith of that church, which at the first was
planted thorowout the whole world. There is no cause then for us to forsake our
own church, or to think that the same began with Friar Luther, as this
dreamer imagines, which by so plain deduction is approved to be the same
with the first church, and consequently to be truly and properly the Catholic
Church. Finally, says he, they believe no church in all points of faith. But
does his wisdom find it in the articles of the Creed that we are to believe
any church in all points of faith? The church how far to be believed in
points of faith.
We are taught there to believe that there is a holy catholic Church, which is
the communion of Saints: but nothing do we find there of believing any Church
in all points of faith. We believe the Church in points of faith, so far as
she yields herself like a faithful and obedient spouse to be guided by the
voice of her Lord and husband Jesus Christ. But if the Church prefer her own
will before the word of Christ, as the proud harlot of Rome does, it should be
a wrong to Christ to believe the Church, and a way to set up humane error in
stead of divine truth. It is not the voice of the Church, but the word of the
written Gospel which God has appointed, as Irenaeus even now has told us, to
be the foundation and pillar of our faith. For the words of the Church are many
times the words of error and untruth; and therefore if we should rely our
salvation upon the credit thereof, we should indeed rely upon an uncertain
ground and erring guide; but the word of the Gospel is always one and the
same, without any variableness or uncertainty, and therefore safely may we
rely our salvation thereupon. Now therefore it cannot be said, but that we
always believe one holy catholic Church, according to the profession of faith
specified in the Creed, though sometimes and in some things we do not believe,
that is, credit the visible Church as touching points of faith, because the
Church sometimes teaches us to believe otherwise than God has taught. Which
though it seem strange to M. Bishop in that language which he has learned to
speak, yet to us it is not strange, who in the Canonical histories of the
Churches both of the old and new Testament do so often see them diuerting and
turning from the right way. As for that he says, that our learned masters do
commonly cashiere out of the Creed the addition of the communion of saints, it
is but a fruit of the harnessing of his face, and he is therefore bold to say
it, because he has learned not to be ashamed of any thing that he list to say.
That by the Saints are there meant al good Christians, all the faithful,
whether alive or dead, we will not deny; Communion of Saints implies neither
Purgatory nor prayer to saints.
but that either prayer to saints, or prayer for souls in purgatory, belong
to this communion of Saints, we never yet learned, and are too old to learn it
now. For as for the Saints in heaven Aug. de vera relig. cap 55. Honoramus eos
charitate, non seruitute: honorandi propter imitationem, non propter religionem
adorandi.
We honor them with love, as Austin says, but not with service; to follow
them by imitation, not to adore them by religion, and therefore not to pray
unto them. Further intercourse as yet there is none betwixt them and us,
because Esaias 63.16.
they know us not, nor are acquainted with us, nor can we any way acquaint them
what we say unto them. Now beside the Saints triumphant in heaven, we
acknowledge none but those that are militant upon the earth, because the holy
Ghost divides the whole body of the Church into Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 1.20.
those that are in heaven, and those that are in earth, and pronounces them
all Reu. 14.13.
blessed that are dead in Christ, as who rest from labors and sorrows, and
thereby are discharged from all Purgatory pains. But if there be any souls
in Purgatory, to which all good Christian souls should yield and afford
their help to do them ease, and this be one matter of the intercourse and
communion of Gods Saints, why does the Pope violate the communion of Saints, by
withholding from those tormented souls that help and ease which he is able to
afford them. Surely, if he cannot do them ease, then is he an impudent liar,
and a notable impostour and cozener of the world. If he can do it, then is he a
cruel wretch that without compassion suffers poor souls to lie broiling in
those fiery flames. But we rather approve the former member of this division,
and take him for a liar, both for that without warrant he thrusts in
Purgatory into the articles of our faith, and with less warrant challenges
the same for a jurisdiction to himself.

13. W. BISHOP.
10 The forgiveness of sins. It is not easy to find what is their settled
opinion, touching theforgiuenesse of original sin in Infants. Some attribute
it to Baptism; but that cannot stand with their common doctrine, that
Sacraments have no virtue in them to remit sins, or to give grace. Others
say, that God without any means does then, when they be baptized, of himself
immediately justify them. But that cannot stand in their own doctrine,
because Infants want the instrument of faith to lay hold on that (...) then
offered by God, and therefore cannot, being so young, take it unto them. Others
will have Infants sanctified in their mothers womb, by virtue of a covenant,
which they suppose God to have made with old father Abraham, and all his
faithful servants, that (forsooth) their seed shall be holy. But this is most
fantastical, and contrary to the Scriptures and daily experience: for Isaac
was the son of promise, and yet Esau his son was areprobate; David's father
was a godly Israelite, and yet David affirms, Psalm. 51.
that he himself was conceived in iniquities; and we may see whole Countries
now turned Turks, whose ancestors were good Christians: therefore not all the
souls of the faithful are sanctified in their mothers wombes. Secondly, how
evil soever they agree about the remission of sin; yet there is a perfect
consent among them, that such relikes of original sin remain in every man
baptized and sanctified, that it infecteth all and every work he does, with
deadly sin: yea that which remains is properly sin in it self, though it
be not imputed to the party; so that sin is always in them, though their
sins be never so well forgiven. And as for the Sacrament of Penance, by which
we hold all sins committed after Baptism to be forgiven; they do renounce
the benefit of it, and are at utter defiance with it.

R. ABBOT.
If we were as full of differences in our doctrine as M. Bishops head is full
of idle fancies, it should be hard indeed to find any settled opinion amongst
us, whereas now our opinion being settled, he out of sundry terms and words
that are used in the expressing thereof, dreameth of great difference and
uncertainty amongst us. Original sin how it is forgiven to Infants.
The matter is concerning the forgiveness of original sin in Infants. Some,
says he, attribute it to baptism. And whom, I marvel, does he know that does
otherwise? Who of us does not acknowledge baptism to be Gods instrument for
the actual application of that grace which he has intended toward us in
Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the world? which notwithstanding has
his effect, not by the very work wrought, or by any virtue infused into the
water, or by any power given to the very words and syllables that are
pronounced, but by the assisting power of the holy Ghost, accompanying the
outward Sacrament to give grace and forgiveness of sins, not indifferently
or generally, but Romans 4.5, vulgat. Ephesians. 1.5.9
according to the purpose of the grace of God. Now of this that we say, that
it is the holy Ghost which in baptism works the effect of grace, he out of
the abundance of his wit frames another opinion, which with us is no other but
only the explication of the former. As for his exception, that children have
not the instrument of faith to lay hold on the grace of God which is offered in
baptism, it avails nothing, because children are brought to baptism, though
not in their own faith, whereof they are incapable; yet in the faith of their
parents, who apprehending the promise of God according to the tenor thereof,
both for Genesis 17.7.
themselves and for their children, do thereby derive and transport unto them
an interest in the grace of God, whereby they are sacred and holy unto God, and
are therefore by baptism to be received to be made partakers of that grace.
Here again M. Bishop imagines a third opinion, whereas still there is
nothing said but what is dependant upon the first. And this third opinion he
delivers according to his own absurd conceit thereof, and not according to
that that by us is intended. We say nothing but what the Scripture has taught
us, that 1. Cor. 7.14. Children of faithful parents how understood holy.
the children of faithful parents are holy. He betwixt his pride and
ignorance, will take no knowledge that the Scripture so speaks, thereby to
give a true sense and meaning of that it says, but scornefully derideth it,
and out of his own distempered brains brings a foolish reason to dispute
against it. This is most fantastical, says he, and contrary to the
Scriptures and daily experience. And how so? Forsooth Isaac was the son of
promise, and yet Esau his son was a reprobate, and many children of
Christians afterward become Turks: Therefore the children of the faithful
are not sanctified in their mothers womb. But did not his eyes see that out of
his own doctrine a man might by the same argument overthrow the sanctification
of baptism also? for in like sort a man may say; The children of many
faithful become reprobates and castwaies; therefore the children of the
faithful are not sanctified in baptism, which I suppose he will not admit.
Surely he knows that by the doctrine of their schools sanctification once
had may afterward be lost, and that many reprobates are for the time partakers
thereof. It is then no argument to say, that because many children of the
faithful are reprobates, therefore they were not sanctified in their mothers
womb, because, as he will say of them, who are sanctified in baptism; so it
may be answered him of them who are sanctified in their mothers womb, that by
apostasy they forgo that which by grace they had received. I speak not this
to affirm that sanctification which he imagines, but only to show him the
silliness of his argument whereby he impugneth it. His other instance as he
sets it down, is as weak as that; David's father was a godly Israelite, and
yet David affirms that he himself was conceived in iniquities. For though
David were conceived in iniquities, yet that lets not but that after his
conception he might be sanctified in his mothers womb. But we do not only
make him say that he was conceived in iniquity, but also that he was Psalm.
51.5.
borne in sin, even as we confess generally of all, that Aug. Enchir. ca.
33. Cum hac quippe (ira dei) omnis homo nascitur.
we are borne guilty of the wrath of God, Ephesians. 2.3.
the children of wrath; and that unless the grace of Christ do thencefoorth
relieve us, John. 3.36.
the wrath of God abides upon us. When therefore the Apostle says, that the
children of believing parents are holy, we do not thereby understand any
inward indowment or gift of holiness, but only that they are with us to be
holden and accounted as belonging unto God, and comprehended within his
covenant, that therefore we may not doubt but that the fellowship of the grace
of God, as God himself has ordained, is to be imparted unto them. We know
that many things by the law were called holy, which yet were not capable of
inward and spiritual holiness; and therefore albeit we say by the Apostles
phrase, that the children of the faithful are holy unto God, even from their
mothers womb; yet is there no necessity to understand this holiness of any
grace of inward regeneration, as they wilfully understand it; it being
sufficient both to the Apostles words, and to our meaning, that they be
reckoned as belonging to Gods household, partakers of his vocation and calling,
designed to his use, and in case to be made partakers of his holiness. That
the remainder of original sin is properly sin in the regenerate, and that it
infecteth and staineth all our good works, so as that it should prevail
against us to condemnation, save only that God imputes not the same unto us,
it has been at large before declared, and M. Bishop for shame should no more
gainesay it, till he have made good that, that there he has said against it.
As for his Sacrament of penance, we know it not. Repentance Christ has taught
us, but Sacrament of penance he has taught none, and therefore justly may we
leave it to them that have been the deuisers of it. For remission of sins,
which we commit after baptism, we look back always in our repentance to
baptism it self, where it was sealed unto us, not for the present only, but
for ever, that 1. Ioh. 2.2.
if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the propitiation for our sins.

14. W. BISHOP.
11 The resurrection of the bodies. Whether Farel the first Apostle of the
Geneuian Gospel doubted thereof or no, let his successor Calvin tell you, who
answers Farels letter thus: Epist. ad Farellum.
That the resurrection of this our flesh does seem to thee incredible, no
marvel, etc. Again, many of them teach that Christ took not his blood
again, which he shed upon the cross: yea, some of them are so graceless, as
to say; that his precious blood wherewith we were redeemed, Vide Conradum lib.
1. art. 20.
rotted away on the earth 1600. years ago. If then it be not necessary to a
true resurrection, to rise again with the same blood; why is it necessary to
rise again with the same bones and flesh, the one being as perfect a part of a
man's body as the other?

R. ABBOT.
The epistle wherein are the words mentioned by M. Bishop, importing a doubt of
the resurrection of the body, was not written to Farel, as he falsely quoteth,
but to one Calvin. epist. 103. Quod res tibi incredibilis videtur huius carnis
resurrectio, nihil miru^.
Lelius Zozimus an Italian, who seems to have been but meanly persuaded of
some other points of Christian doctrine. After two epistles to this Zozinus, in
the former whereof these words are, there follow two epistles to Farell. But
what drowsy fit was M. Bishop in to take Farels name from an epistle that
followed after, and by forgery to add it to the epistle that went before? But
this is one of the Romish holy frauds; whether true or false it skilleth not,
so that it be fit to serve the turn. What we think of Christ's resuming his
blood again, I have Sect. 10.
before showed. As for Conrades reports of the opinions of some of our men
concerning the same, they little move us without better testimony, because
we know what the guise of Romish Sycophants in that case is wont to be.

15. W. BISHOP.
12 Life everlasting. First, Captain Calvin holds it for very certain, that
no soul does enter into the joys of heaven (wherein consists life
everlasting) until the day of doom. These be his words: 3. Institu. 25. sess.
6.
The souls of the godly having ended the labor of this war-fare, do go into
a blessed rest, where they expect the enjoying of the promised glory: And that
all things are holden in suspense until Christ the redeemer appear. Whose
opinion is yet better than was his predecessor Luthers. For he teaches in many
places, Enarra. in Genesis cap. 26. In Ecclesi. c. 9. v. 10.
that the souls of the godly departing from their bodies, have no sense at
all, but do lie fast asleep until the latter day: Take this one for a taste.
Another place to prove, that the dead feel, or understand nothing: wherefore
Solomon thought the dead to be wholly asleep, and to perceive nothing at all.
And again, The sleep of the soul in the life to come, is more profound than
in this life. And Luther with this one position of his (as that famous
historiographer John Sleidan records) overthrew two points of Popery: to wit,
Lib. 9. hist.
praying to Saints: for they are so fast asleep, that they cannot hear us:
and praying for the dead; For they in Purgatory slept also so soundly, that
they felt no pains. A meet foundation surely to build such false doctrine
upon. In 20. Luc. hom. 35.
But Brentius is most plain in this matter, who ingeniously confesses; that,
albeit there were not many among them, that did profess publicly the souls
to die with the body; yet the most unclean life, which the greatest part of
their followers did lead, does clearly show, that in their hearts they think
no life to be after this: yea, that many such speeches do sometimes proceed
from them. Finally, it is a gross error of theirs, to think that every mean
godly man, shall be then made equal in glory with the Apostles, which Luther
teaches; whereas clean contrary S. Paul declares, In 1. c. Petri 1. 1. Cor.
15.42.
that as one star differs from another in glory: so also shall be the
resurrection of the dead.

I omit here many other particularities, that I be not over tedious: For these
their bickerings against the very principles of our Christian faith, (not
leaving any one article of our Creed vnskirmished with all) will serve any
indifferent man for a warning, to beware of their profane doctrine, that
leads the high way to Infidelity. They use to cry out much against the
Antichrist of Rome, for corrupting the purity of the Gospel, as the wicked
Elders did against the adultery of Susanna: but the judicious Christian may
easily epsy, them themselves to be the true forerunners of Antichrist indeed,
by their so general hacking and hewing at every point of the ancient Christian
faith. Thus much concerning the Creed: now let us pass to the Commandments.

R. ABBOT.
Note well, The souls of the faithful affirmed by Calvin and Luther to be in
heaven.
gentle Reader, the wilful impudency and malice of this man. He says that
Calvin denies to souls departed the joys of heaven, until the day of doom;
and yet in the words by him cited, he sees that he affirms them, having
ended this warfare to go into blessed rest; and in his other words in the same
very place might have seen, and in likelihood did see it, that he places this
blessed rest no otherwhere but with Christ in heaven. He applies generally
Call. Instit. l. 3. ca. 25. sect. 6. De fidelibus loquens.
to the faithful the words of the Apostle, that 2. Cor. 5.1.
when this earthly house shall be dissolved, we have a house or building in
heaven. He says that Nisi superstites essent animae corporibus quid est quod
habet deum praesentem vbi fuerit a corpore separatum? Nisi etiam animae
corporibus exutae retinerent suam essentiam, ac beatae gloriae capaces essent,
non dixisset Christus latroni: Hodie mecum eris, etc.
the soul separated from the body has the presence of God; that unless the
souls severed from their bodies did still retain their being, and were
capable of blissful glory, Christ would not have said to the thief, This
day shall thou be with me inparadise. Hereupon he taxes, as well he might, the
infinite curiosities of the schoolmen, in inquiring and disputing of the
place and state, the manner and degrees of heavenly glory as now it is, and
hereafter shall be, and condemns it as a point of rashness and folly,
further to search concerning things unknown to us than God permiteth us to
know. Scriptura vbi dixit Christum illis praesentem esse and eas recipere in
Paraedisum vt consolationem percipiant, reproborum vero animas cruciatus quales
meritae sunt perpeti, non vltra progreditur.
The Scripture, says he, haning said that Christ is present with them (meaning
the faithful souls before spoken of) and does receive them into Paradise to
receive comfort, and that the souls of the reprobate do suffer the torments
which they have deserved, goes no further. For conclusion he says by and by
after: Quum scriptura vbique iubeat pendere ab expectationae aduentus Christi
and gloriae coronam eousque differat, contenti simus his finibus diuinitus
nobis praescriptis, animas piorum militiae labor perfunctas in beatam quietem
concedere vbi cum foelici laetitia fruitionem promissae gloriae expectent,
atque ita omnia suspensa teneri donec Christus appareat redemptor.
Seeing the Scripture every where bids us to depend upon the expectation of
Christ's coming, and thither does defer the crown of glory, let us contain
our selves within these bounds which God has prescribed unto us, that the
souls of the godly having ended the labor of this warfare do go into
blessed rest, where with happy joy they expect the fruition of the promised
glory, and so all things are holden in suspense until Christ our redeemer
shall appear. By all which words it appears, that although Calvin according
Col. 3.3.4. 1. Ioh. 3.2. 1. Pet. 5.4.
to the scriptures do refer the full revealing of the glory of the faithful
unto the coming of Christ, when the same both in soul and body shall be made
manifest to the whole world; yet that in the mean time he denies not but
that their souls departed, are received into Paradise, into heaven, and do
enjoy blissful glory, blessed rest, the presence of God, the presence of
Christ, and therefore does not exclude them from the ioies of heaven, unless
Christ himself, whose presence they enjoy, be excluded from heaven. And whereas
M. Bishop makes him absolutely to say that all things are holden in suspense
until the coming of Christ, he leaudly falsifieth his words by leaving out
the term of limitation, the same being thus set down as has been said, And
that so all things are holden in suspense until Christ's coming, importing
that these things acknowledged before expressed, all things further are to us
holden in suspense until Christ shall come, are therefore God not having
revealed the same, and not to be curiously enquired of. The sum of all which
belief, Calvin himself in another place has briefly comprised thus; that
Calvin. adu. Libertin. ca. 22. Etsi fidelium animae simulac separatae sint a
corporibus viuunt cum deo ac foelici regni gaudio potiuntur, tamen perfecta
omnium filiorum dei foelicitas vsque ad secundum Christi aduentum defertur.
albeit the souls of the faithful so soon as they are separated from their
bodies do live with God, and do obtain the blessed joy of the heavenly
kingdom, yet the perfect happiness of all the children of God is deferred
until the second coming of Christ. Now what is there here for blind Bishop
to dislike in captain Calvin, but that his malice ouerruleth his wit, and
carries him as it were with a violent stream to condemn that which
notwithstanding his own judgment and conscience does approve? And if Calvin
had been of that mind, yet M. Bishop might with the more favor have excused
it, for that Bellarmine driven thereto by the testimony of Pope Adrian, does
confess that Pope John the two and twentieth was of that mind, Bell. de Romans
Pont. l. 4. c. 14. Reuera sensit animas non visuras deum nisi post
resurrectionem.
that the souls of the faithful shall not see God till after the
resurrection. But as he deals with Calvin, so does he also with Luther, most
maliciously and leaudly. It is true that Luther writing upon Ecclesiastes,
reteining as yet somewhat too much of the dregs of Popery, speaks hereof
somewhat obscurely, though not to that meaning as M. Bishop cites him. Upon
the words of the Preacher, Eccles. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand can do, do it instantly; for there is neither work nor
invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in hell, as he reads, whither thou
go; he commenteth thus, that Luth. Eccl. 9. Alius locus quod mortui nihil
sentiant: nulla enim, inquit, est ibicogitatio, ars, cognitio, sapientia:
sensit ergo Solomon mortuos omnino dormire and nihil prorsus sentire. Iacent
ibi mortui non numerantes dies vel annos, sed excitati videbu^tur sibi vix
momentum dormiuisse.
the place shows that the dead perceive nothing; for there is there no
cogitation, art, knowledge, wisdom. Solomon therefore thought, says he,
that the dead do sleep, and have no sense of any thing. The dead lie there,
not reckoning days or years, but being raised up, they shall seem to have
slept a very little while. Now in these words there is no ambiguitie, as shall
appear by the other place, because that which he says of sleeping and not
perceiving any thing, has reference only to the affairs and doings of this
life. Only his error is, that he construeth hell (for which we rather choose
to read the grave) to be the place where the souls thus sleep, expounding it
Ibid. Insernus proprie me iudice significat illum abditum recessum in quo
dormiunt mortui, etc. vt intelligas infernum dici vbi continentur animae and
quasi quoddam sepulchrum animae extra hunc corporalem mundum, stcut terra est
sepulchrum corporum: quid autem illud sit nobis est incognitum.
to be that secret withdrawing place where the souls are contained, and which
is as it were the grave of the soul, without the compass of this corporal
world, as the earth is of the body: but what this is, says he, it is unknown
to us. This conceit it seems he drew, either from the error of Pope John
aforesaid, or from the Popish fable of Limbus patrum, reteining as yet some
taste of that corruption which had been long growing in him, and in respect
whereof, he somewhere beseeches his Reader to read many of his works with
compassion, remembering that he was sometimes a Monk, as acknowledging that
from his Cloister he drew many things that were unsound, and in his writings
might escape him unawares. But whatsoever his fancy were when he wrote that
Commentary upon Ecclesiastes, he was afterward in expounding Genesis so
far from that opinion wherewith M. Bishop charge him, as that most
comfortablie he sets forth the hope of the faithful in their death, yea
even in that very place whence M. Bishop cireth him: the greater is his sin,
that by dismembring a sentence would make him say that that is directly
contrary to the drift and purpose of that whole discourse. He takes occasion
of his speech by the story of Abraham's death, and thereupon says: Luther. in
Genesis c. 25. Nos habemus gratiam and donum ac manifestam and multiplicem
scientiam de morte and vita. Siquidem certi sumus saluatorem nostrum Christum
Iesum sedere ad dexteram dei patris and expectare nos decedentes ex hac vita.
Quandocunque igitur excedimas e viuis, ad Episcopum animarum nostrarum
egredimur, qui recipit nos inmanus suas: is noster Abraham est cuius co^plexu
fruimur: is viuit, imo regnat perpetuo.
We have a grace and gift, even a manifest and manifold knowledge concerning
death and life: for we are sure that our Savior Jesus Christ sits at the
right hand of God the Father, and expects us when we depart out of this life.
Whenever therefore we die, we go to the bishop of our souls, who receives
us into his hands. He is our Abraham, whose bosom or embracing we enjoy: he
lives and reigns for ever. Again he says; Ibid. In Christo mors non est
acerba sicut impijs est, sed est commutatio huius miserae and calamitosae vitae
in quietam and bes^. tam. etc. Et paulo post. Multi loci scripturae sanctae
comprobant quod post mortem non morimur, sed viuimus simpliciter. Esa. 57.
Requiescit in cubili, etc. Ingrediuntur non in mortem, purgatorium aut
infernum, sed in pacem.
Death in Christ is not bitter as it is to the wicked, but it is the changing
of this wretched and miserable life into a quiet and blessed life. Many places
of Scripture, says he, do prove that after death we die no more, but do
simply or perfectly live. And alleging the words of Esaias, Esa. 57.2.
Peace comes; he shall rest in his bed, whosoever walks before him, he
infers; They enter not into death, into purgatory or hell, but into peace.
Hereupon he moves a question, Et mox. Alia quaestio nascitur, cumcertu^ sit
viuere and esse in pace animas, qualis illa vita aut quies sit. Haec vero
sublimior and difficihor est quam vt a nobis possit definiri: deus enim noluit
id a nobis cognosci in hac vita: sufficit igitur nobis haec cognitio non egredi
animas ex corporibus in periculum cruciatuum aut poenarum inferni, sed esse eis
paratum cubiculum in quo dormiant in pace. Differunt tamen somrus sieve quies
huius vitae and futurae. Homo enim in hac vita defatigatus diurno labor sub
noctem intrat in cubiculum suum tanquam in pace, vt ibi dormiat and ea nocte
fruitur quite, neque quicquam scit de ^llo malo sieve incendij sieve caedu. Anima
autem non sic dormit, sed vigilat and patitur visiones and loquelas angeloru^
and dei. Ideo somnus in futura vita profundior est quam in hac vita, and tamen
anima coram deo viuit.
seeing it is certain that the souls live and are in peace, what manner of
life or rest that is. This, says he, is a higher and harder question than can
be decided by us; for God would not have us to know it in this life. It
suffices us to know that our souls depart not from our bodies to danger of
the torments or pains of hell, but that there is a chamber provided for them
where they may sleep in peace. But yet, says he, there is difference betwixt
the sleep or rest of this life and of the life to come. For man in this life
being wearied with the days labor, at night enters into his chamber as in
peace, that there he may sleep, and so in the night he enjoys rest, and
knows nothing of any evil either of fire or of sword. But the soul sleeps
not so, but waketh and enjoys the sight, and hears the speeches of the
Angels and of God. Therefore the sleep in the life to come is more profound
than in this life, and yet the soul lives in the presence of God. Out of
these last words M. Bishop takes the occasion of his quarrel, expounding
sleep as we commonly take it, as if Luther meant that the soul in death
became wholly deuoid of all sense, knowledge and understanding, and were as it
were dead until the last day. But what truth or conscience may we think is in
this man, who thus obiecteth the words as if Luther had put the soul in case
of death, when notwithstanding in the end of the same sentence he adds, that
it lives in the presence of God, and in the whole circumstance of the place,
testifies by the Scripture, that it enioieth the bosom of Jesus Christ, the
sight and speech of God and his Angels, a most peaceful and blessed life, and
that this sleep is not such, but that the soul waketh always. The meaning of
Luther is plain, who finding the rest of the souls of the faithful termed in
Scripture a sleep, would signify that this sleep is a more sound and perfect
rest than any is in this life, void of trouble and fear, free from all
knowledge of misery and sorrow, not distracted or interrupted with the cares
or cogitations of our state, not reckoning number of days, or length of
years, all time seeming short for that blissful and happy pleasure and
conten^ment that is yielded to the soul thereby. For further declaring
hereof, he adds anon after: Ibid. Qui somnum naturalem dormit nihil eorum
scit quae geruntur in domo vicini, and tamen viuit, licet contra naturam vitae
nihil sentiat in somno. Idem in illa vita fiet sed alia and meliore ratione.
Proinde sicut matter desert infantem in cubiculum, ponit in cunas, non vt
moriatur sed vt dormiat and quiescat suauiter, ita ante Christum and multo
magis post Christum ingressae sunt and ingrediuntur omnes animae credentium
insinum Christi.
He that sleeps a natural sleep, knows nothing of those things that are
done in his neighbors house, and yet he lives, though contrary to the nature
of life he perceive nothing in his sleep. The same shall come to pass in that
life to come, but in other and better sort. As therefore the mother brings the
child into the chamber, puts it into the swaddling clouts, not to die, but
sweetly to sleep and rest: so before Christ, and much more since Christ, all
the souls of the faithful did and do enter into the bosom of Christ. The
sleep then whereof Luther speaks is in the bosom of Christ, where faithful
souls are sequestered from the affairs and troubles of this world, and live
with him in perfect bliss, and therefore is no such sleep as M. Bishop
dreameth, or rather leaudly deuiseth by wilfully misconstruing Luthers words.
And this is that position of Luther whereof Sleidan speaks, who mentioning
that ghosts and apparitions of spirits were very common in Popery, and that the
souls of the dead, as they were thought to be, did make much stir and
trouble after burial, and tell why either they were condemned, or for the time
tormented in Purgatory fire; and hereupon solicited their neighbors,
kinsfolk, and friends to help them in that misery, and that the usual manner
was, that they requested either some vows to be paid which they had made to
the Saints, or that Masses and sacrifices to such a number might be performed
for them, whereby the opinion of Purgatory and of the Mass woonderfully
increased, to the great advantage and gain of the Priests; tells
consequently, as indeed the event every where has proved, that Sleidan.
Comment. lib. 9. Sed postquam innotuit, and aliquid roboris assumpsit Lutheri
doctrina, paulatim euanuerunt eiusmodi spectra. Docetenim Lutherus e sacris
literis mortuorum animas quiescere and supremum iudicij diem expectare: turbas
autem illas and strepitus formidolosos ac phantasmata per Satanam excitari
dicit, qui nulla^ praetermittit occasionem vt impios cultus and falsas
opiniones in animis hominum coufirmet and Christi seruatoris nostri beneficium
extinguat.
when Luthers doctrine began to be known, and had gathered some strength,
these ghosts and apparitions by little and little vanished away. For Luther
teaches, says he, out of the holy Scriptures, that the souls of the dead are
at rest, and do wait for the last day of judgment (meaning that where they are
at rest, there they abide until the day of judgment, without that wandering
and walking which was commonly fancied of them) and that those stirs and
fearful noises and sighs were caused by Satan, who omitteth no occasion to
confirm in men's minds ungodly devotions and false opinions, and to extinguish
the benefit of Christ our Savior. Now he that waigheth these words, may
easily see how M. Bishop plaieth the Skoggin in the application of them, there
being here nothing at all directed against prayer to Saints, and that that is
intended against Purgatory, not being for that the souls are so soundly
asleep, as he obiecteth, but for that they are at rest and in peace with
Christ if they belong to him, not subject to any torments, nor having any cause
of those complaints which Satan cunningly pretended under their names. As for
the complaint of Brentius, we do not doubt but that he might find cause of it
in many, who notwithstanding did live under the name of Christians, of the
professors of the faith and Gospel of Christ. The Prophets, the Apostles
complained of such, and yet the pearls then were not the worse esteemed, for
that swine trod them under their feet. The Pagans of old saw many taking upon
them to be Christians, who yet were men of most wicked and damnable
conversation, and they took occasion hereby to condemn all Christians and
Christian religion; and will M. Bishop say that they did well in so doing? Aug.
in Psalm. 30. co^. 3. Quam multos putatis fratres mei velle esse Christianos,
sed offendi malis moribus Christianorum?
How many think you would willingly be Christians, says S. Austin, but do
stumble and are offended at the evil behavior of them that are Christians?
And what? will M. Bishop say that there are no such amongst them? yea amongst
their Popes, their Cardinals, their Bishops, are there not that live as if
there were no God, no hell, no resurrection, no judgment to come? yea that
stick not sometimes to profess that they think so? If he will deny it,
their own stories shall reprove him. If he must needs confess it, then must
he needs confess also, that he has very idly brought in this speech of
Brentius against us. That every mean godly man shall at the last day be made
equal in glory with the Apostles, is not Luthers assertion, but M. Bishops
calumniation. He affirms a paritie of Christians as they are Christians, as
touching mutual reckoning each of other in this life, but no paritie or
equality of reward or glory in the life to come. By occasion of the name of
brethren, he says that Luther. in 1. Pet. c. 1. Fraternitas est qu^d
Christiani inter se vt fratres esse debent, nec vllum prorsus discrimen
admittere: siquidem omnes in communi vnum Christu^, vnum baptisma, vnam fide^,
vnumque the saurum habemus. Non possum equidem pluris esse quam tu: quod tu
babes and ego habeo, etc. Christus aeque meus est ac D. Bernardi: tuus non
minus atque D. Francisci, etc. vnam Christiani omnes fraternitatem habemus,
quam in baptismo sumus consecuti, de qua nullus diuus plus habet quam ego ac
hi. Nam quanto ille pretio redemptus est, tanto sum and (...) redemptus, etc.
brotherhood is for that Christians ought to be one amongst another as
brethren, and not make any difference at all; for we all in common have one
Christ, one baptism, one faith, one treasure. I cannot be of more worth than
thou, and what thou have, I have the same also. Christ is mine as well as S.
Bernards; and S. Frances has no more right to Christ than thou. All we that
are Christians have one brotherhood which we have atteined in baptism,
whereof no Saint has more than thou and I. For with what price he was
redeemed, with the same was I redeemed. It cost God no less for me than for
the greatest Saint; only he has perhaps better laid hold of this treasure,
that is, has stronger faith than I. Now what is here as touching equality of
glory in the world to come? Here is a common brotherhood in this life, wherein
none can challenge more than other; but this hinders not but that who in this
brotherhood does the greater work, shall hereafter receive the greater
reward. Albeit if Luther do affirm equality of glory, what is that to the
impeachment of the article of life everlasting, when as by the common judgment
of the fathers, life everlasting is that Matt. 20.2.12.13. Aug. de Sanct.
Virgin. cap. 26. Hiero. cont. Iouinian. lib. 2. Gregor. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 31.
penny mentioned in the Gospel, which in howsoever great difference of work
and labor, yet is indeed equal and alike to all? Now albeit M. Bishop have
here said whatsoever his malice could devise, and more than truth and honesty
would have said, yet he would make his Reader believe, that he has omitted
many other particularities, that he might not be over tedious: but what his
other particularities are, may be esteemed by those that he has here set
down, consisting more in lies and cauils than in any matters of moment and
truth. Nothing has he said whereby it may in any sort be conceived, that
either our doctrine tends to infidelity, or that it is without cause that we
cry out against the Antichrist of Rome for corrupting the purity of the Gospel.

16. W. BISHOP.
First ( says Master PER.) it is a rule in expounding the several
Commandments, that all virtues of the same kind are reduced to that
Commandment: Hence it follows, that counsels of perfection are inioined in
the law, and therefore prescribe no state of perfection beyond the scope of the
Law.

Answ. None of the counsels of perfection are enjoined in the ten
Commandments, though for some affinity they may be reduced to some of them.
For example: It is commanded that I shall not steal, that is, to take any of
my neighbors goods against his will; but to give away all my own to the poor,
is beyond the compass of the law: so likewise it is commanded not to commit
adultery, but we are not commanded to vow perpetual chastity and obedience.
Such offices only that are necessarily required to the performance of any
Commandment, are comprehended within the same, but no others; though some men
take occasion of the Commandment, to treat of the counsels of perfection.

R. ABBOT.
Psalm. 19.7.
The law of the Lord is a perfect law, All works of perfection prescribed by
the law.
and therefore prescribes whatsoever is necessary to perfection. It requires
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke 10.27.
all the heart, all the mind, all the soul, all the strength, and because
beyond all there can be nothing more, therefore there is no virtue, no
righteousness, no perfection that is not commanded thereby. It is commanded,
says M. Bishop, that I shall not steal, but to give all mine own to the
poor is beyond the compass of the law. But I answer him, that where it is
beyond the compass of the law, there it is not a work of perfection, but an
act of superstition. If God command it, then not to do it, is sin: if God
command it not, there is no piety but folly in the doing of it, because God
casts it off with that reprofe, Esa. 1.12.
Who required these things at your hands? Let M. Bishop tell us, when Christ
said to the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 18.22.
Go, sell all that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me; did he sin or not in refusing to
do as Christ advised him? If not, why does our Savior except against his
entering into the kingdom of heaven? If he did sin, then he brake the law;
for Romans 4.15.
where there is no law, there is no sin, and therefore the giving of all his
goods to the poor, was within the compass of the law. He boasted that he
had kept the law, but our Savior Christ would discover how far he was from
loving the Lord with all his heart, which the law requires, who had so tied his
heart to his worldly wealth, as that he could not find in his heart, God so
requiring, for the relief of his neighbor, whom he should love as himself,
to void himself of the possession thereof. To give all that a man has to the
poor is then a work of righteousness, when the calling of God and the
following of Christ requires it, and then it is commanded by the law. To do
it when duty to God requires it not, may well be called a work of
supererogation, but work of perfection it is none. We are not commanded, says
he again, to vow pertuall chastity and obedience. It is true, and therefore
those vows are no matters of true devotion and religion, but of rash error
and presumption. Such offices only, says he, as are necessarily required to
the performance of any commandment, are comprehended within the same; and I
answer him, that no offices are at all required, but what are necessary to the
performance of some commandment. For notwithstanding all that can be said or
alleged for aduices and counsels, and howsoever it may be pleaded, that they
may seem in some particulars rightly so called, yet circumstance and occasion
always makes them necessary duties, and the omitting of them is either the
violation of the brief of the first table, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, etc. or of the second, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, there being reason of the doing of them, either for the glory of God, or
for the edification of our brethren, of which neither can be neglected without
trespass of the law.

17. W. BISHOP.
Secondly ( says M. PER.) the Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, etc. has two several parts: the first forbids the making
of Images: the second the adoration of them. He concludes out of Deuteronomy,
that the Images of the true Iehoua are forbidden in the Commandment, and
consequently the adoration of such Images. Hence he will have it to follow,
that to worship God in or at Images with religious worship, is abominable
Idolatry.

Answ. First if the Images of God only be there prohibited, and then worship
done to them according to his own exposition, then it follows most clearly,
that there is no probibition for either making or worshipping the Images of any
Saints; and therefore with a very evil conscience does he wrest the
commandment against them. Secondly I say, though God had forbidden us to
worship Images, yet does it not follow thereof, that we must not worship God in,
or at Images. For as God is every where; so may he be worshipped in all places,
and as well at or before an Image, as in the Church, and before the communion
table. Thirdly, we make no Images to express the nature of God, which is a
spirit, and cannot be represented by lines and colors, but only allow of some
such pictures, as set out some apparitions of God, recorded in the Bible; not
doubting but that such works of God, may as well be expressed in colors to our
eyes, as they are by words to our ears and understanding. Lastly, touching
religious worship to be done to Saints or pictures, Analog^n.
the Heretics cauilling consists principally in the diverse taking of the
word religious. For it is ambiguous, and principally signifies the worship
only due to God; in which sense to give it to any creature were Idolatry: but
it is also with the best authors taken some other time, to signify a worship
due to creatures, for some supernatural virtue or quality in them; and in this
sense to term it detestable Idolatry, is either detestable malice, or
damnable ignorance. And whereas (he says) that common reason teaches, that
they who adore God in Images, do bind God and his hearing of us, to certain
things and places: I say the contrary, that God may be worshipped in all
places; but we rather choose to worship him in Churches and before Images, than
in other places, because the sight of such holy things, do breed more
reverence and devotion in us, and better keep our minds from wandering upon
vain matters. If we taught that God could be worshipped no where else, or by
no other means, then he had not lied so loudly.

R. ABBOT.
M. All Images generally forbidden to be worshipped.
Perkins concludes indeed, that the images of God are forbidden in the
commandment, but neither says nor means that only the Images of God are
there forbidden, and therefore he uses no evil conscience in urging the
commandment against the images of Saints; but M. Bishop with evil conscience
defends the images of Saints against the commandment. And whereas he says,
that though God do forbid to worship images, yet he does not therefore forbid us
to worship God in or at Images, he does but frame himself to the guise and
wont of all the masters of idolatry, it being the common pretense of them al,
as has been Of Images. sect. 5.
before showed, that they do not worship the Image it self, which they know
to be but metal, or wood, or stone, but that in the Image or at the Image
they worship the divine essence, which they believe to be immateriall and
immortal. Yea, and by what reason M. Bishop here defends the worshipping of
God in or at Images, for at God is every where, so may he be worshipped in all
places, and as well at or before an Image, as in the Church or before the
communion table, by the same did Jeroboam persuade the Israelites to worship
God at or before, or in his golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, Joseph. Ant.
Iudaic. l. 8. c. 3. See of Images. sect. 5.
because no place is void of God, neither is he included any where, and
therefore they might as well worship him nearer hand before those calves as in
the temple and before the sanctuary at Jerusalem. But as Jeroboam committed
damnable idolatry, in worshipping God before the Calves, so does M. Bishop
also in worshipping God in or before an image commit idolatry against God, who
will not be mocked, nor can abide to have honor done to an idol by pretense
of his name. His third exception, that they make no Images to express the
nature of God, but only to set forth some apparitions of God recorded in the
Bible; how vain it is, has been also fully declared in Of Images, sect. 4.
and 7.
the handling of that question. And very strange it is that M. Bishop should
make those apparitions a color for their idoll-images of God, when God
himself affirms that therefore he did forbear in the day when he gave the
Law, Deu. 4.12.15
to appear in any image or likeness, because he would not have them to make
any image of him. Whereas he says, that such works of God may as well be
expressed in colors to our eyes, as they are by words to our ears and
understanding, he should understand that it is one thing to speak of the works
of God, another thing to speak of the person of God. We question not the
expressing of the works of God, but we condemn the expressing of the person
of God. And if the expressing of those apparitions by words to our ears and
understanding, be a reason why we may express the same by pictures to our
eyes, then nothing hinders but that the nature of God also may be expressed
by colors and pictures to our eyes, because the same is by words according to
our capacity expressed to our ears and understanding. But God has commanded
himself to be preached to the ear and understanding; he has not commanded,
nay he has forbidden himself to be painted to the eye; and therefore the one
is lawful and godly, the other wicked and unlawful. His distinction of
religious worship is most ridiculous and absurd. The very name of religion, as
Austin and Lactantius do derive it, impotteth the Aug. de vera relig. ca. 55.
Ad vnum deum tendentes and e^ vni religantes animas nostras, vnde religio dicta
creditur. Lactant. Instit. li. 4 cap. 28. Hoc vinculo pietatis obstricti deo
and religati sumus; vnde ipsa religio nomen accepit.
obliging and tying of our souls to God only; and if to God only, then it
cannot be truly called religion, that is performed to any other. Therefore
Lactantius says again, that Lactan. Instit. l. 1. c. 20. Religio ac veneratio
nulla alia nisi vnius dei tenenda est.
there is no other religion to be holden but toward God only. So says
Austin, that Aug. cont. 2. ep. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 4. Debent obseruari
Christiani, vt vni deo religionis obsequio seruiatur.
Christians are with duty of religion to serve God only; and that Idem cont.
Faust. Manich. lib. 14. cap. 11. Apostolus creaturam laudat, and ei tamen
cultum religionis exhiberi vetat.
the Apostle forbids worship of religion to be given to any creature. He
tells us, that Ide^ de eiu. dei, l. 5. c. 15. Pietas vera non exhibet
seruitutem religionis, quam latriam Graeci vocant, nisi vni vero deo.
service of religion is that which the Greeks call (...), which true piety
yields to God only. Therefore he says, that Idem de vera relig. cap. 55.
Non sit nobis religio cultus hominum mortuorum. Honorandi sunt propter
imitationem, non adorandipropter religionem.
we are not to make a religion of the worship of dead men, and that we are to
honor them for imitation, not to worship them for religion. Now all these so
express and peremptory resolutions, M. Bishop at once overthrows with a
distinction, taken, as he says, from the best authors: but he says it very
falsely and unhonestly, not being able to bring one good author for the
approouing of it. The word religious, says he, is ambiguous, and principally
signifies the worship only due to God; but it is taken some other time to
signify a worship due to creatures. And as well he may say, that the word
marriage is ambiguous, and principally signifies the bond that is betwixt the
husband and the wife, but yet is with the best authors taken some other time
for that affiance that is betwixt the fornicatour and the harlot, so that
lawfully may the one enjoy the other, because there is betwixt them a bond of
marriage. We are told that religion in Ecclesiastical use belongs only to
God, and that no service of religion is to be done to creatures; and he tells
us that religion belongs principally to God, but that there is religion also
belonging to creatures: yea even to vile and abominable idols. And what marvel
is this, whenas we see the Valentian Jesuit distinguish in like sort of
idolatry, that because S. Peter names 1. Pet. 4.3.
abominable idolatries, therefore we should understand that there are
idolatries which are not abominable, and that Greg. de Valent. de idolat. lib.
2. c. 7. Quid attinebat ita determinate cultus simulachrorum illicitos notare,
si omnino nullos simulachrorum cultus licitos esse censuisset?
some idolatry is lawful? Surely religious worship given to creatures, is no
other but idolatry; but yet forsooth we must not condemn it, because all
kind of idolatry is not to be thought unlawful. These are men of sharp
wits, and can, if ye will put them to it, distinguish God out of heaven, and
Christ out of the Creed, or by a distinction can bring a great number of gods
into heaven, and a great many Christ's into the Creed. As for us, we take the
fathers before alleged to be herein ingenuous and honest as we are, and that
they did not intend with one breath to appropriate religion unto God, and to
blow it from him with another. Albeit not only under the name of religion, but
under the name of worship also they have affirmed the same to belong to God
only, as namely, Cypria. de exhort. martyr. ca. 2. Quod Deus solus coie^dus
sit.
that God only is to be worshipped, Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 1. Cultus and
adoratio nulli creaturae concedi potest absque diuinitatis iniuria.
that worship and adoration can be given to no creature without injury and
wrong to God; Hieron^. aed Ripar adu. Vigilant. Ne solemn quidem and Lunam, non
angelos, non archangelos, non Cherubim, non Seraphim, and omne nomen quod
nominatur and in praesenti seculo and in futuro colimus and adoramus.
that we worship neither Sun nor Moon, neither Angels, nor Archangels,
neither Cherubim, nor Seraphim, nor any other name (of any creature) that is
named either in this world, or in the world to come. Therefore of the Virgin
Marie Epiphanius says: Epiphan haer. 79. Collyrid. Sit in honor Maria: Pater,
Filius, Sp. Sact adoretur: Maria^ nemo adoret.
Let Mary be in in honor; elt the Father, Son, and holy Ghost be
worshipped, but her let no man worship; and Ambrose, Ambros. de Sp. Sancto, l.
3. cap. 12. Maria erat templum Dei, non Deus templi: and ideo ille solus
adora^dus qui operabatur in te^plo.
Marie was the temple of God, but not God of the temple; and therefore he only
is to be worshipped who wrought in the temple. Thus the fathers knew no
religion, they knew in religion no worship, but what belongs to God alone;
and M. Bishops distinction both in the one and in the other, was wholly
unknown unto them. But it is worth the while to note, how the said
distinction, such as it is, is applied by him to pictures and images. Religious
worship, says he, does sometimes signify a worship due to creatures for some
supernatural virtue or quality in them. But good Sir tell us, what
supernatural virtue or quality is there in your images and pictures? If any
religious worship be due unto them, you tell us that it must before some
supernatural virtue or quality in them. If there be no such, then how shall
religious worship be due unto them? May we not think that you have sent us a
very natural distinction, that gives supernatural virtue and quality to
stocks and stones? But if supernatural virtue and quality do yield a title
of religious worship, how is it that Reu. 19.10.
the Angel refused to be worshipped of S. John, and Act. 10.25.
the Apostle Peter of Cornelius, seeing it cannot be doubted but that there
was a supernatural virtue and quality in them? Well, he will tell us that
the next time; in the mean while he gives us leave to think their Romish
favorites to be very naturally affected, that conceive so supernaturally of the
deuisers of such blind and witless tales. As for that he says, that they do
not bind God and his hearing of us to certain things and places, because they
hold that God may be worshipped in all places, he says no more than Jeroboam
has in effect said before for the setting up of his idols; no more than the
Pagans and Heathens conceived, that their gods were in heaven; and therefore
that in all places they might pray and sacrifice unto them. Notwithstanding as
they thought, that to pray before their Images, was a more special and solemn
devotion, and they had there the heavenly powers more nearly present unto
them, so have they been affected in Popery, and have thought those prayers to
be most effectual which they have made in the presence of filthy idols, and
to that end have taken great pains to go long iourneies and pilgrimages unto
them. But says M. Bishop, the sight of such holy things does breed more
reverence and devotion in us, and better keep our minds from wandering upon
vain matters. He should have said if he would have spoken as the truth is,
that they breed superstition and error, rather than reverence and devotion,
that they cause God and his Saints to be contemned in that stoliditie and
blockishnesse of dumb idols, or at leastwise do hold the mind so entangled
here upon the earth, as that it has not power and liberty of affection to
ascend to heaven, as has been Of Images, sect. 5.8.
before sufficiently declared, and needs not here to be repeated. His
coupling of Churches and Images is like Deuteronomy. 22.10
the yoaking of an ox and an ass; because Churches have their use for
yielding conueniencie of place and assembly for prayer, for hearing of Gods
word and ministration of his Sacraments, for which uses only it is that they
are holy; but Images have no use at all to these purposes or any other, yea
they serve to set the mind a wandering, and to withdraw it from that
steadfastness and devotion which these spiritual offices and exercises do
require of us. In a word, Lactantius makes it Lactant. Inst. l. 2. c. 19. Non
est dubium quin religio nulla sit vbicunque simulachrum est.
a thing undoubted, that where Images are, there is no religion, and therefore
very justly do we affirm, that the Popish use and defense of Images is no
furtherance as M. Bishop would persuade, but the very bane and overthrow of all
true religion.

18. W. BISHOP.
But let us hear the end of his discourse: thus he argues: They that worship,
they know not what, worship an Idol. This exposition is false, unless they
worship it with divine honor. But go on: the Papists worship they know not
what. I prove it thus: To the consecration of the Host, there is required the
intention of the Priest: but they cannot have any certainty of the Priests
intention: wherefore they are not certain whether it be bread, or the body of
Christ. ergo, worshipping of it, they worship they know not what.

Answ. First, here is leaping from the Commandments to the Sacraments, which
is out of order: secondly, I return his argument upon himself. To their
service and in the administration of the Lords Supper, the Ministers intention
is required: for if he intend to serve the Devil, and by giving them the
communion to bind them the faster to him; then do they (in saying Amen to his
prayers, and receiving the communion at his hands) join with him in the Devils
service. Now they have no more certainty of their Ministers meaning, than we
have of our Priests intention: yea much less of many of them, who are
mad-merry fellows, and care not greatly whereabout they go, nor what they
intend: must they therefore fly from their diuince service and holy communion,
because they be not certain of their Ministers intention therein? Surely they
should, if his reason were ought worth. But in such cases we must persuade our
selves that Gods Ministers do their duty, unless we see great cause to the
contrary; and thereupon are we bold to do our duty to the blessed Sacrament:
If he should fail in his, yet our intention being pure to adore Christ's holy
body only, and nothing else there, we should formally be the true worshippers
of Christ, though materially we were mistaken in that host; which to term
Idolatry, is to style our Savior Jesus Christ an Idol, and therefore
blasphemy in the highest degree.

R. ABBOT.
They that worship they know not what, The Papists worship they know not not
what.
says M. Perkins, do worship an idol. M. Bishop says that this is false,
unless they worship it with divine honor. But that worship whereof M. Perkins
speaks, is no other but divine honor; and in the subject whereto he makes
application of this rule, which is the Sacrament, M. Bishop himself does no
otherwise understand it, and therefore his exception is very idle. Neither is
there here any unorderly leaping, as he speaks, from the Commandments to
the Sacraments, but very orderly and direct proceeding, when as having in hand
to set forth their breaches of the Commandment, he exemplifieth the same by
their idolatry committed in the Sacrament. For proof whereof M. Perkins uses
this argument; They that worship they know not what, do worship an idol. This
M. Bishop acknowledges, if they worship it with divine honor. But the Papists
in worshipping the Sacrament do worship with divine honor they know not what:
Therefore they worship an idol. That they know not what they worship, it is
evident and plain, because they cannot know whether it be bread or the body
of Christ. For they confess that it is not the body of Christ, Bellarm. de
Sacra. in Genesis ca 27. sententia Catholicorum est requirs intentionem faciendi
quod facit Ecclesia.
without the Priests intention in consecration to do that which the Church
does. But how can any man tell whether the Priest have this intention or not?
who can look into his heart to be assured of his meaning, when as it is God
only that knows the heart? If no man can search into the Priests heart to
know his intention, then can no man know whether the Sacrament be the body of
Christ or not, and therefore in the worshipping of it, they worship they know
not what, which is no other but idolatry. With this argument M. Bishop is
cruelly pinched, and knows not which way to avoid the absurdity that is
thereby cast upon them; and yet somewhat he must say, howsoever little help
he receive by it. First he would return the argument against us, as touching
the intention of our Ministers, but deals therein childishly and vainly,
because he knows well that we hang not the Sacrament or any power thereof
upon the intention of the Minister, but wholly upon the word of Christ. It may
be that some Ministers be as the greatest number of their Priests have been
wont to be, mad merry-fellowes that care not greatly whereabout they go;
but this hinders us nothing, who by the words of Christ himself, by them
delivered, do firmly apprehend that which Christ has promised. But to salve
the matter the best he can, he tells us, that we must persuade our selves
that Gods Ministers do their duty, unless we see great cause to the
contrary. Where he should remember, that the matter here urged is not
determined by our persuasion, but by the Priests intention. We may be in
charity well persuaded, but in our being well persuaded, we may be deceived,
and therefore do not yet know but that we commit idolatry in that which M.
Bishop calls duty to the blessed Sacrament; and the rather for that he
himself Sect. 63.
afterward confesses, that it is idolatry in the Sacrament to worship for
Christ, that which is not Christ. But now welfare a distinction to help at a
pinch: for if the Priest in his intention fail, yet our intention being pure,
says he, to adore Christ's holy body only, and nothing else, we shall be
formally the true worshippers of Christ, though materially we be mistaken in
that host. Let him speak plain English, and tell us, that formally we shall
be true worshippers of Christ, but materially we shall be idolaters, and then
let him resolve us how in one and the same act it may be justified that we are
both true worshippers and idolaters, and what shall become of the formally true
worshipper, when for being materially an idolater he shall be adjudged to hell. I
have wondered at a saying which I have read, cited out of the great Schooleman
Robert Holcot, thinking it to be more absurd than that any Christian man would
utter it, namely, Humphred. de vita and obitu Iuelit, pa. 120. ex Holcot.
Asserit fidem laici adorantis hostiam non consecratam sufficere illi ad
saluationem, tametsi erroneam: and hominem posse mereri per fidem erroneam,
etsi contingat vt adoret diabolu^.
that the faith of a lay man worshipping an Host that is not consecrated;
though it be an erroneous faith, yet suffices to salvation; and that a man by
an erroneous faith may merit, although it fall out that he worship the devil.
This speech is strange, but yet M. Bishop now by his distinction teaches us,
how it may very well stand, because though a man materially worship the devil,
yet by his intention he does formally worship God. Now what ill hap had
Jeroboam, that he was not acquainted with these Romish schoole-trickes; for he
might well have answered both for himself and for the people, that though
materially they erre^d in the Calves, yet their intention was pure and holy, to
worship the true God, and therefore formally they were true worshippers. Yea
this distinction will serve to clear a great part of the idolatries of the
Gentiles and Pagans, because albeit the devils did present themselves at their
idols and images, to receive the sacrifices and devotions that were there
performed, as in Popery they have also done, yet this hindered not, but that
formally they were true worshippers, because though they were materially
mistaken, as before was said, in taking the devil for God, yet their formal
meaning and intention was to do service to the only true and immortal God.
Thus shall they be excused of whom Christ says, Ioh. 16.2.
The time will come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service. Which many undoubtedly thought in the crucifying of Christ, being
(formally) Act. 22.3.
zealous toward God, but Luke 23.34.
not knowing (materially) what they did. So S. Austin says of the Donatists:
Aug. epist. 48. Arbitrabantur se pro ecclesiae dei facere quicquid inquieta
temeritate faciebant.
Whatsoever they did in their turbulent rashness and fury, they thought they
did it in behalf of the Church of God. The same we say of all schisms and
heresies, that the followers thereof, at least many of them, are formally true
worshippers of Christ, because they have an unfeigned intention and purpose to
serve the Lord Jesus Christ, howsoever materially they be mistaken in some
things. Thus does M. Bishop make a hotch-potch and mixture of all religions,
and by his distinction of materialiter and formaliter a man may in any religion
be a true worshipper of God, because he may have a zealous intention to serve
God. But if his learning and understanding did not fail him, he would remember
that Ioh. 4.23.
the true worshippers do worship God, not only formally in spirit, but also
materially in truth. It was the religion of the Samaritanes Ibid. verse. 22.
to worship they knew not what; but the religion of the true Jews, of whom was
salvation, was to know what they did worship. Our Savior would thereby
instruct us that there is no salvation where men worship they know not what.
God has reueiled unto us the knowledge of himself and of his will, that
thereby we may be directed to serve him. In this Ioh. 17.3.
knowledge is eternal life, but Os^ 4.6.
in the want of knowledge is perdition and destruction. Intention and zeal is
good, and in the service of God necessarily required, but yet our intention and
zeal is no other but fury and madness, and fighting against God, if it have
not knowledge to guide it (materially) in the way of God. Now if it be
idolatry to worship that for God which is no God, and yet it follows not
that God is hereby styled an Idol, then surely it is likewise Idolatry to
worship the Sacrament under the name of the body of Christ, when it is not the
body of Christ, and yet we do not thereby style our Savior Jesus Christ an
idol, as he fondly obiecteth against us for blasphemy in the highest degree.

19. W. BISHOP.
His third objection is out of the fourth Commandment, which (as he says)
gives a liberty to work six days in the ordinary affairs of our calling,
which liberty (says be) cannot be repealed by any creature: the Church of
Rome therefore erreth, in that it prescribes other set and ordinary festival
days, to be observed as straightly, and with as much solemnity as the Sabbath
of the Lord.

Answ. Does not the Church of England also prescribe the Nativity of our
Savior, and of S. John Baptist, the feasts of the Apostles, and many others to
be kept holy, and command that no man work in the affairs of their calling
those days? does their own church also err therein? How say you then to the
church of the Israelites, which kept the feasts of Easter, Whitsontide, and of
the Tabernacles, as straightly and with as much solemnity, as they kept the
Lords Sabbath? was it also misled to the breach of Gods commandments? or must
we not rather thereby learn, that six days in the week, were at the first
left us free to labor in; but yet so, that by the decree and commandment of
our spiritual Governors, any of them might (upon just occasion) be made
festival, and thereupon every good christian bound to keep them, by their
obedience unto their Governors? to think the contrary is a high point of
Puritanisme.

R. ABBOT.
M. Festival days lawfully prescribed by the church.
Perkins intends nothing against the authority of the Church, for the
prescribing of some solemn and festival days, but condemns the church of
Rome justly for prescribing such days to be observed, as straightly and with as
much solemntie, he should have said more straightly, and with much more
conscience and solemnity, than the Lords Sabbath day. Yea it is a thing
impious in the Bishop of Rome, that he takes upon him to make such days, in
themselves Bellar. de cultu sanct. l. 3. ca. 10. Sunt dies festi vere alijs
fanctiores and sacratiores, and pars quaedam diuini cultus.
more sacred and holy than other days, and a part of the very true worship and
service of God. Whereas M. Perkins says, that it is not in the power of any
creature to repeal the liberty of working six days, he says rightly, if we
understand it of the liberty of conscience; for no creature may bind the
conscience from the acknowledgement of a lawfulness with God, to work all and
every of the six days in the affairs of our callings, but yet in charity and
obedience we yield to our governors, and to our brethren somewhat upon
occasion to refrain our liberty, and to forbear the doing of those things,
of which notwithstanding we know and are persuaded that in conscience and with
God, they are free and lawful to be done.

20. W. BISHOP.
Fourthly (says M. PER.) the fifth Commandment enioineth children to obey
father and mother in all things, specially in matters of moment; as in their
Marriages and choice of their calling, and that even to death: and yet the
Church of Rome against the intent of this Commandment, allows that
clandestine Marriages and the vow of religion shall be in force, though they
be without and against the consent of wise and careful parents.

Answ. It is very false to say that children must obey their parents in all
things: for if parents command them any thing either against Gods law or the
Princes, they must not obey them therein. And touching clandestine and privy
Marriages, they are of force as well in the Church of England, as in the Church
of Rome: yea more too. For by the Church of Rome always they have been
forbidden very severely; and since the Council of Trent, are made void and
of no force, where the Council can be published. Concerning entering into
religion, childrens vows (during their minority) may be annullated and made
of no force by their parents: marry, when they come to riper days, if their
father stand not in necessity of their help, they may forsake him to follow
Christ in a more perfect kind of life: as S. James and S. Matthew. 4.22.
John forsook their father Zebedee, and followed Christ.

R. ABBOT.
There is little discretion in M. Bishops first exception, because M. Perkins
did use no other but the Apostles words; Col. 3.20.
Children, obey your parents in all things, for that is well pleasing unto the
Lord. When the Apostle says, in all things, M. Bishop should not be so rude as
to say, It is very false to say, in all things; howsoever we deny not but
that the words have their limitation and restraint to those things wherein they
command in right of parents. The validity of contracts and marriages without
consent of parents.
As touching marriages without consent of parents, M. Bishop misreporteth the
Council of Trent, which though it do detest and prohibit the contracts of
such marriages, yet does also Conc. Trident. sess. 24. Sancta Synodus
anathemate damnat eos qui falso affirmant matrimonia a filijs familias sine
consensis parentum contracta irrita esse, and parents rata vel irrata facere
posse.
condemn them who say that such marriages when they are contracted are void,
and that it is in the power of the parents either to ratify or disanull them.
The Church of England not meditating contradiction but truth, approoueth so
far the sentence of the Council, and albeit it endeavors with all good
care and circumspection to prevent and to exclude such wilful and ungodly
courses of marriage, yet it acknowledges that marriages being so acted and
done, cannot be revoked; lamented they may be, and greened at, but voided they
cannot be. M. Perkins seems to be of other mind, and he follows therein
the judgment of sundry late Divines; whom though otherwise we greatly esteem
and honor, yet we cannot subscribe that which they determine in this point.
Consent of parents belongs to the honest and orderly proceeding of marriage,
and it is true that children sin against the fifth Commandment, in neglecting
their consent, but this consent is no part of the essence and being of
marriage, which therefore being complet and perfect without it, must
necessarily stand good, albeit the parents give no consent unto it. The very
essence of contract and marriage, consists in the parties actual giving of
themselves mutually each to other, according to the form and manner of the
country and place wherein they live, which being done, the want of parents
consent cannot undo it, neither may they be sundred in two, who by Gods
ordinance, though unlawfully abused, are become one. By Gods ordinance, I say,
because albeit they have not used that manner of proceeding which God has
ordained to the fastening of this bond, yet the bond it self wherewith they
are fastened, is the ordinance of God to remain inviolable betwixt them that
are once bound thereby. Neither does it make against this which is objected,
that God ioineth not such together, that they marry not in the Lord; for so may
it be said of them that marry only for carnal and worldly respects, of the
believer that matcheth him or her-selfe with an unbeliever, that they are not
joined by God, nor married in the Lord, because God has forbidden such kind
of marriages to be made. But yet as the bond of marriage though unlawfully
entered into holds these together, and may not be broken, even so though
children may not lawfully marry without consent of parents, yet being married,
they are tied by the covenant of God each to other, as husband and wife, and may
not shake off the yoke which they have taken upon themselves. As for those
phrases of Scripture which are urged in this behalf of parents, Genesis 21.21.
Exodus 34.16. Deuteronomy. 7.3.
taking wives for their sons, or husbands for their daughters, and giving
their sons and daughters in marriage, they imply indeed the parents right and
power for the bestowing of their children; but yet we cannot from thence argue,
that if the children prevent their parents, and do give and bestow themselves,
their gift should be void, and their marriage a mere nullitie, as if it had
not been. For as we read of parents taking wives for their sons, so we
read of sons also without consent of parents, taking wives for themselves,
when yet the want of such consent has been no disanulling of their marriage.
Esau Genesis 26.34.
took him two wives of the daughters of Heth or Canaan Ibid. 28.8.
contrary to the liking of his father and mother, and yet when he had taken
them hey held it not in their power to frustrate his taking of them, but with
grief were forced to endure them. And if the sons taking of a wife be of no
force without the parents consent, then Rebecca had no such cause of fear
Ibid. 27.46.
lest Jacob also should take a wife of the daughters of Heth, because his
taking had been nothing, so long as his father and mother should give no
consent unto it. So is it said of Genesis 38.2.
Judah, that he took him to wife a daughter of a Canaanite, which we cannot
doubt but that it was as offensive to his father Jacob, as it had been before
to Isaac, and yet his marriage was not taken to be of no effect. To be short,
as the one phrase of Scripture may be deemed to import a right in the father to
bestow the children, so the other may be thought to import a validity of that
which the children do, though unlawfully, without the father. It is here, I
know, commonly objected, that God by his law provided, that Number. 30.4.
the vow of the daughter should not stand that was disauowed by the father, and
thereof is inferred, that the daughters bestowing of her self in marriage
cannot stand good without the father. But that law if it be duly weighed,
makes as little to that purpose as any thing else that is alleged. For the
vows and bonds there spoken of, are of things futurely to be done; but here
the question is of a thing already done. If the daughter made a vow of an
offering to the Lord, it was in the fathers power to disanull her vow; but if
she had already offered any thing to the Lord, it was not then in the fathers
power to revoke her offering. Even so if the daughter make a vow or give a
promise that she will marry thus or thus, it is in the hand of the parents to
resist and frustrate her vow; but if by contract and marriage she have effected
her vow and promise, it is then past the parents hands to undo what she has
done, and it is not lawful marriage but adultery to bestow her otherwise. To
conclude this point, it is a true rule in law; Multa fieri non possunt, quae
tamen facta valent: Many things may not be done, which yet stand good when they
are done. Exodus 4.25.
Zipporah might not have circumcised her son, but yet when she had done it,
there was no reuersing of it. Corah, Dathan and Abiram, might not have presumed
to offer incense to the Lord, and yet when they had so done Number. 16.38.
their censers were holy unto him. It is not lawful for children rashly and
head-strongly to bestow themselves at their own will; God has forbidden it,
there is no blessing to be expected in it; but yet when it is done, it cannot
be avoided. It is not without cause, that I say rashly and head-strongly,
because the necessity of parents consents is not always absolutely to be
understood, there being sometimes cases of conscience by the iniquity of
parents that do necessarily enforce a mitigation of this law, and rules of
this nature are commonly taken to hold only ordinarily and for the most part.
Childrens vows of Moonkerie unlawful.
Concerning childrens vows for entering into religion, as they fondly term it,
M. Bishop speaks more honestly and handsomely than they practice in that
behalf. It is neither minority of years, nor necessity of parents that can
redeem the children out of the hands of these Wolves and Bears, if once they
have found means to make a pray of them. Yet well it is that he will confess
what ought to be respected, howsoever amongst them it be not so. His words of
following Christ in a more perfect kind of life, are ill applied to their
Moonkerie, and so is the example of the Apostle James and John, forsaking their
father Zebedee to follow him. James and John were called by Christ to do that
which they did, and where God calls, no respect of man must prevail to hold
us back; but they of whom M. Bishop speaks, have no calling of God, neither
has Christ prescribed any such kind of life for them to be called unto. But
against all their hypocrisy in this behalf, we oppose the ancient Canon of
the Council of Gangra; If any children by pretense of serving God, do forsake
their faithful parents, thinking it just so to do, and shall not rather yield
due honor unto them, to reverence it in them that they are faithful, accursed
be he.

21. W. BISHOP.
Fifthly, The last Commandment ( says M. PER.) forbids the first motions to
sin, that are before consent. Conc. Ga^grens. cap. 16. Si qui filij parents
maxim fideles deseruerint occasion Dei cultus, hoc iustum esse iudicantes,
and non potius debitum honorem parentibus reddiderint, vt hoc ipsum in eis
venerentur quod fideles sunt, anathema sint.
He proves it thus: Lusting with consent is forbidden in the former
Commandments: Thou shall not commit adultery, and thou shall not steal:
therefore if the last forbid no more, it is confounded with the former. Again,
the Philosophers knew that lust with consent was evil, even by the light of
nature; but Paul a learned Pharisee, knew not lust to be sin, that is forbid
in the Commandment. Romans 7.
Lust therefore that is forbidden here, is without consent. Wicked then is the
doctrine of Rome, that requires our consent to every mortal sin.

Answ. Their doctrine is most reasonable and godly: For the first motions to
sin, are rather the actions of the evil spirit, tempting us to evil; than
of a man, in whose mind they are before he is aware of them; and who as soon
as he begins to mark them, disliketh them and chaseth them thence: and how
can he carry a right opinion of the mild goodness of God, that thinks him
so hasty with his frail creature man, as to punish him eternally for such a
thought, as is thrust into his mind at unawares, and may come upon him in his
sleep, went he never so well disposed to bed? See more of this in the question
of original sin. To his reasons to the contrary, I answer to the first,
that lust with consent is not expressly forbid in the former Commandments, but
the act of adultery and stealing: yet, it might well have been reduced unto
them, as it is in the other Commandments. Neucrthelesse, because our frailty
is more prone to the wicked lust of concupiscence, and desire of our neighbors
goods; it pleased God for the better bridling of of them, to give us particular
precepts against them; specially considering, that it was also very hard, by
the dim light of our darkened reason, to discern them to be such capital
sins. And whereas he says, that the Philosophers knew the inward consent of
our mind, without any exterior acts to be mortal sin: I take him to speak
at random, and more than he can prove. Sure it is, that many learned Jews,
who should know more than Philosophers, Cap. 5.28. and 29.
knew not so much: as may be gathered out of S. Matthew, and out of Josephus,
lib. 12. Antiq. c. 13. and David Kimhy upon the 66. Psalm verse 17. And S.
Romans 7.7.
Paul's own confession rightly understood witnesses the same: For (says he)
I had not known concupiscence to have been sin, unless the law had taught
it to be sin. Wherefore it was very expedient, after the inhibition of the
acts of adultery and theft, to forbid in plain and express terms, the lusts
and desires of them.

R. ABBOT.
I refer thee here, gentle Reader, as M. Bishop does, to the question of
Original sin, That concupiscence is sin in the first motions thereof.
where it has been already fully declared that the Romish doctrine is neither
reasonable nor godly which denies the first motions of concupiscence to be
sin. In the sixth and eleventh section of that question, those particulars are
answered, which here he fetteth down in the first part of this section. I
only note therein further, that he makes the first motions to sin, the
actions of the evil spirit, contrary to the express testimony of S. James,
that Iam. 1.14.
every man is tempted of his own lust. If it be his own lust wherewith he is
tempted, then is it not the action of the evil spirit: and that it is the
action of the person, is showed in the third section of the aforesaid question.
His answers to M. Perkins are insufficient. The question is, whether consents
to wicked lusts be forbidden by the several commandments to which the acts of
them do belong. Our Savior Christ briefly decideth it, that Matt. 5.28.
to look upon a woman to lust after her, is the breach of the seventh
commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery. Now if the lust of adultery
with consent be forbidden by the seuench commandment, then that which is
forbidden by the tenth is lust without consent. Now such lusts with consent M.
Bishop confesses are forbidden in the other Commandments; only they belong
not to the commandments against adultery and stealing. And why? Because our
frailty, says he, is more prone to the wicked lust of concupiscence, and
desire of other men's goods, it pleased God to give particular precepts of them.
But that is not true, specially in the one of these, that we are more prone to
these than to other lusts; for we are as prone to self-love and pride, and
wilfulness, to hypocrisy and lying, to malice and envy, and wrathfulnesse,
and sundry other like sins, to say nothing of the lusts that tend to the
breach of the first table of the law. The cause why God would exemplify lust
by those particulars, is because those are most familiar and sensible, and of
them grows the most ^^all and common breach of the society of men. But
distrusting that reason, he adds another of more specialtie, which makes
specially against himself. Specially considering, says he, that it is very
hard by the dim light of our darkened reason, to discern them to be such
capital sins. But by what reason I marvel does he make these more capital
sins than all the rest? Is not the lust of murder as capital as the lust of
adultery? Is not the motion and will of dishonoring parents, and rebelling
against Princes as heinous as the desire of other men's goods? And does not he
himself presently signify that it is as hard by the dim light of our
darkened reason to discern them also to be such capital sins; inasmuch as
the Philosophers, as he says, in whom was the greatest light of reason, did
not see so much concerning any consent of mind without the exterior act. If
it be not as hard to discern the one as the other, let him give us reason of
the difference. If it be as hard, and there be in that respect no difference,
then let him acknowledge that there was as great reason of giving particular
precepts against the lusts of other sins, as of adultery and theft; which
being not done, let him acknowledge as the truth is, that the lusts of
adultery and theft, where consent is yielded to them, are as in the heart
reputed for the acts themselves, as by the former words of Christ is testified,
and therefore are forbidden by the seventh and eighth commandments; and
therefore that it is very lust it self, without consent that is forbidden by
the tenth commandment. He makes M. Perkins to say, that the Philosophers knew
the inward consent of our mind without any exterior acts to be mortal sin:
but M. Perkins says nothing of mortal sin, knowing well that the
Philosophers had no such knowledge of sin, or of the death that is effected
spiritually thereby; but affirms only that they knew the same to be evil; and
it is M. Bishop indeed that roueth at random in the denial of it. Tully
says, that Full. Offic. l. 1. Cauet in omnibus opinionibus and factis nequid
libidinose, aut faciat, aut cogitet.
nature and reason (rightly informed) shunneth to do or to think any think
libidinously or licentiously. He affirms them Idem Tuscul. quaesi. lib. 4. Vt
turpes sunt qui efferunt se laetitia tum cum fruuntur venereis voluptatibus;
sic flagitiost qui eas inflammato animo concupis^u^t. Et paulo post: Ve haec
omittamus, (stupra, corruptelas, etc.) perturbatio ipsa mentis in amore foeda
ser se est.
to be leaud men that with eger minds covet after venereous pleasures; and that
setting aside fornications, deflowrings, adulteries, incests, the filthiness
whereof is subject to accusation, even the perturbation of the mind in wanton
love, is by it self a filthy thing. In the same place he sets it down for
a rule, that Ibid. Quae crescentia perniciosa sunt, caedem sunt vitiosa
nascentia.
what things are pernicious in their increase (namely when they come to
exterior acts) the same are vicious in their beginning; that is, in the
thoughts and cogitations of the mind. But M. Bishop says, that some learned
Jews knew not so much. And I answer him, that some unlearned Jews did know so
much. They knew it that did obediently submit themselves to the law and word of
God; they knew it not, as also many other things, who made the law of God
subject to themselves. It is many times so, that men who are, with the world,
of reputation, for wisdom and learning, yet do not see those things which
children see, and there was a time and occasion for God to complain, not of
the unlearned only, but also of the learned amongst the Jews; Esa. 42.19.
Who is blind but my servant, or deaf as my messenger that Isent? Who is
blind as the perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? Albeit it may perhaps
be rather said, that they would not know this than that they did not, because
out of the first common principles of moral discipline, they could not but
understand, that a man is evil and wicked, not only for his outward actions,
but also for his inward habit and quality, howsoever the same by occasion be
restrained from breaking forth into outward acts. Therefore the constructions
which they are reported by the Evangelist to make of the commandments, as M.
Bishop here alleges, may seem rather to have been partial and wilful
deprauations of the law of God, than matters of mere ignorance, as not to know
that God condemned the wickedness and evil imaginations and intentions of the
heart. Again, he cites Josephus, who mentioning that Polybius said, Joseph.
Antiq. Iudat^^. l 12. ca. 13. D^m^r^r Polybium qui ait (...) Antiochum (...)
conatu^ sit Dianae templi thesaures and donaria (...) V^^u^sse enim tan (...),
ac non etiam perse^^sse (...), non vitetus res ^^g(...).
that Antiochus perished for that he went about to make spoil of the treasures
and offerings of the temple of Diana, excepteth against him with these words,
Only to will or intend sacrilege, and not to do it, seems not a thing
worthy of punishment. Which testimony of Josephus, M. Bishop has quoted
only, and that upon the credit of his Master Bellarmine, who reports the
words as if Josephus had said, B^^l de Amiss. gr^^ and s^at. p^^c. l. 5. c. 10.
Qu^ s^ribit motum internum non esse (...) ^^si (...) se prodat.
that the inward motion is no sin, unless it do outwardly show or bewray it
self. Wherein he deals very unhonestly, to make his Reader believe that he
fetteth down the authors words, when he sets down only what he himself
list to collect and gather of them. The words of Josephus, considering the
occasion are very unfitting and absurd, and so contrary to common sense, as
that we may wonder they should come from so wife a man. Antiochus brought his
army against the city of Elymais, as Josephus there declares, where the
temple of Diana was: he assaulted it with all his might, he left nothing
undone that he could do for the atchieuing of his purpose, though by the
valor of the Citizens he was resisted and frustrate of his desire. Now was it
for Josephus here to say, that to intend a mischief, and not to act it,
seems not worthy of punishment, when notwithstanding he himself confesses
that th^^e wanted no endeavor or attempt for the effect (...) it? It seemed
strange to Tully, that Tu^. Orat pro (...) forti (...), non (...): perind^
(...) (...) non him aum con^^^ia legibus vindic^ntur.
a thing should (...) be punished vnless^ it were effected; as though, says
he, the issues of things only were punished by laws, and not men's counsels
and purposes of them. And do not humane laws every where take hold of
attempts and practices of murder, of treason, and other villainies, albeit they
atteine not their intended end? And if by the laws of men such intents and
purposes are thought worthy of punishment, would not, or might not Josephus
think that much more they are so adjudged by the law of God? But taking the
words as they are, yet that follows not which Bellarmine reports, that the
inward motion is no sin, because Josephus might think the same a sin, and
yet not such a sin as that a man therefore should be punished. And so it
seems the Rabbine conceived thereof, whom M. Bishop further cites out of
Bellarmine, who where David says, Psalm. 66.18.
If I have locked unto or regarded iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear, makes this exposition and meaning of it, Bell vt supra ex R. David
Kimhi. Non imputabit ad p^ccatum desiderium minstum, si tantum sit in cord.
The Lord will not impute an unjust desire for sin if it be only in the
heart. Where he does not say, that it is no sin if it be only in the heart,
but only that the Lord will not impute it or punish it for sin. For that it
is sin he acknowledges, in that he calls it unjust; but he acquitteth
it from punishment so long as it is restrained and kept in. But S. Paul's own
confession, says M. Bishop, rightly understood witnesses the same. And what
is that? for Romans 7.7.
says he, I had not known concupiscence to have been sin, unless the law
had taught it to be sin. But what hinders this, but that as he knew by the
law concupiscence to be sin, where it has consent, so by the law he knew it
to be sin also, though it have no consent? It is true, that Romans 4.14.
where no law is, there is no transgression; and without the law either written
in our hearts, or written in our books, we know nothing to be sin. But
what hinders this confession, I say, but that as by the law he know the one,
so he knew the other also? Does not M. Bishop himself see how idly he has
brought this in? And in truth the Apostle spoke those words of concupiscence it
self by it self, where it has no consent. For of the same concupiscence he
says soon after, verse. 15.
I allow not that which I do; for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I. All which complaint being made in the person of Aug. cont. 2.
epist Pelag. l. 1. c. 10. and ^ont. Julian. l. 6. c. 11.
the regenerate man, who hates the evil concupiscences of his own heart, and
therefore gives no consent unto them, does plainly euict, that of
concupiscence without consent the Apostle says, that by the law he knew it to
be sin, as has been Of original sin sect 2.
otherwhere declared more at large. But howsoever M. Bishop will cavil
concerning some learned Jews, the Roman Catechism it self will justify
that which M. Perkins says, that Catech. Romans part. 3. de 9. and 10 praecept.
Quodam naturaetumine intellectum est, alienae vxoris potiundae cupiditatem
prohiberi, vetito adulterio: nam si concupiscere liceret, fa^ item esset potiri.
by light of nature it was understood, that in the forbidding of adultery, was
forbidden the lust of having or enjoying another man's wife, because it should
be lawful to have her, if it should be lawful to desire her. Now if by light
of nature it be discerned, that in the forbidding of adultery, the will and
desire of another man's wife be also forbidden, and therefore that the
forbidding hereof belongs to the seventh Commandment, then M. Perkins
concludes very rightly, that the tenth Commandment goes further, to condemn
even the first motions of concupiscence and lust, though they proceed not so
far as to gain the will. We may hold nothing here superfluous: God would
not add a latter commandment to forbid that which was already forbidden by a
former.

22. W. BISHOP.
Lastly ( says M. PER.) the words of the second Commandment (and show mercy
unto thousands on them that love me, and keep my commandments) over throws
all humane merits. For if the reward be given of mercy to them that keep the
law, it is not given for the merit of the work done.

Answ. Either simple was this man's judgment sometimes, or else most peruersly
bent to deceive the simple. For God speaks there, neither of the reward that
is rendered in heaven for good works; neither of any reward at all, that is
rendered unto the person himself that keeps Gods commandments: but of a
superaboundant favor, that God of his bounty will show unto thousands of
others, for one man's sake that loves him and keeps his commandments:
therefore very peeuishly does he draw hence any thing against merits.

R. ABBOT.
I have before declared, Gods mercy excludes the merit of man.
that this promise of mercy makes plainly against merit, that it concerns
not the children only, but the fathers themselves; and that if it be mercy,
by which God bestows the things of this life, which are the lesser, then that
it cannot be merit for which he bestows eternal life, which is the greater.
See the seventh section of the question of Merits before handled.

23. W. BISHOP.
And to begin here where M. PER. leaves, to show how their new doctrine and
inventions, does cross and make void the commandments of God. First in that,
that he promises mercy and favor unto thousands for ones sake, that keeps
his Commandments, we gather: that God in regard of his Saints (who so holily
observed his Commandments) does grant unto us many favors and graces: also,
that the satisfaction of one may serve for another; for else God would not
punish children unto the third and fourth generation, for the offense of their
great grandfather, unless their punishment served to satisfy for their
ancestors offense: hence also we gather, that some men do keep Gods
commandments, otherwise God did in vain promise to favor thousands for their
sakes that keep the Commandments, if he knew well that there should be none
such. Therefore most ungodly is that position of the Protestants, that it is
impossible to keep the Commandments: and which alone overthrows all the ten
Commandments. For as all men skillful in the true nature of laws do hold:
there can be no just law, that is impossible to be kept, by the greater part
of them to whom the law is given; because laws are both to direct our actions,
and do also bind every man to observe them. Now what reasonable lawmakers will
beat his brain to direct a man to do that, which he knows before hand, not
to lie in the man's power to do? and as tyrannical should he be esteemed, that
would bind a man under a great penalty, to do that which he know to be
impossible for him to do. Which two points, S. Augustine does in one sentence
confirm, Defid. cont. Manich. cap. 9.
saying; Who does not cry out that it is folly to give him Commandments, in
whose power it is not to perform them? and who does not say that it is unjust,
to condemn him for not doing just things, when he could not do them? The
Protestants therefore affirming the Commandments not to be possible to be
performed, do make them no laws at all; and so they at one blow, do beat
down all the ten Commandments. But let us come to the particulars.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishops head is old, and therefore he thinks our doctrine to be new. If
his head and heart were renewed Romans 1.5.
to the obedience of faith, he would easily see our doctrine to be old, even
that Ier. 6.16.
old way which is the good way, wherein they that walk shall find rest for
their souls. Sure we are that Popery is not the old way, because they have
taught us nothing of it, who of old declared the right way. But yet he here
takes upon him to show that our doctrine crosses and makes void the
Commandments of God. And how, I pray? First, in that he promises mercy and
favor to thousands for ones sake that keeps his Commandments, we gagather,
says he, that God in regard of his Saints, who so holily observed his
Commandments, does grant unto us many favors and graces. But what Saints
does he mean? for shall we say, or does the Commandment say, that to every
man God shows mercy for every man's sake that keeps his Commandments? If
so, then we must also say, that God to the third and fourth generation
punishes every man for every man's sake that hates him. If he had spoken more
distinctly we could easily have told in what sort to answer him. But because
he speaks at randon, I answer him in general, that God indeed shows favor
to one man for another sake, but so, as that the Commandment says, he
shows mercy on both sides: and therefore that it is his mercy that takes
occasion, and not man's me^t that gives cause of doing whatsoever he does. His
second collection is most ridiculous and absurd, No satisfaction of one man for
another.
that the satisfaction of one may serve for another. For how come we here to
satisfaction? Marry God would not punish children to the third and fourth
generation, for the offense of their great grandfather, unless their
punishment served to satisfy for their ancestors offense. O admirable device!
But yet tell us, M. Bishop; what if neither the fathers nor the children be in
the state of grace, for then Of Satisfaction. sect. 11.12.
by your own doctrine neither are the fathers capable of satisfaction to be
done for the^, neither are the children capable of the doing of it. And such it
seems the Commandment intends, because it names them that hate God. Yea
and of the Babylonians God says; Es. 14.21.
Prepare a slaughter for the children for the iniquity of their fathers, where
both the fathers and the children were infidels and idolaters, and wholly
estranged from the grace of God. How then shall we understand that any
satisfaction is here intended? or how may we not think this man to be drunk
and senseless that sets forth such paradoxes that can no way stand with
their own grounds? God teaches no satisfaction there, but proclaims the
terror of his judgment and wrath, which being once kindled, is not easily
quenched that both the parents may dread to offend God for the safeguard of
their children, and the children may beware of following the evil example of
their fathers, The keeping of Gods commandments not denied.
knowing that how much they ad to their fathers sins, so much they add to
their own plagues. Thirdly, he gathers from hence, that some men do keep
Gods commandments: And we also gather the same, and do say further with S.
John: 1. Ioh. 2.4.
He that says, I know him and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. Therefore we do not say, that it is impossible to
keep Gods Commandments, but that it is impossible in this mortality and
frailty to keep Gods Commandments perfectly, so as to be justified thereby.
But the residue of this tale I leave, as being but babbling of course, whereof
he has sundry times received ample and full answer, which he cannot gainsay;
only like the cariers horse he is acquainted with a way, and out of that he
will not go. I refer him to that that has been said hereof before, both
in the former parts of this work, and in the answer to his Preface of this
book; and further vouchsafe him no answer, but with that dictate of Solomon;
Pro. 27.22.
Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, as wheat is braied with a
pestell, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

24. W. BISHOP.
1 The first Commandment, as it forbids us to worship false Gods: so does
it also include a commandment to worship aright the only true God, which is
done principally by Faith, Hope, Charity and Religion. The Protestants by
their perverting of many articles of our belief (as has been showed) have
lost the true Faith, and by their new certainty of Faith, leave no place for
Hope: for they are past hope of salvation, 1. Epist. 5. v. 3.
that make themselves so assured of it as they do. And as for Charity, which
S. John defines to be the keeping of Gods Commandments, they must needs
confess themselves to be far from it, which hold that to be impossible: and
with the principal part of true religion (which consists in offering a true,
real, and external sacrifice unto God, as in that question has been
proved) they are at utter defiance.

R. ABBOT.
You have showed your own folly M. Bishop, and dishonestly, The Protestants
teach faith, hope and charity aright.
but for the perverting of any articles of faith on our side, you have showed
nothing. We teach faith, hope, and charity as God has taught them, not as
your school has newly framed them. We teach faith whereby 1. Io. 5.10.11.
to believe the record that God witnesses of his Son, that God has given
unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. We teach hope whereby
Romans 8.25.
to wait with patience for the reueilling of that which God has given us. We
teach charity, whereby to perform Ephesians. 2.10.
those good works which God has prepared for us, as the way wherein to walk
to the receiving of it. True, real and external sacrifice for propitiation of
sin we teach none but the sacrifice of the passion of Christ, because by Heb.
9.28. and 10.14.
being once offered, he has taken away our sins, and made perfect for ever
them that are sanctified. Therefore the sacrifice which he intends, is no
other but sacrilege and idolatry, and because God has condemned it,
therefore are we justly at defiance with it. I may not omit how he here
bobbeth his Reader with, as in that question has been proved, whereas of
that question he has said just never a word.

25. W. BISHOP.
2 Touching the second Commandment after our account; as God is honored by
swearing in justice, judgment, and truth; so he is also by vows made unto him
of godly and religious duties, which the Prophet David signifies, when he
says: vow ye, Psalm. 75.13.
and render your vows unto the Lord your God. Hereupon many Catholics have,
and do continually vow perpetual poverty, chastirie, and obedience, the more
fully and freely to serve God: which holy vows the Protestants disallow
wholly: neither do they allow of any other vows, for ought I have heard: they
do therefore diminish the service of God, and pare away a part of that which
is reduced to the second Commandment.

R. ABBOT.
We diminish not the service of God, because we teach all that the word of God
has taught, and with men's devises God will not be served. Spiritual vows
admitted; Popish vows rejected.
The true spiritual vows whereby we consecrate our selves to God we duly
approve, but Popish vows we reject and detest, not only as superstitious,
but also as they teach them with opinion of merit and purchase of remission of
sins for themselves and others, most wicked and damnable. There needs
hereof nothing more to be said, then has been before delivered in the
handling of that question.

26. W. BISHOP.
3. And whereas in the third we are commanded to keep holy the Sabbath day,
which is principally performed by hearing (attentively and devoutly) that
divine service, which was instituted by Christ, and delivered by his Apostles,
which is the holy Mass: they may not abide it, but serve God after the
invention of their own brains, with a mingle-mangle of some old, some new,
odly patched together.

R. ABBOT.
What Christ instituted, appears in the Gospel: what the Apostles practiced
and delivered, appears by S. Paul, holding himself entirely to that 1. Cor.
11.23
which he had received of the Lord. What do we find there that does in any
sort resemble the ougly monster of the Popish Mass? Gregory Bishop of Rome
says, that Greg. ep. l. 7 Indict. 2. ep. 63. Mos Apostolorum fuit vt ad ipsam
solummodo orationem dominicam oblationis hostiam consecrarent.
the Apostles were wont with the Lords prayer only to consecrate the sacred
host, and shall we then think the Apostles to have been the authors of those
gew-gawes and fooleries, those turnings and windings, and crossings and
blessings, and murmurations and eleuations, that are used in the Mass? Julius
Bishop of Rome the first, condemned the dipping of the Sacrament of Christ's
body in the cup of the blood of Christ, De cons. did. 2. Cum omne. Quod pro
complemento communionis intinctam tradunt Eucharistiam populis nec hoc prolatum
ex Euangelio testimonium receperunt, etc.
because no witness hereof is brought out of the Gospel. If nothing be to be
done in the celebration of the Sacrament, but whereof there is witness in the
Gospel, and Cyp. l. 2. ep. 3. In sacrificio quod Christus est nonnisi Christu.
sequendus est.
none, as Cyprian says, be to be followed therein but only Christ, we have
just cause to reject the Mass, which has so little of that that Christ did,
and so much that he did not. The Mass therefore is no sanctifying, but a
profaning of the Lords Sabbath: but the true sanctifying of the Sabbath is in
our divine service, wherein Gods word is read and taught, prayer is made to God
in the name of Jesus Christ, and the Sacraments are administered accordingly as
Christ himself has left the same unto us. Wherein we have retained whatsoever
the abomination of desolation had left remaining of the ancient service of the
Church; and whatsoever was wanting, we have supplied agreeably thereto, and to
the word of God; and no man will account it odly patched together, but such
odd fellows as M. Bishop is, who are so far in love with the Romish harlot,
as that they like to eat no bread but what is molded with her unclean and
filthy hands.

27. W. BISHOP.
In the fourth we are commanded to obey our Princes, as well as our parents,
and all other our Governors in all lawful matters: yet the Protestants hold,
that our Princes laws do not bind us in conscience.

R. ABBOT.
What; Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? Princes laws how they bind in
conscience.
Is M. Bishop now come to speak of obedience to Princes; by the problemes of
whose religion no Prince shall be obeyed, if the Pope list by any pretense of
religion to pick a quarrel against him; nor any matters shall be lawful for
him to command, but what must stand with the Popes law? Does he speak of
obedience to Princes, who because his Prince likes not to follow his course,
has before threatened him, Epist. to the king sect. 34.
God knows what that forcible weapon of necessity will drive men unto at
length? When the Fox preaches, beware the Geese. To the point, I answer him
briefly, we teach that Princes laws in things subject to their command do
bind the conscience to external obedience, though not to any spiritual
opinion of the things wherein we do obey. And that we do not deny this, he
himself Preface to the Reader. sect. 3.
before has testified for us, so that we shall see that he had need of one to
remember him, that a liar must bear a brain. See further what has been said
hereof to the first section of his answer to M. Perkins his Dedicatorie
Epistle.

28. W. BISHOP.
5. The fifth Commandment, teaches that no man be killed by private
authority: yet Protestants hold it lawful to take arms, even against their
lawful Princes for the advancement of their Gospel; and haue^n th^^ quarrel
killed, and caused to be killed millions in Ger^anie, ^rance, Flanders, and
Scotland.

R. ABBOT.
This is a mere slander leudly devised b^ some Papists, to take from
themselves the envy and just reproach of that savage and barbarous cruelty
which they have practiced in Germany, Popish barbaritie colored by slandering
the Protestants.
France, Flanders, in shedding the blood of so many thousands of innocent
persons without respect of time, place, sex, age or degree. They have been in
their Churches together to pray to God, and to hear his word, suspecting no
harm, when these Tigers and Wooles have come armed upon them, and there slain
them without any difference, both man, woman and child. It were too long to
set forth the tragedy of those but cheries that have been committed in such
like sort by the means of the Guises in France, of the duke of Alba, and
others in Flanders, and in Germany by the impetuous and headlong tyranny of
Charles the fifth. The Protestants arms in this case have been only
defensive, when as contrary to public edicts and proclamations, contrary to
laws and rights, and privileges, and without legal course of proceeding,
they have been thus barbarously destroyed. Neither have they then taken arms
by private authority, but by law, and by the public direction of them to
whom the maintenance and defense of those rights and liberties did belong. Now
that Papists for the advancement of their idolatries and superstitions do hold
it lawful and by their Confessors have been resolved that it is lawful not
only to take arms against their Princes, but by secret practice to murder
them, and by gunpowder to blow up a whole Parliament house, to the utter
confusion and subversion of a whole state, our experience from time to time
has sufficiently made known to us. But See hereof, The difference betwixt
Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion. part. 3. by D. Bilson then
Warden of Winche, and now Bishop there.
that Protestants hold it lawful as he obiecteth to take arms against their
lawful Princes for the advancement of the Gospel, it is a lie, and contrary
to the doctrine and profession of al our Churches.

29. W. BISHOP.
6 The sixth forbids adultery, which is allowed of by Protestants in some
case. For they permit one party after dinorcement to marry again, the other
yet living; whereas our Savior says: Whosoever dimisseth his wife and
marries another, commits adultery upon her. And if the wife dimisse her
husband and marry another, she commiteth adultery. Moreover, incest is also
forbidden in this Commandment: now by the Canons of the Catholic Church, and
the authority of the ancient Fathers, it is incest for one Cosen german to
marry with another: yet is it not seldom practiced; yea, it is generally
allowed of in the church of England.

R. ABBOT. Protestants allow neither adultery nor incest; Papists do both.

The limitation of divorce which our Savior Christ has set down ( Mat. 5.32.
and 19.9.
except it be for fornication) makes it lawful for the party innocent to
marry again, the delinquent being left to the censure of the Church until
satisfaction shall be given of true repentance for so heinous sin. The Church
of England notwithstanding for the preventing of some mischiefs that by the
wickedness of men do arise by abusing the liberty of marriage upon divorce,
uses a restraint of that liberty, that the parties divorced shall put in
caution not to marry again so long as they both live. But the Church of Rome
does openly admit adultery in this behalf, making it free to the Pope to
pronounce of a solemn marriage a nullity, and to give liberty to the husband to
marry again, the former wife being neither deceased nor divorced. As for
incest (so determined by the law of God) the Pope has given allowance to it in
giving dispensation to the king of Spain last deceased, to marry his own
sisters daughter, as also to King Henry the eight of England to marry his own
brothers wife. But that whereof M. Bishop speaks, for one cousin germain to
marry with another, is no incest by Gods law, nor there determined to be
unlawful. Yet thereof we commend that conceit which of old was had of it as S.
Austen notes; August. de ciu. d^i l. 15. c. 16 ^actum etiam^^^^um propter
vicinitatem horrebatur illiciti.
that that which was lawful to be done, yet was abhorred, for that it is so
near to that that is unlawful. Therefore albeit by law we prescribe no other
bounds than God has set, yet we dissuade such marriages rather than approve
them, lest men by taking the uttermost of that that is lawful, should thereby
the rather presume to that that is altogether unlawful. As for the Canons of
the Church of Rome we little respect them, because we know they make no
conscience to permit or prohibit as they themselves list, who have brought in a
new devise of spiritual kindred unknown to ancient times whereby it is
unlawful for them to marry each to other, who have been godfathers and god
mothers together at the baptism of a child. Let them make Canons for
themselves, but for us by the grace of God they shall make none.

30. W. BISHOP.
7. The seventh Commandment, condemns with theft, usury, and all withholding
of our neighbors goods, which was gotten unlawfully: yet Protestants commonly
make no conscience to take ten in the hundredth, which is plain usury; and as
for restitution of evil gotten goods, it is clean out of fashion among them.

R. ABBOT.
Hypocrite, Our laws allow no usury at all.
as though it were not common amongst Papists also to take ten in the hundred.
Yet our law allows not this, but punishes it, if it be informed, with the
loss of the increase. If M. Bishop will say that because there is no execution
of this punishment, therefore it must be taken to be permitted. I answer him,
that it is permitted as Moses permitted the bill of divorce only Mat. 19.8.
for the hardness of men's hearts, who cannot be induced to lend to supply the
occasions and necessities of their brethren, unless they may be suffered to
make benefit of their lending. As for restitution of evil gotten goods, we say
that the wanting thereof wittingly is a token of the want of true repentance,
without which there is no salvation. And albeit I doubt not but that I may say
hereof that it is more sincerely practiced with us than it is with them: yet I
will not now stand to contend thereabout. But whereas Watson the Proctor for the
Priests against the Jesuits has particularly set down great value of goods
gotten by the Jesuits through mere collusion and fraud, let him acquaint us
that they have made restitution hereof and then I will give him further answer.

31. W. BISHOP.
8. The eight prohibiteth us to bear false witness against our neighbor: and
yet do Ministers (the master Procestants) in their pulpit (where truth should
only be taught) most commonly bear such false witness against Catholics,
that the very stones may be astonished at their most impudent slanders: to wit,
that Papists believe in stocks and stones: that they will not be saved by
Christ and his passion, but by their own works: that they rob God of his
honor, and give it to Saints; and a hundredth such like most notorious and
palpable lies. Wherefore as the Preachers be guilty of bearing false witness:
so the auditors deserve to be seduced by them, who hearing them to lie so
shamelesly in some things, will nevertheless believe them in others.

R. ABBOT. Papists believe in stocks and stones.

The very stones if they could speak would justify the Protestants in this
behalf and cry out against the idolatry and abomination of the Papists.
Whether Papists believe in stocks and stones and teach men so to do let it
appear by Thomas Aquinas who propounding the question, Tho. Aquin. sum. p. 3
q. 25. art. 4. See before of Images. sect. 14
whether the cross of Christ be to be worshipped with the worship of Latria,
determines the matter in this sort: We give the worship of Latria to that
wherein we put the hope of our salvation. But we put the hope of our salvation
in the Cross; for the Church sings, All-haile O Cross our only hope at this
time of the passion; To the godly increase righteousness, and to the guilty
grant forgiveness; Therefore the Cross is to b^e worshipped with Latria. Let
M. Bishop now tell us whether they trust in stocks and stones who place the
hope of their salvation in that Cross to which they say All-haile O Cross,
etc. that is in a Cross of wood or stone. Yea and Polydore Virgil
acknowledges of their rude people that Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rerum. l. 6.
c. 13. his (imaginibus) magis fidunt quam Christ vel alijs diuis quibus
dicatae sunt. Papists will be saved by their own works, not by the passion of
Christ
they put more trust in their images than they do in Christ or in the Saints
whose images they are. He spoke gently of it being loath to touch the sore too
hard for fear of offense; but it is well known how the common people have been
affected with these delusions and still are where their abominable idolatry
holds still it former strenth. The second point that Papists will not be
saved by the passion of Christ but by their own works is made plain to us by
the Spanish Inquisitours in their Index Expur. Hispan. Ex libro qui
inscribitur, Ordo baptizandi cum Modo visitandi, impresso venetijs, ann. 1575.
Index Expurgatorius, who finding in an Order for visiting the sick imprinted
at Venice these questions to be asked of the sick man, Deieantur illa verba:
Credis non proprijs meritis sed passionis domini nostri Jesus Christi virtute ac
merito ad gloriam peruenire? Credis quod dominus noster Jesus Christus pro
nestra salute mortuus sit, and quod ex proprijs meritis vel alio modo nullus
possit saluari nisi in merito passionis ipsius?
Beleeuest thou, not by thine own merits, but by the power and merit of the
passion of Christ to come to glory? Beleeuest thou that our Lord Jesus Christ
died for our salvation; and that none can be saved by his own merits or by any
other means but by the merit of his passion; with comfort given that Deleantur
illa verba: Non erit desperandum vel dubitandum de salute illius qui
suprapositas petitiones cord crediderit and ore confessus fuerit.
there is no doubt to be made of the salvation of him who thus believes with
the heart and confesses with the mouth, have defaced all these words and
appointed them in new impressions to be wholly left out. The third point also
is manifest; for since worship and devotion of religion belongs to God only,
as has been Supra sect. 17
before showed, surely the Papists in giving religious worship to Saints, do
rob God of his honor and give it unto the Saints. These things, M. Bishop, are
clear and plain; they are not our notorious and palpable and shameless lies,
but they are your notorious and palpable and shameless heresies. We know you
daube these things and set colors upon them, as heretics have been wont to
do upon their false and wicked opinions; but your colors with us are soon
washed off, and where you are in your own kingdom, there we know how you
appear in your own likeness. As for our auditors, thanks be to God, they are
not like yours. Yours are like 1. Cor. 12.2.
the Gentiles of old carried away to dumb Idols even as they are led. They must
follow you blindfolded without seeing which way they go. They must search
nothing, they must know nothing, but take what you tell them. But our hearers,
thanks be to God, have the liberty of Gods word, wherein they see with their own
eyes, and whereby they plainly understand that we seduce them not, because we
teach them nothing but what they find there that God has taught. And you they
thereby learn to hate and detest as seducers and deceivers, because you go
about to teach them those things which they see God has not taught you.

32. W. BISHOP.
9. and 10. Of the ninth and tenth I have spoken already; wherein they err
grievously, in teaching every man to sin damnably, by having any evil motion
cast into his mind by the Devil, albeit he resists it presently, and
forthwith chase it away. In which conflict and ouercomming of temptation, the
grace and power of God is perfited, as S. Paul witnesses: and S. James calls
the allurement of concupiscence temptation only; and then first sin when it
conceiueth (that is) gets some liking of the party.

R. ABBOT.
Where the mind is free from sin, the Devil can cast no evil motion into
the mind. Every evil motion is sin.
If the Devil cast evil motions into the mind, it is a token that he finds
there a mould wherein he casts them, and a mine whence he diggeth the matter
of them. From the habitual corruption of our nature, all evil motions flow,
which both in the spring and in the stream, both in the root and in the
branch, is before justified to be sin. We resist it, he says, and chase it
away; but therefore we resist it and chase it away, because it is sin; it
being the use and work of our warfare Heb. 12.4.
to fight against sin, and the grace and power of God assisting us, whereby
we overcome sin. He alleges that S. James calls it only temptation, and
then first sin when it conceiueth: and I answer him, that S. Paul calls it
sin before it be temptation, Romans 7.8.
sin wrought all manner of concupiscence in me, and therefore in temptation it
is sin. See hereof the question of original sin handled at large before,
and of this place of S. James, the sixth section.

33. W. BISHOP.
Now to conclude this passage, if you please to hear to what height of perfect
observance of the Commandments, the Evangelical Preachers have brought their
followers in Germany unto, by teaching the Commandments to be impossible, and
that only faith justifies, and that good works have no reward in heaven, and
such like; Iacobus Andreas a famous Lutheran shall inform you, De planetis.
who writes thus. That the whole world may see these men alienated from the
Papacy, and to put no confidence in works; De Planetis.
therefore they do no good work at al. In stead of fasting, they feast, and
are drunken day and night: in lieu of Alms, they oppress and pill the poor:
they have changed praying into cursing and blaspheming the name of God, so
profanely, that no Turks nor Saracens commit the like impiety against
Christ: for humility, there reigns pride, disdain, cruelty, and riot in
apparel, etc. and much more to the same purpose. And that this truth may be
confirmed by the testimony of two sound witnesses; Musculus, a man of no small
account among them, thus reports of his brethren in the Lord. De prophetia
Christi.
Such now adays is the condition of the Lutherans, that if any man list to
behold a great number of Knaves, robbers, malicious persons, coseners, usurers,
and such like deceivers, let him but enter into a City where the Gospel is
taught, and there he shall find good store of them: and a little after. Surely
it is true, that among Heathens, Jews, Turks, and other Infidels, none can
be found more unruly, and that less esteem of honesty and virtue, than the
Evangelical brethren; with whom all things pass current, and nothing almost
is blamed (except virtue:) For the devil has shaken off all their bands, and
turned them loose.

R. ABBOT.
And what M. Bishop, are there not, think you, The virtuous conversation of
Papists.
as many knaves in Rome as in any city of the Lutherans? What, are there no
Minions, and Courtisans there that serve for the use of the Pope and his
Cardinals? Did you not remember what was said of Rome by one of your own
Poets? Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma.
Depart from Rome all ye, whose care is to live holily.
Did you not consider that it was easy for us to retort your words to your
selves, and to say; If you please to hear what good effects the Popish
doctrine of justification by works does bring forth, look to the Jesuits
Catechism, to Watsons Quodlibets, and to the rest of those books of the same
argument, written by Popish Priests concerning the Jesuits, who are the
Puritane-Papists, and the very quintessence of their religion, and yet are
there described to be no other but Epicures, Atheists, fornicatours, Sodomites,
coseners, traitors, proud, malicious, contentious, covetous, and what not? Now
we know that the Jesuits will say that you are as leaud and naught as you
have described them to be. Like will to like, and get you both together: there
is no such goodness in either of you, as that you should take upon you to
question our goodness. And if I should rippe up this matter of your virtues to
the full, I should but cause a loathsome and filthy stink, troublesome both to
my self and to the Reader. Therefore I rest my self with that answer that I
have Sect. 15. and of satisfaction sect. 19.
before given upon the like occasion. Only I must note it for one of M.
Bishops Sycophants tricks, that he reckons it amongst our doctrines, that
good works have no reward in heaven.

34. W. BISHOP.
Having done with the Creed and ten Commandments, we must now come to our
Lords prayer.

Master PER. begins with it thus. The Lords Prayer is a most absolute form
of prayer: now in this we are taught to direct our prayers to God alone, Our
father, etc. and that only in the name and mediation of Christ; for God is our
father only by Christ: therefore to use any mediation of Saints is needless.

Ans. We allow our Lords prayer to be a most perfect form of prayer: yet hold
that many other sort of prayers may be made unto God very acceptably, as sundry
other prayers used by Christ, and set down in the Gospel do teach us: and
therefore to argue, that because one prayer of Christ's making is directed to
God, that no other may be made to any Saint, is very childish. We gather
prayer to Saints out of S. Paul's requesting the Romans and Corinthians, and
others to pray for him: and out of the mediation of the woman of Cananea to
Christ for her daughter: and the Disciples speaking to Christ for her; with
such like, both out of the old and new Testament. For if it had been either
needless or bootlesse, to have prayed unto God any otherwise, than in the name
and by the mediation of Christ; then S. Paul would not have requested the help
of mortal men's prayers to God for him: and if poor sinners prayers may help
us, much more may the intercession of the glorious Saints do, who are in far
greater favor with God: See the question of intercession of Saints. Again, if
that only form of prayer were to be used, neither were it lawful to pray to
Christ himself; neither could it be proved thereby, that we should pray in
Christ's name. For there is no express mention of Christ's name; neither any
petition for Christ's sake. For God may be truly called our Father, in that he
immediately creates and gives us our souls, which is more than our bodies,
that we receive from our carnal fathers.

R. ABBOT.
If the Lords prayer be a most perfect form of prayer, The Lords prayer
excludes prayer to Saints.
as M. Bishop allows it to be, then are we perfectly thereby directed, both
to whom and for what we are to pray. It cannot be called a most perfect form
of prayer, wherein there is any want of either of these things. To add any
thing to that that is perfect, is to deny the perfection of it, and to take
away any thing from it, is to make it maimed and imperfect. Seeing then by the
most perfect form of prayer, we are instructed to pray no otherwise but to God
only, it follows necessarily, that prayer to Saints is unlawful, because it
is exorbitant from that most perfect form. M. Bishops exception heereto is
very childish and vain, that other prayers may be made unto God very
acceptably, and that other prayers are used by Christ, and set down in the
Gospel, because in other prayers there may be nothing, and in the prayers set
down in the Gospel there is nothing, but what is consonant and agreeable to
this form. For though prayer be conceived in other words, yet it varieth not
from this form, so long as we pray to no other but to whom in this form we
are directed, nor for any other thing, but what in this prayer is concluded.
And albeit M. Bishop can allege, that in the Gospel and otherwhere there are
other prayers used and set down beside the Lords prayer, yet in the whole
course of Scripture can he find us no example of any prayer but to God alone.
If he did bring us example of prayer to Saints, somewhat it were, but now it
is idle that he alleges that there are prayers in other words. But he tells
us that they gather prayer to Saints out of S. Paul's requesting the Romans,
Corinthians, and others to pray for him. And well indeed they may, if they can
prove that S. Paul in the same sort praid to the Romans and others to pray for
him, as they pray to the Saints in heaven to pray for the^. But if that which
S. Paul did, were but a familiar request of mutual charity, whereas their
prayer to Saints is a service of religious duty; and he did beseech them
only as fellow members of the same body to give assistance to his prayers, not
as Mediators, as they make the Saints to obtain for their sakes the
acceptance thereof; then does M. Bishop show himself a ridiculous man, that
will draw from the one of these a conclusion of the other. Or if he will needs
confound the one of these with the other, it shall be well that his disciples
that crave the help of his prayers do take their ghostly father and set him up
like sweet S. Rood, and devoutly kneel down and pray unto him. But if to
crave each others prayers be piety, and to do that each to other which they do
to the Saints be damnable idolatry, then it is apparent that they gather that
which was never sowed, and do colourably allege these instances for the
abusing and blinding of simple men. As for Matt. 15.22.
the woman of Canaan, we read that she prayed to Christ for her daughter, but
we do not read that her daughter prayed to her; and we find that by her
prayer she showed her compassion, but that she took upon her any power of
mediation, we do not find. Chrysostom. ex varijs in Math. locis hom. 17. Vide
prudentiam mulieris: non rogat Iacobum, non obsecrat Ioannem, neque pergit ad
Petrum, nec intendit Apostoloru^ chorum, non quaesiuit mediatorem, sed pro
omnibus illis poenitentiam accepit comitem, quae adu^cati locum in pleuit and
sic. ad summum fontemperrexit.
But whereas he adds the disciples speaking to Christ for her, he shows
little discretion therein, because it appears not that they spoke for her,
but only requested their master to send her away, as being offended at her
importunate crying. And so little help is there out of this example for prayer
to Saints, as that Chrysostom rather gives us hereby a note to except against
it. Behold, says he, the wisdom of this woman; she requesteth not lames, she
entreats not John, she goes not to Peter, she looks not to the company of
the Apostles, she seeks for no mediator, but in stead of them all she takes
repentance for her companion which supplied the place of an advocate, and so
went to the wellhead. And whereas he has before demanded of her; Ibid. Dic
mihi mulier, quemadmodum ausa es, cum sis peccatrix and iniqua, accedere ad
Chrisium? Ego, inquit, nou^ quid agam etc. propterea descendit, propterea
carnem assumpsit and hon^o factus est vt ego ei audeam loqui.
Tell me woman, how durst thou, being a sinful and wicked woman thus come to
Christ? he brings her in answering; I know what I do: therefore descended he
from heaven, therefore did he take flesh and became man; that I might be bold
to speak unto him. It should seem then that it is a point of godly wisdom,
neither to go to one Saint nor other but to go directly to Christ himself,
and not to be terrified by the conscience of our sins, because for that
purpose he became man that we might be bold to come to him and to seek of him
the remission thereof. But M. Bishop adds another wise reason and well
beseeming his learning; If it had been either needless or bootlesse to have
prated unto God any otherwise than in the name and mediation of Christ, then S.
Paul would not have requested the help of mortal men's traiers unto God for
him. As if S. Paul when he requested them to pray for him, did intend that
they should pray otherwise for him than in the name and by the mediation of
Jesus Christ. He prays for them and they pray for him, not to be heard each
for others sake, but all to be heard for Christ's sake. Aug. cont. epis. Parmen.
l. 2. c. 8. Sic oration pro in uicemmembroru^ omniu^ adhuc in terra laborantium
ascendit ad caput in quo est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris.
Thus, as Austen says, the prayer of all the members laboring upon the earth,
each for other, goes up to the head who is gone before into heaven, in whom is
the propitiation for our sins. Now therefore M. Bishop very vainly infers,
that if poor sinners prayers may help us, much more may the intercession of
the glorious saints, because poor sinners prayers do not help us by way of
mediation, but only in loving care they join themselves to pray with us, that
we may both be helped for Christ's sake; whereas Popish intercession of Saints
intends not so much that the Saints should pray for us for Christ's sake, as
that Christ should accept us for the Saints sake. As for the favor of the
Saints we know God favors us no less than he favors them, being
redeemed with the same blood, and by one spirit sealed to the same hope; and no
more will he suffer an elect to perish on earth, than he will suffer a Saint
to perish in heaven. Whatsoever M. Bishop will plead for their favor, sure we
are that they have no favor in this respect, and therefore without assuming
any thing to themselves, they have left us to depend upon Christ's favor as
they have done. Now here again, see, says he, the question of the
intercession of Saints, whereas he has taken pains to skip over that question
also, and has said nothing of it. But remembering himself, he goes further
here and says, that if that only form of prayer were to be used, neither
were it lawful to pray to Christ himself, neither could it be proved thereby
that we should pray in Christ's name. As if any of us do say, that that only
form of prayer is to be used, who do commonly our selves use other forms of
prayer, and condemn them that hold it unlawful so to do. We only say, as
has been already declared, that no prayer is to be made, the matter and
substance whereof is not contained in the Lords prayer. And though that only
form were to be used, yet it follows not that Christ is not to be prayed
unto, because Christ is that God who is our heavenly father, and therefore to
Christ also we pray when we say; Our father which art in heaven. Neither does
it follow that then we should not pray in the name of Christ, because it should
nothing detract from the perfection of this form of prayer, that we be
otherwhere taught to make this prayer in the name of Christ. Albeit the prayer
it self, though not in words, yet in effect leads us thereunto, because God
is our Father no otherwise but in Christ, who has taken us into his communion
and fellowship where he has said; John 20.17.
I ascend to my father and your father, to my God and your God; Cyprian. de
orat. Domin. Hoc nomen nemo nostrum in oratione auderet attingere, nisi ipse
nobis sic pernasisset orare.
Which name (of father) says Cyprian, none of us might presume to use in
prayer but that Christ has given us liberty so to pray. Now therefore we cannot
truly say unto God Our Father but with implication of the name of Christ, in
whose name only it is that we understand him to be our father. As for that
which M. Bishop says, that God may be truly called our father, in that he
immediately creates and gives us our souls, that is nothing to the purpose,
because we question not how God may be called our father, but in what meaning
it is that we do call him father when we say, Our father which art in heaven.
For since Catechis. Roman p. 4. cap 9. sect. 1. Quid iucundius est patrius
nomine quod induigentiam sonat and charitatem?
the name of father imports kindness and love, as their own Roman Catechism
expounds, surely it follows, that because God is no otherwise kind and
loving unto us but 2. Cor. 1.20.
only in Christ, therefore in Christ only it is that we can call him father.

35. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, he hoppeth to the fourth petition; Give us our daily bread: in which
words we acknowledge (says he) that every morsel of bread is the mere gift
of God: what madness then is it for us to think that we should merit the
kingdom of heaven, that cannot merit so much as bread? It is false that we
cannot merit our bread: Math. 10. v. 11. 1. Cor. 9. v. 14.
For Christ teaches, that he who goes to preach the Gospel, is worthy of,
that is, meriteth and deserves his meat; which S. Paul testifies, saying:
that our Lord ordained, that those who preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. And do not day-labourers deserve their bread, before they eat it? and
others that buy their bread, do I hope deserve it. What ignorance then is it,
in the very principles of our faith, to avouch that we cannot merit bread?
which notwithstanding we pray God to give us; because, neither could we
deserve and yerne it, without his help and as sistance; neither would it do us
any good without his blessing.

R. ABBOT.
When Christ says, Our daily bread is of Gods mercy.
Mat. 10.10.
The workman is worthy of his meat, he makes one man debtour to another, but
God is debtour to no man. The preacher deserves his lively hood of the hearer,
but yet at Gods hands he can challenge nothing by desert. He that sets a
day-labourer to work is bound to pay him his hire, but God is not bound to pay
him bread. Yea many a man labors most painfully, and yet cannot thrive to
maintain himself with bread, and will M. Bishop say that God does him wrong
in not giving him his desert? And if the labor of the hands be to merit at
Gods hands, then the wicked man meriteth as well as the just, because the wicked
often labors as carefully as the just. So if to buy bread be to merit bread,
then the ungodly also meriteth his bread, because he has money to pay for it.
Would any man expect such silly and childish toies from so learned a man as M.
Bishop would be thought to be? Notwithstanding all the labor and travel of
our hands, notwithstanding all the virtues and righteousness of our life, yet
we beg our bread at Gods hands as the gift of his mercy. M Perkins therefore
rightly argues, that if by merit we cannot claim of God the bread of this
life, much less can we have any merit whereby to lay claim to everlasting
life.

36. W. BISHOP.
Thirdly, in the next petition: Forgive us our debts; four opinions of the
Roman religion (says he) are directly overthrown. What four at one blow!
what a Hercules have we here? let us hear which. The first is humane
satisfaction: for the child of God is taught here to pray for the pardon of his
sins; now to pray for pardon and to make satisfaction be contrary.

Answ. This is a silly overthrow: for it is so far off, that prayer and
satisfaction are contraries, that prayer it self is one of the three works of
satisfaction: Fasting, Praying, and giving of Alms are not contrary, but the
very works of satisfaction. And our Lords prayer is esteemed by S. Augustine (
who is as soon to be believed as M. Lib. 1 de Symbolo. cap. 6. in Enchir. cap.
69.
PERKINS) sufficient of it self, to satisfy for the light daily offenses that
just men fall into: besides, Christ himself prayed for pardon of these mortal
sins, for which notwithstanding Gods justice was fully satisfied by Christ
his sufferings; wherefore satisfaction and to sue for pardon, are not so
contrary, but they may well stand together.

R. ABBOT.
Christ offered himself to God for the sacrifice and satisfaction of our
sins, Forgiveness of sins excludes our satisfaction.
that by virtue of this satisfaction he might entreat pardon for us, and we
thereby also in his name might entreat pardon for our selves. Therefore we do
not say that prayer for forgiveness of sins is the denial of satisfaction,
but we say that this prayer being grounded upon a satisfaction made already in
Christ is a denial of satisfaction to be made by us. Our sins being satisfied
for in Christ, remain upon our faithful prayer freely for his sake to be
forgiven us. The forgiveness of sins is noted in scripture to be 2. Cor.
5.19.
the not imputing of them. If satisfaction be required for sin, it cannot be
said not to be imputed; and if it be not imputed, because Bernard. in Cant.
ser. 23. Omne quod mihi ipse non imputaredecreuerit sic est quasi non fuerit.
it is as if it never had been, as Bernard says there can no satisfaction be
required for it. What a frantic dream it is whereby they have made prayer
for forgiveness of sins to be a satisfaction for sin, and that S. Austins
words make nothing for their purpose, it has been Of satisfaction. sect. 6.
and 15.
before sufficiently declared, and is needless here to be repeated.

37. W. BISHOP.
Now to the second downfall: Merits are here also ouerthrown. For we
acknowledge our selves debtors, and we daily increase our debts: now it is
madness to think that they, who daily increase their debts, can deserve or
purchase any good of the creditors; in a word, this must be thought upon, etc.

And good reason too. First then I answer, that venial sins and small debts
that just mendaily incur, do not hinder the daily merit of their other good
works. As aseruant hired by the day, by committing some small fault, does not
thereby lose his days wages: again, though he should commit such a fault,
that might make him unworthy of his days hire; yet, if his Master did forgive
him that fault, his wages were notwithstanding due to him: and so the asking
pardon for our sins does not overthrow, but rather establish and fortify our
merits.

R. ABBOT.
Venial sins, Confession of sins is the demall of merit.
small debts, small faults, says M Bishop. A vain man, that knows neither
God nor himself, and therefore has so small conceit of the sins that he
daily commits against God. No doubt but he could plead the matter in Adams
behalf, that God did him wrong to censure him so severely for so small a
fault. What, it was but the eating of an apple or a fig, and he might by his
merits soon have made amends for it, and would God for so light a trespass
adiudge him to death, yea, and all his posterity for his sake? Well, God make
him wise to know with whom he has to do, and then he will see that his
sinallest faults are great enough to blow up all his merits, yea, and that in
his best merits there is enough to condemn him, if God should enter into
judgment with him. And let me ask him out of his own wise sawes that he has
here set down, if a hired servant of his by breach of conenants from day to
day, have voided the condition of his wages, and yet he be in the end content
to remit all, and to yield him his conditioned hire, will he think it well
that his servant shall say, that he owes him no thanks because he has nothing
but what he has merited and deserved? Surely M. Bishop would expect that his
good will and bounty should be acknowledged in this case, and would think it
a wrong to be vpbraided with his servants merit. But though his head serve him
not to conceive this, yet do thou remember, gentle Reader, that one forfeiture
of a man's estate, puts him wholly under the mercy of his Lord, and
whatsoever he can plead for himself otherwise, it serves not the turn, but
he stands at the courtesy of him whom he has offended. And what shall we
say then for our selves, whose life is a continual forfaiture of our estate
with God by our trespassing daily and hourly against him? Shall we think we
have merits to plead? shall we not acknowledge and confess that we stand
merely and wholly at the devotion of his mercy? And if remitting aliour
trespass, he vouchsafe to remember our service otherwise, and to reward it,
shall we say that he gives us but our own desert? Do we not see our good
deeds whatsoever they be, to be so drowned and overwhelmed with our sins, as
that it is Gods mere mercy that any mention is made of them? But when
furthermore our good deeds have in themselves such spots and stains of sin
as do give God just cause to reject them, as has been Of justification,
sect. 44. etc
before declared, shall we be so drunk with our own fancies as that we will
still dream of merit toward God? These things need not to be strongly urged,
because they pretaile mightily in the consciences of all that are not of
benumbed and dead hearts, and more has been answered hereof before, than
that M. Bishop should think fit to trouble us any more with these blind
reasons. He never cease to oppose, though when he is answered he never
knows what to reply.

38. W. BISHOP.
The third opinion imagined to be confuted by this petition, is: that temporal
punishment may be retained after the crime it self, and the eternal is
remitted: but this cannot stand (says he.) For we owe to God obedience, and
for the defect of this payment, we owe to God the forfeiture of punishment.
Sin then is called our debt, in respect of the punishment: And therefore when
we pray for pardon of our sins, we require not only the fault to be
pardoned, but the whole punishment; and when debt is pardoned, it is absurd to
think that the least payment should remain.

Answ. Here is a most absurd collection: For when we in our Lords prayer crave
pardon of our debts, we confess that we are in his debt, and that there is
payment of punishment yet due unto us, the remission whereof we then require:
now this prayer is made by the best men after their conversion (as he
confesses) who standing in Gods favor, and therefore free from eternal
punishment, do notwithstanding crave pardon and release of some punishment, by
M. PER. own interpretation: Whereupon it follows most evidently out of this
petition, that after eternal punishment is forgiven unto the just, there is
some other punishment remaining, of which they crave pardon; and consequently
this opinion of ours is (by this very petition and M. PER. own exposition of
it) much strengthened and confirmed, and nothing at all weakened.

R. ABBOT.
If M. Temporal punishment remitted in forgiveness of sins.
Bishop may be the expounder of M. Perkins exposition, we doubt not but he will
make some good matter of it. M. Perkins meaning is plain enough, and so are
his words, that after our first converting and turning unto God, we have still
cause from day to day to humble our selves before God, and to beg of him
remission both of temporal and eternal punishments, which by our sins from
day to day we run into. It follows not of any thing that Master Perkins
says, that the eternal punishment being already forgiven, we ask here the
forgiveness of some temporal punishment, but that as our sins are daily, so
we ask forgiveness daily both of the one and of the other. Aug. de vera and
falsa paenit. cap. 5. Quia quotidiana est effensio, oport^t vt sit quotidiana
etiam remissio.
Because the offense is every day, says S. Austin, therefore we have need to
have remission eucry day. Now the collection against M. Bishop is pregnant and
clear; for if to ask forgiveness of the sin be to ask release of the
punishment, then it follows, that our petition being granted, there is no
remainder of punishment after the forgiveness of the sin. The ground of this
collection he himself approoueth, saying, When we in our Lords prayer crave
pardon of our debts, we confess that we are in his debt, and that there is
payment of punishment due unto us, the remission whereof we then require. If
then we here require the remission of punishment, I ask him, do we not require
theremission of eternal punishment? What, have we the remission of eternal
punishment without asking or praying for it? Does Christ teach us to beg the
forgiveness of temporal punishment and not of eternal? Tell us your mind
plainly M. Bishop: do not gloss the matter with a false application of M.
Perkins words. A man commits mortal sin, and thereby incurreth eternal
punishment. He comes to God and humbles himself and says as Christ has
taught him: forgive us our trespasses. Does he not hereby crave of God for
Christ's sake, the release of of that punishment? If he say, no, he is more
absurd than that Christian ears will give him the hearing. If he say, yea, he
is confounded in the cause, because it must then needs be granted, that the
hearing of our prayer is the relaxation both of temporal and eternal
punishment; of temporal, by his own confession; of eternal, by a truth which
he must confess whether he will or no. Their opinion therefore is not
strengthened as he vainly pretends, but is plainly overthrown by the true
and necessary construction of this petition.

39. W. BISHOP.
The fourth point of our doctrine hence impugned by M. PER. is: that a man in
this life may fulfill the law. Whereas in this place every servant of God is
taught to ask daily pardon for the breach of the law: answer is made, that our
daily sins are venial, and not against the law, though besides the law: but
this which they say, is against this petition: for a debt that comes by
forfeiture, is against the band or obligation. Now every sin is a debt,
causing the forfeiture of punishment, and therefore is not beside, but against
the law.

Answ. I grant that every sin is a debt, causing the forfeiture of
punishment; but this punishment may be small and short, and so the sin
venial, and the debt not against the law directly, yet against the band of
some moral duty: as the misspending of time, using of some idle words, and the
committing of such like light faults, which I am bound in reason to avoid; but
not by any prescript law directly. And thus in fine we see, how foulely M. PER.
was mistaken, that thought to overthrow four points of our doctrine at a clap,
when not so much as one is thereby any whit at all stirred.

R. ABBOT.
It will be well for M. Bishop that misspending of time and using of idle words
be reckoned for venial sins; for God knows he has misspent a great deal
of time in the writing of these books, and has sent us a number of idle words.
Tush, says he, the sin is but venial, and the punishment but small and
short for such light faults. But if it be a point of godly Ephe. 5.16.
wisdom to redeem the time, as S. Paul teaches, surely it is a point of
folly to esteem so lightly of misspending time; and he will not so easily
swallow idle words, that regards what our Savior says that Mat. 12.36. No
man lives without breach of Gods law.
of every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account at the day of
judgment. To come to the matter, M. Perkins reason is very good, There can be
no forfaiture without breach of the condition of a bond. Every sin is a
forfeiture. Therefore every sin is a breach of the condition of a bond. The
obligation or bond here is the law of God. Seeing then every sin, and
therefore every venial sin makes a man subject to a forfeiture of
punishment, it must needs be that every venial sin must be holden to be a
breach of the law of God. And because no man can live without daily committing
venial sins, therefore it follows that no man can live without daily
breach of the law of God. I dispute not here whether sin be rightly called
venial in his sense or not; I aim at the point, that because no man by their
confession can live without venial finnes for which he daily says, forgive us
our trespasses, and every venial sin is a breach of the law of God,
therefore no man can live without daily breach of Gods law, and therefore that
no man in this life does fulfill the law. But well fare a schoole-tricke yet
that shall put this argument quite out: forsooth there is a twofold bond whence
the forfeiture arises. One is the law of God, and venial sins he tells us
are not against the law directly; we are not bound to avoid them by any
prescript law directly. Thus faintly and fearfully he speaks: his own
conscience tells him that they are against the law of God, but being loath to
confess the truth, which thus notwithstanding reigns over him, he minceth
the matter with directly and indirectly. But if the curse of God which is the
penalty of the law do light upon him for these sins, what shall it boot
him to say, that he did but indirectly run into it? Well they are not
directly against the law, but against what are they directly? They are, says
he, against the bond of some moral duty, and we are bound in reason to avoid
them. Here is then the other obligation or bond, the bond of reason, the bond
of moral duty. But is there any bond of moral duty but only the law of God?
and does not the law perfectly determine all moral duty? or does the reason of
man find it self otherwise bound than by the conscience of the law? Surely S.
Paul says, Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin but by the law, and has M. Bishop a way to know sin
otherwise than by the law? S. Paul says; Romans 4.15.
Where there is no law, there is no transgression, and shall we believe M.
Bishop that there is transgression where there is no law? August. de pecc.
meritis and remiss. l. 2. c. 16. Quomodo non vetatur per iustitiam si peccatum
est? Neque peccatum erit siquid erit, si non diuinitus iubeatur vt non sit.
How should it not be forbidden by righteousness, says S. Austin, if it be
sin? and that that is sin, says he, shall be no sin if God do not forbid
the being of it. Does God forbid all sin or else it is no sin; and yet is
there some sin that is not against the law of God? Well, let us leave M.
Bishop to his reason; for we see he knows not the law. As for us, we doubt
not but the law of God is the full description of all moral duty, and that
every trespass in moral duty, and namely their venial sins are
transgressions of the law, and therefore that no man fulfilleth the law because
no man lives without daily venial sins: venial as they call them, though
all sin by the law be adjudged mortal. Thus we see how foully M. Bishop was
mistaken to think with his elder sticks to prop up his four points of
Popery, which whether he will or not are fallen to the ground, and he can
devise no further to hold them up.

40. W. BISHOP.
He says further, In this clause (as we forgive our debtors) it is taken for
granted, that we may certainly know that we repent and believe, and are
reconciled by God; which all Roman Catholics deny.

Answ. Nothing less, because much more is required to the one, than to the
other. For it is far easier to discern, whether I do yet bear any evil
will to my neighbor, than to know assuredly, that I do heartily repent me of
all my sins, and that for the love of God; and further, that I have a firm
purpose not to commit hereafter, any kind of mortal sin: these things (as
every one may plainly see) are far more difficult, than the other of
forgiving them that trespass against us.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins does not say, Our repentance and faith to be known as well as our
charity.
that in this clause it is taken for granted that we may certainly know that we
repent and believe, as M. Bishop has falsely and guilefully set down, but that
in this clause it is taken for granted that we may certainly know that we are
in love and charity with men when we make reconciliation. Whereupon he
infers the other, Why then may we not know certainly that we repent and
believe, and are reconciled to God? M. Bishop tells us, that much more is
required to the one than to the other, but what that is he tells not. He
says it is far easier to discern the one than the other, but reason he gives
none. He says that every one may plainly see it, and we think we can see into
a millstone as far as he, and yet we cannot see but that a man may discern the
truth of his heart in the one as well as in the other, and till he give reason
to the contrary, we so leave him.

41. W. BISHOP.
In the last words: and lead us not into temptation, Psalm. 26.1.
we pray not (says he) that God should free us from temptation, for it is
otherwhiles good to be tempted: but that we be not left unto the malice of
Satan, and held captive of the temptation: for here to be led into temptation,
and to be delivered, are opposed. Now hence I gather, that he who is the
child of God truly justified and sanctified, shall never fall wholly and
finally from the grace of God; and I conclude on this manner: 1. Ioh. 5.
That which we ask according to the will of God, shall be granted: But this
the child of God asks, that he might never be wholly forsaken of his father,
and led captive into temptation: this therefore shall be granted.

Answ. If this argument were sound, never should any Christian that says our
Lords prayer, fall finally and be damned; because they all make this petition,
and that according to the will of God, who would have all men saved. Many
things then besides saying our Lords prayer, are required to salvation, for
want of which many that have often said that prayer fall finally. Again, he
mistaketh the true sense of that petition: for therein we do not ask that we
continue not in sin, which we asked in the former petition (forgive us our
trespasses) but we pray that we be not overcome by the devil, by yielding our
consent to the temptation, and so fall into sin. Lastly he forgeteth himself
much when he says, that it is good to be tempted: for he holds for certain,
that the very first motions to sin in us (which is the beginning of the
temptation) are mortal sins; and so by himself, it is good to fall into
mortal sin, if it be good we should be tempted.

R. ABBOT.
Many there are who are Christians in name, The true Christian never falls
away.
but not in deed; Christians to men, but not to God, Christians by outward
profession and partitipation of Sacraments, but not by inward regeneration and
grace. M. Perkins namely speaks of them who are truly justified and
sanctified, who with a true heart and unfeigned faith, do call upon the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The rest speak prayers, but they do not pray: they
repeat words with the mouth, but the heart, where is the true seat of prayer,
has no feeling of that they say. Now of them that are truly the children of
God, and do faithfully and truly pray, it is undoubtedly true which M. Perkins
says, that never any does wholly and finally fall away from the grace of God.
For Psalm. 145.18.
the Lord is nigh unto all them that call faithfully upon him, and fulfilleth
the desire of them that fear him; he will hear their cry and will help
them. And 1. Ioh. 5.14.
this is the assurance that we have of him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us; and if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we
ask, we know that we have the petitions that we have desired of him. Aug. do
bono pers^uer. cap. 6. Quisquis igitur exauditur hoc poscens, non infertur in
contumaciae tentationem qua possit vel dignus sit perseuerantiam sanctitatis
amittere. At enim voluntate sua quisque deserit deum vt merito deseratur a deo.
Quis hoc negauerit? sed ideo petimus ne inseramur in tentationem vt hoc non
fiat, and si exaudimur vtique non fit quia deus non permittit vt fiat.
Whosoever then is heard, says S. Austin, in that he prays, not to be led
into temptation, he is not brought into the temptation of that wilfulness,
whereby he should fail to persevere in holiness. And whereas it may be
objected, Yea, but it is by a man's own will that he forsakes God, so as to
be woorthily forsaken of God; he answers, Who will deny that? But therefore
do we ask not to be brought into temptation, that that may not come to
pass; and if we be heard, surely it does not come to pass, because God does
not suffer it so to be. As touching the sense of the petition, M. Bishop to
assume somewhat to himself, takes upon him to correct M. Perkins, whereas the
sense delivered by M. Perkins, is the more sound and effectual, that our
prayer is; not to be left to the malice of Satan, and held captive of the
temptation. For whereas M. Bishop says, that we pray that we be not overcome
by the devil, by yielding our consent to the temptation, and so fall into
sin, it is true indeed that so we pray; but yet because we know that God
does not so free his elect from temptation, but that they are sometimes
overcome, and do consent to the temptation, and fall into sin, we
understand further, that if God see it expedient thus to let us fall by
temptation, yet he will not leave us to be holden captives therein, nor suffer
us so to be tempted, but that he be always with us, to deliver us from evil,
that Psalm. 37.24:
though we fall, yet we may rise again whilst he supporteth us with his
hand. For whereas M. Bishop says, that M. Perkins much forgets himself, in
saying, that it is good otherwhiles to be tempted, it is he indeed that much
forgets himself in so blameing M. Perkins, who intends not that
temptation is good of it self, but only accidentally in respect of the good
use which God makes thereof, turning the poison of one sin to be a
preservative against another, and by falling once making a man the more wary
not to fall again. And thus S. Austin by the words of the Apostle says, that
Romans 8.28.
all things to Gods elect work together for good; Aug. de corrept. and great.
ca. 9. Talibus diligentibus deum omnia coopera^tur in bonu^, vsqueadeo prorsus
omnia vt si qui little deuiant and exorbitant, etiam hoc ipsum eis faciat
proficere in bonum.
even so altogether all things, as that if any of them swerve and go aside out
of the w^y, he makes that also to further their good. Bernar. de diverse. ser.
1. An vero ei peccata ipsa non cooperantur in bonu^ qui ex eis humilior,
feruentior, solicitior, timoratior, and cauti or inuenitur?
For do not sins work for good to him, says S. Bernard, who is found
thereby more humble, more fervent, more careful, more fearful and wary than
before? And thus Gregory very truly says, that Greg. Moral. l. 2. c. 25.
Fit mira dispensatione pietatis vt vnde malignus hostis cor tentat vt
interimat, inde misericors conditor hoc erudiat vt viuat.
by the wonderful dispensation of piety, it comes to pass that by what
the wicked enemy tempts the heart to destroy it, by the same our merciful
creator nurtureth it to life. But the concupiscences and lusts of sin, do
specially serve for this end; which God has left as an enemy within our own
berders, to fight against us for the exercising of our faith and hope, that
seeing our own weakness and danger in our selves, we may the more earnestly
call upon God, and depend upon his power; that being vexed and afflicted with
the temptations of sin, we may hunger and thirst after righteousness so
much the more; that being wearied with war, we may the more long after the
place of our peace; and obteining through his grace the conquest and victory,
we may through his mercy obtain the promise of the crown of glory. Thus God
2. Cor. 4.6.
commands the light to shine out of darkness, and out of evil works good
unto those that are his, which M. Bishop also I doubt not would acknowledge,
but that a malicious spirit of wilful contradiction carries him headlong to
resist apparent and known truth.

42. W. BISHOP.
Finally (he says) this clause (Amen) signifies a special faith concerning
all the former petitions, that they shall be granted, and therefore a special
faith concerning remission of sins.

Answ. It signifies a special hope and confidence to obtain them, but no
certainty of faith, unless upon a condition which is uncertain: that is, if
we do our parts, God will not fail of his; if we do heartily repent us,
and use the Sacrament of Penance duly, we shall assuredly obtain remission of
our sins.

R. ABBOT.
The Roman Catechism in this point confirms that which M. Amen what it
imports in the Lords prayer.
Perkins says and makes good our special faith, expounding Amen to be added
by our Savior Christ Catec. Roman. p. 4. cap. 17. sect. 4. Cui voci illa
quodammodo subiecta sententia est, scito tuas auditas esse preces. Habet enim
vim respondentis and illum qui precibus quod velit impetrarit cum bona gratia
dimittentis dei. Et sect. 6 Intelligentes nos iam impetrasse omnia ac
sentientes praesentem vim diuini auxilij illud vna cum propheta canimus; Ecc^
dominus adiuuat me etc.
as Gods answer to this effect; Know that thy prayers are heard; and that we
are to understand it, as that we have obtained all our desires, and feeling
the present power of the help of God do sing with the Prophet; Behold God is
my helper; the Lord is the protector of my soul. If I be to conceive Amen to
be Gods answer that he has heard the prayer that I have faithfully made unto
him, then am I to believe that God has forgiven me my sins, because that is
one part of the prayer which I have made. Whatsoever poison there is in the
Roman Catechism that M. Bishop sucketh very greedily; but this
acknowledgement of truth, though perhaps unwarily delivered, he can by no
means admit. As for his uncertain condition I have before showed that it is
the overthrow of Christian faith and hope, which wholly withdraws our eyes
from looking upon our selves and our own merits that we may rest wholly and
only upon the mercy and goodness of almighty God. It may well stand with that
doubting and fear which elsewhere he requires, but confidence and hope can in
no sort grow upon it.

43. W. BISHOP.
Hitherto M. Perkins has argued against us out of the Lords prayer: now I will
briefly show how the Protestants doctrine contrarieth it.

I have in my answer to his objections, touched some points already: I add,
that one position of their doctrine crosses three of the first petitions. I
prove it thus: In every petion we must be assured (as M. Perkins holds) or
at the least have a good hope to obtain that we pray for, or else it booteth
us not to pray: but according to the Protestants doctrine no man can be
assured, nay can have any hope to obtain the three first petitions: for if
original sin do continually dwell in us, and infect all our actions with
deadly sin, as they teach: Gods name cannot be sanctified in us, that are
infected with such an unclean leprosy: neither secondly, can God reign as a
King in us, if sin possess and command all our members: and thirdly, Gods
will cannot be done by us on earth as it is done in heaven, if we cannot
keep his laws and commandments, which they in heaven do: wherefore the
Protestants have no assurance to obtain the three first petitions, who are by
their teachers assured, that they are not to be expected or hoped for: nor
they cannot (according to their own rules) from their heart make the said
petitions, being out of all hope to obtain them.

R. ABBOT.
There is a notable picture of the regenerate man in the holy woman Rebecca
when Genesis 25 22.23.
the children strove within her, and the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in
thy womb, and two manner of people shall be divided out of thy bowels, and the
one people shall be mightier than the other, and the elder shall serve the
younger. For so are there in the faithful the old and the new man, the flesh
and the spirit, somewhat whereby they are the children of God, and somewhat
whereby they are still the children of this world. The original leprosy still
cleaves unto us, but it is begun to be cleansed and the strength of it is
abated already. Sin still possesses and dwells in our members, but we do
not say, as M. Bishop falsely pretends, that it has the commanding of them.
Aug. de peecat. mer. and remiss. l. 2. c. 7. Nunc ei similes esse tam coepimus
per primitias spiritus, and adhuc dissimiles sumus per reliquias vetustatis,
proinde in quantu^ similes, in tantum regenerante spiritu filij dei: in qua^tum
autem dissimiles, in tantum si. ij carnis and seculi. Illinc ergo peccare non
possumus; hinc vero si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, nosi, so^ decipimus
etc.
We are now like unto God, says S. Austin, by having the first fruits of the
spirit, and we are still unlike unto him by the remnants of our old state. So
far therefore as we are like him, so far are we by the spirit of regeneration
the sons of God: and so far as we are unlike him, so far are we the children
of the flesh and of the world. On the one side therefore we cannot sin, but
on the other side if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves and
there is no truth in us. Now then semblably we answer M. Bishop, that
according to that we are renewed, and by the spirit of God are become the sons
of God, the name of God is sanctified in us, his kingdom is begun in us, and
we do his will in earth with ready will as it is done in heaven. But by the
remainder of the corruption of flesh and of the old man, there is a let that
Gods name is not perfectly sanctified in us, his kingdom takes not full place
in us, neither do we his will in such measure as we ought to do. Yet we pray
that the old man, the body of sin may more and more be destroyed, that the
work of Gods kingdom may more and more be fulfilled in us; that we may more
and more keep his commandments and do his will, not only with ready will, but
without all let and hinderance fully and perfectly as they in heaven do.
Herein we pray that we may increase from day to day, and we believe that God
hears us and grants our request and will go forward with his good work
till he bring us in heaven to the perfection of it: so far are the Protestants
from being out of hope of the obtaining of these three first petitions as M.
Bishop fondly dreameth.

44. W. BISHOP.
In the fourth we ask as well to be made partakers of Christ's blessed body in
the Sacrament, which is the food of our souls: as for our daily corporal
sustenance. For so do the ancient fathers expound that petition: as namely S.
Cyprian in oratione Dominica: S. Hiero. in 6. Matt. S. Amb. li. 5. de Sacra. c.
4. where he has these memorable words of the blessed Sacrament: that before
the words of Christ it was bread, but after it is the body of Christ. Why then
(says he) is it called here bread? he answers, that it is called bread not
simply, but supersubstantiall bread. For so does the Greek word Epiousion
signify, as well as daily:) it is (says he) not such bread as passes into
our body, but it is the bread of eternal life that vpholdeth the substance of
our souls. Now you may be well assured, that Protestants who will not believe
any such bodily presence, do not pray to God to give it them.

R. ABBOT.
We wot well that sundry of the ancient Fathers have expounded this petition,
Real presence fondly collected out of the Lords prayer.
not only literally of corporal food, but also mystically of the
participation of the blessed Sacrament, wherein Christ is spiritually offered
and given unto us to be unto us the bread of everlasting life. Of this we will
not contend with the fathers; only we would know of M. Bishop, if this daily
bread be understood of the Sacrament, how is it that the people with them are
not called and urged to the daily participation of the Sacrament, that daily
they may be partakers of this bread, accordingly as they are taught to pray? Or
if without the receiving of the Sacrament, a man may be partaker of the
spiritual food of the body and blood of Christ, as by their construction of
this petition compared with their practice it may seem they do confess, then
they must acknowledge that there is no necessity of their real presence, to
make us partakers of the body and blood of Christ. Which although I do not see
how M. Bishop should well and hansomly avoid, yet he thought good here to put
in one place for the same real presence of Christ's body, his choice
notwithstanding being so small, as that he has brought us one that says
nothing for him, yea in very truth says altogether against him. The words of
Ambrose are these: Ambr. de Sacram. l. 5. cap. 4. Ante verba Christi quod
offertur panis est: vbi Christi verba deprompta suerint, iam non panis dicitur
sed corpus appellatur.
Before the words of Christ that which is offered is bread; but when the words
of Christ are uttered, it is not now termed bread, but it is called the body.
M. Bishop falsifieth the words: but taking them as they are, what does he
find in them, for assertion of the real presence? Is it any proof of real
presence, to say that the Sacrament is called the body of Christ? Now as it is
called the body of Christ, so is it also called supersubstantiall bread, not
for that that it is really to the mouth and belly, but for that that it
signifies and presents to our faith. And this does Ambrose himself
immediately declare when he adds, Ibid. Non iste panis est, qui vadit in
corpus, sed ille panis vitae eternae qui anima nostrae substantiam fulcit.
for it is not this bread which passes into the body, but that bread of
eternal life that vpholdeth the substance of our soul. Where when he deuideth
the bread of eternal life, from that which goes into the body, he plainly
shows, that that which goes into the body, is not the real body of Christ,
which is the bread of eternal life. What hap had M. Bishop here to speak of
the real presence, having no better witness to plead for it?

45. W. BISHOP.
And touching forgiveness of their debts to God, and sins; they are so assured
of that before hand, by the certainty of their new faith, that they can no
more request of God forgiveness of their sins, then they can ask, that God
will make them reasonable creatures, which they see that he has done already.
And they holding the first motions to evil in temptation, to be mortal
sins, which no mortal man ordinarily can now avoid; how can they pray God
not to suffer them to be lead into temptation, when they teach it to be
impossible to escape the venime of it? And if they understand it so, as M.
PERKINS teaches: to wit, that they there pray, not to be left to the malice of
Satan, they cannot without loss of the certainty of their faith pray so;
because they hold themselves assured of that before hand.

Neithey can they pray God generally to deliver them from all evil, affirming
as they do, that we must needs fall into mortal sin at every step almost,
which is the greatest of all other evil. And finally, if it belong to God to
deliver us from sin, and all other evil; then Calvin and his followers do
wickedly blaspheme, who teach God to be the author and worker in us, of all
error, sin, and wickedness. Thus much of the Pater noster.

R. ABBOT.
Our belief and assurance of the forgiveness of sins is, that when we beg
the same of God by faithful prayer, he grants us our desire; and therefore
do we pray for it, because he has promised, and we believe his promise,
that in praying we shall obtain it. Of this idle Sophisme of his, there has
been enough said a Of the certainty of salvation. sect. 5.18.

How we pray not to be led into temptation, but delivered from evil.


before. We pray that we be not led into temptation, in such meaning as before
has been said, understanding simply temptation, so as to be left of God
therein, without the assistance of his grace. This hinders not but that the
first motions of lust wherewith we are tempted, are in their own nature
mortal sins, though by the mercy of God they become not so to us. For we do
not say, as he untruly alleges, that it is impossible to escape the venime
of temptation; nay, we say that the faithful do escape the venime and poison
of it, because Romans 8.28. See before sect. 41.
all things (even temptation and sin) work together for good unto them that
love God. And thus do we pray also, to be delivered from evil, that though
we be not as yet set free from temptation, yet the same by his ouerruling
providence, may be so ordered, as that by his mercy we may be free from the
evil and danger thereof. And what should let but that we may pray God generally
to deliver us from all evil, even from that Romans 7.21.
evil which is (always) present with us when we would do good; from verse. 23.
the law of sin that is in our members; from Gal. 5.17.
the flesh that lusts against the spirit, because we believe that God
hears us when we so pray, and will deliver us from that bondage wherein we
are forced for the time to serve? Yea this he has begun to do already,
destroying by the power of his spirit more and more the body of sin, and
yielding 2. Cor. 4.16.
the outward man to be corrupted, that the inner man may be renewed from day to
day, until perfect newness shall come, and all evils shall be fully
abolished, because 1. Cor. 15.28.
God who is all good, shall be all in all. And if we cannot pray generally to
be delivered from all evil, because we affirm the first motions of sin
which are evil to continue still in us, let M. Bishop tell us how they pray to
be delivered generally from all evil, who though they acknowledge not the
first motions to be sin, yet acknowledge them to be evil as well as we; and
that from this evil no man is set free so long as he continues in the warfare
of this life. As for the certainty of salvation, we loose it not by these
prayers, but are rather thereby confirmed in it, because we believe as has
been said, that God hears us when we so pray, and therefore rest assured
according to the measure of our faith, that God will guide us in safety through
the midst of all temptations, and will finally deliver us from all evil, and
bring us to be partakers of his kingdom for ever. That which he says of
Calvin is an odious repetition of an impudent slander, which is cleared before
in the answer to his Preface, the tenth sect.

46. W. BISHOP.
Now before I come to the Sacraments, I may not omit to speak a word of the
Aue-Maria, which in old Catechismes follows immediately after the Pater
noster. The Protestants have cassierd it, and may not abide to hear it once
said; but therein, as much as in any other such matter, they disgrace their
doctrine, and discredit themselves. For all the words used of old therein, are
the very words of the holy Ghost, registered in S. Lukes Gospel; and therefore
they bewray either great ignorance, or a wicked spirit to dwell in them, that
cannot endure to hear the words of Gods spirit. Besides in holy Scripture it
is prophesied, Luke 1.
that from henceforth all generations should call the Virgin MARY blessed. In
what terms then can we more conveniently so call her, then in the very same
that were composed by an Archangell, are penned by the Evangelists, and by them
commended unto all good Christians? besides, the sense of them is comfortable
unto us, as containing a remembrance of the incarnation of the Son of God for
our redemption, and we on our parts do thereby give thanks to God for that
inestimable benefit, and congratulate our Savior with humble thanks therefore,
saying: Blessed be the fruit of thy womb, JESUS. I need not in such clear
evidence of Gods word, allege the testimony of any ancient father: he that
list to see how it has been used in the purest antiquity, let him read S.
Athanasius in Euang. de deipara. S. Ephem. de laudibus B. Mariae. S. Basils and
S. Chrysostomes lyturgies, which can with no more reason be denied to be
theirs, then the rest of their works. One short sentence I will set down in
commendations of it, out of that most reverend and devout Bernard. The Angels
triumph, and the heavens do congratulate with them; the earth leapeth for joy,
and hell trembles when the Aue-Maria is devoutly said. Apud Dionisi. Corinth.
1. part. in Euan. c. 5.17.
Good Christians then must needs take great delight in it, even as the badde
may not abide it.

R. ABBOT.
The Protestants do so well endure to hear the words of Gods spirit, as that
they have made special choice thereof as the principal weapon wherewith to
fight against the superstitions and abominations of the Papists. Whose absurd
dotage as many other ways, so in their Aue-Marie most notably appears, in
that of a salutation to the virgin Marie being present, they have made an
invocation of her being absent, and think it a matter of great merit and
devotion to use it like a charm by saying it over thus or thus many times at
once which the Angel spoke but once. M. Bishop allegeth for it the old
Catechismes, but he neither tells us what Catechismes he means, nor how old
they are; which if he had, we should easily have descried the vanity of his
speech. For if by old Catechismes he mean as he should, the Catechismes of the
ancient fathers and primitive Church, he is therein found a liar, because in
those Catechismes there is nothing of it. But if by old Catechisms he mean any
that have been of latter times under the darkness of Popery, he abuses his
Reader, who in case of Religion looks for satisfaction even from the first
age, because what was not then a part of religion can be no part of religion
now; the truth of Christ being one and the same from the beginning and for
ever. The words, he says, are the words of the holy ghost, and so say we; but
we say that the words of the holy ghost may be abused, as here they are,
against the purpose and meaning of the holy Ghost. They are the words of the
holy Ghost which Christ used to the Apostles, Luke 24.25.
Fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: and
will M. Bishop therefore say that we may use those words for invocation of the
Apostles? He allegeth again that it is prophesied that all generations should
call the virgin Mary blessed; and we deny it not but we may call her blessed in
the meditations of our own hearts, and in speaking of her to them that hear
us, though we speak not idly as to her that hears us not. Be it that the
words were composed by the Archangell, penned by the Evangelists, commended to
the reading of all good Christians as other words of scriptures are; be it that
the sense of them is most comfortable unto us, yet what is all this to prove
that these words are to be used for a devotion and service to the virgin Mary?
specially in such sort as Popery has used them in a strange and unknown
tongue, which could yield no comfort of the sense, nor remembrance thereby of
the incarnation of Christ, nor perfourmance of thanksgiving or congratulation
toward God. That purest antiquity which he allegeth is but corrupt nouelty,
and lewd forgery. The Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostom are very falsely so
termed, and yet in Basils Liturgy there is no mention of the Aue-Mary. Of
Chrysostomes Liturgy there are so many different copies published, one by Leo
Tuscus, another by Erasmus, another by Pelargus, who also testifies that he
has seen a fourth, as that if Chrysostom did leave any, yet no man is able to
say of any of them that this is it. The sermon of Athanasius in Euangel. de
Deipara, is by Nann. epist. nuncupatoria praefixa oper. Athanasij. In tertiam
classem: relegaui omnes supposititios libros quos Athanasij non puto.
Nannius their own translatour put amongst the rank of bastards and
counterfets. The name of Deipara was not so famous in the time of Athanasius as
to be prefixed in the title of a sermon; neither could it have wanted memorable
testimony in the council of Ephesus if it had been then known for his.
Ephrems works, as Hieron. in Catalog. script. ecclesiast. Multa syro sermon
composuit.
Hierome says, were written in the Syrian tongue. If M. Bishop can show them
in the same tongue, yea or ancientlie translated into the Greeketongue, we can
give the better credit that they are his indeed. Otherwise we know that they
have been in hucksters handling; neither can we but be suspicious of that
iugling and foisting which we find to have been so usual and common with
them. And if M. Bishop will have us to take it for Ephrems work, let him tell
us who is the translatour of it. Gerardus Vossius who translated and published
the works of Ephrem by the warrant of Pope Sixtus the fifth, whereas he puts
his name to so many as he translated, puts no name to the Sermon which M.
Bishop cites, showing thereby that it is not in Greek, and therefore
importing it to be a counterfeit. He says, that these can with no more reason
be denied to be theirs, then the rest of their works: But I answer him, that
though there were no other reason, yet it is sufficient reason for us to be
suspicious of these, because in them some things are set down, whereof in the
rest of their undoubted works, and in the infinite volumnes of antiquity
which are approved and acknowledged, there is no token to be found. As for
Bernand he lived in latter times of great apostasy and corruption. In that
truth which he retained, he is a good witness for us against them; but he can
be no witness for them to make good those corruptions which he drew from the
time wherein he lived. And yet neither is his testimony cited out of any of
his own works, but from another, I know not whom, and therefore is the less
to be regarded; to say nothing, that the speech is ridiculous and fond: for why
should we imagine that the Angels triumph, and the heavens congratulate, that
the earth leapeth for joy, and hell trembles at the devout saying of the
Aue-Mary, more then when we say devoutly, Our Father which art in heaven, etc?
Surely good Christians will reject such absurd dotages and idle dreams, though
with bad Christians al is fish that comes to net: and what custom offers,
they are ready to entertain, never regarding to consult with the word of
Christ for warrant of that they do.

47. W. BISHOP.
Now let us come to the last part of the Catechism, which is of the
Sacraments, where M. PER. does briefly repeat his arguments, used before
against the real presence: I might therefore, send the Reader unto the first
Chapter of this book for the answer; but because the matter is of great
importance, I will here again give them a short answer. (says he) the real
presence is overthrown out of these words, he took bread and brake it: ergo,
that which Christ took, was not his body, etc.

A simple overthrow, Christ (indeed) took and brake bread, but presently after
blessing it, made it his body by these words, this is my body.

R. ABBOT.
I might send the Reader, says M. Bishop, unto the first chapter of this book
for the answer, and yet in this book there is no such chapter where his answer
should be found. But touching the real presence, M. Perkins argues out of the
words of Christ to this effect; that Christ brake that which he took, and that
which he took was bread and not his body, and therefore that it was bread and
not really his body which he brake; it being absurd that Christ should be
said to break himself, and therefore remaining that that which he brake was
the Sacrament only, and not himself. To answer this M. Bishop we see is
somewhat hardly bestead, and forces the words of Christ to another order than
the Evangelists and S. Paul have observed in the delivering of them. Yea he
crosses the Canon of the Mass of rather sets the Canon of the Mass at
variance with the institution of Christ. In a word he says he knows not
what, and and cannot tell what to say. The Evangelists and the Apostle
constantly and with one consent put blessing before breaking; but he says that
Christ first brake and then blessed. He says that it was bread which Christ
brake, but if it were bread which Christ brake, then what is it which the
Priest breaks? If it be bread, then there is no transubstantiation. If it be
not bread, then he swarueth from Christ's institution. He makes Christ to
break the host before consecration; but the Mass Priest breaks it not till
after consecration. How then shall the Masse-book and the Gospel be thought to
agree together? All this it seems he runs into because he cannot tell how
it should be said that Christ did break himself which was the thing that M.
Perkins urged. But let him reconcile these differences, and then send us a more
perfect answer; otherwise we must hold him for a simple man that could not
avoid such a simple overthrow.

48. W. BISHOP.
Again: M. Per. 2.
Christ said not under the form of bread, or in bread; but this that is, bread
is my body.

Answ. It is false to say that this word (Hoc. This) does demonstrate bread:
for it is of a different gender from it, both in Latin and Greek; and if he
had said, that that bread had been his body, his word was so omnipotent, that
it had been of force to make it his body; so that M. Perkins makes a false
constraction, which nothing helps his error.

R. ABBOT.
His exception as touching the different gender is excepted against, I will not
say by his Grammar rules; for I will not shame him so much as to send him to
his Grammar, but by their gloss of the Canon law which tells him that
Extravag. de schismat. c. dudum. in glossa. Neutrum adiectiuum de omni genere
praedicatur.
the adjective in the neuter gender is spoken of every gender. Though therefore
the particle demonstratiue This be in the neuter gender in the Greek and Latin
tongue, yet that hinders not but that bread being of the masculine gender may
be demonstrated thereby. And so the ancient fathers understood it that Tertul.
cont. Marcionem. l 4. Panem corpus suum appellans.
Christ called bread his body, even Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 6. Corpus suum panem
vocat de multorum granoru^ adunatione congestum.
bread made of many corns he calls his body; that Theodoret. Dialog. 1.
symbola and signa quae videntur appellatione corporis and sanguinis honorauit.
he honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood; that Orig.
de rectae in deum fide. Corporu and sanguinis signa and imagines ^ anem and
poculum ministrauit.
he ministered bread and wine for signs and tokens of his body and blood; that
Cyprian, de vnct. Chris. In mensa in quae vitimum cum Aposto^is participauit
conuiuiu^ proprijs manibus tradidit panem and vinum.
he gave to his Apostles at his last supper bread and wine; and in a word that
Aug. ser. ad Infant. Quod autem fides postulat instruenda, panis est corpus
Christi.
bread is the body of Christ. Now if there be no bread, then it cannot be said
that bread is the body, or that it is called the body of Christ. If bread be
called the body of Christ, then is it necessarily imported that there is bread
which is so called. Which because it cannot be before consecration, therefore
after consecration there must be bread to be and to be called the body of
Christ. And beyond this the omnipotent force of the word of Christ does not
extend it self. He thereby makes the bread his body, not as John 2.9.
of water he made wine, so as to be no longer water, but as John. 1.14.
the word was made flesh, and yet still continued to be the word, Theodoret. vt
supra, Non naturam mutans sed naturae gratiam adijciens.
not changing nature, as Theodoret expresses it, but adding grace unto nature.
Albeit to dispute here what the word of Christ had been of force to do, is
fantastical and idle: what he did intend to do, is manifest and plain unto
us. He purposed to institute a Sacrament; and Aug. epi. 23. si sacramenta
similitudinem quandam non haberent earum reru^ quarum sunt sacramenta, omnino
sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plerunque reru^ ipsaru^ nomina
acci^iunt.
sacraments have a resemblance of the things whereof they are sacraments, and
by reason of that resemblance they commonly take the names of the things
themselves. Christ therefore according to this accustomed manner calls the
Sacrament of his body and blood by the name of his body and blood, and says
of bread, This is my body, and of the Cup, This is my blood, and not in name
enely but Cyprian de resurrect. Christi. Quod videtur, nomine and virtute
Christi corpus censetur.
in power and effect they are to the faithful receiver the same that they are
called. Herein the force of Christ's word is seen, that to so weak and simple
creatures he adds so rich and unspeakable grace; and by so slender means
works so great effects whereby he makes us poor creatures of the earth to
become one with himself in heaven. But if M. Bishop will deny the meaning to
be, This bread is my body, we desire him to declare a better meaning, and to
tell us certainly whereto to refer This; which if he can define, we will hold
him for a wiser man than any hitherto has been amongst them. After much
tossing this matter to and fro needless here to be stood upon, their great
Master Bellarmine comes to strike the matter dead, and tells us that the
meaning is; Bellar. de sacram. Eucharist. l. 1. c. 11. Hoc, id est, substantia
sub his spectebus contenta.
This, that is, the substance contained under these forms. But his wisdom
might have seen that the question here continues still the same, what the
substance is that is contained under the forms. The body of Christ they say,
is not there till Tho. Aquin. sum. p. 3. q. 75. art. 7. ad 2 vltimuminstans
prolationis verborum est primum instans in quo est in sacramento corpus
Christ's; in toto autem tempore praecedente est ihi substantia panis.
the last instant of the words of consecration, and till then the substance of
bread is there. The sustance then demonstrated by This, must necessarily be
granted to be bread as we expoundit, because as yet there is no other. Much
ado they make about this matter, and can resolve nothing, and whilst they
will not submit themselves to the truth, they are so entangled in their own
error that they know not which way to quit themselves.

49. W. BISHOP.
Thirdly, Per. 3.
Bread was not given for us, but only the body of Christ, and in the first
institution, the body of Christ was not then really given to death.

Ans. This makes nothing at all against the real presence, but does greatly
fortify it: For Christ gave us in the Sacrament, that which should be put to
death for us, this is my body that shall be given for you. Now not bread, but
Christ's true body was given to death for us: ergo Christ gave us to eat not
bread, but his true real body.

R. ABBOT.
If M. Bishops argument be good against us, we will return it to himself
again. Christ gave us in the Sacrament that which should be put to death for
us; but not the form of bread: but Christ's true body was given to death for
us, therefore Christ gave us to eat, not the form of bread, but his true
real body. And does M. Bishop believe so? If he do not, then let him answer
his own argument, and we shall thereby find a way to answer him. It is true
that Christ in the Sacrament gives his body, but he gives not only his body,
but also the Sacrament of his body. He gives the Sacrament of his body
externally and corporally to be received by the mouth: he giueth-his true
body internally and spiritually to be received by faith. He gives us then
that body that was given to death for us, but he does not give it to the
swallowing of the throat, but to the meditation of the heart. And this S.
Austin notably declares, when for exposition of the words of Christ, Except
ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, etc. he says, or
rather makes Christ to say: August. in Psalm. 98. spiritualiter intelligite
quod locutus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri
illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent, sacramencum aliquod comn
endani vohi^; spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit v^s.
Understand spiritually that which I have said; Ye shall not eat this body
which ye see, nor drink that blood which they shall shead that crucify me: I
have commended unto you a Sacrament, which understand spiritually, and it shall
give you life. Where understanding eating and drinking properly with the mouth,
he denies the very body and blood of Christ to this eating and drinking, and
leaves only the Sacrament to be appertaining thereto. Now in this mean while
M. Bishop has slipped M. Perkins argument, and let it go without answer that
the Sacrament is not simpl^e the body of Christ, but only as it is given to
death for us, and because the body of Christ neither was in the first
institution, nor now is in the Sacrament really given to death for us,
therefore the Sacrament is not really the body of Christ.

50. W. BISHOP.
Fourthly, Per. 4.
The cup is the new Testament by a figure, why not then the bread the body of
Christ by a figure?

Answ. A goodly reason, if there be one figure there must needs be two. How
follows this? if those words of S. Paul be obscure, why did he not rather
clear them by conferring them with S. Matthew, and S. Mark, who deliver it
plainly thus: this is my blood of the new Testament that shall be shed, etc?
But he that delights in cauilling, must seek darkness.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop anon Sect. 63.
after tells us that no good Christian may think but that our Savior Christ
Jesus very well foreseeing all such inconveniences, as he has there expressed,
did deliver the Sacrament in such terms as he would have to be taken
properly, and not be construed at men's pleasures figuratively. If this be
true, how does he here think of himself that does admit, that Christ in the
delivering of the Sacrament, namely of the cup, did speak figurariuely? Or if
he be a good Christian notwithstanding, that contrary to his own rule he admit
a figure in Christ's delivering of the Sacrament, must we be no good Christians
if we admit two? Surely there is the same reason of the one part of the
Sacrament as there is of the other; and sich there is a necessity to understand
a figure in the one, either he must give us sound reason to the contrary, or
else he must leave us to our own reasons to conceive the like of the other
also. Though it be not a goodly reason to say, if there be one figure, there
must needs be two, yet it is a good reason to say, if there may be one figure,
nothing hinders but there may be two. If Christ might say by a figure, Luke
22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, as S. Luke and S. Paul have set
down, then he might say also by a figure, This is my body; this bread is my
body. But says he, if those words of S. Paul be obscure, why did he not
rather clear them by conferring them with S. Matthew and S. Mark? So then
there may be here somewhat obscure, but it must be only what pleases them,
who, notwithstanding of that that is most clear, as we have seen in the
former section save one, do by their exposition make a matter most intricate
and dark. But what clearing does S. Paul receive from S. Matthew and S. Mark?
Forsooth they deliver it plainly thus, This is my blood of the new testament
that shall be shed, etc. He sets down the words, but what clearing it is
that he means, he shows not. And indeed the words on both sides are alike;
S. Luke and S. Paul speak by a figure; and so do also S. Matthew and S. Mark.
S. Matthew says; Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the new testament; but what means he by This? Surely
This has here the nature of a relative, and must be referred to his
antecedent before set down. And what is the antecedent but the cup? Jesus
took the cup, and gave it to them saying, Drink ye all of this; of what, but
of this cup? for this, that is, this cup is my blood of the new testament, etc.
The words of Mark. 24.23.24.
S. Mark do bear also the same sense; which as it is the very Grammatical
construction of the words, so it is also fully confirmed in that S. Luke and S.
Paul do expressly deliver it in that sort. So then by all three Evangelists and
S. Paul, there is a figure in one part of the Sacrament; let us then ask M.
Bishop again, why may there not be so in the other also? But he does not love
to be troubled with too many questions. He cannot tell as yet what answer to
give us, and therefore we must be content to give him further time till he may
better bethink himself.

51. W. BISHOP.
Fifthly, Christ did eat that supper, but not himself? Per. 5.


Answ. A Protestant cannot say that Christ did eat of that Sacrament, as M.
PERK. does, because he has no warrant for it in the written word: yet we do
grant that he did so, and hold him most worthy to taste of that heavenly food.

R. ABBOT.
If the written word do not warrant that Christ did eat of the Sacrament, I
marvel why M. Bishop cites to that purpose out of S. Luke those words which
Sect 62. ex Luc 22.15.
anon he does; that he maruellously desired to eat this last banquet with his
disciples. Whether he cite it truly or falsely, let himself look to that;
but either he must confess that he has cited amiss there, or else that he
has spoken rashly here. But if Christ did eat of the Sacrament, will M. Bishop
have us to believe that he did eat himself, or drank the blood of his own
body? May we be persuaded that one and the same Christ at one and the same
time was both wholly within himself, and wholly also without himself? that
he sat visible by his Apostles, and yet was then wholly contained within the
compass of his own bowels? or that in his own bowels he at that time carried
his own blood? or that moreover he was then by the Sacrament in the bellies
of all the Apostles, even of the traitor Judas? Surely what Christ did eat,
the same Judas did eat also. But of Judas S. Austin teaches, that Aug. in
Joan. tract. 59. Non est ex eis iste, etc. Illi manducabant panem dominum; ille
panem domini contra dominu^.
he did eat of the Lords bread, but not of the bread which is the Lord.
Therefore although Christ did eat the Sacrament, yet may we not imagine that
he did eat himself. These are horrible and unchristian fancies; but out of
the school of Transubstantiation they come, and they that maintain the one,
must necessarily maintain the other also.

52. W. BISHOP.
Sixthly, We are bid to do it till he come: Christ then is not bodily present.

Answ. We are bid by S. Paul to show the death of our Lord till he come to
judgment, which we may very well do, 1. Cor. 11. v. 26.
his body being present: as certain noble Matrons preserved of their husbands
blood, to represent more freshly unto their children, the slaughter of their
fathers.

R. ABBOT.
It is true that his coming shall be to judgment; but what shall he need to
come if he be here already? It was not questioned whereto he should come, nor
whether we may show the death of the Lord, his body being present, if it were
present; but why the Apostle should say till he come, if he be intended to be
here already present. His body being present says he, as though he meant that
Christ were not wholly present, whereas they tell us that whole Christ is in
the Sacrament, both God and man, soul and body, flesh blood and bone as he
was borne of the virgin and nailed afterward to the Cross. And if Christ be
wholly present, what reason had the Apostle to say till he come? He tells us
a ridiculous and impertinent tale of certain noble Matrones, who preserved of
their husbands blood to represent more freshly to their children the slaughter
of their fathers. But what is this to the matter here in hand? If those noble
matrones had had their husbands with them, and in the presence of their
children; then let him tell us whether it had not been a witless thing to bid
them expect their fathers till they come? But he steals away from the point,
and though he do but gull his Reader with an idle jest, yet he would have it
thought that he has given a worthy answer. As touching the truth of this
matter, our Savior informs us when he tells his disciples, John. 12.8.
The poor ye shall have always with you, but me ye shall not have always. S.
Austin gives a reason of those word; August. in Joan. tract. 50. Quoniam
conuersatus est secundum corporis praesentiam quadraginta diel. us cum
discipulis suis and eis deducentibus videndo, non sequendo a scondit in caeiu^
and non est hic.
because according to the presence of his body, he was conversant forty days
with his disciples, and then they bringing him on the way by seeing, but not by
following, he ascended into heaven, and is not here. Christ then according to
the presence of his body is not here; yea Acts 3.21.
the heaven must contain him, says S. Peter, until the time that all things
be restored, and therefore Phil. 3.20.
from heaven we look for him, says S. Paul, even as in our Creed we profess
to believe that from thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead. Now because we believe according to the scripture, that Christ as
touching his body is in heaven and not here, and that from heaven we are to
look for him at the last day, we are able to give a just reason why the
Apostle should say, until he come, which M. Bishop out of his learning cannot
do.

53. W. BISHOP.
Seventhly, Christ bid us to do it in remembrance of him; but signs of
remembrance are of things absent.

Answ. We see one thing and remember another. By Christ's body really present,
we remember the same to have been nailed on the Cross for our redemption: as
Goliaths sword was kept in the tabernacle, in remembrance of the cutting-off of
Goliaths head with the same sword; and the women before rehearsed, kept their
husbands blood, and might much easier have prescrued their bodies embalmed, to
keep the better their deaths in fresh memory.

R. ABBOT.
We see one thing, says M. Bishop, and remember another. But Aug. sermon. ad
infantes, apud Bedam in 1. Cor. 10 Quod videtis panis est and calix, quod vobis
esiam oculi renunti^nt.
that which you see, says S. Austin, is bread, as your very eyes tell you. If
then our remembrance be by our sight, it is by bread that we remember the body
of Christ. M. Bishop, I hope, will not say that we see the body of Christ
really present; and if we see it not, how should we remember any thing by it,
seeing signs of remembrance must be things seen? Such was Goliaths sword, such
was the husbands blood kept by the wines, as much pertinent to this purpose as
a goose quill to a woodcocks tail. The real presence therefore in this
behalf, is altogether idle neither is there any fruit or effect of it, because
there is nothing thereby to be seen. Albeit Christ did not say, see this in
remembrance of me, but do this in remembrance ofme. And what he bid us do, S.
Paul tells us, namely 1. Cor. 11.26
to eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. And how shall we eat of this
bread in remembrance of him, if it be true which they say that in the sacrament
there is no bread? If he will say that by the form of bread we may be
remembered, though the body be not seen, we can also say that by the bread we
may be remembered though there be no real presence of the body, and therefore
the real presence because it is needless is justly affirmed to be none at all.

54. W. BISHOP.
Eighthly, If the real presence be granted, Per. 8.
then the body and blood of Christ are either severed or joined together: if
severed, then Christ is still crucified: if joined together, then the bread is
both the body and blood of Christ; whereas the institution says, the bread is
the body, and the wine is the blood.

Answ. The body and blood of Christ, are (by force of Christ's words)
consecrated apart, so that if they could be naturally separated, they should
be also severed in that Sacrament, as they might have been at Christ's death,
when all the blood was poured forth of his body; but ever sithence Christ's
resurrection, they are so joined together, that they can be no more severed:
so that we grant under one kind of the Sacrament, to be both Christ's body and
blood, which is not wrought by the words of the institution, but by the
necessary and inseparable conjunction of Christ's body with his blood, ever
since his glorious resurrection.

R. ABBOT.
To this it shall be needless to say any thing here, because it comes more
fitly to be spoken of in the next section.

55. W. BISHOP.
Finally, M. Perkins condemns the administration of the Sacrament under one
only kind: for the commandment of Christ is, drink ye all of this, Mat. 26.
verse. 27. and this commandment is rehearsed to the Church of Corinth in these
words: do this as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. verse. 25. and no
power can reuerse this commandment, because it was established by the
sovereign head of the Church.

Answ. He began to set down the institution of the Sacrament out of S. Paul,
1. Cor. 11. here he leapeth back to S. Matthew, because he fitteth him better
in this point: to whom I answer, that Christ there spoke only unto his twelve
Apostles, who were afterward to administer that holy Sacrament to others; and
so something ther-about is spoken to them which may not be extended unto
laymen, but unto Priests only, who were to succeed the Apostles in that
ministry. All men do confess these words: hoc facite, do ye this: that is,
administer ye this Sacrament, to be spoken only to the Apostles, and in them
to all of the Clergy alone: even so, drink ye all of this, was in like manner
spoken unto them only as Clergy men; and therefore it is a commandment only
to Priests so to do: and as for others, they may either drink of it, or not
drink of it, as it shall be thought most expedient by their supreme Pastors;
and this may be gathered out of those very words, drink ye all of this. For
why should the Apostles have a special charge more to drink of that cup,
then to eat of that food; unless it were to signify, that whereas all men
should be bound to receive Christ's body: they should be further bound to
receive that holy cup also; from which bond other men should stand free? But
to come to the purpose, when they quarrel with us for taking away from the
people one kind of the Sacrament: we answer, that we do them no hinderance
thereby; because we give them both the blessed body, and sacred blood of Christ
together under one kind: yea whole Christ, both God and man; because they be
so united that they cannot be separated. But what can they answer, when we
complain upon them, for that they have defrauded the poor people, of both
body and blood of Christ, and in lieu of that most precious banquet, do give
them a cold breake-fast, of a morsel of bread, and a suppe of wine? this is a
most miserable and lamentable exchange indeed: our blessed Lord give them grace
to see it, and deliver them speedily from it. Here is the place to show how
the Protestants do not only bereave their unfortunate followers of this most
heavenly food of Christ's body: but that they also deprive them of the manifold
and great graces of God, derived unto us in sieve other Sacraments: but because
I have touched it in the Preface, I will omit it here, and make an end with M.
PER. as soon as I have requited him, by propounding briefly some arguments for
the real presence, as he has done against it.

R. ABBOT.
Whether it be S. Matthew or S. Paul, they serve both for the confirming of one
truth, and do both condemn the Antichristian and damnable sacrilege of the
Church of Rome, in maiming the Sacrament of Christ contrary to the institution
of Christ himself, to the very intention and purpose of the Sacrament, to the
example and practice of all ancient churches. Our Savior Christ says: Matt.
26.27.
Drink ye all of this. But the Church of Rome says; Not so, for there are
just and reasonable causes why it is not fit that all drink thereof, but it is
sufficient that the Priest alone drink for all. M. Bishop to make this good,
tells us that Christ there spoke to his Apostles only, and that some thing
thereabout is spoken to them, which may not be extended unto laymen, but unto
Priests only. But how will he make it appear that Christ in the one part of
the Sacrament spoke to the Apostles only, and not in the other also? There
were none there present but the Apostles, and what direction have we in the
words of Christ, to restrain the use of the cup, as peculiar to the Priests,
and to make the other common to the people? And if Christ did so intend, how
falls it out that the Apostle S. Paul in the recital of Christ's institution,
professing 1. Cor. 11.23
to deliver precisely what he had received of the Lord, makes no mention of
this restraint? and what presumption was it in the whole primitive Church,
contrary to that intendment, to make that common to the laity, which Christ
had made the prerogative of the Priests only? He says, that others may drink
of it, or not drink of it, as it shall be thought most expedient by the Pope,
whom he falsely names the supreme Pastor. But how may it appear that there
is any such authority left to the Pope? Surely, if Christ spoke only to the
Priests, it should not seem likely that the Pope should have liberty to extend
this favor to the people; and if the Pope may give liberty hereof to the
people, then it is certain that Christ did not speak only to the Priests. But
there is a special secret here which I would gladly have M. Bishop to unfold:
for if the words of Christ, Drink ye all of this, were spoken only to
Priests, and do belong to them, how is it that Council. Trid. ses. 5. can. 2.
Ecclesia iustu causis and rationibus adducta vt laicos atque etiam Clericos non
conficientes sub panis tantum: modo specie communicaret, etc.
Priests also in the church of Rome, he only excepted that ministers, are
excluded from being partakers of the cup? Christ says, by their own
confession, Drink all ye Priests; how impudently then do they transgress
the commandment of Christ who bar all Priests from the Cup but him only that
says Mass? Here their wicked and damnable hypocrisy most plainly appears,
and the knots wherewith they are tied are such, as that they know not which way
to untie them. The Priests that minister not, are with them in that behalf as
in the case of laymen, and therefore are forbidden to be partakers of the cup.
But in that case also the Apostles were at the institution of the Sacrament;
for Christ only ministered and not any of them. And yet to the Apostles being
thus as in the state and condition of lay men, because they ministered not, our
Savior Christ says, Drink ye all of this. What now follows hereof, but
that to lay men, and of lay men as well as of Priests, our Savior Christ said,
Drink ye all of this; even you all that have eaten of this bread, drink ye
also of this cup? But all men confess, says M. Bishop, that these words hoc
facite, do ye this, were spoken only to the Apostles, and in them to the
Clergy alone. And it may be that all his men confess so, or all the men that
he had in his head when he wrote this, but otherwise all men will not so
confess, because to confess so, should be to confess an untruth. For those
words have reference to the whole celebration of this mystery, requiring the
same to be performed in remembrance of him by whom it was first ordained. Yea
and that they have their respect to the receivers, appears plainly by the
very coherence and consequence thereof; Mat. 26.26. Luke 22.19.
Take, eat; do this, namely that I have bidden you do, to take and eat, in
remembrance of me. And this is as clear in the Apostles description of the
institution of the Cup; 1. Cor. 11.25
He took the cup, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood which is
shed for you; this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. Which later
words sound plainly to this effect; Drink ye all of this, and as often as ye do
so, do it in the remembrance of me. But yet we will deal courteously with M.
Bishop, and grant him his desire, that Christ here speaks of the ministration
of the sacrament which appertains to the Clergy alone; and will he hereof
conclude that when he says Drink ye all of this, his meaning was that the
Clergy only should drink thereof? Verily the contrary rather most plainly
follows. For when he says, Do this, what else does he say, but what ye see
me do, the same do ye; I say to you all here present, Take and eat; I deliver
the cup to you all that you may all drink thereof; do you administer to
others in the same sort; what I have done to you, the same do you to them in
remembrance of me. And this rule Cyprian most vehemently presses, and urges
it to Cecilius again and again; Cyprian lib. 2. ep. 3. In commemorationem
domin^ hoc faciamus quod secit and dominus etc. Ab Euangeii^i^ praeceptis
omnino recedendum non esse, and eadem quae magister docuit and fecit,
discipulos quoque obseruare and facere debere etc. Vtique ille sacerdos vice
Christi vere fungitur qurid quod Christus fecit imitatur. etc. Nihil aliud quam
quod ille fecit facere debemus etc. Quotiescunque calicem in commemorationem
domint and passionis eius offer^mus^^ quod consia^ dominum fecisse, faciamus,
etc.
that in remembrance of the Lord, we are to do the same that the Lord did; that
we are not in any sort to depart from the precepts of the Gospel; and the
disciples are to observe the same things which their master has taught and
done; that that Priest does truly supply the room of Christ, who imitateth
that which Christ has done; that we ought to do nothing but what he has
done; that so often as we offer the cup in remembrance of the Lord and of his
passion, we are to do the same which we are assured Christ did. Now if the
minister be to do the same that Christ did, then is he to administer both
parts of the sacrament alike to all that are present, because we find that
Christ did so. Yea but why should the Apostles, says M. Bishop, have a
special charge more to drink of that cup, then to eat of that food, unless
it were to signify that whereas all men should be bound to receive Christ's
body, they, namely the Apostles, should be further bound to receive that holy
cup also; from which bond other men should stand free? Thus he falsifieth the
institution of Christ, that from an imagined ground of his own, he may infer a
conclusion answerable thereto. For had not the Apostles as special charge to
eat of that food, as to drink of that cup? did not Christ as well say to all
his Apostles, Take, eat, this is my body, do this in remembrance of me; as he
said, Drink ye all of this? If he did so, and thereby all men are bound to
eat of that food, does it not follow that by the other all men are bound also
to drink of that cup? Christ commands all his Apostles to take and eat. He
commands al his Apostles to take the cup and drink. On the one side he
says, Do this. On the other side he says, Do this. What reason can M. Bishop
give why al Christians should be concluded on the one side; and all save the
Priests should be excluded on the other; yea and all the Priests also that are
present, save he only that administreth for the time? What, will he wilfully
blind himself? Will he stop his own eyes, that he may not see that which
he cannot choose but see? Well, he will yet make amends for all, telling us,
that when they take away from the people one kind of the Sacrament, they do
them no hinderance thereby, because they give them both the body and blood of
Christ together under one kind. But who has taught them so to do, or that so
they can do? and if both may be given under one, why did Christ by his
institution ordain severally a Sacrament of both? Let him satisfy us in this
behalf; if the whole intention of the Sacrament be atteined in one kind, why
our Savior Christ would do a needless work to institute both? and if it be
needful for the Priest to drink of the Lords cup, why is it needless for the
people? or if it be sufficiently available for the people that the Priest
drink thereof, why is it not also sufficient that the Priest only do eat
for all? He tells us that the body and blood of Christ be so united that
they cannot be separated; and we grant so much of the body and blood of Christ
as now they are, but he should remember that by this Sacrament 1. Cor. 11.26
we show forth the death of the Lord, and in the death of the Lord his body
was broken, and his blood was shed for us, accordingly as it is said, 1. Cor.
11.24.
This is my body which is broken for you, Mat. 26.28.
this is my blood which is shed for you, and therefore that the sacrament must
represent and offer unto us the blood of Christ, as separated from the body.
Which because it cannot do, being used in one kind, therefore it follows,
that the Popish usage thereof in that sort, excludes the intention of the
sacrament, and robs us of the comfort of Christ's blood shed for the
forgiveness of our sins. And surely if the effect of the sacrament be wholly
attained by receiving only in one kind, there was no cause why Gelasius
Bishop of Rome, hearing of some, De consecrat. did. 2. Comperimus quosdam qui
sumpta sacri corporis portione a calice sacrati cruoris abstineant; qui quia
nescio qua superstitione docentur astringi aut integra sacramenta percipiant
aut ab integru arceantur; quia diuisio vnius einsdemque mysterij sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest prouenire.
who receiving the portion of Christ's sacred body, did forbear the cup of
his sacred blood, should decree as he did, that either they should receive the
whole sacrament, or else be excluded from the whole, adding a reason thereof,
which clearly cutteth off all Popish exceptions, because the dividing of one
and the same mystery cannot come without great sacrilege. Why should Gelasius
urge a matter so needless if it be true which now is taught in Popery? or if
Gelasius then saw it to be sacrilege to divide this mystery of Christ, how
comes it about that it is not so now? In the time of Julius the first, long
before Gelasius, another abuse was creeping into the Church, of dipping the
Sacrament of Christ's body into the cup, as thereby to save a labor, and so
under one to deliver both. It appears hereby, that Christian people were not
then taught as they are now in the Roman church, that the one part of the
Sacrament is by concomitancy, as their Schoolmen have devised, both the body
and the blood of Christ, neither did Julius upon that ground condemn that
dipping as superfluous and causeless, which both he and they should in that
respect have conceived so to be if that fancy were true. But they by Christ's
institution conceived a necessity to receive both, and therefore in this sort
by dipping the Eucharist in the cup, provided so to do; in which sort
notwithstanding to receive both, Julius approved it as a thing unlawful,
Did. 2. cap. Cum omne. Quod pro complemento c^mmunionis ineinctam tradunt Eu
haristiam populis nec hoc prolatum ex Euangelio testimoniu^ receperunt, vbi
Apostolu corpus suum commendauit and sanguinem; seorsum enim panu and scorsum
calicis commendatio memoratur.
because there is no testimony hereof in the Gospel where Christ commended to
his Apostles his body and blood; for there is recorded severally the delivery
of the bread and severally of the cup. Now if Christ to the end he might
commend to us both his body and blood, would severally commend the one, and
severally the other; surely the church of Rome in debarring the people from the
cup, confounds the institution of Christ, and commends the one only
without the other. And since Julius did hold that for direction in this behalf,
the Church is to have recourse to the example of Christ in the Gospel, to do
as Christ there is recorded to have done, we must needs conceive that the
Church of Rome now, is not of the same mind that Julius was, which so
manifestly crosses that which is described in the gospel. And not Julius only
but the whole Church of Christ held it self tied to that example, and
practiced accordingly: neither was there any Church in the world which held it
sufficient or lawful to administer the sacrament to the people in one kind.
Hierome says that Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11. Dominica coena omnibus debet esse
communis, quia ille omnibus distipulu suis qui aderant aequaliter tradidit
sacramenta.
the Lords supper ought to be common to all, because the Lord Jesus equally
delivered the sacraments to all his disciples that were present. So Chrysostom
says Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom. 18. Est vbi nihil differt sacerdos a subdito vt
quando fruendum est sacris mysterijs; similiter enin, omnes vt (...)
participemus digri habemus.
that in the receiving of the holy mysteries there is no difference betwixt the
Priest and the people; for we all, says he, are vouchsafed to receive them
alike. Theophylact. in 1. Cor. c. 11. praesertim cum tremendus hic calix pari
cunctis condition sit traditus.
This dreadful cup, says Theophylact, was in like or equal condition
delivered to all. In a word, when Cyprian says that Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 2.
Quomodo ad martyrij poculum idoneos facimus si non eos ad bibendum prius in
ecclesia poculum domini iure communicationis admittimus?
by right of communion we admit the people to drink in the Church of the Lords
cup, what does he but plainly declare that the Church of Rome does apparent
wrong to the people of God, in that it bereaueth them of this right? We may
therefore justly think them very impudently obstinate, whom neither the
authority of Christ, nor the consent of fathers, nor the practice of Christian
Churches universally through the world, nor the very reason of the Sacrament it
self can move to reform this maiming of the sacrament of Christ, but do make
choice rather to continue still in error, than to acknowledge that they have
erred. But M. Bishop here pretends that they have more cause to complain of
us, than we of them; for he says that we have defrauded the poor people of
both body and blood of Christ, and in lieu of that most precious banquet, do
give them a cold breakefast of a morsel of bread, and a sup of wine. Which
words he uses rather of malice, then for that he knows not that we affirm
in the due participation of this Sacrament a heavenly riches of grace and of
the communion of the body and blood of Christ. Tell us M. Bishop, when Gelasius
says, that Gelas. cont. Eutych. and Nestor. Certe sacramenta quae sumimus
corporis and sanguin^^ domini, diuina resest, and per illa diumae consortes
^fficimur naturae, and tamen esse non desinit substantia vel natura panis and
vini.
the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of Christ are a divine
thing, and we are thereby made partakers of the divine nature, and yet there
cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine, did he make the
Sacrament to be no more but a morsel of bread, and a sup of wine? If we
respect the nature of the outward and visible elements, it is true that we
receive in the Sacrament a morsel of bread, and a sup of wine, for these
creatures Theodoret. dialog. 2. Manent in priore substantia and figura and
forma, etc.
remain still, as Theodoret says, in their former substance: but if we
respect them in their use and effect, this bread is heavenly bread, and this
cup is the cup of salvation and life eternal. And as he is a mad man who
having a rich gift confirmed unto him by his Princes seal, will vilify the
seal and say it is but a piece of wax; even so is he as mad who of the
Sacrament of Christ, which is Romans 4.11.
the seal of the righteousness of faith, the pledge of the remission of
sins, the means whereby grace and life through faith are derived unto us,
will say either in baptism that it is but a handful of water, or in the Lords
supper that it is but a morsel of bread and a sup of wine. But of this and of
his five other sacraments, as he has spoken before, so I have answered him
Preface to the Reader, sect. 20.
before: and I refer the reader to that that is there said, where he shall
easily see that he has no cause to account himself unfortunate for following
us, but rather to hold them for unfortunate fools that yield themselves to be
guided by such fancies.

56. W. BISHOP.
Let this be the first.

The state of the new Testament, which is more perfect then the old, requires
accordingly Sacraments of greater grace and perfection than the old had: they
had Manna, which for substance and taste far passed our bread, and in
signification was equal to it: Wherefore, either we must grant our Sacrament
of bread and wine, to be inferior to theirs of the old Testament; or else
acknowledge and confess it to be the true body and blood of Christ, which does
surpass theirs exceedingly, as the body does the shadow. This argument is
confirmed by our Savior himself, who in express terms does prefer the
meat that he was to give to his disciples, before that of Manna, Ioh. 6.48.49.
which their Fathers had eaten in the wilderness.

R. ABBOT.
If this argument be good, it proves real presence in Baptism as well as it
does in the Lords supper. If in Baptism without any real presence, there be
greater grace and perfection, as in a Sacrament of the new testament, then
there was in the Sacraments of the old, then nothing hinders but that in the
Lords supper the like also may be: neither can M. Bishop allege any reason to
prove it necessary in the one, that shall not prove it in the other also. The
preeminence of the state of the new testament above the old, stands in
cleerenesse of light; not in difference of faith; in the performance of
promises, not in any diverse effect of them. 2. Cor. 4.13.
We have the same spirit of faith: and a little to turn the Apostles words;
Act. 15.11.
they hoped to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ even as we do.
Aug de not. and great. cap 44. Ea fides iustos sanauit antiquos quae sanat and
nos, id est, mediatoris dei et hominum, hominis Jesus Christi; fides sanguinis
eius, fides crucis eius, fides mortis and resurrectionis eius.
The same faith, says S. Austin, saved the just of old time that saves us;
even the faith of the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Jesus Christ; the
faith of his blood, the faith of his cross, the faith of his death and
resurrection. To them he was to come, to us he is already come; he has stood
as it were in the midst betwixt us; they looked upon him forward, we look
upon him backward, but both receive from him the same grace. Accordingly
therefore the Sacraments of the old and new testament, though in outward form
and administration they differ much, yet in inward power and effect they are
the same. Aug. ep 118. Leus iugo suo nos subdidit and sarcinae leui; vnde
sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis, significatione
praestantissimis societatem noui populi colligauit.
Christ as S. Austin notes, has laid upon us an easy yoke by Sacraments, in
number very few, in observation most easy, and in signification most
excellent: they were forced to attend to many types and figures, and encumbred
with infinite operositie of manifold observations and ceremonies. Our state
therefore is better than theirs, for that we with more ease are partakers of
the same effects of grace, which with greater labor and difficulty, God so
disposing, they did atteine unto; but otherwise what benefit we receive by our
Sacraments toward eternal life, they also received by theirs. For why does
the Apostle say, that the Israelites 1. Cor 10.2.
were baptized in the cloud and in the sea, but to signify, that in these
types and figures they were made partakers of the same spiritual blessing and
grace that in baptism is ministered unto us. And why does he say, that they did
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, but to
give to understand that they also did Ioh. 6.54.
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, that they might live
thereby? for if we respect the outward signs, they did not eat the same, or
drink the same that we do. It must needs therefore be as touching the
spiritual and inward meat and drink which is the body and blood of Christ.
And so the Apostle says, that they drank of the spiritual rock which
followed them, and the rock was Christ. Amb. de Sp. Sanct lib. 1. in Prolog.
Quod vtique non ad diuinitatem eius sed ad carnem relatum est quae sitientium
corda populorum perenni riuo sui sanguinis inundauit.
Which, says Ambrose, is not referred to the godhead of Christ, but to the
flesh, which did water and refresh the hearts of the thirsty people, with the
euerflowing stream or river of his blood. And thus S. Austin says of Manna,
that it signified Aug. in Joan. tract. 16. Hunc panem significauit Manna; hunc
panem significauit Altar dei. Sacramenta ill: fuerunt; in signis diuersa sunt;
in re quae significatur pariasunt.
the same bread (even the body of Christ) that is signified in the table of the
Lord; they are both Sacraments says he; in signs they are diverse, but in the
thing signified they are equal and alike. Now if without any real presence
the faithful in Manna did eat the flesh of Christ, and in the water of the
rock did drink the blood of Christ, then it follows, that there is no
necessity of the real presence to our eating the flesh of Christ, and our
drinking of his blood. But I would yet further ask him how the real presence
makes our Sacrament of greater grace and perfection then the old, seeing the
body of Christ is thereby made subject to be eaten of wicked and ungodly men,
who receive no grace by it, yea of swine and dogs, and mice, as they affirm,
which are not capable of any grace? For if the very receiving of Christ's body
into our bodies do work effect of grace, then should grace be wrought in
these also. But if the effect of grace be to be attributed unto faith, then the
real presence is needless, because faith touching the Sacrament, but as the
hemme of Christ's garment upon earth, receives virtue from the body of Christ
in heaven to heal, to feed and strengthen us unto eternal life. That which
he brings for confirmation of his argument belongs nothing thereto. Christ,
says he, prefers the meat that he was to give to his disciples before that
of Manna which their fathers had eaten in the wilderness. And who doubts
thereof, when as our Savior says; Ioh. 6.48.51.
I am the bread of life? The bread which I will give is my flesh which I will
give for the life of the world (for who doubts but that Christ or the flesh
of Christ is to be preferred before Manna?) but that this flesh of Christ is to
be eaten in the Sacrament really with the mouth and into the belly this place
proves not. Christ there compares not their sacrament with ours, but he
compares their sacrament as the sign with himself, as the thing that was
signified thereby. Augu. cont. Faust. Manich. li. 12 c. 29. veterem figuram
carnaliter accip^entes, mortui sunt.
Which sign or figure they who understood no otherwise but carnally, died and
perished; but they who understood the same aright, understood Christ therein;
they did eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, as before was said, and
obtain life by his name. Aug. in Joan. tract. 26. Visibilem cibum
spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter esurierunt, spiritualiter
gustauerunt, vt spiritualiter satiarentur.
The visible food, says Austin, they understood spiritually they spiritually
hungered after it, they spiritually tasted it, that spiritually they might be
satisfied. So do we in our Sacrament, and without any real presence it is life
to us even as it was to them.

57. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, flesh to eat, and his blood to drink: and when they marueiled how
that could be, he assured them; Ioh. 6.55.
that unless they did eat his flesh, they should not have life in them; and
further certified them, that his flesh was truly meat, and his blood truly
drink: whence it is most plainly deduced, that he who never fails of his
promise, gave them his true flesh to eat.

R. ABBOT.
We grant his conclusion, that Christ gave to his disciples, and further gives
unto us his true flesh to eat: but the question still is how or in what sort we
eat it. Christ indeed has taught us that John 6.55.
his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed; but will M. Bishop
say that they are meat and drink to the body; that the body is nourished and
fed with the body and blood of Christ, and that the same is turned by digestion
into the substance of our bodies? If not, then it cannot be said that with the
body we eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, but this must
necessarily be understood to be an action of the mind. Therefore Cyprian says
that for the doing hereof Cyprian. de caena domini. Haec quoties agimus non
dentes ad mordendum acu imus, sed fide syncera panem sanctum frangimus.
we do not sharpen our teeth to bite, but with sincere faith we break the
sacred bread: and Austin questioneth; Aug. Cur paras dentes and ventrem? creed
and manducasti.
why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten; and
defines it Idem. in Joan. tract. 26. Qui manducat intus non foris; qui
manducat cord, non qui premit dente.
to be eating within, not without; to be eating with the heart, not crushing
with the teeth. And otherwise to understand it of eating the very flesh of
Christ with the mouth, what is it but the gross error of the Capernaits,
literally understanding the words of Christ, because they were no other but
carnal men? Tertul. de resurr. carnis. Durum and intolerabilem existimauerunt
sermonem eius, quasi vere carne^ suam illis edendam determinass^t.
They thought his speech to be hard and intolerable, says Tertullian, as
though he had determined that they should verily eat his flesh. But if they had
been intelligent hearers, and men spiritually minded, they would have discerned
by the other words of Christ the true meaning of this speech. For when he
attributes the same to believing in him, that he does to the eating of his
flesh and drinking of his blood, that John 6.47.
whosoever believes in him has everlasting life, he plainly gives to understand
that the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blood is to be expounded by
believing. And so does S. Austin construe it when he says; August. in Joan.
tract. 26. Credere in Christum hoc est manducare panem viuum: qui credit,
manducat.
To believe in Christ, that is, to eat the bread of life: he that believes
eats. Again, when he perceived their repining at his words, he says unto
them; ver. 61.62.
Does this offend you? What then if ye shall see the son of man ascend where
he was before? Aug. vt supra ille putabant eum erogaturu^ corpus suum; ille
autem dixit se ascensuru^ in calum, vtique integrum. Cum vid eritis filium
hominis, etc. certe vel tunc videbitis quia no^ eo modo quo putatis erogat
corpus suum; certe vel tunc videbitis quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus.
They thought, says Austin, that he would impart to them his very body, but he
tells them that he will go up to heaven even whole. When ye shall see the
son of man ascend where he was before, surely then ye shall see that he does
not impart his body in that manner as you think; ye shall then understand that
his grace is not devoured by morsells. Now if the ascending of Christ into
heaven were an argument for the reforming of their fancy, and correcting of
their error, then it must needs be a misconstruction of eating and drinking the
flesh and blood of Christ whereby the same is said to be done by his being
really present upon the earth. And that it might not be so understood, he
further says; verse. 63.
The words which I speak unto you are spirit and life: it is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, thereby aduertising them as S. Austin
gives to understand, that Aug ibi. Quomodo quidem edatur and quisnam sit
manducandi modus ignoratis.
they knew not in what sort his flesh was eaten, or what the manner thereof is,
and that they should spiritually conceive the doing of it, in such manner as was
before expressed out of Austin. And hereof Origin says; Ori. in Leuit. hom. 7.
Est and in nouo testame^to litera quae occidit eum qui non spiritualiter
aduertit. Nam si secundu^ literamsequaris id quod dictum est; Nisi
manducaueritis carnem etc. litera illa occidit.
There is in the new Testament a letter which kills him that does not
spiritually listen to it; for if thou follow according to the letter that which
is written, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood,
that letter kills. Therefore S. Austin delivering certain rules whereby
figurative speeches are to be known does by his rule find that this speech of
Christ is not properly or literally to be understood, but by a figure. Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16. si flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere aut
vtilitatem and beneficentia^ vitare, figurata est. Nisi manduca^eritis carnem
filij hominis etc. facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere. figura ergo est
praecipiens passioni domini esse co^municandum and suauiter atque vtiliter
recondendum in memoria quod car^ eius pro nobis crucifixa and vulnerata sit
If any speech seem to command a heinous or wicked act, or to forbid well
doing or any profitable thing it is a figurative speech. Where Christ says,
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood etc. he
seems to command a heinous thing. It is therefore a figure instructing that
we are to communicate of the passion of the Lord, and sweetly and profitably to
lay up in mind that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. In which sort
S. Bernard also expounds that Bernar de verb. Habac. super custodia^ etc. sub
edendi corporis sus mysterio discipulos ad commun^^ andum passionibus suis
aumonens.
under the mystery of eating his body Christ admonishes his disciples to
communicate of his passions. Here is therefore no other but a spiritual action
of the heart and soul, which requires no real presence because the spirit of
man by faith climbeth up to heaven and looks back unto the cross of Christ,
and there receives nourishment and strength of him to live by him for ever.

58. W. BISHOP.
Thirdly, this is my body: this is my blood. What could be more certain or
more perspicuous?

R. ABBOT.
The words as we expound them out of the circumstance of the text and the
consent of ancient fathers are indeed perspicuous and clear yielding this
meaning, This bread is my body, this wine is my blood, that is, the sign, the
sacrament, the participation of my body and blood. But M. Bishop for his life
cannot make any certain and definite meaning of them whereby their
transubstantiation and real presence may be made good If the words be so
perspicuous and clear for them, how comes it about that they have so tossed
and tumbled them, and yet there is no certain meaning thereof concluded
amongst them till this day? I need not stand hereupon having before said what
is sufficient for this purpose in the eight and fortieth section.

59. W. BISHOP.
Fourthly, but his body; and that his body which should be given for our
redemption on the cross: ergo, it was that his true real body, which was
nailed to the cross for us.

R. ABBOT.
Even so three Evangelists and S. Paul do uniformly deliver that the cup is
the blood of Christ or the new testament in his blood, as has been Sect. 50.
before said, and yet M. Bishop will not say, I hope, that the cup is really
the blood or testament of Christ. That the Sacrament is the figure of Christ's
body, is no new speech. S. Austin says, that Aug in Psalm. 3. Conuinium in quo
corporu and sanguinis sui figuram discipu^usuis co^mendauit and tradidit.
Christ commended and delivered to his disciples the figure of his body and
blood. Tertullian expounds thus, Tertul. cont. Marcion ^^. 4. Ac^eptum panem
corpus suum fecit, dic^^do, hoc est corsus meum, id est, figura corporis mei.
This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. Gelasius the Bishop of
Rome says, that Gelas. cont. Eutych and Nest. Et certo imago and similitudo
corporis and sanguinis domini in action mysteriorum celebratur.
an image and semblance of the body and blood of Christ is celebrated in the
administration of the Sacraments. Chrysostom says, that Chrysostom. Opimperf.
in Mat. hom. 11. In quibus non verum corpus Christi, sed myst^rium corporu eius
continetur.
in the sacred vessels not the true body of Christ, but the mystery of his
body is contained. The ancient Liturgies do usually call the Sacraments
Constit Clem. l. 7. c. 26. Antitypa corporis, etc. Iacob^ Liturg. Typus
corporis and sanguinis Christi tui.
the signs of the body and blood of Christ, and so Carol. Magn. epist. ad A
cuin. Panem fregit and calic^m pa^iter dedit eis in figuram corporis and
sanguinis sui.
Charles the great, styles them in his epistle to Alcuinus. It should not
therefore seem strange to M. Bishop, that we also should expound the
sacrament to be the figure of Christ's body. Yea but Christ, says he, says
not that it is the figure of his body, but his body. And even so S. Paul says
not that the rock was a figure of Christ, but 1. Cor. 10.4.
The rock was Christ; August. in Leuit. q. 57. Quod vtique non erat per
substantiam sed per significationem.
which yet, says Austin, was not Christ in substance, but in signification. If
S. Paul might say, that the rock was Christ, though in substance it were not
so; then might Christ say of bread, this is my body, though it be not so in
substance, but in signification and power only, even as has been Sect. 48.
before said, that Sacraments commonly bear the names of those things whereof
they are sacraments, and that because though they be signs and figures, yet
they are such signs as do by the ordinance of God truly and effectually
exhibit and yield to the faith of the believer the heavenly and spiritual
grace that is signified thereby. Now when we say that the Sacrament is thus the
figure of Christ's body, how do we mean it but of his body which was given
for our redemption upon the cross? and therefore that addition set down by M.
Bishop is impertinent and makes nothing at all for him.

60. W. BISHOP.
Fifthly, 1. Cor. 10.16.
S. Paul demands thus: the Chalice of benediction which we do bless, is it
not the communication of the blood of Christ? and the bread that we break, is
it not the participation of the body of our Lord? if then we do in receiving
the blessed Sacrament participate Christ's body, and communicate his blood, they
surely are there really present.

R. ABBOT.
We do in receiving the blessed Sacrament participate Christ's body, and
communicate his blood, and yet they are not there really present, because we
participate Christ's body by faith in spirit and soul, not in body by the mouth
and belly, as has been before showed. S. Austin supposing Christ to be absent
in body yet teaches us how we receive him when he says; Aug. in Joan. tract.
50. Quomodo tenebo absentem? quomodo in coelum manum mit^am vt ibi sedentem
teneam? fidem mitte and tenuisti.
How shall I lay hold of him being absent? how shall I put up my hand to
heaven, to lay hold of him sitting there? send up thy faith, says he, and thou
have taken hold of him. There needs then no real presence for the receiving
of Christ's body, but by faith we lay hold thereof sitting at the right hand of
God the father.

61. W. BISHOP.
Again, says: He that eats and drinks unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.28.
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our
Lord: and before, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ: ergo, the body and
blood of Christ are there present; or else why should a man incur that guilt,
but by his unworthy receiving of it, and by not discerning Christ's body to be
there present?

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop thinks that we do indignity to the Saints when we pull down
their images which they worship, and yet he will not say that those images are
the Saints themselves; and can he not conceive that in the dishonor of the
sacrament, is the dishonor of Christ, though the sacrament be not verily
Christ himself, but the representat^on and sign of his body and blood? the
despite and villain that is done to the Princes picture or seal is construed
to be an indignity to the Prince, and so will the Apostle have us to conceive
of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. It is by Gods ordinance to
us, and in our use as it were the body and blood of Christ, and therefore
justly is he said not to discern the Lords body, and to be guilty of the body
and blood of Christ, who irreverently and with contempt presumes to offer
himself to these mysteries of Christ, though Christ himself be not really
present in the usage thereof.

62. W. BISHOP.
Besides all these plain texts of holy. Luke we have, Luc. 22.15.
that our Savior maruellously desired (desiderio desideraui) to eat that this
last banquet with his Di^ciples. S. John adds, that whereas he loved his that
were in the world, unto the end he loved them: and knowing that the Father gave
all things into his hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God, etc.
What coherence (I say) with this exceeding love and infi^^te power of Christ,
to be showed in his last supper, if he has left only bread and wine to be
taken in remembrance of him, any mean man might easily have done as much; and
Helias departing from his Disciple Heliseus, did much more: for he left a more
noble remembrance of himself behind him, to wit, his cloak and double
spirit. But Christ bequeathing us his true natural body to be the food of
our souls, and comfort of our hearts as we believe and teach, he then
(indeed) showed his i^finite power and love toward us, and that he came from
God, and as God bestowed an inestimable gift upon us, such a one as never any
other did, or could possibly do.

R. ABBOT.
It is truly said by Tertullian, that Tertul. de Baptism Nihil adeo est quod
obiurat mentes hominum quam simplicitas diuinorum operum quae in actu videntur
and magnificentia quae in effectu repromittitur, etc.
nothing so much offends men's minds (in the Sacraments) as the simplicity
of Gods works, as they seem in act, and the magnificence which is promised in
effect. M. Bishop looking to the outward signs in the Lords supper, takes the
same to be a simple token of Christ's exceeding love toward us, a matter that
any man might do; and not so much as that that Elias left to his scholar
Elizeus. Thus in his blind fancy he amplifieth the matter as if we taught
that Christ in his last supper had recommended nothing to us but bread and
wine. But let him understand that we see and teach in this sacrament, the
exceeding great love of Christ, not in those simple creatures which we see in
act, but in the magnificence of grace which is promised in effect. If we
consider these creatures in act, they are but bread and wine, but consider them
in use and effect, and then this bread is heavenly bread, the bread of life,
the food of immortality; there is in it the spirit of Christ, even the power
of the word of God, not only feeding but also sanctifying and clensing the
soul. I will express it by M. Bishops own words, that Christ has bequeathed
and hereby gives unto us his true natural body, to be the food of our
souls; of our souls, I say, not of our bodies; which if he did rightly mean,
as he rightly speaks, he would not understand it to be received by the body.
And thus Christ sealing unto us in the Lords supper, all the fruits of his
passion, and giving himself unto us spiritually to become one with us, and to
make us one with him, he has without real presence bestowed, as M. Bishop
says, an inestimable gift upon us, such a one as never any other did or
possibly could do.

63. W. BISHOP.
Moreover, that they should eat Christ's flesh, Ioh. 6.
and that his body was truly meat: and therefore believed Christ's words without
further question.

R. ABBOT.
The institution of a religious rite and ceremony for the use of the Christian
Church, required such terms as had been formerly accustomed in the
institution of such religious rites, wherein as has been Sect 48.
before noted out of Austin, Sacraments commonly bear the names of those
things whereof they are Sacraments. So is circumcision called Genesis 17.13.
the covenant of the Lord, being but the sign and seal of his covenant. So is
the lamb called Exodus 12.11.
the Lords Passover, though it were but a signification and remembrance
thereof. So were the sacrifices of the law called Leuit. 1.4. and 4.20 etc.
attonements or reconciliations for sin, which yet they were not in
themselves, because Heb. 10.4.
it was impossible that the blood of calves and goats should take away sins,
but were only signs and figures of the atonement that should be made by the
blood of Jesus Christ. And thus Cyprian says expressly of the Lords supper,
that therein Cyprian de Vnct. Chrismat. significantia and significata eis. them
nomenibus censentur.
the signs, and the things signified are reckoned by the same names, being
both termed the body and blood of Christ. And herein is no occasion of
contention but to them only that are contentious, and will prefer their own
absurd fancies before the light and truth of the word of God. Who as they do
peruersly and wilfully mistake, so do wilfully by mistaking run into
idolatry, Romans 1.25.
worshipping the creature instead of the creator, and giving to the sign or
sacrament that divine honor which belongs properly to Christ himself. And
if it be idolatry, as here he tells us, to worship for Christ, that which
is not Christ, then he has told us amiss before, that men do not commit
idolatry, though they worship the Host when the Priest has had no intention
of consecration. In a word our Savior Christ though he spoke by a figure, yet
spoke so, as that not at men's pleasures, but according to the course of Gods
word he might easily be understood. And as for the Apostles, we cannot doubt
but that they were so well instructed in those other signs and sacraments
wherewith they had been before acquainted, as that they could not make any
scruple or question what his meaning was in the institution of this. Therefore
no cause was there for them to be troubled, or to ask interpretation here, as
of some dark and obscure matter, but there had been cause for them to have
questioned many things in the words of Christ, according to that interpretation
which the Church of Rome has made thereof. For though Christ spoke to them
before of the eating of his flesh, and that his flesh was truly meat, yet had
he said nothing unto them that they should eat a whole body in the likeness
of a piece of bread. Yea though he spoke to them of eating his flesh and
drinking his blood, yet withal he spoke enough whereby to give them instruction
how that should be understood, as Sect. 49. and 57.
before has been declared.

64. W. BISHOP.
Finally, this holy Sacrament is a principal part of the new Testament, and
one of the chiefest legacies by Christ bequeathed unto us Christians. Now what
law or conscience will permit, that any legacy should be interpreted
figuratively? to wit: that for a house, goods, or lands bequeathed and given by
last will and testament, you should understand a figure of a house to be given,
or the signification and representation of some goods or lands. If this be most
absurd and ridiculous in the testament of any ordinary man, about temporal
goods: how much more pernicious and intolerable is it, to suffer this in the
eternal Testament of the Son of God, and that in his divine and inestimable
treasures?

And thus at length by the grace of God I come to the end of this book,
wherein (good Christian Reader) if thou find any thing, that may confirm thee
in the true Catholic faith, or further thy knowledge therein; give God (the
Father of lights, from whom all good gifts descend) the whole praise: If any
thing be amiss, impute it partly to my slender skill, oversight, or
negligence; and partly to the want of a convenient resting place, commodity of
books, and conference: all which, these times of persecution do deprive us of.

R. ABBOT.
He that makes his last will and testament and gives thereby great legacies
of lands and goods, and puts to his seal for confirmation of the legacies
that he has given, shall he be said in giving his seal to bequeath only a
piece of wax, or a figure and representation of lands and goods? The seal
indeed is but wax; it is but a sign and token of somewhat, but yet it serves
to give assurance of the legacies for confirmation whereof it is appointed. The
new testament of Christ is, the covenant and promise of forgiveness of sins
purchased by his blood. This has he published by the Gospel to all that
repent and believe in him. For confirmation hereof he has put to his
Sacrament as a seal, thereby to deliver after a sort, and to put into our
hands the thing which he has promised; even as he who has received a seal
presumes that thereby he has in effect the thing that is sealed unto him.
And shall a man say that Christ in giving us this seal, has bequeathed to us
no other but a figure, a signification or representation of somewhat, and not
the thing it self that is represented thereby? If it be absurd to say so in
humane testaments and wills, what means M. Bishop to transfer such an
absurdity to those things that are divine? I need not stand upon this matter;
I say briefly, that it is idle to say that the Sacrament is the chiefest
legacy that Christ has bestowed upon us. He has bequeathed unto us himself,
the fruit of his passion, the riches of his grace, the inheritance of eternal
life, which he will undoubtedly give to every true believer, and in the mean
time has given his Sacrament to be to our faith the pledge and assurance
thereof.

And thus M. Bishop tells us that he is come at length to the end of his
book; wherein I guess he has taken small joy, because he has quite left out
the middle, even whole twelve questions handled by M. Perkins, and which he
notwithstanding pretends to have answered, as has been before observed. We
are beholding to him for that he gives us leave if any thing herein be
amiss to impute it partly to his slender skill, oversight, or negligence. And
surely, what betwixt his slender skill one way, and his oversight and
negligence, another way, he has sent us so many things amiss, as that the
Reader has small cause hereby to be confirmed in that which he by a wrong
name calls the true Catholic faith. Thou have gentle Reader, what he can
say on the one side; thou have what I have had to answer on the other side: it
is now left to thee to judge of both, which so do, as being thy self to give
answer of thy judgment to Christ the Judge of all.

AN ADVERTISEMENT for the time concerning Doctor Bishops Reproof lately
published against a little piece of the Answer to his Epistle Dedicatory to the
King.
With an answer to some few exceptions taken against the same, by M. TH.
HIGGONS lately become a Proselyte of the Church of Rome.
1 THou may well remember, gentle Reader, that it was full three years in
February last since I published an answer to Doctor Bishops Epistle to the
Kings Majesty, whom he had thereby solicited to entertain the now-Romane
religion, pretending many great and weighty reasons, that it should be
expedient and necessary for him so to do. Wherein, how unfaithfully and
undutifully he demeaned himself toward his liege and Sovereign Lord, seeking
by false glosses and colors very trecherously to abuse him; I was careful in
the said answer to make it plainly to appear, for the satisfaction of all, who
in that behalf were desirous to be satisfied. With what conscience of fidelity
and truth I have carried my self in all that business, from the beginning
hitherto, it is known to God, who shall be both M. Bishops Judge and mine, and
does appear to them who without prejudice or forstalled opinion, do take
knowledge of the cause betwixt him and me. That to M. Bishop himself it
seems not so, it is no wonder, because by ouerstudying himself in the
schools of Rome, he is grown squint-eied, and can see nothing aright, or
rather hoodwinketh himself, that he may not see, that which indeed he does
see. By reason whereof it comes to pass with him, as in the like case with
the rest of his consort, which Saint Augustine said of the Donatists long ago;
August. con. epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 7. Cum eos obmutescere compellit
veritas, tamen silere non permittit iniquitas.
Though truth compels them to be dumb, yet iniquity suffers them not to
be silent. They see themselves ouermastred in the cause, but a state they have
to maintain, and somewhat they must say for it, whether it be right or wrong.
From this iniquity it has proceeded, that M. Bishop though convicted in his
conscience that the answer aforesaid was such, as that howsoever in some things
he might cauil at it, yet in the maine he could not tell by any means how to
contradict it; yet that he might from his Romish masters receive the thanks,
which upon an infamous overthrow and loss of a whole army Terentius Varro
received by the policy of the Roman senate, Liu Decad. 3. lib. 2 in fine.
Quod de rep. non desperasset, For that he had not despaired of the state of
their commonwealth, he would make show by writing some kind of reply, be it
what it might be, to carry still a courage, and no whit to distrust the
quarrel that he had taken upon him to defend. This is the drift of his
Reproof which he has lately published, which goes abroad amongst his
accomplices under a name, and with an applause, that I am answered, I am now
answered; as if he had made me some great answer; whereas, if we respect them
aine question and controversy of religion, save only that he has given a
snatch at one or two points by the way, he has written (whether it may be
said, he has answered, it rests further to be considered) only to four
sections of my first book, the second, third, fourth and seventh; which he
has inched out with enlarging sundry retorsions and matters of discourse, and
diverse silly excuses and defenses of the traitorous speeches and practices of
himself and his confederates, against the King and the State, in answering the
Epistle Dedicatory and Preface to the Reader, and the first and thirty four
sections; but the maine substance of the book concerning the suggestions and
motives by him pleaded to pervert the King, he has by a figure of preterition
quite let go, Reproof page 259. 286.
remitting the points thereof to be handled (ad calendas Graecas) in their
proper questions, because he was loath (forsooth) first lightly to skimme them
over in have, as I had done, and afterward to recoile and turn back to them
again.

2. But he should have remembered that he wrote that Epistle to his Prince and
Sovereign, where being charged to have dealt perfidiously with his most
excellent Majesty, and to have very leaudly attempted to abuse him with many
falsehoods and lies, with many broken and lame conclusions; and that he could
not make good that which he had written, he should have thought, that
whatsoever became of the rest of his book, it concerned him in all loialty and
duty to yield to his Majesty, a special and clear justification of that
Epistle. Again, he knew well that there were many points handled by occasion of
his Epistle, which belong not to any question after ensuing, and that the rest,
though handled other where, yet being here written to the King, were to be
answered by me, and therefore maintained by him in the same nature wherein they
were written; and would he then thus like a micher steal away from all, and
leave the chief and principal matters of his suggestion without succor or
defense? I had often said, and he has now verified it, that either he would
not reply at all, or else would do it in that patching sort as he has now
done. And surely, had not I my self ministered unto him the matter whereupon
he has framed his Reproof, without any necessity thereof arising out of his
Epistle, I should have gone for this time without any reproof at all. Upon
mention made of the Catholic faith, I took occasion, further than I was
compelled by him, to insist upon the name of Catholic, and to show their abuse
thereof. Upon his appeal to the Roman Church, when the same was in the best
and most flourishing estate, I took occasion of a comparison of the doctrine,
of the old and new Church of Rome, by sundry sentences of the Bishops and other
writers of that Church, whereas, it had been sufficient for me to have
disprooued those instances whereby he took upon him to prove the same faith
in both. From these two points arises the whole substantial part of his
book, and had I omitted these, in hard case had he been for the writing of a
book; for, for defense of his own allegations he had had nothing more to say.
Now gentle Reader, to confess to thee the truth, I had determined so soon as
time should serve, by a special treatise to enlarge the said comparison and to
remove their exceptions which they have to take against it, and so more fully
to describe, The true ancient Roman Catholic. What then has M. Bishop in
effect done by his Reproof, but only given me further occasion to do that,
that I had beforehand purposed to do, and to consider of sundry matters, which
happily otherwise not minding I might easily have ouerpassed? For the doing of
this, I must crave thy patience for a time, because it is a matter that will
require convenient time; but in the mean time, to give thee some satisfaction
as touching that Reproof, I have thought good by a short Aduerisement to make
it appear to thee, that Foxes whelps are all alike, and that M. Bishop is no
changling, but continues in his proceeding the same man that he was in the
beginning.

3. And first, I would have thee to observe what a terrible inscription he has
put in the forefront to fright owls and buzzards, that they may keep them in
their corners and not come forth to see the light. A Reproof, says he, of M.
Doct. Abbots Defense of the Catholic deformed by M. W. Perkins, wherein his
sundry abuses of Gods sacred word, and most manifold misapplying and falsifying
of the ancient Fathers sentences be so plainly discovered to the eye of every
indifferent Reader, that whosoever has any due care of his own salvation, can
never hereafter give him more credit in matter of faith and religion. But not
contented heerewith, to bombast this skar-crow to the full, and to cause the
greater terror, taking occasion belike, by my comparing him and his fellow
Wright to Iannes and Iambres, he vnderwriteth to that title the words of the
Apostle; 2. Tim. 3.8.
As Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so these men also resist the truth, men
corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith; but they shall prosper no
further, for their folly shall be manifest to all, as theirs also was. Now is
not this a horrible coniuration, Gentle Reader, and sufficient to make any man's
hair to stare? Would thou not imagine hereby that there should be cause to
cry out upon me, yea to hang me up for abusing Scriptures and fathers, and
beguiling the world in such sort as he pretends? But stay I pray thee a
while; remember that losers must have their words, and they will cry lowdest
that smart most, neither does any thing in being handled make so importunate a
noise as the filthy swine does. Saint Austine says rightly that August. de
ciu. dei. lib. 5. cap. 27. Non ideo plus potest vanitas quam veritas, quia si
voluerit etiam plus potest clamara quam veritas.
vanity is not therefore stronger than truth, because if it list it can cry
louder than truth. Thou know that naughty drabs, when they are reproved for
their leaud and dishonest life, do set themselves with all bitterness and
violence to devise and frame words and terms to gall and disgrace them by whom
they are reproved. Thou may well conceive that the greatest occasion of
suspicion lies on his part, who like the silly wood-cocke that thrusts his
head into a hole, and leaves his body to be beaten till both head and all be
dead, so after three years space, leaving the whole body of his Epistle
undefended, thrusts himself into one corner of a book, there for a time to
shroud himself, till his head being crushed in that corner also, he shall have
no place left further to yield him breath. But that thou may see from what
spirit that title of his book has proceeded, I have thought good here to
examine the whole matter of his preface, wherein he takes upon him to justify
the same, and professes to have said so much therein Page. 11.
as may suffice to discredit me with all indifferent men. Mark well, I pray
thee, the matters which he brings, consider well the weight and the truth of
them, and then take knowledge of some other observations that I shall give thee
concerning the whole book.

4. His Preface he begins artificially, according to a precept of
Rhetoric, which teaches a man Quintil. Orator institut. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Haec simulatio hucusque procedit vt quae dicendo refutare non possumus, quasi
fastidiendo calcemus.
a dissembling trick, that what he cannot confute he shall seem scornefully
to reject and trample upon. He tells his Reader concerning mine answer, that
Page 3.
he found so little substance in it, that a long time he was unwilling to reply
upon it, and could not think the time well bestowed which should be spent in
so frivolous and vain altercation. Aquil^ non capit muscas. The Fox would
none. And in this vein the man much pleases himself, having much in his
mouth my Page 45.
unlearned writings, Page 94.
more meet to stop mustard-pots, than likely to stop any mean scholars mouth.
He calls me Page 86.
shallow and shuttle witted, Page 16.
one of the most shallow and beggerliest writers of these days, Page 52.
one of the shallowest for substance of matter that ever he read; and Page 40.
if, says he, there lie more marrow and pith hidden in my writing than one at
the first sight would perhaps suppose (spectatum admissi risum teneatis?) then
surely it does require a man of more substance than he, though of lesser show:
yea Page 47.
if there be more in my book, says he, than you sometimes would have people to
believe, they that have a good opinion of it may hap to think that those grave
and wise men in high authority foresaw that it would hardly be answered by
laying nakedly testimony to testimony, and reason to reason; wherefore they
thought it best policy to make choice of some jolly smooth-tongued discourser,
that might with a ruffling multitude of fair pleasing words carry his Reader
from the matter. Thus he is all marrow and pith, a terrible man, our grave wise
men in high authority were afraid of him, they were put to their shifts to have
his book answered; as for me I am no body, all words and no worth; a man of
too little substance to encounter with the profound learning of so great a
Clerk. I do him here a double favor, both that I traduce not his foolery as
it deserves, and that I forbear to give him a ierke for so leaudly demeaning
himself toward those grave wise men in high authority. But what he is, and
what I am is not to be determined by him or me, God and the Country must try
us both; only this I do not doubt, that my writings, unlearned as they are,
have set a dagger at his heart, which he shall never be able to pull away. It
appears by this Preface, that he has heard somewhat thereof that pleases
him not, whereupon he is grown so furiated and enraged, as that he spitteth
nothing but poison, and straineth himself to the uttermost, to disgrace that
which he sees to be so disgraceful to himself. But he is herein but as the
dog which gnaweth the stone, which causes pain to his own teeth, but to
the stone can do no harm at all. And here it troubles him, that to his
Epistle, being but one sheet and a half, I should write so long an answer of
thirty sheets; but I answer him, that in the service of my Prince, and in a
business of that nature I was not to huddle up any thing, but to unfold and lay
open all things, that the truth might the more fully and plainly appear. I do
not wonder that he would have had me more brief, because thereby his dishonest
and shameful dealing should have been the less seen. In a word, I wrote as
the ancient fathers of the Church have been wont to do, not to serve the
humor of Heretics and enemies, but as might best make for the satisfaction
and edification of Gods Church.

5. Another quarrel he has concerning my sharp and bitter words,
disgraceful and odious terms, and bitter railing, as he speaks, against the
best men of their side. As touching the persons, I must tell him, that the best
of their side are very bad if they be no better than those of whom I have
spoken. As touching the words I will not justify my self, but that in a just
and righteous cause, humane affection may carry me somewhat too far in heat:
but yet I must advertise M. Bishop, that there is a difference to be made
betwixt words spoken by way of private anger and revenge, and those that are
spoken by way of just reproof. By way of just reproof Esaias says to wicked
men, Esaias 57.3.
Ye witches children, ye seed of the adulterer and of the whore. By way of
just reproof, John Baptist said to the Pharisees and Sadduces, Mat. 3.7.
O generations of vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to
come? In like sort does our Savior Christ bitterly reproach the Scribes and
Pharisees, calling them Mat. 12.34.
generations of vipers, Mat. 16.4.
a wicked and adulterous generation; Mat. 23.13.16.17.26.
Hypocrites, blind guides, fools and blind, blind Pharisees, and in extreme
passion says, Ver. 33.
Ye serpents, Ye generations of vipers, how should ye escape the damnation of
hell? So does Steven speak to the Jews, Act. 7.51.
Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears: And Paul to Ananias, Act.
23.3.
God shall smite thee, thou painted wall. The words then are not always
faulty, but the occasion thereof is always to be regarded, and the occasion
thereof must be taken to depend much upon the condition of the persons. For
where men are in any sort tractable, and do not wilfully oppose themselves
against instruction, the Apostle prescribes that rule alleged by M. Bishop,
2. Tim. 2.24.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all, apt
to teach, instructing with meekness them that are contrary minded. But where
men absurdly and wilfully resist the truth, and do leaudly seek to draw
others to be partakers with them in their sin, there the Apostles example
sometimes takes place, who when he saw Elymas the sorcerer laboring to turn
away Sergius Paulus the Roman Deputy from the faith, brast out with great
indignation and said, Acts 13.10.
O full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child of the devil and enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the Lord?
Now therefore albeit I do not in any sort compare my self in measure of grace
with those excellent servants of God, as M. Bishop to make himself work full
simply cauelleth, yet according to that measure of the same spirit which God
has given me, let no man marvel that I have been deeply moved in heart to
see these vassals of Antichrist by trocherous calumniations of true religion to
offer so great indignity to the Anointed of the Lord, and therefore have
somewhat dipped my pen in gall to exagitate their hypocrisy and iniquity, in
such sort as to me it seemed the cause it self did require. Neither will I for
that cause be a foul mouthed wrangler, as M. Bishop has styled me, but an
earnest Advocate of Gods truth, Jude verse. 3.
vehemently contending, as the Apostle Jude exhorts, for the maintenance of
the faith, which was once given to the Saints, carried with zeal and
indignation toward malicious and wicked hypocrites, who having prostituted
their own souls to the fornications of the whore of Babylon seek
perfidiously to entangle the consciences of others in the fellowship of their
ungodly courses; and in a word, so far from wrangling; and having with so sound
reason and proof repulsed the cauillations and Sycophancies of his epistle, as
that after three years he can say nothing for justification of his motives
which he tendered to the King, but shiftingly abuses the world by a mere
collusion, enlarging a book out of some matters of discourse, and making a
miserable answer only to some few sentences alleged against him, without the
compass of that that he had written. But it is not to be omitted in this
behalf, what M. Bishop himself even here says; Page 4.
I wot well, says he, that the most mild and sweet penmen are sometimes
through zeal of the truth, or by the overthwart dealing of their adversary
moved to let slip now and then a word or two. Yea and let it be noted how one
sweet penman in this case excuses another, M. Bishop his fellow Watson, after
that he had with all importunity and fury thorowout his whole book of
Quodlibets run upon the Jesuits. Answer to particulars against D. Bishop.
page 17.
Sorry I am, says he, that to some blemish of his former virtues, certain
books set out of late carry the letters of his name, because the style seems
too sharp, and some thing in them sounds harshly in Catholic ears. But to
mitigate the matter, the occasion of writing which time and place ministered
must be duly considered, and withal, how he and others were before grievously
hurt in their reputation by the other party, and that in defense of their
honor they might lawfully discredit the injurious aggressours. Now if any man
look upon me with the same eyes wherewith M. Bishop looked upon M. Watson, he
will easily see that the reputation and honor of our religion being so deeply
touched, and so many infamous aspersions being cast upon our whole doctrine and
ministry by his malicious and slanderous libell, the zeal of truth, and
importunate impudency of such an injurious aggressour, must needs wrest from
me what spleen or passion I had to show in the service of my Prince, and in
the cause of Jesus Christ. And this I hope shall excuse me in this behalf,
with all that are friends and welwillers to the cause in hand: or if any take
exception further, I must say to him with the words of S. Bernard, Bern. in
Cant. sermon. 12. Inhumane little redarguis opera quorum onera refugis: temerarie
obiurgat rirum de praelio reuertentem mulier nens in domo.
Thou dealest ungently to blame the doings of them whose burdens thou refusest:
it is rashness for the woman that sits spinning in the house, to check the
soldier returning from the war. Hieron. Apolog. ad Pammach. Delicata
doctrina est pugnanti ictus dictare de muro.
It is a dainty kind of teaching, says Hierome, to sit upon the wall, and to
appoint the man in fight, in what manner he shall strike. Consider that thou art
but as a beholder and looker on, but I was as he that felt the blows, and
therefore do not marvel if I were more moved than thou, yea esteem of me in
this business by the experience of thine own affections in that that touches
thine own cause. But I must needs here entreat thee, gentle Reader, by the
way to note how this sweet pe^-man carries himself in that kind wherein he
obiecteth so great fault to me. The flowers of his speech are; Preface to his
second part, sect. 10.
Of the same accursed crew was Melancthon; Calvin in his institutions to hell;
Reproof. Page 50.
craking impudency, and impudent craking: Page 64.
a vain craking iangler, and notorious liar; Page 211.
deuoid of all good conscience and honest dealing; Page 264
past all shame, and worthy to be thrust into an Asses skin; Page 272.
base and bastardly minded Ministers; Page 283.
cosening companions, false hypocrites, most impudent liars; Page 281.
the spirit that possesses his heart, to wit, the father of all lies, Page 283.
he that will be fed with lies let him take the devil to his father and M.
Abbot or some other such like of his lying Ministers to be his master. Nay, the
term of lying is nothing every where; and it is wonderful to see what a rare
dexterity he has to multiply lies upon me, as for example, five lies in a
place, where indeed there is no lie. Reproof. Page 83.
A lie it is, says he, that I denied to his Majesty such authority as would
serve for the taking order how God might be rightly served in his Realm;
whereas my words are, that he denies to his Majesty that supreme government in
causes ecclesiastical whereby he should take upon him so to do; which he so
far denies as that against this Page 170. 171. etc.
Supremacy he has said more than of any one matter thorowout his whole book.
What authority he dreameth would otherwise serve so to do, that to me is
nothing. Another lie it is, says he, that the Popes laws do inhibit Princes
to meddle with matters of religion; whereas the law is plain, Did. 96. Si
imperator. Ad Sacerdotes deus voluit quae ecclesiae disponen. da sunt pertinere
etc. Non publicis legibus, non a potestatibus seculi, sed a Pontificibus and
sacerdotibus opus deus Christianae religionis voluit ordinari. etc.
The ordering of matters for the Church God would have to belong to Priests,
not to the secular powers: not by public laws, not by secular powers, but by
Popes and Priests would God have the work of Christian religion to be ordered.
Sext. de haeret. Quicunque. Inhibemus ne cuiquam laica personae liceat public
vel priuatim de fide Catholica disputare. Qui contra fecerit exco^municationis
laqueo innodetur.
We forbid any lay person either publicly or privately to dispute or reason
concerning the Catholic faith; he that does so, let him be excommunicated.
Again he says: A third lie it is that I affirmed Kings to hold their crowns
immediately from God; but that his foolery may the better appear he adeth;
Which though it be true in that sense he takes it, yet it is false that I said
so in that place, for I meddle not with those terms of immediately or mediatly.
So then he says so, but yet I lie in saying that he says so, because he says
not so in that place, whereas notwithstanding I neither charge him with
mediatly nor immediately in that place, but only repeat his own former words,
that of Gods mere grace and bounty Princes receive and hold their diadems and
princely scepters. Yet again: The fourth lie is that the Pope denies Princes
to hold their Diadems and Princely authority immediately from God, but are to
receive them by his mediation; whereas the Pope himself says of the Emperor;
Auent. Annal. lib. 6. Imper ator quod habet, totum habet a nobis. Ecce in
potestate nostra est imperium vt de^^us i^ud cui volumus, propterea constituti
a deo super gentes and regna vt destruamus and euellamus, and edificemus and
plantemus. etc. Ex epist. Adriani 4.
What he has, he has it wholly of us; the Empire is in our power to give it
to whom we will; being therefore appointed of God over nations and Kingdoms,
to destroy and to pull up, to build and to plant. Which words I alleged used
by Bull a Pij 5. apud Sander. de schism. Anglic.
Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth, and applied generally to that purpose
by the Extrauag. de mayor. and obed. cap. V^am sanctam. De ecclesiastica
potestate verificatur vatietnium Ieremiae: Ecce constitui te hodie, etc.
Decretall of Boniface the eight, and M. Bishop with a wile slily passes by
them and tells me that I lie; saying withal, that the common opinion of all
their Divines is to the contrary, whereas a number of their Divines have
published it to the world, that God has settled the power of all kingdoms
immediately in the Pope, and that the further disposing of them belongs to
him, as is to be seen in the Large Examination of M. Blackwell. page 27. 28.
etc.
examination of M. Blackwell the Archpriest, by many of their speeches to that
effect, some of the books being approved and printed in Rome, as containing
nothing contrary to the Catholic faith. The fifth lie, says he, that he makes
within the compass of less than half a side is, that the Pope says, By me
Kings reign; whereas notwithstanding the Pope says expressly, concerning the
Emperor, Auentin. vt supra. Per not imperat.
By me he reigns; and I further quoted the place where he does say so, in his
book of ceremonies, which he suppresseth, as shall appear anon. Now do thou
not think, gentle Reader, that this man has a great facility in obiecting
lies? And this is his manner thorowout his whole book, whilst as the drunken
man cried, fire, fire, when he saw but the redness of his own nose, so does
he cry out every while, a lie, a lie, when the lie is no other but a giddy
apprehension of his own distempered brain, being with anger grown so far
into melancholy that he thinks every straw that lies in his way to be a lie.
And indeed we know by experience how the subtle thief when he is pursued
cries out with all his might, stop the thief, stop the thief, that whilst
he seems to cry after another, he himself may not be taken to be the thief.
So it is with M. Bishop, who in policy cries out upon me, a lier, a lier, that
he in the mean time may lie freely and no man may suspect him. But who the
lier is, the process shall declare, and let him receive the shame that
belongs thereto. In the mean time, whereas for reproachful words, he has
applied to me those words of Saint Paul, Romans 3.13.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they deal deceitfully,
the venime of serpents is under their lips, their mouth is full of malediction
and bitterness, etc. I wish him to consider, whether it touch him which is
written, Romans 2.21.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? And again, Luke
19.22.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee thou evil servant. Consider him, I
pray thee, gentle Reader, thorowout his whole book, and think with thy self
whether he be not in this behalf a sit master for me to be instructed by. As
touching that he says, that Page 5.
if I hold that course of scurrility, I shall drive him to give me over in the
plain field, I wonder not thereat, not for that I give him cause by any
scurrility of mine to leave the field, but for that he sees a necessity
thereof by the badnesse and wretchedness of a leaud and dishonest cause, which
he sees himself unable to defend.

6. His next quarrel is, that I cite for confirmation and proof of any doubt
our own writers, Bale, Fox, Jewel, Humphrey, Holinshed, and such other. Now if
I do so, then I am a fool; but if I do not so, then what is he? Some of them
whom he names have compiled stories of former times, collecting what they have
found recorded by others that were before them, whose stories standing
uncontrolled, is it not as lawful for me to cite, as it is for Bellarmine and
the rest of his fellows to cite Tert. and Parsons Respo. ad Apolog. pro iuram.
fidelit.
Baronius the Cardinal, Blondus the Popes secretary, Genebrard, Bellarmin. de
notis eccles. cap. 14.15.16. etc.
Surius, Cochleus, Staphylus, yea Bolsecke a very infamous runnagate and
rakeshame, and such other of the like stamp; or for M. Higgons so often to
cite Motives. Page 44. 75. 78.
Parsons his three Conuersions? or for Parsons there to cite Three Conuers. pa.
2. cha. 10. Examen of Fox his calendar, chap. 16. and passim.
Waldensis, Antoninus, Genebrad, Surius, Prateolus, Sanders and such like; yea
to report what he list upon hearesay from Ibid chap. 12. sect. 15.
Sir Francis Inglefield? or for M. Bishop to cite Of Images sect. 20.
Bellarmine, Preface 2. part. sect. 13.
Caluino-turcismus, Answer to the Aduer. sect. 10.
Conrad, Ibid. sect. 46.
Ludolph, Of Traditions, sect. 16.
Gregory Martin, yea to report to us a matter out of Preface. 2. part. sect. 8.
a conference at Paris upon his own word? yea to write us a whole book as he
has done upon the credit of Bellarmine and some other of his own side? Surely
we have no cause to doubt but that those writers of ours in their relations are
men of as great honesty and fidelity as any of theirs: and though I allege
from them matters of history and fact, or do perhaps cite a sentence of an
author mentioned by one or other, referring the Reader to the reporter because
I have not the prime authors works at hand to search the original of it; yet
very childishly does M. Bishop conclude hereof, that I make their word a
confirmation or proof for any point of faith, because I respect not at all
what they say, but what they have said or done whose doings or sayings they
report, and their report I cannot but take to be true, so long as I see M.
Bishop can say nothing for the disproofe of it. Thus have I alleged out of
Answer to the epistl. sect. 4. page 26.
Holinshed the epistle of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to Lucius King of
Britain, not to prove any matter of question by Holinsheds word, (what wizard
would so conceive?) but to show by Eleutherius what the duty of a King is
toward the Church of God. What a jest is this? says M. Bishop, how knew this
late writer what passed so long before his own time? But I pray thee, gentle
Reader, put the like question to him. He tells thee in great sadness that
Reproof. Page 248.
amongst many other pardons granted by S. Gregory (whereof he cannot tell one)
there is to be seen until this day one altar by him erected in the Monastery
of S. Andrews in Rome, whereat whosoever says Mass for a soul in Purgatory
shall deliver a soul from thence. Say now to him, What a jest is this? how
knows M. Bishop, a new vpstart writer, what passed so long before his own
time? Would he not, think thou, take pepper in the nose if a man should
answer him in this sort? The thing that he reports is indeed a very lie, and
a tale merely devised by themselves, but yet it goes for a tradition at Rome,
and he will hereupon have it to be believed. But that which Holinshed sets
down is a matter of record, extant and to be seen in the ancient Inter leges.
S. Edwardi. cap. 17. Lambert. de priscis Anglor. legib.
laws of our land, and therefore has testimony sufficient to move us to give
credit unto it. And that the matter might not rest upon the silly poor credit,
as he speaks, of Holinshed only; of whom notwithstanding, I may assure any
man that he was a man of much more fidelity and honesty than M. Bishop is, I
cited also Stow as a witness thereof, a man known to have been too well
affected to the Romish religion, so as that for his partiality that way he is
commonly alleged by themselves as a most authenticke author, specially by
Parsons in his three Conuersions, of purpose by him to thwart M. Fox the
uttermost he can, and therefore of whom M. Bishop cannot doubt but that he
found it in good record In lib. Const^^ tut. London.
as he professes to have done, or else he would have made no such mention of
it. Now what might be the cause that he could here see Holinshed and could not
see Stow, but that he desires to make some show of exception, where
notwithstanding he himself knows that justly he can take none?

7. Now we see that Stow for countries sake finds more favor with him than
Polydore Virgil, whom I cited as testifying Siricius Bishop of Rome to be
Answer to the epistle. sect. 8. page 60.
a noueller, in forbidding the marriage of Priests, and he says that I prove
it by the worshipful verdict of Polydore Virgil. Surely Polydore Virgil was no
Protestant, he was a writer of their own and deserved well of them, a man of
great learning and knowledge of history, one that would write nothing in favor
of us, and therefore his verdict, in reason and equity, should be strong for
us. Yea that which he wrote, he wrote by the warrant Polyd. Virgil. de invent.
rer. lib. 5. cap. 4. Siricius primus sacerdotibus and diaconis, vt ait
Gratianus did. 82. coniugio interdixit.
of Gratian, the Collectour of the Decrees, the founder of their Canon Law; and
says no more than the received Gloss of the Canon Law mentions, as a thing
commonly received; Did. 84. Cum in praeterit. in glossa. Dicunt quod olim
sacerdotes p^terant contrahere ant^ Siricium.
Men say that of old, before the time of Siricius, Priests might marry. Being
then a man of so good worth, and speaking upon so good ground, does M. Bishop
with the flout of a worshipful verdict thus scornfully turn him off? But it is
nothing with him thus to spurn at their own writers when they stand in his
way, and therefore tells us afterward that Matthew Paris the Monk who wrote
three hundred years ago, Reproof. Page 2^9.
did ignorantly and saucily reprehend Gregory the seventh for forbidding men to
be present at the Masses of married Priests; whereas Matthew. Paris. in Willielm.
1. ex Chronico Sigeberti, anno dom. 1074.
Matthew wrote the conceit and opinion of many that lived in that time; and
borrowed the same from Sigebert the Monk that lived before him.

8. I come at length to examine how in the process he makes good that
horrible crimination which he has expressed in the title of his book, of my
abusing, mangling, misapplying, falsifying, both scriptures and fathers. Now
whereas a man in the entrance of this accusation would expect some great and
weighty matter which might work some impression in the Reader, the more
strongly to apprehend the rest that follows, see how coldly he begins for
want of better matter, with a ridiculous and childish cavil, that by the very
beginning it may be conceived how idly he carries himself in his whole
discourse. In my Epistle Epist. dedicat. to the Answer to D. Bishops epistle.
to the Kings Majesty I noted the necessary use of the course intended by his
Highness as touching the answering of the dedications and supplications of
these Popish Proctours, for the discovering of the impudency of the
petitioners; for the gaining of such as may be gained to the acknowledgment of
Gods truth; and that as Saint Bernard says, though the heretic arise not from
his filth, yet the Church may be confirmed by the faith. From these words he
takes his example of my misapplying the sentences of the fathers, because
Bernard meant not thereby Page 7.
to dissuade any man from the Roman faith, and does in that discourse describe
those heretics to be such as denied Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, and
invocation of Saints, etc. Where I pray thee first to observe, that the words
by me alleged import only a phrase of speech, no sentence or argument for
proof. They serve fitly to signify the thing by me intended, but for any
weight they have one way or other, it had been all one to have set them down
as mine own words without adding Bernards name. And who knows it not to be a
thing usual to borrow the phrases and speeches of Poets, Orators,
Philosophers, yea of heretics, of schismatikes, of Apocryphal books or
writings, without respect what they meant that spoke them, so long as they
fitly express the mind of him that uses them? Bernard meant not by those
words to dissuade men from the Roman religion: no more did Aratus the Poet
mean to dissuade men from Paganism by those words, Acts 17.28.
For we are also his generation, the generation of God, and yet Saint Paul
uses them to that purpose. Neither did Menander by those words, 1. Cor. 15.33.
Evil words corrupt good manners, intend to reprove them that denied the
resurrection of the dead, which he himself believed not, and yet the same
Apostle forbeareth not to turn them that way; and will M. Bishop enter an
action against the Apostle for misapplying the Poets words? Neither did
Petilian the Donatist mean it well, and yet who doubts but that by his words
it may be truly said: Apud Aug. cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 8. Laqueo
traditor perijt, laqueum talibus dereliquit.
Judas the traitor perished with a halter, and to such as himself he left the
halter. Let M. Bishop take an example of this usage from M. Higgons their late
convert, who alleging it to be said of him by the Apostles words, Gal. 5.7.
He did run well, who did let him that he did not obey the truth? says thereto
thus; Motives. book 2. in the preface.
Unto these men I return a loving, a faithful and just answer, founded in the
demand of an eminent professor of their Gospel; Will you be any longer led by
them who thus grossly abuse you? and notes in the margent; Doct. Abbot against
Doct. Bishop part. 2. in fine. These words I used to withdraw M. Bishop from
the Romish religion, and yet M. Higgons thought that without offense he might
take my words to serve him for an answer why he had now embraced the same,
presuming it to be the custom of all writers to take words even out of the
adversaries mouth, and to retort them upon himself; how ill he has done it I
will not here say. Now therefore in like sort though Saint Bernard had been
mine adversary professedly writing against me, yea though the words had been
M. Bishop words, yet nothing could let but that thereby I might thus express
the benefit of answering their books, that, to use M. Bishops words, though
the heretic arise not from his filth, yet the Church may be confirmed in the
faith. But the words as they are delivered by Saint Bernard do serve fully and
directly to that purpose whereto I applied them. He handles that which is said
in the Canticles, Cant. 2.15.
Take us the Foxes; where by Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 64. Vulpes haereses vel
potius haereticos ipsos intelligamus. Capiantur non armis sed argumentis quibus
refellantur errores little, ipsi vero si fieri potest reconcilientur Catholicae,
reuocentur ad veram fidem, etc. Homo de ecclesia exercitatus and doctus si cum
haeretico homine disputare aggreditur, ille intentionem suam dirigere debet
quatenus ita errantem conuincat vt and conuertat, etc. Nec propterea sane nihil
se egisse putet qui haereticum vicit and conuicit, haereses confutauit,
verisimilia a vero clare aperteque distinxit etc. nam etsi haereticus non
surrexit de faece, tamen ecclesia confirmatur in fide.
Foxes, he understands generally all heretics which annoy and trouble the
Church of God; whom he will have to be taken, not with weapons but with
arguments whereby to refute their errors, that so they may be reconciled to
the Catholic Church, and recalled to true faith. He says, that he that
disputes with an heretic should propound to himself to convince his error
that so he may convert him, and thereupon to take away all objection of losing
his labor therein, he adds, that though he will not be converted, yet he
that has conquered and convicted him is not to think he has done no good;
for though the heretic, says he, arise not from his filth, yet the Church is
confirmed in the faith: which is fully answerable to the drift of my speech
where I used the same words. What, will he tell us that he is not the heretic,
and therefore the words are misapplied? But then I will deride his folly that
charge me with misapplication only upon his own conceit of the point in
question. He says, I am the heretic, and I say that he is so. He says it
only, but proves it not, but he himself stands by me convicted of many
heretical positions and doctrines delivered in his epistle and otherwise in
his book, so as that he cannot find how to trauerse the evidence thereof. Yea
but S. Bernard, in that very place, describes those heretics to be such as
denied Purgatory and prayer for the dead, etc. But M. Bishop therein says
untruly; for Bernard in that place speaks of heretics in general, as I have
showed, and therefore leaves his words to be applied to M. Bishop, who does
patronise and defend so many wicked and damnable heresies. True it is, that in
the two sermons following he speaks particularly of some heretics in his
time, and notes them for some points by M. Bishop set down, as namely
Purgatory, and prayer for the dead; but those matters he brings in a great
way after in the end of the second Sermon, and we doubt whether for those only
without greater cause he would have noted them for heretics, in as much as
Petrus Cluniacensis, Bernards equal, does testify as the Centurists have
observed, Magdeburg. Centur. 12. cap. 5. page 839. Petrus Cluniacensis ter in
ea ipsa epistola fatetur Catholicos quosdam de sacrificijs and orationibus pro
defunctis dubitare.
that some Catholics did then doubt of sacrifices and prayers for the dead,
and consequently of Purgatory, which depends thereon. He notes them for
other points wherein they are more like to the Papists than to us, as namely,
first, that Bernard. in Cantic. ser. 65. Firmauerunt sibi sermonem nequam,
Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli. etc. Quod immobili iure sancitu^ est, non
peierandum scilicet, hoc tanquam indifferens pro sua voluntate dispensant.
they dispensed with themselves to swear and forswear for the concealing of
their own secrets, as now the Jesuits and Priests, by their equivocation and
mental reservation teach their pupils to do. They Ibid. Contubernio faeminaru^
nemo inter eos qui careat. etc. Vxorne tua? Non, inquit: nam voto meo istud non
conuenit. and ser. 66. In operimentum turpitudinis co^tinentiae se insigniere
voto: porro turpitudinem in solis existimant vxoribus reputandam.
vowed continency, but yet would not be without the company of women, yea their
vow of continency was but for the covering of their filthiness, thereby
forbearing marriage as unclean, but in the mean time committing fornication,
as Popish Priests and Votaries are accustomed to do. Ibid. Quidam
dissentientes ab alijs inter solos virgins matrimonium contrahi posse fatentur.
Some of them permitted the first marriage, but the second marriage they held
unlawful, and the Church of Rome now denies to it their sacramental
benediction. They also condemned the eating of flesh, as a thing unclean, as
the Maniches did; they thought they might every day at their own tables
consecrate for themselves the body and blood of Christ; they derided the
baptising of infants: which things, with other like, were such as might justly
move S. Bernard to inueigh against them. And these things he spoke as he was
advertised concerning them of whom he spoke; but whether he were truly
advertised it may be doubted, because he himself says, that not only Ser.
66. in fine. Non solum laici principes sed and quidam, vt dicitur, de Clero
necno^ de ordine Episcoporum eos sustinent.
Princes of the laity, but some also of the Clergy and of the Bishops were
favorers of them; which it is not likely they would have been, if they had
been men so ill conditioned as he reports them, howsoever he upon an
unlikely rale impute it to their taking bribes of them. As for those matters
which M. Bishop names, it is no wonder that Bernard living in a time of so
great corruption and declination of Christian faith were somewhat entangled in
the superstitions of that time; wonder it is rather, that in the most material
points thereof which most nearly concern our justification and eternal life,
he continued so sincere and sound as we find he did. Who although he had a
conceit that the church of Rome should not err in faith, as M. Bishop
alleges out of his Epistle to Innocentius, yet if he lived now would
disclaim that conceit, because he should see the church of Rome oppugning that
Doctrine of the imputation of righteousness by Christ which he maintains at
large in that epistle, as I have Of Justification, sect. 6.8.
before cited him in the handling of that point. Yea in sundry points from
place to place I have showed how Bernard fully accords with us, and
condemns the doctrine which the church of Rome has since drawn out of the
puddles of her own schools; so that howsoever he were misted with some
superstitious fancies, yet that lets not, but that by his judgment, M.
Bishop is one of those heretics against which he would have the church
confirmed in the faith. For his further censure of the Bishop and church of
Rome, I refer the Reader to that which has been before said in the second
part, pa. 70, 72. For conclusion of this point, I note how in answering my
Epistle to the King, he takes the same exception of misapplication to two
other sentences borrowed by me from S. Austin. The one is prefixed under the
title of the book: Answer to the Epistle. ex August. de ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap.
1. Eorum dicta contraria si toties refellere velimus, quoties obnixa front
statuerunt non curare quid dicant dum quocunque modo nostris disputationibus
contradicant, infinitum esset.
If we would so often refute their gainsayings, as they resolve with impudent
faces not to care what they say, so that they may in any sort contradict what
we say, there should be no end. Forsooth, S. Austin pronounced this against
infidels, and with what countenance could M. Abbot cite it against us
Christians, which in S. Austins meaning concerns us not? Forsoorth, M.
Bishop, because S. Austins words of those Infidels do sitly express the
dealings of such Christians as you be, whose perverseness and wilful
obstinacy in error is such (...) howsoever plainly your untruths be reprove
^^^d convinced, yet you verify of your selves those other words of S. Austin,
concerning other such Christians as you be; Aug. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2.
c. 13. Malunt peruersis vocibus veritati reluctari quam confessis erroribus
paci restitui.
They choose rather with froward words to strive against the truth, than by the
confession of their errors to be restored to Christian peace. In the Epist
dedicat. to the answer to Doct. Bishops epist.
other place, mentioning M. Bishops threatening the King, that if he did not
yield to them, God knows what that forcible weapon of necessity would drive
men unto at length, I said, that they thereby verified in themselves that which
S. Austin said of their predecessors the Donatists; Where they cannot by sly
and wily cosenage creep like Aspes, there with open professed violence they
rage like Lions. Here M. Bishop notes, that both this sentence and the former
out of Bernard, I set down in general, not quoting the very place, because I
knew they made nothing for my purpose. But I would have him to note, that I
penned that Preface being from my books, and though I did well remember the
words, yet I could not by memory particularly note the place. But the words,
he says, are not to my purpose, because they were pronounced against the
Donatists. Yes, they are therefore to my purpose, because as they served to
express the usage of the Donatists of old, so they serve to set forth the
usage of Popish Donatists and Circumcellions now. S. Austin compares heretics
to Aspes, and tells that August. in Psalm. 57. Aspides insidiose volunt venena
immittere and spargere.
Aspes lurkingly seek to thrust in their poison and to disperse the same. This
he applies to the Donatists, and declaring how Christian Emperors by barring
them from the use of Churches, resisted them in that course, he shows how
these proceedings were justified against the Donatists, by the example of the
Donatists dealings amongst themselves, so as that their mouths were stopped,
and they had not to plead further for themselves. Ibid. Non est quod
respondeant, etc. Ideoque vbi non possunt lubrica fallacia serpere vt aspides,
aperta violentia fremunt vt leones: profiliunt and saeuiunt armatae turbae
Circumcellionum, dant stragem quantam possunt.
And therefore, says he, where they cannot by their wiles and subtilties
creep like Aspes (to spread their poison, being by laws restrained from their
will) there by open violence they rage like Lions; the troops of Circumcellions
come forth armed, and they murder and kill all that they can. Now do not
these words fitly agree to M. Bishop and his fellows? who because they cannot
be suffered like Aspes to spread the poison of their heretical corruptions, do
fall therefore to raging and threatening, to practices of surprising and blowing
up with gunpowder, and if they durst, to open tumulting, and in the mean time
saying, both M. Bishop, and his father and fellow Parsons, for they are both in
one note, that patience often provoked is turned into fury, hereby to imprint
in their followers, that it is no wonder being so hardly dealt with as they
pretend, that they take their opportunity to play the Lions, to raven upon
them by whom they are so ill entreated, that so howsoever they clear it for
the time as M. Bishop does, yet they may have them in affection prepared when
time shall serve; though their Reproof page 30. Parsons Answer to the Apology
for the oath of allegiance, page vlt.
eyes, I hope, shall rotte the while, and they shall never see it serve? But
here is to be noted that he says, that those words may be applied to the
Lutherans in Germany, and Protestants in England. But how I pray, M. Bishop,
seeing S. Austin knew them not nor meant any thing of them? He will have it
thought, because the Lutherans and Protestants do in like manner as the
Donatists did. But then, M. Bishop, I pray you understand, that the words of
Austin concerning those Pagans and Donatists are not misapplied to you, when
you carry your self in the like sort as did the Pagans and Donatists, or else
by your own crooked rule you have abused S. Austins words, which you apply to
me; Preface to the Reproof page 16. ex August. cont. Gaudent. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Nihil affert praeter lassum and quassum.
He brings nothing but what is weared and spent, because Austin spoke those
words against Gaudentius the Donatist, and I am not Gaudentius.

9. Another trick no less shameful, he obiecteth to me in misconstruing the
words of the fathers. He makes it to be but Answer to the Epistle, sect. 12.
page 103. 104.
a fable of mine, that Gregory the Bishop of Rome commended the zeal of
Serenus Bishop of Massilia, who could not endure that any thing should be
worshipped that is made with hands, or did tell him that he should forbid the
people the worshipping of them. But what will M. Bishop say that Gregory did?
Marry, Preface to the Reproof page 8:
he did not commend but reprehend the indiscreet zeal of that Bishop, who did
break some pictures set in the Church, because some late converted heathens
not yet well instructed in the Christian religion did adore them as if they had
been Gods. Well, let Gregory tell his own tale, and then do thou, gentle
Reader, judge thereof. Greg. li. 7. ep. 109. Indico dudum ad nos peruenisse
quod fraternitas vestra quosdam imaginum adoratores aspiciens easdem ecclesiae
imagines confregit atque proiecit. Et quidem zelum vos nequid manu factum
adorari possit, habuisse laudauimus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse
iudicamus. Iderirco enim pictura in ecclesiis adhibetur vt hi qui literas
nesciunt saltem in parietibus videndo legant quae legere in codicibus non
valent. Tua ergo fraternitas and illas seruare and ab earum adoratu populum
prohibere debuit, quatenus and literarum nescij haberent vnde scientiam
historiae colligerent, and populus in picturae adoratione minime peccaret.
I certify you, says he to Serenus, that it came of late to our hearing that
your brotherhood beholding some worshipping images, did break the same
Church-images and threw them away. And surely I commended you that you had that
zeal, that nothing made with hands should be worshipped; but yet I judge that
you should not have broken those images; for therefore is the picture used in
the church, that they who are not learned by book, may yet by sight read upon
the walls those things which they cannot read in books. Therefore your
brotherhood should both preserve the images and forbid the people the
worshipping of them, that both the ignorant may have whence to gather the
knowledge of the history, and the people may not sin in the worshipping of
the picture. In the other epistle written of the same matter he wishes
Serenus, Idem li. 9. ep. 9. Conuocandi sunt dispersi ecclesiae filij eisque
Scripturae sacrae est testimonijs ostendendum, quia omne manufactum adorare non
liceat, quoniam scriptum est, Dominum deum tuum adorabis and illi soli seruies.
to gather together again the Children of the Church, who upon offense of
breaking those images had withdrawn themselves from him, and to show unto them
by testimonies of Scriptures, that it is not lawful to worship any thing that
is made with hands, because it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only thou shall serve. Now compare the words of my answer with these
words of Gregory, and see whether I say any thing but what he says. Consider
where thou may find those skiruie shifts, of late converted heathens, and of
worshipping images as Gods, seeing Gregory says nothing of worshipping them as
Gods, but merely and only of worshipping them, affirming, that worship by the
testimony of scripture belongs to God only. Yea it is to be noted, that M.
Bishop himself confirms the same by the words of Gregory which he cites,
but that I know not how he is blind and sees not his own way. Gregor. ibid.
Frangi non debuit quod non adorandum in ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas solummodo
mente^ fuit nescientium collocatum.
Gregory, says he, tells him plainly that that should not be broken which
was not set up in the Church to be adored, but only to instruct the ignorant.
Mark what he says; only to instruct the ignorant. Surely if they be set there
to be worshipped, then not only to instruct the ignorant; if only to instruct
the ignorant, then they are not to be worshipped. Therefore he absolutely
opposes the one to the other, not to be adored, but only to instruct the
ignorant, which cannot stand if it be true which M. Bishop says, that in any
manner or meaning they be to be adored. Yet he tells us, that though S.
Gregory forbid images to be adored as Gods, yet does he teach them to be
worshipped as representations of most holy personages. But how may this
appear? Marry, by his letters, says he, to Secundinus, to whom he sent the
images of our Savior, of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of Peter and Paul. It is
true indeed that Secundinus sent to Gregory for the picture of Christ, and
Gregory sent it him; signifying to him, that his request did greatly please
him; because, says he, thou love him with all thy heart and whole intention,
whose image thou desire to have before thine eyes. Withal he sent him those
other pictures which M. Bishop speaks of. So then here we have pictures and
images, and thereof we make no scruple, but we have yet nothing for the
worshipping of them. For the affirming whereof, M. Bishop here very impudently
abuses his Reader by false translation. For the words of Gregory are thus:
Greg. lib. 7. ep. 54 Scio quidem quod imaginem saluatoris nostri non ideo petis
vt quasi deum colas, sed ob recordationem filij dei vt in eius amore recalescas
cuius te imaginem videre consideras. Et nos quidem non quasi ante diuinitatem
ante illam prosternimur, sed illu^ adoramus quem per imaginem aut natum aut
passum sed and in throno sedentem recordamur: and dum nobis ipsa pictura quasi
scriptura ad memoriam silium dei reducit, animu^ nostrum aut de resurrectione
latificat aut de passione demul^et.
I know verily that thou do not therefore desire the image of our Savior
that thou may worship it as God, but for a remembrance of the son of God,
that thou may become fervent in his love, whose image thou considerest thy
self to behold. And we verily fall not down before it as before the Godhead,
but we worship him, whom by the image we remember, either as borne, or having
suffered, or now sitting upon his throne. And whilst the picture, as it were a
writing, brings to our remembrance the Son of God, either it rejoices our
mind as touching his resurrection, or appeaseth it by his passion. Now whereas
Gregory says; We do not fall down or cast down our selves before it as
before the Godhead, M. Bishop reads; We do cast down our selves before the
said Image, not as before a Godhead. And so he understands the former words,
Thou worshippest the image, but thou do not worship it as a God, taking the
particle (as) to import a distinction of the variety of worship, which is only
an exemplification of the propriety thereof. For Gregory has no meaning to
instruct Secundinus to worship the image or to kneel to it which we see before
is the thing he wholly condemns, but wills him to understand that these
devotions belong to God only, and therefore that he must beware not to put the
image in the place of God to do to it those duties of religious humiliation,
which are proper to God alone. For as when I say of another man, I will not
kneel to him as to the king, I do not mean that I will kneel to him, though
not in that manner as to the king; but whereas of duty I kneel to the king, I
will not kneel to him: so when Gregory says to Secundinus, that he is not to
worship the image as God, or to kneel before it as before God, he means not
that he is to worship the image or kneel before it, though not in that manner
as before God, but that this duty belongs only to God, and is not to be
performed to the image. And that this may appear to be Gregory his true
meaning, and not any gloss of mine, it is undeniably confirmed by Gregory
himself, where for conclusion of his instructions given to Serenus for the
quieting of his people, he says thus: Ide^. l. 9. ep. 9. Si quis imagines
facere voluerit, minime prohibe: adorare vero imagin^^ omnibus modis deuita:
sed hoc solicit fraternitas tua admoneat vt ex visione rei gestae ardorem
compunctiunis percipiant and in adoratione solius omnipotentis sanctae
Trinitatis humiliter prosternantur.
If any man will make images, forbid him not; but by all means avoid the
worshipping of images: but this let your brotherhood carefully advertise them,
by the sight of the story to gather feruency of compunction, but humbly to fall
down or kneel in the worship of the holy Trinity only. Now if he so forbid
the worshipping of images, as that he reserueth kneeling or casting down our
selves only to the worship of the holy Trinity, let it be esteemed with what
conscience it is that M. Bishop says, that he approoueth the worshipping of
images, even so far forth as to kneel before them. Albeit out of the very
words themselves, the thing is manifest; for if Gregory had intended that
images though they were not to be worshipped as Gods, yet were in other sort to
be worshipped, he would by the aduersatiue have opposed worship to worship, to
express what that sort of worship should be, whereas now he sets worship on
the one side, and only remembrance on the other side, not to worship but for
remembrance; not to fall down before it, but to worship Christ, whom we
remember by it, still appropriating worship to God, but attributing nothing to
the image save to be put in mind thereby of him whom it does represent. Surely
a senseless thing it is to imagine that he who would not have images to be
worshipped as gods, and yet would have them to be worshipped, should never
direct in what sort they should be worshipped, but teach absolutely as we have
seen, by all means to avoid the worshipping of them. M. Bishop says, that he
has diverse other places to make good that meaning of Gregory: but he abuses
his Reader therein; he has not one place more whereby to make any show of it,
and therefore I hope it plainly appears, that I have not wrongfully alleged
Gregory's words, but have justly affirmed that he in this point directly
crosses the doctrine and practice of the now-church of Rome.

10. In the next place he charge me with the falsifying of Epiphanius, which
yet he could not hansomely do, but that he must first play a false trick with
me. The original of this matter is from Hierome, who inueighing against
certain bishops of Spain, as I take it, for that they would admit none to be
priests or deacons, except they were first married, detesting as it seems the
horrible fruits of forced single life, alleges in prejudice of them the
examples of other Churches, namely the Churches of the East; none else save
only the Churches of Egypt and Rome. Against this allegation of Hierome
concerning the Eastern Churches, I say, Answer to the Epistle sect. 8. page 62.
that Socrates who wrote his story within less than twenty years after the
death of Hierom, Socrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. Id adeo cum omnes illustres
presbyteri in Orient, and episcopi etia^, modo ipsi voluerint, nulla lege
coacti ab vxoribus abstineant; nam non pauci illorum, dum episcopatum gerunt,
etam liberos ex vxore legitima procreant.
affirms of those Eastern Churches (which Epiphanius also an Eastern Bishop
even in the time of Hierome, of some parts thereof acknowledges) that the
Priests and Bishops thereof were not forced by any law to forbear their wives,
and that many of them whilst they were Bishops had children borne unto them of
their lawful married wives. Now mark I pray thee gentle Reader, the bad
dealing of this untowardly wrangler; for whereas I rest the maine report
hereof upon Socrates, to Socrates he says nothing, standing convicted
hereby, that all the Omnes illustres presbyteri.
famous Priests of the East, and the Bishops also at their discretion had their
wives, and being bishops did beget children of them. Again, whereas I allege
Epiphanius only as a party-witnesse, he peruerteth my words, as if I made him
a witness of the whole. He sets down my words thus: Epiphanius an
Eastern bishop, says M. Abbot, even in the time of Hierome, acknowledges for
true those words of Socrates, that the Priests and Bishops thereof were not
forced by any law to forbear their wives, etc. whereas I say by a parenthesis
only thus, which Epiphanius also an Eastern Bishop even in the time of Hierome
of some parts thereof acknowledges. The difference is this, that whereas
Socrates affirms the matter generally of the East, I allege Epiphanius
testifying it only of some places thereof, though not concerning bishops, as
M. Bishop excepteth, yet concerning Priests and Deacons, which was sufficient
for my purpose, because Hierome against whom I objected it, spoke only of
Priests and Deacons. Albeit he does not wholly except Bishops, because saying,
that Epiphan. haer. 59. sed and adhuc viuentem and liberos gignentem vntus
vxoris virum non suscipit, etc. diaconum and presbyerum, and episcopum, and
hypodiaconum; maxim vbi synceri sunt canones ecclesiastici.
the Church receives not (amongst the rest) a bishop that lives still the
husband of one wife, and begets children, he adds this limitation,
specially where the ecclesiastical Canons be sincere or exact. He denies not
then but that bishops also were married and begat children, but he excepteth
that it was not so, where the ecclesiastical Canons were sincere and exact.
Upon this he adds; Ibid. At dices mihi, omnino in quibusdam locis adhuc
liberos gignere and presbyteros, and diaconos, and hypodiaconos. At hoc non est
inxta Canonem, sed iuxta hominum mentem, quae per tempus elanguit, and propter
multitudinem quum non inueniretur ministeriu^.
But thou will say unto me, that in some places Priests and Deacons and
Subdeacons do still beget children: He answers; But this is not according to
the Canon, but according to the mind of men, which in time has fainted, and
for number sake when there were not found to perform the ministry. So then he
justifies that that I affirmed, that Priests and Deacons in some places were
married and did beget children, this being yielded to the frailty of men's
minds, and for the supplying of the ministry, though it were not according to
the Canon. M. Bishop presses this, that Epiphanius testifies, that the
Ecclesiastical Canons had decreed otherwise; but the question is not, what was
decreed by I know not what Canons, but what by practice in some places was
done. The thing that I affirm is, that some places admitted no such Canons,
but their Priests and Deacons and Subdeacons, were married men. Albeit it were
worth the while to know of M. Bishop what Canons those were, and whence, which
Epiphanius speaks of. For there was before that time no general Council
holden but only the Council of Nice, and the Council of Nice though some motion
were made to bring in Socr. hist. eccles. li. 2. cap. 8. Visum erat episcopis
legem nouam in ecclesiam introducere vt qui ^ss^nt sacris initiati, sicut
episcopi, presbyteri and diaconi, cum vxoribus, quas cum erant laici in
matrimoniu^ duxissent, minime dormirent, etc. Paphnutius vehementer vociferatus
est, non grave iugu^ ceruicibus illorum imponendu^ esse qui erant sacris
initiati, honorabile esse coniugium inter omnes and thoru^ immaculatum etc.
viri cum legitima vxore concubitum castimoniam appellarit.
a new law, as Socrates calls it, to separate Bishops, Priests and Deacons
from the company of their wives, yet gave it over upon the aduertisment of
Paphnutius, earnestly crying out that it was too heavy a yoke to be laid upon
the Clergy, that marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, that the
company of a man with his own wife is chastity. Yea there was an ancient Canon
under the name of the Apostles: Canon. Apost. 6. Episcopus vel presbyter, vel
diaconus vxorem suam ne eijciat religionis praetextu: sin fecerit, segregetur;
and si perseueret deponatur.
Let not any Bishop, Priest or Deacon, put away his wife under color of
religion; if he do so, let him be excommunicated; if he continue therein, let
him be deposed. Which Canon, though abbridged in respect of Bishops, yet
concerning Priests and Deacons is renewed in the sixth Council in Trullo, where
those fathers professing Constantinopol. 6. in Trull. can. 13. Nos antiquum
Canonem Apostolicae perfectionis ordinisque servants hominum qui sunt in
sacris coniugia deinceps ex hoc temporis momento firma and stabilia esse
volumus, nequaquam eorum cum vxoribus coniunctionem dissoluentes, vel eos mutua
tempore conuenienti consuetudine priuantes. Quamobrem siquis dignus inuentus
fuerit qui hypodiaconus, diaconus, vel presbyter ordinetur, is ad talem gradum
assumi nequaquam prohibeatur si cum legitima vxore cohabitet. sed neque
ordinationis tempore ab eo postuletur vt profiteatur se a legitima cum vxore
consuetudine abstenturum, etc. siquis ergo praeter Apostolicos Canones
incitatus sit aliquem eoru^ qui sunt in sacris, presbyterorum, vel diaconorum,
vel hypodiaconorum coniunctione cum legitima vxore and consuetudine priuare,
deponatur: similiter and siquis presbyter vel diaconussuam vxorem pietatis
praetextu eiecerit, segregetur, etc.
to observe the old Canon of Apostolic perfection and order do decree, that
the marriages of Clergy men shall from thenceforth continue firm and good, and
say, that they will not dissolve their conjunction with their wives, or deprive
them of their mutual company in time convenient. Wherefore if any, say they,
be found worthy to be made a Subdeacon or Deacon or Priest, let him not be put
back though he dwell with his lawful wife; neither let it be required of him
in the time of his ordination to profess that he will abstain from having
lawful company with his wife. If therefore any contrary to the Apostolic
Canons shall be moved to deprive any Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon of the
company of his lawful wife, let him be deposed; and if any Priest or Deacon
shall put away his wife under pretense of religion, let him be excommunicated;
and if he so persevere, let him be deposed. Now if these were ancient Canons of
Apostolic perfection and order, as the Council tells us, then it was an
error in Epiphanius to account those Canons sincere and perfect that were
contrary to these. They were, it seems, some positive and local
constitutions to which he refers his speech, which as they were in some
places accepted, so in other were rejected, but neither the Apostles nor any
general Council had prescribed any such Canons to be used in the Church. Now
therefore I have lost nothing by Epiphanius, because he plainly says that for
which I alleged him; neither has M. Bishop gained by him any thing against
me, because he can give us no authority for the Canons which Epiphanius names
for him, and we give him very good authority for other Canons that are against
him.

11. But in this matter of falsifications M. Bishop yet means to show
himself more false. I objected it Answer to the Epistle, sect. 14 p. 122.
as a horrible impiety written in their law, that they style the Pope, Our Lord
God the Pope. He says that herein is Reproof in the Preface. page 10.
a double lie. First, for that I avouch that to stand in the Law which is only
written in the Gloss. But is he so nice and strict in his terms that he
never calls Law but only the text of Law? Surely we call those Law books
wherein matters of Law are handled, although there be no text of Law. And might
not I say that was written in their Law which is written in the Gloss, that is
the exposition of their Law, and which by authority amongst them is always
printed together with the law? Albeit what I meant by the Law I expressed my
self by setting down the quotation thus, Extrauag. Joan. 22. cap. Cum inter.
in Glossa. Yea but the more shameful lie is, that it stands not in the
gloss neither, but I belly both the one and the other. Where I confess to
thee, gentle Reader, that I thought that by their new editions he had had some
advantage against me. I had read the words as I cited them long ago in a fair
print of the Canon Law, in the library of the Church of Worcester. Now when I
saw M. Bishop thus confidently auouching that I belied them, I thought
undoubtedly that even for shame in their latter impressions they had altered
those words, never imagining that he would be so shameless as to charge me
with belying them in a thing apparent to the sight of every man. Thus I meant
in simplicity to have passed it, with referring the Reader to the old books,
though it were changed in the new. But now I pray thee to do the same that in
the end for more assurance I thought good to do. Look to their edition of the
Canon Law printed at Paris, Anno. Dom. 1601. and there thou shall find it
still as I cited it; Extrauag. Joan. 22. cap. Cum inter. in glossa Parisiis.
Anno dom. 1601 Cum priuilegio Gregorij 13. and aliorum principum.
Credere dominum Deum nostrum Papam sic non potuisse statuere, etc. haereticum
censeretur. To believe that our Lord God the Pope might not so decree, should
be accounted heresy. Now whether shall we think here to be more impudent,
the Pope or M. Bishop? Surely the Popes sin is the greater, who by Optat. lib.
3. Passus est homines per se sie iurare tanquam per deum: in quo si vnusquisque
hominu^ errauerat, ipse prohibere debuerat; cum non prohibuit, deus sibi visus
est.
Optatus his argument, because he does not forbid this style, takes upon him
to be our Lord God the Pope. M. Bishop has some grace to be ashamed of it, but
little grace has he to deny that which is so open for every man to see. By the
hardness of his forehead in this thou may take occasion to esteem what he
is in all the rest.

12. Again he says, that it is Answer to the Epistle, sect. 13. p. 119.
a lie which I cite out of the Decretals, that they say the Pope is not a mere
man. The words are, Decretal. Greg. de translat. episc. Quanto.
Non puri hominis sed very Dei vicem gerit in terris. Where I doubted not but
that by a phrase of speech often used where the word of double government has
his proper signification only in respect of the latter, not of the former
which it governs, the meaning is that he has not the condition of a mere
man but is the vicar of the true God. And this meaning is elsewhere confirmed
where it is said, that Sext. proaem. inglossa. Ostenditur per mutation
m^nominis facta mutatio hominis: cum enim pr^us esset purus homo, nunc vicem
very deige^it interris.
by the changing of the Popes name is imported the changing of the man; for
where he was before a mere man, now he is Gods vicar upon the earth; leaving
it to be understood, that therefore now he is not a mere man. But yet because
I knew they might make another construction of those words, I would not
thereupon rest the proof of that that I said, that the Canonists persuaded the
Pope that he was not a mere man, but added for that purpose their noble verse
whereby they say to the Pope, Clement. Prooem. in gl^ssa.
Nec deus es, nec homo; quasi neuter^es inter vtrunque; Thou art neither God
nor man, but as it were a neuter or mungrell betwixt both; even as elsewhere it
is said, Did. 96. Constantinus in glossa. In hac part Papa non est homo sed
vicarius dei.
The Pope in this behalf is not a man but the vicar of God. Tell us now, M.
Bishop, did I lie or not? or do not you rather dally with your Reader in
cauilling thus vainly at one place, when you saw the thing that I said
purposely justified by another? Surely you take a wrong course; this is not the
way to recover the credit that you desire.

13. His next quarrel is concerning a place of Beda. I allege out of him,
that Answer to the epistle sect. 31. page 199.
in his time the Scriptures were in four several languages of so many several
nations in this Island, beside the Latin tongue common to them all, thereout to
search the knowledge of Gods truth. This he says, is a lie also, but to
persuade his Reader that it is so, he leaves out the words wherein I conceived
the proof to stand. The words of Beda are these: Beda hist. eccles. gent.
Anglor. lib. 1 cap. 1. Haec in praesenti iuxtra numerum librorum quibus lex
di^ina scripta est quinque gentium linguis vnam candemque summae veritatis and
verae sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur and confitetur, Anglorum videlicet
Britonum, Scotorum, Pictorum and Latinorum, quae meditatione scirpturarum facta
est omnium communis.
This Island at this present according to the number of books wherein the Law
of God is written, does in the languages of five Nations search and confess
one and the same knowledge of the highest truth, and of true sublimity or
height, namely of the English, the Britons, the Scots, the Picts, and the
Latins, which by meditation of the Scriptures is become common to all the
rest. Where I confess that in those words, according to the number of books
wherein the law of God is written, I understood Beda his meaning to be, that
they studied Gods truth according to the Canonical Scriptures which are
contained in a certain number of books; not conceiving, such was then my
dullness, that it might be taken, that as the Law of God is written by Moses in
five books, so this Island, in five languages, did study and search the
knowledge of Gods truth; which in further waighing the words I since
considered. Now M. Bishop to show his fidelity, leaves out those words,
imagining that the Reader might perhaps take my first meaning to be as likely
as this latter. These be S. Bedes words, says he; This Island at that time did
study and confess one and the same knowledge of truth (of the highest truth he
should have said) in five sundry languages. But if he had meant honesty, and
plain dealing, he would not have done thus; he would have set down the words,
and left them to the consideration of the Reader, that it might appear what it
was that might induce me to that that I affirmed thereupon. Albeit, setting
those words aside, I would ask him, and he indeed should here have told us,
how this Island should in five languages study and search the knowledge of the
highest truth, if they had not in five languages the books of the highest
truth? Tell us M. Bishop, we desire to know of you, and if you would needs
answer the place, you should have declared it, how they should study the
highest truth without having the books of the highest truth? And that they had
so, we cannot doubt, because it was said by Theodor^tlong before, Theodoret. de
enrand. Graecor. affectib. lib. 5. Hebraici libri non modo in Graecum idioma
conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque linguam, Aegyptiam. etc. semelque vt dicam
in linguas ^mnes quibus omnes gentes in hunc diem vtuntur.
that the books of the old Testament were translated, no^ only into the
Greek tongue, but also the Latin, Egyptian, Persian, Indian Armenian,
Scythian, and all tongues which all Nations used at that time. But of that that
Beda says, that the Latin tongue by meditation of the Scriptures became
common to the rest, M. Bishop makes a very poor and simple collection, that
they needed not to have learned the Latin tongue for the studying of the
Scriptures if the Scriptures had been translated into their own mother
languages. As if he should say, that because we have the scriptures now
translated into our English tongue, therefore we need not for the studying of
the Scriptures learn the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues. The absurdity of
which connection is such, as that we may think M. Bishop out of his wits that
would so much disgrace himself as to be the author of it.

14. Another notorious untruth and most malicious slander, he says, I cast out
against Austin the Moonke, whom he terms our English Apostle, of whom I say
in my answer, that Answer to the Epistle, sect. 31. p. 198.
he being offended at the bishops of the Britons, for that they refused to be
subject to his Romish authority, provoked against them Ethelbert, then King of
Kent, by whose procurement an army of Infidels was sent to slay them, who
cruelly and unmercifully performed the slaughter, not sparing them who in their
shirts came forth to them to entreat mercy. For the justifying whereof, he
says, I can produce no ancient author, but am glad to shroud my self under
an old namelesse Chronicle cited by the Arch-liar and late partial writer
Jewel. I do not marvel that Bishop Jewel in his reckoning is a liar, because
he knows that where Bishop Jewel is not taken for a liar, there he and his
fellows must be accounted so to be. But as touching the story, if his eyes had
served him, he might have seen that I cited not the old Cronicle only
alleged by Bishop Jewel, but also Galfridus Monumetensis, whom in the
beginning of that narration I quoted as a witness thereof, who out of the
ancient British story reports, that Galfrid Monumetens. lib. 11. cap. 12.
Augustino petenti ab Episcopis Britonibus subiectionem. etc. Dino^t diuersis
argumentationibus ipsos ei nullam subiectionem debere respondit. Et. c. 13.
Edelbertus rex Cantiorum vt vidit Britones dedignantes subiectionem Augustino
facere, etc. hoc gra^issime ferens, Edelfridu^ regem Northanumbrorum and
caeteros regulos Saxonum instimulauit vt collecto grandi exercitu in ciuitatem
Bangor Abbatem Dinoot and caeteros Clericos qui eos spernerent perditum irent.
etc. Edelfridus ciuitate capta cu^ intellexisset causam aduentus Monachoru^ (vt
pro salute populi sui orarent^ iussit in eos primum arma verti et sic mill
du^enti little in ipsa die martyrio decorati regni caelestis adepti sunt sedem.
in the city of Bangor there was a most noble Church of 1200. Monks, all living
with the labor of their hands. Their Abbot was named Dino^ch a man
maruellously well learned; who by diverse arguments made it appear, when Austin
required the Bishops to be subject unto him, that they ought him no subjection.
Edelbert therefore the King of Kent, as soon as he saw them refuse to yield
obedience to Austin and despise his preaching, sturred up Edelfride and other
princes of the Saxons to gather a great army, and to go to Bangor to destroy
Dinoochand his Clergy. Who taking the city, commanded the swords of his men to
be turned first upon the Monks, and so twelve hundred of them the same day,
decked with Martyrdom, entered the kingdom of heaven. By which record it is
plain that though that slaughter were not committed by Ethelbert, as M. Bishop
says, yet by the procurement of Ethelbert, as I affirmed, it was done. Albeit
our English Chronicle cited Defense of the Apology. part. 5. in the beginning.
by M. Jewel delivers that both the Kings Ethelbert and Edelfride joined
their power together, and so the murder was committed by them both; Austin
also meeting them at Leicester as they were going to the place where that act
was done. Moreover he cites a Chronicle written in French by one Ibid.
Thomas Gray, above two hundred years ago, wherein it is said, that Austin
being so refused of the Bishops and other learned of the Britans, made such
complaint thereof to Ethelbert King of Kent, that forthwith he levied his
power and marched against them, and slew them in most cruel wise, having no
more regard of mercy then a woolfe has upon a sheep. So then it should seem
that neither Austin nor Ethelbert, were free of that bloody and cruel murder,
howsoever M. Bishop do his good will to clear them both. Yea by that which
Beda reports, it may be well coniectured that Austins hands were not free of
it, for that he threatened them when he saw they would not yield to him Beda.
hist. li. 2. cap. 2. fertur minitans praedixisse quod si pacem cum fratribus
accipere nollent, bellum ab hostibus forent accepturi.
that if they would not accept of peace with their brethren, they should find
war of their enemies. But it may better be coniectured by the same answer as
in two written Cronicles in the Library of Baliol College in Oxford it is
expressed, where it is not, they should find war of their enemies, but,
Polychron. magn. and Polychron. Monachi Cistrensis. Quod qui pacem cum
fratribus accipere nollent, bellum ab eisdem forent accepturi.
if they would not accept of peace with their brethren, they should (ab eisdem)
of them, or from them, find war and revenge, plainly importing that he
himself would procure the same. For whereas M. Bishop alleges out of Beda
that Austin was dead and buried many years before that slaughter happened,
Bishop Jewel shows that therein they have for Austins credit falsified the
Latin story of Beda, because by Beda translated by Alfred seven hundred years
ago into the Saxon tongue, the contrary plainly appears that, Austin after
that slaughter was alive. Yea he produces a Charter of the Church of
Canterbury yet extant and to be seen, which was granted and confirmed by King
Ethelbert, and by Austin accepted and subscribed the same year that that was
done, whereby it is without all controversy manifest and clear that it is
false which M. Bishop says, that Austin was dead many years before. And for
some further conjecture of this matter, I will not omit to note out of Doct.
Powell his history of Wales, certain verses of that famous and renowned Poet
Ambrosius Telesinus, or Taliessin, surnamed in his time, Ben Beirdh, the
chiefest of the wisemen, which seem in all likely hood to tax Austin as a
procurer of that slaughter. For although he mention the said Taliessin as
having been a writer in the year 540. yet because there can be imagined no
occasion of those words before Austins coming in, I conceive that either there
is some error in the notation of the time, or that living perhaps to great
years, as in those days was no rare thing, he wrote the Ode, whence those
verses are taken, in his last time. I will define nothing hereof, but leave it
to the judgment of the Reader to conceive as he sees cause. The verses then
he first sets down in the Welsh tongue as they were written by him that
made them: History of Wales by Doct. Powel.
Gwae'r offeriad bid
Nys angreifftia gwyd
Ac ny phregetha.
Gwae ny cheidw ye gail
Ac efyn vigail
Ac nys areilia
Gwaeny theidw ei dheuaid
Rhae bleidhi Rhufeniaid
A'iffon gnwppa.


These he repeateth in English thus: Woe be to that Priest yborne
That will not cleanly weed his corn
And preach his charge among.
Woe be to that shepherd (I say)
That will not watch his fold always
As to his office does belong.
Woe be to him that does not keep
From Romish woolues his sheep
With staff and weapon strong.


Where when he names Romishwolues, we cannot doubt but that he alludeth to
some cruelty, caused or practiced by some that came from Rome; which because it
can have no application in those times but only to the slaughter of the Monks
aforesaid, therefore I doubt not but that it has reference to Austin the
Monk, who came then from Rome, as the cause of that slaughter.

Now because we are in hand with falsifications and misconstructions, I hold it
not amiss to reduce hither two other taxations of his of the same nature, as
most properly belonging to this place. The first by order of my book is a
place of Matthew Paris, by whom I say it appears, that Answer to the epistle,
sect. 3. page 20.
for the space of twelve hundred years after Christ, the Popes authority
could gain no acknowledgement in Scotland, for that in the time of King Henry
the third (the one and twentieth of his reign) when the Popes Legate would have
entered into Scotland to visit the Churches there, the King of Scots Alexander
the second, forbad him so to do, alleging that none of his predecessors had
admitted any such, neither would he suffer it, and therefore willed him at his
own peril to forbear. Concerning this allegation, M. Bishop sets down a
postscript in the end of his book, when all the rest was finished in this
courteous manner; Courteous Reader, I must needs acquaint thee with a notable
legerdemaine, which by perusing the author, I found out after the rest was
printed. Now gentle Reader, I know thou look for some special great matter,
which he was thus careful to add after all the rest was printed; but what is
it I pray? M. Abbot, says he, to prove that the Pope had no authority in
Scotland twelve hundred years after Christ, auerreth that Alexander the second
utterly forbad the Popes Legate to enter within his kingdom, which is not
true. No is? Surely then M. Abbot dealt very undutifully with his Prince, to
delude him with a false tale. But I pray you, M. Bishop, tell us what the truth
is? For his author Matthew Paris declares, says he, that the King indeed did
at the first oppose himself against that visitation of his kingdom to be made
by the said Legate, not for that he did not acknowledge the Popes supreme
authority in those ecclesiastical causes, but because it was needless, the
matters of the Church being (as he said) in good order, and for fear of
ouer-great charges. And is this all M. Bishop, that you could find, perusing
the author so diligently as you have done? But I pray you put on your
spectacles once more, and turn over your book again. Thou shall understand
gentle Reader, that the impression of Matthew Paris which I follow, is that
Tiguri in officina Froschoviana. 1589.
at Tigure, in officina Froschouiana, anno 1589. There in the one and twentieth
year of Henry the third, being the year of our Lord 1237. page 431. which in
the edition, cited by M. Bishop, I take by some notes of mine, to be page 597.
thou shall find Matthew Paris set down this matter in these words; Math.
Paris. in Henrico 3. anno 1237. pa. 431. Volenti autem domino Legato intrare
reguum Scotiae vt ibi de negotijs ecclesiasticis tractaret, sicut in Anglia,
respondit rex Scotiae, Non me memini Legatum in terra mea vidisse, nec opus
esse alique^ esse vocandum, deo gratias, nec adhuc opus est; omnia been se
habent. Nec etia^ tempore patris mei, vel alicuius antecessoru^ meorum visus
est aliquis Legatus introitu^ habuisse, nec ego dum mei compos fuero tolerabo.
Veruntamen quia fama te sanctum virum praedicat, moneo te vt si forte terram
meam ingrediaris cau te progrediaris nequid sinistri tibi contingat, etc.
The Lord Legate being desirous to enter into the kingdom of Scotland, there
to deal in Ecclesiastical matters, as he had done in England, the King of
Scotland answered him, I remember not that I have seen any Legate in my
country, nor that there has been any need, thanks be to God, that any should
be called, neither is there yet any need; all things are well. No, nor in the
time of my Father, or of any of my predecessors, has any Legate been seen
to have had any entrance there, neither will I suffer any so long as I am in my
right wits. Notwithstanding, because by report you are a holy man, I warn you,
that if ye do go into my country, ye go warily, lest any thing befall
amiss to you. For unruly and savage men are there dwelling, which thirst after
men's blood, whom I my self cannot tame, nor hold them back from me, if they
fall upon you. These are the words of Matthew Paris; now ask M. Bishop, I pray
thee, wherein stands that notable legerdemaine which he would acquaint thee
with: Ask him what it is wherein I have varied from my author. I said that
the king forbad the Legate to enter; so says the story. I said that the King
alleged, that never any Legate in the time of any of his predecessors had
been admitted there: the story says the same. I said that this was twelve
hundred years after the time of Christ; the story notes it to have been in
the year 1237. Wish him now to tell thee where the legerdemaine is, or whether
it be rather some policy of his, thus to talk of legerdemaine. But this place
he would not see; yet the latter place he saw; he quoteth the page 667. justly
agreeing with the edition, wherein I have formerly read the story; and is in the
edition which I now follow, page 481. We see what he has made of it; now let
us see how Matthew Paris himself reports it. Math. Paris. ibid. anno dom.
1239. page 481. Eisdem diebus Legatus in Scotiam intrare sestinauit, etc. Et
antequam regnum Scotiae intrasset, occurrit ei Rex Scotiae non acceptans
ingressum suu^. Dixit enim quod nunquam aliquis Legatus excepto illo solo in
Scotiam intrauit; non enim vt asseruit, opus erat: Christianitas ibi floruit,
ecclesia prospere se habebat. Et cum sermones multiplicarentur, and rex fere ad
contradicendum erigeretur, confectu^ est scriptum, intercedentibus vtriusque
regni magnatibus inter eos, cuius tenor fuit, vt nunqua^ ratione illius
aduentus talis consuetudo in consequentiam verteretur; in super in recessu suo
scriptum illud signaret, and hoc procuratum est ne confusus in Angliam quasi
repulsus reuerteretur etc. Rege vero in interioribus terrae commorante, Legatus
sine Regis licentia clam and subito recedens praedictum scriptum asportauit.
In those days, says he, the Legate hastened to enter into Scotland, and
before he was come into the kingdom of Scotland, the King met him, not liking
well of his coming. For he said that never any Legate, beside him, had entered
into Scotland, for there was, as he said, no need; Christianity flourished
there, and the Church was in good case. And upon multiplying of words, when the
King was almost ready to chide, there was a writing drawn betwixt them by the
intercession of the Nobles of both kingdoms; the tenor whereof was, that there
should never any custom grow by reason of his so coming, and that at his
departure he should seal that writing, and this was procured that he might not
return into England with disgrace, as having received a repulse. But whilst
the King was abiding in the innermost parts of his country, the Legate, without
the Kings license, privily and suddenly departed and took away with him the
writing aforesaid. Here we see by both these places, that the King of Scotland
denied the Popes Legate any entrance into his land, protesting that never in
his time, or in the time of his predecessors, any Legate had been admitted
there; and although he were content the second time upon intercession to give
him leave to visit that once, to quit him from disgrace, yet it was with
caution, that no custom should grow thereof, neither should that example be
pleaded to do the like another time. May I not then here say of M. Bishop as
Austin said of Adimantus the Manichee; August. cont. Adimant. cap. 15. O
hominem pessimum securum de negligentiae generis humani ad occultandas
deceptiones suas, etc.
O leaud man presuming of the negligence of men for the hiding of his own
cosenage and deceit, that did not think that any man would be so careful as
to take the book, and by searching find out how falsely and trecherously he
deals in these things. Is this his conuincing of me to be so perfidious and
without all conscience in alleging ancient authors as that no man can repose
trust in my allegations, as he here of infers? Ah wretched man that thus
makes havoc of his own conscience, and sets his soul to sale for the
defense of an unjust and wicked cause. As for that which he further alleges,
that the said King did afterward acknowledge the Popes Legate; and by his
letters profess that he and his heirs were and would be obedient to his
jurisdiction and censures, though I find no such matter by his quotation, yet
though it were so, it skilleth not. I question not what befell after, but what
had been before, knowing that the Pope where he had once set in foot was heedy
to take all advantages and opportunities, specially of the distresses and
troubles of Princes, to wind himself further in. And therefore as little to
the purpose is that which he alleges, where by order he answers this
matter, that when Reproof, page 122.
King Edward the third, as he names him, indeed the first, would have given to
the Scots John Baliol to be their King, they answered him, that they would not
accept him without the Popes consent, who had their country in protection,
which was five and fifty year after the Legates first attempt to enter into
that land, and therefore no prejudice to that that I have said.

16. The other point that I have thought fit to touch in this place concerns
the opinion of Proclus the Origenist heretic, of whom M. Bishop alleged to
the King, that he taught as we do, that sin in baptism is not wholly taken
away, but only covered, citing Epiphanius, as mentioning him for this opinion
to be an heritike. Answer to the epistle. sect. 7. page 49.
I answered him as the truth is, that by this allegation he had sheathed a
sword in his own side, for that under the name of Proclus he had by error
cited the opinion of Methodius an ancient and godly Bishop of Tyrus, approved
also by Epiphanius, and therefore had at once produced two ancient witnesses
teaching by his own confession as we do, that original sin in baptism is
not wholly taken away, but that the filth thereof cleaves fast to us so long
as we continue in the frailty of this life. The matter being clear and evident
by that that I alleged, I told him that either he read the place too early in
the morning, or too late at night, or else borrowed it from some of his Masters
the Jesuits, who make little conscience what they say. Now I find since, that
as almost in all the rest, so in this also Bellarm. de notis ecclesiae. cap. 9.
and de baptismo. c. 13.
Bellarmine has been his Master, and has showed as little wit in this
objection as he has done. Yet he has led himself along in a strong opinion,
that he has therein great advantage against me, and therefore though he have
cunningly passed over all the rest of my answer under pretense of handling all
things in their proper questions, and there follow Of Original sin, sect. 9.
a question afterward where this matter is mentioned, and to which it properly
belongs, yet not meaning in truth to trouble himself with any more
questions, he would needs out with that that he had to say of this matter.
And herein he mightily bestirreth himself, he sets down opinions, notes
divisions and coherence of speeches, examineth circumstances, looks into the
Latin, looks into the Greek, taxes me for shameless audacity, for simple
and shallow wit, for carelessness of credit in thrusting out such an impudent
assertion; for gross ignorance; and in a word tells me that I am past all
shame, and worthy to be thrust into an Asses skin. But what, M. Bishop, can ye
not be content to be a fool, but ye must be a fool in print? I must be thrust
into an Asses skin; but it seems that you need not be thrust into it: who do
of your own accord so willingly put it on: or let the skin light to whom it
will, sure I am that the ears must belong to you. Men would have thought
before, that you had had some learning, but now you give them cause to think,
that you understand not the Latin tongue, or if you do, then remember him that
said, Esaias 5.20.
Woe unto them that put darkness for light, and light for darkness. Once
again, gentle Reader, to give thee more full satisfaction in this matter, thou
shall understand that Epiphanius setting down the heresy of Origin, and
intending as in the rest, a confutation thereof, Epiphan. haer. 64. page 175.
Contentus esse duxi his quae recte a beato Methodio in sermon de resurrectione
contra^psum Origenem dicta sunt. etc.
thought best for one part of it to borrow the said confutation from Methodius
a Bishop of former time. Take knowledge by the way that I follow the edition of
Epiphanius translated by Iano Cornario interpret. Basileae ex officina H.
ruagiana. etc. 1578.
Ianus Cornarius printed at Basil, anno. 1578. Hereupon he sets down from
Methodius the words of Origin, and having ended them, there follows toward
the end of the next page this distinction set down by the translatour: Page
176. Hactenus Methodius Origenis verba retulit; sequuntur nunc Procli verba
quae item Methodius recenset.
Hitherto Methodius has rehearsed the words of Origin; there follow now the
words of Proclus, which Methodius also sets down, where in the Greek there
is no more but (...), that is, the words of Proclus; who namely in the time of
Methodius maintained the condemned opinions of Origin, and with whom it seems
that Methodius had much to do. These words of Proclus extend to the seventh
line of the next page 177. the very effect and substance whereof is this, as
Master Bishop also has expressed it, Page 177. Siquis potens fuerit exact
intelligere, etc. cognoscet resurrectionem de hoc corpore non oportere accipi,
vt sp non possit in a ternu^ i^ mutabile permanere, sed despirituali, in quo
idem ipse character qui nunc in hoc habetur conseruabitur quo vnusquisque
nostrum etiam secundum formam idem sit, quemadmodum and ab Origene dictum est,
etc.
that the resurrection must not be understood of this body, as which cannot
abide for ever without change, but of a spiritual body wherein the same shape
that now is in this body shall be kept, that every one of us in form and
proportion may be the same, as, says he, Origin has said. This being the
opinion of Proclus by M. Bishops own confession, if he would have had all the
discourse following to be taken for the words of Proclus, he should have showed
us how the same had suited to this opinion, and have laid before us some of his
arguments whereby he had endeavored the proof of it. He saw that I had so
done, and that the speeches which I alleged from Methodius do fully tend to
the confuting of this opinion; which he in his book has wholly suppressed,
knowing that no man can see those words, but he must also see his folly, that
would take those for the words of Proclus, which tend directly to the
overthrowing of that which he confesses to be the error of Proclus. But to
make the matter plain, the words of Proclus being thus set down, there follow
these words in the next line: Page 177. Verum hanc ipsorum contentionem and ex
his and ex alijs pluribus quis redarguere poterit. Demonstrabimus enim in
sequentibus ac sermonis progressu per naturae veritatem and non per
coniecturaes neque Hieremiam vinctos terrae nos dixisse propter societatem ad
corpus, neque Dauidem hac de causa ligatos Operaepretium enim est haec
proferre, in quibus maxim labi videntur. Proinde cum de pelliceis tunicis and
quod ante structuram ipsarum primi parents vixerunt cum corpore immortalitate
fruentes, insuperque quod non potest corpus vinculum and carcer putari, ea quae
conueniunt dixerimus, o viri Iudices, deinceps ad consequentia me conuertam,
velut promisi, vt dilucidius videamus quod volumus.
But this which they contend for, a man by these and many other reasons may
reprove; for we will show in the process of our speech following, by truth of
nature and not by conjectures, that neither Jeremy calls us prisoners of the
earth, because of the society with the body, nor David calls us bound or
fettered for that cause: for it is worth the while to allege those things
wherein they specially seem to err. Therefore when we shall have spoken what
is convenient of the coats of skins, and that our first parents before the
making thereof, lived with a body enjoying immortality, and moreover, that the
body cannot be taken to be a bond or a prison, then I will turn me to those
things that follow, that we may the more plainly see that that we desire. Here
we see a disputation plainly propounded against the foundations of the opinion
of Proclus before set down, whose Master Origin held Page 173. An^^am hum^nam
p^ae existere dicit; esse autem hae augelos and virtuces supernas in pe^catis
constitutas and ea gratia in supplicium in hoc corpus conclusas. Quaproter
inquit etiam vinculum vocatu^ est corpus, eo quod anima in corpore ligatdest,
etc. Et hinc inquit Scripturam etiampelliceas tunitas indicasse, quia fecit
ipsis, inquit, tunicas pelliceas and induit ipsos; hoc corpus est, etc. Et
mortuorum resurrectionem defectnosam facit, etc.
that the soul was first created without the body, and that when it sinned,
God created it a body and shut it up thereinto as into a prison wherein it is
fettered and bound, and that this the Scripture means where it says, that
God made to the man and the woman coats of skins and put upon them; by these,
says he, is understood the body. Hence drew he the rest of that absurd
fancy, whereby as Epiphanius there adds, he made the resurrection defective,
inferring that since this is the nature and use of the body, it cannot be that
this body should rise again, but that God will create a more excellent and
spiritual body for the soul to dwell in. And that this was the opinion of
Proclus, appears in the dialogue which is afterward set down betwixt
Methodius and Auxentius on the one side, and on the other side, not Proclus and
Origin as M. Bishop dreameth, Origin being dead many a year before, but
Aglaophon and Proclus; Methodius on the one side speaking for Auxentius and
himself, and Aglaophon as the better man on the other side for Proclus and
himself, where Methodius says to Aglaophon thus; Page 185. b. Dicebator anima
corpus hoc nobis circumsitum propter transgressionem suscepisse, cum
superioribus temporibus absque ipso foeliciter degissetpelliceas enim tunicas
corpora esse in quae concludi animas contigitsquo mortale gestantes pro his
quae fecerunt poenam darent. Annon erant haec quae primum in principio ante
dicta sunt? Imo a^mone si non videor tibi recte meminisse. Non opus habes,
inquit ille, admonitione: haec ipsa enim erant quae inprimis a nobis dicta sunt.
It was said that the soul received this body that is about us for sin and
transgression, when as before time it had litted happily without it; and that
the coats of skin are these bodies wherein it has befallen our souls to be
shut up, whereby in state of mortality they may be punished for the things
they did amiss. Was it not this that was before said? Tell me if I seem not
rightly to remember. Aglaophon answers, Thou need no telling; thus it was
indeed that we said before. Anon after he asks him again; Page 186. a
Nonne and illud, inquam, o Aglaophon, videtur tibi non recte habere, dicere
vinculum and pedicas corpus construclu^ esse contra animam, and quod propheta
vinctos terrae nos dixit, ideoque etiam David, ligatos? Et ille, Non habeo,
inquit, in promptu quod tibi respondea^. Et paulo post. Tu, inquam, ergo
vinculis and carcerem and sepulchrum and onus and pedicas ipsum (corpus) esse
dixisti. Vera, inquit ille, mihi dicis.
Seems it not amiss to thee, Aglaophon, to say that the body is made for
fetters and chains against the soul, and that the Prophet called us prisoners
of the earth, and that David terms us men in bonds? Where being doubtful to
be circumuented, he answers, I cannot readily tell what to say. But being
persuaded by Methodius to say his mind, and charged again that he said, that
the body is a bond and a prison and a grave, and a burden and fetters, he
answers, It is true as thou say. Now since this is the opinion of Aglaophon
and Proclus according to the doctrine of their master Origin, whom in this
behalf they followed, how is M. Bishop bewitched to take those words which
propound the confutation of this opinion to be the words of Proclus? Yea it is
further to be noted, that as in the latter part where M. Bishop confesses
Methodius to speak, so in the former also the speaker still directs his
speech against Aglaophon the companion of Proclus; Page 177. c. At fortassis
opponentis vosipsos aduersus relata. O Aglaophon and dicetis, etc.
But you, Aglaophon, will oppose your selves against the things that have been
spoken. Page 180. b. Attend, o sapientissime Aglaophon.
Listen here, O wise Aglaophon. Page 182. b. Vbi dominum pronunciasse dixisti,
etc. mox intu^sti, etc. ignarus quod qui, etc.
Thou say thus, Aglaophon, not knowing that he that has made all things of
nothing, etc. Page 183. c. Sic te O sapientissime Aglaophon considerare oportet.
Thus it behooves thee to consider, O wise Aglaophon. What will M. Bishop here
say? will he to save himself set Aglaophon and Proclus together by the ears?
Can he make us believe that Proclus here disputes against Aglaophon his own
fellow? Nay is he so mad as so to believe himself? But if this be not enough,
let us look into the matter of the discourse and see how well it accords
with the opinion of Origin and Proclus. Remember briefly what their conceit
was, that the soul was first alone without the body; that in that state it
sinned, and for a punnishment was thrust into the body, and that this body is
not that wherein we shall rise again, but that God will create a spiritual and
more excellent body bearing only the figure and shape of this. Now the speaker
in this discourse disputes first, Page 177. b. Homo verissime dicitur secundu^
natural neque anima sine corpore, neque corpus sine anima, sed quod ex compage
animae and corporis in vna boni forma^ co^positu^ est, vnde hinc immortale^
hominem factu^ esse apparet.
that God in the beginning made man immortal, consisting of a body and a
soul, because according to truth of nature man is called neither the soul
without the body nor the body without the soul, but that which is made into
one by the conjunction of body and soul. Mark here in the very beginning an
express contradiction to the opinion of Proclus, namely, that man was at the
first created not a soul alone but a body and a soul. Then he shows that
Page 179. a Pollutus and inquinatus est homo a sententia Dei dis essione facta,
and multas maliciei maculas sibi affricuit quas princeps ille and pater erroris
peperit, etc. Deus omnipetens immortale malum ex insidijs ipsum factu^
intuitus, velut etiam diabolus seductor erat pelliceas tunicas ob id fecit
velut mortalitate ipsos amiciens quo per corporis solutionem omne in ipso
factum malum moreretur.
man became polluted and defiled by swaruing and declining from the
commandment of God, and did set upon himself many spots of wickedness, which
the prince and father of error brought forth: and that God beholding man thus
made by the subtilty of Satan immortally evil as Satan himself was, did make
for the man and the woman garments of skins, as it were clothing them with
mortality, to the end that by the dissolution of the body all the evil that
was wrought in him might die. Hereupon he proves, that the making of coats
of skines cannot be understood of the making of bodies, seeing Ibid. Adam
confitetur se ossa habere and carnes, etc. Accepit Deus limu^ de terra and
formauit hominem; quod proprie de corpore dictum esse apparet, no^ enim de limo
and grauioribus essentiam aedepta est amma. Quare verissime certu^ est
vndequaque ante pelliceas tunicas incorporatum fuisse hominem.
it is evident that man before the coats of skins had a body, for that it was
said by Adam concerning Euah; This is flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone;
and of the creation of man it is written, that God formed him of the dust or
slime of the earth, which is manifestly spoken of the body, because the soul
had not his being thereof. This is also directly against the fancy of Proclus;
for Proclus held that the making of those coats was the making of bodies, but
this author proves that the bodies were before the making of those coats.
Then he further alleges, that God having made for man coats of skins Ibid.
b. Non quod non vellet Deus ipsum decerpere de ligno vitae ac edere, eiecit
eum: poterat enim in aeternu^ viuere vbi rursus de ligno vitae edisset, sed vt
ne immortale fieret malum etc. Eiecit eum vt mortificaretur primum morte
peccatu^ quo sic post mortem consumpto peccato excitatus homo purus ederet
vitam, etc. Qui enim omnino decernit carne^hanc non esse immortalitatis
susceptoriam, reuera dementiae per morbu^ maledicus est.
cast him out of Paradise, not properly for that he would not have him to eat
of the tree of life and live for ever, for why would he send Christ into the
earth if he would have had man utterly to die and not to taste of life? but
because he would not have sin to be immortal by man's living for ever in that
state wherein he was. Therefore he cast him out, says he, that sin first
might be mortified by death, that so sin being consumed, man after death
being raised up again might live pure and vncorrupt; setting down hereupon
this conclusion, which I wish M. Bishop to observe how it fitteth his Proclus;
that by a disease of folly or madness he speaks amiss who in any sort
determines that this flesh is not capable of immortality. This he repeateth
again, that Ibid. prohibitus est autem ^t peccatum cooccisum cu^ corpore
moreretur, corpus vero peccato perdito resurgeret.
man was hindered from eating of the tree of life, that sin being killed with
the body might die, but the body, sin being destroyed, might rise again.
What, M. Bishop, may we not well think that you were in a dream that would
take those words to be the words of Proclus, that this flesh is capable of
immortality, that this body, sin being destroyed shall rise again? And this
again is set forth by two notable similitudes, whereof the one is taken Ibid.
c. Quemadmodum in aedificijs templorum pulchroru^ vbi ficus enata est, etc. and
in omnes compositiones lapidum per multum sarmentosas radices diffusa non prius
a nascendo quiescit donec tota euellatur, dissolutis lapidibus in locis in
quibus enata est; possunt enim rursus in suos locos adaptari lapides, ficu
sublata, quo templu^ quidem seruetur, etc. ficus vero tota radicitus euulsa
emoriatur; eodem modo Deus optimus artifex templum suum hominem, qui instar
syluestris ficus peccatum produxit breuibus mortis ictibus dissoluit, occidens
velut scriptum est and viuificans, quo rursus earundem partium caro post
exsiccatum ac mortuum peccatum instar renouati templi immortalis and illaesa
excitetur, peccato perfect ac funditus perdito.
of a Fig Tree growing in the wall of a goodly temple and spreading the roots
into the iointes of the stones; which cease not to grow til it be quite
pulled out, the stones being taken asunder in the places where it grew, which,
the fig tree being taken away, may be put every one into his place again, that
so the temple may be preserved, and the fig tree pulled up by the roots may
die. For even in the same sort, says he, almighty God by the stroke of death
dissolueth man who is his temple, who has brought forth sin like a wild
fig tree, killing him, as it is written, and giving him life again, to the end
that the flesh or body of the same parts (even of the very same parts) after
sin dried up and dead may be raised up again immortal and without any hurt,
sin being wholly and utterly destroyed. Then follow the words which first
Bellarmine the Master and then M. Bishop the scholar object unto us as matter
of heresy, that Ibid. Viuente adhuc corpore antequam moriatur necesse est
simul viuere peccatum intus in nobis radices suas abscondens etiamsi forinsecus
per castigationum ac admonitionum fectiones fuerit refraenatu^ etc. Constat
contrahi quidem ac so piri per fidem nunc peccatum vt ne fructus noxios
producat, non tamen radicitus tolli etc.
so long as the body lives sin must needs live withal, inwardly hiding in
us the roots of it, albeit outwardly by the checkes of chastisements and
admonitions it be brideled and refrained; that certain it is that sin is now
holden short and laid asleep by faith, that it may not bring forth noisome
fruits but it is not pulled up by the roots; with other words more to that
purpose which I have set down in answer to the epistle, this conclusion
thereupon ensuing, that Page 180. a. Proinde in auxiliaris medicamenti modum ab
auxiliatore nostro and vere medico Deo ad eradicationem peccati ac deletionem
assumpta est mors, vt ne perpetuo durans in nobis immortale sit peccatum, etc.
Instar medicamentariae purgationis quo sic omnino inculpabiles and innoxij
efficiamur.
therefore death is appointed by God our helper and Physician to be as a
medicinable purgation for the rooting out and destroying of sin that it may
not continue immortally in us, but we may be made blameless and without spot.
To the same purpose then he adds the other similitude, Ibid. b. Videtur
velut siquis summus opifex flatuam pulchram ex auro aut alia materia conflet,
mutilatam repent conspicatus a pessimo quodam homine qui prae inuidia non
tulit decoram esse statuam eamque laesit, etc. si voluerit opus ipsum pulchrum
esse ac irreprehensibile, confringi ac rursus conflari oportet, quo
turpitudines and alterationes omnes ac quae ex insidijs ac inuidia in ipso sunt
per reparationem ac conflationem pereant, ipsa vero statua in speciem suam
integra and inadulterata simillima sibijpsi fabricetur: statuae enim perire non
contingit per artificem ipsius etiamsi rursus in materiam resoluatur; restitui
enim potest; turpitudines autem and mutilationes perire contingit,
colliquescunt enim, etc. Idem sane videtur in nobis Deus disposuisse; hominem
enim decentissimum suum opificium insidijs and inuidia male afflictum non
sustinuit relinquere talem, etc. sed dissoluit rursus in materiam quo per
reformationem colliquescant ac dissipentur omnia in ipso vituperabilia. Nam
illit conflari statuam, est hic mori ac dissolui corpus: illic vero reformari
materiam ac suo niteri restitui, est hic post mortem resurgere.
that as a workman having made a goodly fair image of gold or some other
metal, if he see it by any leaud body of envy maimed and disgraced, takes
course for the bringing of it to the former beauty to have it broken and cast
anew, that all the disgraces and alterations and whatsoever is caused by
practice and envy may by being repaired and new-cast be quite abolished, and
the image may be framed again perfect according to the former shape and
fashion most like unto it self, because it befalls not to it to perish
though it be resolved into the matter again, for it may be restored; but the
hurts and maimes and disgraces thereof are by melting taken away; even so God
beholding man his most goodly work brought to evil case by the subtilty and
envy of the devil, would not endure to leave him in that case, for that he is
gracious toward man, but dissolved him into his first matter, that by making
him anew all things that are faulty in him may be as it were melted away and
consumed. For what is the melting of the image there, the same is here the
dying and dissoluing of the body, and as is there the new forming of the matter
and restoring of it to his beauty, the same is here the rising again from the
dead. Here I pray thee, gentle Reader, to bethink thy self the new building
of a wall of the same stones, and the new casting of an image of the same gold,
how well it agrees with the opinion of M. Bishops Proclus that our bodies in
the resurrection shall not be the same. Even as well agrees that which
afterward he construeth of the words of God, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I will kill and I will make alive, I will strike and I will heal; Page 181.
b. Quid aliud docere vult quam quod ob hoc corpus prin^um occiditur and moritur
vt rursus resurgat ac viuat; percutitur primum a sauciatur vt rursus scluum ac
sanum formetur.
what else does he teach hereby, says he, but that for this cause the body is
killed and dies, that it may rise and live again; and is therefore stricken
and wounded, that it may be new, made whole and sound. Surely M. Bishop if your
face can blush, I trow it will appear here, in that you have so outfaced us
that Proclus the heretic speaks here where the author does thus
Categorically determine against the heresy of Proclus. After this he answers
two objections directly made in the behalf of Origin and Proclus. The one is,
that Ibid. Stom^e quod genera^u^ est aegrotat, and secundum natiuitatem and
secundum aiime^tum ab accedentibus angetur and ex decedentibus min^itur, etc.
Patiuntur autem aegrotantia, etc. Quod vero paetitur and deficit and perit,
etc. Non potest ergo exors laesionis esse homo and immortalis.
all things that are by generation are subject to sickness, both by condition
of birth and by reason of food and nourishment; and are increased by that that
is put to them and diminished by that that goes from them, and being by this
means subject to passion, are subject also, and therefore so is man's body, to
failing and perishing and cannot be immortal. Thus does Origin reason, before,
Page 175. c. Omne corpusque a natura continetur quae forinsecus aliqua disponit
ac succenturiat instar alimenti in ipsum and pro ingestis alia se cornit,
nunquam habet idem materiale subiectu^: quapropter non male flauius appellatum
est corpus, co quod neque per biduum idem subiectum est in corpore nostro.
that that which from without receives and supplieth some things by way of
food, and for the things which it puts in euacuateth other, cannot continue
the same material subject, and therefore is not amiss compared to a river not
being two days the same: importing hereby that the resurrection cannot be
said to be of this body, because it cannot be determined in so great alteration
what it should be that should rise again, as he has before more largly
expressed. In like sort the words of Proclus are, Page 177. a. Flaxile est
corpus materiale and nunqua manet in serpso ne minimo quidem tempore, sed
accedit and discedit circa speciem quae hominem delineat, etc.
that the material body is fluxible and never continues in it self so much
as for a very small time, but comes and goes under the shape which
proportioneth the man. The author of this discourse answers, that Page 181.
c. Si omne quod factum aut generatum est perit, nihil enim refert vtrum dicas,
nam and primi parents non generati sunt sed facti, facti sunt item and angeli
and anime, etc. Percunt ergo angeli and animae ex ipsorum ratione. At neque
angeli neque aenimae pereunt etc. Non placet autem vt illud dicatur quod omnia
funditus pereant, and terra and aer and caelum non futura sint. Exardescet
equidem ad purgationem ac renouationem mundus, etc. non tamen ad perfectum
interitum ac corruptionem deueniet, etc.
there is no difference whether things be created or begotten; for our first
parents were not begotten but created, who yet were in condition as we are; and
if things that are by creation or generation must perish, then so must the
angels and the souls of men, which yet neither of them do perish; yea and
that the world it self shall not utterly perish so as there be no more heaven
or earth or air, but shall be burned only to the purging and renewing thereof.
The other objection is taken from the words of Christ, that in the resurrection
Page 182. b. Qui resurrectionem assequentur erunt tunc velut angeli, etc.
Angeli vero carnem non habentes in summa beatitudine and propterea gloria sunt.
Ergo etiam nos, etc.
we shall be as the Angels; but the Angels are in perfect bliss and glory not
having flesh, and therefore we shall be so also. It is answered, Page 183. a.
Christus igitur si non esset resurrectio carnis sed anima solum seruaretur,
suffragatus esset ipsis velut been ac recte sentientibus. Nunc vero respondit
dicens, In resurrectione, etc. non quod carnem non habent, sed quod non
matrimonium contrabunt, sed sunt de caetero in incorruptibilitate, and per hoc
angelis assimilates dicit, etc. Sicut angeli; gloria nempe and honor coronati,
etc. Quare absurdissimum est dicere, Quoniam Christus pronunciauit sanctos
conspiciendos esse velut angelos in resurrectione, ob id corpora haec non
resurgere.
that if there were no resurrection but the soul only were saved, Christ would
have accorded to the Sadduces as being well and rightly persuaded. But now he
answers saying, In the resurrection they marry not nor are given in marriage,
but are as the Angels of God in Heaven, not because they have not flesh or
bodies, but for that they marry not, but are thencefoorth in state of
incorruption, crowned with glory and honor, and thereby likened to the angels.
In a word he says, that it is a most absurd thing to say that because Christ
says we shall in the resurrection be seen as Angels, therefore these bodies
(mark what he says, these bodies) do not rise again. And that it must be
understood of these bodies he proves even by the term of resurrection. Ibid.
Resurrectio n^n de non lapso sed de lapso dicitur and resurgente, etc. Moritur
autem caro; Anima enim immortalis est. Promde si anima est immortalis, corpus
autem ipse mortuus, qui r^surrectionem quidem esse dicunt, verum carnis non
esse, hi resurrectionem negant.
For resurrection is not named of that that is not fallen, but of that that is
fallen and does rise again. Now it is the flesh that dies, for the soul is
immortal; and if the soul be immortal, and it be the body that is dead, then
they that say there is a resurrection but not of the flesh, do deny the
resurrection. For conclusion he sets forth death and resurrection by
comparison of sleeping and waking, affirming, that Ibid. c Quemadm^ dum ex
dormiendo excitari ac vigilari contingit: sic etiam viuere ex morte continget
and non omnino qui mortuus est postquam mortuus suerit in eodem mane^.
as it befalls a man to rise and wake from sleep, being the same rising that
he was when he lay down to sleep, so does it befall also to live again from
death, so as that the dead does not still continue in that state. Hitherto then
it is plain that all this discourse tends directly to the confuting of
Proclus and Origin, and therefore that M. Bishop was scarsely in good temper in
the reading hereof, that took all these words to be the words of Proclus. One
only exception he yet further has, that what is Proclus his opinion and
proposition in the beginning, where I designed it, the very same is his
conclusion five leaves after, where he ends his discourse with a comparison
of our mortal bodies to a beasts hide filled with water. He sets down the
words and then says: Do you not see how the same that Proclus propounded in
the beginning with Origin, the same he concludes in the end? Wherefore all
that whole discourse between those two places was his own, and no word in it
of Methodius. But by M. Bishop I see that a wise man would as well have looked
to the middle as to the beginning and the end. It is true indeed that in the
end as it is distinguished there are certain words of Proclus, but M. Bishops
understanding should have served him to look in what manner they come in. For
the author of that discourse having proceeded so far as I have declared,
concludes that matter thus; Page 183. c. etc. Caeterum de his plura dicere in
praesens, eptime Theophile, voique reliqui sermonis iudices, omittamus.
Arriptamus autem ea quae deinceps ad haec consequuntur, quomodo long ab eo ^p
oportet discessit, quando in prophetia sexagesimi quinti Psalmi quam coacte and
improprie exponit, resurrectionem in sola specie seruari sperare oportet, dicit.
But let us give over, O noble Theophilus, and you other Judges of our speech,
to speak any more of these things at this time. Whereupon follow these words;
But let us take also those words which hereupon further follow, how far he
departed from the right when in the prophecy of the threescore and fifth Psalm
which he expounds forcedly and improperly he says, We must expect that the
resurrection shall be performed in shape only. Mark well, gentle Reader, how
he that has spoken all this while professes to cite other words of Proclus,
taxing him for departing from the right, for forced and improper exposition,
and setting down the opinion wherein he departed from the right to be this,
that the resurrection shall be only in the same shape. What; do we hear him
that speaks condemning Proclus, and yet must we believe M. Bishop to take the
words whereby he is condemned to be the words of Proclus? Nay hereupon are the
words of Proclus rehearsed to the same effect as M. Bishop has set down, that
as a beasts hide being filled with water, if by little and little it be
emptied, and by little and little be filled again, it carries still the same
show though it be not still the same water; even so our bodies being by food
and euacuation altered and changed from day to day, though they still have the
same shape and show, yet in substance of flesh continue not the same, and
therefore being not now the same for a few days together, shall not be the
same at the resurrection. This he sets down as the sum of Origens
opinion, and then against the objection of the body of Christ he answers,
that Christ's body was not as ours are, his being not conceived in sin but by
the power of the holy Ghost, whereas ours are sleep and pleasure and filth,
fit to be lest to beasts and worms. The words of Proclus being thus delivered,
the Latin interpreter makes a division thus, Sequuntur nunc ipsius Methodij
verba: there follow now the words of Methodius himself, where in the Greek
there is no more but (...); the rest or the remnant of Methodius; wherein he
sets down a narration of that which befell as it seems upon Proclus his
declamation already mentioned upon the threescore and fifth Psalm, namely that
thereupon they grew to a disputation, Methodius and Auxentius on the one side,
Aglaophon and Proclus on the other side, as was before said. In which
disputation Methodius having convinced Aglaophon, that Page 186. Qui ligatus
est non potest peccare; Coarctatur enim^ nec permittitur a vinculo. At corpus
ad peccandum est auxiliarium, etc. Non ergo corpus est vinculum, etc.
the body cannot be said to be the prison of the soul, as Origin held it to
be, because a prison is for restraint of a man from doing that for which he is
imprisoned, but the body is so far from being a restraint from sin, as that
it is a helper thereto, goes on forward again in another large speech to the
same effect and purpose as has been already declared. Thus I have at large
handled the matter of that large discourse, that thou may see, gentle
Reader, how absurdly and unhonestly M. Bishop deals with thee, who being
admonished of his oversight, will yet wilfully go on to persuade thee that
that is a bad discourse, as he calls it, of an heretic, which so plainly
appears to be a memorable speech of a reverend and godly Bishop. Proclus
held that the same body shall not rise again. The author of that discourse
proves that the same body shall rise again. Therefore the author of that
discourse was not Proclus but Methodius, which being approved by Epiphanius,
my former speech is justified, that these two ancient godly Bishops, Methodius
and Epiphanius did teach as the Protestants do, that sin is not utterly
rooted out or taken away by baptism, but continues in the regenerate so long
as this life continues. And now I pray you, M. Bishop, to tell us whether you
or I be more worthy to be thrust into the Asses skin, and whether you have
not given us just cause to doubt that you are so hide-bound therewith as that
it will very hardly be pulled from you? Surely we shall think you are no Ass
if you give us many more such tokens of your discretion and honesty as you have
done here.

17. To return now to his preface, again he tells his Reader, that Page 11.
if he would make a Catalogue of M. Abbots corruptions, falsifications and
other odd tricks, he should hither reduce the gretest part of his book: but
this that I have here declared, says he, cannot but suffice to discredit him
with all indifferent men. But in thee, gentle Reader, the judgment rests,
whether he have said any thing to cast discredit upon me, or whether he has
not rather heaped shame and confusion upon his own head. Surely he that thus
cries out with a wide mouth of falsifications and corruptions, and in a whole
book can bring no better proofs or examples thereof than he has here done,
does exceedingly justify his adversary, and plainly declare that his outcry is
not upon occasion but only by device. If, says he, he has wittingly
misreported such worthy authors of purpose to beguile the credulous Reader,
then he has a most seared and corrupt conscience unworthy the name of a
Divine, and walking alive is dead in conscience, and consequently in credit
with all men that love the truth, for the tongue that lies, kills the soul.
Be it so; I willingly subscribe the sentence; the doom is just, and let it so
befall to him that deals in that sort. His untruths, says he, are so plain
and palpable that you need no more but compare his reports with the authors
words, and at first sight any mean scholar shall find his cosinage and
deceit. But therefore have I now set down the authors words which he has not
done, and thereby the Reader shall see where the cosinage and deceit is. He
professes to have read the places: if he have done that himself which he
imputes to me, he has pronounced his own doom: if God give him not grace to
repent, woe be unto him, and better had it been for him that he had never been
borne. We are come now, he says, to the last kind of abuse offered by me to
the sacred Senate of those most renowned ancient fathers. And what is that?
forsooth to deny their authority flatly, to control and censure them as simple
men, to accuse them of error and falsehood, yea and to prefer the opinions
of old rotten heretics before them, and herein, he says, I do most
ingenuously discover the right humor of a true Protestant. But I must tell him
that the Protestants make more true account of the ancient fathers, and do
yield them more honor than the Papists do. The Protestants give all authority
to the ancient Fathers, save where the Fathers are ouer-ruled by the word of
God. The Papists overrule the Fathers by their own Decrees, and the will and
pleasure of a buzzardly Pope or of a few blind Bishops depending upon him, must
be with them of more account and reckoning than all the Fathers of the Church.
They doubt not plainly to say, that 24. q. 1. Quotiescunque contra Papae
authoritatem nec Augustinus nec Hieronymus nec aliquis Doctorum suam sententiam
defendit.
neither Austin, nor Hierome, nor any of the Doctors may maintain his opinion
against the authority of the Pope. I have before noted a speech of theirs
generally of the Fathers; Index Expurgat. Belg. in censur. Bertrami. Cum in
Catholicis veteribus alijs plurimos feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus,
excogitato commento persaepe negemus and commodum ijs sensum affingamus dum
opponuntur in disputationibus aut inconflictionibus cum aduersarijs.
In the old Catholic writers we bear with very many errors, but we extenuate
and lessen them, we excuse and make the best of them: by some devised shift we
often deny them or set some good meaning on them when they are opposed in
disputations or in combats with our adversaries. What, and will a Papist now
say that there are errors in the Fathers? Yes forsooth, where the Fathers
speak as the Protestants do, there the Fathers must be said to err, yea, in
very many things, and then their authority must be flatly denied, they must be
censured for simple men, accused of error and falsehood, and the opinions both
of old and new heretics must be preferred before them. But let us see in
particular of whom he speaks. The first is Eusebius that most famous
Historiographer, as he calls him; of whom I use these words: Answer to the
epist. sect. 26. page 177.
Let him give me leave to censure Eusebius a little, because the Canons of
their own Church have censured him much more. And what is the censure whereof
I spoke? No less than this, that Gelas. 1. Decret. de Apocryph. did. 15.
sancta Romana. Historia Eusebij Pamphili apochrypha, etc. Haec and omnia his
similia, etc. non solum repudiata, verumetiam ab omni Romana Catholica and
Apostolica ecclesia eliminata, atque cum suis authoribus in aternum confitemur
esse damnata.
his story by Gelasius Bishop of Rome with seventy other Bishops is pronounced
Apocryphal and it self with the author abandoned with the rest, out of the
whole Roman Catholic and Apostolic Church, which censure I noted to have
been by Gratian also transcribed into their Decrees. Now is this judgment
pronounced upon Eusebius in the church of Rome, and does a Romanist think much
that I touch Eusebius for an iniudicious and presumed application of an act of
Constantine, and that when he himself gives occasion to touch him therein,
confessing that Constantine said nothing thereof, and declaring that
Constantine at his death gave occasion to conceive the contrary? Thus is
Ruffinus charged by Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 2. c. 13. falsa est
expositio Ruffin.
with expounding falsely the Council of Nice, Socrates to be Idem de cultu
sanct. ca. 10. Dico Socratem haereticum fuisse Nouatiamum, neque eius
testimonium in dogmatibus vllius esse momenti.
a Nouatianheretike, and his testimony nothing worth in matters of doctrine;
Zozomen to be Idem de Clericis. cap. 20. ex Greg. l 6. ep. 31. Ipsam historia^
(Sozomeni) seeds Apostolica reciperc recusat, quoniam multa mentitur, etc.
a lier in many things, which Gregory has noted of him, and signified the
rejecting of his story by the Church of Rome. May they now thus at their
pleasure reject the ancient Historians of the Church, and was it so heinous a
matter for me to censure Eusebius, being known to have been an Arian
heretic, for fathering upon Constantine a superstition which it appears by
himself he gave him no occasion to conceive of him?

18. There follows Chrysostom in the next place, against whom Sixtus
Senensis sticks not to put in an exception, that Sixth. Senens. Biblioth.
sanct. l. 5. in Prafat. Chrysostomus impetu disceptandicum Manichaeis and
Gentibus, etc. saeponumero naturae nostrae vires plus aequo attollit.
by heat of reasoning against the Manichee^ and Heathens he does often too much
extol the power of nature; and Andradius, condemning Origin of great error
for imputing sin to the Virgin Mary, says, that Andrad. Defens. fidei
Trident. l. 5. Neque ab hoc Origenis errato Chrysostomus plurimum abfuit; etc.
Chrysostom was not far from the same error of Origin when he charged her
with importunity and ambition for that she interrupted her son as he was
preaching. Will they again at their liberty thus tax Chrysostom, and do I
offend in saying, that Answer to the epistle sect. 25. page 175.
as an Orator he apprehended a thing to speak according to present occasion
which otherwise he approved not, when I give plain demonstration and proof
that it is so? The place it self, gentle Reader, will satisfy thee, neither
need I to use any defense of it. So will the other also, where I say of a
speech of Chrysostom concerning Constantines son, that Ibid. page 176.
howsoever it proceeded from him, it is much different from the certain story.
I show that it is so: what a vain brangler is he to cavil at my words when
as he is not able to control the proof?

19. The next abuse that he notes is to S. Austin, wherein he plaieth Will
Summers part, striking him that is next him, but letting him alone by whom he
himself is stricken. My words are these; Answer to the Epistle sect. 8. pa.
54. ex Erasm. argument. in lib. Hieronym. aduers. Ioninian. Diuus Augustin^o
errores quosdam confert in Iouinianum quos tamen illi non impingit Hieronymus,
vtique non dissimulaturus siquid tale docuisset, etc. Verum apparet diuum
Augustinum nec Iouiniani nec in hunc Hieronymi libros legisse: tantum rumore
populari didicisse quod nouerat de Iouiniano.
Erasmus observes truly that Austin charge Iouinian with some errors,
whereof Hierome makes no mention, who would not have passed by them if
Iouinian had taught them, whereby it appears as he collecteth, that Austin
had neither read Iouinians books nor Hieromes books against Iouinian, but
only by peoples rumors and talk had learned that that he knew concerning
Iouinian. I note what Erasmus collecteth; Erasmus himself gives reason of his
so collecting, and was not this a mortal abuse committed by me toward S.
Austin; that M. Bishop should say as he does? In like manner he slandereth S.
Austin for writing against Iouinian, whose opinions, says M. Abbot very
audaciously, S. Austin knew only by hearesay and not of any certainty. Do
thou not think he is well skilled in his art that can so well bombast such a
quarrel as this is? But there is forsooth another matter, that I say Austin
was deceived where he said that no Priests embraced Iouinians opinion. And did
I not prove so much by Hierome himself that there were both Bishops and
Priests of the same mind? Yea that the Clergy and Monks of the church of Rome
notwithstanding the sentence of Siricius then Bishop of Rome retained still
their opinion, that married wives are the same (with God) as Virgins are? the
thing is plain, and were M. Bishop so wise as he should be, he would never
trouble us with such idle stuff.

20. I note Hierome Ibid. page 54.
for rude and indecent speeches against marriage. He that will know whether he
used any such or not, let him read his epistle, ad Gerontiam de Monogamia, and
his first book against Iouinian, in which his usage is such in that behalf as
gave occasion of great offense in Rome, so as that the greatest part of his
Apology to Pammachius is spent in excusing such speeches which notwithstanding,
to say the truth, very slenderly he does. That he wrote against Iouinian with
Page 57.
all indignation and stomach who doubts that reads what he wrote? who sees
not that he labored to the uttermost of his power to disgrace him against whom
he wrote? As for railing I mention it not by mine own words but by the words of
Erasmus, who says of him against Vigilantius; Answer to the epist. sect. 9.
page 67. ex Erasm. argum. in lib. Hieron. aduers. Vigilantium. In hunc ita
conuicijs debacchatur Hieronymus vt plusculum in eo modestiae cogar desiderare.
Vtinam argumentu duntaxat egisset and a conuicijs temperasset.
He does so rail at him as that I cannot but wish that he had showed more
modesty. I would he had dealt by argument only and had for borne railing
speeches. False doctrine I name not, but if there be nothing false in Hierome
how comes it about that Bellarmine mentioning that Bell. de Romans Pont. lib.
1. c. 8. Videtur beatus. Hieronymus inea sententia fuisse vt existimaret
episcopo^ esse presbyteris maiores iure ecclesiastico non diuino, qua sententia
falsa est and suo loco refectetur.
Hierome seems to be of that opinion that Bishops by the law of God are not
superior to Priests, says, that that opinion is false, and he will afterward
refute it; or how does Alfonsus De Castro say, that Alphons. de Castro aduers.
haeres. l. 6. apud Sixth. Senens. Biblioth. sanct. l. 6. annot. 324. Non veretur
fateri Hieronymum hac in part errasse.
he doubteh not to confess that Hierome in that behalf erred, as Sixtus
Senenfis has reported of him? Thus it appears that I have not taken
exception against any father but that they themselves also except against the
same, as they do also against the rest. Of Justinius, Irenaeus, Epiphanius,
Oecumenius Bellarmine says, Bellarm. de sanct. beatitud. c. 6. Iustini,
Irenaei, etc. sententiam non video quo pacto possimus ab errore defendere.
I do not see how we can defend their opinion from error. Idem de Romans Pont.
l. 4. c. 7. Videtur mortaliter peccasse cum praecepto expresso Apostolico non
paruerit.
Cyprian, he says, seems to have sinned mortally for that he obeyed not the
express commandment of the Bishop of Rome. In another case he says, Ibid.
cap. 8. Respondeo non esse omnino fidem habendam Tertulliano in hac part,
quandoquidem ipse Montanista erat.
Tertullian is not to be believed because he was a Montanist. Again he says,
Idem de verb. Dei interpret. ca. 10. Constat quosda^ ex praecipuis little non
leuiter in quibusdam lapsos.
It is certain that some of the chief of the fathers have greatly erred in
some things. This being so, what other does M. Bishop but play the Sycophants
part in calumniating us for disclaiming sometimes the opinions of some fathers,
when we deal therein no otherwise than they themselves do, nor do indeed
dissent from them in so many things as they do? It has hitherto, God be
thanked, very well appeared, that though sometimes we dislike the opinion of a
father, yet in all the questions that we have handled, the fathers have yielded
more strength to us than they have done to them.

21. But here he makes haste to acquaint the Reader with the most shameless
pranke of all other, in which he has showed himself as shameless as he has
done in all the other. In his epistle to the King he has charged us with the
heresies of Vigilantius, Aerius, Iouinian. It has been answered him in what
sort and how far we agree with these, and what reason we have for that we
do. Here like the cuckoo he barely sings over the same song again, and not
here only but Page 252.253. etc.
again also toward the end of his book; he disprooueth not our answer, he
confuteth not our reasons, but only bableth, that we prefer the most infamous
condemned heretics even in the very points of their errors, before the most
judicious, learned and sincere Doctors of the Church. For as the hackney that
is accustomed to one way, if he be put beyond or beside that way has no pace
at all; even so he having learned a form to cry out against Iouinian, Aerius
and Vigilantius, is very expert and ready in that, but put him beyond that and
he is dumb and has nothing more to say. But I answer briefly, that it
skilleth not what or how mean they were. We rest not our belief upon any of
them, but only join with them, where they hold that which God has taught both
us and them. We know it to be true which the Poet has said, that Iuuenal. Sape
etiam stultus fuit opportunae locutus.
a fool many times speaks a wise word, and which S. Austin says and
doubts not thereof, that August. de Anima cap. 1. Feri posse non ambigo vt
aliquid imperito and indocto cuipiam scire contingat quod aliquis doctus and
peritus ignorant.
it may befall to an ignorant and unlearned man to know something which the
skillful and learned man is ignorant of. And in a word as Hierom though
Epiphanius had noted Aerius for an heretic for that he affirmed that by the
law of God. Epiph. haeres. 79. Quid est episcopus ad presbyteruns? Nihil
differt hic ab illo; vnus enim est ^rdo, and vnus honor, etc.
Bishops had no superiority over Priests, but they were both equal and the
same, held that no reason for him to renounce therein the opinion of Aerius,
whereof Hieron. ad Euagr. Apostolus docet eosdem esse presbyteros
quosepiscopo^, and in Tit. 1. Idem presbyter qui episcopus. Nouerint episcopi
se consuetudine magis quam dispositionis dominicae veritate presbyteris esse
maiores.
he thought himself by good reason rightly persuaded; even so though Hierome
and Austin have for some points taxed Iouinian and Vigilantius as heretics,
and Epiphanius in another point Aerius, yet is that no sufficient motive to us
to forsake those opinions of Iouinian, Aerius and Vigilantius, so long as we
have warrant by the word of God and by good inducements of antiquity to be
persuaded as they were. And as Hierome held it no prejudice to him that Aerius
otherwise was an Arian heretic because in this he condemned him though he
agreed with him in the other, even so it is no prejudice to us that either
Aerius was an Arian, or Iouinian and Vigilantius taught otherwise amiss,
because we profess to agree with them only in the truth, but in what they
taught against the truth are ready to condemn them. Further I say nothing
here, but refer the Reader to that that in my answer to his epistle I have
already said; only noting how untruly he says, that I confess in the same
place that the conceit of the holiness of virginity before the holiness in
marriage was by the whole court of Rome maintained at those days, whereas I
show that setting aside the Bishop of Rome, both Clergy and Laity, Nobles and
others, Monks and such as professed continency were in that behalf adverse to
Hierome and did most scandalously take it that he should say that virginity was
a holier estate than marriage was, yea and gave honor and countenance to
Iouinian, which I verily resolve they would never have done, so well am I
persuaded of the church and City of Rome that then was, if he had been a man
of so base and bad condition as Hierome in his choler reports him to have
been. As for his declamation hereupon following it is but idle stuff and an
empty flourish of his Romish Rhetoric, his tongue mightily outrunning his
wit, in talking of the poor miserable Protestants blindly bent to defend their
own errors; of their consorting themselves with heretics; of likelihood that
Austin, Hierom and Epiphanius, should see more than Iouinian, Vigilantius and
Aerius, as if the Protestants built any thing upon the sight and authority of
any of these; of my misapplying, misconstruing, corrupting, and falsifying the
Doctors sentences as Calvin says the Libertines did the Scriptures, of their
being deceived that thought I had beaten the Papists with their own weapons;
of our catching hold only of some broken sentences of the Fathers to astonish
and deceive the simple Reader: All these are but words, and we know his wind
serves him to give words enough, but how simply he makes good his words
appears by that that has been and shall be said.

22. He comes now to show how reverently I behave my self toward the holy
Scripture. One example he will give here whereby the Reader may take scantling
of the rest. It is contained in some words of mine in answer of the first
section of his Epistle. Answer to the Epistle sect. 1. page 6.
This is the thing, say I, that M. Bishop labors for, seeking with Elymas
the sorcerer Act. 13.10.
To PERVERT THE STRAIGHT WAYS OF THE LORD, and whereas his Majesty as he
confesses has made open and often profession of his vigilancie and care to
advance the divine honor of our Savior Christ and his most sacred religion,
he would in stead thereof draw him to advance the idol Dan. 11.38.
MAVZZIM the god of Antichrist, and to establish 2. Pet. 2.1.
DAMNABLE HERESIES by him PRIVILY BROVGHT IN, whereby his agents and factours
verse. 3.
THROVGH COVETOVSNES WITH FAINED WORDS MAKE MERCHANDISE OF Revel. 18.13.
THE SOVLES OF MEN, Tit. 1.11.
SPEAKING THINGS WHICH THEY OUGHT NOT FOR FILTHY LVCRES SAKE. The first fault
that he finds here is the dismembring of Gods word, and renting of it in
pieces, with which pieces odly and idly patched together, he makes up, says
he, as it were a poor beggars cloak rather than any testimony of Scripture.
Now may we not think that this man was very destitute of examples of my
abusing of holy Scripture, that upon such a pretense as this would bring in
such an example as this is? I name Elymas the sorcerer seeking to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord; I note the place where it is said that he did so. I
mention Mauzzim as the god of Antichrist according to the exposition of sundry
of the Fathers; I direct the Reader where it is that the Scripture makes
mention of him; I tell what the work of Antichrist shall be; I express it by
the words of the Apostle Peter, which are a Prophecy of the time of
Antichrist, that by himself and his he shall privily bring in damnable
heresies, and through covetousness with fained words shall make merchandise of
men. And that this merchandise shall be of the souls of men, I forgate to note
it, but should have done out of Revel. 18.13. where the souls of men are
reckoned amongst the merchandise of the whore of Babylon. And how this shall be
done, I note by the words of the Apostle concerning such deceivers and false
teachers, that they speak things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake.
Is this now that dismembring and renting of Gods word in pieces that he
complains of? Surely I have not dismembered the word of God, but it seems
his understanding is dismembered that can no better conceive what it is to
dismember the word of God. He is grieved that the word of God fiteth so rightly
to describe the Master whom he serves, and for whom he has yielded so far
to engage his own soul. But says he, the words hang untowardly together; for
if his Majesty should be persuaded to advance the idol Mauzzim the God of
Antichrist, he could not establish heresies privily brought in. And why so? For
that false God, says he, will wholly oppose himself against Christ, and
openly profess idolatry and compel others to do the same. And even so does
the Pope, even so, I say, the Pope does wholly oppose himself against Christ,
persecute the faith of Christ, tread under his feet the laws of Christ, openly
profess idolatry, and compel others to do the same. But he is said privily
to bring indamnable heresies, not because he does not openly profess them, but
because he brings them in underhand, by goodly pretenses and colorable
shows, by fained and fair glossing words, hiding therewith so much as he can
the iniquity and impiety that is contained in them. In which sort Saint Paul
says, that 1. Tim. 4.1.2
the spirits of error shall speak lies in hypocrisy, so that though the
doctrines which they teach be doctrines of devils, yet they shall color them
with fair pretenses of piety and religion, that they may not seem to be that
that indeed they are. For in this sort the Pope delivers all his lies,
coloring all with the pretense of the name of Christ. He is the vicar of
Christ and whatsoever he does, he does it by the authority of Christ. He
sets up faires and markets for selling and buying forgiveness of sins,
and we must think that he does it by a power received from Christ. He teaches
men to commit idolatry in the worshipping of images, but he bears them in
hand that therein they honor Christ and the servants of Christ. It would be
too long fully to discover how Babylon being Revel. 17.5.
the mother of the whoredoms and abominations of the earth, yet does all in
amystery, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
a mystery of iniquity, as the Apostle calls it, giving her poison in a
golden cup, and by golden terms commending those things whereby she impiously
prophaneth the true worship of God. Whereas M. Bishop says, that Antichrist
will not suffer any God to be worshipped but himself, it is a fable. He shall
not deny the worshipping of God, but 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
he shall exalt himself above all that is called God or that is worshipped. So
has the Pope done, lifting up himself above God in that he takes upon him
to dispense against the Law of God, to repeal what God has established, to
unsay what Christ has said, and to say otherwise what he list, verifying in
himself that which S. Hierom says of Antichrist; Hieron. in Dan. cap. 7.
Eleuatur supra omne quod dicitur Deus cunctam religionem suae subijciens
potestati.
He shall subject all religion to his own power. Nothing is Gods word but as
he expounds it; no article of faith is to be taken but as he declares it;
nothing to be approved for religion that has not warrant from him, and what
he list to warrant must be taken for religion. M. Bishops third exception is
upon a false ground. These words, says he, are most falsely and fondly applied
to us Roman Catholic Priests; for that false god of Antichrist shall not be
advanced by the Romans, but fought against and foiled by them. A mere fancy:
for that Part. 2. in the defense of M. Perkins Prologue. page 39. etc.
Rome is Babylon and the Pope Antichrist has been already proved, and that
must stand till by M. Bishop it be disproued. The words of Daniel, The Galls
and Romans shall come upon him, etc. belong not to Antichrist but to Antiochus,
who though in his outrage and fury against the Temple and people of God he
prefigured the abomination of desolation that should stand in the holy places
of the Church; and the prophecy of Daniel be so far forth to be extended
both to the one and to the other, yet in the same prophecy had many things
otherwise proper to himself, which to apply to Antichrist is most ridiculous
and vain, and that the rather for that there is mention made of some nations
therein which were being in the time of Antiochus, and the prophecy in them was
accomplished, Dan. 11.41.
the Edomites, the Ammonites and Moabites, whereof there is now no more name or
remembrance under heaven, that the prophecy of Antichrist should be expected to
be verified in them.

23. As for covetousness and desire of filthy lucre, and making merchandise of
souls for the satisfying thereof, it properly concerns Romish Priests. It is
well known to the world by what means they have formerly gotten the riches of
the world into their hands. By the same means now do Seminary Priests feed
their bellies and cloth their backs; if not in such manner as they desire, it
is but with them as many times it is with whoremongers and drunkards who are
content to live otherwise in penury and want, so that they may have but to
continue them in their beastly and filthy life. But, M. Bishop, we too well see
that you and your fellows have too little cause to complain thereof. A friend
of yours could once familiarly tell an acquaintance of his what base reckoning
is made of our Ministers, but for them how they were magnified and honored,
and where they came had all things at command. The truth is, that according to
the world it is better with you than it is with many of them whom you envy for
their Bishoprics and Deanries, and many other also that are honester than you
be. As for Tyburne you have not to fear it for religion but for treason only,
because you yield your loyalty and fidelity from your Sovereign and natural
Prince to an usurping foreign Priest. So long as you do so, whatsoever your
colors be, justly shall Tyburne belong to you. I know how much ado you have
made both in the beginning and end of your book to acquit your self in that
behalf. You shot out your bolt to the King, God knows what that forcible
weapon of necessity may constrain and drive men unto at the length. You are
desirous to persuade us that that was but a friendly caution against that you
feared might come to pass, not any threatening of any thing to be done. And
although the words were used when the powder treason was in hand, yet it was
not meant thereof, neither were any of their part consenting or willing to it
but a few green heads, some rash unadvised Catholics for the greater part
decayed in their estates. But his disloiall and traitorous mind therein
appears, that he thus dreiueth this matter to a few green heads, when as by
course of legal proceeding and by the Kings Majesty's Declaration to foreign
States it is made manifest that that hellish designment had the priuity and
consent of sundry their principal Jesuits, and there were then commonly
amongst them all prayers for the success of some special enterprise in their
behalf, though they knew not what it was. For my part concerning all that
justification of his, I briefly answer with the words of S. Austin; August. in
1. Joan. tract. 3. Opera loquuntur and verba requirimus? Quis enim malus non
been vult loqui?
Your deeds speak, and shall we listen after your words? for who is so bad but
he will say well? S. Austin said to Petilian the Donatist; Idem. cont. lit.
Petilian. l. 2. c. 64. De vestra mansuet^dine non tuae voces; sed
Circumcellionum fustes interrogentur.
Of your gentleness we will not ask your words, but the bats and clubs of the
Circumcellions. So say I to M. Bishop; Of your fidelity we will not question
your words, but the continual and manifold plots of villainies and treasons
that have proceeded from your consorts.

24. The conclusion of his Preface concerns me. He tells his Reader, that
he shall seldom light upon any Divine that deals more insufficiently or
perfidiously, that I set a brazen face upon the matter, speak confidently,
convey cunningly, gild artificially, seeming some jolly fellow and a rare
flourishing writer, and being one of the most shallow and beggarly writers of
these days; a very Mount-banke, setting forth for fresh and new merchandise
the very rif-raf and refuse of other Protestant authors, bringing nothing that
has not been by their part, so shaken, battered and beaten, that it can not be
but a foul disgrace among the learned to put into light and to set to sale so
base, ouerworne, threed-bare and ragged stuff. But what, M. Bishop, is all
that I have said so threed-bare, so ouerworne, so many times answered in so
many of your books, and could not you all this while contract so much marrow
and pith out of your large volumes as should serve to reply to one whole part
of that that has been answered to you? I smile at his folly heerin, and can
not withal but pity him, that he has not so much wit as to think that every
man will wonder, that against such a writer and such an answer he should not be
able in three years and more to defend so much as his Epistle to the King, yea
and that to make good that which he says, he can bring no better exceptions
than he has here done. I see that he is not willing to make sale of me; he
would feign have me stick still to him, and so, God willing, I will, till my
rags have choked him, and my threed-bare stuff have worn him so bare, as
that he shall be ashamed to come any more into the company of honest men.

25. In the mean time and until I can give further defense against his
Reproof, I pray thee, gentle Reader, by some few examples to take knowledge
what sincerity or fidelity thou art to expect of him who has so deeply
charged me with the want thereof. And here first I wish thee to observe how,
that he may lay an imputation of untruth upon me, he sticks not to eat and
deny his own words. I said in my Epistle Dedicatorie to the King, that he
charge the religion professed by his Majesty with heresies, impieties,
blasphemies, etc. He answers me thus: Reproof, page 25. 26.
You in the weightier part falsely slander me, which I will prove even by your
own testimony; for I say, as it may be seen in your own book, that I will
let pass their impiety that make God the author of all wickedness, and say
nothing of their blasphemy who touch our Savior with doubting, if not with
despair of his own salvation; in which speech I tax by the way Calvin and
Beza and some other, etc. Whereas both in my book and in his own his words are
general as touching the Protestants religion which the King professes: Answer
to the epistle. sect. 13.14. page 109. 121.
Thus much for my first reason collected from the untruth of the Protestants
religion. The second shall be grounded upon the ungodliness of it, where I
will let pass that high point of impiety that they make God the author of
all wicked actions, etc. and will beside say nothing of that their blasphemy
against our Savior, etc. See here, the protestants religion, the ungodliness
of it, they make God the author of sin, their blasphemy against our Savior,
all in general, no show of restraining it to Calvin and Beza, and yet, as if
he presumed that the books were all lost and no further to be seen, he dares
to challenge me for slandering him, and to refer me thereupon to mine own
book, where he saw and where it is open for every man to see that he himself
lies: but this is a trifle perhaps, to deny his own words; thou shall
discern him much more plainly in the usage of mine. In Page 12.
answer to the second section of his Epistle I say thus: Bulla Pij. 5. and de
Mayor. and obed. cap. Vnam sanctam.
Behold, says the Pope, we are set over nations and kingdoms, to build up and
to plant, to pull up and to destroy, etc. and therefore what the wisdom of God
says, as M. Bishop alleges, Prou. 8.15.
By me Kings reign, the same the Pope blasphemously applies Ceremon. eccles.
Romans lib. 1. cap. 2. Ad sum. mum pontificem D^i vices gerentem in terris
tanquoam ad eum per quem reges regnant, etc.
to himself, Per me reges regnant, By me Kings reign. To prove that the Pope
says, that By him Kings reign, I alleged his own book, Sacrar. ceremon.
eccl. Romans l. 1. c. 2. where it is expressly said, that it is he by whom Kings
do reign, as I have now set down in his own words even as supra. sect. 5.
before I noted him, saying of the Emperor, By me he reigns. Now in setting
down my text in Reproof. page 82.
his book he quite leaves out the citation, and then tells his Reader,
Page 84.
This is the fifth lie that he makes within the compass of less than half a
side: for albeit the Pope use the words spoken to the Prophet Jeremy, Ecce nos
constituti sumus, etc. yet does he not those by King Solomon uttered in the
person of Gods wisdom, which M. Abbot deceitfully shuffleth in. But, M.
Bishop, do I lie indeed? What, will you tell me that I lie, and in the mean
time suppress the proof whereby it should appear that I do not lie? If I
should thus deal, I know what you would term it, and I could not but
acknowledge it; what it is in you, let the world judge: I forbear to give it
the right name. Another prank he plaieth of as great honesty as this, in
putting in of words which are none of mine. Answer to the epistle, sect. 3. page
19.
Our faith therefore, say I, because it is that which the Apostles committed to
writing is the Apostolic faith, and our Church ex consanguinitate doctrinae,
by consanguinity and agreement of doctrine is procued to be an Apostolic
church. At the end of which words M. Bishop Reptoofe, page 103.
in setting down my text has put in etc. as if there were something else to
come in than he has expressed, and in the rehearsing of them in his answer
adds these words, Page 114.
And is the only true Catholic church; as if I had said, that our Church of
England is the only true Catholic church, and is proved by perfection of
doctrine to be the only true Catholic church, hereupon running upon me for
saying the same which I reproved in the Donatists; whereas the words against
which he fights are none of my words, but are most leaudly and falsely
thrust in by himself. You tell me of tricks, M. Bishop, but if I had used such
tricks as these and many other of yours, I would be ashamed ever to set pen to
paper again. Remember what your self have said, Reproof, page 283.
The devils cause it is that needs to be bolstered out and underpropped with
lies.

26. Yet further, gentle Reader, to give thee some small taste of his answers
to the authorities by me alleged, thou may first take knowledge of those
words of Austin; Answer. to the epistle, sect. 3. page 18. ex August. cont.
lit. Petilian. l. 3. c 6 Siquis sieve de Christo sieve de e^us ecclesia, sieve de
quaecunque re quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, non dicam, Nos, etc. sed
si angelus de caelo vobis annunciauerit praeterquam quod in scripturis
legalibus and Euangelicis accepistis, anathema sit.
If any man, nay if an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you concerning
Christ or concerning his Church or concerning any thing pertaining to our faith
and life but what ye have received in the Scriptures of the Law and the
Gospel, accursed be he. What says M. Bishop here? Reproof, page 112.
To S. Austin I answer, first, that those are not his formal words which he
cites. Is that all? But if those be not his formal words, why does he not
tell his Reader what his formal words are? Surely if he were a man formally
honest, he would deal more materially than to mock his Reader in this sort.
Well, though he will not tell the formal words, yet he expounds the meaning
to be; if any shall preach contrary to that that is written, whereas S. Austin
tells us, that August. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. In ijs quae aperte in
scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque
vinendi.
in those things which are plainly set down in the Scripture are found all
those things which contain faith and conversation of life, and therefore
means not only, if any preach contrary, but as his words are, if any preach
any thing beside that that is written, accursed be he.

27. I alleged that S. Paul writing his epistle to the Romans Answer to the
epistle, sect. 4. page 24. ex Theodoret. praefat in epist. Pauli.
comprehended therein, as Theodoret says; omnis generis doctrinam and
accuratam copiosamque dogmatum pertractationem; doctrine of all sorts, or all
kind of doctrine, and very exact and plentiful handling of the points thereof.
The first part of these words in Latin he leaves out in my text, and in his
answer says to it thus, Reproof, page 132. 133.
That you may see how nothing can pass his fingers without some legerdemaine,
mark how he Englisheth Theodorets words; Dogmatum pertractationem, the
handling of opinions is by him translated, all points of doctrine, whereas it
rather signifies some than all opinions or lessons. But M. Bishop this dealing
of yours is somewhat too gross. Me thinks you should seek to be acquainted
with some Egyptians, that you may learn of them somewhat more cunningly to
shift and conueigh. Thou see, gentle Reader, that he has dashed out Omnis
generis Doctrinam, all kind of Doctrine, wherein the force of the words
consists, and then says that by legerdemaine I have Englished, Dogmatum
pertractationem, all points of Doctrine. Do not marvel that he does so,
because he well perceived that by these words of Theodoret his Reader should
see that if the Apostle comprehended in that epistle all kind of Doctrine,
then the doctrine of the church of Rome, that now is, cannot be the same that
it was of old, because they have so many Doctrines now, whereof there is
nothing contained in that epistle.

28. I produce Agatho Bishop of Rome professing Answer to the epist. sect. 4.
page 29.
duty of obedience to the Emperor Constantinus the fourth, and taking upon him
obediently to perform what the said Emperor commanded. Hear his own words,
gentle Reader, and judge thereof. Agatho. epist. in synod. 6. Constantinop.
Act. 4. Meliori resectus sum confidentia paulatim quae per mansuetissimae
fortitudinis vestrae sacram dudum praecepta sunt efficaciter promptam
obsequentiam exhibere, vt personas quales se^undu^ tempor is huius defectu^ ac
seruilis prouinciae qualitate^ poterant inueniti pro obedientiae satisfactione
inquirere^, etc. Olim hoc quod vix tande^ nunc fieri potuit, studiosa
obedientia noster famulatus impleret. etc. secundum pijssimam iussionem a Deo
protegendae mansuetudinis vestrae pro obedientia quam debuimus; non pro
confidentia little scientiae quos dirig imus praesentes confamulos nostros, etc.
curauimus demandare, etc. Hoc imperialis vestra benignitas clementer iul ens
hortata est and nostra pusillitas quod iussum est, obsequenter impleuit, etc.
Et paulo ante. Pro quibus flex^ mentis poplite, suppliciter vestram clementiam
deprecamur vt acceptione eos dignos efficiat, etc.
I am encouraged effectually to show ready obedience to the things commanded by
your Majesty's writ; to inquire out for giving satisfaction of my obedience
such persons as by the scarsenes of this time and state of this servile
Province may be found; this our service would long ago have performed with
careful obedience, according to the most godly commandment of your Majesty I
have had care for the obedience that I owe, not for the confidence of the
learning of them that I send, to direct unto you such and such my fellow
servants; this your Imperial grace with gentleness commanding has wished,
and my pusillity has obediently performed your commandment; for whom with
bowing the knee of my heart I humbly beseech your clemency to vouchsafe to
grant them acceptance. We here see what Agatho says; now let us understand M.
Bishops answer: observe it well and think whether thou have known any man's
forehead so hard as his. First, he says, Reprofe page 180.
that he finds no such words in the place by me quoted, marry, that he has
indeed but the abbridgement of the letter as it stands in the sum of the
Councels. But it is strange that he should light upon such an abbridgment
whence he would take words going before and words following after, as he has
done, and could light upon none of these. This smells somewhat strong, but
thou shall perceive him by and by to stink outright. Forsooth he will not
stand upon denial of the words, but by this kind of arguing, he says, I
might prove every Pope to profess due obedience to every private servant of
God, because his ordinary style is, The servant of Gods servants. But M.
Bishop, I argued not; do not seek to blind your Reader in this sort; I did not
of other words conclude a duty of obedience, but I brought the Bishop of Rome
in his own words acknowledging this duty. The Pope calls himself indeed the
servant of Gods servants, but we do not hear him say, that he owes
obedience to any, which he scorneth to profess or yield to the Emperor his
Lord and Master, and we know the service which he professes toward the
servants of God stands not in obeying but in ruling and commanding them. But
we hear Agatho professing in terminis, that he owes obedience to the
Emperor, that he was careful to give satisfaction of his obedience, that he
obediently performed the Emperors commandment; that in his mind and
affection being absent, he did bow the knee to entreat the Emperors favor
toward those whom he sent. How leaudly then does M. Bishop presume of the
blindness of his Reader that thus goes about to persuade him that both these
cases are alike? Well yet, all that we shall have is but this, that Page 170.
they are common and usual words of courtesy, Page 181.
words uttered of custom and courtesy in all countries, and it is but a
miserable shift of mine to use such words for sound proofs. Whether it be a
miserable shift of mine let the Reader judge, but sure I am that he has put it
off with a very miserable and shameless answer. If all Italians and Frenchmen,
says he, that will say they are your servants should be taken short at their
word and thereby be pressed to your obedience and service you might soon
become a great signiour over many stately servants that will do what they
list. Yea but, M. Bishop, we see that Agatho does perform obedience and
service, and acknowledges to owe the same, and therefore what is that to this?
And what; are all your Italians and Frenchmen so courteous as that they will
profess by way of courtesy to owe obedience, and take upon them for giving
satisfaction thereof to do what they are commanded? Surely, Sir, we see that
you have learned much courtesy in Italy, and France, but we say commonly, Much
courtesy, much craft, and therefore it is that here together with your
courtesy you have showed us your craft also. You should not think any man to
be so ignorant as not to know that though men use such complementall words of
service each to other, yet never does the superior take upon him to owe
obedience to his inferior, specially one that is so infinitely superior, as
they say the Pope is to the Emperor, and surely the Pope now, as courteous as
he is, is far from that courtesy. I cited Leo to the same purpose, but it
would be too long here to show how he abuses him, and therefore I leave it to
a larger answer.

29. I alleged Gelasius Bishop of Rome affirming that in the Sacrament Answer
to the epist. sect. 4. page 27. ex Gelas. contra Eutych and Nestor. Nec tamen
esse desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini.
there cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. He
answers, that Reproof page 162.
the meaning is, that the nature of bread does not wholly cease to be in the
blessed Sacrament because the form, taste and savor of bread which be natural
qualities thereof do still remain, though the whole inward substance be
turned into the body of Christ. Compare his answer, I pray thee, with the
allegation, and see how well and hansomly they agree, Gelasius says, that
there cease not to be the substance of bread, and his meaning is, says M.
Bishop, that the substance does cease to be, being wholly turned into the body
of Christ. Gelasius says, that the substance of bread remains, M. Bishop
says that he means that the form, taste and savor of bread remains, but
the substance remains not. Do thou not think that this man has a
wonderful dexterity in answering, or can thou wonder that with little ado,
if need were, he should answer all the Fathers, yea and the whole Bible also
that can tell us that where it is said, it cease not, the meaning is, that it
does cease? But yet he says that Gelasius in that place signifies so much in
that he affirms, that by the operation of the holy Ghost the bread and wine
do pass into a divine substance. And it is true indeed that Gelasius so
says: But M. Bishop, did your eyes serve you to look no further? Gelas. vt
supra. Indiuiuam transennt sancto spiritu perficiente substantiam, permanent
tamen in suae proprietate naturae.
They pass, says he, into a divine substance, but yet they remain in the
propriety of their own nature; even as to the same purpose Theodoret says;
Theodoret. dial. 1. Symbola and signa quae videntur appellatione corporis and
sanguinis honorauit, non naturam quidem mutans sed naturae gratiam adijciens.
Christ honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood, not
changing their nature but adding grace unto nature. Now if they still continue
in their own nature as before, then they do not so pass into a divine
substance but that there is still the substance of bread and wine. The thing
whereto Gelasius drives that speech, is to show against Eutyches, that as in
the Sacrament the bread and wine become unto us the body and blood of Christ
and yet retain the same nature and substance as before, so the manhood of
Christ being joined into one person with the Godhead is not thereby drowned or
swallowed up, but continues in substance the same that it was from the
beginning. This he imagined to be very direct against the heresy of Eutyches,
but by M. Bishps transubstantiation it proves wholly to the advantage thereof,
for that it may be said that as in the Sacrament the substance of bread and
wine are extinguished though there remain the show and likeness and taste
thereof, so in the union of the manhood with the godhead there continued the
semblance and likeness and outward appearance of a man, but the substance
thereof was swallowed up and continued not. And this M. Bishop helps to
strengthen by expounding nature to be understood of natural qualities, whereas
Gelasius as he speaks of the bread and wine, there cease not to be the
substance or nature of bread and wine, so says of Christ, Gelas ibid. Dicimus
proprietatem vniuscuiusque substantiae vel naturae in Christo manner perpetuam.
We say that the propriety of each substance or nature abides continually in
Christ, understanding still by nature the same that he does by substance, as
he has said before, Ibi. Substantia nulla est quae non natura dicatur.
There is no substance but it is called nature, even as Austin says, August.
cont. Julian. li. 1. ca. 3. Natura est ipsa substantia. and cont. sermon.
Arianor. c. 36. Vnius eiusdemque substantiae vel vt expressius dicamus
essentiae, quod plantus dicitur, vnius eiusdemque naturae.
The nature is the very substance, and, Of one and the same substance or
essence, is more plainly said, of one and the same nature; which made the Euty
chians that they could not endure to name Gelas ibid. Quis ferat eos dedignari
vocabula promere naturarum?
two natures in Christ, because thereby should be imported two entire and
perfect substances. And albeit it be true that sometimes the name of nature is
used to signify some intrinsecall properties issuing immediately from the
essence of the thing, yet he that shall say that the nature of bread and wine
is the form and taste and savor thereof may be thought to speak like a
natural rather than like a learned man. His exception that this Gelasius was
not Bishop of Rome, is vain. It has been still and is printed by themselves
under his name. The conclusion does give token that it was his; Ibid. in fine.
Hanc regulam Catholicae fidei, etc. cum sedem Apostolicam vestram dilectio
vnanimiter teneat, co^sta^ter praedicet, sapie^ terque defendat.
seeing you beloved do with one mind hold fast the Apostolic sea, therefore
constantly preach and wisely defend this rule of the Catholic faith, yea and
that very fragment which we now have, is cited by Bibliot. sanct. Patr. edit.
2. Iom. 4. pa. 557.
John the first his successor soon after to the same very purpose whereto he
wrote it, which alone is sufficient for approbation thereof. Again I cited Page
35.35.
Theodoret making mention, that the Council of Laodicea did forbid to pray to
Angels or to worship them, and I alleged Austin noting them for heretics that
did so. To S. Austin M. Bishop answers nothing at all, with whom, as I cited,
they are recorded for heretics, and termed August. ad Quod vultd. haer. 39
Angeliciin Angelorum cultu inclinati.
Angelici, who were bowed down in the worship of Angels. How trimly he
answers to Theodoret and the Council of Laodicea shall be the better
discerned if I first set down the words of Theodoret himself. Who handling
the words of the Apostle, Col 2.18.
Let no man at his pleasure be are rule over you by humblenes of mind and
worshipping of Angels, says thus, Theodoret. in Col. 2. Qui le^ g^m
defendebant eos etiam ad angelos ^olendos inducebant, dicentes fuisse legem per
eos datam. Ma^sit autem diu hoc vitium in Phrygia and Pisidia. Quocircae
Synodus quoque quae conuenit Laodiceae quae est Phrygiae metropolis lege
prohibuit ne precaerentur Angelos. Et in hodiernu^ vsque diem licet videre apud
illos and eorum finitimos oratoria sancti Michaelis. Illi ergo hos consulebant
humilitate vtentes, dice^tes, vniuersorum deum nec cerni nec comprehend^ nec
perueniri ad eum posse, and oportere per Angelos diuinam sibi heneuolentiam
conciliare. Hoc antem dixit Apostolus, In humilitate and cultu Angelorum.
They who defended the law did induce them (the Colossians) to worship Angels,
saying that the Law was given by them. And this corruption continued long in
Phrygia and Pisidia. Wherefore the Council of Laodicea the chief City of
Phrygia, did by decree forbid to pray to Angels. And even to this day we may
see amongst them and others near to them Chapels of S. Michael. And this they
persuaded pretending humility, saying that the Lord of all might not be seen
nor comprehended nor come unto, and that by the Angels we must procure or
obtain the good will or favor of God. And this, says he, the Apostle meant
by humility and worship of Angels. And what does M. Bishop now say to this? The
Council forsooth meant it Reproof page 238.
of leaving our Savior, Jesus Christ, to commit idolatry to the Angels,
preferring the Angels before him. But Theoderet knew well the meaning of the
Council. Theodoret knew the occasion of that decree, namely a superstition
brought in by the false Apostles to worship Angels and to pray to them, and
that under the same pretense by which the Papists excuse their praying to
Saints and Angels, that we may not presume immediately to go to God himself,
but must by them procure favor and make way to him. This superstition
continued, he says, in Phrygia and Pisidia. They builded Oratories and Chapels
in the names of the Angels whither they assembled themselves for the exercise
of this devotion. This says Theodoret was the thing which the Council
condemned. Yea, but see the Canon, says M. Bishop, and you shall find M.
Abbots legerdemaine. But why did not he himself set down the Canon? He knew
well that he wrote to them that would never see the Canon, and does he thus let
the matter slip, with See the Canon? Be well assured, gentle Rreader, that he
would never have omitted to set down the Canon if there had been any thing in
it, either to help himself or to cross me. The Canon is this; Council. Lao.
dicen. c. 35. Quod non oportet Christianos relicta Dei ecclesia abire ((...))
and angelos compellare vel congregationes facere, quod est prohibitum. Siquis
ergo inuentus fuerit huie occultae idoloatriae vacare, sit anathema; quia
reliquit dominum nostrum Iesum Christum and accessit ad idoloiatriam.
That it behooves not Christians forsaking Gods Church to go and call to the
Angels, or to make assemblies, which is forbidden; if any man therefore be
found to give himself to this secret idolatry, accursed be he, because he has
forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ and has resorted to idolatry. Mark well the
Canon, I pray thee, and see whether thou can find that I have committed any
legerdemaine, or whether it be not rather one of M. Bishops tricks of
legerdemaine, thus to object the same to me, that he in the mean time may be
thought to be free from it, with whom indeed is no other but legerdemaine. The
Council plainly instructs us that to pray to angels is idolatry; that the
assemblies of those superstitious people to pray to Angels were assemblies of
idolatry; and that to forsake the Church to go to pray to Angels, is to
forsake Christ and to repair to idolatry, leaving us thereby consequently to
understand, that to bring invocation of Angels into the Church, as the Papists
have done, is to bring idolatry thereinto. M. Bishop would make us believe that
the Council means not that it is unlawful to pray to Angels, but so to pray
to them as to forsake Christ, and to prefer them before Christ, whereas the
Council says not a word of preferring the Angels before Christ, nor speaks
of forsaking Christ, but it says that to forsake the church to go to pray to
angels, is to forsake our Lord Jesus Christ to run to idolatry, plainly
resolving that to pray to angels is idolatry and in no sort to be received in
the Church of Christ. We conclude therefore against M. Bishop, that the Church
of Rome in praying to angels does commit idolatry, and is not now all one with
the ancient Church of Rome that did condemn the same. This then is the
advantage that M. Bishop has gotten by referring his Reader to the Canon, that
we are to account his talk of legerdemaine but as the preaching of the fox,
crying out upon falsehood that he himself may the more securely practice it,
as I might further show, but that for a taste I have said enough already by his
answers concerning Carpocrates and Marcellina and concerning a Canon of the
Council of Gangra in the very same place.

31. To show his treachery in citing antiquities, one or two examples shall
suffice. To attribute unto the Bishop of Rome a sovereign power for the
assembling of Councels, he allegeth certain words written by some Eastern
bishops, as to Damasus bishop of Rome; Reproof, page 176.
By the commandment of letters sent the last year by your reverence unto the
most royal Emperor Theodosius we undertook the journey even to
Constantinople; whereas those words were not written to Damasus only, but also
to Ambrose, Britto, Valerian, Acholius, Anemius, Basil, and other holy Bishops
assembled in the city of Rome; neither are as he cites, By the commandment
of letters, etc. but, Theodoret. hist. lib. 5. cap. 9. Concurreramus
Constantinopolim ad vestrae reuerentiae literas post conciliu^ Aquileie^se
missas Theodosio summa pietate Imperatori.
Upon the letters of your reverence sent after the council of Aquileia to
Theodosius the most religious Emperor we assembled together at Constantinople.
Did he here mean any truth that would bring that as proper to the Bishop of
Rome which was common to a whole Synod of Bishops, and would translate letters
of commandment where there appears nothing at all but that they were letters
of request? In the very next words he commits the same fraud, alleging that
in the Council of Chalcedon the Bishops of Maesia writing unto the Emperor
Leo, do say; that many holy bishops met together in the city of Chalcedon by
the commandment of Leo bishop of Rome, who truly is the head of bishops;
whereas it is not there only Council. Chal. ced. epist. episcop. Maesiae ad
Leonem Imperat. per iussionem Leonis Romani pontificis qui vere caput est
episcoporum and venerabilis sacerdotis and patrairchae Anatolij concilio
celebrato.
by the commandment of Leo bishop of Rome, but it is added, and of the
reverend Bishop and Patriach Anatolius; so that Anatolius the Patriarch of
Constantinople, is made here a commander as well as the bishop of Rome, each of
them of those bishops which within their several precincts and bounds were
subject unto them, and both by virtue of the Emperors writ, as appears
plainly for that Ibid. Act. 1. Facta est synodus ex decreto fidelissimorum
Imperatorum. etc. and in Epist. Council. act. 3. Synodus secundum Dei gratiam
and sanctionem vestrae pietatu congregata.
the Council is said to have been assembled by the Decree of the Emperors
Valentinianus and Martianus, and so in an Epistle to the said Emperors
professes it self, by the grace of God, and by their commandment, to be
there gathered together. It were worth the while, but that I am loath here to
be ouer-long, to declare how notably he abuses his Reader concerning
Tertullian and the Montanists. I will for the time only note first, that
whereas I set down Tertullians relation of the arguments used by the Catholic
Church against him and the rest of his sect, the knowledge whereof is very
effectual to give light of judgment concerning the point in hand, he under a
lying pretense that I have Reproof, page 222. 224.
mangled them, and peeced them together at my pleasure, very trecherously
suppresseth them, as before I showed he did in the very same sort, the words of
Methodius concerning original sin; and secondly, that he says that Ibid.
page 223.
Tertullian confesses there that Catholics held themselves bound to fast the
Lent, and on Wednesdaies and Fridaies, whereas in Tertullian there is no such
matter, and he contrariwise plainly says of them Tertul. de ieiun. Certe in
Euangelio illos dies ieiunijs determinatos putant in quibus ablatus est
sponsus; and hos esse iam solos legitimos ieiuniorum Christianorum.
that in the Gospel they thought those days determined for fasting wherein
the Bridegroom was taken away (which were good Friday and Easter even) and
that these only were the days by law appointed for Christian fasts. Such
iugling tricks are not dainty with him, and thou shall see store enough of
them when hereafter we shall come to examine him more at large.

32. Now here to observe the same course that he has done, it shall not be
amiss before I end with him to show by one or two places with what conscience
he carries himself in the usage of holy Scripture. And first I note his
prodigious impudency in the defense of that damnable prayer which heretofore
they have used as touching Thomas Becket, who though by undue course, yet died
no other but a rebel and traitor to his Prince; Breuiar. in translat S. Thom.
Cantuariens.
Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
By the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend,
Make us O Christ to climb whither Thomas did ascend.
This prayer the masters of the Church of Rome were ashamed of; and in the
reforming of their Portesses they have put it out, it being one of the great
infamies of their church that ever it came in. But this jolly gamester
resolving to play at all, will have us think that they were fools and did
more than they need to do, because this prayer may be warranted Reproof, page
109. 110.
by example of the like, recorded in the old Testament, Lord remember David and
all his mildness; for why may we not (says he) as well beseech God to
remember the constant fortitude of S. Thomas, as they did the mildness of
David? he should say, the affliction or trouble of David. But did he not know
that sundry great authors both old and new, and namely, Leo in Natiuit. dom.
ser. 4. Hinc David promissionem Dei prophetico spiritu canit, dicens, Iurauit
dominus David and non frustrabitur. etc.
Leo Bishop of Rome, have taken that Psalm to have been written by David
himself, and do thereby exclude that blasphemous construction of his? And if
it were not so, will he make it all one for the people to beseech God to
remember David's trouble, and for us to pray by the blood of Thomas to be
brought to heaven? The people entreat God to remember the affliction of mind
and care that David had for the building of the Temple, upon which God took
occasion to make promise to him of his son to sit upon his throne by whom
that should be done. To this care of David, and to the promise thereupon made,
they desire God in the beginning of Solomon's reign to give effect. Chrysostom
makes it the prayer of Solomon himself, and gives the effect thereof thus;
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 131. Quoniam genus ab co duxi and qu^mam cum tibi acceptum
fuisset cius studium and diligentia dixisti te eius genu and regnu^ erec^urum,
propterea haec pacta conuenta nunc a te exigimus.
Because I am borne of him, and for that when his study and diligence was
acceptable to thee, thou saiedst that thou would raise up his stock and
kingdom, therefore we now desire of thee the things that thou have couenanted
and promised. Now this being so plain and clear a meaning of that place, what
may we think of him that would thus impiously wrest it to the maintenance of a
horrible blasphemy, which far has it been from any ancient Christian
writer to imagine to be meant, either there or any otherwhere.

33. Again, Answer to the epistle sect. 25.
the Apostle, say I, in express terms affirms the imputation of
righteousness without works. The words are plain, Romans 4.6.
David declares the blessedness of that man to whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works. Now what does he say heereto? Forsooth Reproof,
page 135.
touching imputation of righteousness, the Apostle speaks not like a
Protestant of the outward imputation of Christ's justice unto us, but of
inherent justice, to wit, of faith which works by charity, which are
qualities powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost; so that, says he, there is
only a bare sound of words for the Protestants, the true substance of the text
making wholly for the Catholics. Thus he confesses, that the words sound for
us; and may we be sure that the Apostle has any other meaning than he
sounds by the words? Forsooth M. Bishop tells us so, and we must so believe
it, though his exposition be a mere contradiction to the words of the Apostle.
Inherent righteousness is the righteousness of works. The Apostle speaks of
imputation of righteousness without works. And yet we must think that he
speaks of imputing inherent righteousness. Surely the very phrase of
imputing inherent justice is in the Apostles drift a thing very absurd ( for
Origin. in Romans cap. 4. Quid videbitur gratiae iusto reputari iustitiam ad
iustitiam?
what grace or favor should it seem to be, says Origin, that to a just man
his justice should be reputed for justice?) but to say that by the imputing of
righteousness without works, is meant the imputing of inherent justice, that
is, the imputing of the righteousness of works, it is a construction so
frantike, so senseless, so shameless, as that we have good cause to fear that
the author of it has desperately resolved himself rather to say any thing
than to confess the truth. The thing is plain by the words in which the
Apostle says, that David declares the blessedness of that man to whom the
Lord imputes righteousness without works, namely, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Whereby it is manifest,
that not the imputing of inherent justice but the forgiveness of sins by
faith in Christ is the imputing of righteousness without works. Man having no
works whereby to appear just in the sight of God, yet by forgiveness of
sins is reputed just, because August. Retract. li. 1. c. 19. Omnia mandata
facta reputantur quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur.
all the commandments of God are reputed as done when that is pardoned which
is not done. Now what impudency is this man grown to, that dares thus
apparently delude and abuse the world? Surely these shifts of his are such, so
wilful, so wretched, as that they give all men just occasion to detest him,
crying out of falsifying and corrupting, of cosenage and deceit, when he
himself intends and practices nothing else. Such as thou have seen him
here gentle Reader, such shall thou find him almost in all his answers
throrowout his whole book; which when I shall have stripped out of those rags
wherewith he has clothed them, thou shall see him a poor Doctor, and shall
well perceive that he was put to a cruel shift and streining of conscience for
the writing of this book.

34. In the mean time I callenge him to give an answer to this advertisement.
He has with wide mouth cried out upon me for false and corrupt dealing. I
challenge him to make good his accusation against this brief Defense. I know
he loves not to meddle with the answering of long books, and when I shall have
given check to his Reproof, he will not be at leisure to give me at large a
countercheck. I challenge him therefore to clear himself, if he can, against
those exceptions that I have here taken against him, and setting down plainly
the authors words in their own tongue, as I have done, to make it appear, if
it be so, that in charging me with falsehood and lying, he has done the part
of a trusty and honest man, being no further so to be taken, if having made
such a clamor against me of lying, lying, it now prove to be but a cry of
course, not for any matter in me, but only of form in him. I pray thee gentle
Reader, to urge him by all means thereunto. Tell his friends and followers,
that if in these few matters he cannot better acquit himself, it shall be a
shame for them to suffer themselves any longer to be deluded by such a
shameless man. If he say he will do it in his second part, understand that he
does but mock thee. The book that he has now published, was coming forth
without any name of the first part. The Press being then surprised, they have
since by some common advice amongst them reuiewed and better furnished it, and
now for a color have called it The first part. Thou have been three years
and more in the expectation of this little piece; let him not hold thee three
years more in the expectation of another part. But whether it be this piece or
that part, thou may now by thine own experience judge of both. If God
continue my health and strength, and the use of those eyes at the distemper and
soreness whereof he so often sporteth himself, I will by the assistance of
his grace give thee further experience of him in the rest. Albeit I think thou will not wish that I either trouble thee or my self with all his wandering
discourses, his idle descants, his fond surmises, his imagined contradictions.
Much work he makes that I should say, Reproof, page 50.
I would stop the adversaries mouth, and leave him nothing to reply. But let
him remember that to that part whereof I said so, he has yet replied nothing,
and let him understand withal, that I take not every dogs barking to be a
reply: He charge me with Ibid. page 62.
contradiction, for that I say that in his dedication he had no hope to
prevail with his Majesty, and yet I say that in his book he thought himself
to have performed some great exploit, that is, says he, to prevail marvelous
much with his Majesty. But his Commentary fitteth not my text, because his
great exploit there intended, was not in prevailing with his Majesty, but as I
there declared, in writing a famous and worthy work, the marrow and pith of
many large volumes contracted and drawn into a narrow room. Another
contradiction he fancieth in that I Ibid. page 267. 268. etc.
say that he revealed a counsel and secret of his own and his fellows, in
saying, God knows what that forcible weapon of necessity will drive men unto
at length, and yet I bid him be of good cheer, and tell his fellows, that we
knew their mind before. I answer him, that in their desire it is a secret which
by all means they conceal and hide, and which they would not have us by any
means or in any sort to imagine of the^; and yet by experience we have learned
to judge of them, that they are, as there I said, treacherous, false-hearted,
faithless, waiting for time and opportunity, if power would serve, to compel
his Majesty to their order. Now to what end should I spend either time or
paper for the examining of such dreams? To the matter and question of
religion, or if there be any thing else material, I will answer him, if God
will; the rest which serves only for the lengthning of his book, I will
pass by with contempt.

35. Now then to leave M. Bishop for the time, I come to M. Higgons, who having
upon mere discontentments lately revolted from us, and being strangely become
a proselyte of the Church of Rome, to the great grief of his father, the
untimely death of his mother, the wonder of all who have known what formerly
he was, has of figtree leaves like Adam made him a mantle to cover this
nakedness and shame, delivering under the name of motives certain
fantastical apprehensions, whence as he pretends he took the occasion of
this revolt. In these motives taking upon him to censure the state and
proceedings of our church, and to tax sundry of our men who by writing have
applied themselves for the defense thereof, he picketh here and there some
petit quarrels against me amongst the rest, as if in writing against Doct.
Bishop I had not dealt syncerely and uprightly in the report and allegation of
some things. The matters are but few, and those such, as that I shall not need
to stand long upon any of them. The matter that chiefly troubled his head, and
gave him occasion of this apostasy was, as he pretends, our denial of
Purgatory and prayer for the dead, which he now upon the sudden has learned
to be an Apostolical tradition. And amongst other reasons that have induced
him so to conceive of it, one is a proposition delivered by Doct. Field, that
First Motive of T.H. book. 1 part. 1 chapter 2. 2. number 8.
whatsoever all or the most famous in all ages or at least in diverse ages have
constantly delivered as received from them that went before them (no man
doubting or contradicting it) may be thought to be an Apostolical tradition.
This he affirms to be true of prayer for the dead, that the most famous and
renowned in all ages, have constantly delivered it as received from them that
went before, and none have gainsaied it but damned heretics, and therefore
that it must by Doct. Fields rule be taken to be an Apostolical tradition.
Whence, says he, I was compelled to infer, that Doct. Abbot does willingly
deceive himself, saying, that prayer for the dead is a tradition and ordinance
of the Church, to which purpose he misinforceth the testimony of Epiphanius,
whereby he would exempt Aerius from the crime of heresy justly laid unto his
charge by S. Austin and many others. But I answer him, that though as a man I
may be deceived, yet God has given me more grace than that in these matters I
will willingly deceive my self. In this matter of Epiphanius I do not take my
self in any sort to be deceived. His conclusion against Aerius as touching
prayer for the dead is this: Epiphan. haer. 75. Ecclesia necess^r^o hoc
perficit traditione a patribus accepta; quis autem poterit staturum matris
dissoluere aut legem patris, velut Solomon dicit, Audi fili, fermones patris
tui and ne repudies statuta matris tuae? ostendens per hoc quod and in scriptu
and sine scripto decuit pater; matter autem nostra ecclesia habet statuta in se
posita indissolubilia quae dissolui non p^ssunt^^ Cum itaque ordi nata sint in
ecclesia statuta and been se habeant and omnia mirab^itter fiant, confuta^us
est tursus etiam hic seductor.
The Church necessarily does this by tradition received from the Fathers, and
who may dissolve the statute of his mother or the law of his Father? as Solomon
says, My son hear thy Fathers words, and refuse not thy Mothers statutes?
hereby showing that both in writing and without writing the Father has
taught, and our Mother the Church has statutes set down in her which are
inviolable and may not be broken. Seeing then, says he, that there are
statutes ordained in the Church, and they are well and all things are admirably
done, this seducer is confuted. Now then, do I say that prayer for the dead is
a tradition? Epiphanius says the same, that the Church does it by tradition
from the Fathers. Do I say that he makes it a statute or ordinance of the
Church? He himself expressly calls it so, and finally presses the authority
of the Church only for the confuting of Aerius. He alleges no Scripture, his
words import that he has none to allege; Only to grace the ordinances of the
Church he wresteth a saying of Solomon nothing pertinent thereto, as if we were
taught that God without scripture teaches us by the Church. And if he mean
any otherwise but that it is the ordinance of the Church, very vainly and
idly does he here name the ordinance of the Church. But M. Higgons will say,
that though Epiphanius name it thus a tradition and an ordinance of the Church,
yet he means it to be such a tradition and ordinance as is from the Apostles.
But let him mean what he will, yet so long as he makes it a tradition without
Scripture, my words stand good which I used to M. Bishop; Answer to Doct.
Bishops epistle. sect. 10. page 79. 80.
Epiphanius resolves us that prayer for the dead is a matter of tradition and
an ordinance of the Church, and therefore freeth us from any trespass against
any thing that Moses or the Prophets or Christ and his Apostles in the
Scriptures have delivered unto us. If it be no matter of Scripture with
Epiphanius, then I say rightly that he cleereth us from impugning therein any
thing that is delivered in the Scriptures. Albeit because it is by Epiphanius
his confession a tradition without Scripture, therefore we resolve undoubtedly
that it came not from the Apostles, because whatsoever they taught concerning
faith and salvation, is contained in the Scriptures, as before has been
showed at large. Yea and how unsoundly Epiphanius urges Apostolic tradition
is to be seen in the point which he speaks of immediately before, where he
says, that Epiphan. haer. 75. Decreuerunt Apostoli quarta and prosabbato
ieiunium per omnia excepta Pentecoste, and de sex diebus Paschatis praecipiunt
nihil omnino accipere quam panem and salem and aquam.
the Apostles decreed a fast upon Wednesdaies and Fridaies continually, save
betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, and that six days before Easter men should
receive nothing but bread and salt and water, whereas S. Austin professes,
that Aug. epist. 86. Quibus diebus non oporteat ieiunare and quibus oporteat
praecepto Domini vel Apostolorum non inuenio de finitum.
what days to fast or what days not to fast, he finds it not defined or set
down by any commandment of Christ or his Apostles; and by Tertullian it
appears, that the Primitive Church alleged against the Montanists, Tertul.
de ieiunio. sic and Apostolos obsernasse, nullum aliud imponentes iugum
certoru^ and in common ^mnibus obeundorum ^etunorum.
that the Apostles imposed no yoke of standing and common fasts; and of the
Lent-fast Socrates resolves, that Socrat. hist. li. 5. c. 21. Quoniam nemo de
ea praeceptum literarum monumentis proditum potest oste^dere, perspicuum est
Apostolos liberam potestatem in eadem cuiusque menti and arbitrio permisisse vt
quisque nec metu nec necessitate inductus quod bonum est faceret.
because no man can show any written commandment thereof, it is manifest that
the Apostles left it free to every man's will and discretion that without fear
or necessity every man should do what good is. Now we cannot wonder that he
that would thus unadvisedly name Apostolic tradition for the one, should do
the same for the other also. Albeit if M. Higgons can justify prayer for the
dead according to Docter Fields rule, we will not stick with him to grant it
to be an Apostolical tradition. But he might have seen that I had put it
without the compass of that rule, if he had been desirous to know the truth
and had not resolved first upon other occasions to fall away and afterward to
seek shifts to excuse his fall. I showed by Origin that the Church at first
used no prayer for the dead; by the author of the ecclesiastical Hierarchy
that when it was first used, it was used only for just and holy men of whose
souls they were resolved that they were in heaven, for what causes I have
expressed there; by Epiphanius, that they added afterward to pray for evil
men also and public offenders; by Austin that there was not known any
definite and certain use and effect of prayers and offerings for the dead, and
that many in his time did plead that if any good were to be done for the soul
after death it should rather be by it own confession of sins than by
offerings procured by other men. And lastly whereas prayer for the dead by M.
Higgons confession depends upon Purgatory, I showed by Austins express words
that he had no certain belief or knowledge of any such place, which are more
clear to that purpose than that by any Popish sophistications they can be
shifted or deluded.

36. Albeit I did not only allege him doubting of Purgatory, but also plainly
excluding it upon occasion by denying any third place. This denial of a third
place M. Higgons Book 1. part 1. chapter 2. 4. number. 10.
acknowledges, and notes me in his margent for citing the places where it is
denied, but seeks to avoid it by saying that Austin thereby only denied
against the Pelagians any third place of eternal rest here upon earth after
the day of judgment for children dying without baptism; for this is the
brief of the differences that he has there set down. But this will not
serve his turn, because Austin does not merely deny their third place, but
from the absolute denial of a third place infers that their third place
cannot be. August. de peccat. mer. and remiss. l. 1. cap. 28. Non est vllus
vlli medius lo^us vt possit esse nisi cum diabolo qui non est cum Christo. Hinc
and ipse dominus volens auferre de cordibus male credentium istam nescio quam
medietatem quam conantur quidam parunlis non baptizatis tribuere, etc.
definitiuam protulit ad haec ora obstruenda sententiam vbi ait, Qui mecum non
est, contra me est.
There is not any middle place for any man, says he, that he may be but with
the devil that is not with Christ. He adds. Hereupon the Lord himself also
willing to take away from the hearts of misbeleeuers this I know not what
middle place which some seek to assign to children unbaptized, has to stop
their mouths pronounced a definitive sentence, where he says, He that is not
with me is against me. There is then no middle place for infants unbaptized
because there is not after death any middle place for any man and therefore does
the Lord pronounce that definitive sentence, from which how M. Higgons will
shift Purgatory I cannot well tell. The other sentence is as plain; August.
Hypognostic. lib. 5. Da mihi praeter hunc alterum locum vbi vitae possit
requies esse perennis. Primu^ enim locum fides Catholicorum diuina authoritate
credidit regnum ess^ coelorum, etc. Secundum Gehennam vbi omnis Apostata vel a
fide Christi alienus aeterna supplicia experietur. Tertium penitus ignoramus,
imo nec esse in Scripturis Sanctis inuenimus.
Give me beside this, (that is, the kingdom of heaven) any other place where
there may be perpetual rest of life. For the first place the faith of
catholic men by divine authority have believed to be the kingdom of heaven.
The second hell fire, where every Apostata and alien from the faith of Christ
shall feel everlasting punishments. A third we are utterly ignorant of, yea
we find by the holy Scriptures that there is none such. Where we see that S.
Austin taking in hand to refute the third place affirmed by the Pelagians,
distinguishes generally how many places there be, and resolves that that
third place of theirs cannot be, because there is no third place. Heaven and
hell he says he finds in the Scriptures, but third place he finds none,
and therefore makes us confident against believing any Purgatory, because in
the Scriptures we find none. The Papists say they find it there, but they say
untruly; they find it in their own constructions, forced upon the Scripture,
but in the Scripture it self they find it not. All the places which they
allege have their just and perfect use even by the exposition of the fathers
themselves, without any Purgatory to be inferred thereby.

37. In the same chapter number. 12. he touches me again, for that whereas Austin
reuerenceth Epiphanius as a holy man, and famous in the Catholic faith, it
seems good to me to justify Aerius a damnable heretic against him. But I
reverence Epiphanius as far as Austin did, or teaches me to do. I
acknowledge he was a holy man, and famous in the Catholic faith, but yet I
say of him as S. Austin said of Ambrose another holy man, and famous in the
Catholic faith, August. con. Pelag. and Cele. lib. 1. cap. 43. Quantis
praedicat laudibus quamlibet sanctum and doctu^ virum nequaquam tamen
authoritati Canonicae Scripturae comparandum.
Though he were a holy and learned man, yet is he not to be compared to the
authority of the Canonical Scripture. I dissent from Epiphanius as Austin
himself did concerning fasting days, as I touched a little before, who
denies that to be Apostolic tradition which Epiphanius affirms to be so. I
justify Aerius against Epiphanius in one point, as in another point S. Hierome
did, as I have showed also Sect. 21.
before; not rejecting a truth, for that either an heretic has affirmed it,
or a Catholic doctor has denied it, but therefore embracing it wheresoever I
find it because God has taught it. And although Aerius for Arianisme were
justly to be accounted a damnable heretic, yet do I not think that M.
Higgons can make good his word which before he has given, that for those
matters wherein we approve him, there were beside Epiphanius and Austin many
other, that did condemn him. Epiphanius indeed does so, and Austin professing
to follow Epiphanius, transcribeth the same from him; but Philaster and
Theodoret writing of heresies, mention no such matter; neither do I think
that M. Higgons can bring us any father or story of those times that taxes
Aerius in that behalf. Yea, I may not omit that which I pointed at before,
that when Dulcitius moved the question to Austin, Aug. ad Dulcit. quaest. 2.
Vtrum oblatio quae fit pro quiescentibus aliquid eorum conferat animabus, etc.
Ad quod multi dicunt quod si aliquis beneficij in hoc locus esse possit post
mortem, quanto magis sibi anima ferret ipsa refrigeria, sua per se illic
confitendo peccata, quam in eorum refrigerium ab alijs oblatio procuratur.
Whether the offering that is made for the dead, do avail their souls any
thing, he sets down the opinion of many in that time concerning that point;
Many say to this matter, that if herein any good were to be done after death,
how much rather should the soul it self obtain ease to it self by
confession of sins there, than that for the ease thereof an offering should be
procured by other men, which opinion he would never have set down, neither
would Saint Austin have let it go without hard censure, if it had been then
publicly taken for heresy so to think; yea Dulcitius would never have moved
the question thereof, if Purgatory had been a known and undoubted point of
faith as M. Higgons would feign have it thought to be. But this is not all
that he has here to blame me for; for in the margent he charge me, that I
pervert the sense of Epiphanius, as though the church had prayed for the
Saints, etc. If they did not so, what is it then that Epiphanius reports?
Epiphanius reports, says he, that when we make a memorial of Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, etc. we separate Christ from the order of men, by the
honor and adoration which we perform unto him, that is to say, says he
again, We do not offer thanks for him as we do for some other men but unto
him as being God of equal Majesty with his Father. But it is he himself
indeed that by this exposition does manifestly wrest the words of Epiphanius,
the circumstance whereof by him guilefully omitted, does clearly convince that
they can by no means be taken as he expounds them. His words are these: Epip.
haer. 75. Veru^ enimuero eo quod nos saepe dum in mu^do sumus fallimur and
erramus tu^ inuiti, tum voluntary, quoid quod perfectius est significetur and
pro justice and pro peccatoribus memoriam facimus; pro peccatoribus quidem
misericordiam dei implorantes; pro justice vero and patribus, and Patriarchis,
Prophetis, Apostolis, Euangelistis, etc. Vt do minu^ Iesum Christum ab hominum
ordine separemus per honorem quem ipsi exhibemus and vt adorationem ipsi
praestemus, illud mente voie^tes quod dominus non est alicui homini adaequatus
^tiamsi millies and vltra in iustitia degat vnusquisque homo; quomodo enim
possibile fuerit? Ille enim est Deus, hic homo; and ille in coelo, hic in terra
per reliquias in terra.
Verily for that whilst we are in the world, we are often deceived, and go
awry both unwillingly and with our will, to the end that that which is more
perfect may be signified, we make a memorial both for the just and for
sinners; for sinners entreating the mercy of God; but for the just, the
Fathers, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs and
Confessors, the Bishops and Anchorites, and the whole order that we may
separate our Lord Jesus Christ from the order of men, by the honor which we
yield unto him, and may perform worship unto him, waighing this in our mind,
that the Lord is not compared to any man, though a man live in righteousness a
thousand times and more; for how should it be possible? for the one is God, the
other man: the one in heaven, the other in earth by remainder of his body in
the earth. Where thou art to note, gentle Reader, that Epiphanius says not as
M. Higgons reports; We make a memorial of the just, of the Patriarchs, etc.
but for them; neither does he say only, we make a memorial for the just, but
we make a memorial for the just and for sinners; meaning by sinners such as
had been publicly noted some way or other for evil life. Now the phrase
being one, and the act one both for the one and for the other, how shall M.
Higgons persuade us that it was a prayer for the one, and only a thanksgiving
for the other? Epiphanius says not so, nor gives any ground whereupon to
conceive it to be so; and that this memorial or commemoration was a prayer for
them that were thus remembered, appears by S. Austin, saying, that Aug. de
cura pro mortuis gerenda cap. 4. Supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum quas
faciend as pro omnibus in Christiana and Catholica societate defunclis sub
generali commemoratione suscepit ecclesia.
the church has received under a general commemoration, to make supplications
for the spirits of the dead, even for all that are dead in the Christian and
Catholic society. Now if it were a prayer which was used for all that have
died in Christian society, then it was a prayer which was used for the Saints,
Martyrs, Confessors. etc. Therefore Chrysostom faith, that Chrysostom. de
sacerdot. lib. 6. Deprecator est apud Deum vt hominum omnium non viuentium modo
sed etiam mortuorum peccat is propitius fiat.
the Priest prayed to God to be merciful to the sins of all, both quick and
dead. I question not here what construction latter times made hereof; I know
that this custom as it grew to be used, grew to be questioned; and because it
seemed absurd to pray for them that already are in heaven, which
notwithstanding the church formerly had done, as out of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy I most clearly proved, therefore though the form of words were one
and the same for all, yet by interpretation they made them a prayer for some
only, and a thanksgiving for the rest, S. Austin I take it being the first
that ever brought in that rule, that August. de Verb. Apost. ser. 17. I^uria
est orare pro martyr.
he does wrong to a martyr that prays for him. But let M. Higgons wrangle
hereof all he can, by the very place of Epiphanius, that which I say is
plainly euicted. For when he says, that we often are deceived and go awry so
long as we are in this world; he thereby expresses the cause why they did
make that memorial both for the sinners and for the just, there being none so
just but that that is verified in them, that they are often deceived and go
awry. Now will M. Higgons make Epiphanius to say of the Saints and just men,
that because so long as they were in this world they were often deceived and
went amiss, therefore now we give thanks for them? It were very absurd to say
so; but the other way the words are clear, that because we are all subject to
sin, therefore we pray for all. And if by this it be not plain enough, the
rest shall make it more plain. For out of this reason issues another of as
great effect, when he says, that this memorial is made for just and holy men,
that we may separate our Lord Jesus Christ from the order of men, by the honor
that we do unto him. Which honor wherein it stands, is understood by those
former words, that that which is more perfect may be signified; noting it to be
the acknowledging of his most high and glorious perfection; he only being free
from all spot and stain of sin and uncleanness, but all other carrying the
marks of frailty and corruption, betokened, not in giving thanks, as I hope M.
Higgons will confess, but rather in praying for them. To which purpose he yet
further more plainly adds those other words, And that we may yield worship to
him. But how? Waighing in our minds that there is no man compared to him,
though a man live in righteousness a thousand times and more. By which words
it is clear as the light, that that separation whereof he speaks, has no
intendment of the difference which M. Higgons mentions of giving thanks to
the one and for the other, but that it concerns righteousness and sin, it
being to be known by this memorial, that all the Saints, even they that
atteined to the greatest measure of righteousness, yet being men, were subject
to infirmities and imperfections; that so Christ alone may have the glory to be
transcendent and beyond the condition of frail and sinful flesh. Now because
no part of this could be imported in that memorial, if it were a thanksgiving
for the Saints, therefore whether M. Higgons will or not, it must necessarily
be taken to have been a prayer for them. And hereof there is one argument more
in the last part of the comparison, when he says of Christ that he is in
heaven, and of the Saints that they are in the earth by their bodies yet
resting in the earth. Where it has some reason that they should say, We pray
for them as respecting that their bodies lie yet in the dust of the earth,
expecting a blessed and happy resurrection, which we crave to be revealed upon
them, but to say that they meant to give thanks to God for that the bodies of
the Saints lie buried in the earth, it were senseless and absurd. And because
it is confirmed unto us by the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, that the Church did
pray for the dead, in respect of the resurrection, therefore we cannot doubt
but that the memorial here spoken of by Epiphanius, used for the Saints in
respect of their bodies in the earth, was a prayer for them to wish their full
and perfect consummation by the resurrection from the dead. My former
conclusion therefore hence deduced, stands good, that since the ancient Church
thus prayed for the Saints and Martyrs, therefore that certain it is, they did
not pray unto them. And because they thus prayed for the Saints, whose souls
they were assured were in heaven, therefore they prayed for the dead without
respect of Purgatory, which now is made the only ground and reason of prayer
for the dead.

38. The next matter for which he questioneth me is concerning the opinion of
the Greek churches as touching Purgatory and prayer for the dead. My words are
such as might have served to weaken his motive, had he not been resolved
without any motive to remove and run away. What could he have better to
resolve him then that which I say, that the Papists themselves confess that
Purgatory was not received or believed in the Greek Churches, and therefore
that it is certain that they had no respect of Purgatory in their prayer for
the dead? I did not only say, that the Papists confess it, but I cited the
places of their confession. Alfonsus De Castro says; Alfons. De Castro adu.
haeres. lib. 8. tit. de Indulgent. In antiquis scriptoribus de Purgatorio fere
nulla mentio, potissimum apud Graecos Scriptores: quae de causa vsque in
hodiernum diem purgatorium non est a Graecis creditum.
Of Purgatory there is in a manner no mention at all with the ancients but
specially with the Greek writers; for which cause Purgatory is not believed of
the Greeks until this day. Yea not of the Greeks only, but of the Armenians
also, he acknowledges, that Ibid lib. 12. de purgatorio vnus ex notissimis
erroribus Graecorum and Armeniorum est quo docent nullum esse Purgatorium, etc.
they teach there is no Purgatory, calling it an error well known, concerning
them both. The words of Roffensis their great and holy Martyr I cited out of
Polydore Virgil: Polyd. Virg. de invent. rer. lib. 8. cap. 1. ex Roffensi. De
Purgatorio apud priscos nulla vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio; sed and Graecis
ad hunc vsque diem non est creditum esse.
Of Purgatory there was none or very rare mention made amongst the ancient
Fathers; yea and with the Greeks it is not believed till this day. Thus did
they ingenuously acknowledge as the truth is, and did it nothing stagger M.
Higgons to find this so plainly acknowledged? Did it make him nothing doubt of
his imagined mutual dependence of Purgatory and prayer for the dead? Surely he
was a very voluntary convert, or else he might easily have seen that it is no
good connection to say, They prayed for the dead, therefore they believed
Purgatory; but rather, they believed not Purgatory, therefore they prayed not
for the dead in any such meaning as the Papists now do. He might have
remembered that which I told Doct. Bishop, that many amongst us of custom, and
of humane affection of love, do use many times words of prayer for the dead,
who notwithstanding from the bottom of their hearts do utterly defy both
Purgatory and the Pope.

39. In another place he says, that it is Book 1. part. 2. cap. 3. 4. number. 2.
to our great disreputation that I name the Albigenses as professors of the
same faith and religion which we now prefesse. But why? Forsooth he knows no
cause himself, but refers his Reader to Parsons the Jesuit, in his treatise
of the three conuersions of England. Yea M. Higgons, would you make Parsons his
narration a motive of your recantation? Would you give heed to him whom you
knew by the testimony of his own fellows to be a man of Belial; an infamous
wretch, a mere politizing Atheist, and therefore likely, if it were to serve
his turn, to deal with the stories of the ancient Christian Martyrs as he
has done with M. Foxes story, carrying himself in all that work like a very
Porphyrie or Julian, applauding himself and seeking to be applauded in a
iollity of forcing all things even against the hair to scorn and mockery? You
say, the Albigenses in their opinions followed the Waldenses, as indeed they
were the same, some part of them only being so called of the town wherein
they dwelt; and would you believe Parsons concerning the opinions of the
Waldenses, who Exam. of Fox his calen. cap. 3. number. 13. Of these Walde^ses see
at large Simon Goulart. Catalog. test. veritatis. lib. 15. Where thou shall see
how leaudly Parsons has dealt with them.
disclaimeth Aeneas Syluius, who was afterward Bishop of Rome, testifying
their faith and doctrine uprightly and faithfully as of his own knowledge,
that so he may give way to other either careless or malicious reporters, who
impiously fathered upon them strange paradoxes, in no other sort than Friar
Edm. Campi. december. rat. cap. 8. and passim.
Campian lately dealt with us? Yea and is not ashamed to cite Three Conuers.
page 2. c. 10. number. 29.
Prateolus and Sanders for witnesses thereof, whose joy it has been to find
out any thing, were it never so untrue, which they might report opprobrious and
disgraceful to them? I doubt not but that the Waldenses and Albigenses might
happily in some things be otherwise minded than we be (and what? are they in
the church of Rome all in all things of one and the same mind?) but if we
respect the substance of their faith and doctrine as we may discern the same,
not only by Aeneas Sylu. de Origin Bohem. cap. 35.
Aeneas Syluius, but also by Alfons. adu. haeres. passim.
Alfonsus De Castro, and specially by Sleidan. Comment. lib. 16.
the confession of their faith exhibited to the French King, as Sleidan has
recorded, it shall be no disreputation to us that we have joined with them,
neither shall it be to M. Higgons any reputation with God that he has departed
from them.

40. I may not omit that mentioning elsewhere, that Luther terms their
religion by the name of Popery, though this were but a very small occasion, yet
his gall casting upon the sudden he adds: Book. 2. p. 1. c. 1.. 1. number. 7.
Whom I might more justly call a foul-mouthed-dogge, then D. Abbot bestows
this homely courtesy upon a very learned Priest, meaning thereby T. Wright.
Let the Reader esteem whether it were not a meet courtesy for him that was
not ashamed to set it down for an article, Certain Articles or forc^ble
reasons, etc. part. 2. art. 5.
That the Protcestants make God the author of sin, the only cause of sin,
that man sins not, that God is worse than the devil. If Luther have any
where in that leand and impious manner calumniated the Church of Rome, I will
not deny but that M. Higgons should have cause to style him afoul-mouthed
dog; but if he have not so done, then is M. Higgons to blame to assign to
him that which of right belongs to another man. Whom indeed we think to be a
man of some kind of learning whereby he can audaciously and impetuously wrangle
where he may have his way; but he that would give forth to the world for
forcible reasons such misshapen stuff, as specially some of those are which he
has published, is very far from the worth, where he is uprightly judged, to
be accounted a very learned Priest.

41. His last matter touching me concerns a difference betwixt Doct. Field
and me. Doct. Field thinks that the cause why Aerius was condemned of
heretical rashness, was for that he durst condemn the laudable custom of the
commemoration of the dead by way of giving thanks for them. Against this
opinion of Docter Field he produces me amongst others for a witness, though
mangling and disordering my words to other purpose in some sort than I intended
them. But the sum of all is, that I hold it to have been the cause why
Aerius was taxed of heresy for that he reprehended and denied prayers and
offerings for the dead. Whereupon D. Field groundeth his opinion I cannot tell:
by Epiphanius and Austin I conceive that it is right which I have said. But
upon this occasion M. Higgons, because I had said that Austin and the Papists
as touching the end of prayer for the dead, did agree like harp and harrow,
returns my phrase and says; Do not these men agree like harp and harrow?
Where I cannot but think that he was very idly disposed and wanted matter
that would so much trouble himself as he has done with a difference of so
small effect. If Doct. Field conceive rightly of the opinion of Aerius, then in
the condemning of Aerius we al accord with him. If we conceive more truly of
Aerius that it was prayer for the dead which he impugned, then in the approving
of Aerius Docter Field accordes with us. And may we not think this to be a
great matter to trouble M. Higgons mind? Did he see no greater differences
than this in the Church of Rome? Had he not found in Bellarmine concerning
sundry weighty points of faith, a first opinion of such a one, a second opinion
of such a one, a third, yea a fourth opinion of such and such? To let other
matters go, did you not M. Higgons remember your two great Cardinals, Baronius
and Bellarmine standing in great difference, the one that it is directly, the
other that it is indirectly, that the Pope has a power over Kings and Princes
to depose them; yea and another opinion regnant amongst many of your great
Divines, that the Pope has no such authority either way, and that they are but
Parasites and pickthankes that sooth him in so unjust and undue a claim? Go,
M. Higgons, go and tell your own Cardinals, haec est mendaciorum natura vt
probe cohaerere non possint, for the third opinion proves them to be liars
on both sides. As for your self you are now become one of those pedling
merchants, in the exercise of whose trade you shall indeed find it true, that
they cannot thrive at all unless they can lie much.

42. I pity your folly, M. Higgons, and cannot but for your friends sake lament
that miserable state whereinto you have wilfully cast your self. Surely it was
a strong and a strange humor that possessed both your head and your heart,
that could drive you to this extremity for Purgatory and prayer for the dead.
Doubtless it was not Purgatory nor prayer for the dead that you respected; but
when you had resolved to run into this ruin, you thought these points most
plausible and ready whence your wit might weaue some spiders webs for the
hiding of your shame. I doubt not M. Higgons, but if you were here as you
would wish to be, you are able your self to show that all you have said is no
other but a spiders web. God give you grace to understand what you have done,
that if it be possible you may return again out of the snare of the devil
and out of that hell of inward terrors whereinto you have desperately plunged
your own soul. I know you are in the hands of Gryphes and Vultures that do
not easily let go the prey that they have once seized upon, but I commend you
to his mercy who is able to do more than we can any way expect of you.

43. And so for the time I leave both M. Bishop and M. Higgons, but with mind
speedily to take M. Bishop in hand again. The mean while, gentle Reader, I
have given thee this Advertisement for some satisfaction concerning his late
book, that thou may with the more patience expect the full answer thereof.
And albeit I have here made it appear that he has prostituted his
conscience, and set himself to sale, to say and face and outface any thing to
serve the Popes and his own turn, so as that hereby he has voided himself
of that credit which he would detract from me, and his book shall remain for
no other but the record of his own shame, yet I will not so leave him but will
go forward, if God will, more thoroughly to pull the vizard from his face and to
make him appear in those colors that do belong unto him. Assist me with thy
prayers unto God for the doing of the work of God, that it may be to his
glory, to the conuincing of the adversary, and to the edification of the
church of Christ. Amen.

Some faults escaped to be corrected thus.
Page 126. line 5. room, read no room. p. 129. l. 3. in marg. vitiosas, r.
vitiosus. p. 139. l. 4. integrity, truth, r. integrity and truth. p. 143. l. 2.
visibly, r. visible. p. 175. l. 17. public, r. public. p. 190. l. 8. strive,
r. stir. p. 195. l. vit. see in the, r. see the. p. 201. l. 12. most ancient,
r. the ancient. p. 214. l. 37. the article, r. that particle. p. 215. l. 2.
certainly in the, r. certainly the. p. 262. in marg. l. 24. ipe, r. sibi. p.
368. l. 16. approved, r. reproved. Ibid. l. 26. the Church, r. that the
Church. p. 380. in marg. l. 5. obiurat, r. obdurat.

Thus far I saw the book before it came forth: what faults shall follow, I
must pray thee by thine own judgment to amend.


