TWO GODLY AND NOTABLE SERMONS PREACHED BY THE excellent and famous Clarke,
master John Caluyne, in the year.1555. The one concerning Patience in
adversity: The other touching the most comfortable assurance of our
salvation in Christ. Jesus.

Translated out of French into English.

To the Christen Reader.
Among the manifold, sound, and most wholesome lessons, which are taught us
in the heavenly schole of our Savior Jesus Christ, there be none that the holy
ghost in more ernest wise requires us to learn, or that more makes for our
comfort here and in the world to come, then to have quietness of mind in
aduersytie, and to be assured of eternal salvation in Christ Jesus. For Heb. 12.
(though all trouble for the present time be grievous) yet like as when we
pacyently run the race that is set before us, enduryng such correction and
chastisement as our heavenly father leyeth upon us, he then causes the same to
turn so much to our profit, and to bring us so quiet fruit of
ryghtuousenes, that we thereby obtain more of his holiness, and become
vessels more apt to serve the glory of his name, and to edifye his church:
Even so, of all consolations and comfortes, this is most incomparable, Ephe. 1.
2. Tim. 1 Mat. 25
that through the most graciouse purpose of the eternal God, our
everlasting salvation is so certain and sure, that it was determined and
decreed by him in Christ Jesus his eternal son, before the foundation of the
world was leyed.

Touching these two points: namely, the quiet or pacient sufferynge of
trouble in Christ's cause. And the assurance of our eternal salvation in him,
thou have here (gentle reader) two notable, godly and comfortable sermons, made
by gods faithful servant, master John Calvin even at such time as here in
England, the sword of tyranny was full of bloudde, and the fire burning
hot. By the which worthy sermons, we all be cauled upon: partly to chose
rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, Heb. 11.
then to enjoy the plesures of sin for a season: And partly in nothing to
rejoice so much, as in that our names are written in heaven. Luc. 10.
As we be taught by our said soueraygne lord and master Christ Jesus,
blessed for ever Amen.

Sunday the.v. of May. 1555. in the forenone.
2. Tim. 1 Be not therefore ashamed to testify our Lord, neither be ashamed of
me which am bound for his sake: but be partaker of the afflyctions of the
gospel, through the power of god, who saved us, and cauled us with an holy
caulyng, not according to our deeds, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which grace was given to us, through Christ Jesus before the world was:
but is now declared. etc.


Although that almighty God has in his son sufficientlye Io. 17. 1. Co. 2.
Ephe. 3.
manyfested his glory and majesty through his spirit and gospel,
wherethroughe he is of all the world to be honored and worshypped, yet is
man's unkindness such, that he needs continual exhortation, to be nothing
shamed of that gospel. And why? for though god by his word cauleth all
creatures to him self, yet Mat. 13. Mar. 4. Luke. 8.
the more part rebel, despise and dispyte the doctrine whereby he would be
known and worshipped: Seeing then, men are so proud, perverse and froward,
Ps. 74.
as to eleuate them selves against their creator, let us not withstanding
take sure hold of this place of scripture here declared, that is, Luc. 9.
that we be not ashamed of the gospel. And why? because it is the testimony of
our god, which we as nyghe as in us lies, 1. Cor. 9.
should publyshe and declare, that al may be referred to this end, that he be
known and gloryfied as he is worthy. For when the gospel is not preched, it
lies as it were buried. Wherefore he apoynteth Act. 10.
wytnes bearers, to testifye the same unto us. And therefore let us render unto
him this honor, although the whole world went astraye, Phil. 3. 2. Ti. 2.
that we abide fast by this wholesome doctrine: for S. Paul sets here forth
his own parson, not for that he cares for our approbation, but to declare,
that Mat. 10 1. Tes. 4
when we separate our selves from gods servants, it is a sufficient
testymonie, that the master is also forsaken and given over. Some paraduenture
will think, that in forsakyng the mynister of the word of god being
tormented, disquieted and in distress, he has forsaken but a mortal man:
Heb. 10, 2 Timothy 4
but god is therewith also displeased, in as much as the man which so is
troubled, bears the mark of the gospel, for gods cause there through is
declared, as it were betrayed. Saynct Paul therefore consydering this: says
notably to Tymothee, 2. Ti. 1.
be not ashamed of me. And to say the truth, as I have already declared, one
might laughe Tymothe to scorn, and send him back to his master, as the
wicked can full well spy their advantage at such times, when god humbles
his servants, and suffers them to be unjustly tormented, 2 Pa. 36 Psalm.
35.78.79.
for then they assault and hardely lay at them which have maynteined their
doctrine. Here by may thou see that Tymothe might be in doubt what to do,
and therefore says Saint Paul unto him, although I be made as it were 1. Co.
4.
an outcast in the face of the world, so as some laugh me to skorne, others
deteste and hate me, yet be not thou therefore ever a whit the sooner moved. For
I am (says he) Ep. 3.4. Col. 4.
the prisoner of Jesus Christ, As who would say, though the whole world
would lay to my charge all the vyllany that could be devised, yet do they it
not for mine offenses, for my cause is avouched in gods presence, and truly
the cause is his, for I suffer not for mine offenses, his truethe is always on
my side, when I suffer persecution, for that Phil. 1.
I have maynteyned and do maynteyne the word of God. Care not for the
judgment of the world, for men are led Gene. 6. Psa. 94
with froward affections. Let it suffyce the then, that I be as it were an
hostage for the son of god, who honoreth mine imprysonment, in such wise,
that though the world thyncke it vile and detestable, Ps. 116. 1. Pet. 1.
yet before god and his angels it is not a lyttel esteemed and honored. Now
then, let us learn hereby in no wise to defrawde Jesus Christ of the
testimonye Ephe. 6.
which we ought of bear of him having our mouth shut, when it shall be
nedeful to Phil. 1.
maynteine his honor and thactoritie of his gospel: but contrary wise when we
see our brethren to be afflicted for the name of god, Heb. 13.
we be found ready to be cowpled with them, and that we stand in defense as
much as in us is, for the same cause, Phil. 1.
trembling or fearing nothing at all, for all the storms which might
happen, though the devil have the brydell at will, and though things were
never so far out of order. 1. Co. 15. Colo. 1.
Let us always abide sted fastly in our determynation, when we must bear
wytnes of the son of god, seeing Romans 1. Phil. 2.
he will be served of us in a matter of such weight and worthiness. But yet,
let us have a special eye, whether they suffer for their fautes, or for the
testimony of gods truethe, having a special regard 1. Co. 16.
that we set not light of any person whom we shall perceive for such a cause
to be oppressed. For Ioh. 7. Phil. 1.
we may not rashely judge in such a case, least thiniurie thereof touch god
him self: we must therefore make dylygente inquisition, to know the cause why
men do suffer. If we perceive they have walked in an upright conscience, and
nevertheless blamed, reviled and tormented, and that for serving of God, let
that suffice the to blotte out all the obprobries of the world: for that is
the reason wherefore sayncte Paul adds: 2. Tim. 1
be thou partaker of the afflyctions of the gospel: for Ephe. 5.
naturallye, it is given to every one of us to spare gladly him self: And
though we confess, and that without dissymulation, Phil. 1.
that it is a syngular grace which God gives when he will be served of men for
the mayntenaunce of his cause, yet is there noone which would not gladdely
exempt him self from persecution. We can well praise *such, as valiently
offer them selves to the conflicte, (as the martirs of Jesus Christ) Heb. 11.
are worthy to be esteemed and honored) yet in the mean while, Ephe. 5.
there is none which would not gladly be far of from the strypes. And why?
because we respect not this admonytion of s. Paul, Heb. 12. 2. Ti. 3.
that is, that the gospel brings afflyctions. Ihesus Christ having once
suffered in his own person, Act. 14.
will now also have his doctrine coupled and joined to many miseries: He can
when it shall please him, cause the gospel to be received without
contradiction, but what? Act. 1. Luc. 1.
the holy scripture must be fulfilled, which shall be declared amongst the
midst of his ennemies. Men also must come unto him Eccle. 2.
upon this condition, to suffer many conflyctes, for as much as the wicked when
god cauleth them, auaunce them selves and rebel against god, Mar. 10 2. Tim. 3
it is then impossible for us to enjoy the gospel without persecution. Not for
that the cooles are kyndeled and the faggottes always set on fire, but whether
it be after one sort or other, it must come to pass, that Heb. 12.
we be exercised, we must needs (I say) fight under our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now then, he which would get him self a far of from the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Ti. 2.
renounceth he not his own salvation? where is the hope of life, but in this
sacryfyce of the son of god? for thus stands the case that he will be like
unto us, and we must be transformed into his symilitude. Seeing then that it so
is, let us learn to walk after that manner, seeing we are thereunto cauled, as
heretofore we have seen, that such is the pleasure and will of God: we must
then without farther disputynge or contradyction, Mat. 11.
bow down our shoulders, and humble our selves thereunto. Now let us
farther see, what Saynct Paul here says: for he leads us by degrees to the
matter, in that he 2. Tim. 1
would not have us to be ashamed of our brethren, when they be evil spoken
of, and rebuked of the world, but that we should be ever united unto them:
but how may that be? first he declares, that the gospel can not be without
persecution, as tofore is said: it pleases god Mat. 10
that men be so divided: not but that God cauleth al men outwardly to the
unity of faith, Luc. 14.
and the doctrine of 2. Cor. 5
the gospel is the message of reconsiliation. But yet note that the faithful
Romans 8.
are drawn by the hour of his holy spirit, Romans 11
the unfaithful abide in their hardness of heart, as hereafter it shall be
more at length entreated of.

For as the fire is kynled, when thu^der being inge^dred in the air brings
forth a great hurly-burly, so is it when the gospel is preached. Now then if
persecution follow the gospel, and Jesus Christ would that to be Colo. 1.
fynished in his members which he suffered in his own person, thereby to be (as
it were) daily crucified, Mat. 10 16.
can it be lawful for us to withdraw our selves from that state? Saying then
that in the gospel consists all hope of salvation, and that Colo. 1.
thereon we should stay our selves, let us note what Saynct Paul says, who
wylleth us to Romans 12 Heb. 6.
stretche forth our hand toward our brethren, when we see them
oppressed, trodden under fete, spit at, and despited, and Heb. 10.
that we should rather desire to be their companyons in sufferinge all
obprobries and vyllanies of the world, Heb. 11.
then being honored, had in reputation and credyte, to be alienated from the^
which suffer for the cause which is common to either of us. This have we then
to learn out of this place of scripture, now because on our behalf we be
weak, and thyncke we should be swalowed up, as it were through persecutions,
as soon as we are assaulted by the rage of the enemies, Ps. 74.
which we se to have the swing and power in the world. S. Paul adds, that
Heb. 13.
we shall not be destitute of the aid succor and help of our God, for when
he sends us to the conflycte, it is not to try our force and strength, but he
armeth us immediatelye, and gives us an invincible power to wythstande, and
therefore adds S. Paul: According to the power of God, to take away all
excuses of dyscouragement. Every man (as I have said) would have a color and
cloak to withdraw him self from persecutions, and say. Oh, I would to god I
had the grace to suffer for his names sake, I acknowledge it to be the
greatteste benefyte that might happen to me, every one (I say) will confess
this, but they will add, we are weak, we shall sone be overthrown, the
torments will astonyshe us, ye se the cruelty and rage of thenemyes. Thus
will every one, after he has confessed what an excellent thing it is to suffer
for the name of god, be nevertheless quit. But S. Paul plucketh from us all
such excuses, 1. Cor. 10
saying that god shall be ready to strengthen us, for we may not respect what
is in our selves: For true it is that besides the inuations of our enemies,
there needs but our own shadows to fraye us: our own conceyte were
sufficient to put us to flyghte. But after we have acknowleged our weakness,
let us come to the remedy: and when we behold our own infyrmities, and what a
difficulty we have to withstand our enemies, Psalm. 50
let it be an occasion to induce us to call upon god with all humbleness for
aid: and acknowledge 2. Cor. 3.
no manner of ability in our selves, let us humblye caul upon him to stretche
forth his hand, to the end he fail us not when we be brought to thextremytee.
And so (being at rest) to acknowledge, 2. Co. 11.
that we are more then feable, to the end that our god prepare us to
thexamynation and trial. For that is the true consideration of our weakness:
yt is (say I) that we acknowlegynge our infyrmities, Mar. 9.
should desire god to help our weakness, according to that he knows to
be meteste for us: for thereunto must we have ^^specte. If this doctrine were
imprynted in our hearts without farther reasonynge, we should be far away
better dysposed to suffer then we are. But alas? there are very few which
remember this lesson: nay, it seems that we would rather stop our ears,
and shut our eyes when we are spoken unto thereof, *we make wise that we are
desirous, that god should strenthen us: but in effect we can not induce our
selves to behold this power, whereof S. Paul speaks, presumynge that the
matter touches us not. 2. Co. 12
But yet does our lord testify unto us, that his power shall be always in us
and that we shall thereof be possessed. And therefore let not our (...) be
occatio^ to withdraw us from the cross and persecutions, seeing that god 1.
Pet. 5.
has taken the care of us, to supplye that which wants in us, who also
promyseth to do it. Now S. Paul takes not here the power of god, to trifle
withal, but Phil. 1.
he testifyeth to al faithful people, that it shall be redye and at hand when
we desire the same, so ferforth as we desire to be armed and warded therewith to
fight when the son of god calls us to the conflycte, 2. Cor. 9
farthermore in as much as men have need to be spurred forth on all sides. S.
Paul adds here oone note to make us ashamed, if we be not fervently minded
to glorify Jesus Christ, yea to suffer persecution when it shall be so his
pleasure to call us thereunto, he says, that Tit. 2.3.
god has saved us, and has cauled us with an holy vocation, then if God
through his infynyte goodness has so Psa. 59.
prevented us, is our ingratitude to be excused, if we on the other side
answer him not accordingly? behold the goodness of our God, Psa. 86 Osee. 13
which has drawn us out of the goulfe of hell, wherein we were lost and
dampened, Tit. 2.
he has brought us the salvation, and has further cauled us to make us
partakers thereof. when then god shows him self thus lyberall, if we on our
behalf turn our backs and will not vouchesafe to receive the salvation
which he offers, Romans 2.
were not that a point of malice to far out of square? Let us then take heed, how sayncte Paul goes about to accuse here, all such as have not been
constante and coragyouse to suffer all thassaultes, which for the gospelles
cause were laid on men's shulders. So does he without doubt go about to
Romans 1. Act. 14.
confyrme the hope of the faithful, by opening that which god has already
done for them: for when god has showed us any evident token of his kindness,
he does it to the end 2 Cor. 1.
we should hope for the like an other time at his hand, until he have
finished that which he has begun. If then god has 2. Tim. 1
saved us, and has also cauled us with an holy vocation, thyncke you that he
will leave us in the middle of the way? when he has Act. 14.
opened unto us the salvation, that he has given us legs to walk with, that
he has given us his gospel, by the which he leads us unto his kingdom,
that he opens the gate unto us: when he has thus wrought with us, shall we
think, that he will then leave us there, and so mock us, and cause his grace
to be unprofitable, frustrate and lost? No, no, 1. Cor. 1. Phil. 1.
let us hope, that he will bring his work to perfection. Therefore let us go on
Heb. 4.10.
boldly: for seeing god has displayed one parcel of his power and might
toward us, let us not doubt, but he will continue always 1. Co. 15.
to give us the perfect victory over satan and al our ennemies so far as we
tarry and abide until that Jesus Christ Col. 1.
who is our headde and captain, show him self, that Heb. 12.
all power and strength is given him of god his father, Mat. 28 Phil. 2.
to comunicate of the same unto us. We see now then, the meaning of Sayncte
Paul. Wherefore after we have conceued what is the power of God, whereof we
have a little before made mention, let us immedyately add this declaration
which has been made. True it is god has in effect and by experyence
testyfyed unto us, 1. Cor. 10 Heb. 13.
that he will never fail us at our need, and why? for he has already saved us.
Let us then so depend of him (seeing we are in the way) that he will surely
bring us to salvation. 2. Tim. 1
He has cauled us with an holy vocation, that is to say, Ioh 15.
he has chosen us unto him self, he has severed us from the world, whereby he
declares 1. Cor. 11
that he would not have us cast away with the universal destruction of the
world. For as much then as our lord has thus withdrawn us from the
wicked world, Isa. 40 62
will he not still hold us under his mighty arm and conducte us until the
end? This then is a sufficient confirmation of the power of god: which we
shall still find redye at hand to help us, Hebr. 3.
so farforthe as therein we put our confidence and trust, calling to
remembrance how we have already felt the same: But to make our profit of this
doctrine effectually: first we must understand, that when god reveled his
truth unto us, Act. 15.
it was an euydent testymonye, that we Tit. 3.
alredye apperteyned to his heavenly inherytaunce, that he would avouche for
his own, and to be of his flock. Now then, when we shall be hereof well
persuaded, and in our selves well resolved, then need we not doubt to walk on
continually and go forward. For Psa. 91.
we shall be under his protection and defense: for seeing he is of such
strength to surmounte al our enemies, Ioh. 10.
our salvation can not but be in safe keeping. Let us not then fear when we
feel our infyrmitie, but psalm. 37
let us stay our selves upon god, who will provide for us, seeing he has Iosu.
1. Heb. 13.
promised to assyste us. This had need to be well borne away. Let us therefore
apply our study, and see, that we take good head to remember that which is
here said, for he will not fail us. Thus after many persuasions made for the
strengthenynge of us against such temptations, when we shall be at a full
point that Phil. 1.
god will finyshe our salvation as he has begun, 2 Timothy 3.
assystynge us in the myddle of persecutions, in such wise that we shall with
constancy surmounte them, and tryumphe over our enemies, although 1. Cor. 4
2 Cor. 4
it seems to the world that we are trodden under feet, yea and utterly
swolowed up, then must we come to this declaration which Saynct Paul adds,
towchynge our salvation and holy vocation whereof we have spoken. He says that
Tit. 3.
it is not for our deserts, but according to the purpose of God and his
grace. Hereby will he better admonyshe us, by declarynge, that our ingratitude
is so much the more to be condemned Heb. 6.
in that that god has opened the inestimable treasors of his goodness toward
us, for he has had Romans 3. Ep^e. 2.
no respect to our worckes or dignite, when he called ^s to salvation, it
proceaded of h^s fre grace. That was the cause wh^ he drew us to him self.
A^^ therefore the less shall be our e^cuse when we shall falsefye ou^ faith,
seeing that not only w^ ^eb. 9.
have been purchased through the blood of our Lord Ie^ Christ his only
begotten son, (...) that he also cared for our sal^^cion before the creation of
t^ world. ^phe. 1.
Let us mark well the how S. Paul does here co^dempne our ingratitude, ^ebr.
3.
if w^ be found unfaithful to our god, (...) stand not stout to bear
witness unto his gospel, when he thereunto cauleth us. For Tit. 3.
we be not saved according to our deeds (says he) but according to his own
purpose and grace. S. Paul adds, that that was given us Ephe. 1.
before the world was, before the world had his course and beginning, but
now has it been manyfested (says he) at the coming of our lord Jesus
Christ. For when that great Tit. 2.
sauyoure appeared, the grace which before was hid (yea not to be comprehended
by man's judgment) was manifested and opened. And why? because Heb, 2.
the son of god, setting death at naught (says he) has also brought an
immortal life. And we need not to make long cyrcuytes to sinde the same, Ephe.
3.
for the gospel leads and conducteth us thereunto. When therefore god sends
us that message of salvation, we must receive the inheritance promised, Romans
10.
we need not trotte far of for it, for god seeks us out, by whose grace we
open our hearts and give passage to this testimony of the gospel and
immortalite of the heavenly kingdom to dwell in us, although we be Psa. 103.
Job. 17.
poor and frail vessels yea though there be but corruption and rottenness
in us, yet apprehende we out of hand this immortality, and have a Romans 8.
suffyciente testimonye accepting the grace which in the gospel is offered
unto us. Herein is comprehended the whole process whereof saynct Paul
speaks. Now to understand better that which is here contained, let us note
this word Purpose to betoken the everlasting Ephe. 1.
Decree of god, not as though the matters were to be carried hither and
thither: for when we speak of the council of god, Romans 9.
we may not always dispute, who has so induced him we may not imagyne
reasons, as to say, for this cause has god so determined, or wherefore would
he so do, but contrary wise god would have us Romans 12. 1. Pet. 1.
kept under this modesty to think that his only will should suffyce us
for reason, when he says, god has so ordained. Although the thing seem
strange unto us, or that we could perceive therein no apparante reason, yet
must we conclude, that his only will To. 9. Psa. 92.
is just, and not to be reproved. That (say I) should be Deu. 4.
al our wisdom, to ratify all that for good, which god orders and
disposes, with out saying why or wherefore. Now for as much as men have
always such tyklynge spirits, and give them selves over much liberty to
their curiosities: S. Paul to abate such boldness, brings us back 2.
Tim. ^
to the purpose of god, into the which we may not enter so depelye, as to
know who has moved him, but also to note it as a weyghty matter, and that
Psa. 92.
his will is just. Hereby then are we admonyshed that our salvation Ephe. 2.
dependethe not for the respect of our merytes, that god inquyred not what we
were, nor whereof we were worthy, when he chose us to him self. But he had his
purpose, that is to say, he sought not without him self the cause of our
salvation, for so this word purpose signifies Decree. Saint Paul's mind
herein is euydent. but because that men according to their arrogansie, can not
temper them selves except they imagine always some dygnytie or worthynes to be
proper to them selves, and that theye well deserve that god should seek after
them. S. Paul specially the better to Romans 3.
exclude all that men can attrybute unto them selves, says, purpose and grace:
which imports as much as though he had said, purpose freely. It serves then
to abate al our works, to the end we be no more so folyshe and obstynate as
to thyncke, that God has chosen us, for any thing that was in us. No no, for
we know Ephe. 1.
that god went not out of him self when he chose us to salvation, for he saw
Romans 5.
there was but dampnation in us, he then contented him self with his pure grace
and infinite mercy. Who Psa. 102.
beholdynge our myseries, would Psalm. 12.
succor and help us, although we were not worthy thereof. And for more ample
confyrmatio^ hereof. Sayncte Paul says that this grace was given us Ephe. 1.
before all times. And herby se we, how men are Eccle. 16.
deprived of their senses when they will bost them selves, and stand in their
own conceyt, that they be the cause of their own salvation, and that they
have anticipated or prevented gods goodness: Now then, does not our
salvation depend of the eternal election? Ephe. 1.
God chose us before we were, what could we then do, were we then apt
vessels? were we then well disposed to come to God? we se then that our
salvation begins not from the time we had knowledge and discretion, since
we were well disposed or minded, our salvation (I say) begins not thens,
but it is grounded upon the eternal election of god which was before the
world was made. What could we then do? Had we the means to promote our
selves? could we move god to caul us to him self? and to separate us from
the world? is there not the^ in us a great blyndnesse, Romans 10. Phil. 3.
as to thyncke in our selves some worthynesse, to exalte our merytes to the
obscuryng and darkening of gods grace, and that we can prepare our selves to
have access unto him through our merits? well then for what purpose has
sayncte Paul set here the election of god, saying, that the grace of god has
been given us before al times? but that there through we are suffycientely
admonysed, that they which thyncke to abolyshe the doctrine of the election of
god, do adnichylate (as much as in them is) the salvation of the world, and
blot out by such deuelishe suppostes and pillars, the virtue of the bloudde of
our lord Jesus Christ: to put all to confusion, Gala. 1.
to overthrow the gospel, yea, and utterly to quench and bring out of memory
the goodness of god, the devil has no meter proppes then such as fight
against predestination, which Act. 13. 1. Tess. 2.
can not suffer in their deuelishe rage, that the same be spoken of, and that
this message be publyshed as it ought. If we detest the papystes being most
execrable, because they have prophamed all the holy scripture, because they have
perverted and corrupted the truth of the gospel and service of god, by
infectynge all the world with superstition and idolatrye, thothers are much
more detestable which go about to set at naught the sprite of grace and
election of god, and would by crooked and perverse ways He. 10.29 1. Tes. 2.
endeavor to stop the mouths of such as would clearly and openly publishe
this doctrine, as the worthynes thereof requires. For wherein consystethe the
salvation of the faithful, Romans 11.
but in the free electyon of god? should we not preach and declare, that god
has chosen his, through his free mercy without respect of any thing that
is? shall we not suffer this mystery (high though it be, incomprehensible
though it be) to be declared, 2. Tim. 1
when as god would have it to be reveled? Truly it is an euydence, that we
conspyre with satan, to declare that Jesus Christ has suffered in vain and
that the passion which he suffered profytethe the world nothing, and that all
went to the devil and to destruction. This then is the first point which
we have herein to observe and mark, that when we adnychylate the election of
god, the gospel can not be preached: for without it, it is a bastard gospel
and a profane: it is a doctrine of machomyte, there can be no more church
nor chrystyanitie, what shall then be said? Luke. 12
when we shall belie the holy ghost which here speaks: when we go about to
refuse this doctrine. And therefore on our behalf let us determyne Phil. 1.
constantly to defend it, for it is the ground of our salvation. How can we
build and maynteyne the building, when the foundation shall be overthrown?
Sayncte Paul cauleth us hereunto when he will go about to show by what power we
have to fight, how we shall aspyre to this inherytaunce which has been so 1.
Pet. 1.
derely bought for us how we enter into the glory of god, Luc. 14.
how we shall fynishe this building. He says, my friends you must be
founded upon this grace which is not of to day or yesterdaye, but before the
creation of the world. True it is, that at this present god cauleth us, but
Romans 8.
the election goth before: yea god elected us being not moved thereunto through
our deserts, before we could have laid before him any thing at al, for we owe
him al, he has drawn us zach. 5.
from the goulfe of destruction wherein we were drowned like poor desperate
creatures. It is then good reason 1 Pet. 9.
that we submit our selves wholly unto him, accountyng our self Romans 3.
al together bound to his goodness, wherewith we should be wholly rauyshed. In
this wise speaks saint Paul. And so let us hold fast this foundation (as I
have said) except we would that our salvation should run into decay and
destruction. And to conclude, let us note also that this doctrine is more then
profitable, when it is well applied for our usage. They which would we
should speak nothing at al of the election of god, will say. Oh what, it is
not necessary. But such persons never tasted of the goodness of god, nor of
the hope which we ought to have: little know they what it is, not to goo to
our lord Jesus Christ. For if we know not, that we be saved for that it
has pleased god Ephe. 1.
to choose us before the creation of the world, how should we know that,
which Sayncte Paul here rehersethe unto us, which is, Ephe. 2.
that we be dedicated to God, 1. Pet. 2.
for to be made apt and disposed to live and dye in his service? How can we
magnify his holy name? how can we confess that our salvation proceadeth of
him alone? and that he is the beginning? and that we have not assysted him
therein? well we may say it with our tongue, but it shall be hypocritically
spoken, except we be resolved upon this doctrine, as it is here set forth and
declared. Let us learn therefore that this doctrine of the election of god, and
by the which we be taught that he has predestined us before the creation
of the world, that this doctrine (I say) 2. Tim. 3
ought to be preached boldly and plainly in despite of all the world which
would withstand the same. And not only, that, but we know that it is an article
more then profitable: for without that, we can not effectually apprehende the
infinite goodness of our god, until we be brought so far: for a man shall
but shadow alwais the mercies of god, if we have not this sure prynciple and
ground, that he chose us Ephe. 1.
before we were borne, or could otherwise prevent him. And why? though men
would say, we have been redeemed by the bloudde of our lord Jesus Christ and that
we were unworthy of his so great mercy showed us, yet whoo is it (will they
say) that has his part and portion in such redemption which god has
purchased in the person of his son but such as will have it, such as seek
after god, such as do subject them selves, such as be not too stubburne,
such as are of good inclynation and disposition, they which have some good
devotion? but when they shall meddle with the matter after such a sort, and
presume to be cauled unto god and to his grace through any thing procedynge of
them selves, or thyncke that they brought some gobet of their own to part
stake with god concerning their salvation, 1. Co. 4.
it wear as much as to obscure, yea to tear (as it were) in pieces the grace
of god, which is a sacrilege not to be born with and therefore have I said,
that the goodness of god shall never be known at the full as it ought, until
such time as the election be laid before us, 1 Pet. 1.
testyfiynge that we are at this instante cauled,

(...) Sunday the.v. of May. 1555. after dinner.
2. Tim. 1 But be partaker of the afflyctions of the gospel, through the power
of god: who saved us and cauled us with an holy caulyng. Not according to our
deeds, but according to his own purpose and grace: which grace was given to
us through Christ Jesus, before the world was. etc.


WE have declared this morning according to the text of Saynct Paul, that
to know effectually gods fre grace concerning our salvation, we must have
recourse to his eternal counsel, by the which he did Ephe. 1.
chose us before the creation of the world: For therein we behold and see,
that Romans 11 Ephe. 2.
he had no respect to our persons, or to any dignity that was in us, nor
to any merytes that we could bring him. And why? because that yer we were
born, we were written up in his Regester, and he had alredye Luc. 10. Romans 8.
accepted us for his children. Therefore let us learn to attrybute the whole to
his mercy, acknowledginge and testifienge, that on our behalf, 1. Cor. 4.
we could not rejoice of any thing that was in us, without derogation of
the honor due unto god. True it is, that according to man's Gene. 6.
wicked nature, some will cauyll to darken the grace of god: saying, that
though god had chosen some before the creation of the world, he did it
according to that which he foresawe they should dyffer from thothers.
Nevertheless the scripture shows evidently, that Mat. 25
god staieth not until they can show them selves whether they be worthy or
not, when he choseth them: But the sophisters think, they can obscure the
grace of god: in saienge, that thought he regarded not the merits past yet
rekeneth he upon the merits that are to come. For (say they) though Jacob
and Esau his brother Romans 9.
had done no good nor evil, yet god did chose the one, and rejected the
other: So he foresawe (as Heb. 4.
all things are present unto him) that Esau would be a wicked manne, a
contemner of all: and that Jacob would be such one, as with the time he
declared him self. In this wise do such persons lay their foundation: but
these are vain imaginations, for they all together belie S. Paul, Ephesians 1.2 2.
Tim. 1
who proves that God gave no reward to our works when he chose us, in
as much as that was decreed and done before the creation of the world. And
though the Authority of S. Paul were not of force, yet is the matter so
evident, that they which think to escape through such shyftes, show them
selves very beasts, and as men to far over seen (I say) not only in the
understanding of the scryptures, but also to be void of al reason. For if we
would search to find out what is in man, what shall we find there? Genesis 6.
Is not the whole mass of mankind accursed? Psa. 51.
What brought we out of our mothers womb, but all iniquity? Eccle. 2.
We differ not at al then the one from the other but that it pleased god to
gather unto him self Ioh. 15.
those whom he would. And therefore uses S. Paul that word in an other place
of scripture, when he says, that 1. Cor. 4
men have not whereof to rejoice, because none shall be found to excel his
neighbor, but in that wherein we are dyscerned of god. Seeing then it is the
propre office of God to discern us from them which abide in their
condemnation. Let us acknowledge, that all should have been lost, Romans 5.
e^cepte the remedy had come unto us by an other means. So then after we
have confessed, that Ephe. 1.
god chose us before the world was made, it follows thereof, that he then
prepared us to receive his grace, which he powered into us that which was not
there before: not that he only Tit. 3.
chose us to be inherytours of his kingdom, but that also immediately he Romans 8.
marked us, to the end we should be justified and governed by his holy spirit.
This doctrine ought to be so assured and resolved upon among Christians, that
if any despise it (as we se many at this present day goo about to quench
and extinguishe the truth of god) we ought to acknowledge them to Act. 7.
repyne or repugne against the holy ghost: yea to be as bulls and mad
beasts, which would utterly set at naught all the holy scripture. For in deed
there has bin more honesty in the papystes then in them. For the doctrine of
the papystes in this behalf is better, holyer, and far away more
conformable to the holy scripture, then is that of these wicked wretches,
which this day go about like barking dogs and hogs, that with their
mussels would wrote up al (as we may see) to overthrow and turn up side down
the election of god, which men's impiety to far passes measure. Wherefore
come of it what will, let us stick hard to the doctrine here declared. For
seeing God had chosen us Ephe. 1.
before the world had his course, let us attribute the cause of our salvation
to his free goodness. We ought to confess, that Ephe. 2.
we are not adopted by him according to our demerytes: for we had nothing,
nor could bring any thing at all of our own unto him. We must therefore
ascrybe the Ebre. 5.
cause and ofspringe of our salvation to remain in him alone, and thereon to
ground our selves, for other wise all that ever we shall build, will run to
ruin. But yet we must well note that which S. Paul here addethe: First the
grace of Jesus Christ with the eternal counsel of god his father. And then
how he brings us to our vocation: to the end we might be assured of gods
goodness and good will Colo. 1.
which had been hyd from us, except he had given us a testimony thereof. For
the first point then S. Paul says, that the grace which depends of the
only purpose of god and therein comprysed, is given us in our lord Jesus
Christ. As though he would say: For as much as Romans 5.
we deserve to be rejected and hated as mortal ennemies of god, it was of
necessity, that Ioh. 15.
we should be graffed as it were in Jesus christ: to the end that god might
recognize and aduouche us for his children. For when god respects us, Psalm. 30
he can not but detest us, for that he finds us full of pouerte, full of
sin, and as it were stuffed up with all iniquity. God who is the
soueraygne Justice, Isa. 59.
can not enter into any manner of league or appointment with us, whiles he
beholds our nature. Where as he then would chose us before the creation of the
world, it was of necessity, 1. Ti. 2.
that Jesus Christ should be there between both: to the end we might be
elected in his person, for he was the well be loved son: and when god
coupleth us unto him, Ephe. 1.
then are we acceptable in his syghte. Let us learn then to be fully certified
of the election of god, thereof to make our profit, and dyr^ctly to come to
Jesus Christ: for he is the 2. Co. 4. Colo. 1.
true glass, wherein we may behold our election. If Jesus Christ be take
away, then remains God a judge for sinners, at whose hands we can not hope
for favor or good thing but rather wait for all vengeance. His majesty also
will be alwais terrible unto us Ioh. 15.
without Jesus Christ. If any talk unto us of his eternal purpose, we shall
be so astonyed, as though he were in full readiness to cast us down into
hell. But when we shall acknowledge, that John. 1.
in Christ rests all grace, then may we assure our selves, that god has
loved us, although we were not worthy thereof. Let this serve for one special
point, touching that whereof S. Paul here speaks. Secondarely that he here
speaks not symplye of the election of god (for that could not sufficientely
resolve us, but rather bring us into a greater perplexity of mind) But S.
Paul adds the word Vocation, by the which, god has 2 Cor. 2. 1. Pet. 1.
manifested his counsel, that before was unknown, and whereunto we else
could never aspyre. How shall we then know, that we are elected of god, to
the end we might rejoice in him, and glory over the goodness which he has
reveled unto us? Some speak of the election of god at auentures, leauyng the
gospel, leaving all that god lays before us, to bring us unto him self: yea
all the means which he has ordained, and knows to be meet for us to put in
ure. But we may not so proceed: For we must ( 2. Tim. 1 Romans 8.
according to S. Paul's rule) couple the vocation with the eternal election.
Now this word (Vocation) signifies as much as a caullynge. True it is that
the word is taken out of the latin: yet such as understand no latin, ought
to know what the word imports. Now then it is said, that we are cauled,
which is the second word. God then cauleth us: But how? When it pleases him
1. Co. 2.
to certify us of our election, which otherwise we should never have
attained unto. For who ever entered into the council of God? Isa. 40 Romans 11.
as the prophet Isaie and S. Paul also does say. But when it pleases god to
communicate him self first of all unto us, then have we that which
surmounteth all the reason of man. For we have a good witness bearar and a
faythefull: that is to say, Romans 8. 1. Cor. 11
the holy ghost, which lifts us up above the world, and leads us into the
marvelous secrets of god. wherefore we may not without great delyberation
speak of the election of god (as to say, that we are predestynated) neither
may we (to be well assured of our salvation) search in the air, or at all
adventures, whether God accompteth us of the number of his or not. What then? 2
Co. 4.
we must look unto the gospel which is opened and set before us: for there
does god manifest him self to be our father, and that he has 2 Cor. 1.
sealed us, to lead us to the inherytaunce of life. And this knoweledge is a
seal of the holy ghost in our hearts, and a sure testimonye of our salvation,
so far as we receive him by faith. For the gospel is preached to many, which
nevertheless are reprobates: nay god does utter and declare, that he has
cursed them, that they have no part nor portion in his kingdom, because they
do resyste the gospel, and Romans 2.
refuse the grace that is offered unto them. But when we receive in obedyence
of faith the doctrine of god, and rest upon his promises, accepting the offer
which he has made Gala. 4 Ephe. 1.
to hold us for his children, this (say I) is a true 2. Pet. 1
certificate of our election. yet have we to note, that when we know this our
salvation through this calling, and that god has illumynated us in the
faith of his gospel, it is not to adnichylate the everlasting predestination
which went before. For at this day, a man shall see many that will say,
who are they whom god has chosen, saving the faithful? I grant. But like
beasts as they are they make an evil consequence: that is to say, that faith
should be the cause of our salvation, yea the first cause. It is true in it
self, if they caul it the mean. For the scripture says, Act. 15. Ephe. 2.
that we be saved through faith: But we must ascend higher. For if they
attribute faith to the free will of men, they wickedly blaspheme against god,
rob god of his honor, and are in this behalf worse then the papystes, as I
have alredye said. Wherefore we must otherwise talk of the matter, 1. Pet. 4.
so far as the scripture gives us leave: that is to say, when god gives us
faith, it lies not in our power to receive the gospel, but as he disposes it
through his holy spyrite. For it suffyseth us not to have our ears beaten at
with the voice of a man. It shall be but a sound, which will vanyshe away
with the wind, 1. Cor. 2.
except God work inwardely, and speak unto us after a more secret manner
through his holy spirit. Note then, that from thence proceeds the faith.
But who is the cause? Why is faith given to one sooner then to an other? Act.
13.
S. Luke has declared, saying, that they which were ordained to salvation,
believed the sermon of Sayncte Paul. There were many hearers, and yet but some
of them receued the promise of salvation. But who were they? Such as were
ordained to salvation, says saint Luke. What needs longer disputation? And
again Saynct Paul in the first chapter to the Ephesians Ephe. 1.
treats hereof so at length, that the enemies of gods predestination
must needs be utterly void of sense, and that the devil has torn their
eyes in sondre, and be without understanding. Yea wholly Gala. 3.
bewitched, when they se not more in a matter so euydent. For S. Paul says,
that god has cauled us, and has made us partakars of great treasures and
infynite richesse opteyned for us through our lord Jesus Christ. But how?
According (says he) to that that he did choose us before the creation of the
world. Sayncte Paul intreatinge of faith, brings us back to his prynciple,
to lead us higher, to lead us to the first cause, and to the fountain of
our salvation. This is that fre grace, whereof we have so often made mention.
When then we say, that we Romans 8.
are cauled to salvation, and assured thereof, in as much as god has given us
the faith, there is yet a cause higher to be considered, that is, the election
eternal. And who so will not ascend thither, derogateth from god his honor
seeing he can not discern between man and man, otherwise then by their merytes
and dysposition that he seith in them. Thus must we then knytte together the
sentences or words, which saint Paul here reherseth, which is also to be
seen throughoute the whole holy scripture.

Now then to make a brief conclusion: let us take heed what order we ought
to observe in serchyng out for our salvation. We may not begin at this
point, as to say, are we elected or not? No, no, Romans 11.
For we shall never asce^de nor aproche so nere the counsel of god, but that
we shall be Pro. 25.
in danger to be confounded an hundredth thousand times, and to be utterly
depryued of all our senses. How shall we then proceade? Hebr. 2.
Let us give ear to that which is spoken unto us in the gospel, how that
god has given us the grace to receive the promise which he offreth us,
knowing that it stands us in as much stead, as if he had opened his heart
and enrolled our election in our consciences, Note therefore how we must be
certifyed, Romans 8.
that god has adopted us for his children, and that 1. Pet. 1.
the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven is unfeignedly ours: in that (I
say) that we be cauled in Jesus Christ. How shall we know it? How shall we
be stayed upon the doctrine which god lays before our eyes? We must
immediately (for the better magnifyenge of the grace of God) Dan. 9.
acknowledge, that we can bring nothing on our part, but so to abase us,
without chalengynge so much as one drop of praise toward our selves, that
we acknowledge 2. Tes. 2
god to have cauled us now to the gospel, according to that he did Ephe. 1.
chose us before the creation of the world. Now true it is, that this
election of God is as it were cloose letters: yea to us, for that it consists
in it self, and in his own nature. But therein may we read because that god
gives a testymony unto us, Romans 8.
when he cauleth us unto him self through the knowledge of the gospel, and
through faith. Then have we thereby Deuteronomy. 17
a double or copy given us. For like as the Origynal or pryncipall Regester
derogateth nothing from the copy or instrumente which shall be read, but is
rather an approbation of the same: and none will search out for the oryginall,
when he has the copy autentique: 2 Pet. 1.
Even so must we be assured of our election. For when god certifieth us by
his gospel, Romans 8.
that he accompteth us for his children, they are letters autentique, signed
Hebr. 9.
with the bloudde of our lord Jesus Christ, and 2. Cor. 1.
sealed with his holy spyrite. When we have that, have we not suffyciently
wherewith to be contented? Now then as I have said, so far wide is the
election of god from contraryeng this point, that it rather ratifyeth and
confyrmeth the testimony which we have in the gospel. Not that we have need
to look into the orygynall or regester of god, as though there were some
doubt. We have the instrumente which can not fail: what would we more? Romans 9.
Shall it not be over great rashness who will demand more? Who will ascend
Romans 10.
up above the clouds, when we have the word in our mouth and in our heart
Deu. 30.
as Moses says? True it is, that if we thought the instrumente were not
taken out of the true Regester and Orygynall, then might a man call it in
question or doubt. But when the thing is plain and certain, what would we
more? So fares it with us, that we need no more to doubt, but that Luc. 10.
god has enrolled us in the number of his elect and children Ephe. 1.
before the creation of the world. Colo. 1.
But he kept the matter secret unto him self: Yet have we in the mean time
letters patentes of our salvation. 2. Pet. 1.
We have an instrument sure enough as I have declared alredye. But yet must we
always Mat. 13.
resort to our lord Jesus Christ, when there is question of our election.
For Io. 10.14.
without him (as I have showed) we can not approach near unto god. And again,
when we shall speak of his decree, we shall be astonyed as coulpable of death.
But having Jesus Christ for our guide, To.. 5.8.
we may boldelye rejoice, knowing how that he has Heb. 3. Ap. 4.5.
dignity and worthynesse inoughe in him self, to make all his members
acceptable to god his father. It suffiseth, that we be Ephe. 4
graffed in his body, and united unto him. Now se ye, how we ought to
meditate this doctrine, if we list to do therewith our profit, according to
that which is here declared unto us by sayncte Paul, 2. Tim. 1
Who says, that this grace was given us. And how before al times says he.
We must ascend above the course of nature, when we will go about to know
how we be saved, and for what cause, and whence it should proceed. And farther
we must understand, that god would not leave us in suspe^ce Mat. 11. Ioh. 17.
nor yet would he hide his counsel from us, to bring us in doubt of our
salvation. But he has Ephe. 1.
cauled us to him self: not only by preaching of the gospel, (for that had
not ben suffyciente) but 2. Cor. 1.
he sealed in our hearts the testymonie of his goodness and fatherly love.
So then when we have such a certaynetie, let us first of all Romans 15.
gloryfie god, for that he has cauled us through his free mercy. And farther
we must stay our selves upon our lord Jesus Christ, acknowlegynge, that
he deceived us not of our expectation, when he caused to be publyshed, that he
Gala. 1.
gave him self to us, testyfienge also the same unto us Romans ^.
by the holy ghost. For faith is to us (as I have alredye said) an
infallible mark, that 1. Ioh. 3.
god rekeneth us for his children, being conducted thence to the eternal
election. And wherefore? God has cauled us (says sayncte Paul in the first
chapter to the Ephesians) Ephe. 1.
according to that he forechose us He says not that god chose us because we
hard the gospel: but contrary wise he gives faith, which for this special
cause is given us, to declare, that Rom 5.
God reserved us to save us when we were lost and cast away in Adam. Farther
we have to note, that saint Paul speaks not here of others then the
faithful. But some block heads there be, which to blind the eyes of the
ignoraunte and such as they are, will here cauyll, that the grace of salvation
was given us, because god had ordained, that his son should be the redemer of
mankind, and that the same was commen and indifferent unto al. But saint
Paul has so uttered his speech, that his doctrine can not with such
chyldishe gloses be corrupted. For notably 2. Tim. 1 Tit. 3.
he said before, that god has saved us. Is that referred indifferently to al
without exception? 1. Ti. 4.
No, no: he speaks but of the faythefull. Cauled he all the world? Some Ma.
22. Luc. 14.
were cauled by the preaching, but yet they showed themselves unworthy of that
salvation which was offerid them and therefore were reproved. Romans 1.
Others some god left in their incredulity, who never heard so much as one
word of the gospel preached. So then saint Paul does specially adresse him
self to the^ whom god had chosen and reserved to him self.

And therefore let us hold this pryncyple, that the goodness of god shall
never be perfectely and worthelye honored as it deserves, except we know
that Act 17. Gala. 1.
god would us not to abide and remain in the commen destruction of the world,
wherein he has left them which were like unto us, and from whom we dyffered
in nothing, Ephe. 2.
being of nature no better then they were: But Luc. 12.
such was his good will and pleasure. Wherefore Romans 3
let all men stop their mouths herat, and no man presume to attrybute any
thing to him self: geuynge in the mean time god the praise with open mouth,
Dani. 9.
confessyng, that to him we owe all that concerns our salvation. This is the
sum of all that which we have to reteyne and keep in memory. But in the
mean while, let us note well the other words which S. Paul uses here.
True it is, that in effect he understands the same that we have alredie
declared, that the election of God should not profit us nor come unto us,
except we had known it, which by means of the gospel is made known unto
us. For this cause Mat. 11.
would god have that manyfested unto us, Colo. 1.
which he kept as it were secret to him self before al times. But (for the
better expressing of his mind) he enterlaceth as it were by the way, to
declare, that Tit. 2.
this grace was now reveled unto us. And how? In the apperyng of our Lord
Jesus Christ. He shows, that we shall be to far unkind, unless that
herewith we can be contented and at rest. When the son of God Ephe. 5. Gala,
1.
gives him self unto us, what can we desire more? Though we could mount up
above the clouds, and could enter into the most deep secrets of god, what
shall be the end thereof? Is it not to know, that we are his children and
heirs? That now is sufficientlye manifested and declared in Christ Jesus, for
it is said, that Ioh. 1.
all they which believe in him, shall enjoy this privilege, to be made the
children of God. We may not therefore declyne (the least thing that can be)
from Jesus Christ, if we will be full certifyed of our election. True it is,
that saynct Paul has already declared, that we were never beloved nor chose^
of god, Ephe. 1. Colo, 1.
except in the person of Jesus christ his only son. But he now makes a more
ample declaration, when he says, that Jesus christ after he appeared, has 1.
Ioh. 1.
opened unto us the life which otherwise should have been unknown to us. He has
presented us the grace of god, Ephe. 2.
from the which we were otherwise far of. He has made us so familiar with
god, that we know what is his everlasting counsel, without Eccle. 3. Romans 12.
serchyng above our reach, that which is not laufull for us to inquire of.
For when god will instruct us by his own propre mouth, we may not presume
to wade so far as they which walk not under obedience: For it is a
presumption to seek to know more the^ god will permytte. But 1. Pe.
when we walk soberly and with reverence under the obedience of our God,
geuinge audyence and receive that which he utters in holy scripture, as I
have already said, Psalm. 25.
the way shall be made meet for us to wade through withal.

Mark then saint Paul which says, that the son of God, 2. Tim. 1.
by his apperance in the world, opened our eyes, to the end we should know
the grace Mat. 25.
prepared for us before the beginning of the world: As to be received for
children of God, to be made acceptable unto him, and Ephe. 1. 2. Cor. 5.
to be accounted as just, in such wise, that we need not to doubt, the ^.
Pet. 1.
inheritance is made ready for us in the kyngedome of heaven. (...). 11.
(...). 2.
Not that we have it for any merytes of ours, but for that Jesus Christ had the
right title, whereof he has made us participante.

And where as it is here spoken of the appering of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. ^
we must refer that to the gospel, because sayncte Paul concludes herewith
that through the gospel he brought life and immortality to light. For how
appeared Jesus Christ unto us? As he appears every day. But yet saynct Paul
would not darken those things that the scripture sets forth for the
assurance of our salvation which is laid up in Jesus Christ. It is not
said in one word, that Jesus Christ is our sauyoure, that he was sent as
the lieutenaunte of god his father. No? no? It is said, that he was sent as
the Romans 3. Hebr. 9.
mediatoure, which has reconcyled us by the sacryfyce of his death: He was
sent us, 1. Pet. 1.
as the lamb without spotte, to pourge and make satisfaction for all our
dettes: He is our pledge, to deliver us Romans 5.
from the condempnation of death, wherein we were: He is 1. Io. 2.
our justice, our advocate, which makes intercession in our name: Ioh. 14.
which will bring to pass, that our prayers shall be heard of god: which
is the band of concord between god and us: which has opteyned for us, that
which apperteyned not unto us by nature. For all these qualyties must we
attrybute to Jesus Christ, if we will effectuallye know how he appeared. For
if we should but symplye take the gospel, and not have regard to the
substance therein contained: that were inoughe to overthrow all, and in effect,
we should make of Jesus Christ but as it were a shadow. For if we say, that
Jesus Christ has appeared to be our savior, without mention making of that
which he suffered for our salvation, and declare not how we have been Romans 5.
reconcyled into the favor of god his father through and by his means: that
we Heb. 9.
have been cleansed from our filthynes and spots: that we have been redeemed Colo.
2.
from the oblygation of everlasting death. If we have not that with all, what
avails it? If we know not Heb. 7.9.
that Jesus Christ is our advocate, and that he caryeth our prayers when we
pray to god, to the end we should not be repulsed, what shall become of us?
What trust were there to call upon the name of god, which is Pro. 18.
the fortress of salvation, as the scripture says? Let us note well then, that
sayncte Paul says that Jesus Christ has Hebr. 9.
appeared, that he means chiefly, that he has accomplyshed all things that
were requisite for the redemption of mankind. But by the way he settethe
forth the 1. Cor. 15.
virtue of this bryghtnesse which has appeared unto us in his resurrection:
to the end we should be partakers of so great a benefit, and so to enjoy the
same.

Now if the gospel were taken away, what could the bitter death which the
son of God suffered, and his rysynge again on the third day, avail us?
All should be unprofitable unto us. 1. Co. 4.15 Ephe. 3.
The gospel then puttethe us in possession of those richesse, which Jesus
Christ has opteyned and procured for us. Again, Colo. 3.
though he be now absente in body, and is not here in this earth conuersaunt
with us, let us think our state therefore never a whit the worse. For Mat. 28
he has not so withdrawn him self that we should seek him, and not find
him. For the Son which shyneth, does not so clearly give light to the
world, as Io. 14.
Jesus Christ does manyfestly show him self to them which have the eyes of
faith to behold him, when the gospel is preched. And that is the reason
wherefore saynct Paul (besides this word appearing) says, that Jesus has
brought to light that life, yea the life everlasting. But to the end we may
find in the very words of sayncte Paul, all that I have said, let us mark
well and follow that which is contained in this place of scripture. He
says, that the son of god has Heb. 2.
destroyed death: but how destroyed he it? If he had not offered the
everlasting sacrifice for the Romans 5.
appeasynge of godds wrath: If he had not descended Ephesians. 4.
down to the loweste place, to draw us out from thence: If he had not taken
Gala. 3.
our curse upon him for the dyschargynge of us, and had not taken away Act. 15.
the burden under the which we began to syncke. What had it been? Should
death have been destroyed? No: death had had the dominion over us, death had
raygned immediately over us. And truly if every one of us would enter into him
self, we shall find, that Ebre. 2.
we are of nature the slaves of Satan, who is the prince of death. Thus had we
ben shut up in this miserable bondage, except Ose. 13.
that god had destroyed the devil, syn, and death. And that is done: But
how? In that that through the blood of our lord Jesus Christ, Colo. 2.
he has blotted out all our spots. Now though we be poor sinners, and in
danger of the judgment of god, yet can Romans 8.
not sin hurt us: because the sting where the poison lay, is so thrust away,
1. Cor. 15.
that it can not prick us, for now has Christ the vyctorye: for he suffered
not in vain, the sheddynge of his bloudde fell not on the earth, nor at all
adventures: but it has been a lauatory wherewith we have been sprikeled by the
holy ghost, as saint Peter has declared. 1. Pet. 1.
So then we see well, that sayncte Paul intreatyng of the gospel, wherein
Jesus Christ has appeared, and daily does appear unto us puts not in
forgetfulness his death and passion, nor any thing else apperteynyng to the
salvation of mankind. We must therefore note these two things: that is, that
in the person of Jesus Christ Romans 8.
we have (all the sort of us) that which we can desire. We have a full and an
assured trust of the goodness of god, and of the love which he bare unto us:

And how? Se we not, how our Isa. 59.
sins have separated us from god, and that they are the cause of continual
war and enmity? But Rom 3
we have the attonemente in our lord Jesus Christ: for Heb. 9.
he has shed his blood to wash us from all our fylthynesse. He has offered
a sacryfyce, by the which God is at one with us: Psa. 68.
He has paid al our dettes: To be short, he has Gala. 3.
adnychylated the curse, to the end we should be blessed of god. And
farther, he has Heb. 2.
vanquysed death, and triumphed over her, to the end we might be delivered
from the tyranny which was in readynesse, wholly to swalowe us up: he has
strength to surmou^t all. By this then we see all the things which apperteine
to our salvation, to have been Colo. 2.
accomplished in our Jesus Christ, and that there through we enter into the
possession of al his goods. Let us note, that daily he appears unto us
through his gospel. True it is, that Phil. 2.
he dwells in his heavenly glory: we shall not se him here in this earth
visiblye, but Mat. 28
yet will he not be far of from us, neither need we make long compases to
seek him. Let us open the eyes of faith, and we shall se him manyfestynge
him self unto us.

Thus have we learned out of the text of saynct Paul, all that which I have
touched. And therefore let us learn, not to separate that which the holy ghost
has conjoined. Furthermore let us note, that sayncte Paul here by the way of
comparyson, would amplify the grace which God has showed to the world
since the coming of our lord Jesus Christ. As though he would say, that
Luke. 10
the aunciente fathers had not this advantage, for that Jesus Christ appeared
not unto them as unto us. True it is, 1. Co. 10.
they had the same faith, and the inherytance of heaven was commen to them as
unto us, in that god reveled unto them his grace, as well as unto us, but not i^
such measure. For Heb. 11.
they saw Christ afar of, and as it were in a shadow, as sayncte Paul
says, under the fygures of the law. There was the veil of the temple, which
was so stretched forth that 2. Cor. 3.
the Jews could not approach to the materyall saynctuarye. But now that the
veil of the temple is broken, we may approach to the majesty of our god We
come unto heaven with full pryuylege, and then immediately we have the lively
image of god, wherein dwells all the perfection of glory. To be short: Colo.
2.
we have the body, where as the fathers had but the shadow only, as sayncte
Paul speaks to the Colossians. Now then we are thereby warned, that if the
fathers of old had such constancy and inuyncible zeal, to Heb. 11.
endure and abide in the afflyctions of the son of god, being as yet not
reveled to the world as at this day, shall we not be of to fainte a courage,
if we be not inflamed with a more fervent zeal? The aunciente fathers did
fully resolve them selves, to bear the afflyctions of Jesus Christ, as it is
said in the eleventh chapyter to the Hebrews. For it is not said, that
Moises bare the rebuke of Abraham his father, but of Jesus Christ. Note then
that the ancient fathers, although 1. Co. 10.
they lived under the dark shadows of the law, yet presented they them
selves unto god in sacryfice, to Heb. 11.
endure with much patience the afflyctions of Christ. But now 1. Co. 15
that Christ is risen again from the deadde, and has made open this life
unto us what shall be said of us, if we be so delycate, that we can not bear
the afflyctions of the gospel? Are we not worthy to be rased out of the
Regester of god, and not to be auowed of him. And therefore let us look unto it:
for Heb. 12.
we ought to be so encouraged with such constancy of faith, as to endure
for the name of Jesus Christ, what so ever pleases god to lay upon us, seeing
that life is made manyfeste before our eyes, and that we have a Luke 10.
better and more familiar knowledge thereof, then had the auncyente fathers.
Whereof the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews speakethe, Heb. 11.
where we read that the auncyente fathers never shronke, but had such a
marvelous consta^cie, that the hearing thereof were enough to astonyshe us. For
we know how they were tormented by tirantes and enemies of the truth, and
yet constantely suffered the same. The state of the church is at this present
day no harder, nor more troblesome, the^ it was than. And seeing it so is,
shall we make it more strange, to follow after Christ Jesus, who has showed
us the way? But to the end we be not to fearful nor over cold, let us mark
well how 2. Tim. 1
he says, that Jesus Christ has made manifest the life and immortalytie
through the gospel, for that that as often as the grace of god is preched
unto us, it is as much as if the kingdom of heaven were opened unto us, as if
god stretched forth his hand and certyfyed us, that the life is at hand, and
that he will participate unto us of his heavenly in herytaunce. For that is
spoken unto us, to the end that until we have seen Jesus Christ lyftynge us
up with him, and bringyng us unto a life certain, we should content our
selves with this present life. We would gladly remain here in this world,
Hebr. 9.
but by force must we be drawn hence. But when we shall behold the life which
our lord Jesus Christ has opteyned for us, we Phil. 3.
shall set but little by all that might reteyne us here, consyderyng we have
to ascend up to heaven. So then let us not be wyllyngely blind, when Jesus
Christ sets daily before our eyes the life and immortalytie, which we have
spoken of. But let us note well, that when saint Paul speaks of the life,
and adds the word immortality, that it betokens as much, as if he said:
We enter even now into the kyngedome of god thoroughe faith. For though we
be as 1. Pet. 2
strangers here in this earth, and that it seems there is but death and
maledyction in us, yet will the life and grace, whereof we are made partakers
through our lord Jesus Christ, bring forth his fruit in his convenient
time: that is to say, when he shall be Mat. 25
sent again of god his Father, to show us the effect of such things as are
daily preached unto us, and which have been accomplished in his person, when he
was clothed with our nature.

Now to end, let us psalm. 95
prostrate our selves before the face of our good God, acknowlegyng our
faults, desyryng him that it would please him, so to cause us Mat. 5.
feel our pouerties, that we never be so presumptuouse, as Dan. 9.
to attrybute any glory unto our selves: but that we Genesis 18.
acknoweledge our selves, to be stinking and detestable in our nature before
him, to the end we may search the whole cause of our salvation in his
purpose and in that counsel which has been reveled, through the Colo. 1.
knoweledge of the grace by him opteined, when he cauled us to his gospel: And
that also he would vouchesafe to grant us this benefit, that we may adresse
our selves to our lord Jesus Christ, and wholly to stay and rest our selves
upon him and the redemption which he purchased for us: to the end we may be
auowed for the children of god, to be made partakers of the inherytaunce of
life, after we have fought in this world. And for as much as it pleases
him, that we should be assaulted of Satan and of so many ennemies, as well
domestical as strangers, 1. Co. 10. Ephesians. 6.
That he would give us power to withstand their assaults: so as we be never
left of him until we have ended our course. And that we be come to that rest,
unto the which we are daily conducted. And that this Grace be not only
showed unto us, but to all people and nations of the earth. etc.

Imprynted at London by VVyllyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paul's
church at the sign of the hedgehogge.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


