A SERMON PREACHED AT Hampton Court before the Kings Majesty, On Tuesday the
23. of September, ANNO 1606.

By JOHN BVCKERIDGE, D. of Divinity.

IMPRINTED AT London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Hampton Court before the Kings Majesty, on Tuesday the
23. of September 1606.
ROMANS 13.5. Quapropter necesse est subijci, non solum propter iram, sed etiam
propter conscientiam.

Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience.


THese words are a conclusion of this discourse of the Apostle concerning the
obedience of Christians toward their superiors; The process of which
Scripture is grounded upon many reasons: 1. ab Authore, Omnis potestas est a
Deo; All power is of God, to whom in himself, and in his ordinance all
creatures must be subject: wherein although it sometime happen, That Potens,
the Ruler is not of God, Osea 8.4.
as the Prophet says, They have reigned and not by me: And likewise modus
assumendi, the manner of getting kingdoms is not of God always, because it is
sometimes by sinful means: yet potestas, the a bono Ordinis, 1. Cor. 14.33.
from the good of Order: and the Lord calls himself, The God of Order, not of
confusion. And, Ordo est vniuscuiusque bonum, Order is the good of every
creature: with whom it is better not to be, then to be out of order: And,
potestates quae sunt a Deo, ordinatae sunt, The powers that are of God, are
ordained a malo culpae, to disobey God in his ordinance is a sin, He that
resists, resists the ordinance of God. a malo poenae, they that disobey,
acquirunt, not only accipiunt, do not only receive for their deserts,
deservedly, but willingly pull upon themselves damnation; temporal, in which
God is more quick to revenge the wrong and Treasons committed against his
Lieutenants, and Viceroyes, then the greatest sins against himself; And also
eternal, as is manifest in Chore, Numb. 16.32.
Dathan and the rest, that went down quick to hell; And, non est damnatio
sine peccato, there is no damnation but for sin. The 5. is, a bono societatis,
from causa est, He is the cause of thy good, temporal and eternal; If an
evil Prince, occasio est, He is an occasion of thy eternal good, by thy
temporal evil. Si bonus, nutritor est tuus; Si malus, tentator tuus est; If
he be a good King, he is thy nourse, receive thy nourishment with obedience; If
he be an evil Prince, he is thy tempter, receive thy trial with patience; so
there is no resistance, either thou must obey good Princes willingly, or endure
evil tyrants patiently. The 6. a signo, from a sign, tributa penditis, or
praestatis, not datis: You pay tribute and custom, and Subsidies of duty and
Justice; You give them not of courtesy; and they are stipendium Regis, not
praemium, they are the Kings stipend or pay, not his reward: Ministri Dei sunt,
in hoc ipsum seruientes; They are Gods ministers serving for that purpose; Not
to take their own ease and pleasure, but to govern others; Waking when others
sleep, and taking care, that all men else may live without care.

All these Arguments the Apostle in the words of this text, concludes with an
Ideo; Ideo necessitate subditiestote, Therefore you must be obedient of
necessity, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Wrath is forum
externum, that external court, that contaynes all outward arguments, a praemio
and poena, from reward and punishment of God and man. Non sine causa gladium
portat: he caryes not the sword in vain, he is to reward or punish. And this
is the servants and hirelings argument, which keeps base affections within
compass, and prepares the way to charity it self, Vt seta filum introducit,
as the needle or brissell brings in the thread: wherein although he that obeyes
for wrath, has not the virtue of obedience, and so been non agit, quia ex
voluntate non agit, He does not well, because he does not with his will, or
from the heart; yet quia bonum agit, timor seruilis bonus est, Because the act
of obedience is good and a political virtue, this servile fear for wrath is
good, proceeding sometimes from the holy ghost, and of great consequence in
Church and Common wealth.

Conscience is that forum internum, that inward Court wherein God sits, and
either by the principles of reason, or by the laws of the holy ghost, gouernes
and judges all our actions done or to be done, and either accuses, or
excuses, It is Iudicatorium rationale, Bern. de Domo Interiori. ca. 28
not an affectionate or wilful, but a reasonable Judge. It is Liber animae, ad
quem emendandum scripti sunt omnes libri, It is the book of the soul, for the
examining and amending where of all books were written: In which are registered
all our thoughts, words, and deeds: what we have done, what we must receive,
and whither we must go, to heaven or hell; and when we must leave all other
books, this book will not leave us, but bring us to Gods tribunal, where it
shall be laid open, and judge us. Haec est priuata lex hominis: this is every
man's private law: against which whosoever does any thing, sins. And
therefore in some cases, Conscientia etiam erronea ligat: An erroneous
conscience does bind.

The process of this conscience is by way of Syllogism. The proposition is
framed by the Synderesis of the soul, which cannot be deceived; All good is to
be done, all evil is to be avoided. The Assumption is the discourse of reason:
and therefore many times is erroneous. This is good, or this is evil. The
conclusion is the collection of conscience. Therefore this is to be done, or
that is to be avoided. Wherein because the discourse of reason being
erroneous, makes an erroneous conscience; therefore that the laws of men be
not exorbitant, it shall be needful to prescribe certain rules or causes,
that must concur in all laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical, that they may bind
the conscience.

materia debita, a due matter, that is just and lawful, or else indifferent in
it self: for in things simply good or evil, which are commanded or forbidden
by God and Nature, No man has power to cross the will of God. And in these
things man's power is declaratory and executory, not sovereign of it self; In
things indifferent there is a power to command for circumstances of time,
place, order, and the like, and there is a necessity of obedience, and that
for conscience sake, else man has no power to command any thing of himself;
And yet it is the sin of disobedience, Non solum malum, sed and vetitum
facere, not only to do that which is evil, but that also which is forbidden.

The 2. is forma debita, a due form, an equal Efficiens debitam, a due finis
debitus, a due end, Public good, and not private: for as a Tyrant herein
differs from a King, that the Tyrant intends his private good, and the King
proposes the public: so evil Laws aim at private and bad ends, and good
Laws propose the most public and best ends, the increase of good Religion,
and safety of the Common wealth. And these causes concurring, the matter being
lawful or indifferent, the form due, the efficient potent, and the end
public and good, the Laws of man must be obeyed, not only for wrath but for
conscience, which is the greatest Obligation on earth: For Nemo humanam
potestatem contemnit, nisi qui prius diuinam contempsit, No man contemnes the
power of man, unless he first have contemned the power of God.

Thus we see, All must obey: Evil men for fear, and good men for conscience.
Now Subjection in this Text, is a transcendent, and has no proper place to be
spoken of, because it is to be spoken of in every place; And therefore let us
consider two points. The persons, and the necessity of obedience. The persons
are two, Subjects that must obey, and Higher powers, that must govern and
command. The necessity will bring us to the circuit and causes, in which we
must obey.

The subjects are set down in the first verse, with a note of universality,
Omnis anima, Let every soul be subject; Not only heathen, but Christians, and
Clearkes also: they have no exemption, but by the grace and privileges of
Princes. Omnis anima, quia ex animo: Let every soul be subject, and subject
with the will and heart, and inward affection of the soul, as S. Paul often
teaches, Ephesians. 6.6. Coloss. 3.22.
Non ad oculum, but ex cord, Not with eve-seruice, but from the heart. So that
in Naturam totam peccat, qui potestatibus resistit, he sins against all
Nature, body and soul, that resists the higher powers; And qui dicit Omnem,
excludit nullam, He that says, Every soul, exempteth no soul: The soul of
the Priest, and Ecclesiastical person, as well as the soul of the Layman must
be subject to the higher powers. For why? S. Paul in this Epistle wrote as well
to the Clearks and Priests, or Bishops of Rome, (if there were any then
resident at Rome,) as to the people. Matthew. 22.21.
And our Savior when he said, Date quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari: Give to
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, spoke as well to the high Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees, as to the people. Chrysostom. in Romans 13. hom. 23.
Chrysostom says upon this place, Sieve Apostolus, sieve Euangelista, sieve
Propheta, sieve quis quis tandem fueris: Be thou an Apostle, an Evangelist, a
Prophet, or whosoever thou art, thou owe this subjection: His reason is,
Neque enim pietatem subuertit ista subiectio, For this subjection does not
overthrow true godliness. In which exposition concur Theodoret, Theophylact
and Oecumenius upon this place. Gregorius Epist. 1.2. cap. 100. and 103.
S. Gregory in an Epistle to the Emperor Mauritius in the person of Christ,
says, Sacerdotes meos manui tuae commisi, I have committed my Priests to thy
hand. And in another Epistle he says, That God made him ruler, not only over
Soldiers, but also over Priests, Dominari enim non solum militibus, sed etiam
sacerdotibus concessit. Bernard. Epist. 420.
And S. Bernard long after writing ad Archiepiscopum Senouensem in France,
alleges this place, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; And
adds further, Si omnis anima, and vestra: quis vos excepit ab vniuersitate?
If every soul be subject, then is your soul: For who has exempted you from
this universality? And if a man survey all ancient Histories, he shall find
that this exemption is much younger then their times. Act. 25.11.
The Apostle S. Paul appealed to Caesar, to his lawful superior. The Martyrs,
and Confessors, and godly Bishops, never pleaded this exemption against their
persecutors, until the Bishop of Rome, like the Iuy that growing by the wall,
eats out the wall, so he growing by the Roman Empire, had eaten out the
Empire, and then he did exempt himself and his Clergy, from the higher
powers ordained of God.

For so they are higher, and indeed highest Powers next under GOD: that is the
next thing to be considered in the persons, Powers they are, and therefore
gouerners, for potestas is regiminis: the power is the power of governing; And
civil powers they are, which then were Gentiles and Infidels, though now
Christians: and that appears by two circumstances: they bear the sword, and
they receive tribute: Neither of which belongs to the Priests office. And they
be higher powers: (...):
the word is with a comparatiue preposition, the same that S. Peter has, (...):
(...): Regi tanquam excellenti: to the King as to the superior, merito
fortasse inferiori, 1 Pet. 2.13.
but dignitate and authoritate superiori: inferior peradventure to some in
graces and virtues, but in dignity and authority superior to all; for all men
are under them, and therefore they are superior to al mortal men, carrying that
sword, quo omnes corrigendi, with which all men are to be corrected. And
therefore the style of Supremacy, or Supreme governor is waranted out of the
letter of this Text. And Kings and Emperors, as they have their calling
immediate from GOD, so they admit no superior on earth but God, to whom only
they must make their account. And so much Tertullian acknowledged Colimus
imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, Tertull. ad Scapul.
and solo Deo minorem, We Christians honor our Emperor as the second man
after God, and minor to none but to God. Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus
Deus qui fecit Imperatorem, Optatus contra Parm. lib. 3.^
says Optatus; The Emperor admits no superior but that GOD that made the
Emperor. And in that place he accuses Donatus, that he esteemed himself as
GOD and not a man. Dum se Donatus super Imperatorem extollit, dum se Episcopus
Romanus, or, Dum Presbyterium, he might have said, either while Donatus the
Bishop of Rome, or the Presbytery, one Pope, or many Popes does extol
himself above the Emperor: non verendo eum qui post Deum, not reuerencing nor
fearing him, who next after God is reverenced and feared of all men. Theodosius
Images were cast down in Antioch, whereupon Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ad
pop. Antioch, hom 2.
Laesus est qui non habet parem super terram, summitas et caput omnium super
terram hominum. The Emperor is wronged who has no equal upon earth, the
height and head of all men. Wherein let no man mistake: when we call Emperors
and Kings Supreme governors, we do not extol them above GOD, or his Law or
word: Ministri Dei sunt, as the Apostle says, they are Gods ministers: and
therefore subordinate to him that sent them. Act. 4.19.
And if they command any thing against GOD, their authority comes too short:
in such things it is better to obey GOD then man. And yet in these things
though we may not obey, yet we may not resist but suffer, as Iulians soldiers
would not sacrifice at his command, August in psael. 142.
yet when he led them against an enemy, they obeyed most readily:
Distinguebant dominu^ temporalem a Domino aeterno, and tame^ subditi erant
propter Dominum aeternum, etiam domino temporali, as S. Augustine says, August.
De verbis Dom. sec. Matthew. hom. 6.
They made a difference between their temporal Lord and their eternal Lord,
and yet for their eternal Lords sake, they were subject to their temporal
Lord: for as among men, if the Proconsul command thee any thing, and the
Emperor command the contrary, thou do well to obey the Emperor, and not
the Proconsul: So if the Emperor command any thing, and God command the
contrary, thou do well to obey God, and not the Emperor. In these cases
says S. Augustine, Timendo Potestatem, contemn potestatem, in that thou
fear Gods power, fear not man's power. So then they are supreme, because
they admit no mortal man as superior upon earth, yet they are not supreme
above GOD nor above Christ, for all their authority is derived from GOD and
Christ. And as it is a Deo, from God and Christ, so it is propter Deum, and
propter Christum, for God and for Christ, not against God nor against Christ,
for the truth, not against the truth. Dan. 3.6, 29.
As Nabuchodonosors Law was to be disobeied that he made for an Idol, so the
Law that he made for the true GOD was to be obeyed. And as in civil causes by
all men's confession they are supreme, and yet not above God nor Christ: So in
causes Ecclesiastical they are likewise supreme on earth, yet not above God
nor Christ: they are ministri Dei no^ Papae, non presbyterij. They are Gods
immediate ministers of whom they hold in Capite: not man's, not the Popes, not
the Presbyteries, to draw their swords at their command. Now that their
authority is not confined to the second Table of causes Civil, but extends it
self to the first Table, and causes Ecclesiastical, will appear in this word,
Necessitate subditi estote: (...),
you must of necessity be subject: for this is not Necessitas externa, an
external necessity, only of force and compulsion for wrath, propter iram;
but also Necessitas interna, an internal necessity, of love and duty,
propter conscientiam: And according to the School, there is Duplex necessitas,
a double necessity. There is necessitas naturae, the necessity of nature: as
the fire is necessarily hot by nature; and if it cease to be hot, it cease
to be fire. And there is necessitas praecepti and finis, the necessity of the
precept and the end: for all precepts are necessarily to be kept in respect of
the end. So that a sick man should recover his health, it is necessary
necessitate finis that he observe the precepts of Physic and keep a good
diet: So S. Paul says: ^. Cor. 9.16
Necessitas mihi incumbit, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me, if I
preach not the Gospel: there is a necessity not of nature, but of precept, his
calling, and the end, salvation: So subjection to higher powers is necessary
in Christians, Necessitate praecepti and finis, by the necessity of the end:
peace, and tranquillity, and Religion in this life, and life everlasting after
death: and by the necessity of the precept, Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and mother: in which number all Kings and Fathers of
Countries, and Princes must have the honor of reverence to their Persons, of
obedience to their Laws, of patience to their punishments, of maintenance to
their Estates, and of fidelity to their Crowns. Now because Government, and
Obedience are relatiues of equal extent; so far must we obey as their
commission is to govern: And the precept of their Authority extends not only
to civil causes in the second Table, but also to Religion in the first. And
this precept according to the difference of times, is threefold: Natural,
Legal, and Evangelical. In the Law of nature it can be no question, but
causes Civil and Ecclesiastical belonged both to one man, since the calling of
King and Priest was united in one man: The Prince of the family was both chief
Magistrate, and Priest, and had the supremacy in both: Which Aristotle well
observed, when he said, Arist. polit. lib. 3 cap. 10 and 11.
Quae ad Deorum cultum pertinent commissa sunt Regibus. Things pertaining to
Gods worship are committed to Kings as a part of their charge: In which respect
he says, Imperator erat Rex, and Iudex, rerumque diuinarum ei cura commissa
est, The King was in war an Emperor, in peace a Judge, and in divine causes
an Ouerseer; And this was practiced by all Nations, Assyrians, Medes, Persians,
Grecians, Romans, Jews and Gentiles, Pagans and Christians: All which did
establish Religion by their public Laws, and maintained it by the
Magistrates sword. Justinian said, Nouel Constit. 6
Nos maxima sollicitudine, The true Religion of God, and the honest
conversation of Priests is our greatest care. Rex seruit Deo, aliter qua homo
aliter qua Rex, (says S. Augustine) The King does serve God as a man, and as a
King; August Epist 50.
As a man he serves God by living holily, As a King he serves God by making
(Ecclesiastical) Laws with convenient rigor and severity, that shall
command that which is just, and forbid that which is contrary. His examples
are Ezechias and Josias that destroyed Idols, and reformed the worship of God.
And also among the Heathen, first Nahuchodonosor, Dan. 3.29.
who being instructed by the miracle of the fiery Furnace, made a Law for the
worshipping of Daniels God: (...) 6 26.
next Darius, who by occasion of a like miracle made a Decree that al men
should fear and tremble before the God of Daniel: (...). 2 6.
And last of the King of Niniuee, who at Jonas preaching proclaimed a fast, and
commanded all the city, man and beast to fast, and to cry mightily to God, and
to turn from their wicked ways: And these three did this, not out of a
prophetical Spirit, as some pretend, that David, and Solomon, and Josias did;
But as belonging to their function Royal by the light of Nature. Wherein if
any shall say, That servitude is the punishment of sin, and so this
proceeds out of nature corrupted, not pure, I answer: Peccatum seruitutem
fecit, Natura subiectionem induxit: Sin brought in tyranny and slavery.
Genesis 9.25.
Cursed be Cham, a servant of servants shall he be. But order of superiority
and subjection is the instinct of purest nature: For in heaven there is order
among blessed Angels, and some are higher, and some lower, and they obey one
another, if not ex praecepto, yet ex consilio: if not by precept and command,
yet by counsel and direction. And in the state of innocence, there was
superiority and subjection not only between man and all other creatures, but
between man and woman: and had they lived in Paradise, till they had been
father and son, there should have been patria potestas: and being many
families, there must necessarily have bin Regia potestas: Else the best and
most happy life must have been without the greatest happiness of life, and
that is Order. And this superiority and subjection remained not only in the
profane and wicked, but also in the line of the godly and the Church, until
the Law of Nature, which was daily adulterated and corrupted by the affections
and traditions of men, was written by Moses in Tables of stone: which is the
second precept of this subjection.

And this Law of Moses did renew the Law of the kingdom, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
and ordained that the King should have a book of the Law written by the
Priests, and delivered him at his Coronation, in which he is commanded to
read all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God,
and to keep all the words of this law, and these ordinances to do them; And in
this law there be many Precepts that concern the King, as he is a man, and
many that concern him, as a King; And in this ordinance the king is made
Custos legis Diuinae, The guardian of Gods Law, and the whole Law is committed
to his charge; The first Table, that concerns Gods worship and causes
Ecclesiastical, as well as the second Table that concerns civil
conversation, and causes secular. By virtue of which Commission, when the
kingdom and Priesthood were divided in Moses and Aaron, Moses the civil
Magistrate exercised a Supremacy over Aaron the high Priest, Exodus 32.21.
in causes Ecclesiastical, whom he reproved for making the golden calfe:
Numb. 15.31.
and in his time the breach of the Sabbath by gathering of sticks was punished
by the Civil sword.

Joshua a Prince and no Priest, as Moses is said to be, succeeded Moses in this
charge, and by this Commission he Iosue. 5.2.
circumcised the sons of Israel, Iosue 8.30.
erected an Altar of stone, read Iosue 8.32, 34.
the Law, did Iosue. 7.24.25.
execution on him that concealed the things dedicated to Idols, Iosue. 24.23,
25.
caused the people to put away strange gods, and renewed the covenant between
God and the people. And these are causes Ecclesiastical.

David's whole study was for causes Ecclesiastical, after he had freed Israel
from all enemies: then did he compose Psalms to be sung by Asaph and his
brethren, then did he set orders for the Temple, appointed Priests, 1. Paral.
16. 1. paral. 23. 1. paral. 24. 1. paral. 25. 1. paral 26. 1. paral. 27.
Levites, singers, and other inferior seruitors, and assigned to them their
dignities, courses, and offices.

Solomon by this Commission built the Temple and dedicated it, 1. Reg 6. 1.
Reg. 8. 1. Reg. 2.3^.
he deposed Abiathar the high Priest, and placed Zadok in his room. I hope
this is a matter and argument of great supremacy.

Asa took away the Altars of strange gods, 2. Paral 14.4. etc. 2 Paral. 15
8.12, 13, 14, 15. 2. paral. 15.16.
the high places and groves: he put down his mother because she had made an
Idol: he took an oath of Judah and Benjamin, that whosoever would not serve
the Lord, should be slain. This was sharp Law in a cause merely
Ecclesiastical.

2. Paral 17.6, 7.
Iehosaphat sent his Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah, and with them
Levites, and Priests: 2. Paral. 19.4.
himself went from Beersheba to mount Ephraim and brought all the people again
to the God of their fathers: ^. Paral. 19.8.
he set of the Levites and Priests and chief of the families of Israel, for
the judgment and causes of the Lord, and this is as a Kings high Commission.

2. Para. 29.3, 4.
Ezechias service in this kind is famous: he opened the doors of the House of
the Lord, and brought the Priests and Levites in, ver. 5.
he commanded them to sanctify themselves, and to offer burnt offerings, which
they did according to the Kings commandment.

Here Priests are obedient to the Kings command in their own duties and
charge. He commanded the Levites to praise God with the words of David; 2.
Paral. 29.30.
2 Paral. 30.1, 6, 12. 2 Paral. 31.2.
there he enjoined a Liturgy: He commanded all Israel and Judah to keep the
Passover; here is omnia cum Imperio: 2. Paral 31.1.
He appointed the courses of Priests and Levites by turns, he took away the
hie places, broke down the Images, and brake the brazen Serpent made by Moses,
4 Reg. 14.4.
because the people burnt incense unto it.

Manasses that had set up Altars, groves, 2. Paral. 33.3, 15.
and Images before his captivity, after his repentance and return, he took
away the strange gods and the Image that he had put in the house of the Lord,
and the like, and restored the worship of God; and there he commanded Judah to
serve the Lord.

The last example I will trouble you with, is Josias; 2. Paral. 34.3, 4, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33.
he purged Judah and Jerusalem from high places, groves, and Images: he gathered
all Israel, read the Law, renewed the Covenant, and caused all Israel to stand
to the Covenant, and he compelled them to serve the Lord: he kept the famous
Passover, 2. Paral. 35.1, 2, 3, 10, 18.
and reduced the Priests and Levites to their courses set by David and Solomon.
These and many more are the Acts of famous Kings in the time of the Law, done
by their Royal authority, not at the appointment and command of the Priests:
that had been only Potestas Facti non Iuris: A power of Execution, and not a
power of Jurisdiction, if the Priests had first commanded the King, and then
the King had commanded the people: But the Kings did make Orders and Decrees,
and commanded the Priests as well as the people, and reformed the Priests, as
well as the people. Yea, Solomon did depose Abiathar the high Priest: and they
forced and compelled both Priest and people to serve the Lord, and to abolish
idolatry and superstition: And therefore this is a power of Jurisdiction over
persons Ecclesiastical in causes of Religion.

If it be said that these Kings did this by the direction of the Prophets, and
most of these Kings had their peculiar Prophets and Seers; this is nothing to
the question: for no man ever denied direction to Kings. They have Counsailers
for causes Civil, and Prophets, Priests and Bishops for causes of the Church.
And the question is not, Qua directione, but, qua authoritate: Not by what
direction; they must direct themselves by their best helps: but by what
Authority; not a derived or delegated Authority from the Priest, but by that
original Commission, Necessitate praecepti, by the necessity of the precept,
in which they are made guardians of the whole Law.

If it be further said, these Kings did this by an extraordinary and
Prophetical power, which is but only said and never proved; the confutation
is ready: If this had been done by a Prophetical power, why are those Kings
registered as glorious and good Kings, that walked in the ways of David, and
took care of Gods Religion: And on the other side, those Kings that omitted
these duties of Religion, not only noted and disgraced, but condemned for the
omission of that which according to this opinion concerned not their office?
Had the supreme care of Religion in these Kings been only a Counsel and no
Precept, no man should have been disgraced and condemned for it; for no man is
to be condemned for the omission of a Counsel, And therefore the Scripture
condemning many Kings for the omission of this duty, and registring
Nahuchodonosor, Darius, and the King of Nineue for their great care in this
charge; this is not a Counsel, but a precept in the Law, that Kings must
take charge of the whole Law, and causes Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal.

When the Donatists pleaded that Kings were to meddle with Civil causes of the
second Table, Optatus contra Parm. lib. 3.
and not with Ecclesiastical causes of the first, Optatus held it to be a
madness in Donatus: Ille solito furore accensus in haec verba prorupit, Quid
Imperatori cum Ecclesia? Donatus enflamed with his accustomed fury, brake
forth into these words, What has the Emperor to do which the Church? But,
says Optatus, the Apostle taught us to pray for Kings. Non enim est Respublica
in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Republica, i. in Imperatore Romano: The
Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church is in the Commonwealth, that
is, in the Roman Emperor. And S. Augustine rejects the plea as ridiculous,
(...)
Nolite curare in regno vestro, a quo tueatur vel oppugnetur Ecclesia: Take you
no care in your Kingdoms who oppugneth the Church, and who defends it; who is
religious, and who sacrilegious: This is as much as if you should say, Take no
care who is chaste and who is unchaste. Cur enim adulteria legibus puniuntur and
sacrilegia permittuntur? As if adulteries were to be punished, and sacrilege
permitted. The force of the Argument is this, If the King be to punish by
Civil punishment in the second Table, murder, theft, adultery, and the like;
much more in the first Table, Atheism, Idolatry, Sacrilege, Heresy,
Schism, and the like: (...)
else these sins must go unpunished in this life.

But it will be said, Indeed the kingdom was above the Priesthood in the Law:
but in the Gospel, the Pristhood is above the kingdom, And therefore though
kings in the Law meddled with Ecclesiastical persons and causes, necessitate
praecepti; yet in the Gospel their authority is confined only to causes
Civil: the Church that was governed 300. years before any king was Christian,
has no need of their supremacy, there is no precept of obedience in the Gospel
which imposes this necessity. Indeed if the Gospel were either a Reuocation
or limitation of their Commission granted in the Law, it were somewhat.

But when the rule holds, that Euangelium non tollit praecepta naturae and
legis, sed perficit: The Gospel does not take away the precepts of nature, and
the moral Law, but perfect them: The commission of Kings granted in the Law,
stands good to the worlds end. And Christ came vt tolleret peccata non iura
mundi, John. 1.29.
not to take away the Laws and societies, but the sins of the world: And he
renewed the precept, Matt. 22.21.
Date quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari: Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's
by the Law of Nature and Moses: And the Apostles do often and almost every one
of them in their writings double the precept, As Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.23. Jude
8. 1. Tim. 2.2.
and Saint Jude, and Saint Paul in many Epistles. One place shall serve for all.
1. Tim. 2. he ordeineth that Christians shall pray for Kings and men in
Authority. The reason is, That we may live a quiet and peaceable life under
them, And the compass is: (...): in all godliness and honesty. Therefore
godliness and honesty belongs to the Kings charge; And so the same precept
with the same extent remains in the Gospel that was given in the Law. Psalm.
2.11.
In the 2. Psalm it is prophesied, that Christian kings should serve the Lord
Christ in fear, and rejoice to him in reverence: and they must serve him not
only as men, but as kings; and kings as they are kings, August. contra
Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 51.
(says S. Augustine out of this place,) serve the Lord, if in their kingdoms
they command that which is good, and prohibit that which is evil, Non solum
in ijs quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam in ijs quae ad Diuinam
religionem, Not only in things pertaining to humane society, but also in
matters concerning Divine worship. Isai 49.23.
And Esai prophesied that in the Gospel Kings should be noursing fathers and
Queens should be noursing mothers of the Church, and they must nourish by
their milk: and internal milk of the word and Sacraments, they cannot give:
they can neither preach the word, nor administer the Sacraments no more then
Vzziah could burn incense, or offer sacrifice to God: 2. Paral. 26.16.
Neither can they give commission or power to any man to preach or minister the
sacraments, which is an authority derived from God by imposition of hands;
Ite, praedicate: Permittere, Marc. 16.15.
and licentiam dare possunt, non authoritate^. Their authority is a permission
or license to preach in their dominions, not a power of mission or ordination:
And therefore since they cannot give the internal milk of the word and
Sacraments; they must give the external milk of discipline and government.
And although the Church were governed for the first three hundred years before
any Emperor or king became a public professed Christian: yet as S. Augustine
says, August. Epist. 50.
Aliud fuit tunc tempus, and omnia suis temporibus aguntur. The times were
different, and all things have their time. And therefore as soon as Constantine
became a Christian, he assumed this supremacy: he put down idolatry, he
established Christian religion, composed differences of Bishops, suppressed
heresy and Schisms, called Councels, and gave his suffrage in them, he heard
causes of religion, and judged them in his own person, he made laws, decrees,
edicts and orders for religion. And this says Eusebius, Eusebius de vita
Constan. lib. 1. cap. 37.
he did tanquam communis Episcopus a Deo constitutus, as a common Bishop or
ouerseer ordained of God. And concerning these that boldly and unadvisedly were
inflamed with the memory and praise of those Arrian Bishops: pestium illarum
is Constantines words, those plagues and firebrands of the Church, (...). lib.
1 ^^. 19.
Illius statim audacia, ministri Dei, hoc est, mea executione, coercebitur. The
boldness of such, (Bishops and others) shall be brought in order by the sword
or execution of Gods minister, that is, my self. And the sixth Toletan Council
speaking of Chintillanus the king, (...). 14.
says: Nefas est in dubium deducere eius potestatem, cui omnium gubernatio
superno constat delegata iudicio. It is an heinous offense to call his power
into question, to whom it is apparent that the government of all is delegated
by the divine Decree.

To reduce these things to certain heads: 1.
The first work of this supremacy is reformatio Ecclesiae, The reformation of
the Church, by abolishing Idolatry, superstition and heresy, and placing of
true Religion: practiced by Constantine, and all the godly Emperors his
successors: A matter so evident both in the Law and the Gospel, that it needs
no proof; And they which withstand, and cry down the Supremacy of Kings,
were the men that first told Kings that they had a supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, and ought to reform the Church, and make way for Gods own
kingdom, and Christ's own Scepter: which when they had effected by the Civil
sword, and grew potent and strong, and able to stand of themselves; Then these
Equiuocating companions began to deal plainly, and to tell Kings that they
had nothing to do in causes Ecclesiastical; As those that when they have beat
the child, burn or cast away the rod: as who using temporal Authority as a
ladder to clime up to the height of their ambition, fling it away and break it
in pieces, as if they that reformed for them, might not also reform them, and
bring them into Order.

The second work of this Supremacy, is Conuocatio Synodorum, the calling of
Councels and Synods: as the four first general Councels were called by four
Emperors: The Nicene Council against Arrius, by Constantine: The Council of
Constantinople against Macedonius, by Theodosius the elder: The Council of
Ephesus against Nestorius, by Theodosius the younger: The Council of Chalcedon
against Eutiches, by Martian. I might add the Council of Sardis by Constans
and Constantius, and many more, for many hundred years after Christ. But I
note rather the weak allegation of Cardinal Bellarmine, That all these
Councels and many more, Bellar. de Council. l. 1. cap. 13.
were called by Emperors, but authoritate Papae, by the authority of the
Bishop of Rome (or the Presbytery, if there were any such thing then in
being,) as if in those times Emperors had been vassals to the Bishops of Rome;
Leo Epist. 9.
whereas Leo magnus made supplication to Theodosius the younger, supplicationi
nostrae dignetur annuere, that the Emperor would call a Council in Italy. But
the Emperor called it at Ephesus, And the Bishops of Italy could not come in
time: and Eutiches hersie was there countenanced by the means of Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria. Epist. 24.
Then Leo made a second supplication, and alleged the sighs and tears of all
the Clergy, for to obtain a Council in Italy. Epist. 26.
He solicited the Princess Pulcheria, to further his supplication to the
Emperor: He wrote to the Nobles, Epist. 23.
Clergy and people of Constantinople, to make like supplication to the
Emperor: yet he could not obtain it in the time of Theodosius. When Martian
succeeded (by the favor of Pulcheria) a Council was granted, not in Italy,
but at Chalcedon; Then Leo made a fresh suite, Epist. 43.
That the Emperor would command the Bishops of the Council, that the faith of
the Nicene Council might stand in full force unaltered, which the Emperor did
at his request, Oration Marriani in Council. Calc.
And the Emperors Oration to that purpose is extant. Now, if supplication,
intercession of friends, sighs and tears of Priests be the authority of the
Pope, then the Pope used his authority, and commanded the Emperor to call
Councels. Epist. 59.
But in the subscription you shall see his authority, Because (says Leo) I
must by all means obey your sacred and Religious will, I have set down my
consent in writing to those Constitutions. Here you see it is plain, Councels
were called by Emperors at the Popes supplication and entreatie: And therefore
when Ruffinus alleged the Canon of a Council against S. Hierome, Hierom. in
Apologia contra Ruffinum.
his answer was, Doce quis eum Imperator iusserit conuocari, show what
Emperor commanded this Council to be called. I will therefore end this point
with Socrates words, Who giving a reason why in his Church-story he made so
often mention of Emperors, Socrates lib. 5. in praemio.
says, Propterea quod ex illo tempore quo Constantini esse coeperunt, negotia
Ecclesiae ex eorum nutu pendere visa sunt, atque adeo maxima concilia de eorum
sententia, and conuocata fuerunt, and adhuc conuocantur, Since Emperors became
(like Constantine) fathers of the Church, the causes of the Church have
depended upon their will: And therefore the greatest Councels have been, and
yet are called by their authority.

The third work is promulgatio legum, the promulgation of Church Laws and
Edicts, commanding or forbidding things, Eusebius de vita Constantini. lib. 2.
cap. 20. cap. 21. cap. 24. cap. 44.
expedient or hurtful for the Churches government: whereof the Church stories
are full. Constantine made many Laws concerning Confessors and Martyrs,
Christians and Heathen. Eusebius mentions two Laws; one that abolished
idolatry, images, sacrifices and diuinations; an other concerning building and
enlarging of Churches at the Emperors charge. Theodosius made a Law against
the Arrians: Theodoret. li. 5. cap. 15.
the manner of it is worth the repeating. Amphilochus Bishop of Iconium had
been a long suter in vain, at last he used this stratageme: he came into
the Court and saluted the Emperor, but would not salute the Emperors son
Arcadius newly created Caesar. Theodosius thinking he had not seen his son,
showed him his son and bid him salute and kiss him. Amphilochus answered, It
is enough to honor the father. Theodosius interpreting it as a contempt of his
son, grew very angry, whereupon Amphilochus discovering himself said, Art
thou offended O Emperor that I reverence not thy son, and think thou that
God is not offended with the Arrians the blasphemers of his son? The Emperor
overcome with these words, Legemscribit, made a Law presently forbidding the
assemblies of the Arrians. I should tire my self and your patience, if I
should enter particulars: only I must refer you to the titles of the Civil
law, De summa Trinitate, and fide Catholica: de sacrosanctis Ecclesijs: de
Episcopis and clericis, de haereticis, etc. which were promulgated by
Justinian, Theodosius, Valentinian, Honorius, Arcadius, and other godly and
Religious Emperors. (...) Franciae per Ansegisum (...).
There is a Collection of Ecclesiastical Laws made by Charles the Emperor,
Lodouicke and Lotharius: gathered by Ansegisus Anno 827. Of Charles his Laws
there be 168. And of the Laws of Jews and Lotharius 157. In the Preface, the
Emperor Charles professes, Quapropter and nostros missos ad vos direximus,
qui ex nostri nominis Authoritate vna vobiscum corrigerent, quae corrigenda
essent: Therefore we have directed our Commissioners unto you, (Here you see
Kings high Commissioners and visitors are ancient) that shall join with you to
redress those things which need reformation, according to our Canonical
Constitutions, in our name, and by virtue of our Authority.

And these Laws were of that force in those days, that when Mauritius the
Emperor that made a Law, that Nemo publicis administrationibus implicatus ad
Ecclesiasticum officium perueniret, Gregorius Epist. lib. 1. cap. 100. and 101.
That no man entangled with public charge, should be advanced to an
Ecclesiastical office, S. Gregory approved this part of the Law, because many
under this color did mutare seculum, not relinquere. And further, the Law
forbade any Soldier to enter a Monastery till his warrefare was expired. S.
Gregory though he wished not any to fly the wars, or not pay their debts,
under the name of a Cloister; yet because he saw it hindered many from the
warrefare and service of God, wrote an humble Letter to Mauritius, Ego dignus
pietatis vestrae famulus.
and another to Theodorus the Emperors Physician, to entreat the reuocation of
this Law invented by Julian, in a very submisse Style: Ego quidem iussioni
vestrae subiectus, I your servant and subject to your command, have sent this
Law to many parts of the world, and now I write my opinion to your Majesty:
Vtrobique ergo quod debui exolui, qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and
pro Deo quod sensi, non tacui: In both I have done my duty; I have performed
my obedience to the Emperor, and I have not concealed what I thought fit for
Gods cause. August. Epist. 166.
And S. August. says of this power of Laws, Hoc iubent Imperatores quod and
Christus iubet, quia cum bonum iubent, nemo iubet nisi per eos Christus: When
Emperors command that which is good, it is Christ and no man else that
commands by them.

The fourth work of this Supremacy, is receiving of Appeals, and giving
Decisions, Restitutions, and Deprivations, and other punishments of Bishops for
causes Ecclesiastical. Wherein although Constantine at the first in modesty,
and a desire to suppress the calumniations of Bishops, and being not yet so
fully instructed in Christian faith, took the papers and Articles of the
Bishops and burnt them in the Nicene Council; yet being better instructed, and
seeing the necessity of his Authority in these causes, Vide Optatum lib. 1.
and Aug. Epist. 162. and 166.
he judged Cecilianus cause himself. Donatus procured Cecilianus to be
condemned by 70. African Bishops for certain crimes objected against him: As
also that he was ordered by one Foelix, who as it was pretended had burnt the
Scriptures. And in a tumult they set up another Bishop of Carthage against him:
then they appealed to Constantine, and desired him to assign them Judges:
Constantine by his Commission extant in Eusebius, Eusebius li. 10. cap. 5.
delegated and authorized Meltiades Bishop of Rome, Marcus a Clergy man of
Rome, yet no Bishop, and Rheticius, Maternus, and Marinus three French Bishops,
to hear the cause, who gave sentence for Cecilianus. Upon a second Appeal,
Eusebius li. 10. cap. 5.
Constantine made a second Delegacy to Chrestus bishop of Syracuse, and
certain Bishops of France met at Arle, who likewise gave sentence with
Cecilianus. Upon the third Appeal, Constantine appointed Elianus a Civil
Magistrate to examine Foelix, who acquitted Foelix also. Then the Emperor
called both parts before him, and gave final sentence for Cecilianus, and made
a severe Law against the Donatists; by which Law many Donatists were brought
home to the Catholic Church. In which passage, I pray you observe: 1. That
Meltiades not as supreme Judge of all Controversies, but as delegated by
Constantine, did judge of Cecilianus cause: August. Epist. 162.
And S. Augustine defends him from usurpation upon the 70. African Bishops,
because the Emperor so appointed it. Next the Bishops of France did judge the
same cause after Meltiades without any wrong to the Sea of Rome: no man in that
age found fault with it. And thirdly it is apparent that Constantine was
superior to Meltiades, and both made him his Delegat, and judge of his
sentence and judgment, August. contrae Parm. lib. 1. cap. 6.
which S. Augustine calls vltimum iudicium, the last judgment, vltra quod
causa pertransire non potest, and that the cause had gone as far as it could
go. And whereas the Donatists pleaded that a Bishop should not be purged
iudicio Proconsulari, by the Proconsuls judgment; S. Augustine answers,
August. Epist. 166.
The Bishops sought it not, but the Emperor enjoined it; Ad cuius curam, de
qua rationem Deo redditurus erat, res illa maxim pertinebat, To whose charge,
of which he must make account to God, this matter did chiefly appertain.
Extat haec collatio apud. Optum.
There was a conference held by the appointment of the Emperor Honorius: the
Judge designed by the Emperor was one Marcellinus, (to whom Augustine after
writ his Books De Ciuitate Dei,) at which S. Augustine was present, and
others, who disputed against Petilianus, Emeritus, and Gaudentius, and other
Donatists: which was gathered by Marcellus: And S. Augustine has written the
several days Collations. Marcellinus gave sentence against the Donatists, and
it was confirmed by the Emperor Honorius, all which is extant. Theodosius
called a Council of all sorts, Socrates lib. 5. ^ap. 10.
Nactarius and Agilius made the confession of Consubstantialitie: Demophilus
delivered up the Arrian faith: Eunomius the Eunomian faith: Eleusius the
Macedonian faith. Tum solus and separatus precatur Deum, says Socrates, Then
the Emperor alone, separate from all company made his prayers to GOD, to direct
him in the Truth, and then he read the several faiths: and condemned and rent
all the rest, that rent and divided the Trinity, and commended and approved
that faith of the Consubstantialitie of the Father and of the Son. I must
here omit infinite other matters of facts and punishments, and many objections,
and conclude with a question that Theodosius proposed to these several sorts
assembled, which he did by the counsel of Sisinius; What account (says
Theodosius) make you of the Doctors and Histories of the Church, Socrat. lib.
5. cap. 10.
that are impartial, and lived before these questions were moved? If it be
answered, as then it was, Habemus tanquam magistros, We esteem them as our
fathers and masters; the cause is clear, they give witness on our side; If
they reject them, it is a matter of great deliberation, whether a man would be
of such a Church, whereof never any man was before themselves. In which case it
seems more then reasonable, That in a reformation, we should conform our
selves, Ad regulam Antiquorum, to the rule of the Ancient, Scriptures, Apostles
and fathers, Chrysostom, Nazianzen, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine,
Gregory and the like, rather then after the New cut of those, who have not
above the life of a man on their backs, sixty or seventy years. And surely
the rule of Charity is, That since all the Question is of the Churches
Regiment, not so much who should feed and rule the Church, for so must both
Prince and Priest, but who should rule and govern most; we should every one
lay down all contentious humors, and join hand and heart to feed and govern
Gods inheritance, and strive rather in deeds then words, who shall most
carefully do that duty which God has laid upon him necessitate praecepti by
this triple necessity of his precept. That so we may be all partakers of the
end, peace and tranquillity, and religion in this life, and life everlasting
in the kingdom of heaven, which God grant, Amen.


