A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

OR, THE WHOLE BODY AND substance of Divinity.

By T. C.

Thomas Orwin printer's device BY WISDOM PEACE

BY PEACE PLENTY



AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for THOMAS MAN.

1616.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
MAny have bin sorry (good Reader) to see some writings of this learned and
godly Author come forth in public, since his death, with so many defects and
maimes. To give an instance hereof, there is an exposition of the Epistle to
the Colossians, published under his name; wherein he has had very much wrong
done to him: it being nothing else but a bundle of raw and imperfect notes,
taken by some unlearned hearer, never perused (or so much as seen) by the
Author himself. Wherein there is scant any good coherence of matter to be
found, or any perfect periods and sentences handsomely knit together, or sutably
depending one upon another.

This Treatise of Religion, now reprinted, was the first; whereof of there was
much expectation and desire; as of that which would be of more general use to
all sorts of people: in which respect the Author himself was known to make more
account of it, and would (if God had prolonged his days to have perfected the
same according to his own wishes) have given fuller satisfaction to his
judicious and impartial Reader. His purpose was, to set down in most plain
and familiar manner, all the necessary points of positive Divinity, whereunto
God (in a gracious measure) has enabled him; as may appear even by the first
impression, though it were published with many wants and imperfections.

What pains and faithfulness has been used in this second edition, for the
supply of defects, and amendment of the faults of the former, will appear to
them that shall take time and pains to compare them together.

His help was principally used herein, who was well acquainted with the Author
and his purpose; and who has done no more herein in effect, then what he had
help in, either from the Authors own little Catechism, or from some
directions in the best and last copy that he left behind him, or which the
necessity of the method which he propounded did require.

The first edition (as appears) wanted a beginning; by means whereof the
whole work was as the trunk of a body without the head; the reason whereof
was the transposing of the doctrine of the Scripture, (wherewith he first began
the Treatise) into a more fit place; this as near as can be, according to the
Authors mind and special direction, is supplied in the first Chapter: the like
transposition of other particulars, not well understood by his servant that
copied forth the book, afterward was a cause of the multitude of other
errors also, which we hope are now sufficiently amended, all particulars
being brought to their proper places. Only there is in the exposition of the
last petition of the Lords Prayer, a large discourse of Gods government
concerning sin; which were to be wished had been brought back to the tenth
Chapter, which is the first and fittest place for that argument to be handled
in: and also whether by the Printers negligence, or his that writ the copy,
there is one whole question and answer which belongs to the latter end of the
seventeenth Chapter, placed out of order, and set in the beginning of the
eighteenth Chapter. There are also (to my grief) many other verbal faults
which the Printer and the transcriber must divide between them, which though
they may be easily discerned by the judicious and advised Reader, yet may make
others to stumble; and therefore I earnestly pray thee good Reader (which thou
easily may do) that thou would amend them in the first place, according
to the direction following.

Further thou art to be entreated that hereafter thou esteem nothing to be
his, but what shall be published or approved by them, to whom by his last will
and Testament he committed the perusal and examination of his writings.
Farewell.

W. B.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS.
Chapter 1. Of Christian Religion, and the parts thereof. page 1. 2. Of the Essence
of God. 3. 3. Of the Attributes and properties of God. 6. 4. Of the Trinity.
15. 5. Of the kingdom of God, especially his Decree. 18. 6. Of the execution
of Gods Decree; where of the creation in general, and special. 22. 7. Of the
creation of man. 31. 8. Of Gods government in general. 38. 9. Of his special
government, and of the fall of man. 42. 10. Of Original and actual sin, and
the guilt thereof. 63. 11. Of the punishment of sin. 70. 12. Of the word of
God. 73. 13. Of the parts of Gods word, and of the Covenant of Works in
general. 80. 14. Of the Covenant of works in special. 85. 15. Of the first
Commandment. 91. 16. Of the second Commandment. 95. 17. Of the third
Commandment. 103. 18. Of the fourth Commandment. 107. 19. Of the second table
in general. 120. 20. Of the fifth Commandment. 122. 21. Of the sixth
Commandment. 133. 22. Of the seventh Commandment. 140. 23. Of the eighth
Commandment. 147. 24. Of the ninth Commandment. 153. 25. Of the tenth
Commandment. 157. 26. Of the sum of the Law. 162. 27. Of the Covenant of
grace. 166. 28. Of Christ's person. 169. 29. Of the office of Christ. 174. 30.
Of his Prophetical office. 179. 31. Of his Priestly office. 182. 32. Of his
Kingly office. 187. 33. Of the excellency of his Kingly office in special.
192. 34. Of the parts of Christ's Kingdom. 200. 35. Of the special working of
Gods spirit in the Church by the word. 205. 36. Of the Sacraments in general.
211. 37. Of Baptism. 218. 38. Of the Lords Supper. 225. 39. Of Ecclesiastical
discipline. 233. 40. Of Prayer or Invocation. 241. 41. Of fasting. 247. 42. Of
feasting. 251. 43. Of the rule of Prayer, and of the Lords prayer in general.
255. 44. Of the first Petition. 261. 45. Of the second Petition. 263. 46. Of
the third Petition. 267. 47. Of the fourth Petition. 270. 48. Of the fifth
Petition. 274. 49. Of the last Petition. 280. 50. Of thanksgiving, the second
part of the second prayer. 289. 51. Of Vows. 292. 52. Of the Church Militant.
296. 53. Of the day of Judgment in general. 308. 54. Of the day of Judgment
in special, and of Antichrist. 311. 55. Of the nearer signs before the day of
Judgment. 327. 56. Of the Judgment it self. 341. Of the sentence of the
Judge. 349.
57. Of the execution of Gods Judgment. 354.


A TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
CHAP. 1.
Of Christian Religion in general, and the parts thereof.

Christian Religion treats of the Nature of God, and therein of the Unity of
the Godhead; Where Of his Essence, Chap. 2. Of his Attributes, Chap. 3.
Trinity of Persons, Chap. 4.
Kingdom of God, Chap. 5.

IOH. Chap. 17. verse. 1. 2. 3. 1. These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes
to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy
Son also may glorify thee.

2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him.

3. And this is life eternal, that they might know: thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.


Q. WHat principal matter do you learn out of this Scripture?

Answ. I learn, what is the chiefest, and most necessary knowledge.

Q. What knowledge is that?

A. The Christian Religion, here called the Knowledge of God, and in the
Schools commonly called Theology, or Divinity.

Q. What is the Christian Religion?

A. A holy doctrine concerning God, revealed and taught by Christ, showing the
principal means to glorify God, and thereby to come to life everlasting, and
true Blessedness.

Q. What are the parts of this doctrine concerning God?

A. They are two: the first treats of the Nature of God, the other of his
Kingdom.

Q. What is the Nature of God?

A. An absoluteness of perfection, infinitely excelling all other things.
Consisting in unity of Essence, and Trinity of Persons.

Q. Is there then but one God?

A. No verily, but one only true God. As sufficiently Exodus 20. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 4.
Psalm. 18. 32. 1. Cor. 8. 4. 5.
appears by the third verse of this Scripture. This is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God. And whereas this title is given to more
then to one, it is either abusiuely, to Idols or false gods, which are no gods;
or tropically, and by a grace of speech, to Magistrates, who are the special
deputies, and Lief-tenants of God here upon earth.

Q. What are we more specially to consider concerning the Nature of this one
only true God?

A. His Essence, and Attributes.

CHAP. 2.
Of the Essence of God.

Herein consider his Name Primitive, (...) I AM.
Deriuatiue, IAH. JEHOVAH.

Special Essence expressed by that name.

EXODUS Chap. 3. verse. 13. 14. 15. 13. And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I
come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your
fathers has sent me unto you: and they shall say to me, what is his Name? what
shall I say unto them?

14. And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM, and he said, thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.

15. And God said more over unto Moses. Thus shall thou say unto the children
of Israel. The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever, and this
is my memorial unto all generations.


Q. What learn you out of this Scripture principally?

A. I learn in the first place two general duties, which are to be observed
in the question of Moses, verse. 13. One, that we be careful to be instructed
in all things concerning our calling, thereby to be able to answer al doubts
that may be moved: the other, that being desirous to learn any thing
concerning God, we enquire it of God himself: And because now he uses not to
speak, but in the Scriptures, 2. Cor. 5. 20. Hos. 12. 10.
and by his Ministers, interpretors of the Scriptures; we must have our
recourse unto them.

Q. What learn you else?

A. I learn more specially, what the proper name of God is.

Q. What is that?

A. I am that I am, or (as the Hebrew sounds) I will be that I will be;
saving that the Hebrews use the future time for the present, as that which
notes a continuance.

Q. What is meant by these words?

A. Hereby is set forth the manner of the Being and Essence of God, far
otherwise then is usual in the proper names of men; which declare either
nothing, or very little of their nature and being.

Q. Is there nothing of God to be known, besides that which is signified by
this Name?

A. Nothing, as touching the special manner of his Being, falling under our
weak and shallow capacity.

Q. What Names of God in the Scripture are derived from these words?

A. Two: the name Jehovah, and the name Iah; both which being drawn from the
description of God, do set forth the manner of his Essence and Being.

Q. Can you from hence define, what God is?

A. He must have the Art and Logic of God himself, that can give a perfect
definition of God; but he may in such sort be described, as he may be
discerned from all false gods, and all creatures whatsoever.

Q. What is that description?

A. God is a Spirit, which has his being of himself.

Q. What mean you by that addition, of himself?

A. It has a secret opposition to all creatures, which has a being, but not
of themselves: whereas God alone is he, in whom we live, and move, and Act.
17. 28.
have our being: which proves, that he alone has his Being of himself; and
therefore all other things have no being in comparison: whence the Prophet
says, that all nations before him are nothing, Esa. 40. 17.
yea, to him less then nothing: and if men be nothing (for whom the whole
world was made) how much more are all other creatures in heaven and earth
nothing before him, and to him less then nothing?

Hitherto of the Essence of God, it follows to treat of his Properties and
Attributes.

CHAP. 3.
Of the Attributes and Properties of God.

The Properties or Attributes of God, are either First, and they Principal, as
Simpleness. Infiniteness, in Quantity, as Immensity, etc. Quality, as Time.

Secondarie, Life. Knowledge. Will. Power. Goodness. Justice. Graciousnesse.
Love. Mercy. Holiness.

Arising from the first Perfection. Happiness.


PSALM. 145. 1. I will extol thee, my God, O King: and I will bless thy Name
for ever and ever. 2. Every day will I bless thee: and I will praise thy Name
for ever and ever. 3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: and his
greatness is unsearchable. 4. One generation shall praise thy works to
another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. 5. I will speak of the glorious
honor of thy majesty: and of thy wondrous works. 6. And men shall speak of
the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy greatness. 7. They
shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness: and shall sing of thy
righteousness. 8. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: slow to anger,
and of great mercy. 9. The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over
all his works. 10. All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord: and thy Saints
shall bless thee. 11. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom: and
talk of thy power. 12. To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts:
and the glorious Majesty of his kingdom. 13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom: and thy dominion endures throughout all generations. 14. The Lord
vpholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be bowed down. 15. The
eyes of all wait upon thee: and thou give them their meat in due season.
16, Thou openest thine hand: and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works. 18. The
Lord is nigh unto all them, that call upon him: to all that call upon him in
truth. 19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will
hear their cry, and will save them. 20. The Lord preserves all them that love
him: but all the wicked will he destroy. 21. My mouth shall speak the praise
of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.

Q. What does the Prophet here mean by thy Name?

A. In that the name of God is distinguished from God himself in this verse,
the Prophet thereby sets forth the things, whereby God does manifest
himself to others, amongst which, the chief and principal are his Attributes.

Q. What are the Attributes of God?

A. They are essential faculties of God, according to the diverse manner of his
working, which are uncommunicable with the creatures, notwithstanding that
there are some shadows and glimpses of them in Men and Angels.

Q. How may they be considered?

A. Either in themselves as they are essential; or in their works or effects,
which are all perfect.

Q. How many sorts of Attributes are there?

A. Two, either first, or such as arise from the first: Again the first, are
either principal or secondarie.

Q. What are the principal Attributes in God?

A. Simpleness and Infiniteness, which are not Ioh. 4. 24.
only incommunicable themselves, but which make all the other Attributes of God
incommunicable.

Q. What is Simpleness or singleness in God?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, Exodus 33. 19. 20.
that every thing that is in God, is God himself. And therefore he is
uncompounded, without parts, invisible, impassible, all essence: whence it is,
that he is not only called holy, but holiness; not only just, but justice,
etc.

Q. What learn you thereby?

A. That he is in no sort mutable, or changeable, Jam. 1. 17.
but in all things ever one and the same, without any alterarion, or shadow of
change.

Q. Is not God in diverse places of Scripture said to repent?

A. Yea. But this is spoken of God only tropically Genesis 6. 6.
and improperly, because upon the change and alteration that is in men, he
uses often to change his work, and therein seems to do as man does, when he
repents; whereas (in truth) he therein never does any thing, but what he has
determined so to do from all eternity.

Q. What do you say of his Infiniteness?

A. It is either in quantity and greatness, or in time and eternity.

Q. What is his Infinitenes in quantity and greatness?

A. It is an Attribute in God, whereby is noted, Psalm. 139. 7. Job 11. 7. Esaias
66. 1. 1. King. 8. 27. Esaias 40. 12.
that he contains al things, and is contained of nothing that either is or
may be imagined. And therefore that he is every where, and in all places
present; it being not possible that he, that is infinite in greatness, should
be circumscribed or bound within the limits of any finite place.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That seeing God is every where present, that therefore in the whole course
of our lives we should walk as in his presence, and fear to do any thing
that may offend him: for if it be a sign of contempt unto man to do that
before his face, that you know will displease him; it must needs argue a high
contempt of the great Majesty of God, to dare to do any thing that he is
displeased withal; especially when we can do nothing in secret that can be
hidden from him: yea, whatsoever we do, it is done in his face and presence,
he looking upon us.

Q. What is his Infiniteness in time or eternity?

A. It is an Attribute in God, whereby is noted, Revel. 1. 8. 11. Esaias 44. 6.
Psalm. 90. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 17.
that he is the first and the last, without beginning, and without end.

Q. What learn you hereby?

A. We are strengthened hereby in the truth, not only of the immortality of
our souls, but also of the immortality of our bodies after the resurrection;
considering that he being everlasting, can give continual Being to such of his
creatures as he pleases.

Q. What are the other Attributes of God, which you called secondarie?

A. They are chiefly ten; Life, Knowledge, Will, Power, Goodness, Justice,
Graciousnes, Love, Mercy, Holiness.

Q. What is the Life of God?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, Psalm. 36. 9. Ioh. 5. 26.
that he lives of himself. Whence, 1. Tim. 6. 16. it is said, that he only
has immortality, and therefore cannot die.

Q. What learn you hence?

A. That the lives and deaths of all other things depend upon his good
pleasure.

Q. What is the Knowledge of God?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, that he perfectly knows
himself; and of, and by himself, all things which are, and which are not.

Q. In what manner does God know all things?

A. Not successively, or by discourse, collecting one thing from another, but
in one simple and eternal act, knowing and comprehending all things; and
therefore neither foreknowledge, nor remembrance are properly in God, all
things both past and to come, being present before him.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That he is infinite in wisdom and understanding; and therefore whatsoever
he does, must needs be done most wisely, and no vain act can proceed from
him.

Q. Is not the knowledge or foreknowledge of God the cause, why all other
things are?

A. No: but his will.

Q. What is the Will of God?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, Psalm. 139. 11. Heb. 4. 13.
John 21. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 16.
that of himself most freely he approves, or disapproueth whatsoever he
knows.

Q. What learn you hereby?

A. First, that nothing comes to pass by mere hap or chance, but as God in
his eternal knowledge and just will, has decreed before should come to pass.

Secondly, that whatsoever comes to pass, though we know no other causes
thereof, yet we are to acknowledge the same to be always from God; and though
it be never so contrary to our wills, yet we should bear it patiently, and
therein submit our wills to the good will and pleasure of God.

Q. What is the Power of God?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, Job. 42. 2. Luke 1. 37.
that he is able to do whatsoever is honorable for him to do: whereby are
excluded contradictions, and whatsoever things else are dishonorable, as being
not things of power, but of weakness.

Q. What instructions do you learn from the power of God?

A. First, that we should not despair of the things that God does promise,
either in respect of our own weakness, or in respect of the apparent weakness
of the things, that God has sanctified for our good.

Secondly, it serves both for a spur to do well, considering that God is
able to save: and a bridle to restrain from evil, seeing he has power to
destroy.

Q. What is Gods Goodness?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, Mark. 10. 18. Iam. 1. 17.
that he is infinitely good, in, and of himself; and consequently that he is
the Chiefest Good.

Q. Is nothing then good but God?

A. Nothing of it self; howbeit all creatures have their being, and many good
things, (which are not of themselves), but from God.

Q. What learn you hereby?

A. That he is the fountain from which all goodness does stream; and that
whatsoever he does is good, yea perfectly good, whatsoever men judge of it:
yea, that by this goodness of his he uses all things well: and seeing God is
good to us, we ought to be good one toward another.

Q. What is his Justice?

A. It is an Attribute, whereby is noted, that God Psalm. 119. 137. and 145. 17.
is just in himself, and of himself, and exercises justice toward all
creatures.

Q. What is the rule of this Justice?

A. His will: for because he wills it, therefore Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 115. 3.
Matthew. 20. 15.
it is just, not because it is just, therefore he wills it: and these things
may be applied to other the properties of God.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. Not to call into question, or to murmr and repine at, or to refuse to do
any thing that he wills, seeing that cannot but be most just and equal,
which proceeds from his will, how hard and unreasonable soever it may seem
to our natural disposition.

Q. What is the Graciousnesse of God?

A. It is an Attribute, whereby he is of himself Exodus 34. 6. Joel 2. 13.
most gracious and amiable.

Q. Is he only Gracious?

A. Only, in and of himself: for whatsoever else is gracious and amiable, it
is so from him.

Q. What learn you from this?

A. That we ought to love and reverence God above all. For seeing gracious and
amiable men do win love and reverence from others, in whose eyes they
appear gracious and amiable: who is able more to win this at our hands then
God, who is the fountain of all graciousnesse and amiablenesse?

Q. What is his Love?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby is noted, that he loves himself above
all, and others for himself.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That we should love him dearly, and all other things for him.

Q. Seeing his Mercy follows of his Love, what is his Mercy?

A. It is an Attribute of God, whereby he is ready Judge. 2. 18. and 10. 16.
merely of himself to help them that be in misery.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. In all our miseries and distresses, to seek unto him, who is infinite in
Mercy and Compassion, and able to help us, and therefore will assuredly do it.

Q. What is his Holiness?

A. It is an Attribute, generally noting the Virtues Exodus 15. 11. Psalm. 145.
17.
of God, as his Truth, Justice, Mercy, etc.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. First, that as every one comes nearer unto him in holiness, so they are
best liked and loved of him; and consequently it should breed a love in our
hearts, of holiness, and hatred of the contrary.

Secondly, that this ought to kill in us all evil thoughts and opinions
concerning God, which rise in our hearts, seeing that in him that is Holiness
it self, there can be no iniquity.

Q. You have showed me the first Attributes of God: now tell me what Attributes
arise from thence?

A. Two: Perfection, and Happiness.

Q. What is Perfection?

A. Perfection is an Attribute of God, whereby whatsoever is in God, is perfect.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That he is to seek his own glory, and not the glory of any, in all that he
wills or wills not, Prou. 16. 4. Romans 11. 36.
does, or leaves undone: whence they are confuted, who think that God is
moved to will or nill things in respect of the creatures: as men, who seeing a
miserable man, are moved to pity; whereas God, of himself, and in himself,
is moved to save It is to be understood of reprobation, not of condemnation.
or reject, to receive some, and to cast away others. Whence also is to be
noted, that all which he does is perfect, howsoever he deal with us.

Q. Hitherto of the Perfection of God: what of his Felicity?

A. It is the Attribute of God, whereby he has all fullness of delight and
contentment in himself, and needs nothing out of himself to make him
blessed and happy.

Q. What learn you hence?

A. To expect and look for happiness, only in our union with him, and
fruition of him, and not in any thing else whatsoever.

CHAP. 4.
Of the Trinity.

The Trinity is the Father. Son. Holy Ghost.

1. IOH. 5. verse. 7. For there are three, that bear witness in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one.
Q. THE Essence and Attributes of God being already spoken of, what remains
to be spoken of touching God?

A. The Trinity of the Persons, subsisting in the unity of the Godhead:
which is a mystery in it self most incomprehensible.

Q. What is a Person?

A. It is a distinct subsistence, having the whole John 11. 22. and 14. 16.
Godhead in it.

Q. How is it distinguished?

A. Into the Father, and of the Father. John 14. 9. Coloss. 2. 3. 9.


Q. What is the Father?

A. He is the first Person in the Trinity, who has John 20. 17.
by communication of his Essence, eternally begotten his only beloved Son, of
himself.

Q. What is of the Father?

A. The Son, and Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Son?

A. The Person begotten by the Father, who is also called the Word. John 1. 1.


Q. Why is the Son and second person called the Word?

A. First, because he is so often spoken of, and promised in the Scriptures,
and is (in a manner) the whole subject of the Scriptures. Secondly, because as
man does make known his will to man by word, so does God make known his will
to man, only in and by his Son.

Q. What is the holy Ghost?

A. The Person proceeding from the Father and the Son.

Q. Why is the third person called the holy Spirit, more then the Father and
the Son, which are Spirits as well as he, and infinitely holy as he?

A. Because he is (as it were) breathed both from the Father and the Son,
that is to say, proceeds from them both.

Q. Why is he called Holy, rather then the Father and the Son?

A. Because he sanctifies, and makes holy the children of God.

Q. Why? does not the Father and the Son sanctify also?

A. Yea verily: but they do it by him mediately, and he from them immediately;
and therefore he has the title of Holy, peculiarly attributed unto him;
otherwise the Father and the Son are equally holy with him, and not one more
holy then another.

Q. Not to stand upon the old Testament: what testimonies are there for the
proof of the Godhead of these three persons, out of the New, jointly:

A. Where the Father from heaven witnesses of Matthew. 28. 19.
the Son, the holy Ghost appearing in the likeness of a Dove. And in that we
are to be baptized into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Also where we are required to pray to the Father to send the holy Ghost: and
this testimony we have in hand.

Q. Having showed the proofs of their Godhead jointly; let us also hear the
proofs of every one of them apart. What therefore are the proofs, that the
Father is God?

A. We are Matthew. 6. 6. 9. and 11. 25. 27.
directed to pray to him, and he is said to reveal mysteries, and to Mat. 5.
45.
make his sun to shine on the evil, and on the good. The Apostle says; Romans
1. 7.
Grace and peace from God the Father: and Christ himself says; John 17. 3.
This is life everlasting, to know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

Q. What proofs are there that the Son is God?

A. That he is called Jehovah, and that the essential Esaias 25. 9. Zach. 2. 10.
11. Prou. 8. 22. John 1. 1. Heb. 1. 10.
properties, works and actions of God, are given to him.

Q. How prove you that the holy Ghost is God?

A. For that the Name, Properties, and actions of Act. 3. 4. Genesis 1. 2. Esaias
61. 1.
God are given to him also, as to the Father and the Son.

Q. How are these (being three,) said to be but one?

A. They are one in Being, and Essence: but three Persons in subsistence. Act.
20. 28. 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Mark. 12. 32. 1. Cor. 8. 4. 5. 6.


Q. What learn you from this, that the Apostle says, That they are three?

A. That the word Trinity, although it be not expressly set down in the word,
yet has it a sufficient ground from thence.

Q. What learn you from this, that they are said to be three Witnesses?

A. A Great assurance of the truth of al things, that God speaks, whether
they be promises or threats; seeing all is confirmed by three witnesses,
against whom no exception lies.

Q. What do they witness?

A. That God has given eternal life unto us, and that this life is in that
his Son.

And thus much of the first part of Divinity, which is of the Nature of God. It
follows to speak of his kingdom, which is the second Part.

CHAP. 5.
Of the Kingdom of God, and specially of his Decree.

The Kingdom of God has two parts: his Decree, (whereof Predestination
consisting of Election. Reprobation.
Execution thereof, Chap. 6.

PSALM. 99. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 1. The Lord reigns, let the people tremble: he
sits between the Cherubims, let the earth be moved.

2. The Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all the people.

3. Let them praise thy great and terrible Name: for it is holy.

4. The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do establish equity:
thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.


Q. What learn you from these words, the Lord reigns?

A. That God alone has, and exercises sovereign and absolute empire over
all, and that he admits no fellow-gouernour with him.

Q. What is the Kingdom of God?

A. It is an eternal kingdom, appointed and ruled Esaias 9. 7. Dan. 3. 33. Esaias
40. 13. Romans 11. 34. 35. 36. Ephesians. 1. 11. Esaias 44 24. and 45. 7. 48. 11. Ephesians.
1. 12. 14. Psalm. 97. 5. Prou. 16. 4. Romans 11. 36.
by the counsel of his own will.

Q. Wherewith does he reign and rule?

A. Principally by his own powerful Spirit, which none can resist.

Q. What end does he propound unto himself in his Kingdom?

A. His own glory.

Q. What is that, about which his Kingdom is occupied?

A. All things visible and invisible.

Q. When shall it end?

A. Never: either in this world, or in the world to Psalm. 145. 13.
come.

Q. What manner of Kingdom is it?

A. A righteous Kingdom.

Q. What instruction learn you from this, that God Psalm. 45. 7. and 97. 2.
reigns, as is aforesaid?

A. First, that therefore all Nations, and sorts of men tremble, and stand in
greatest awe of him, for that he alone is able to save and to destroy. For if
men tremble under the regiment and kingly rule of men, how much more ought we
to tremble under the powerful Kingdom of God, who has more power over the
greatest Monarchs, then they have over their basest subjects?

Q. This trembling does it stand only in fear?

A. No: but in Reverence also, that that which we Psalm. 2.
comprehend not in this kingdom with our reason, we reverence and adore.

Q. What learn you thereby further?

A. That we subject our selves to his Kingdom erected amongst us; that we
presume to know nothing concerning the same, but that he teaches us; to will
nothing but what he commands, or allows; to love, hate, fear, and affect
nothing but as he requires.

Q. What other fruits are there of his Kingdom?

A. That he ought to be magnified, because he is great, and fearful, and yet
holy, and holiness it self: verse. 3.

Q. What comfort learn you from this, that God reigns?

A. First, that when we are wronged and oppressed by tyranny of men, we may
have our recourse to the just and righteous Judgment of God, which is the
Ecclesiast. 5. 7. and 3. 16. 17.
righteous Judge of the world: and that it is not in the power of any tyrant to
keep us from him.

Secondly, that although all the world roar and Psalm. 93. 10. 11. and 97. 1.
fret, yet we should not fear, because the Lord is greater, and more powerful
then they all.

Q. What learn you of that, the Prophet says, He is high above all people?

A. That which himself teaches, verse. 5. that we extol him with praises.
Psalm. 145. 12.


Q. What are the parts of his Kingdom?

A. Two: 1. His decree. -- 2. The execution of his decree.
ver. 4.

Q. What is Gods decree?

A. It is an action of his most perfect will, whereby Ephesians. 1. 11.
(from all eternity) he has freely determined of all things that ever have
been, are, or shall be; which makes the thing he decrees perfectly good.

Q. Seeing his Decree is defined by his will, what must we consider therein?

A. We must not subject it to our shallow and base Romans 11. 33. 34.
capacity, to measure it by our reason, considering that the will of God, (from
whence the Decree comes) is unsearchable.

Q. What gather you from that fourth verse?

A. That he has not only decreed the things Act. 27. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25.
26. 27. 31. 32. 34. 44.
themselves, but also their circumstances of place and time: so that they shall
not come to pass in any other place or time then he has ordained: and then,
and there they shall come to pass necessarily.

Q What is the Decree of God in the things he has ordained for his glory?

A. That which is of the good or evil of men, or Angels, which is called
Predestination.

Q. What is Predestination?

A. It is the Decree of God, touching the everlasting state of men and Angels;
especially of men.

Q. What are the parts of Predestination?

A. Two: Election, and Reprobation.

Q. What is Gods Election of them?

A. It is his Predestination of certain men and Angels Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. 1 Thessalonians* 5. 9.
to everlasting life, to the praise of his glorious grace.

Q. What is Reprobation?

A. It is his Predestination of certain men and Angels 2. Pet. 2. 8. Jude 4.
to destruction, to the praise of his glorious justice: Romans 9. 22.

Q. What is the cause why these are chosen, and these refused?

A. The mere will and pleasure of God. Rom 9. 18. -- 21. 22.


CHAP. 6.
Of the Execution of Gods Decree; where, of the Creation in general, and
special.

The Execution of the Decree is, the Creation of things Spiritual, Angels. Men.
Corporal, whole mass, or Chaos. furniture, Bodies Simple. Compound without
sense Earthly. Heavenly.
with sense, Brutish. Reasonable. Man. Chap. 7.




Government, Chap. 8.

GENES. Chap. 1. verse. 1. 2. 3. etc. to the 26. 1. In the beginning God created
the heaven, and the earth.

2. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face
of the deep: and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

3. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

4. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the
darkness.

5. And God called the light, Day; and the darkness he called Night: and the
evening, and the morning were the first day.

6. And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters: and
let it divide the waters from the waters.

7. And God made the firmament; and divided the waters, which were under the
firmament, from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

8. And God called the firmament, Heaven: and the evening and the morning were
the second day.

9. And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto
one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

10. And God called the dry land, Earth; and the gathering together of the
waters called he, Seas: and God saw that it was good.

11. And God said, Let the Earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self,
upon the earth: and it was so.

12. And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his
kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in it self, after his kind:
and God saw that it was good.

13. And the evening and the morning were the third day.

14. And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven, to
divide the day from the night: and let them be for signs, and for seasons,
and for days and years.

15. And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give light
upon the earth: and it was so.

16. And God made two great lights: the greater light to rule the day, and the
lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

17. And God set them in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the
earth:

18. And to rule over the day, and over the night, and to divide the light from
the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

19. And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

20. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature
that has life, and foul that may fly above the earth in the open firmament
of heaven.

21. And God created great whales, and every living creature that moves, which
the waters brought forth abundantly after their kind, and every winged foul
after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

22. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the
waters in the Seas, and let the foul multiply in the earth.

23. And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

24. And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his
kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and
it was so.

25. And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after
their kind, and every thing that creeps upon the earth, after his kind: and
God saw that it was good.


Q. HItherto of the Decree of God. What is the execution of it?

A. It is an Action of God working all things effectually according to his
decree.

Q. What are the parts of the Execution?

A. Two: the Creation of the world: And the Government thereof.

Q. What is Creation?

A. It is the execution of the Decree, of nothing, making all things very good.

Q. Where is this taught?

A. In sundry places of the Scripture, but especially in Genesis, 1. and 2.
chap.

Q. What are the general things considered in all this matter of the Creation?

A. First, the Creator of all these things, which is God the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost.

Secondly, his omnipotency, that he made all by his word, that is, by his
only will, who calls things that Romans 4. 17.
are not, as though they were.

Thirdly, that he made not all at once, and in a moment, but in six days.

Q. Why did he make them in six days, which could have perfected all in a
moment?

A. First, that we might thereby more easily conceive, that the world was not
made confusedly, or by chance, but orderly, and by counsel.

Secondly, that all men from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof,
might have, in God himself, an example of laboring in their vocations, six
days in this life, and resting the seventh.

Q. How many sorts of creatures are there?

A. Two: Spiritual and invisible. Corporal and visible.

Q. What are the things Spiritual and invisible?

A. The Angels, and Souls of men.

Q. Why is not mention made of the Creation of the Angels more expressly,
especially being creatures in glory passing all others?

A. They are not expressly mentioned, because Moses propounds here to set
forth the things that are visible, and corporal. But that they were in one of
the six days created, it is evident enough. Psalm. 103. 20. 22. and 148. 2. 5.
Coloss. 1. 16.


Q. What are the visible and corporal things?

A. Two, first the mass or matter of the world, made (as is probable) the
first night, wherein all things were contained, and mingled one in another. And
secondly, the beautiful frame thereof, which he made the rest of the six days
and nights.

Q. What are the parts of that mass?

A. Heaven and earth (as it were) the center and circumference: for as the
Arch-builders first shadow out (in a plot) the building they intend; and as the
Painters draw certain gross lineaments of that picture, which they will after
set forth, and fill up with orient colors: so the Lord our God (in this
stately building, and cunning painting of the frame of the world) has, before
the most beautiful frame, set out (as it were) a shadow, and a common draught
thereof.

Q. Whereof was that lump or mass created, of which, after, other things were
made?

A. Of nothing] that is to say, when as yet there was not any thing whereof it
might be made, God, by his Almighty power caused it to be; as appears both by
the word of Creation, which Moses uses, signifying, the (...)
making of a thing of nothing: and that he made this in the beginning, that
is, when before there was not any thing but God the Creator, and before which
there was no measure of time, by man or Angels.

Q. It being without form, and void, how was it kept?

A. By the holy Ghost, which ( (...) Genesis 1. 2.
as a bird sitting over her eggs) kept and preserved it.

Q. What were the things that were made of this mass?

A. The beautiful frame and fashion of this world, with the furniture thereof.

Q. What do you consider in the Creatures of the world?

A. Two things: the Elements, which are the most simple substances, by the
uneven mixture whereof all bodies are compounded; and the bodies themselves
that are compounded of them.

Q. What do you generally observe in them all?

A. First, that they are all said to be good; which should stop all the
mouths of those that speak against any of them.

Q. How did he make all things good, when we see there be diverse kinds of
Serpents, and noisome or hurtful beasts?

A. That they are hurtful, it comes not by the nature of their Creation, in
regard whereof they at the first should only have served for the good of man.

Q. What other things do you observe generally?

A. Secondly, that their names are given them. Thirdly, that their uses and
ends are noted.

Q. What is the highest of the Elements?

A. The fire: for when it is said, he set light in heaven A probable opinion.
(which is a quality of the fire) it is to be understood of fire also, which
has that quality.

Q. What note you hereof?

A. The wonderful work of God, not only making 2. Cor. 4. 6.
something of nothing, but bringing light out of darkness, which is contrary.

Q. What is the next Element?

A. The Air, between the clouds and the earth, distinguishing between water
and water: in which, and by means of which, all things that have life do
breathe, and thereby continue in life.

Q. What is the third Element?

A. The waters severed from the mass, called the earth, the seas, the floods,
the springs, the lakes, etc.

Q. What is the fourth Element?

A. The earth, called the dry land, which remains, al other being separated
of God to their proper places.

Hitherto of the simple bodies, called the four Elements: now follows to
speak of the mixed and compounded bodies, made of the four Elements, unequally
mingled together.

Q. What is general in the Creation of the compound and earthly bodies?

A. First, that provision is made for the inhabitants of the earth, before they
be made, as grass for the beasts, and light for all living and moving
creatures; and all for man.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. Not to be carking for the things of this life; Mat. 6. 26. Luke 12. 24.
nor to be distracted with the cares thereof, seeing God provided for the
necessity and comfort of the beasts, before he brought them into the world;
and therefore will much more have care of them (especially of man) seeing now
they are.

Q. What is general in all the earthly Creatures?

A. That God proceeds from the things yt be less perfect, to those that are
perfecter, until he come to ye perfectest; as from the trees, corn, herbs,
etc. which have but one life, that is, whereby they nourish and grow; unto the
beasts, which have both an increasing, and feeling, or sensitive life, as
fishes, fowls, beasts, etc. and from them to man, which has (besides both
them) a reasonable soul.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That we should therein follow the example of the Lord, to go from good to
better, until we come to be perfect.

Q. What else is general?

A. That they have power and virtue given them, to bring forth the like unto
themselves for the continuance of their kind, which is generally given to all
those that are expressed in the creation here. And this blessing of
multiplication is principal, in the things that have the life of sense, beside
the life of increase. And therefore the Lord is brought in, speaking to them in
the second person, which he did not to the Plants. Genesis 1. 2^.


Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That the chief and special cause of the continuance of every kind of
creatures, to the worlds end, Heb. 1. 3.
is this will and word of God: without which, they, or sundry of them, would
have perished ere this, by so many means as are to consume them.

Q. What is the first Creation of the compound bodies?

A. God (having caused the waters to retire into their vessels the third night)
in the third day, which followed that night, clad the earth with grass, corn,
and trees, for the use of man, and beast, but chiefly of man.

Q. Seeing that the growth of these is from the influence of the heavenly
bodies, how comes it to pass, that he first makes the grass, corn, and
trees, before he made the heavenly bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars?

A. To correct an error in us, who use so to tie the the increase of these, to
the influence of the heavenly bodies, that we do (after a sort) even worship
them, therein forgetting the Lord, who hereby shows, that all hangs upon
him, and not on them: for as much as he made them, when the heavenly bodies
were not.

Q. What else?

A. That the fruitfulness of the earth stands, not so much in the labor of
the Husbandman, as in the power which God has given to the earth to bring
forth fruit.

Q. What was made the fourth day?

A. The Lights: all which, although they be great in themselves, to the end
they might give light to the dark earth, that is far removed from them; yet
are they distinguished into great ones, as the Sun, and Moon; and small, as
the Stars, all which are (as it were) certain vessels, whereinto the Lord did
gather the light, which before was scattered in the whole body of the heavens.

Q. Why does Moses call the Sun and Moon the greatest lights?

A. First, because they are greatest in their use, giving us more light then
all the Stars besides, and exercising more virtue upon these terrestrial
bodies. Secondly, for that they seem so to us: it being the purpose of the
holy Ghost, by Moses, to apply himself to the capacity of the unlearned.

Q. What is the use of them?

A. First, to distinguish the times, as Spring, Summer, Genesis 1. 14. -- 18. and
9. 1. Psalm. 136. 8. 9.
Autumn, and Winter, from whence their work and natural effect upon the
earthly creatures is gathered: also to distinguish the night from the day, the
day from the month, the month from the year: last of all, to give light to
the inhabitants of the earth.

Q. Have they not operation also in the extraordinary events of singular
things, and persons, for their good and evil estate?

A. No verily, there is no such use taught of them in Esaias 47. 12. 13. Ierem.
10. 2.
the Scriptures.

Q. What was the work of the fifth day and night?

A. The creation of the Fishes and Birds.

Q. What were the fishes made of?

A. Of all four Elements, but more (as seems) of the waters, then other
living things.

Q. What were the birds made of?

A. Of all four Elements, yet have more of the Genesis 2. 19.
earth; and therefore that they are so light, and that their delight is in the
air, it is so much the more marvelous.

Q. What is the work of the sixth night and day?

A. In the night thereof (as is probable) he made the beasts of the earth,
both tame and wild, going and creeping.

CHAP. 7.
Of the Creation of Man.

Wherein note Generally, of the image of God, and therein the Parts, Inward.
Outward.
Effect.
More specially the Creation of the Man, his Body. Soul.
Woman, the End of her Creation.
Manner



GENES. Chap. 1. verse. 26. 27. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our Image,
after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the foul of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing, that creeps upon the earth.

27. So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him;
male and female created he them.

GENES. chap. 2. verse. 7. and verse. 18. to the end. 7. And the Lord God formed
man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life; and man became a living soul.

18. And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone: I will
make him an help meet for him.

19. And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and
every foul of the air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call
them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof.

20. And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the foul of the air, and to
every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for
him.

21. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept:
and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in stead thereof.

22. And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and
brought her unto the man.

23. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she
shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

24. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave
unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

25. And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.


Q. What was made the sixth day?

A. Man in both sexes, that is, both man and woman.

Q. Why was he made last of all?

A. First, because he is the end, for whose use unreasonable creatures were
made; and therefore that he might glorify God for all. Secondly, for that he
would have him first provided for, ere he brought him into the world; whereby
we may gather, that if he had such care of man before he was made; much more
will he care for him being created.

Q. What is to be observed in his Creation?

A. That here, in regard of the excellency of the work, God is brought in
(as it were) deliberating Genesis 1. 26.
with himself, the Father with the Son and the holy Ghost, and they with
him: for where the other creatures were made suddenly, man was (as we shall
see) not so, but with some space of time. Hitherto also belongs, that the
holy Ghost stands longer upon his Creation, then upon the rest.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That we should mark so much the more, the wisdom and power of God in
the Creation of him, thereby to imitate God, in using most diligence about
those things which are most excellent.

Q. Wherein does his excellency stand?

A. In the perfection of his nature, endued with excellent gifts, which is
called the Image of God.

Q. Wherein does that Image consist?

A. In that which is inward, and that which is outward.

Q. Wherein stands that part of the Image of God, that is inward?

A. First, in knowledge of all duties, either concerning Coloss. 3. 10.
God, his neighbor, or himself; unto which knowledge may be referred
wisdom, to use knowledge, to discern when, where, and how every thing should
be done; conscience to accuse or excuse, as his doings should be good or evil:
memory to retain; providence to foresee what is good, to do it; what is
evil, to avoid it. Reason to discuss of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
every particular action of a man's own self. Hitherto refer the knowledge of
the natures of the creatures, whereby he was able to name them according to
their nature.

Secondly, in holiness of mind and will: whereof it is that God says, Be ye
holy, as I am holy.

Thirdly, in Justice, or uprightness of desires and affections.

Q. So much of the inward gifts, what is the outward Image of God?

A. That God set such a grace and majesty in the person, especially in the face
of man, as all the creatures could not look upon, without fear and trembling:
as appears, when they all came before man to receive their names. From all
which both inward and outward, rises the dominion that God gave him over all
the creatures, of which dominion, the authority to name them was a sign.

Q. Having heard before of Gods counsel and deliberation touching the making
of man in that excellency, as we have heard; let us now consider of the
execution of that counsel. And therein first of the Creation of the Man, and
then of the woman; therefore I ask you, when was man made?

A. The sixth day, howsoever the story of his creation more at large, is placed
after the Lords rest in the seventh day.

Q. What parts does he consist of?

A. Of two parts: of a body and of a soul.

Q. Whereof was his body made?

A. Of the very dust of the earth: in which respect the work of God in making
him, is set forth by a similitude of the Potter, which of the clay makes his
pots. Romans 9. 21.


Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That seeing it pleased God to make man's body Genesis 18. 27. Ier. 22. 29.
(more principally) of the basest Element, that thereby he would give man to
understand, of what base matter his body was framed, that so he might have
occasion to be lowly, and humble in his own sight, according as the Scripture
it self directs us to this instruction.

Q. What else learn you?

A. The absolute authority that God has over man, Romans 9. 21.
as the Potter has over his pots, and much more.

Q. How was the soul made?

A. His soul was made a spiritual substance, which Genesis 2. 7. Mal. 2. 15.
God breathed into that frame of the earth, to give it a life, and such a life,
as had the excellency before spoken of.

Q. Why is it said, that God breathed into his face the breath of life?

A. Because he made it immediately, not of any of the Elements, as he did all
other creatures: that being a thing free from composition, it might be
immortal, and free from the corruption, decay, and death, that all earthly
creatures are subject unto. And therefore as it had life in it self, when it
was joined to the body, so it retains life, when it is separated from the
body.

Q. Hitherto of the Creation of the Man; now follows the Creation of the
woman: How does God say, It is not good for man to be alone?

A. When he says, It is not good for man that he should be alone, he
means, that it is not convenient and comfortable.

Q. What is meant by these words, as before him, verse. 18.

A. That she should be like unto him, and of the same form for the
perfection of nature, and gifts inward and outward.

Q. What is the end, why she was made?

A. To be a help unto man.

Q. Wherein?

A. In the things of this life, and of the life to come.

Q. How in the things of this life?

A. By continual society, 1. Pet. 3. 7. and for the procreation of children,
Genesis 1. 28.

Q. How for the life to come?

A. She is to be a companion with him in the service of God, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
And a remedy to him against sin; though this latter was not from the
beginning, but since the fall, 1. Cor. 7. 2.

Q. What reason is brought to prove, that God was to make a woman for a help
unto man?

A. Because (as in every other kind) the male had his female to help him: so
it was most convenient for Adam to have a help of his own nature, for the
propagation of mankind.

Q. What learn you from thence, that the Lord would have Adam see and
consider, that in every other kind of creature, there was male, and female: so
raising in him a desire to have a helper also in his kind and nature?

A. To teach us, that ere we enter into marriage, we should have feeling of our
own infirmity, and need of a wife: whereby that benefit may become more
sweet, and we more thankful unto God.

Q. What else?

A. That it is a perverse thing to love any creature so well as mankind;
against those men, that make more of their horses, and hounds, then of their
wives; and against those women, which make more of a monkey, or of a parot, or
of a spaniell, then of their husbands.

Q. What note you of that, that when Adam was asleep, his wife was made?

A. That the Lord is the giver of the wife: And that Prou. 19. 14.
besides our prayers to God for one, and other dutiful means, the care is to
be laid upon the Lord, and upon our parents, which under God, are to direct us
therein.

Q. Why did the Lord make the woman of the man?

A. To note the near conjunction that should be Ephesians. 5. 28. 29. 1. Cor. 11.
8. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 13.
between them; and also the pre-eminence of the man above the woman, as the
Apostle observes hereupon.

Q. Wherefore does God bring the woman?

A. To note, that how fit soever a woman be; yet she should not be received
to wife, until God give her; and when he gives her by the ordinance he has
appointed, that then he should receive her.

Q. What learn you of that, that Adam gave her a name?

A. Her subjection to man.

Q. Whereof depends this, that a man shall leave father and mother, and
cleave to his wife?

A. Of this, that she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and that
God did give her unto man, and he accepted her.

CHAP. 8.
Of Gods Government in general.

Hitherto of the Creation, Chap. 5. 6. the Government follows, which is
Generally in all: 1 Small. Great.
2 Necessary. Casual.
3 Good. Evil.

Special, in Angels and men.

ROMANS chap. 11. verse. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.
Q. THus much of the Creation, being the first part of the execution of Gods
Decree; now follows the Govern meant; for which consider Romans 11. 36. Is then
the government of God, as universal as the Creation?

A. It is so: for it is not with God, in the government of the world, as it is
with him that makes a ship, or builds a house, which when he has made, he
leaves another to govern and inhabit: for God governs whatsoever he has
made.

Q. How may government be defined from this place?

A. It is the execution of Gods eternal Decree of Zach. 4. 10.
all creatures, whereby he governs them, with all that Prou. 15. 3. Ierem. 23.
23.
belongs unto them, directly to their proper ends.

Q. Has God then a hand in governing the smallest matters?

A. Yes, even the small, as well as the great: for not Mat. 10. 29. 30.
one sparrow (whereof two are sold for a farthing) falls without the
providence of our heavenly Father, not so much as a hair of our head: no (it
may be truly said) not the bristle of a swine falls, without the providence
of God.

Q. But is it not a thing unworthy of Gods infinite Majesty, to have a hand in
small matters; as for a King to look to the smallest matters of his household?

A. Nothing at all: no more then it is a disgrace for the Sun, to shine in
the fowlest places.

Q. How is that to be understood then, that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 9. 9.
Has God care for oxen?

A. It is spoken only by way of comparison, having regard to the great care he
has of men: for in respect he commanded, that they should not muzzle the mouth
of the ox that did tread out the corn; by the care he has of oxen, he would
show that his care is much more for men, especially for the Ministers of his
Gospel.

Q. But it seems God has no government in things that come by casualty.

A. Yes verily, even of things most subject to chance: Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19.
5. Prou. 16. 33.
for the lots are cast into the bosom, yet the issue of them, and their
events, hang upon God.

Q. What is the use of this doctrine?

A. First, to breed thankfulness to God in all things, that come unto us
according to our lawful desire, and not to sacrifice to our own nets, or to
stay our minds in the instruments there of, without looking up to him Habak. 1.
16. Romans 11. 36.
by whose special providence and government we obtain our desires: and this
use the Apostle expressly notes, when he says, to him be glory, etc.
Secondly, to cause us to humble our selves under the hand of God, when they
come otherwise to pass then we desired. Thirdly, to work patience in us, as
in diverse the servants of God it has done: as appears in Ely, saying, It is
the Lord, let him do what pleases him. 1. Sam. 3. 18.


Q. But it seems that the inequality, holden in the government of men, should
prove, that all things are not governed by the Lord; for the wicked prosper
most oftentimes, and the godly are in adversity.

A. Notwithstanding this proceeding, yet the Scriptures directly declare God to
be the author hereof, and that for good uses; because, though the godly be
often in adversity, yet God turns it to their greater Romans 8. 28. Psa. 73.
and. 109.
good; and the prosperity of the wicked turns to their ruin, in that it
makes them without excuse, and more iustifies Gods judgments laid upon them.

Q. If God did guide all things, we should have no Serpents, and other noisome
and hurtful things; no war, no sickness.

A. They are instruments and means of the execution of Gods Justice and
vengeance, upon men that offend against him: in which respect the Prophet
says, There is no evil in the City, which the Lord has not Amos 3.
done.

Q. How comes it then to pass (if these be instruments of vengeance for
sin) that they fall upon the good, and rather upon them, then upon the wicked?

A. The most godly, having the remnant of sin that dwells in their mortal
bodies, deserve everlasting condemnation; and therefore in this life are
subject to any of the plagues of God: As for that they are sharplier handled
oftentimes, then the wicked, it is to Romans 5. 3. 4.
make trial of their patience, and to make show of the graces he has
bestowed upon them, which he will have known; and that it may be assuredly
known that there is a judgment of the world to come, wherein every one shall
receive according to his doing. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4. 5.


Q. What is the end, or effect of this general government, in all things?

A. The one is, that we should fear God; far otherwise then the wicked
conclude, which, upon that that it is taught, that all things come to pass by
the providence Ecclesiast. 3. 11. 14.
of God, according to that he has decreed, would conclude, that then a man may
give himself liberty to do any thing, considering that it must needs be
executed, that God has decreed.

The other, that which the Apostle notes in this text, that God therefore in
all things, even in the sins of men, is to be glorified, in regard of the good,
which he draws forth from the evil thereof.

CHAP. 9.
Of the special government of God, concerning Angels and men: where, of the
Fall.

The special government of God, concerns Angels, and Men, but specially Man;
wherein is to be considered, the Fall, where note, 1. Causes External,
Principal, Satan. Isntrumental, Serpent.
Internal, Corporal, Seeing. Touching. Tasting.
Mental, Appetite.

Manner, The woman did first eat. The man, by her persuasion.

2. Consequent concerning Our first Parents principally. Their Posterity, Chap.
10.

Means of his recovery, Chap. 10.

GENES. Chap. 3. 1. Now the serpent was more subtle then any beast of the
field, which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, Yea, has God
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

2. And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden:

3. But of the fruit of the tree, which is in the midst of the garden, God has
said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.

4. And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die.

5. For God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened: and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil.

6. And when the woman saw, that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and
he did eat.

7. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked,
and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.

8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the
cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord God, amongst the trees of the garden.

9. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

10. And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden: and I was afraid, because I
was naked, and I hid my self.

11. And he said, Who told thee, that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the
tree, whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat?

12. And the man said, The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of
the tree, and I did eat.

13. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou have done?
And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14. And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou have done this, thou
art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field: upon thy
belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat, all the days of thy life.

15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman; and between thy seed,
and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

16. Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception. In sorrow thou shall bring forth children: and thy desire shall be
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

17. And unto Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall
not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of
it, all the days of thy life.

18. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee: and thou shall
eat the herb of the field.

19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground: for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall
thou return.

20. And Adam called his wives name Eve, because she was the mother of all
living.

21. Unto Adam also, and to his wife, did the Lord God make coats of skins,
and clothed them.

22. And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know
good and evil. And now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree
of life, and eat and live for ever.

23. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the
ground, from whence he was taken.

24. So he drove out the man: and he placed at the East of the garden of Eden,
Cherubims, and a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life.


Q. Having spoken of the general government of of God, it follows to speak
of the special, which concerns Men and Angels: wherein does it consist?

A. First, in the fall of certain Angels, and of all mankind, from that estate
wherein they were created. Secondly, in the means of man's recovery: the
former of which two points is laid down in the 3. Chapter of Genesis.

Q. What is the sum of that Chapter?

A. The fall of the reasonable creatures, especially of mankind, and the
wretched estate he threw himself, and all his posterity into.

Q. How consider you of the fall of the reasonable creatures?

A. First, in the fall of certain Angels, then of Man.

Q. How is the fall of the Angels considered out of this place?

A. It appears by this place, that it was the Serpent that deceived Eve, but
the Serpent was only an instrument of the devil, (as appears in that he is
called the old Serpent, and also said to have been a murderer from the
beginning) who being an Angel, (as the Scriptures often testify) this place
shows, that the Angels had fallen before.

Q. What do you consider in the fall?

A. The causes of the fall, and the fall it self.

Q. Which be the causes?

A. The cause in Angels, is very briefly, and in general implied, because God
leaves them in their condemnation: but the causes in man are set down more at
large; to the end that in the due and deep consideration of his fall, he might
more clearly see the rich mercy of God, in restoring him again, and be more
effectually stirred up to lay hold upon it.

Q. What then were the causes of the fall of Man?

A. They were either from things from without man, or from man himself.

Q. Which are those, that were from without him?

A. Either principal, as the Devil; or isntrumental, as the Serpent, in, and
by whom the Devil spoke.

Q. What observe you in the principal?

A. First, the cause of his attempt, that was his hatred to mankind, and his
envy of his happy estate; in John 8. 44.
which respect our Savior says, he was a murderer from the beginning.

Q. What gather you from thence?

A. That Satan is most busy to assail them, in Luke 22. 31.
whom the Image of God, in knowledge and holiness, does appear: not laboring
much about those which either lie in ignorance, or have no conscience of
walking according to knowledge; as those that are his already.

Q. What note you secondly?

A. The instrument he uses thereunto, viz. the Serpent, which was wiliest of
all the beasts of the earth.

Q. Why did he use the Serpent, rather then any other?

A. Because it, of all other, was the subtilest, and (by reason of his
subtlety and wiliness) the fittest.

Q. If there were craft and wiliness before the fall; then it seems there
was sin?

A. Craft in beasts is no sin; and the word here (...)
used, signifies a nimblenesse, and slinesse, to turn and wind it self any
way; in which respect also it seems, the Devil chose this beast, that he
might creep into the garden, unseen of Adam, (who was to keep the beasts out
of it) and to remain there, without being espied of him; and creep out
again, when he had done his feate.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That the Devil (to work his mischief) is exceedingly cunning to make his
choice of his instruments, Mattb. 7. 15. 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14. 1. Tim. 2. 14.
according to the kind of evil he will solicit unto.

Q. But we do not see, that he comes any more in the body of Serpents?

A. He may; and in the body of any other beast Ephesians. 6. 12.
which the Lord will permit him to come in; howbeit Revel. 2. 10.
our case in this, is more dangerous then Eues was: Now Satan uses commonly
for his instruments, men like unto us, and familiar with us, which he could
not do before the fall.

Q. What note you thirdly here?

A. The person or subject he assaileth, the woman, Luke 5. 30. Mark. 2. 16.
Matthew. 9. 11. 2. Tim. 3. 6.
which is the weaker vessel: which is his continual practice.

Q. Let us now come to the Devils speech, which is the cause of sin: What is
it?

A. It is this: Is it even so that God has said, ye shall not eat of the
fruit of the garden?

Q, What note you from hence?

A. First, that it is likely there had been some communication before, between
the devil and the woman; and that Satan had asked, why they did not eat of
the forbidden fruit, seeing it was so goodly and pleasant to behold; and that
the woman had answered that they were forbidden, or somewhat to that effect:
whereupon he infers this that Moses sets down.

Q. What learn we from hence for our direction, when we are tempted?

A. By Eues wants, we learn (as we are taught Ephesians. 6. 14. Jude 9. 1. Pet.
5 9. Mat. 4 ^. 10.
elsewhere) that we are to resist Satan, by strong faith; and to use against
him the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God; and to turn our selves
to God, desiring him to command him away, at whose commandment only he will
depart.

Q. What learn you hence?

A. To take heed, lest for want of some one thing Philip. 4. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
which God withholdeth from us, which we gladly would have; we be not
unthankful to the Lord for his great liberality, and enter further into a
mislike of him for that one want, then into the love and liking of him for many
his benefits we enjoy; especially, it being for our good that he withholdeth
it, and it being not good for us, which we desire.

Q. What learn you out of the answer of Eve?

A. That she began to slip at the first: for notwithstanding so far she
answered truly, in that she says, that God had forbidden them to eat of the
fruit of that tree, and tells also the punishment truly that would follow
thereof; yet that she says, they were forbidden to touch it, it is more then
the Lord did make mention of: And seems thereby to insinuate some rigor of
the Lord, forbidding even the touch of the fruit.

Q. Wherein else is she to be blamed?

A. For her manner of expressing the punishment, which was threatened for the
eating of the forbidden fruit; for that where the Lord had most certainly
pronounced, that they should die, if they ate of the fruit; she speaks
doubtfully of it, as if they should not certainly die; saying, lest ye die.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That albeit men are often persuaded they sin, yet they are not so persuaded
of the Justice of God against it, as they ought to be; whereby a door is
opened to sin, which is to spoil God of his Justice: as if he were so all
mercy, as he had forgotten to be just, when he is as well Justice as Mercy;
as infinite in the Exodus 34. 7. Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
one, as in the other: who (notwithstanding the satisfaction made by the death
of Christ) corrects sharply the sins of such as he will save.

Q. What observe you in the reply of the Serpent?

A. First, his craft, in applying himself to the woman, for seeing her to be
in doubt of the punishment, he is bold to draw her on further, and to assure
her she shall not die.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That the Devil proceeds by degrees, and will not at the first move a man
to the grossest: as in Idolatry, he will move us first to be present; after, to
kneel only with the knee, keeping his conscience to himself; Numb. 25. 2.
lastly, to the greatest worship. In Whoredom, first to look, then to dally,
etc. and therefore let us resist 2. Sam. 11. 2. 4.
evil in the beginning.

Q. What else note you out of this reply?

A. That he is a Cauiller, or slanderer, whereof he Or Calumniator, (...).
has his name Devil; and therefore an interpretor of all things to the worst:
and that it is no marvel though he deprave the actions of good men, seeing
he deals so with God; surmising that God has forbidden Job. 1. 9.
to eat of the fruit, lest they should know as much as he; and therefore is
he (not without cause) called the Revel. 12. 10.
Accuser of Gods children.

Q. What more?

A. That knowing, how desirous men are by nature (especially they of best
spirits) of knowledge, he promises unto them hopes of a great increase
thereof. Whereas we ought to remember that which Moses says, that the secrets
of the Lord are to himself: and that Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
the things he has revealed, are to us, and to our children: and that our
ignorance in such things, is the best knowledge. Revel. 2. 24.


Q. Having heard of the outward causes of the Fall: what were the causes that
did rise from our first Parents themselves?

A. They were either outward things of the body, or the inward affections of
the mind moved by them.

Q. What are the outward things of the body?

A. They are the abuse of the tongue, and of the ears, whereof has been
spoken: or of the eyes, and of the taste, which are here mentioned. For in that
it is said, it was delectable to look on, the eyes are made an occasion and
means of this sin; and in that it was said, it was good to eat, the taste
also is made to be an instrument of it, and an inducement to it.

Q. How could Eua tell it was good to eat, which never had tasted it?

A. She might collect so much, by the beautiful color or smell thereof: for if
we be able, in this darkness we are fallen into, to discern commonly by the
sight of the fruit, whether it be good; and especially the Simplists in
Physic, by the color and smell only of the herb, to tell whether it be hot
or cold; how much more were Adam and Eve, who had the perfection of the
knowledge of those things, more then ever Solomon himself?

Q. What learn you from this hurt they received, by these outward instruments
of the body?

A. That which the Apostle warns, that we beware Romans 6. 13.
that we make not the parts of our bodies weapons of iniquity: for if without
a circumspect use of them, they were instruments of evil, before there was any
corruption, or inclination to sin; how much more dangerous will they be now
after the corruption, unless they be well looked unto?

Q. What more particularly learn you out of them?

A. That as the tongue, as it is a singular blessing of God, whereby man
excels all the creatures upon the earth: so the abuse of it is most
dangerous, because it sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is it
Iam. 3 6.
self set on fire of hell.

Q. What of outward senses?

A. That they are (as it were) windows, whereby sin entered into the heart
when there was no sin; and therefore will much more now, the heart being
corrupted.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. First, that we must shut them against all evil and unlawful use of their
objects, and open them to the use of good things, and make a covenant with
them, as Job did with his eyes, by a strong and painful resistance Job 31. 1.
of the evil that comes by the abuse of them; as it Matthew. 5. 29.
were cut them off, and throw them away, as our Savior gives counsel.

Secondly, that as the senses are more noble, (as the hearing and sight, called
the senses of learning); so Psalm. 119. 37. Mark. 4. 24.
there should be a stronger watch set upon them, those being the senses that
Adam and Euah were specially deceived by.

Q. What observe you of that it is said, She saw that it was desirable for
knowledge?

A. That it was her error, which she having begun to sip of by communication
with the Devil, did after drink a full draught of, by beholding of the beauty
of the fruit, and receiving the delicate taste thereof.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. First, that we are apt and cunning by nature, to heap up reasons, true or
false, to persuade us to the following of our own pleasures. Secondly, that
the heart (enclining to error) does draw the senses to an unlawful use of
them: and that the abuse of the senses Mark 7. 22. 23.
does strengthen the heart in error.

Q. What was the effect of all these outward and inward means?

A. The eating of the forbidden fruit, which was the sin that brought the
fall.

Q. What observe you, in that she gave it (also) to Adam to eat?

A. The holy Ghost thereby (by a special word of amplification also) does
aggrauate the sin against her.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. First, the nature of sinners, which is to draw others Prou. 4. ^6.
to the condemnation they themselves are in: as Satan Euah, and Euah her
husband, even those that are nearest them, whose good we should procure.

Secondly, that we should take heed of that, the Apostle 1. Tim. 5. 22.
warns us, namely, not to communicate with other men's sins, as if we had
not enough of our own to answer for: which especially belongs unto those in
Charge.

Thirdly, how dangerous an instrument an evil 1. King. 16. 31. 2 King. 8. 18.
Nehem. 13. 26.
and deceived wife is; which the Lord commands men should beware to make
choice of: and if the man (which is stronger) may be deceived by the woman;
much more the woman, which is the weaker, may be deceived by the man.

Q. What learn you of that Adam eat?

A. First, (that which has been before noted) that the Devil by one of us
tempts more dangerously, then in his own person: so that Satan knew he could
not so easily have deceived Adam by himself, as by Euah. Secondly, for that at
her motion he yielded; it teaches husbands to love their wives no otherwise
Coloss. 3. 18.
then in the Lord, as the wives must do their husbands.

Q. Hitherto of the former part of this chapter, touching the sin of Adam:
Now let us come to the other, of the things that follow the sin.

A. It follows, that their eyes were opened, and that they saw themselves
naked.

Q. Why? were they not naked before; and having the eye sharper, then after the
fall, must they not needs see they were naked?

A. It is true: howbeit their nakedness before the fall was comely, yea more
comely then the comliest apparel we can put on, being clad with the robe of
innocence, from the top of the head, to the sole of the foot: wherefore (by
nakedness) he means a shameful nakedness both of soul and body, as the
Scripture Revel. 3. 17. 18.
speaks otherwhere.

Q. What gather you from thence?

A. That the lothsomnesse of sin is hidden from Prou. 5. 4. and 23. 32.
Matthew. 27. -- 3. -- 5.
our eyes, until it be committed, and then it presents it self fearfully to
our consciences, and appears in it proper colors.

Q. Was that well done, that they sewed fig tree leaves to hide their
nakedness?

A. In that they were ashamed to behold their own nakedness of the body, it
was well: but in so much as they were not moved thereby, to seek a remedy for
their inward nakedness, it was not well.

Q. What gather you from thence?

A. First, that those that do feed their carnal delight, Habak. 2. 15. Genesis
9. 22.
in the beholding either of their own nakedness, or the nakedness of any
other, have lost even that honesty, that the sinful nature of man naturally
retains.

Secondly, that such, as for custom sake have covered their nakedness with
clothes, do notwithstanding Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. -- 12.
with filthy words (as it were) lay themselves naked, are yet more wretched,
and deeplier poisoned with the poison of the unclean spirit, and have drunk
more deeply of his cup.

Q. Seeing our nakedness comes by sin, and is a fruit thereof, it may
seem that little Infants have no sin, because they are not ashamed.

A. So indeed did the Pelagian Heretics reason: but they considered not, that
the want of that feeling is, for the want of the use of reason; and because
they do not discern between being naked, and clothed.

Q. What follows?

A. That at the noise of the Lord in a wind, they fled from the presence of
God, and hid themselves where the trees were most thick.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. First, that the guilt of an evil conscience strikes Job 18. 11. 14. Prou.
15. 15.
horror into a man. And therefore it is said, that terrors terrify him round
about, and cast him down, following him at the heels, and leave him not, till
they have brought him before the terrible King: thereof it is that a good
conscience is so greatly extolled, that it is said to be, not only a feast,
but also a continual feast.

Secondly, that the fruit of sin is fear, which makes a man to fly from
God, as from an enemy. Whereas on the contrary side the Apostle affirms, that
having peace of conscience, we have access and approach Romans 5. 2.
unto God.

Thirdly, their blindness following their sin, whereby they thought that the
shadow or thicknes of trees, Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 1. Sam. 10.
22. 23.
would hide them from the face of God, which could not have hidden them from
the face of a man: whereas it is said of God, If we go up to heaven, he is
there; if down into the deep, he is there also.

Q. What follows?

A. That God asks where he is, which knew well where he was.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. First, that we would never leave running from Esaias 65. 1.
God, until we came to the depth of hell, if God did not seek us, and follow
us to fetch us back again, as the good shepherd the lost sheep. Secondly,
that the means of calling us home, is by the word of his Luke 15. 4.
mouth.

Q. What follows?

A. That Adam being asked, assigns for causes things, which were not the
causes: as namely, the voice of the Lord, his fear, and his nakedness: which
were not; considering, that he had heard the voice of God, and was naked when
he fled not; dissembling that which his heart knew to be the true cause of his
sin.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That it is the property of a man unregenerate, to hide and cloak sin,
and therefore that the more we hide and cloak our sins, when we are dealt
with for them, the more we approve our selves the children Job 31. 33.
of the old man, the cursed Adam.

Q. What follows?

A. The Lord asks how it should come, that he felt his nakedness as a
punishment, and whether he had eaten of the forbidden fruit.

Q. What note you from thence?

A. That before that our sins be known in such 1. Sam. 15. 13. Josh. 7. 20.
2. King. 5. 25. Act. 5. 8.
sort, as the denial of them is in vain, and without color, we will not
confess our sins.

Q. What learn you out of Adams second answer unto God?

A. That the man unregenerate (dealt with for his sins) goes from evil to
worse; for his sin that he Prou. 19. 3.
hid before, now (he cannot hide it any longer) he excuses it, and by
excusing it, accuses the Lord: as those do, who when they hear the doctrine
of Predestination Mat. 25. 24. 25.
and providence, thereupon would make God a party in their sins.

Q. What learn you further?

A. That howsoever Adam alleged it for an excuse, because he did it by
persuasion of another, yet God holds him guilty: yea deals with him as
with the principal, because his gifts were greater then his wives.

Q. What learn you from the answer of Eve, to the Lords question; why she did
so?

A. The same which before, that the unregenerate man does go about to excuse
the sin he cannot deny; for she casts her sin upon the Serpent, where
she said that which was true, but kept back the confession of her
concupiscence, which she ought especially to have confessed, as being that
without which the Serpent could not have hurt her.

Q. How comes it to pass, that the old Serpent, the author of all, is not
called to be examined.

A. Because that the Lord would show no mercy unto him, wherefore he only
pronounces judgment against him.

Q What learn you from thence?

A. That it is a mercy of God, when we have sinned, to be called to account,
and to be examined, whether immediately by God, or mediately by those whom God
has placed over us, as by the father of the household, or by the magistrate,
or by the governor of the Church; and it is a token of Gods fearful judgment,
when we are suffered to rot in our sins, without being Hos. 4. 4.
drawn to question for them.

Q. Hitherto of the examination and conviction of the offenders, now follows
the sentence. What observe you in the sentence against the Serpent?

A. That the first part, contained in the 14. verse, is against the instrument
of the Devil; and that the other part, contained in the 15. verse, is against
the Devil.

Q. What learn you of this proceeding to sentence?

A. That (according to Gods example) after the cause well known, judgment
should not be slacked Judge. 19. 30. Eccles. 8. 11.
by those, which are his vicegerents on earth.

Q. Why does God pronounce sentence against the Serpent, that knew not what it
did?

A. It was for man's sake, and not for the beasts sake.

Q. Why for man's sake?

A. To show his love to mankind, by his displeasure against any thing, that
shall give any help to do hurt unto him. In which respect, he commands that
the ox that kills a man should be slain, and that the Exodus 21. 18.
flesh thereof should not be eaten: Like a kind father that cannot abide the
sight of the knife, that has maimed or killed his child.

A. What manner of curse is this, when there is nothing laid upon the Serpent,
but that which he was appointed to at the beginning, before this service he was
abused unto?

A. It is like that he crept upon his belly before, and ate dust before. But
his meaning is, that he shall creep Esaias 65. 25.
with more pain, and lurk in his hole for fear and eat the dust with less
delight, and more necessity.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. Not to suffer our selves to be instruments of evil to any in the least
sort, if we will escape the curse of God: For if God did punish a poor worm,
which had no reason or will, to choose or refuse sin; how much less will he
spare us which have both?

Q. What is the sentence against the devil?

A. The ordinance of God, that there shall be always enmity between the
Devil and his seed, of the one side; and the woman and her seed on the other
side, together with the effect of this enmity.

Q. What do you understand by the seed of the Devil, seeing there is no
generation of the Devils; for that there is no male or female amongst them,
neither have they bodies to engender?

A. The seed of the Devil are all both wicked men John 8. 44. 1. John 3. 8.
Act. 13. 10.
and Angels, which are corrupt as he is, and carry his image: in which
respect the wicked are called the children of the Devil, and often times the
sons of Beliall.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That the war of mankind with the Devil, is a lawful war proclaimed of
God, which is also perpetual, Iam. 4. 7. 1. Pet. 5 9.
and without all truce: and therefore that here it is, wherein we must show our
choler, our hate, our valor, our strength; not faintly, and in show only, but
in truth: where we being collered with our enemy, leave our fight with him to
fight against our brethren, yea against our own souls: whereas he
continually, and without ceasing, fights with us; and not against Matthew. 12.
24.
his own, as the blasphemous Pharisees said.

Q. Concerning the seed of the woman, the treatise of it belongs to another
place; tell me therefore, what is the sentence against the woman?

A. First, in the pain of conception and bearing. Secondly, in the pain of
bringing forth (wherein is contained the pain of nursing, and bringing them
up). Thirdly, in a desire to her husband. Fourthly, in her subjection to her
husband.

Q. Was she not before desirous and subject unto her husband?

A. Yes: but her desire was not so great through conscience of her infirmity;
nor her subjection was so painful, and the yoke thereof so heavy.

Q. What is the sentence against Adam?

A. First, his sin is put in the sentence, and then the punishment.

Q. What was his sin?

A. One, that he obeyed his wife, whom he should have commanded: then, that
he disobeyed God, whom he ought to have obeyed; the first being proper to him,
the other common to his wife with him.

Q. What was the punishment?

A. A punishment, which although it be more heavy upon Adam, yet it is also
common to the woman: namely, the curse of the earth for his sake, from whence
came barrenness by thistles and thorns, etc. Whereof, first the effect should
be sorrow and grief of mind. Secondly, labor to the sweat of his brows, to
draw necessary food from it, and that as long as he lived. Lastly, the
expulsion out of Paradise, to live with the beasts of the earth, and to eat of
the herb which they did eat of.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That all men, from him that sits in the throne, Psalm. 104. 23. and 128.
2.
to him that draws water, are bound to painful labor, either of the body,
or of the mind, what wealth or patrimony soever is left them.

Q. But it was said, that at what time soever they ate of it, they should
certainly die.

A. And so they were dead in sin, which is more fearful then the death of
the body, as that which is a separation from God: whereby they were already
entered upon death and hell, to which they should have proceeded, until it had
been accomplished both in body and soul in hell, with the devil and his
angels for ever, if the Lord had not looked upon them in the blessed seed.

Q. How does it agree with the goodness, or with the very Justice of God, to
punish one so fearfully for eating of a little fruit?

A. Very well: for the sin was horrible and manifold, being first a doubting
of the truth of God. Secondly, a crediting of the word of Gods enemy and
theirs. Thirdly, a charge against God, that he envied their good estate.
Fourthly, intolerable pride and ambition, in desiring to be equal in
knowledge to God himself. Last of all, (which much aggrauateth the sin) for
that the commandment he brake, was so easy to be kept, as to abstain from
one only fruit, in so great plenty and variety.

Q. What observe you else?

A. I observe further out of this verse, and out of the two next, that in the
midst of Gods anger he remembers Habak. 3. 2.
mercy: for it is a benefit to Adam, that he may live of the sweat of his
brows; To Euah, that she should bring forth, and not be in continual
travel: unto them both, that he taught them wisdom, and gave them liberty
to make fit and comely garments of the skins of beasts.

Q. What learn you from that it is said, that God made them coats?

A. That in every profitable invention for the life of Exodus 35. 31.
men, God is to be acknowledged the author thereof, and to have the honor of
it, and not the wit of man that invented it, as it is the manner of men in such
cases, to sacrifice to their own nets. Habak. 1. 16.


Q. When there were better means of clothing, why did they wear leather?

A. It seems, that thereby they should draw themselves the rather to
repentance and humiliation, by that course clothing.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That howsoever our condition and state of calling afford us better array,
yet we learn even in the best of our clothes, to be humbled by them; as those
which are given us to cover our shame, and carry always the mark and badge
of our sin; especially when these, which were even after the fall, the
goodliest creatures that ever lived, learned that lesson by them.

Q. What follows?

A. A sharp reproof that the Lord gives Adam, verse. 22. further to humble
him; as if he should say, Now Adam do thou not see and feel, how greatly
thou art deceived in thinking to be like God, by eating of the forbidden fruit?

Q. What learn you from it?

A. That by the things we think to be most esteemed, contrary to the will of
God; we are most subject to derision: and that it must not be a plain and
common speech, but a labored speech that must thoroughly humble us for our
sins, and bring us to unfeigned repentance.

Q. Why does God banish him out of Paradise, lest he should eat of the tree
of life, seeing there is no corporal thing able to give life to any that sin
has killed?

A. It is true, that the eating of the fruit of the tree of life would not have
recovered him: but the Lord therefore would have him banished from it, lest he
falling into a vain confidence thereof, should be the more slack to seek for
grace.

Q. Wherefore are the Angels set with a glittering sword to keep them from the
tree of life:

A. To increase their care to seek for remedy by some other means, being
banished from it, without hope of coming so much as to the sign of life.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. The necessary use of keeping obstinate sinners from the Sacraments, and
other holy things in the Church.

CHAP. 10.
Of Original and Actual sin, and the guilt and punishment thereof.

The consequent of their fall in their posterity, is the Guilt of Adams sin
imputed. Effect thereof: Sin, Original. Actual.
The consequent of sin, Guilt. Punishment, in Chap. 11.



ROMANS chap. 5. verse. 12. 13. 14. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned.

13. For until the Law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when
there is no Law.

14. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of
him that was to come.

EZRA chap. 9. verse. 6. 6. And said, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift
up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and
our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.


Q. HItherto of the Fall of our first parents, and the miserable effects
thereof in their own persons: now we are to consider the like fruits and
effects that it had in their posterity: as it is declared, Roman. 5. 12. 13.
14. Ezra 9. 6. Romans 6. 24. Tell me therefore what is the principal scope of
this first place?

A. To show, that the sin of one Adam eating the forbidden fruit, is the
sin of all men.

Q. How is the sin called the sin of one man, when as both Adam and Euah
sinned, which are two; and seeing Euah sinned before Adam?

A. Because all mankind was originally, and more properly (according to the
phrase of the Scripture) in the loins of Adam, then in the loins of Eve:
Besides, by Adams eating, the sin was complete and full.

Q. What ground is there, that all the posterity of Adam should sin in that
one sin, that they never committed?

A. The reason hereof is, because all mankind was in Adams loins, when he
sinned.

Q. This reason seems to be as doubtful, as the question it self.

A. But it may be explained by the example of Abraham, Heb. 7. 9. 10.
in whom Leui is said to have paid tithes to Melchisedeck, which was not borne
some hundred years after: also by the example of Rebecca, who having two
sons in her womb, is said to have two Genesis 25. 23.
Nations.

Q. Is there any proof hereof out of this place?

A. Yea verily: for besides that, it is expressly said, that By one, sin
entered into all, it is further implied by comparison thus: Even as the
righteousness of Christ is reckoned to those that believe in him, although it be
not their own, because they are one with Christ; so the sin of Adam is
reckoned to all his posterity, because they were in him, and of him, and one
with him.

Q. Can you shadow out this unto me by any resemblance of earthly things?

A. We see, that by the act of generation in leprous parents, the parents
leprosy infecteth the children: and the slavish and villainous estate of the
parents is communicated unto all their offspring. And the treason of one man
tainteth his whole posterity, till it please the Prince, out of his compassion,
to pardon it.

Q. Then it appears, that by propagation from our last parents, we are become
partakers of the transgressions of our first parents?

A. Even so: and for the same transgression of our first parents, by the most
righteous judgment of God, we are conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity.
Psalm. 51. 5.


Q. What call you that Inborne sin, wherein every one is conceived?

A. It is called Original sin, which is a sin arising from the former,
whereof all the posterity of Adam are equally guilty; and whereby all the
powers of the soul and body being infected, we are made drudges and slaves of
sin.

Q. Seeing by the Law sin is, and the Law was not before Moses; it seems,
that there is no sin until Moses?

A. When it is said, the Law was not before Moses, it is to be understood of
the written Law in the tables of stone by the finger of God; and other laws
ceremonial and political, written by Moses, at the commandment Romans 2. 15.
of God: for otherwise the law (the ceremonial excepted) was written in the
heart of man, and after the decay thereof (through sin) was taught by those to
whom that belonged, from the fall, unto Moses.

Q. Whom does the Apostle mean, when he notes them that sinned not to the
similitude of Adam?

A. Infants, who are borne in sin, and who sin not by imitation, but by an
inherent corruption of sin.

Q. How is it showed, that babes newborn into the world, sin?

A. In that they are afflicted sundry ways, which they bewray by their bitter
cries: and in that they coming out of the mothers womb, go straight unto the
grave.

Q. What are the fruits of this sin?

A. Actual sin, viz. all thoughts, words and deeds against the Law, and the
righteousness thereof.

Q. Thus much of sin and the kinds thereof; what are the things that
generally follow sin?

A. They are two: guilt, and punishment; both which do most duly wait upon
sin, to enter with it; and cannot by any force or cunning of man, or Angel,
be holden from entering upon the person, that sin has already entered upon.

Q. What is the guilt of sin?

A. It is the merit and desert of sin, whereby we become subject to the
wrath and punishment of God.

Q. Is there any evil in the guilt, before the punishment be executed?

A. Very much: for it works unquietness in the mind; as when a man is bound
in an obligation upon a great forfeiture, the very obligation it self
disquieteth him; especially if he be not able to pay it (as we are not): and
yet more, because where other debts have a day set for payment, we know not
whether the Lord will demand by punishment his debt, this day before the morrow.

Q. What learn you from this?

A. That since men should shun by all means to be in other men's debts or
danger, as also the Apostle exhorts, Owe nothing to any man; and Solomon also
counsels Romans 13. 8. Pro. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
in the matter of suerty-ship; we should more warily take heed, that we
plunge not our selves over head and ears in the Lords debt: for if it be a
terrible thing to be bound to any man in statutes, staple, or merchant, or
recognisance; much more to be bound to God, who will be paid, by one means
or other, to the uttermost farthing.

Q. How else may the hurt and evil of the guilt of sin be set forth unto us?

A. It is compared to a stroke that lights upon the heart or soul of a man,
where the wound is more dangerous, 1. Sam. 24. 4. 5. 6* Prou. 23. 32.
then when it is in the body; and so it is also a sting, or a biting, worse
then of a viper, as that which brings death everlasting.

Q. Have you yet wherewith to set forth the evil of the guilt?

A. It seems when the Lord says to Cain, If thou Genesis 4. 7. Romans 2. 15.
do not well, sin lies at the door, that he compares the guilt of
sin to a dog, which being awaken, is always arring and barking against us:
which is confirmed by the Apostle, who attributes unto it a mouth, Romans 2. 15.
always open to accuse us, and that of no small matters, but of faults
deserving eternal death.

Q. What is the effect of this guilt of conscience?

A. It causes a man to fly, when none pursues; Prou. 28. 1. Leuit. 26. 36.
and to be afraid even at the fall of a leaf.

Q. When a man does not know whether he sin or no, how can he be smitten, or
bitten, or barked at, or fly for fear? and therefore against all this evil,
ignorance seems to be a safe remedy.

A. It is far otherwise: for whether a man know it or no, his guiltremaineth:
as debt is debt, although the person indebted know it not, and it is by so much
more dangerous, as not knowing it; he will never be careful to seek after
the means to discharge it, till the Lords arrest be upon his back, when his
knowledge will do him no good.

Q. But we may see, that many heap sin upon sin, and know also that they
sin, and yet for all that, cease not to make good chere, and make their hearts
merry: in so much as none are more iocund and pleasant then they.

A. Yet the countenance does not always speak Prou. 14. 13. 2. Cor. 5. 12.
truth, but sometimes when in show it is most merry, there are pricks and
stings in the conscience; and though it be oftentimes benumbed, and sometimes
through hypocrisy seared (as it were with an hot iron) 1. Tim. 4. 2.
yet the Lord will find a time to awaken and revive it, by laying all his
sins before his face. Psalm. 50. 21.


Q. When the guilt of our sin is known, what is the remedy of it?

A. First, it were wisdom, not to suffer it to run long on the score; but
to reckon with our selves every night, ere we lie down to sleep, and look
back to to the doings of that day: that in those things that are well done, we
may be thankful, and comfort our own hearts; and in that which has passed
otherwise from us, we may call for mercy, that so our sleep may be the
sweeter. For if (as Solomon advises us) in the case of Prou. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6.
debt by suertyship, it be our wisdom to humble our selves to our Creditors;
and not to take rest, til we have freed our selves from their danger: much more
ought we in this case to be wise, to have to humble ourselves unto God,
especially seeing nothing else but the blood of Christ, can satisfy the
Justice of God for sin.

Q. Is the guilt of sin in all men alike?

A. Of Original sin it is, but not of Actual; for Ezra. 9. 6.
as Actual sins exceed in some above others, both in greatness, and number,
so the guilt of them increases accordingly. As appears, Ezra 9. 6. where
sin is said to be gone above their heads, and the guilt thereof to reach up
to the heavens.

Q. When the sin is gone and past, is not the guilt also gone and past?

A. No: but though the act of sin be gone, so as Prou. 23. 32. Mat. 17. 3-5.
the least print thereof appears not, yet the guilt remains always, as the
mark of burning, when the burning is past.

Q. What is contrary to the guilt of sin?

A. The testimony of a good conscience, which is Prou. 15. 15. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
Prou. 18. 14.
perpetual joy and comfort, yea and a heaven to him that walks carefully in
Gods obedience; as the other is a hellish torment unto men, especially when
their consciences shall be awakened.

CHAP. 11.
Of the Punishment of Sin.

The punishment of Sin, In this life, In the Persons, Jointly in body and
soul. Apart, In soul. In body.

In the things belonging to the Persons.
In the life to come.

ROMANS chap. 6. verse. 23. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God
is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Q. SO much of the guilt of sin: what is the Punishment thereof?

A. All those Judgments and Curses, that are denounced in the word of God
against sin, or which at any time are inflicted upon sinners; all which are
comprehended under this word death, and in regard of the equity, are called the
wages, or reward of Sin.

Q. Are all the Judgments and Curses, which are, or shall be inflicted for
sin, laid down in the word?

A. They cannot all in particular be laid down, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. and 28. 61.
they are so manifold and diverse; and therefore it is said, that they shall
come, written and unwritten.

Q. How far does the punishment of sin extend it self?

A. Even to the whole estate of him that sins: for whereas Executions upon
Obligations unto men are so directed, as they can charge but either the person
alone, or his Goods and lands alone, so as if the Creditor fall upon the one,
he freeth the other; as if he fall upon the person, he can proceed no further
then unto his body, and upon that only till death; the execution that goes out
from God, for the obligation of sin, is extended Luke 11. 4. 5.
to the whole estate of the sinner, and that for ever.

Q. Can you draw this great number and diversity of Judgments to certain
heads?

A. Yea: for they are either in this life, or in the life to come.

Q. What are they in this life?

A. They are either in the persons themselves, or in the things that belong
unto them.

Q. What are they in the Persons themselves?

A. They are either in the whole person, body and soul jointly, or in the
parts severally.

Q. What are they in the whole jointly?

A. 1. Cor. 15. 56. Romans 5. 20. and 6. 20. 1. Job. 1. 8. Mat. 12. 34.
A necessity of sinning, (but without all fear or constraint on Gods part),
and that until they be borne again by the Grace of God.

Q. What are they in the Persons severally?

A. In the soul, and in the body apart.

Q. What are they that are in the soul apart?

A. A Spirit of Ignorance, and of want of judgment Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19.
to discern between good and evil; Forgetfulness of holy things: A strange
Sottishness, and dullness to conceive of them: Hardness and stupiditie of
heart, void of all sense and apprehension of saving goodness, and of any
affection or desire thereunto; which Judgments, though for a time they are
least felt, yet are more fearful and dangerous then those which are presently
apprehended, and the sense whereof is sharp and bitter.

Q. What are they upon the body apart?

A. Hunger, thirst, weariness, want of sleep, all Deuteronomy. 28.
kind of diseases, even to the itch; in the least of which (though few make
account of them) we ought to have a sensible feeling of the anger of God, and
of his just judgment for sin.

Q. What are they in the things which belong unto them?

A. Calamities upon their wives, children, families, Mat. 15. 22. and 7. 1. 2.
goods, and good name.

Q. Hitherto of the punishments in this life: What are they in the life to come?

A. They are most horrible and unspeakable: first, the souls of the wicked,
after this life, are sent immediately Luke 16. 22. 23.
to hell, until the day of Judgment: then at Matthew. 10. 28. Luke 16. 25.
the day of Judgment, their Bodies shall be joined to their Souls, and both
together shall be tormented in hell fire everlastingly; and so much the more
tormented there, by how much they have had more freedom from pain of body,
and anguish of soul, and loss of outward things in this life.

Q. Is the punishment of all sins alike?

A. No: For as the guilt increases, so does the Joh. 19. 11. Mat. 11. 20-25.
punishment; and as the smallest sin cannot escape Gods hands, so look how
we shall multiply sins here, he will heap his Judgments then.

CHAP. 12.
Of the Word of God.

The means of man's recovery, in the Word of God, Which is contained in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament: viz. the Law. 5. books of Moses: Genesis.
Exodus. Leuiticus. Numbers. Deuteronomie.
Prophets, which are either Poesy, Doctrinal only, as Proverbs. Ecclesiastes.
Canticles. Lamentations. Job.
Both doctrinal, and foretelling things to come; as the Psalms.
Prose, Historical Iosuab. Judges. Ruth. Samuel. 2. books. Kings. 2. books.
Ezra. Nehemiah. Hester. Chronicles. 2. books.
Doctrinal, and foretelling things to come. Greater Prophets Esaias. Jeremy.
Ezechiel. Daniel.
Smaller, Hoseas. Joel. Amos. Abdias. Jonas. Micheas. Nahum. Abakkuk. Zephanie.
Aggei. Zachary. Malachy.




New Testament, Historical, of Christ Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.
His Apostles, the Acts.
Doctrinall Only, as the Epistles to the Romans. 1. Corinthians. 2. Galath. 1.
Ephesians. 1. Philip. 1. Coloss. 1 Thessalonians. 2. Timoth. 2. Titus. 1. Philemon. 1.
Hebr. 1. James. 1. Pet. 2. Ioh. 3. Jude. 1.
Prophetical also, Apocalypse.


Consists of two parts, Chap. 13.

2. TIM. chap. 3. verse. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 13. But evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse; deceiving, and being deceived.

14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them,

15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:

17. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.


Q. THus far of the miserable and unhappy estate of man by sin, guilt, and
punishment: where are we to seek remedy for recovery from this cursed and
damnable Estate?

A. In the word of God, as may appear by the words of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3.

Q. What is the word of God?

A. The revealed will of God, concerning the means of man's salvation. Romans 15.
4. 1. Tim. 4. 16. Ioh. 5. 39.

Q. Where is the word of God to be found?

A. In the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, called the Scriptures, Ioh.
5. 39.

Q. What were these Prophets and Apostles?

A. Holy men, that writ by divine Inspiration. 2. Pet. 1. 21. 2. Tim. 3 16.


Q. How are the Scriptures divided?

A. Into the Old and New Testament.

Q. How is the Old Testament divided?

A. Into the Law, and the Prophets.

Q. Where is the Law contained?

A. In the five books of Moses, called Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomie.

Q. What are the Prophets?

A. Expositions of the Law, written either in Poesy, or Prose.

Q. What are they that are written in Poesy?

A. They are either Doctrinall only, as the Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes,
the Canticles, the Lamentations of Jeremy, and Job; or both Doctrinall, and
foretelling things to come, as the Psalms.

Q. What are they that are written in Prose?

A. They are either Historical, or Doctrinall, and foretelling things to come,
called the Prophets.

Q. What are the Historical?

A. Iosuah, Judges, Ruth, the 2. books of Samuel, the 2. books of the Kings,
Ezra, Nehemiah, Hester, and the 2. books of Chronicles.

Q. What are the Doctrinall, and which foretell things to come?

A. They are called either the greater Prophets, as Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
and Daniel. Or the smaller, as Hoseas, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas, Micheas,
Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephanie, Aggei, Zachary, and Malachy.

Q What are the books of the New Testament.

A. They are Historical, or Doctrinall.

Q. What are the Historical?

A. Either such as write of Christ, as Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; or of
the Apostles, as the History of the Acts.

Q. What are the Doctrinall?

A. They are such as are either only Doctrinall, or Prophetical also.

Q. What are they that are Doctrinall only?

A. The Epistles of Paul to the Romans, the 1. and 2. to the Corinthians, to
the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, the 1. and 2. to the
Thessalonians, the 1. and 2. to Timothy, to Titus, Philemon, the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the 2. Epistles of Peter, the 3. Epistles of John, the
Epistle of Jude.

Q. What is that which is Prophetical also?

A. The book of the Apocalypse, or Revelation.

Q. How may these books be discerned to be the word of God?

A. By these considerations following: First, they Prou. 8. 8. and 30. 5.
Psalm. 12. 7. and 19. 8.
are perfectly holy in themselves, and by themselves: whereas all other
writings are profane, further then they draw holiness from these; which yet
is never such, but that their holiness is imperfect and defective.

Secondly, they are perfectly profitable in themselves, Jam. 1. 21.
to instruct to salvation, and all other are utterly unprofitable thereunto,
any further then they draw from them.

Thirdly, there is a perfect concord and harmony Act. 26. 22.
in all these Books, notwithstanding the diversity of persons by whom, places
where, and times when, and matters whereof, they have been written.

Fourthly, there is an admirable Psalm. 19. 7. Heb. 4. 12.
force in them, to incline men's hearts from vice to virtue.

Fifthly, in great 1. Cor. 1. 17. 18. 21. 24. and 2. 15. 1, Tim. 5. 21.
plainness and easiness of style, there shines a great Majesty and
authority.

Sixthly, there is such a gracious simplicity in the writers of these Books,
that they neither spare their friends, nor themselves, but most freely, and
impartially, set down their own faults and infirmities as well as others.

Lastly, Gods own Spirit working in the hearts of his children does assure
them, that these Scriptures are the word of God.

Q. Is it agreed upon, that these Books are alone in account of the Books of
Scripture?

A. Concerning the Books of the New Testament it is generally agreed, that all
they, and that they alone are of that account: But the Church of Rome holds,
that diverse other books, (called Apocrypha) do belong to the Old Testament,
and are of the same authority with the other that have been named.

Q. By what reasons may this error of theirs be overthrown?

A. By these: First, they were not written at the first in the Hebrew tongue,
in which, all the authentical Books of the Old Testament were originally
written.

Secondly, the Jews (to whom the Oracles of God Romans 3.
were committed, under the Old Testament) have acknowledged and kept these
only as Canonical, and the Oracles of God, and not the other.

Thirdly, these only were read and expounded in Act. 13. 15.
their Synagogues, and not the other.

Fourthly, the Primitive Churches after the Apostles, (both Greek and Latin)
did receive these Books only for Canonical Scripture.

Q. What worthy use and effect of these books of holy Scripture, does the
Apostle set forth in this place?

A. This, that they are able to make a man wise to 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.
Salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ.

Q. How does that appear?

A. First, for that God is the Author of them, who is for his wisdom, able;
and for his love to his Church, willing, to set down such a Rule as may guide
them fully and perfectly to eternal Life. Secondly, for that it is profitable,
to teach all true doctrine, and to confute the false; to correct all disorder,
private, and public, and to inform men thoroughly in the way of
righteousness. Thirdly, for that the Minister of the Word is said thereby, to
be made complete and perfect to every duty of the Ministry.

Q. How does this last reason hold?

A. Very strongly: for more being required of a Minister, that is to be the
eye and mouth of the people, then of the people themselves; if it be sufficient
to make him perfect, it is much more able to give them sufficient Instruction.
And seeing the Minister is Act. 20. 27.
bound to disclose the whole Counsel of God to his people, and may be thereunto
fully furnished out of the treasury of the Word of God; it follows that they
also out of the Scriptures may be abunda^tly taught to Salvation; and need not
elsewher to seek for any supply.

Q. What other things do you gather from these causes, properties and effects
of Scripture?

A. First, that it alone being able and sufficient to Mat. 23. 8. Ioh. 5. 39.
Matthew. 15. 9.
make us wise to Salvation, we need no unwritten Verities, no Traditions of
men, no Canons of Councels, or Sentences of Fathers; much less Decrees of
Popes, to supply any supposed defect of the written Word of God, or to give us
a more perfect direction in the way of life, then is already set down
expressly in the Canonical Scriptures.

Q. What else learn you from thence?

A. I learn further, (especially from this, that they John 12. 48. Galath. 1.
9.
they are inspired of God): 1. That they are of divine authority. 2. That they
are ye rule, the line, the squyre, and light, whereby to examine and try all
judgments and sayings of men, and of Angels, whether they be such as God
approves, yea or no; and that they are not to be judged or sentenced by any.
And therefore that the Church of Rome, who hangs the credit and authority of
the Scriptures on the Churches sentence, does therein offer horrible injury
and indignity unto God, making thereby the Churches word, of greater credit and
authority then the Word of God.

Q. What further do you learn from hence?

A. I learn from hence (and especially in that it is Matthew. 5. 18. Psalm. 19 9.
said to be a rule and a line) that it is firm and stable, and changes not:
and therefore is as a rule of steel, and not (as the Church of Rome
blasphemously affirms) like a rule of lead, which may be bowed every way at
men's pleasures.

Q. But it seems the Scriptures are dark, and hard to be understood, and
therefore that the reading of them is not to be permitted unto the common
people, but unto those only that are learned.

A. The direct contrary is taught by the Apostle, when he affirms, that
Timothy was nourished up in the Scriptures from his infancy. For if they be so
penned, that little children may profitably read them, there is none so gross
(which has the understanding of a man) but may profit by them; coming in the
fear of God, and with invocation of his name, to the reading and hearing of
them.

CHAP. 13.
Of the parts of Gods Word, and of the Covenant of works in general.

The parts of Gods word, are the doctrine or Covenant of Works, called the
Law, of which in General. Special. Chap. 14.
Grace, called the Gospel. Chapter 27.

GAL. chap. 3. verse. 17. to the 25. 17. And this I say that the covenant that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after, cannot disanull, that it should make the promise of none
effect.

18. For if the inheritance be of the Law; it is no more of promise: but God
gave it to Abraham by promise.

19. Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added because of transgressions,
till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made, and it was ordained by
Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

20. Now a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one.

21. Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had
been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the Law.

22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.

23. But before faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith,
which should afterward be revealed.

24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith.

25. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster.


Q. HItherto we have heard of the Doctrine of the Scriptures what they are,
and what are the causes, properties, and effects of them; as being they, from
whom only all Doctrine concerning our salvation, is to be drawn and derived:
What are the parts of that Doctrine?

A. Either the doctrine of works, commonly called the Law: or of Grace, called
the Promise; and since the coming of Christ, the Gospel, as appears by this
Scripture.

Q. What is the drift of this Scripture?

A. It shows two ways of recovering happiness; the one by the works of the
Law, the other by faith in the promise of grace: and that the Law is not that
way, whereby we can receive the Happiness we have lost.

Q. How is that showed?

A. For that the promise of grace, whereby Abraham was justified, was 430.
years before the Law; and therefore that the Law which comes after, cannot
make void the Covenant of Grace; which it should do, if a man were justified
by the Law.

Q. But it may be said, that the Justification by Works of the Law, does not
make void the Promise of Grace, when as the matter is so handled, as Salvation
comes in part by the Works of the Law.

A. Yes verily, it is made void notwithstanding: for if Salvation were before
the Law was, only by Grace; and now should be by Works and Grace: then the
promise given to Abraham, of Grace only, should be made void. And therefore
the Apostle in the 18. verse does show, that if it be of the Law, it cannot
be by the promise of Grace. Yea the Law is so far from bringing salvation,
that through the corruption of our nature, it increases sin in us.

Then it should seem that there is no use of the Law, seeing it does not
justify us, either in all, or in part?

A. Not so: for it was given to show and discover sin, and in that regard to
terrify and affright us, and drive us from all confidence in our selves: as
also to serve as a rule, whereby we are to direct and amend our lives.

Q. How is that showed?

A. 1. By the testimony of the Apostle, saying, that by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin. 2. By the Romans 3. 20.
manner of the giving, which was with such terror of thunder, lightnings, and
smoke, and fearful sound of the trumpet, as the people could not abide the
voice of God: but were feign to desire that they might not hear the same, but
that Moses might be a Mediator to receive the Law from Gods mouth, and that
they might receive it from him.

Q. What observe you from that?

A. That the Law is terrible unto us, by reason of the guilt of our sins; and
that it drives us to seek for a Mediator, which is Christ alone, who is here
figured in the Mediation of Moses.

Q. If the promise of Grace take away sin, and the Law increase sin; if it
take away the conscience of sin, and this does cause a conscience and remorse
of sin; it seems that the Law is contrary to the promise of Grace.

A. Not a whit: for the Law would also take away sin, and the conscience of
sin, if any man were able perfectly to observe it; for the Law of it self
causes no sin, but only by accident, by reason of our corruption: Romans 8. 3.
otherwise it is a furtherance to the Salvation which is by Grace.

Q. Tell us then how the Law serves, to the helping forward to the
Justification, which is by the free Grace of God?

A. The Law shuts all men, and all that is of man, under Sin: not to this
end that they should perish, but contrariwise that they might be saved, that
believe.

Q. Make that more plain.

A. The Apostle compares the Law to a Justice of Peace, or a Sergeant which
arresteth such as transgress Gal. 3. 23.
the same, and lays them in prison; not that they should perish there, with
hunger, cold, or other annoyances of the prison: but that when they feel their
misery, and discern, that of themselves, and by their own deserts they
cannot get out of it, they should thereby be moved the more earnestly, to seek
after the free pardon and grace of the Prince. And therefore it is not contrary
to the promise of grace, but a special help toward the obtaining thereof.

Q. How is this further cleared.

A. By this, that the Apostle compares the Law to Gal. 3. 23.
a Garrison, which is set in a town, to keep such Inhabitants thereof in awe
and servitude, as have not loyally-affected minds to their Prince; to the end,
that in time, they coming to a just and dutiful obedience, may be freed from
the awe and servitude of the Garrison.

Q How else?

A. It is compared to a Tutor, or Guardian. For as Gal. 3. 24.
he keeps the child that is under age straightly, by means whereof he has a
desire to be out of his nonage, and to enjoy the liberty of a son: so after
the Gal. 4. 2.
same manner, the Law, through the terror and severity thereof, moves us
with the more ardent desire to seek after Christ. Moreover, as a Tutor or
Usher directs the steps of the child, and instructs him in such courses of
life, by which he is afterward to live: so the Law, after it has brought us
to Christ, directs us in the way we have to walk in this life, to life
everlasting: so that it has two notable and worthy effects; one as a spur
to chase us unto Christ, the other as a light to direct and teach us how to
walk, when we are come unto him. Lastly, as a Tutor, it humbles us, whiles
by means thereof we understand, how far we are from fulfilling the same; and
consequently, how unable we are by the works of the Law, (which alone are
good works) to free our selves from the curse of the Law.

CHAP. 14.
Of the Covenant of Works in special.

The Covenant of Works, or the Law in special. In which consider Generally,
How it is defined. By what rules interpreted.
Specially, and herein the Preface. The Law it self, The first Table of Gods
worship, Inward only. 1. Commandment, Chapter 15. Outward also, More generally.
2. Commandment. Chap. 16. More particularly concerning the Special use of Gods
Name. Comman. 3. Chap. 17. The special time of his worship. Com. 4. Chap. 18.


The 2. Table, of our Duties to man.



ROMANS chap. 2. verse. 14. 15. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law,
do by nature the things contained in the Law: these having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves,

15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else
excusing one another:


Q. HItherto of the Covenant of Works in general: it follows to treat
thereof in special. Where is the Covenant of Works summarity set down?

A. In the Moral Law.

Q. Does the Doctrine of the Moral Law go before the Doctrine of the Gospel?

A. Yea.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it was before the Gospel, for it was given to Adam, in his
Integrity; when the promise of Grace was hidden in God.

Q. Must it therefore be first in use?

A. Yea verily: as touching the former use or virtue of the Law, which is, to
show us what we should do, and our sin, and the punishment due unto our
sin.

Q. Why is it said, that the Law was not before Moses?

A. That is to be understood of the Law, as it was written, whether by Moses,
or the hand of God: otherwise the same Law (for the substance thereof) was also
written in the beginning in the heart of Adam and Eve.

Q. What is the Moral Law?

A. It is a Doctrine commanding the perfection of Godliness, and
Righteousness, binding us to eternal Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and 12. 32. 42.
death for our least defect therein; which Law is handled at large throughout
the whole Scripture, but is summarily contrived, first into ten words, or ten
Commandments, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10. 4. Mat. 22. 37.
written by Gods own finger at the first, in Tables of stone: to signify
thereby, not only the hardness of our hearts, in which they ought to be
imprinted; but also the perpetual use of them, to the Galath. 3. 10.
very end of the world. And after, further abridged into two Commandments by
our Savior Christ, containing the sum of the whole Law.

Q. What is the first thing that is necessarily required of us, for our better
profiting by the Law?

A. That we have the true knowledge, and right understanding of the Law,
without the which it is impossible to reap any of the former fruits. For how
can a man acknowledge the breach of that Law, which he knows not? or how can
he serve him in the endeavor of performance of it, unless he understand his
Masters will?

Q. What rules are there to help us, to the right understanding of the Law?

A. There be chiefly four; whereof the first is, that the Law is spiritual,
reaching to the soul, and all the Romans 7. 14. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Mat. 22. 37. Mark.
12. 30. Luke 10. 27.
powers thereof: For the Law charge the understanding to know every duty,
even all the will of God contained in it. It charge the judgment to discern
between good and evil; between two good things, which is the better. It
charge the memory to retain; it charge the will to choose the better, and
leave the worse; it charge the affections to love things to be beloved, and
to hate things to be hated.

Q. Does the Law require these alike of all?

A. No, but according to the sex, growth in age, difference of calling: as
more of a man, then of a woman; of a young man, then of a child; of a public
person, then of a private man.

Q. What is the second rule?

A. That the Law is perfect, not only charging the Psalm. 19. 7.
soul, but also the whole soul: not only to know, discern, retain, will,
and follow good, but to do the same perfectly. So in condemning evil, it
condemns all evil; and in commanding good, it commands all good.

Q. What is the third rule?

A. When the Law forbids or commands any thing, it forbids and
commands all means, Mat. 5. 27. 30.
occasions, and prouocations thereunto.

Q. What is the fourth rule?

A. Whatsoever the Law commands, it forbids the Mat. 5. 21. 23. 24. 25.
contrary; and whatsoever it forbids, it commands the contrary.

Q. Why is every Commandment set forth unto us, by the second person of the
singular number?

A. God therein wisely preuenteth a common abuse amongst men, which is to
esteem that which is spoken to all men, to be (as it were) spoken unto none.
As you shall have it common amongst men to say and confess, that God is just
and merciful, and that he commands this, and forbids that; and yet they
usually so behave themselves, as though it nothing concerned them, and that
they notwithstanding might live as they list.

Q. What learn you from this?

A. That every particular man is to judge and esteem that God speaks in ye
Law, to him in particular, and that he is accordingly to be affected therewith.

Q. Why are all the Commandments (except two) set down negatiuely?

A. Because the Negative binds more strongly: for the Negative precept
binds always, and to all moments of time; the Affirmative binds always,
but not to all moments of time.

Q. To come then unto the words of the Law, how are they divided?

A. Into a Preface, and ten Precepts or Commandments.

Q. What is the Preface?

A. I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage: which has a reference to all the ten Commandments, and
is a reason to urge the observance of every one of the^. Thus: If I be the Lord
thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, thou must then keep all
my Commandments; but I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt; therefore thou must keep all my Commandments.

Q. How can this belong unto us which are not Israel?

A. Though we be not Israel in name, or according to the flesh, yet we are the
true Israel of God, according to the Spirit and promise: God also by this
Leuit. 26. 4-10. Deuteronomy. 28. 13. 13.
style does clearly distinguish himself from all Idols whatsoever.

Q. Why does the Lord make choice of that benefit, which seems nothing at all
to belong unto us, rather then of any other, wherein we communicate with them?

A. First, because it is the manner of God, to allure the Israelites, to whom
the Law was given at the first, as children, with temporal benefits, having
respect to their infirmity and childhood: whereas we are blessed of God with
greater knowledge; and therefore in respect of them, are (as it were) at man's
estate.

Secondly, because it was fittest to express the spiritual delivery from
Satan, by Christ, which was thereby (after a sort) represented; and so it
belongs no less (if not more) to us then to them. And thirdly, we having
been freed from the slavery of our bloody enemies, whereunto we were so near
more then once, and unto whom we justly have deserved to have been inthralled;
and it being the common case of all Gods children, to be in continual danger
of the like, and to feel the like goodness of God toward them, we may also
make use of this title, and esteem it a bond also for us unto God.

Fourthly, because it was the latest benefit, the sweetness whereof was yet
(as it were) in their mouth. And herein ye Lord had a respect unto our corrupt
nature, who are ready to forget old benefits, how great soever.

Q. So much of the Preface: How are the Commandments divided?

A. Into two Tables: whereof the first contain our duties to God, in the four
first Commandments; and the other those to our neighbor, in the six other
Commandments.

Q. What are those toward God?

A. Such as concern his worship; and therefore to be preferred before the
other toward our neighbor.

Q. How may that be showed?

A. By the inequality of the persons offended, God, and man; then also by the
punishments assigned in the Scripture: for the breaches of the first Table, are
to be more severely punished, then the breaches of the second. As he that
reuileth the Magistrate shall bear his sin; but he that blasphemeth God,
shall be stoned ^. Sam. 2. 25.
to death. Which serves to discover the crafty practices of the Papists, who
would make men believe, that the chiefest and most meritorious good Works, of
all, required in the Law of God, are the works of the second Table; as
Charity, almsdeeds, thereby deceiving the people to enrich themselves.

Q. Are all the duties of the first Table greater, then all the duties of the
second?

A. Yea, if the comparison be equally made, as if the chief of the first
Table, be compared with the chief of the second; the middle duties of the
one, with the middle duties of the other; and the last and least of the former,
with the last and least of the latter; otherwise not. For if the murder of a
man be compared with the least abuse of the name of God, it is a greater sin
then it: so is Adultery, being in comparison set against the least breach of
the Sabbath.

Q. How is this Worship of God divided?

A. Into Inward only and Outward also.

Q. Where is the Inward Worship commanded?

A. In the first Commandment.

CHAP. 15.
Of the first Commandment.

The 1. Commandment is of the inward worship of God, in the Understanding,
Knowledge. Faith.
Will and affection, above all to Love him. Fear him. Reverence him.


EXODUS 20. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.
Q. WHat is the first Commandment?

A. Thou shall have no other gods before me.

Q. What is the duty required in this Commandment?

A. The inward worship of God: as appears by the words before me, that is
that whereof I alone take notice. Where we must take heed we imagine no
likeness of God, thereby setting up an Idol in our hearts; which we shall
do, if we liken him to any thing whatsoever, subject to the sense or
imagination of man.

Q. Wherein consists the inward worship of God?

A. In two things, (according to the inward man): first, in the understanding:
2. In the will and affections.

Q. What is required in the Understanding?

A. The knowledge of God, and of his Attributes, 1. Chron. 28. 9.
properties, and actions, so far forth as he has revealed himself in his
word and works. Secondly, Faith, John 17. 3.
both in believing the things that are written of him, and applying to our
selves his promises.

Q. What is contrary to this?

A. Confidence and trust in our selves, or in our Ierem. 17. 5. Psalm. 62. 10.
friends, honor, wisdom, money, learning, or credit, etc. which are but
means given us of God, whereby to glorify him the better.

Q. What is our duty to him, in regard of these, and all other good means?

A. First, to trust in God, no less when we have them, then when we want
them. Secondly, by hope, John 13. 15.
patiently to attend for all things that we need, at Gods hands: not only when
we have the means, but also when we want all apparent means; as was the
condition of the Israelites in the desert: yea, when the means shall seem
contrary, as it was in the case of the Psalm. 37. 7. and 22. 4. 5. Dan. 3. 17.
18.
three companions of Daniel, and of Daniel himself; and as Job professed he
would do, saying, I will trust in God although Job. 13. 15.
he kill me. Thirdly, by humility, to cast our selves down before God,
acknowledging our insufficiency in our selves; and therewith also to season all
our behavior, both toward God, and man. Contrary whereunto is presumption,
whereby we use to glory and boast of our selves, and our own strength and
goodness.

Q. What is required in the will and affections?

A. In the will and affections is required, first to love Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
God; that as we know and believe that he is good, yea the chiefest good; so
we love him above all: John 14. 15. 21. 23. Psalm. 119. 97.
which love (for that we cannot love God in himself) is then in truth in us,
when we love his word and Commandments.

Q. What is contrary to this love of God?

A. Such a love of our selves, and of worldly 1. John 2. 15. Exodus 32. 32. Romans
9. 3.
pleasures, as causes us to leave those duties undone, which God requires of
us: whereas the true love of God will move us, with Moses, and Paul, to wish
our selves accursed, rather then that the glory of God should any thing at all
be stained by us.

Q. What further is required?

A. To fear him above all others, because he (above Matthew. 10. 28. 1. Pet. 3.
6.
all others) is most powerful and just.. And this fear is then in us, when it
is stronger to move us to good, then the fear of men, to move us to evil.
Secondly, when we do not the good we do, only, or principally for fear of
danger from men, but for fear of God.

Q. What is yet further required in the inward worship?

A. The reverence of the Majesty of God, in regard whereof we should carry such
a holy shamefacednes in all our actions, that no unseemly behavior proceed
from us, that may any ways be offensive to him; of which, if men be so
careful in the presence of Princes, who are but mortal men: how much more
careful ought we to be thereof, in the presence of the Almighty and most
glorious God? Which holy Reverence of God, was specially prefigured in the
Ceremonial Deuteronomy. 23. 12. -- 14.
Law, where it was required, that when men would ease themselves (according to
the course of nature), they should go without the Host, and carry a paddle
with them, to cover their feet, because (says the Lord), I am in the midst
of you: whereby the filthiness, and impurity of the mind was forbidden, more
then of the body, and the equity hereof reaches also unto us.

Q. What is contrary to this reverence of the Majesty of God?

A. Irreuerence, or profaneness, when men regard not how basely, and vilely,
and unseemly they behave themselves before God.

And thus much of the Inward Worship of God: the Outward Worship of God
follows. Of which more generally in the Second Commandment; more
particularly in the third and fourth.

CHAP. 16.
Of the Second Commandment.

The outward worship of God in general, in the second Commandment: where
consider the Things Forbidden, General. Special, Images Making. Bowing down
and worshipping.

Commanded, General. Special: Substa^tiall, Ordinary, Prayer.
Extraordinary; Fasting. Feasting.

Circumstantiall, as convenient gestures.


Reason, Threatening. Promise.


EXODUS 20. 4. 5. 6. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.

5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me.

6. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.


Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make thee any graven Image, nor likeness of things, etc.

Q. What is treated of in this Commandment?

A. The outward worship of God, as appears by the words, make, bow, worship.

Q. What learn you from this order of the Commandments?

A. It shows, that the inward and outward worship of God ought to go
together: so that they who dare present their bodies to a Mass, or any other
gross Idolatry, and say they keep their hearts to God, are here convicted of
falsehood and hypocrisy.

Q. What is forbidden in this Commandment generally?

A. All will worship, how great a show soever it have.

Q. What are the parts of that will worship?

A. The outward worship of any besides God. and of God any otherwise then he
commands.


Q. What are the particulars forbidden in the outward worship of God?

A. First, we are forbidden to make Images; and secondly, to bow unto them, or
worship them.

Q. Why is this part so largely set forth?

A. To meet with the corruption of men, that by nature are exceeding prone to
Idolatry.

Q. Are all Images by this Commandment unlawful?

A. No, but such as are made for religious ends and uses: for in civil matters
they may have a lawful and commendable use.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That the Popish doctrine of Images (that they are Lay men's books), is
directly contrary to the word of God; and therefore to be detested of all Gods
children.

Q. What Images are most of all condemned?

A. Images of God: for it is a great sin to conceit or imagine in our hearts,
that he is like any thing, how excellent soever we do think it; but it is
much worse so to set him out to the view of others, considering that the mind
can conceive a further beauty, then the hand of the Artificer can express.
And therefore the children of Israel did sin grienously, and were Exodus 32. 4.
9. 10. 27. 28.
worthily condemned, for worshipping God, in the Image of a Calfe.

Q. Did not the Israelites worship the Calfe as God, as the Papists say?

A. No: but they worshipped God in the Calfe: Exodus 32. 5.
for they said, Let us make a feast to morrow to the Lord.

Q. Wherein did they sin so grievously?

A. In tying the presence of God to the work of their own hands, and coupling
him with their Idols, Exodus 20. 4. 5. 6. 1. King. 18. Matthew. 15. Hos. 2. 16.
which he cannot endure: for God says by his Prophet Hosea, You shall no more
call upon me in Baal. So impossible it is truly to serve God by an Idol, as
the Papists do.

Q. How appears it, that we should make no Image of God?

A. In the 4. of Deuteronomie, the Lord forewarned Verse. 12.
the Israelites, that because they saw no Image of him when he gave the Law;
therefore they should make no likeness of him.

Q. But what moves the Papists to paint God like an old man?

A. The false expounding of a place in Daniel, where Dan. 7. 5.
he is called the Ancient of days. Whereby is meant his Eternity, how he was
before all times: But whatsoever Deuteronomy. 27. 15.
property in God it be, that they set forth by an Image, it is execrable so to
do.

Q. What other Inventions of men (besides Images) are here forbidden?

A. All such inventions of men, as are devised for any worship or service of
God: likewise all representations of any grace of God, otherwise then God has
appointed, or may be allowed by his word. And herein we are to observe the
Apostles rule and practice, 1. Cor. 11. where he says, That whicb I have
received of 1. Cor. 11.
the Lord, I have delivered unto you: for if he might add nothing to Gods
Ordinance, much less may we.

Q. What else is here condemned?

A. First, to use any Word publicly in the Church, besides the written word of
God, contained in the Canonical Scripture. Secondly, to devise any other
ministry, then that which God has appointed. Thirdly, to go to Witches, to
consult with Star gazers, or the like, to whom Moses opposes a Prophet, as
the only lawful Minister of God, and warrantable means to know his will by.

Q. What further is forbidden?

A. All the means and occasions of Idolatry, and al Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 4. 1. Cor.
11. 39.
league and amity with Idolators; therefore no professor of the true worship of
God should marry an Idolater, or an apparent profane and irreligious person.

Q. What other things are here forbidden?

A. All such Ecclesiastical ceremonies, and rites of Religion, as are
repugnant to Gods word, or not warrantable by the general grounds thereof.

Q. What is to be observed of that it is said, Thou shall not bow down to
them, nor worship them?

A. Hereby is noted a further degree of Idolatry, which here also is
forbidden; as when men shall 1. King. 19. 18.
shrine, clothe, and cover Images with precious things; Ezra. 16. 18. 19.
kneel and creep unto them, light candles before the^, and such like; or when
men shall not only use, but commend and extol, and by authority urge the
inventions of men: wherein the gross Idolatry of Popery is condemned, which
though it be taken away from amongst us, yet the corruption cleaves still to
the hearts of many; as may be seen in them, that make courtesy to the chancell
where the high altar stood, and who give the right hand unto standing crosses,
Crucifixes, etc.

Q. What kind of Images are here forbidden, to be worshipped?

A. All kinds, whether such as are made with man's hands, of which Esaias
speaks, saying, One piece of wood Esaias 44. 15. 17. Hos. 8. 4.
is cast into the fire, and another of the same tree is made an Idol: or such
as in themselves are the good creatures of God; as those which Hoseah speaks
of, saying, They worship their gold and silver. Yea, of whatsoever things it
may be said, that they have eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, ears and
hear not, noses and smell not, feet and go not; unto them is this worship
forbidden to be performed. Although therefore the Papists worship not Jupiter,
Mars, and such like Heathen Idols, but the holy Saints (as they say) in, and by
their Images; yet by that, which has been said, it appears, that even that
worship of theirs, is impious and abominable Idolatry.

Q. What further is forbidden here, under the worship of Images?

A. To use any thing that God has commanded 1. King. 18. 4. 1. Chron. 15. 13.
for his worship, otherwise then he himself has appointed; for the brazen
Serpent abused, was worthily broken in pieces; and the Israelites for carting
the Arc, were worthily punished.

Q. What else is forbidden?

A. To pray for such things as God has made no promise of, or for such persons
as he has made no promise unto: as when men pray for souls departed, or for
those that sin to death; or to give thanks to God 1. Ioh. 5. 14. 16.
for things unlawfully gotten.

Q. Proceed to the rest of the things forbidden.

A. The abuse of the Sacraments, which in Popery Luke 22. 25, 26. 1. Pet. 5.
23.
are made Sacrifices; also the abuse of the Ministry, to other ends, then
those for which it is ordained: as when Ministers exercise tyrannical Lordship
over the flock, or their fellow-seruants; as the Bishops of the Church of Rome
use to do. Or when in the execution of their function, they seek themselves,
and not the edification of Gods people, etc.

Q. So much of the things forbidden: What are the things commanded?

A. General, or special.

Q. What is the Commandment in general?

A. To use such outward means only in the worship of God, as himself does
approve in his word.

Q. What are the things specially commanded?

A. The outward Substance and Circumstances of Gods worship.

Q. Wherein consists the outward Substance of Gods worship?

A. Partly in such things as we give to God; and partly in such things as God
gives to us.

Q. What are the things that we give to God?

A. They are ordinary, or extraordinary.

Q. What are the ordinary?

A. Prayer for such things as we lack, (and thanksgiving for such things as
we have received); which all men are bound to use, both publicly, and
privately.

Q. What are the extraordinary?

A. Fasting, and feasting to God.

Q. What are the things God gives us?

A. His creatures in the first place; also his Word and Sacraments, his
Ministry, and the Censures of the Church.

Q. How do we worship God in these?

A. In the Creatures, by beholding his glory in them; in his Word, by diligent
hearing it, and careful believing and practicing it; in his Sacraments, by
receiving them duly; in the Ministry and Censures, by submitting our selves
unto them.

Q. Wherein consist the outward circumstances of Gods worship especially?

A. In the reverend gestures of the body, which being forbidden to be given to
Images, are therein commanded to be given to God.

Q. How can there be any use thereof to God, since he is a Spirit, and looks
to the heart?

A. Very well: for first, the whole man, and consequently the body it self,
owes a duty to God. Secondly, it is a glass, wherein the affections of the
mind are beheld. Thirdly, the mind is the better helped and furthered in the
inward worship, when both body and mind do go together.

Q. What gestures are most convenient for the body?

A. Diverse, according to the diverse exercises of Religion: as at the reading
of the Word, standing; at Prayer, kneeling, casting down our eyes, in witness
of humility; and lifting them up, to witness our confidence, etc. except our
infirmities, or the like lets shall hinder us herein.

Q. So much of the Commandment: what are the parts of the Reason?

A. A threatening, to restrain from disobedience, and a promise to allure to
obedience.

Q. What is the sum of the threatening?

A. That he will punish the offender, both in himself, and children, to many
generations; the greatness of which punishment he shows, by comparing his
wrath to the rage of a jealous husband, upon the unchaste behavior of his wife.

Q. Declare the same more plainly.

A. If any (being joined unto God in Christ) have promised in Baptism to serve
him alone; and yet notwithstanding will serve and worship others, how good
soever they (be whether Angels, or Saints), they shall not escape Gods wrath:
for if corporal adultery be so severely punished, much more shall spiritual.

Q. But how does that agree with the righteousness of God, to punish one for
another?

A. Very well: for if Princes (whose judgments are shallow in comparison of
Gods, the depthes whereof are past finding out) do with equity dis-inherit
and put to shame the posterity of Traitors: the Lord may much more justly do
the like. For the wicked child following his fathers steps, is a Traitor
himself, having both his fathers sin, and his own upon his head.

Q. Why will God be so extremely revenged of them?

A. Because they are (as it is said here) Haters of him.

Q. Is there any that hate God?

A. Yes Ioh. 15. 18. Romans 1. 29. 30. and 8. 7. and 5. 10. Coloss. 1. 21.
verily: for so many as worship him, otherwise then himself has commanded,
do hate him; for although every Idolater will say that he loves God; yet
here God witnesses of him that he is a liar, and that he hates God, in that
he hates the worship that he commands; in the love whereof, God will have
experience of his love.

Q. So much of the threatening: what is the sum of the promise?

A. That he will bless the obedient unto many generations, both in themselves,
their children and posterity, and in whatsoever belongs unto them.

CHAP. 17.
Of the third Commandment.

The special use of Gods name in this Commandment, wherein consider the
Precept, and in it things Commanded in General. Special, the true use of
Oaths. Vows.

Forbidden in General. Special, the abuse of Oaths. Vows.


Reason.

EXODUS 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for
the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.
Q. WHat is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

Q. What is meant by the Name of God?

A. The titles, and Exodus 6. 2. 3. and 34. 14. Deuteronomy. 18. 19. 22.
Attributes of God, together with the Matthew. 28. 19. Act. 2. 38. Act. 21. 13.
ordinances, works, and the whole outward worship of God, as that whereby God
is made known unto us; which is taken from the manner of men, who are known
by their names.

Q. What is meant by the taking thereof in vain?

A. All abuse thereof: where, mentioning the smaller fault, he declares the
heinousness of the greater: for if the taking of his Name in vain only be a
sin; how heinous a sin is it, when it is blasphemed, or used for the
confirmation of a lie?

Q. What requires God of us in general in this Commandment?

A. The Maintenance of his Name and honor with our tongue; which is performed
by a careful and heedie watch; as to avoid the profanation and abuse of the
things aforesaid, by our tongue; so to apply them with all reverence and
circumspection, to such uses as they are appointed unto by God.

Q. What necessity was there to have a special Commandment, for the
direction of the tongue in this first part of the Law, which concerns the
worship of God?

A. Because (as the Apostle says) it is an untamed Iam. 3. 8.
evil, and unbridled; and therefore a whole Commandment cannot be employed
amiss for the direction of it, in the use of the Name of God. And seeing in
the second Table, there is a Commandment tending almost wholly to restrain
the abuse of our tongues toward our neighbor; there is much more need of a
precept, both for the direction and restraint of it, in the matters concerning
God, and his most glorious Name.

Q. What is here generally to be observed?

A. The high honor that God shows unto us, who being able, either by
himself, or by his Angels, to maintain his own Name and glory, has
notwithstanding committed the maintenance thereof unto us; which should teach us
to be very charie and careful to discharge our duty faithfully, and thereby
to show our selves worthy this honor.

Q. By what means are we to show this carfulness?

A. By a diligent preparation, before we speak of any of these holy things,
by considering both of the cause that should move us to speak of them, and of
the reverent manner of using them.

Q. What does God require in this Commandment more specially?

A. The true use of Oaths and Vows.

Q. In the true use of an oath, what should we chiefly regard?

A. First, whether the matter be doubtful whereof we speak.

Secondly, whether it be weighty and worthy of an oath.

Q. Such persons then as have no weighty matters to deal in, may not take an
oath at all?

A. No verily: and therefore it is altogether unlawful for children to swear,
because they cannot think sufficiently of the dignity of an oath: and no
Atheist or profane men should swear, because either they believe not, or they
serve not God.

Q. What further must we regard in taking an oath?

A. First, whether the question or doubt may be ended by Verily, or Truly, or
such like naked asseuerations: Mat. 5. 37.
for then by the example of Christ, we ought to forbear an oath. Secondly,
whether he (for whose Heb. 6. 16.
cause we give the oath) will rest in it, and give credit unto it; for
otherwise the name of God is taken in vain. Thirdly, if an oath be given, we
must use no other then Gods word allows; although in lawful Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Zeph. 1. 5.
contracts with an Infidel, or Idolater, we may admit of such oaths, whereby
they swear by false gods.

Q. What are the things forbidden in this Commandment?

A. First in general, all vnreuerent, sudden, and causlesse speaking of the
Titles, Attributes, Actions, and Ordinances of God: as when men cry, O Lord, O
God, Good God! etc. in matters light, and of no moment. And therefore for
restraining of this corruption, we should seriously think how powerful God
is, to punish such vnreuerent behavior; as also how able and ready to bless
them, who shall reverently behave themselves in their tongues and words,
touching these matters: for which cause we are to remember, that the Name
Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Psalm. 99. 3.
of God is fearful, as it is written.

Q. What is more specially forbidden?

A. First, all abuse of oaths: as 1. rash oaths. 2. Mark. 5. 34. 35. 36. Iam.
5. 12. Mark. 9. 25.
superstitious oaths; as by the Mass, our Lady, etc. 3. blasphemous oaths.
4. counterfeit and mockoathes. 5. the error of Anabaptists, condemning all
oaths.

Secondly, here is forbidden the abuse of Vows: as the making of all unlawful
Vows; the not paying, or delaying of lawful vows, and the performing of
unlawful. Eccles. 5. 1-5. Psalm. 76. 11.


Thirdly, all abuses of the Word to magical Spells, and Charms, for the
healing of diseases, finding out of theft, etc.

CHAP. 18.
Of the fourth Commandment.

The special time of Gods worship, in the 4. Commandment: where note
Circumstances touching the Necessity. Perpetuity or Morality.
Unchangeableness. Beginning and end.
Parts: Preface. Commandment: in which the Things Forbidden: 1. our own
works, Great. Small.
Commanded in Gods service, In the Church. Out of it.

Reasons.



EXODUS 20. verse. 8. 9. 10. 11. 8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.

9. Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work.

10. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor
thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.

11. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.


Q. HItherto of the Commandment. What is the sum of the reason?

A. A threatening of extreme misery and judgment, to the transgressors of
this Commandment. For it being our Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
happiness to have our sins covered, and not imputed; it must needs be
extreme misery to have them reckoned and imputed unto us. Therefore the
transgressors of this Commandment, the more free that (usually) they are from
the judgments and punishments of men, the more heavy plagues and vengeance
will surely light upon them from God, except they repent.

Q. What is summarily required in this Commandment?

A. The setting apart of a special day, every week, Neh. 13. 15. -- 23. Esaias
58. 13.
wherein we are to separate our selves from our worldly businesses, and
ordinary callings concerning this life, that we may wholly attend to the
service and worship of God alone.

Q. What need is there of one whole day in a week, to serve God in, seeing we
may serve him every day?

A. To the end, that we should not plunge our selves so deeply into the
affairs of the world, as that we should not recover our selves; the wisdom of
God has thought it good, that one day in seven, there should be an
intermission from them; that we might wholly separate our selves to the
service of God, and with the more freedom of spirit perform the same.

Secondly, for that a whole day is needful, for the performance of all the
parts of Gods worship; as hearing of public Prayer, and the Word preached,
Catechizing, administration of the Sacraments, exercise of holy Discipline, and
consideration of the glory of God in the creatures. Thirdly, If Adam in his
perfection had need of this help, much more have we, who are so grievously
corrupted.

Q. Is there any one special day of the week, set apart by God himself?

A. Yea.

Q. What day is that?

A. The first day in the week, called the Lords day. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Revel. 1.
10. Act. 20. 7.


Q. Was this day set apart thereunto from the beginning?

A. No: for from the first Creation, till the Resurrection of Christ, the last
day of the week, commonly called Saturday, was the day that was appointed
thereunto; and that which the people of God constantly observed.

Q. And why so?

A. Because upon that day, God ceased from the Genesis 2. 2.
work of Creation.

Q. How came this day to be changed?

A. By Divine Authority.

Q. How does that appear?

A. First, by the Ioh. 20. 19. 26. Act. 2. 1. and 20. 7.
practice of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles; which should be a sufficient
rule unto us, 1. Cor. 16. 1.
especially the Apostles having added a commandment thereunto. Secondly, there
is no reason why it should be called the Lords day, but in regard Revel. 1. 10.
of the special dedication thereof to the Lords service. For otherwise all the
days of the week are the Lords days, and he is to be served and worshipped
in them.

Q. What was the cause why the day was changed?

A. Because it might serve for a thankful memorial of Christ's Resurrection:
for as God rested from his labor on the last day of the week; so Christ
ceased Mat. 28. 1. Genesis 2 1. 2.
from his labor and Afflictions on this day: as the one therefore was
specially sanctified in regard of the Creation of the world; so was the other,
in respect of the restoration and Redemption thereof, which is a greater work
then the Creation it self.

Q. Cannot this day then be altered?

A. No, not by the power of any creature in heaven or earth.

Q. But does not this Commandment directly require the seventh day from the
Creation?

A. No, but the seventh day in general.

Q. But does not the reason annexed (where the Lord is said in six days to
make heaven and earth, and to rest the seventh, and therefore to hallow it),
confirm so much?

A. No, not necessarily: for it does not thence follow, that we should rest the
same day the Lord rested, but that we should rest from our works the seventh
day, as he rested from his: which seventh, as under the Law he appointed to
be Saturday; so nothing hinders, but that by his special appointment, under
the Gospel, it may be Sunday, and yet the substance of the Commandment
nothing altered.

Q. Why does not the New Testament specially mention this change?

A. Because there was no question moved about the same, in the Apostles times.

Q. Is not this Commandment Ceremonial?

A. No: First, if it were so, then the Moral Law should consist but of nine
words, or Commandments, which is Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
contrary to Gods word. Secondly, this Commandment (amongst the rest) Exodus
31. 18.
was written by the finger of God, whereas no part of the Ceremonial Law was.
Thirdly, it (as well as the other) was written Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
in Tables of stone; to signify the continuance of this Commandment, as well
as the rest. Fourthly, Genesis 2. 3.
it was before any shadow or Ceremony of the Law, yea, before Christ was
promised, whom all Ceremonies of the Law have respect unto.

Q. But it sometime shadowed our Coloss. 2. 16. 17 Exodus 31. 13.
Eternal Rest, and is therefore Ceremonial.

A. That follows not: for the ceremonial representation of our Eternal
Rest, came after the Commandment of the Rest, and therefore is accessorie and
accidental; for which cause Dan. 9. 27. Matthew. 11. 13. Act. 15. 6. Coloss. 2.
13. 14. Heb. 10. 14. Gal. 5. 2.
the time of correction, and of abolishment of ceremonies being come, that use
may well fall away, and yet the Commandment remain, it being not of the
substance of the Commandment.

Q. Have you yet any further reason, to confirm the perpetuity of the Rest of
the seventh day?

A. Our Savior Christ willing his followers, which Matthew. 24. 20.
should live about 40. years after his ascension, to pray that their flight
might not be upon the Sabbath, to the end that they might not be hindered in the
service of God; does thereby sufficiently declare, that he held not this
Commandment in the account of a ceremony.

Q. When does this our Sabbath begin?

A. At the dawning of the day, for Christ rose in the dawning thereof; whereby
is put a difference between the Jewish, and the true Christian Sabbath: for as
the Jewish Sabbath began in that part of the day, in which the Creation of the
world was ended, and consequently in the evening; so the celebration of the
memory of Christ's Resurrection, and therein of his Rest from his special
labors, being the ground of the change of that day into this; it also (by the
same proportion of reason) is to begin, when the Resurrection began, which was
in the morning.

Q. Can you show this by example?

A. Yea, Paul being at Troas, after he had preached Act. 20. 7-10.
a whole day until midnight, celebrated the Supper of the Lord the same night,
which was a Sabbath days exercise; and therefore that night following the day,
was a part of the Sabbath: for in the morning he departed, having stayed there
seven days; by which it is evident, that that which was done, was upon the
Lords day.

Q. Is the Lords day only to be separated to Gods service?

A. No: for of this nature also are Leuit. 23. 27. Joel 2. 12.
holy Fasts, observed for the avoiding of some great evil, present, or
eminent; and holy Zach. 8. 19. Hest. 9. 17. 18. 19.
Feasts, for the thankful remembrance of some special memorable mercies
obtained.

Q. How is the Commandment set forth?

A. First in a short sum, and after declared by parts.

Q. What is the short sum?

A. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy.

Q. What is to be observed in the word, Remember?

A. That although all the Commandments are needful diligently to be
remembered, yet this more specially.

Q. Why so?

A. First, because this Commandment has least light of nature, to direct us
to the observation of it.

Secondly, for that we are naturally most negligent in the observation of this,
suffering our selves to be withdrawn by our worldly business, from Gods
service upon the Lords day; and therefore such a special warning is needful to
be added.

Q. What is it that we should here remember, for the better sanctifying of
the Sabbath?

A. That we so compass all our business within the six working days, that
our worldly affairs enter not, or incroch into the possession of the Lords
day; not only willingly, but not so much as by any forgetfulness: as when
(through want of foresight, or fore-casting) the payment of money, due by
obligation, or any such businesses that might be prevented, shall fall out on
that day.

Q. What are the parts of the Commandment?

A. They are two: the first shows what works we are to decline upon this day;
the other, what duties we are to perform.

Q. What are the works that we must decline, and leave undone on the Lords day?

A. Not only the works of sin, which we ought Mark. 3. 4. Ezech. 23. 37. 38.
Numb. 15. 32. 33. Exodus 31. 13. 14. and 34. 21. Neh. 13 15. etc. Esaias 58. 13.
to leave undone every day; but also the works of our ordinary callings
concerning this life, and all bodily exercises and labors, which upon other
days are lawful and necessary to be done.

Q. Is it unlawful to do any bodily work, or worldly business on the Lords
day?

A. Yea, excepting those works which belong to Luke 13. 15. 16.
common honesty, and are necessary for the preservation of life, health, and
goods; which otherwise would be in great danger to perish, if they were not
saved on that day; or those, which are requisite for the performance of Gods
service.

Q. Are we as strictly bound to forbear all worldly labor upon this day, as
the Jews?

A. Yes verily, so far as the Commandment reaches; and more then they,
because of the greater measure of Gods graces upon us, above that which was
upon them.

Q. What do you say to the making of a fire, and dressing Exodus 35. 3. and 16.
23.
of meat upon the Lords day? for neither of these were lawful to the Jews.

A. Not to make a fire, or dress meat on the Sabbath, were proper to the
Pedagogie, or manner of government of the children under the Law; as may
appear by this, that there was no such thing commanded, before the Law was
given by Moses; and therefore it follows that this was Ceremonial, and not
Moral.

Q. Why is there so particular a rehearsal of the Persons, in this
Commandment are forbidden to work?

A. To take away all excuses from all persons: for the Lord did see that such
was the corruption of men, that if they themselves did rest upon this day from
lalour, they would think it sufficient, not caring how they toyled out, and
wearied their servants at home, with continual labor, as many do; so that it
were better to be such men's oxen, then their servants, so small care they have
of their souls.

Q. What is the special use of this rehearsal?

A. To teach us, that all sorts and degrees of persons are bound to yield a
duty unto God in sanctifying the Sabbath.

Q. Was not this ordained to this end, that beasts might sometime rest, and
that servants (especially) might have some time for honest recreation, without
which they could not otherwise continue.

A. Some think so, but there is little or no ground for such an opinion: for
the wearying and toyling out of servants, and beasts, is against the sixth
Commandment. And work is here forbidden, that men might be the more free for
the worship of God; and therefore though servants had never so much rest and
recreation upon other days, yet they ought to rest upon this day in that
regard.

Q. Why does he then make mention of the Rest of the Beasts in this
Commandment?

A. Because Beasts cannot be traveled, or used in any work upon that day,
unless man be withdrawn from Gods service: yea, though the beast could labor
without man's attendance, yet his mind would some way or other, be so carried
away, and distracted thereby, that it would not be so fit as it ought to be,
for Gods service.

Q. But to whom specially is the charge of this Commandment directed?

A. To House-holders, and Magistrates.

Q. What is the charge of the Hous-holder?

A. That not only himself keep the Lords day, but his wife, children, and
servants, as much as may be; for as they serve him in the week, so must he
see that they serve God on the Sabbath.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That a Householder should at least be as careful of the Lords business as
of his own: and if he will not keep such a servant as is not faithful in his
ordinary work: much less should he keep any that will not be careful in
the Lords work, how skillful soever he be in his own.

Q. What is the Magistrates part?

A. To see that all within his gates keep the Lords Neh. 13. 15. etc. Josh.
24. 15.
day; even strangers (though Turks, and Infidels) causing them to cease from
labor, and restraining them from all open and public Idolatry, or false
worship of God; much more all his own subjects, whom he ought to force to
hear the word. 2. Chron. 34. 33.


Q. So much of the first part of the Commandment, what works we are to
decline: the second part follows. What works are to be done on the Lords day?

A. We must wholly, Amos 8. 5. Mal. 1. 13.
and without wearisomnes, exercise our selves in the holy service of God,
partly publicly in the Church, which is the special work, and proper use of
the Sabbath; and partly privately out of the Church, and in the family, both
before the public exercises in the Church, the better to perform them; and
after, the more to profit by them.

Q. What must we do in the Church?

A. Hear the word preached, pray with the congregation, Luke 4. 16. Act. 13.
14. 15. and 15. 22. 1. Cor. 16. 2.
receive the Sacraments in the appointed time, and give unto the poor
according to our wealth, and the blessing of God upon us.

Q. What if we cannot be suffered to use these public means?

A. We must then humble our selves before God, mourning and sorrowing for this
restraint, and with so Matthew. 24. 20. Psalm. 42. 6. Psalm. 63. 1. 2.
much more care and earnestness use the private means.

Q. What is convenient to be done privately out of the Church?

A. The examination of our selves, and those that Luke 14. 7. ^^ 16.
belong unto us, what we have profited: familiar conference of things belonging
unto the kingdom of heaven; also meditation upon the exercises of Religion,
Psalm. 80.
and upon the creatures, and upon the providence Psalm. 92.
of God, especially that which he exercises in the government of the Church:
also visiting the sick, and collecting for the poor, 1. Cor. 16. 2. Neh. 8.
12.
for these also are works of the Sabbath.

Q. What further proof have you of this continual exercise?

A. In the Law, every evening, and every morning Numb. 28. 9.
were sacrifices, which a on the Sabbath were multiplied; and the Psalm
(entitled, A Psalm for the Sabbath) Psalm. 92.
appointed to be sung that day, declares that it is a good thing to begin the
praises of God early in the morning, and to continue the same till it be night.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That all exercises which serve not in some degree, to make us more fit to
the Lords work, are unlawful upon the Lords day.

Q. What difference do you make between Sabbath nights, and other nights?

A. Great: for we should lay our selves down to rest in greater quietness
that night, upon the sense and feeling of the comforts of the former exercises:
So that our sleep should be the more quiet, by how much the former exercises
of the day have been more holy; otherwise we should declare we have not kept a
day to the Lord, so holy as we ought.

Q. So much of the Commandment. What are the reasons to enforce the
Commandment?

A. The first is, a secret reason of comparison of the less: that for so much
as God has given us six days of seven to do our own business in (whether it
be labor, or honest Recreation), when he might have given us but one of
seven, and have taken six to himself; we ought not to think it much, to
spend the whole seventh day in his service.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. The inequall and wretched dealing of most men with God: who (by the grant
of this Commandment) urge usually at their servants hands, the work of a whole
day, in every of the six days; yet upon the Lords day, think it enough both
for themselves, and those under them, to measure out unto the Lord three or
four hours only to his service; using one measure to mete the service due
unto themselves, and another to mete the service due unto God; which is a Prou.
11. 1.
thing abominable before God; and so much the more as the things are greater,
and of more value, which they mete with the lesser measure.

Q. What is the other reason?

A. A reason expressed, taken from the example of God: that as God having made
all things in the six days, rested the seventh from creating any more: so
should we rest from all our own works.

Q. Did the Lord cease from all work, on the seventh day?

A. No verily: he did then, and still continues to do a great work, in
preserving the things created. And so must we learn not to be idle upon the
Lords day, but to attend upon the Lords service; and by his example we may
save things on that day, which otherwise would be lost, but we may not get or
gain more.

Q. What is meant by sanctifying it?

A. The setting it apart from worldly business, to the service of God.

Q. What by blessing?

A. Not that this day in it self, is more blessed then other days, but that,
in setting it apart and separating it by this Commandment from other days, to
be kept holy by public exercises of his holy worship and service, he made it
an effectual means of blessing to them, that shall sanctify it as they ought.

Q. Wherein shall they be blessed, that keep the Sabbath day?

A. First, in an increase both of the knowledge and fear of God, and all other
spiritual and heavenly graces accompanying salvation. Secondly, in matters of
this life, we shall not only not be hindered by keeping the Sabbath, but more
blessed then if we did work that day: as of the other side, the gain on the
Lords day, shall (by the curse of God) melt and vanish away, what show of
profit soever it have; and bring some curse or other upon our labors in the
week days, which in themselves are lawful and honest.

So much of the first Table, concerning our duties to God, the due performance
whereof is called Piety, wherein God (as a King or father of a household) does
teach his subjects, or family, their duties toward himself. Now follow our
duties to our selves, and our neighbor, taught in the second Table, in the six
other Commandments.

CHAP. 19.
Of the duties to our Neighbor, and of the second Table in general.

Of the 2. Table, First, in general. Secondly, in special, the Comma^deme^ts
whereof forbid All advised consent to hurt our Neighbor, where, First, of
special duties concerning special persons. Com. 5. Chap. 20. Secondly, of
general duties concerning all. Com. 6. etc. Chap. 21.
All motions and thoughts of evil without consent, Comman. 10. Chap. 25.


MATTHEW. chap. 22. verse. 36. to the 41. 36. Master, which is the great
Commandment in the Law? 37, Jesus said unto him. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. 38.
This is the first and great Commandment. 39. And the second is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 40. On these two Commandments hang
all the Law and the Prophets.

Q. WHat is the sum of the second Table?

A. The duties that one man owes to another, commonly called Justice.

Q. What learn you out of the 39. verse, where it is said, that this second
Table is like to the first?

A. First, that (according to our measure of profiting in the first Table) we
profit also in this. In which respect we may try our sincerity and
uprightness, in the duties of the first Table, by our forwardness in those
which are required in the second.

Secondly, that out of our love to our neighbor, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. and 5. 15.
we draw all our duties to all me^, reaching the^ even to the wicked (so far
forth as we hinder not Gods glory, nor some great duty to other), but
especially to the household of faith: for sometime it may so fall out, that that
which men require, (and that otherwise of right) may not be given: as Rahab,
though subject to the King of Jericho, might not reveal the Spies, but should
have failed in her duty, if she had betrayed them at the Kings commandment;
and therefore in this case she did well, in preferring the obedience she owed
to God, before the duty she owed to man. In like case also, Jonathan
revealing his fathers counsel unto Josh. 2. 3. 1. Sam. 19. 2. 3.
David, and preferring the greater duty before the lesser, did well. So we
(owing a greater duty to our Deuteronomy. 33.
country, then to our natural kindred) must rather refuse to relieve them if
they be Traitors, then suffer any hurt to come to our country.

Q. But what if two have need of that, which I can bestow but upon one only?

A. I must then prefer him that is of the household Gal. 6. 10.
of faith, before any other; and my kins-men, and those that I am tied unto by
any special bond, before strangers. Joh. 1. 41. Act. 10. 24.


Q. So much of the general. How are these six Commanments divided?

A. Into such as forbid all practice, or advised consent to any hurt of our
Neighbor, and such as forbid all thoughts and motions of evil toward our
Neighbor, though they never come to advised consent of the will.

Q. What Commandments are of the first sort?

A. The first five of this second Table.

Q. How are they divided?

A. Into those that concern special duties to special persons, and those
that concern general duties to all.

Q. What Commandments concern special duties?

A. The first of the second Table, being in number the fifth?

CHAP. 20.
Of the fifth Commandment.

Of the duties of Inferiors to Superiors, and of Superiors to Inferiors arising
there from. Superiors are without authority, by gifts Natural, of Person.
Age.
of Parts, Mind. Body.

Accidental.
with authority Private, By nature Husbands and wives. Parents, Children.
Otherwise, as Masters and Servants.
Public in the Church, Ministers. Commonwealth, Magistrates.



EXODUS 20. 12. Honor thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long
upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy father, etc.

Q. What is the sum of the Commandment?

A. All special duties required in regard of special callings and
differences, which God has made between special persons.

Q. What be those special persons?

A. Superiors, and Inferiors.

Q. What are Superiors?

A. They are such, as by Gods ordinance have 2. King. 5. 13. and 6. 21. 1. Cor.
4. 15. 2. King. 2. 12. and 13. 14. Coloss. 3. 12.
preeminence, and are here termed by the name of Parents; to whom the first
and principal duties required in this Commandment, do appertain.

Q. Why are all Superiors called here by the name of Parents?

A. First, for that the name of Parents, being a most sweet name, men might
thereby be allured (the rather) to the duties they owe; whether they be duties
that are to be performed to them that are properly so called, or which they
should perform to others.

Secondly, for that at the first, and in the beginning of the world, Parents
were also Magistrates, and Pastors.

Q. How does this agree with the Commandment of Christ, that we should Mark 3.
7. 8.
call no man Father or Master upon earth?

A. Very well: for there our Savior means only, to restrain the ambitious
titles of the Pharisees in those days, which desired not only so to be
called, but that men should rest in their authority alone, for matters
concerning the soul.

Q. Who are inferiors?

A. Such as (by the ordinance of God) are any way under Superiors; and who are
principally and in the first place, to perform the duties required in this
Commandment.

Q. What are the special duties required?

A. They are here comprehended under the word Mal. 1. 9.
Honor.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it adds an ornament and dignity to them.

Q. What is the honor that Inferiors owe to Superiors in general?

A. Reverence of the mind, declared by some civil behavior, or outward
submission; as of rising before them, and of giving the^ the honor of speaking
first, etc. Leuit. 19. 32. Job. 29. 8. and 32. 6. 7.


Q. What is the duty of Superiors toward their Inferiors in that respect?

A. To carry themselves so, as they may be worthy the honor that is given
them.

Q. How many sorts of Superiors are there?

A. Two: without authority, and with authority.

Q. Who are Superiors without authority?

A. Such as God has by Age only, or by some supereminent gifts, lifted above
others: as the elder before the younger; the skillful, before him that has
less skill.

Q. Who are inferiors to such?

A. They who are younger, and of meaner gifts.

Q. What is our duty toward such Superiors?

A. First, to acknowledge the things wherein God has preferred them before us,
and to respect them for it. Secondly, to make our benefit of their good graces,
so far as our calling will suffer.

Q. What is the duty of them toward us?

A. First, they who are Superiors in years, are by grave, wise and godly
carriage of themselves, to procure reverence unto themselves: On the one side
avoiding lightness and variableness; of the other, too much seuerenesse and
austerity.

Secondly, they who are Superiors in knowledge and skill, are to use their
skill so, as others may be benefited 1. Pet. 4. 10.
by them.

Q. Who are the Superiors with authority?

A. Such as by special office and calling have charge over others.

Q. What are the Inferiors?

A. Such as be committed unto their charge.

Q. What general all duty is there between the Superiors and Inferiors of
this sort?

A. To pray more especially one for another. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Psalm. 20. and 21.
Genesis 24. 12. Psalm. 3. 9. and 25. 22 and 28. 9.


Q. What is required of the Inferiors?

A. Two things: subjection, and obedience, Romans 13. 1.

Q. What is subjection?

A. An humble and ready mind to submit themselves, to their government who
are set over them, in acknowledging the necessity of their power in governing
Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. 1. Tim. 6. 1.
them.

Q. What is obedience?

A. A voluntary and hearty doing of that which the Superiors command, or
patient suffering of that they shall inflict upon them; albeit it should be
either without Ephesians. 6. 5. 6. 7. 1. Pet. 2. 19. 20.
just cause, or somewhat more excessiuely then the cause requires.

Q. Is there no restraint of this obedience?

A. None, saving that which we owe unto God; in regard whereof, our obedience
to them must be in Ephesians. 6. 1. and 5. 24. 1. Sam. 22. 17.
the Lord; that is, only in lawful things; otherwise we are with reverence to
refuse, and allege our duty unto God for our warrant.

Q. What is the duty of such Superiors toward their ours?

A. Prudently, and after a holy manner, to govern such as are committed unto
them, not as Tyrants, but as those which have a Governor above them, to whom
they shall give an account: and as those which rule over such as have a title
unto, and shall be partakers Ephesians. 6. 9. 1. Pet. 3. 7.
of the same glory, which themselves look for.

Q. In what things does this Government consist?

A. In two: direction, and recompense or reward.

Q. Wherein consists direction?

A. In word, and in work.

Q. What must be done by word?

A. They must instruct and command them in the Genesis 18. 19.
things which pertain to God, and to their special callings: and herein God
has declared his singular care of the everlasting good of men: who has
therefore commended the care of Religion to so many, to the end they might be
so much more assuredly kept in the fear of God.

Q. What is direction in work?

A. Good example of life, whereby they are to go before their Inferiors.

Q. Hitherto of Direction: What is Recompense?

A. It is either a cheerful reward for well doing, or a just chastisement for
evil; which both should be answerable to the deed done.

Q. How many kinds of Superiors are there with authority?

A. Two: private, and public, and consequently so many Inferiors.

Q. Who are private Superiors and Inferiors?

A. Such as are Masters of a family, whether natural, as husband and wife,
parents and children; or otherwise, as Masters, and servants: where first the
husbands are Superiors to their wives; then Parents to their children; and
lastly, Masters to their servants.

Q. What is the general duty of Inferiors in a Family?

A. According to their places and gifts, to perform Genesis 39. 2. 3. 4.
that which is commanded by the governors thereof, for the good of the
household. Genesis 18. 8.


Q. What is the duty of the Superiors in the household?

A. Provision of food and raiment, both sufficient, Prou. 27. 23. 24. 25. Prou.
31 15. Genesis ^8. 6. 7. 8. 1. Tim. ^. 8.
and agreeable to every ones estate, with convenient government: after,
familiarly to teach them, and to go before them in prayer accordingly.

Q. What are the common duties of the husband and wife each to other?

A. Mutual and conjugal love one toward another, declared by mutual help;
and 1. Cor. 7. 3.
due benevolence, except by consent for a time, that 1. Cor. 7. 5. 2. Sam. 11.
11.
they may give themselves to fasting and prayer.

Q. What is the duty of wives to their husbands?

A. First, subjection, in a gentle and moderate kind Ephesians. 5 22.
and manner: for albeit it be made heavier then it was from the beginning,
through the transgression of the woman; yet that yoke is easier then any other
domestical subjection. Secondly, in subjection they are, to perform
obedience, wherein wives are often short, Ephesians. 5. 33. 1. Pet. 3. 1-6.
as husbands in love.

Secondly, she must represent (in all godly and commendable matters) his image
in her behavior: that 1. Cor. 11. 7.
in her a man may see the wisdom and uprightness of her husband.

Thirdly, she must be an helper unto him, as otherwise, Genesis 2. 18. Prou. 31.
12. 1. Tim. 3. 11.
so by saving that which he brings in.

Q. What is the husbands duty to his wife?

A. In an entire love unto her, to defend her from Ephesians. 5.
all evil, and cherish her, as he would cherish his own flesh, and as Christ
does his Church.

Q. What is the duty of children to their Parents?

A. It is either general, or special, viz. in the case of marriage.

Q. What is the general?

A. So to carry themselves, whiles they are under Prou. 10. 1. and 17. 25. and
31. 28.
their parents tuition, and after they are departed from them, as they may
cause their parents (in their good bringing up) to be commended.

Q. What is the special duty in case of marriage?

A. That they ought not so much as attempt, to bestow themselves in marriage,
without their Parents Genesis 24. Judge. 14. 2. Genesis 21. 21. and 27. 46. and 28. 9.
1. Cor. 7. 36. 37. 38.
direction and consent, especially daughters.

Q. What reason have you to persuade children unto this duty?

A. That seeing their Parents have taken such great pains and travel in
bringing them up, they should reap some fruits of their labors in bestowing
of them; beside, they should give them this honor, to esteem them better
able, and more wise to provide for their comfortable marriage, then themselves
are.

Q. Is this duty required only of children to their natural parents that
begat them?

A. No: it is also in some degree required of children to their Uncles, and
Aunts; or to any other under Hest. 2. 10. 20. Ruth. 2. 18. 23.
whom they are, and that be in stead of Parents, when Parents are dead.

Q. What is the second duty of children to their Parents?

A. That if their Parents stand in need of relief, 1. Tim. 5. 4. Genesis 45. 11.
and 47. 62.
they (being able) are to help them.

Q. So much of the duties of children to their Parents: what are those of
Parents toward their children?

A. They are either common to both Parents, or particular to either of them.

Q. What are the common duties of both Parents?

A. They must mark the wits and inclinations of Prou. 20. 11. and 22. 6. Genesis
4. 2.
their children; and as far as their own ability will reach, they are
accordingly to apply them to some honest calling in due time.

Q. What is the second common duty?

A. To lay up and provide somewhat for their children; 2. Cor. 12. 14. Prou. 19.
14.
and what they have received of their Ancestors, to leave the same (where it
may be done lawfully) to their posterity.

Q. What special duty is there of the Parents to the eldest son?

A. That since the Lord has honored him with Genesis 49. 3. 4.
that dignity, as to be their strength; he should also be Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
honored of them (at the least) with a double portion, as of the rest of the
brethren with honor: yet so, as he fall nor from his honor by some horrible
sin. Genesis 49. 4.


Q. So much of the common duties to both: what is required of the father
especially?

A. To give the name unto the child. For notwithstanding Genesis 35. 18. Luke 1.
62. 63.
that the mothers have sometimes given the names, yet that has bin by
permission of the fathers.

Q. What special duty is laid upon the mother?

A. Genesis 21. 7. 1. ^am 1. 23. 1. Tim. 5. 10. 1. Tim. 2. 15. Genesis 24. 10. 1^.
Ephesians. 6. 5. 6.
To nurse the child, if she be able.

Q. What is the duty of the servant to the Master?

A. With care and faithfulness (as in the presence of God) to bestow himself
wholly (at the times appointed) to his Masters business.

Q. What is the Masters duty?

A. To recompense his service, according as the Deuteronomy. 24. 14. 15. and 15. 13.
14.
Lord has blessed him by his labor.

Q. Hitherto of Superiors in private, as also of Inferiors: what are they in
public?

A. Such as govern and are governed in Church and Commonwealth. Lam. 4. 3. 4.


Q. What is the duty of all inferiors to their public Superiors?

A. To minister charges, and other things necessary for the execution of their
offices, and to their power to defend them in the same.

Q. What is due from them to their Inferiors?

A. To procure their common good, they having Exodus 18. 13. 2. Sam. 24. 17.
Matthew. 11. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 8.
received the charge of them, forgetting themselves, and their own private
good, so often as need shall require.

Q. Who are Governors in the Church?

A. The Ministers of the Word especially.

Q. Who are they which are governed?

A. All Christians, and professors of Religion.

Q. What is their principal duty to the Ministers of the word?

A. To hear them willingly, and to submit themselves to all, that they shall
plainly and directly teach Mal. 10. 14. Heb. 13. 17.
them, out of the word of God.

Q. What is the principal duty of the Minister to them?

A. To be faithful and painful in dispensing to 2. Tim. 4. 1. Act. 20. 26.
them the will of God, and not their own fancies, or the inventions of men.

Q. Who are Governors in Commonweals?

A. Civil Magistrates.

Q. Who are under their government?

A. All persons and subjects in the Realm, City, or Romans 13. 1.
State, where they are Governors.

Q. What is the special duty of such Subjects?

A. To obey their Laws in the Lord, and to pay willingly all Custom and
Tribute due to them. Romans 13. 6. 7.


Q. What are the duties of the Superiors in the Commonwealth, (as Kings, and
inferior Magistrates)?

A. They are twofold: First, in respect of Gods 1. Tim. 2. 2.
matters. Secondly, in regard of civil affairs.

Q. What in respect of Gods matters?

A. To see that true Religion be stablished, reformed 2. Chron. 14. 3. 4. and
15. 12-15. and 17. 6-9.
and maintained, after the example of David, Solomon, Ezechiah, Josiah, and
other good Kings; to see those ordinances of Religion, which are grounded upon
the word of God, duly established and practiced; that so God may be truly
served and glorified, and the Churches within their Realms, and under their
government, may under them lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. For he who neglects this duty to God, shall never
perform his duty 1. Tim. 2. 2.
to men, how politic soever he seem to be.

Q. What is the Magistrate specially to perform in respect of civil affairs?

A. He must look to the peace of the Commonwealth, 1. Tim. 2. 1.
over which he is set, and that justice therein be Dan. 4. 7. 8. 9. Romans 13. 4.
5. Psalm. 72. 2. 48. 7.
duly executed, that every man may enjoy his own: that the good may be
cherished, and evil doers punished.

Q. So much of the duties between Superiors and Inferiors. What is required
of equals?

A. First, that they live together sociably, and comfortably, Philip. 2. 3.
Romans 12 10. 1. Pet. 2. 17. and 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 21.
and not exalt themselves one above another; but that they go one before
another, in giving honor.

Q. So much of the Commandment: what is the reason of the Commandment?

A. That thy days, etc. which is a promise of long Esaias 65. 20.
life, to such as shall keep this Commandment.

Q. Have not the other Commandments this promise?

A. No, not expressly; which shows, that a more plentiful blessing in this
kind, follows from the obedience of this Commandment, then of the other that
follow. Hence it is called by the Apostle, the first Commandment with Ephesians.
6. 1. 2.
promise, it being the first in order of the second Table, and the only
Commandment of that Table that has an express promise; and the only
Commandment of the ten, that has a particular promise. Hence it is, that the
Lord reue^geth the breach of this Commandment so often in this life. First,
upon the parents-who have been themselves ungracious, in giving unto them
ungracious and disobedient children; and then upon the children themselves, who
are sometimes immediately stricken from heaven, and sometimes punished by the
hand of the Magistrate.

Q. But how is this promise truly performed; seeing some wicked men live long,
and the godly are taken away, even in the midst of their time?

A. The godly live so long as it shall serve for Gods glory, and for their own
good: but the wicked live to their further condemnation. And herein God does
Esaias 65. 20.
not a whit break his promise; for if he promise a man silver, and pay him
with gold, and that in greater weight and quantity, he does him no injury, and
the wicked gain nothing by their long life, receiving (by means thereof)
greater judgment in hell.

CHAP. 21.
Of the sixth Commandment.

Thus far of special duties to special persons, several follow, concerning
the Person of our neighbor, Com. 6. which forbids Murder, Inward. outward,
against our neighbor, Alive in Gesture. Act, in Word. Deed, against his Body.
Soul.


Dead, against Himself. Them that belong to him.


Things belonging to him, Chap. 22.

EXODUS 20. verse. 13. Thou shall not kill.
Q. SO much of the fifth Commandment, and therein of special duties, to
special persons: the general duties follow: what are they?

A. They are either such as concern the person it self of our neighbor, in
the sixth; or such as concern the things that belong to his person, in the
seventh, eighth, and ninth.

Q. Rehearse the sixth Commandment.

A. Thou shall not murder.

Q. What is the sum of this Commandment?

A. Not to hurt our own person, or the person of Genesis 9. 5.
our neighbor; but to procure safety, and to do those 1. Tim. 5. 23.
things that lie in us, for the preservation of his and our life and health.

Q. What are the sorts of duties, which concern the person of our neighbor?

A. They are to be collected from the diverse breaches of this Commandment.

Q. What are the sorts of breaches of this Commandment?

A. Either inward, or outward.

Q. What are the inward?

A. First, anger, either without cause, or passing Mat. 5. 21. 1. Ioh. 5. 15.
Iam. 3. 14. Amos 6. 5. 6. Romans 1. 31. Psalm. 5. 6.
measure, when the cause is just. Secondly, hatred. Thirdly, envy. Fourthly,
want of compassion. Fifthly, frowardness, and vneasinesse to be entreated.
Sixthly, desire of revenge: of all which, that may be said which is spoken
Prou. 14. 30.
of envy, that they make a man a murderer of himself, and of his neighbors.

Q. What be the contrary duties to these?

A. First, slownesse to anger. Secondly, humanity Ephesians. 4. 26. etc.
and kindness, because we are all the creatures of one God, and the natural
children of Adam. Thirdly, a care of peace, and of avoiding offenses. Fourthly,
an easiness to be reconciled. Fifthly, compassion. Sixthly, a patient
suffering of injuries, lest they break out into greater mischiefs.

Q. What are the outward breaches of this Commandment?

A. They are to our neighbor either alive or dead.

Q. What are they to our neighbor alive?

A. They are either in gesture, or otherwise.

Q. What are they in gesture?

A. All such gestures as declare the anger or hatred Genesis 4. 5. 6. Mat. 27. 39.
Genesis 21. 9. Galath. 4. 29. Psalm. 10.
of the heart, as a lowering or frowning countenance, a scornful nodding of
the head, derision, snuffing, etc. which (as sparks) come from the fire of
wrath and hatred, etc.

Q. What are they that are otherwise?

A. Either in word or deed.

Q. What are the breaches in word against this Commandment?

A When speeches are Mat. 5. 22.
contemptuously uttered, as to call our brother Racha: or wrathfully, as to
call him fool; in which respect, words proceeding from wrath, are in the
Scripture compared to Psalm. 120 4.
Juniper coals, which burn most fiercely; or to a razor, or the Prou. 21. 18.
pricking Psalm. 52. 2.
of a sword that cutteth most sharply. Leuit. 19. 14.
Mockings, for some wants of the body, Genesis 21. 9. 2. Sam. 6. 20.
especially for piety; in stead that they ought to be an Job. 29. 15.
eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame. Ephesians. 4. 31.
Crying, which is an unseemly lifting up of the voice: grudges, and complaints
one of Iam. 5. 9.
another.

Q. What is the contrary duty?

A. Courteous and amiable speeches, which (according Ruth. 2. 13. Ephesians. 4. 32.
to the Hebrew phrase) is called a speaking to the heart one of another.

Q. What are the breaches in deed?

A. Against the body, or the soul: against the body, either directly, or
indirectly.

Q. What are they which are directly against the body?

A. When a man, advisedly, and wittingly, through hatred, and without a
calling, smites, wounds, maimeth the body of his brother, or neighbor.

Q. What are the indirect hurts of the body?

A. They are either Private, or Public.

Q. What are the indirect hurts in private?

A. 1. When it is against our will, and we think nothing of it; as he which
felleth a tree, and his axe head Deuteronomy. 19. 4. 5.
falls, and hurts, and kills a man: in which case (under the Law) a man
was to have the benefit of Sanctuary. 2. When one gives not place to the
fury of another, as Jacob did to Esau, by his mothers Genesis 27. 43. 44. Romans
12. 21.
counsel. 3. When one defends himself with injury, or purpose of revenge,
or to hurt his adversary, Prou. 25. 15. Eccles. 10. 16. 17
and not only to save himself. 4. When a man surfetteth, or eats out of
time, or spends himself by unchaste behavior. 5. When a man neglects
physic, to preserve or recover health, so that it be after 2. Chron. 16. 12.
he have first sought unto God. 6. When he uses not the honest recreation,
wherewith his health may be Judge. 14. 12.
maintained: for we must not think that there are no more ways to kill a
man's self but with a knife, etc. 7. To this indirect murder belongs, when
women with child, either by misdiet, or strain by reaching, violent exercise,
and riding by Coach, or otherwise, and much more by dancing, either hurt the
fruit Exodus 21. 33.
of their womb, or altogether miscarrie. 8. When stairs are so made, that
they are like to hurt either children, servants, or others: or when wells and
ditches, (or any such like dangerous places) are not covered, or fenced:
whereunto belongs that the Lord commanded Deuteronomy. 22.
the Israelites to have battlements upon their houses.

Q. What are the public?

A. First, when the high ways are not mended. Secondly, Number. 35. 31. 32. Prou.
17. 15. Deuteronomy. 25. 3. 2. Cor. 11. 24. Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
when those (to whom it appertains) do not punish the breach of this
Commandment. Thirdly, when the correction is excessive. Fourthly, when it is
not in love of justice.

Q. Seeing the Law commands to love God and man only: whence is it that
unmercifulness is forbidden here to beasts?

A. All hard usage of the creatures of God is forbidden, Prou. 12. 10. Deuteronomy.
22. 6. and cap. 25.
not so much in regard of them, as that thereby the Lord would train us
forward to show mercy to our neighbor: for it being unlawful to use the dumb
creatures cruelly, it is much less lawful to use men so.

Q. So much of the breaches of this Commandment against the body alone: what
are they that are against the soul?

A. When Ministers are either Idol Shepherds, Prou. 28. 19. Ezech. 3. 18.
Jer. 48. 10. Esaias 62. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Act. 20. 28.
and cannot; or idle, and will not feed the flock committed to their charge:
or for the most part neglect their own, and busy themselves elsewhere,
without any necessary and lawful calling. Secondly, when Magistrates, that
procure not as much as in them lies, that the people under their government,
do frequent the hearing of the Word read and preached, and receiving of the
Sacraments, in the appointed times.

Q. Are inferiors also guilty of this sin?

A. Yea verily: all those people that have no knowledge, Prou. 8. 35. Hos. 4, 6.
especially having had the ordinary means appointed of God for obtaining the
same, either of their own, or of others, which they might have been the
partakers of.

Q. How do both Superiors and Inferiors kill the soul?

A. By evil example of life: contrary whereunto Matthew. 5. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14,
Heb. 10. 24. 1. Cor. 10. 32. Leuit. 19. 17.
is, to provoke one another to love, to give no offense, neither to Jews nor
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Also in not rebuking our neighbor when he
is in fault, but suffering him to sin.

Q So much of the breaches of this Commandment appertaining to the person of
our neighbor, whiles he is alive. What are they after his death?

A. They either concern his body, or those that pertain to him.

Q. What are the breaches concerning the body of the dead?

A. When friends and neighbors neglect to see Genesis 23. 19. and 25. 9. 1. Sam.
25. 1. Psalm. 79. 3. Revel. 11. 9. Genesis 49. 29. 1. King. 13. 31.
it honestly buried, and funerals performed with moderate mourning: also it
belongs to the person himself, to give order for his own comely and
Christian burial.

Q. What is the breach concerning those which belong unto him?

A. Not to provide for his wife, children and posterity, Ruth. 2. 20. 2. Sam.
9. 7.
that he may live in them.

Q. So much of the Commandment it self: what are the breakers therefore to
expect?

A. The Apostle James teaches that, when he says, Judgment without mercy
shall be upon those that are merciless. Iam. 2. 13.


Q. Of how many sorts are those Judgments?

A. They are either in this life, or that to come.

Q. What are they in this life?

A. Severe punishments (by the Law) are to be inflicted Exodus 21. 23. Judge. 1.
6. 7. Exodus 21. 28. Psalm. 55. 23.
upon the body; as limb for limb; eye for eye; hand for hand; life for life;
although it were a beast, if it were known to be a striker. Secondly, short
life: Blood thirsty men live not half their days. More particularly,
Magistrates, that should punish murderers, if they spare them, their lives are
in danger to go for the offenders: as Achabs did for Benadads; David also was
1. King. 20. 42.
exceedingly punished for sparing blood-thirstie men (such as was his son
Absolon) and not punishing 2. Sam. 13. 28. 29. and 14. 33. and 16. 11. 2. Sam.
3. 29.
them. Also God threatens, that he will not only revenge the blood of the
slain upon the murderer himself, but also upon his issue and posterity in
incurable diseases.

Q. What is the punishment concerning the life to come?

A. That their prayers are not heard. Esaias 1. 15. 1. Tim. 2. 8.


Q. What reasons are there to set forth the detestation of this sin of
murder properly taken?

A. First, if a man deface the image of a Prince, he is Gen 9. 6.
severely punished: how much more if he deface the Image of God? Secondly, (by
the Law of Moses) if a Exodus 21. 28.
beast (an unreasonable creature) had killed a man, it should be slain, and
the flesh of it (although otherwise clean) was not to be eaten. Thirdly, by
the same Law, if this sin go unpunished, God will require it Numb. 35. 33.
at the Magistrates hands.

CHAP. 22.
Of the seventh Commandment.

Things belonging to our Neighbor, are In regard of his wife: where unchastity
is forbidden, both Inward, of the heart. Outward, in the abuse of the Things
which belong to the body, as Apparel. Meat, and drink.
Body it self, Parts or senses, as the Tongue. Eyes. Ears, etc.
Whole, By himself. With others, by unlawful Co^iunctio^, either Natural, as
Fornication. Adultery.
Unnatural, with Own kind. Other.

Separation.




In other regards. Chapter 23.

EXODUS 20. 14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Q. SO much of the former Commandment, and therein of the general duties that
belong to the person of our neighbor. Now follow those Commandments which
concern the duties we owe to him, in regard of the things that belong to him:
what are they?

A. Either concerning the wife who is nearest unto him, and as himself, being
one flesh with him, Commandment, 7. or other things appertaining to him, Com.
8. 9.

Q. Rehearse the Commandment.

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. Continent or chaste usage toward our selves, and toward our neighbor:
forbidding all uncleanness of the flesh, and commanding all chaste and honest
behavior.

Q. What are the special duties of this Commandment?

A. They are to be gathered from the things forbidden therein.

Q. What are they?

A. They are either inward, or outward.

Q. What are the inward transgressions of this Commandment?

A. The unchastity and vnhonesty of the mind; Mat. 5. 28. Coloss. 3. 5. 1. Cor.
7. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
which is the desire of strange flesh, with resolution to have it (if he could).

Q. What are the duties commanded herein?

A. The virginity and continency of the mind. 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4.


Q. What are the outward transgressions of this Commandment?

A. Such unchasteness, as being once seated in the mind, after shows it self
outwardly.

Q. Of how many sorts is it?

A. It is either in the abuse of those things that belong to the body; as
apparel, meat, drink, etc. or else in the abuse of the body it self.

Q. How is this Commandment broken in the abuse of apparel?

A. First, if it be otherwise then belongs to the Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
sex: as if a man put on woman's apparel; or a woman a man's. For God would
have every sex discerned by distinct apparel, for avoiding of confusion, and
manifold enormities.

Secondly, when it is excessive, above either our estate, Mat. 11. 8.
or our ability.

Thirdly, when there is in it lightness; as some apparel is called by the
holy Ghost, whorish. Prou. 7. 10.


Fourthly, when it is not according to the custom of the country, city, or
town where we dwell, but 2. Sam. 13. 4. 18
newfangled.

Q. But may not women in their apparel, submit themselves to please their
husbands?

A. They must seek to please them by lawful means, and therefore by clothing
themselves in decent apparel, with sobriety; and for their success, to put
their trust in God, who is able, by modesty in apparel, without any such
indirect means, to maintain their husbands love toward them. 1. Pet. 3. 5.


Q. What apparel are we then to use?

A. Such as comes under the rule of the Apostle; namely, such as may witness
our godliness and modesty; and therefore although some (exceeding this measure)
say they do it not to allure any: yet if others be 1. Tim. 2. 9.
allured by it, it is a sin in them; although not so great as in the other,
who propound to themselves (by their wanton apparel) to allure.

Q. So much of the breach of this Commandment in apparel: How is it broken in
the abuse of meat and drink?

Q. Either in the quality, when we seek after too Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Ezech. 16.
49. Luke 16. 19.
much daintiness, and those meats and drinks which provoke this sin: or
else in quantity, when we feed to fullness of them.

Q. What is contrary to this?

A. A moderate and sober diet. Eccles. 10. 16.


Q. So much of unchastity, consisting in the abuse of those things which belong
to the body: Now follows that which consists in the abuse of the body it
self: How many ways is it?

A. Either in the abuse of the parts of the body, or in the abuse of the whole
body.

Q. How in the abuse of the parts?

A. When the tongue, eyes, and ears, do manifest the wantonness of the heart.

Q. How does the tongue manifest it?

A. In filthy speech, whereby not only the speakers 1. Cor. 15. 33. Ephesians. 5.
3. 4. and 4. 29.
heart, but also the hearts of the hearers are inflamed. Whither refer bad
songs, balads, interludes, amorous books, and such like.

Q. What is contrary to this?

A. Modest and chaste talk, by the example of the holy Ghost, who speaking (by
necessity) of matters Judge. 3. 24. 1. Sam. 1. 19.
unseemly to be spoken plainly of, uses chaste speech; as, he knew her; he
covered his feet, etc.

Q. How is wantonness manifested by the eye?

A. When the eye, (which is the seat of adultery, Matthew. 5. 28. Genesis 39. 7.
2. Pet. 2. 14.
or of chastity) is so fixed to behold the beauty of another; or else wanton
pictures, and the like things, that the heart is inflamed to lust thereby.

Q. What is contrary to this?

A. To make a covenant with our eyes, and to pray Job. 31. Psalm. 119.
that the Lord would turn away our eyes from seeing vanity.

Q. How does a man sin by his ears?

A. When he delights in hearing dishonest and filthy words, although (for his
credit) he will not speak them.

Q. What further abuse of the parts is there this way?

A. By all light gesture and behavior of a man's body, Esaias 3. 16.
in wanton dancing, and other lascivious motions. Mark. 6. 22.


Q. What is contrary to this?

A. That a man so carry and direct these parts, as Romans 6.
they be not weapons of uncleanness.

Q. How is the whole body abused?

A. Either by himself, or with others.

Q. How by himself?

A. In ceasing from doing any profitable thing, as in 2. Sam. 11. 1. 2. 1. Tim.
5. 11. 13. Deuteronomy. 23. 10. Genesis 38. 9.
Idleness. Or by the horrible sin of Onan, and the like pollutions.

Q. How is it with others?

A. Either in unlawful conjunction, (of all which the unlawful vows of
continency are nurses), or unlawful separation.

Q. How do men offend by unlawful conjunction?

A. When men do carnally company with others out of marriage, or otherwise
then the holy laws of marriage do require.

Q. What is common to those unlawful mixtures, that are with others?

A. That they may be all either voluntary in both, Deuteronomy. 22. 25.
or by force in the one; in which case the party forced, is to be holden
guiltless.

Q. Of how many sorts are they?

A. They are either natural, or unnatural.

Q. What is the natural conjunction forbidden by this Law?

A. Fornication, and Adultery. Deuteronomy. 22. 28.


Q. What is Fornication?

A. When two single persons come together out of Leuit. 19. 29. Deuteronomy. 23. 17.
1. King. 15. 12. 2. King. 23. 7.
the estate of Matrimony: where it is manifest, that the stews, permitted,
yea authorized and defended in Popery, are unlawful, and expressly forbidden
in the Law; and the Kings are commended in the Scripture, who took away such
filthiness out of their land: the rather, considering that by them, not
Fornication only, but Adulteries, yea Incests also were committed, when as both
married, and unmarried came thither; and oftentimes some of the same blood or
affinity, Ezech. 22. 11.
committed villainy with one whore: so far is it that they are remedies of
uncleanness.

Q. What is Adultery?

A. When (at least) one of the persons, married, or contracted in marriage,
companieth with another: whither also may be referred Polygamie, and the
having of many wives at once; which was ever unlawful Mal. 2. 15. 16.
in conscience, though it was not punished by the positive Law.

Q. May not a man also sin against this Commandment, in abusing his body
with his own wife?

A. Yes verily, when the honorable and chaste estate 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
of Matrimony is used to wantonness, and not with moderation, and
seemlinesse; as a man may fault in excess of wine, although it be his own.

Q. Hitherto of the unlawful conjunction which is natural: what is unnatural?

A. It is either with those of the same kind, or with other; and those of the
same kind are either of both sexes, or of some sex, with the same sex.

Q. What are those of both sexes?

A. First, when a man does keep company with a woman, or with his own wife,
or any other, when it is with them according to the manner of women. Secondly,
when there is a mixture of those bodies that Leuit. 18. 19. Ezech. 18. 6. and
22. 10.
are within the degrees of kindred or alliance, forbidden by the Law of God,
although it be in marriage.

Q. What is that of one sex with the same sex?

A. Buggerie, when man with man, or woman with Romans 1. 26. 27.
woman commits filthiness.

Q. Hitherto of unnatural mixture with their own Leuit. 18. 22.
kind. What is that with another kind?

A. Of a man or woman with a beast. Leuit. 18. 23.


Q. Hitherto of the unlawful conjunction. What is the unlawful separation?

A. It is either committed when the party is present, or when it is absent.

Q. How when the party is present?

A. When due benevolence is not yielded, although 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4.
there be aptness thereunto, nor any hinderance by consent, in respect of
extraordinary prayer.

Q. How when the party is absent?

A. When the party withdraws it self, in mislike, or loathsomeness; or else
by long and unnecessary iourneyes of traveling, of merchandise, wars, etc.
Or when separation has been made by the Magistrate, without lawful cause.

Q. So much of the Commandment. What are the punishments of the breach?

A. First, Numb. 5. 13. Prou. 5. 14.
when many other sins are hid, this is most commonly discovered. Secondly,
Prou. 2. 22. 14. Eccles. 7. 27. 28. Romans 1. 24.
the sin is a judgment of it self. Thirdly, Heb. 13. 4. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10.
God will judge them oftentimes in this world, always in the world to come.
Fourthly, Leuit. 20. 10.
more particularly, whipping for fornication, and death to other unlawful
mixtures. Prou. 6. 26. Hos. 4. 11. Job. 31. 12. 9. 10 Deuteronomy. 23. 2. 2. Sam. 13.
14. and 16. 21. Leuit. 20. 20.
Fifthly, it spends the goods, as also hurts the body, and bereaueth a man
of his understanding and judgment; and not only reaches to the offenders
themselves, but also to their children; for by Moses Law, the bastard (to the
tenth generation) might not enter into the Sanctuary: likewise he sins
against his wife and lawful children, whilst thereby he oftentimes makes a
stews of his house, as David did by the adultery he committed with the wife
of Vrias. And children begotten in horrible incest, were to be burnt or slain
in their mothers womb.

CHAP. 23.
Of the eighth Commandment.

The duties to our neighbor in other regards, viz. Of his goods. The sin
forbidding the hurt of our neighbor, or his goods, is theft: Inward, of the
heart. Outward, the Instruments. Kinds Private, by abuse of our Own, by
Prodigality. Avarice.
Neighbors, With color. Without color.

Public in Church sacrilege, Temporal. Spiritual.
Commonwealth.



Good name. Command. 9. Chapter 24.

EXODUS 20. 15. Thou shall not steal.
SO much of the seventh Commandment, and of those duties we owe to our
neighbor in regard of his wife: now follow those which we owe in other
regards; and that, 1. of his goods: 2. of his name. The duty we owe him in
regard of his goods, is contained in the eighth Commandment.

Q. What is that?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. To give to every one that which is his, and not only not to diminish (by
any means) another man's goods, but to do our best (as far as our callings
and means will suffer) to preserve them, and (as occasion serves) to help to
increase them.

Q. What are the things forbidden in this Commandment, and therein the duties
required to our neighbors in respect of their goods?

A. They are either inward, or outward.

Q. What are the inward?

A. When a man's eye is so set upon his neighbors Mat. 15. 19. 1. Tim. 6. 9.
10. Ephesians. 5. 3.
goods, that he desires them, with resolution to have them if he can. So that
not only men's hands, but also their hearts are here bound to the good
abearing, not so to desire their neighbors goods, as is aforesaid.

Q. What is contrary to this desire?

A. A mind contented with their own, and with Heb. 13. 5. 1. Tim. 6. 6. Phil.
4. 11.
that which is present.

Q. So much of the inward things forbidden: what are the outward?

A. First, the instruments of theft; secondly, the theft it self, in all
kinds thereof.

Q. What are the instruments of theft here charged?

A. First, the tongue, that it profess not the desire Prou. 1. 11. 12. Prou.
20. 14. Josh. 7. 21.
of our neighbors goods, nor practice the diuerting thereof: secondly, the
eye, and hand.

Q. What kinds of theft are there?

A. Either private, or public.

Q. Wherein is private theft occupied?

A. It is either in abuse of our own, or in pursuit of our neighbors goods.

Q. How do we abuse our own goods?

A. Either in lauishing and lashing them out, or in covetous holding of them.

Q. What is the abuse of our goods in lauishing them out?

A. When men in their diet, apparel, furniture of Deuteronomy. 12. 15. Prou. 11. 15.
and 21. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
houses, building, or otherwise exceed either their estate and ability, or the
use and custom of their country: whither refer suretiship unnecessary and
causeless; also giving relief to stout and lusty rogues.

Q. How are our goods abused by niggardly sparing of them?

A. When we withhold those things from the Prou. 3. 28.
poor, which we ought in duty to bestow upon them, or delay to give in due
time.

Q. What is private theft in pursuit of our neighbors goods?

A. It is either with color, or without color; the first being oftentimes
more heinous then the second.

Q. What is the theft with color?

A. When in buying and selling, battering, chapping, scorcing and changing, the
buyer concealeth the goodness, or the seller the faults, and blindfoldeth the
truth with colored speeches. Likewise when in borrowing Leuit. 25. 14. Prou.
20. 14. Luke 19. 8. Exodus 22. 26. Deuteronomy. 24. 6. Deuteronomy. 25. 13. 14. Amos 8. 4.
Prou 22. 18. Hos. 4. 8. 1. Cor. 6. 7.
and lending, setting and taking, gaging and waging, men either make no
conscience, or have no skill to do that which is equal and profitable, as
well for others they trade with, as for themselves; where false measures come
to be considered. Hitherto belongs forestalling, engrossing, monopolies,
oppressing usury (or increase exacted merely in respect of the loan),
bankerupts, that to enrich themselves, endamage others; removing of ancient
bounds: hitherto refer suits in Law for light matters.

Q. How is it without color?

A. Theft is committed without color, either privately Deuteronomy. 22. 1, Iam. 5. 4,
Romans 13. Luke 3. 4.
without the knowledge of the owner, as by thieves and pickers; whither refer
the not restoring of things found: or violently, he knowing it, and sometimes
beholding it, as by pirates, and robbers. Hither is referred oppression; as when
the rich withhold the hire of the labourer, or when due debt is withholden; and
when Soldiers are not content with their pay, but go a free-booting, etc.

Q. What is contrary to this?

A. The right use of that which is our own.

Q. Wherein consists the right use of our own?

A. Frugality, and good husbanding of it. Prou. 21. 5. 17. and 12. 27. 2. Cor.
8. 13. Prou. 13. 11.


Q. What is further contrary?

A. Labor, in some lawful vocation.

Q. How may we know the bounds of a lawful vocation?

A. When it is occupied, either in the information 1. Cor. 7. 14. 1. Pet. 4.
10. Eccles. 5. 8.
and instruction of the mind with good knowledge, which is the calling of them
that teach, and learn; or in exercising civil government, and (where it is
needful and just) in making war: or in the defense of the body, which is the
calling of the Magistrate, both in peace and war: or in providing for the
necessary helps of this life, which is the calling of Merchants, and
Husbandmen, etc.

Q. What manner of men are here condemned?

A. All idle persons, or those which are occupied in hurtful or unprofitable
trades, as the Romish merchants, Image-makers, Bead-makers, Act. 19. 19. and
24. 25. Reu. 18. 11. 12.
and the sellers of such trash: Iuglers, wandering and roguing Minstrels,
Magicians, Stage Players, stews, common dicers, and such like.

Q. Is there any thing else required to a lawful Calling?

A. Yes verily, as that it be lawful to him that uses it; which is, when he
is able to discharge it: secondly, when being lawfully called thereunto, he
diligently, and duly exercises himself in it.

Q. Is there no intermission or recreation, granted unto a Christian man from
his labors in the six days?

A. There is, to the end he may the better continue his labor, (...) same be
honest and profitable, for the exercise of the mind, or of the body; but
hurtful and dangerous pastimes are to be avoided: for as recreation belongs
to the sixth Commandment, so far as health is maintained thereby: so it
belongs to this Commandment, so far forth as we may be the better able to
labor thereby.

Q. What sorts of public theft are there?

A. Two, either in Church, or Commonwealth.

Q. What is Church theft? Malach. 2.


A. It is called Sacrilege, consisting partly in things spiritual, and partly
in things temporal.

Q. What is the sacrilege that consists in things spiritual?

A. When the Church is deprived of found doctrine, Jer. 23. 30.
through the insufficiency, or negligence, or corruption of he Pastors and
Teachers.

Q. Who are they that sin in this kind of sacrilege?

A. Either Ministers, or people.

Q. What Ministers do sin therein?

A. First, the ignorant, insufficient, and dumb Ministers, which take wages,
and cannot do their duty; with the makers and maintainers of them. 2. The idle
negligent Ministers; whither refer Monks, Friars, Nuns, etc.

Q. How do the people sin herein?

A. When they not only are content to be under such Ministers, as either
cannot, or will not reprove Ier. 5. 31.
them of their sins, but also desire and seek for them.

Q. What is that Sacrilege which consists in things temporal?

A. When the goods of the Church are taken from them to whom they belong; or
when men make sale or merchandise of Benefices and Church-liuings.

Q. What is the theft in the Commonwealth?

A. When the common goods are either taken away, or applied to any private use;
or when rewards are given, or taken, to corrupt Judgment; or when men become
false coiners of money, washers, or clippers, or the like.

Q. Hitherto of the Commandment: what special matter do you learn from
hence?

A. The gross error of the Anabaptists, that hold community of goods.

Q. Are there any special judgments, that follow the breach of this
Commandment?

A. Yea: first, evil gotten goods are usually soon, and ill spent, as
experience teaches, and the common Prou. 20. 21.
proverb; Of evil gotten goods, there is rarely a third heir: also the
Scripture says, He that spoileth, shall himself be spoiled; either himself
while he lives, or his Esaias 33. Job. 20. 15. 10 18. Deuteronomy. 25. 15.
posterity after his death. Secondly, poverty often follows. Thirdly,
Shortness of life: for as to those that live justly, long life is promised; so
to him that does otherwise, shortness of life is threatened.

CHAP. 24.
Of the ninth Commandment.

Sins whereby our neighbors good name is hurt, are Inward, by Suspicion. Secret
judging and condemning.
Outward, by Silence, in refusing to speak when they should, and listening.
Speech Given, as when we speak a lie. an untruth.
Received, as by hearing false tales.



EXODUS 20. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Q. SO much of the Commandment concerning our neighbors goods. What is that
which concerns our neighbors good name?

A. The ninth, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. That we hurt not our neighbors good name, but maintain it; and as
occasion is given, augment and increase it.

Q. How is this Commandment broken?

A. Either inwardly, or outwardly.

Q. How is it broken inwardly?

A. When a man has an ungrounded suspicion of (...). 4. (...) 7 15. (...). ^8.
4. (...). 1. 13. (...). 17. 28.
his neighbor. 2. When he does also (in his mind) condemn him (whether alive
or dead) having no good warrant for it.

Q. Is all suspicion and condemnation to be condemned?

A. No, for it is not unlawful to suspect my neighbor of naughtiness, if I
have good ground of it; nor to condemn him in that, whereof he stands truly
and evidently convicted.

Q. What is contrary to this, in observing whereof we may the better keep
this Law?

A. Charity, and love, which is not suspicious, but 1. Cor. 13. 5.
expounds things in the best part, where the presumptions are not strong to
the contrary. Contrary to Genesis 37. 31. 32. 33.
which ungrounded suspicion, is the interpreting of doubtful things in the
best part: yet we are not to neglect such suspicions as have ground, as did
Gedaliah. Ier. 40. 14. 15.


Q. What is the outward breach?

A. In words or deeds, to draw an evil name upon himself, or his neighbor.

Q. What great matter is it, if a man's good name be hurt, as long as neither
his person, nor his gooas are touched?

A. Very great: First, because (by means thereof) those gifts that God has
bestowed upon him, or others, are not so esteemed as is meet, and as they
should be, whereby glory is taken from God, which is the author and giver of
them. Secondly, his endeauours and labors are not so profitable to men, as
otherwise they might be, if his good name remained whole and Eccles. 7. 3.
untouched. Thirdly, it is discomfortable to himself, to have an evil name,
as a good name is comfortable. And therefore a man ought to labor to get a
good Phil. 4. 8.
name, and when he has gotten it, to keep it; and consequently to labor for
righteousness, which preserves a good name. And that not in some parts of
righteousness Prou. 10. 7. Mark. 14. 9. Eccles. 20. 1.
only, but in all; for that as one fly corrupts the whole box of ointment;
so one vice does deface a man's estimation.

Q. How many ways is the outward breach hereof committed?

A. By silence, or speech.

Q. How by silence?

A. When men, either through wilful ignorance Prou. 31. 8. 9. Genesis 40. 23.
cannot, or through malice, or neglect of their neighbors good name, will not
speak the truth, especially when it shall be called into question.

Q. How is it broken by speech?

A. Either by giving forth speeches of our neighbor, Psalm. 15. 3.
or receiving them.

Q. How in giving them forth?

A. Either in speaking that which is false, or that which is truth, but not in
sincerity.

Q. How in speaking that which is false?

A. First, by a lie: which is, when a man speaks Gen 18. 12. Act. 5. 3.
contrary to his own knowledge. Or secondly, by an untruth; which is, when a
man tells that which is Genesis 31. 31. 32.
false, thinking that it is true.

Q. Of how many sorts is a lie, or untruth?

A. Either public, or private.

Q. What is a public lie, or untruth?

A. When Judges give wrong judgment. When Prou. 17. 15. Act. 24. 1. 2. 1.
King. 21. 13. Prou. 19. 5. Eccles. 8. 11.
the Sergiants, or Counselors at Law defend bad causes, either through want of
skill, or contrary to knowledge. When men witness falsely in judgment: as
also, when true judgment is given, and execution comes 1. King. 21. 12.
not accordingly. Also when Ministers teach not sound doctrine, or mis-apply
it; or when one denies a truth before the Church, or public Officers thereof.

Q. What is a private lie, or untruth?

A. When one man lies, or speaks untruth to, or Prou. 12. 22. Coloss. 3. 9.
Revel. 22. 15. Psalm. 50. 1^ ^0. 2. Co^. ^^ 2^. Romans 8 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Act. 15.
3.
of another: of which sort commonly are all backbiters, slanderers, whisperers,
etc. which in conscience of the untruth, or lie they tell, seek corners: here
will come in the lie in jest; likewise the officious lie, (as it is called)
Contrary hereunto is a delight to report well of another, and to rejoice at the
good report that another shall give of our neighbor.

Q. So much of the breach of this Commandment, by speaking of false things.
What is it by speaking true things without sincerity?

Q. When the words are rehearsed, and the sense Mat. 26. 60. 61. 1. Sam. 22. 9.
10. Psalm. 52. 1. 2. 3. and 144. 8. Ephesians. 5. 4. 2. Tim. 2. 14. 16. and 3. 2.
Prou. 15. 23. and 27. 14. and 29. 5. Mat 11. 7-14. Heb. 3. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.
Leuit. 19. 17.
perverted: also, when the truth is spoken, with intent to hurt our neighbor;
also by vain and idle babbling, or proud boasting, and vainglorious words, by
flattery, debasing of our selves, dissimulation, equivocation, etc. Likewise,
when things are spoken out of time, or to them they belong not. Contrary to all
which abuses of the tongue, is the use of it, in commending the good gifts of
our neighbors to others, and admonishing, exhorting, and reproving our
neighbors, as occasion requires, in time and season.

Q. So much of the breach of this Commandment, in giving forth ill speeches.
What is it in receiving them?

A. When men have their ears open to hear ill of Psalm. 15. 3. and 101. 5.
Prou. 17. 4. and 25. 23. ^. Sam. 24. 10.
their neighbor with allowance. Contrary whereunto is the repulsing, and
terrifying of such, as are bringers of tales, and slanderous speeches against
their neighbor.

Q. So much of the Commandment. What are the special punishments of them,
that are the ordinary breakers thereof?

A. First, to be suspected, condemned, and evil reported Matthew. 7. 2. Eccles.
7. 23. 24.
of themselves. Secondly, false witnesses should have that punishment laid upon
them, which should Deuteronomy. 19. 18. 20.
have been inflicted upon those, whom they witnessed against, if their witness
had been true.

CHAP. 25.
Of the tenth Commandment.

Sin that comes not so far as consent, is concupiscence: The cause,
First, Adams sin. Arising from the first, Original Corruption.
The degrees, evil thoughts Never liked of. Liked of, but rejected.


EXODUS 20. verse. 17. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not
covet thy neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid-seruant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
Q. SO much of the Commandments that forbid those sins against our
neighbor, which come to consent, or further. The tenth Commandment follows,
which forbids those sins which come not so far. What is that
Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet, etc.

Q. Is here forbidden all coveting, or desire?

A. No: There is a natural desire of meat, drink, sleep, and posterity,
which kept within their bounds, Deuteronomy 12. 25. Gal. 5. 17.
are not to be condemned. Likewise the spirit (after a sort) desires and
lusts against the flesh, as well as the flesh against the spirit.

Q. What is the coveting then that is here condemned?

A. That which is called Concupiscence.

Q. What is that?

A. All unlawful coveting of pleasures or profit, which concern our
neighbor, and in them all other lusts and desires against our neighbor, which
come not to consent; and therefore it is not simply said, Thou shall not covet,
or, thou shall not covet a wife, a man-seruant, etc. but, Thou shall not covet
thy neighbors wife, etc.

Q. Why is there here special mention of servants, ox, and ass?

A. Because there was special use of these amongst Gods people then, more then
amongst us, for (as the Rabbines also have truly observed) the Scripture uses
to speak of things that fall into the common practice of man's life.

Q. This Commandment then reaches further then all the former?

A. Yea verily: in which respect, the Apostle confesses, that notwithstanding
he profited in the knowledge of the Law above his fellows; yet he knew not
what sin was, until (having commenced Doctor Romans 7. 7.
in the school of the holy Ghost) through the knowledge of the Gospel, he
understood this Commandment. And therefore it is no great marvel, if the
great Doctors in Popery remain ignorant of this Commandment. Further, by
this Commandment especially are all men convinced of sin, because all Psalm.
143. 2. Romans 7. 7.
men covet.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. The error of the Papists, which deny Concupiscence to be a sin; and
that hold, that we have Gal. 5. 16. 17.
free will to do good or evil; whereas we cannot but covet evil, until we
be borne anew; and the very coveting of evil, is a sin.

Q. If we sin necessarily, and cannot but sin, then it seems we are not
to be blamed.

A. That follows not: for though we sin necessarily, yet we sin
voluntarily also: therefore that excuse which the necessity of sinning may
seem to make for us, our willingness to sin does take from us. Besides,
this necessity is no other then that which we brought upon our selves:
therefore as drunkenness excuses not the murderer, because he drank
willingly; no more does the necessity of sinning excuse us, because (by our
voluntary drinking of Satan's poisoned cup, in Adams loins) we brought it upon
our selves.

Q. Show me first the causes, then the degrees of concupiscence,

A. The cause thereof is either first and mediate, or immediate and secondarie.

Q. What is the first cause?

A. That sin which Adam committed first, and which we also have committed in
Adam, the guilt thereof (by propagation and generation) being derived to us;
considering that as Adams integrity should have been ours, if he had stood in
it: so was his transgression ours, the covenant being made with him, both for
himself, and all mankind that were to come of him.

Q. What familiar example is there, to make this somewhat more plain?

A. A man being a slave, his progeny (to all posterities) are slaves. A man
also being attained of high treason, the attaint of blood reaches to his
posterity. The young serpents and wolves that never stung men, nor devoured
sheep, are notwithstanding worthy to die; yea, while they are in their dams
bellies.

Q. What is the secondarie or immediate cause?

A. That sin which is commonly called Original sin, consisting in the
deprivation of good, and pronenesse to evil; which sin is in us from the
first minute Jam. 1. 14. Romans 1. 22. 23. Mat. 15. 19.
and moment of our conception. And this makes against the Pelagians, who
teach, that sin comes by imitation only; whereas this corruption is in all
men hy nature, and is the puddle and sink, from which all other sins do
flow: which the more it is pressed, the more it breaks forth; as mighty
streams that cannot be stopped, till God (by his holy spirit) do Iam. 1. 14.
restrain it: whence all other sins, having their proper and special names,
this is called by the common and general name of Romans 7. 7. 8. 17. and Iam. 1.
Heb. 12. 15.
SIN.

Q. What are the degrees of Concupiscence forbidden here?

A. The first is, wandering and evil thoughts, though we never like of them:
for even the very rising of such thoughts in our minds, argues our corruption
of nature: for were it not for that inborne corruption, such thoughts could not
once enter into our souls, further then they were offered unto us by some
outward tentation of the devil, or of the world, as it was Mat. 4. 1. 2. etc.
unto our Savior Christ. And although in the incorrupt state of man, he might
dutifully have thought of the transgression of the Commandment, with a perfect
hatred of it; yet the same should not have been (as now it is) suddenly rising
in the mind, without thinking or meditation of the naughtiness and
hatefulness thereof; where now these thoughts rise suddenly, and the hatred
and detestation comes after, and is not in such perfection as then it should
have been. Whereas the Lord our God has the eyes of his glory so pure, that
he will not allow of the least corruption Habak. 1. 13.
in the temple of our hearts, where he seateth himself.

Q. What is the second degree of Concupiscence?

A. When there are wandering wicked thoughts with some liking, though we reject
them. Hither may be referred first, vain, sudden wishes; then dreams, which
have some evil in them, and yet are not from any liking of those things when a
man is awake, but which a man when he is awake misliketh.

Q. So much of the Commandment: What is the use of it?

A. It teaches us more then all other Commandments of the second table do,
that we are miserable and wretched by nature, subject to the curse and wrath
of God.

CHAP. 26.
Of the sum of the Law.

The sum of the Law consists in the love of God, with all the powers of our
Soul in 1. Understanding. Judgment. Memory.
2. Will and affection.
Body.
Our neighbor, which is like to the first.

LVKE chap. 10. verse. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and
thy neighbor as thy self.
Q. Having spoken of all the ten Commandments: tell me, what is the sum of
all?

A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Luke 10. 27.
with all thy mind, and with all thy understanding, and thy neighbor as thy
self: taken out of Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and Leuit. 19. 18.

Q. What is the sum of this sum?

A. Love: which consists of two heads; to wit, the love of God, and of our
neighbor. 1. Ioh. 5. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 4. 5.


Q. What use is there of this short sum?

A. It furthereth us in the twofold use of the Law, before spoken of: for
first, it will be a means the more to humble us, and so the more effectually
to drive us to Christ: because when all our sins are gathered and mustered
into one troop or heap, they will appear the greater, and cast us down the
more: as a man owing sundry debts unto diverse, or unto one man, in the
particulars, is confident of his ability, to pay all, as long as he hears
they are all but small sums; but hearing the whole sum, despaireth of the
payment of it. Secondly, it helps us much in our obedience to the Law: for by
this (as by a glass) we may the easier see, and being shortly contrived, we
may the better remember our whole duty both to God and man; this being (as a
Card or Map of a Country) easily carried about with us.

Q. What is it to love the Lord with all our heart, and all our mind, and all
our strength?

A, When the whole man yields simple obedience unto him, in all the powers
both of soul and body. As when the understanding does perfectly comprehend all
things, that God would have us to know; when in judgment we think aright of
them; when the memory accordingly retains them; when in our wills and
affections we perfectly love al known good, and perfectly hate all known
evil; and when all the members, parts and graces of the body, as beauty,
strength, etc. are wholly employed in the service of God, and in the doing of
his will.

Q. What is it to love our neighbor as our selves?

A. When that which we would that men should Mat. 7. 12.
do to us, we do to them.

Q. Is it not possible for a man to do all this?

A. No; for we are ignorant of many things, and those which we know, we know
but in part; and that which we know, we judge not aright of, nor remember as
we ought. And as for will and affections, they are a great deal shorter then
our knowledge. And the wandering of our eyes in the hearing of the Word, and
other parts of Gods service, does easily bewray the small obedience and
conformity of the rest of the members and parts of the body. To conclude, if
we do but examine our souls, how we stand affected to our enemies, to
strangers, to common men, to them we know, yea to our dearest friends; we
shall find, that we herein come short of any such affection to our neighbor;
which as it is so much less then the former, by how much man is inferior to
God; so we being not able to accomplish it, are much less able to accomplish
the other. And therefore the righteousness of the Papist, is a rotten
righteousness, and such as will never stand before the judgment seat of God.

Q. Seeing then that the whole sum, and maine end of the Law is Love: what
gather you thereof? 1. Tim. 1. 4. 5.


A. That which the Apostle exhorts unto, viz. to leave all idle questions as
unprofitable, and to deal in those matters only which further the practice of
love.

Q. Why is the love of God called the first and greatest Commandment?

A. Because we should chiefly and in the first place, regard our duties to
God, and be most careful 1. Ioh. 4. 20.
to understand his will, and to worship him.

Q. Why is the second Table said to be like unto the first?

A. For that they go so hand in hand together, that no man can perform the
one, unless he accomplish the other; which the Apostle John plainly teaches,
1. Ioh. 15. 2.

Q. What is to be said of those that seem to keep the one, and care not for
the other?

A. If they seem to serve God, and are not in charity, they are mere
hypocrites: and if they will seem to deal uprightly with their neighbor, and
have not the love of God in them, they are profane politics, and very
Atheists.

Q. Hitherto of the Covenant of works: what is the maine use of all the
doctrine hereof?

A. To show that we cannot thereby attain unto Reconciliation with God, and
life everlasting, by reason of our corruption, and the infirmity of our flesh,
Romans 8. 3. For we having on our part broke this Covenant, God cannot (without
injustice) justify us by this Covenant; and consequently we cannot be saved
thereby.

Q. But why then is it called a Covenant, seeing it is in the nature of a
Covenant, to reconcile those that are at variance; as is to be seen in the
example of Abraham, and Abimelech: Laban, and Jacob, Genesis 21. 27. and 31. 44.

A. Although it be not able to reconcile us, yet it makes way to
reconciliation by another Covenant. Neither is it meet strictly to bind Gods
covenant with men, to the same laws that the covenants of one man with another
are bound unto: for amongst men, the weaker seeks reconciliation at the hands
of the Luke 14. 31. 32. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
mightier. But God (who neither can be hurt or benefited by us) seeks unto us
for peace.

CHAP. 27.
Of the Covenant of Grace.

In the Covenant of Grace is to be considered, First, The parts Gods act with
us. Ours with God.
The sorts, the Old Testament. New.

Secondly, the foundation thereof, Christ Jesus. Chap. 28.

IER. chap. 31. verse. 31. 32. 33. 34. 31 Behold, the days come, says the
Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah.

32. Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day
that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my
covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them says the Lord.

33. But this shall be the covenant, that I will make with the house of
Israel; After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be
my people.

34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of
them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.


Q. THus much of the Covenant of Works, called the Law: the Covenant of Grace
follows: What does this Scripture call it?

A. A new Covenant.

Q. Why is it called a new Covenant?

A. Because it succeeds the former Covenant, Heb. 8. 13.
and was made upon the breach thereof.

Q. Does then the making of this Covenant disable the former?

A. Yea: for the latter Covenant had not been Heb. 8 7. Romans 3. 23. Galath. 3.
21.
made, if the former had not bin broken, and so become insufficient. And
therefore they are convinced of impiety by the very making of this covenant,
who seek Justification by the old Covenant.

Q. What is this new Covenant?

A. A free contract or Covenant between God, Act. 16. 30. 31. John 3. 16. 17.
18.
and a sinner, concerning the pardon of sin, and life everlasting, through
faith in Christ Jesus.

Q. When did this Covenant begin?

A. Immediately after the Fall. Genesis 3. 15.

Q. What is specially to be considered in this Covenant?

A. First, the parts and sorts thereof: secondly, the ground and foundation.

Q. What are the parts thereof?

A. The mutual acts between God, and a sinner.

Q. What is the act on Gods part?

A. A free offer of salvation unto a sinner, upon this John 3. 14. Act. 10. 43.
condition, that he will believe in Christ.

Q. What is the act on the sinners part?

A. An acceptance of this offer, by submitting to the condition.

Q. What follows hereupon?

A. That he will be their God who are under this Exodus 3. 15.
Covenant, and will be surnamed by them; and therefore in the third of Exodus,
Heb. 11. 16.
and else where, he is called the God of our Fathers; which notes the singular
privilege and glory of Gods people, in that he is content to be surnamed by
them: otherwise the proper name of God would be fearful unto us, without the
addition of some such Sur-name.

Q. Of how many sorts is this Covenant?

A. In substance it is but one; but in regard of circumstance it is two: the
Old Testament, and the New.

Q. What is the Old Testament?

A. It is the covenant of God, Heb. 8. 4. 5.
which (under types, figures, and shadows) did set forth Christ before his
coming in the flesh; and by virtue whereof life everlasting was given by faith
in Christ that was to come.

Q. What is the new Testament?

A. It is the covenant of God, which (since the coming of Christ in the flesh)
has abolished those shadows, and gives life everlasting by faith in Christ,
that is come; by means whereof it is in a special respect called the Gospel.
Coloss. 2. 16. 17. 20. Hebr. 9. 1. 2. 3. etc.

CHAP. 28.
Of Christ's person.

In Christ is to be considered his Person Consisting of two natures, Divine.
Humane.
Conjoined in one person.
Office. Chap. 29.

JOHN, chap. 1. verse. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and
we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father) full of
grace and truth.
Q. THus much of the parts and sorts of the Covenant of Grace: what is the
ground and foundation thereof?

A. Christ Jesus aforesaid, Ioh. 3. 14. Act. 10. 43.

Q. Who is Christ Jesus?

A. The Luke 2. 11. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
eternal Son of God, the second person in the Trinity; that Joh. 1. 45. and
8. 56.
Messiah, whom the Fathers (under the Law) expected, and the Prophets foretold
of.

Q. What are we more particularly to consider in him?

A. First, his Person: secondly, his Office.

Q. What is to be considered in the Person of Christ?

A. The diversity of natures, and union of them.

Q. What are the natures of Christ?

A. Two: his Divine, and Humane.

Q. What have you learned concerning the Divine nature of Christ?

A. That he is the only begotten, and natural Son John 3. 16. 18. and 1. 1.
Heb. 1. 3. Coloss. 1. 15.
of God, his Word, Character, and Image; God co-essentiall, and Coequall with
the Father, and the holy Ghost. Ioh. 10. 30. Romans 9. 5. 1. Ioh. 5. 20.

Q. What is the Humane nature of Christ?

A. That nature, by which he is also true man.

Q. Is Christ Jesus true man also?

A. Genesis 3. 15. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
Yea, in all things, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. Matthew. 1. 18. 20.
sin only excepted.

Q. How did he become man?

A. He was conceived by the holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary; and
was afterward borne and brought forth into the world, after the manner of other
men.

Q. Did he not pass through the Virgin Mary, without taking any thing of her
substance?

A. No: for he is called the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. He is said to be
made of the seed of David, according to the flesh. Romans 1. 3. To be made of a
woman. Galath. 4. 4. To be a plant that sprang out of the root of Iesse. Esa.
11. 1. 10.

Q. How is he said to be conceived by the holy Ghost.

A. Because the holy Ghost (by his incomprehensible Mat. 1. 18. 20.
power) wrought his conception supernaturally.

Q. Is he then the Son of God in respect of his Humane nature?

A. No: for first the Apostle says, He is without Father, and without mother:
that is, without father, as he Heb. 7. 3.
is man; without mother as God. Secondly, then there should be in the person of
Christ two sons; one of the Father, another of the holy Ghost.

Q. But is he not therefore called the Son of the highest, Luke 1. 32.
because he was conceived by the holy Ghost?

A. No: but only because he that was so conceived, was the natural son of
God.

Q. Does the humane nature of Christ consist of a reasonable soul, as well as
a body: or was the Godhead in stead of the soul unto him.

A. It consists also of a reasonable soul, as appears by that which he
said, My soul is heavy to the very Mat. 26. 38.
death. And our souls should have perished everlastingly, except our Savior
Christ had had a soul, and had suffered in soul.

Q. Thus much of the two natures of our Savior Christ: what is to be said
concerning the union of these two natures?

A. The manhood of our Savior Christ, is inseparably united to the person of
the Godhead, and therein it subsisteth, making but one person; which near
union with the nature of man, is so much the more wonderful, in that the very
Angels, (which are much greater in glory then men) are Esa. 6. 2.
not able to abide the presence of God. And indeed it is such 1. Tim. 3. 16.
a mystery, as neither Angels, or men, are able to comprehend.

Q. Then Christ, though he consist of two natures, is but one person?

A. It is truth, he is true God, and true man, in one and the same person of
the Deity. Luke 1. 35. Ioh. 1. 14. Mat. 3. 17. Ephesians. 4. 10. Galath. 4. 4.

Q. Did not the inseparable union of the Humane nature to the person of the
Deity, change the person thereof?

A. No verily; but he is the very same person that he was, from all eternity.

Q. Is it not said in the text, that the WORD, (.i. the second person in
Trinity) was made flesh? may it not seem then that the Godhead was turned
into the Humane nature?

A. Nothing less; no more then it can be said, he was turned into sin, or
into a curse, because it is said, 2. Cor. 5. 11. Galath. 3.
he was made sin, or made a curse.

Q. Can you prove directly by the Scriptures, that Christ, after the union of
the manhood with the Godhead, is true God?

A. Yea verily: for first, the Scripture, (as he is Christ the Messiah)
absolutely calls him God, and gives unto him the name of Jehovah. 1. Tim. 3.
16. Ioh. 20. 28. Act. 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. 1. Ioh. 5. 20. Esa. 9. 6. Ierem. 23.
2. Secondly, the proper works of God are attributed unto him; as the creation
and government of the world. Ioh. 1. 3. and 5. 17. Coloss. 1. 16. Hebr. 1. 2.
3. The searching of hearts. Mat. 9. 4. Mark. 2. 8. etc. Thirdly, the Essential
Attributes of the Divine nature are given to him, he is said to be eternal.
Ioh. 1. 1. and 17. 5. Micah. 5. 2. Almighty, in all places, the King of Kings,
etc. Ioh. 3. 31. Math. 18. 20. Apocal. 19. 16. Fourthly, the Scriptures assign
Divine honor unto him. Psalm. 72. 11. Romans 15. 12. Esa. 11. 10. Ioh. 14. 1.
Act. 7. 59.

Q. But is not the Godhead, and manhood at least mingled and confounded.

A. No, by no means. For then he should be neither God, nor man; for things
mingled do not retain the name of their simples; as honey, and oil mixed
together, can neither be called honey nor oil. Further, the properties of the
two natures are such, as cannot be mingled and confounded. For neither can the
Humane nature, (remaining a true humane nature) partake, or communicate of the
properties and perfections of the Deity, or the Deity of the defects of the
Humanity. So that as the Godhead cannot hunger, thirst, or be shut up and
circumscribed within the bounds of a place: no more can the Humanity be
infinite, or in more places then one. So that though the humane nature be no
person of it self, and has no subsistence, but in the person of the Deity,
yet it continues still distinct in substance, properties, and actions, from
the Deity; and both natures so united, make but one Christ.

Q. Why was it necessary that Christ should be both God and man in one person?

A. It was necessary he should be man, because he could not suffer as he was
God; Heb. 2. 14. and 2. 16. 7. and 4. 15.
and it makes most for the glory of Gods Justice, to exact satisfaction from
that nature that had sinned. Secondly, it was necessary he should be God also,
that he might be able to bear and overcome all that was to be inflicted upon
him for our sins. Thirdly, it was necessary also that the humane nature
should (in manner aforesaid) be united to the person of the Deity, that the
obedience which he performed, might be of infinite merit, as being the
obedience of God. Act. 20. 28.


Q. What further fruit have we by this conjunction?

A. That whereas God has no shape comprehensible, either to the eye of the
body, or of the soul; and the mind of man cannot rest but in a representation
of some thing, that his mind and understanding can in some sort reach unto. If
it consider God in the second person in the Trinity, as he has taken our
nature, and whereby God is (after a sort) revealed in the flesh, he has
whereupon (in some sort) to stay his mind.

Q. How did then the Jews before his coming, which could not do so?

A. They might propose to themselves the second Genesis 18. 1. 2. and 19. 1. 2.
person, that should take our nature, and the same also that had appeared
sundry times in the shape of a man: albeit herein our privilege is greater
then theirs; we beholding him as he is, whereas they did behold him as he
should be.

Q. Have men only benefit by this union of the two natures, or does it reach
also to the Angels?

A. It seems to reach no further then to man; for God never meant to save
those angels that fell, seeing they fell maliciously into rebellion against
God, without tentation, contrary to the clear light of nature revealed in
their Creation. And if he had purposed either to save them, or to have
benefited the elect Heb. 2. 12. 16.
Angels, any otherwise then by confirming them, he would have taken their
nature upon him.

Q. But why then is it said, that God (by Christ) does reconcile all things
unto himself, whether in earth, or heaven? Coloss. 1. 20.

A. By things in heaven, is there to be understood, not the Angels, but the
Saints then in heaven. For although God did elect the Angels to eternal glory;
yet Christ did not redeem them, but only the seed of Heb. 2. 16.
Abraham.

Q. Hitherto of the person and natures of our Savior Christ: is there any such
great necessity that Christians should be grounded in the truth of this
doctrine?

A. Yea, else Satan would never have labored (as he has done), to corrupt and
deprave the same by raising up so many damnable heresies about the same.

Q. Why? what heresies has he raised up about this point?

A. The heresy, first of Macedonius, and the Valentinians, who maintained that
Christ brought with him out of heaven, a heavenly body.

Secondly, of Apelles, that held he had an aeriall body, and that he passed
through the Virgin, only as water through a pipe. Thirdly, of the Manichies,
who made him to have only an imaginary body. Fourthly, of Apollinaris, who
denied that Christ had a reasonable soul; and who held, that his Divinity was
in stead of a soul. Fifthly, of Eunomions, who affirmed that Christ was a
mere man, and the Son of God only by adoption. Sixthly, of Ebion, who held
that Christ was borne of the seed of man. Seventhly, of Nestorius, who taught,
that as there was two natures in Christ, so also there was two persons.
Eighthly, of Eutiches, that held, that the humane nature, after the union with
the Divine, did partake of the properties of the Divine. Near unto which is
the error of the Vbiquitaries, which attribute to the humanity of Christ,
certain essential properties of the Divinity, viz. presence in all places,
etc.

CHAP. 29.
Of the Office of Christ.

The Office of Christ is his mediatorship, wherein is to be considered, First,
That he is the only Mediator. Secondly, His Calling thereunto. Faithful
discharge thereof.
The parts thereof.


1. TIM. chap. 2. verse. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus.
Q. HItherto of the Person of our Savior Christ: What is his office?

A. To be the only Mediator between God, and a sinner, for the pardon of his
sin, and life everlasting. 1. Tim. 2. 5.


Q. Could not this be effected without Mediation?

A. No verily.

Q. Is Christ Jesus the only Mediator between God, and a sinner?

A. Yea verily, as appears expressly by the text.

Q. How pooue you it otherwise?

A. First, there is but one God; and therefore but one Mediator, as the text
also affirms.

Secondly, he only is fit to be Mediator, that partaketh of both their natures
that are to be reconciled; and consequently, he only that is both God and
man.

Thirdly, this was shadowed by the types of Moses, who alone was in the
mountain; and of Aaron, or the high Priest, who only might enter in the holy
of Holies. Exodus 24. 2. Leuit. 16. 17. Heb. 9. 7.


Fourthly, this is set forth by diverse similitudes: as where he says, Ioh. 10.
9. 10.
I am the way, I am the door. Also he is the Genesis 28. 12.
ladder, whereby the Angels ascend and descend.

Fifthly, he only Heb. 7. 25. and 9. 14. 1. Sam. 2. 25.
is able to effect their salvation, fully, a that come unto him.

Q. Then no man, that is a man only can be Mediator between God and man?

Q. No verily: for as Ely says, If one man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
viz. when one man shall offend against another, the matter may be accorded by
Judges, which are but men: but if a man offend against God, there is no mere
man can make his peace.

Q. Is Christ then Mediator in respect of both natures?

A. Yea, in respect of both jointly: first, because though he consist of two
distinct natures, Divine, and Humane; yet he is God and man only in one and
the same person. Secondly, because he that is our Mediator, is a priest, after
the order of Melchizedeck; without father, and without mother; which could not
be said, if he were Mediator, either in respect of his Divine nature alone, or
of his Humane. Thirdly, seeing he is by his office to reconcile God to man,
and man to God, both natures jointly are necessary to this work, he having
(by that means) affinity to both. Fourthly, the works of his Mediation, being
of such an infinite price and value as they are with God, they must needs be
the works both of God and man. Fifthly, none could satisfy God for the sins
of men, but God; and none ought to satisfy for them but man. Therefore Christ,
that has by his Mediation effected this, being both God and man in one person,
is in, and according unto both those natures conjoined, a Mediator between God
and man.

Q. Was he not then a Mediator before he became man?

A. Yes: for though at the first he had not actually taken our nature upon
him; yet with God (things to come being as if they were present, or past), he
was in Heb. 13. 8. 1. Pet. 1. 20. Apoc. 13. 8.
the eye and knowledge of God, and in his acceptance as if he had been from
the beginning both God and man actually. Hence he is said to be a Lamb,
slain from the beginning of the world.

Q. Wherein consists the office of his mediation?

A. In the performance of those works whereby Romans 8. 33. 34. and 5. 1. 10.
God is reconciled to sinners. Whereupon depends the whole merit of their
salvation.

Q. What are we more specially to consider in the mediation of Christ?

A. First, his calling thereunto, and his faithful discharge thereof.
Secondly, the parts.

Q. Who called him unto this office?

A. Esaias 42. 1. 6. Heb. 5. 4. 5. 6.
God.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. Matter of great comfort unto us, in that he thrust not himself into this
office, but entered upon the same, by the will and appointment of God; whereby
we may be the more assured of the good will of God to save us; seeing his
Son has performed nothing herein, but what he did being called thereunto by
him; and therefore he will certainly accept of all that he has done for us,
as that which himself has ordained.

Q. How did God call him thereunto?

A. By anointing him with an especial ointment. By means whereof he is
called Of (...), to annoint.
CHRIST, which signifies one anointed. Which was a 1. Sam. 24. 7. 2. Sam. 1.
14. Psalm. 105. 15.
name also common to them that were types of any part of his Mediator-ship, who
also were anointed, though not with the same ointment.

Q. What was the ointment wherewith he was anointed?

A. The Spirit of God, which was powered upon Psalm. 45. 7. 8. Esaias 61. 1.
him without measure.

Q. Wherein consists his faithful discharge of his calling?

A. In this: that he has left nothing undone, that may be effectual for our
reconciliation with God; in which respect he is compared with Moses, who is
said Heb 3.
to be faithful in all the house of God.

CHAP. 30.
Of the parts of Christ's mediation: and in special, of his Prophetical office.

The parts of Christ's Mediation; are First, his Prophetical office.
Priesthood. Chap. 29.
Secondly, his Kingdom.

HEBR. chap. 3. verse. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 7. Wherefore as the holy Ghost
says, Today if ye will hear his voice,

8. Harden not your hearts as in the provocation, in the day of tentation in
the wilderness:

9. When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years.

10. Wherefore I was griened with that generation, and said, They do always err
in their hearts, they have not known my ways.

11. So I swear in my wrath: they shall not enter into my rest.

12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God.

13. But exhort one another daily, while it is called, To day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.


Q. HOw many parts are there of his Mediation?

A. Two: first, his Prophetical office, and his Priesthood: and secondly, his
kingdom.

Q. What is his Prophetical office?

A. It is the first part of his mediation, whereby he is our Prophet, Doctor,
or Apostle.

Q. How is he our Prophet, Doctor, or Apostle?

A. In that he has opened the whole will of his John 1. 18. Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Father, concerning all things necessary to salvation.

Q. How does that appear?

A. By his own testimony, Ioh. 15. 15. I call you no more servants, because
the servant knows not what his master does. But I call you friends, because
all which I have Esaias 61. 1. Matthew. 17. 5.
heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. What a foul error it is in the^, that think that our Savior Christ
delivered not al things, pertaining to the instruction and government of his
Church, but left them moreover to the traditions and inventions Act. 20. 20. 27.
of men.

Q. What further?

A. That the Ministers of the Word should not utterly suppress in silence, any
truth that Christ has revealed. And that the people should content themselves
with that which Christ has taught, rejecting whatsoever else, the boldness of
men shall obtrude upon them.

Q. Did his office of Doctor-ship then first begin, when he came into the world?

A. No: for he (at the first) opened his Fathers will unto us, by the Luke 1.
70.
ministry of his servants the Prophets: and after he came into the world, he
opened the same doctrine more Ephesians. 4. 10. 11
plainly and fully by the Apostles and Evangelists.

Q. What difference is there between the teaching of Christ, and of the
Prophets and Ministers sent of him?

A. First, Christ taught with another manner of authority, Mat. 7. 28. 29. Mark.
1. 22. Mat. 22. 28. 32. 34. 44.
then ever did any other Minister before or after him: for Christ taught in his
own name, and by his own authority; though (for the more clear conuincing of
the Jews) he often alleged the testimonies of Moses, and the other Prophets.

Secondly, by virtue of his Prophetical office, he did not only bring an
outward sound unto the ear; but wrought (as he did before his coming, and as
he does now by the Ministry of his word), an alteration in the mind.

Q. What have we to learn of this, that Christ taught, and teaches by the
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists?

A. In what estimation we ought to have the books Heb. 4. 12. 2. Cor. 2. 16.
of the Old Testament, since the same spirit spoke then, that speaks now, and
the same Christ also.

Q. What effect has the careless and fruitless hearing of Gods word?

A. It hardens men to further judgment; for it is a two edged sword to
strike to life, or to death: it is either the savor of life to life, or the
savor of death to death.

Q. How does he in this text aggrauate the refusal of this office of our
Savior, against the Israelites?

A. First, by the time of 40. years, verse. 9. Secondly, by the place, the
wilderness, verse. 8. and thirdly, by the multitude of his benefits.

Q. What force has the office of his prophecy in us?

A. We thereby are in some sort made partakers of that office. For by the
knowledge of his will, we are made able to exhort one another to goodness,
and to dehort from evil. 1. Ioh. 2. 27. Romans 15. 4.

CHAP. 31.
Of the Priesthood of Christ.

In the Priesthood is to be considered, the Quality of the person, Out of
himself. In himself.
Manner of his execution.

HEBR. chap. 7. verse. 13. to the end. 13. For he of whom these things are
spoken, pertains to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
Altar.

14. For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which tribe Moses
spoke nothing concerning Priesthood.

15. And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of
Melchisedech there arises another Priest,

16. Who is made not after the Law of a carnal commandment, but after the
power of an endless life.

17. For he testifyeth; Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech.

18. For there is verily a dis-anulling of the commandment going before, for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

19. For the Law made nothing perfect: but the bringing in of a better hope
did: by the which we draw nigh unto God.

20. And in as much as not without an oath he was made Priest.

21. For those Priests were made without an oath: but this with an oath, by him
that said unto him, The Lord swear and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedeck.

22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament.

23. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of death.

24. But this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.

25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the vttermost-that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make inter cession for them.

26. For such an high Priest became us, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.

27. Who needs not daily, as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice,
first, for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for this he did once,
when he offered up himself.

28. For the Law makes men high Priests which have infirmity, but the word of
the oath which was since the Law, makes the Son, who is consecrated for
evermore,


Q. HItherto of the Prophetical office of Christ: what is his Priesthood?

A. That part of his mediatorship, whereby he Mat. 5. 17.
fulfilled the Law, and offered himself a Romans 3. 24. 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
propitiatory sacrifice to his Father; and thereby fully satisfied the Justice
of God, for the sins of the Romans 8. 33. Heb. 7. 24. 25.
Elect.

Q. How did he offer himself?

A. By submitting himself to (manifold miseries, especially) Mat. 20. 28. and
26. 27.
the shameful and cursed death upon the Cross, enduring (chiefly) upon the
same, both in soul and body, the wrath of God, till he had fully satisfied
the justice of his Father for our sins.

Q. In what place of Scripture is this office principally treated of?

A. Hebr. 7. 13. etc.

Q. What is the sum of this text?

A. The declaration of the Priesthood of Christ, by comparing it with the
Priesthood of Aaron.

Q. What are the parts of this declaration?

A. Two: first, what manner a one he ought to be, that has this office: and
secondly, how he executes it. In both which he shows the difference between
his Priesthood, and the Priesthood of Aaron.

Q. What manner of person ought he to be, that is to have this office?

A. The Apostle shows this, by declaring certain qualities; partly without
him, and partly within him.

Q. What are the qualities without him?

A. First, that he was of the tribe of Judah, this of the tribe of Lemi.
Secondly, that the Priests of Leui were Heb. 7. 20. 21.
appointed by the Law of the fleshly Commandment; where Christ was appointed
by the power of endless life. Thirdly, in that he was appointed of his Father
by an oath, for ever to be a Priest, after the order of Melchizedeck. Whereas
the Priests of the Law were made without an oath.

Q. What benefit arises to us, in that this was confirmed with an oath?

A. It serves to assure us, that all the parts of his Priesthood shall be
performed unto us, and that he (consequently) paid the ransom for our sins.

Q. Was not the word of God sufficient for the performance of this promise,
without the binding of it with an oath?

A. Yes doubtless: but the Lord (in this promise) Heb. 6. 17.
having to deal with man, and willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise, the stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an oath.

Q. Whereby is the perpetuity thereof confirmed?

A. In that it did not proceed by succession, as from Aaron, to Eleazer; from
Eleazer, to Phin^es, and so by descent, but is everlasting, always abiding in
him; which is another difference of his Priestly Office, from Aarons.

Q. What profit comes to us by the perpetuity of his Priesthood?

A. That he continually makes intercession for us to God, and of himself
alone is able to save us, coming to the father through him.

Q. So much of the qualities which are without him. What are those which are
within him?

A. First, that in himself he is holy. Secondly, to others harmless and
innocent. Thirdly, undefiled in himself, and in regard of others: and to
speak in a word, he is separated from sinners. In all which, he differs
from those of Aaron; for they are neither holy in themselves, nor innocent,
neither undefiled, but polluting, and being polluted by others.

Q. What is the fruit we gather of this his holiness, innocence, and
vndefiledlesse?

A. That he being holy and innocent, undefiled, and so consequently separate
from sinners, sin is not, neither can be attributed to the faithful, and that
these his properties are imputed to them by faith for theirs, for whose sake
and benefit he became man, and was endued with these properties: and therefore
he freeth them, both from original and actual sin. Contrary to the doctrine
of the Papists, who say, that he delivers us from original sin only, and
that we must make satisfaction for actual.

Q. So much of the manner of his person? how does he execute this his office?

A. First, whereas they offered first for themselves, and then for the people;
he offered for the people only, for for himself he needed not. Secondly, he
offered but once; they many times. Thirdly, he offered himself, they something
else then themselves.

Q. What is the use of this?

A. First, to prove the absoluteness, perfection, and excellency of this his
priesthood. Secondly, to overthrow the Priesthood of the Papists, and prove it
to be a false Priesthood: for first, they are not of the tribe of Judah,
neither confirmed by an oath; and therefore not perpetual. Secondly, they are
not holy in themselves, but unholy; neither innocent, nor undefiled, but
defiling others, and being defiled of them, and so not separate from sinners,
but altogether sinful, and set in sin. Thirdly, they offer first for
themselves, and then for the people likewise many times, and Sacrifices, which
are not themselves: and lastly, they bring a great disgrace to the Priesthood
of Christ, by preferring themselves to him: they making themselves the Priests,
and him the Sacrifice, whom they say they offer.

Q. Are there no Priests under the Gospel?

A. None to offer up a propitiatory sacrifice: otherwise, all Christians are
Priests, to offer up the spiritual 1. Pet. 2. 5. Revel. 1. 6.
sacrifices of Prayers, and Alms.

CHAP. 32.
Of the Kingly office of Christ.

In the Kingly office of Christ is to be considered, the Excellency of his
kingdom, in General, by the Properties expressed, 1. Generally. 2. Specially.
Effects of these properties.
Special. Chap. 33.
Parts. Chap. 34.

ESAIAS, chap. 9. verse. 6. 7. 6. For unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of peace.

7. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to stablish it with
judgment and with justice, from hence forth even for ever: the zeal of the
Lord of hosts will perform this.


Q. SO much of the Priesthood of our Savior Christ. What is his Kingly Office?

A. That part of his Mediation whereby his Priesthood is made effectual unto
us, and without which it is to us void and fruitless.

Q. What is to be considered in the Kingdom of Christ?

A. The excellency, and the parts.

Q. How does this Scripture set forth the excellency of his Kingdom?

A. First, by the properties, secondly, by the effects of those properties; and
the cause of those effects.

Q. How are his properties here expressed?

A. First, generally by comparison, showing the dissimilitude between his
Kingdom, and the regiment of worldly Potentates: that where other Kings
execute matters by their Lieuetenants and deputies, armed with their authority:
in our Saviors Kingdom, although there be used instruments; yet do they
accomplish his will and purpose, not only by his authority, but also by his
strength and virtue.

Q. What do you learn from hence?

A. That there is no ministerial head of the Church, which is Christ his
Kingdom; since he is himself continually present in the same, and that most
notably by his spirit; and more to the advantage of his Church, then when he
was bodily present: and therefore the Job. 16. 7.
Pope of Rome, who makes claim to be head of the universal Church of Christ,
does therein show himself to be that man of sin. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Q. How are his properties set forth more particularly?

A. First, that he should be called Wonderful; not that it should be his
proper name, which was only Jesus; but that he should be as renounedly known
to be wonderful, as men are known by their names.

Q. How is he Wonderful?

A. Partly in his person, in regard of the wonderful union of God and man in
one person, (as has been said); partly in his works.

Q. How is he wonderful in his works?

A. Not only in the Creation of the world, and the preservation thereof, but
especially in the Redemption of his Church; and through those wonders which he
works, either in the gathering or preserving thereof: whereby he makes
himself known to be the Savior and redeemer thereof.

Q. What is the next that follows?

A. It is showed more particularly wherein he is wonderful: and first, that
he is wonderful in counsel, and therefore called the Counselor.

Q. What is here generally to be observed?

A. That whereas in the government of a Kingdom, Esaias 9. 15. 2. Sam. 20. 16.
Eccles. 9. 16.
counsel and wisdom are chief, and preferred even to strength: we may
assure our selves that in the Kingdom of Christ, all things are done wisely,
nothing rashly. Hence in the Revelation of John, he is described thus; To be in
the midst of the golden Candlesticks, clothed with agarment down to the
foot: such as Counselors use to wear; and that his head and hairs are white
as white wool, and as snow: whereby is noted, such a person, as for gravity,
and great experience is fit to give counsel.

Q. What is further to be gathered hence?

A. Matter of great comfort for us that are the children of God, in that our
Savior Christ is our Counselor, who is able and willing to give us all sound
advice, in whatsoever concerns our good.

Q. What are we here further to learn?

A. That when we are in any perplexity, and know not which way to turn us, we
seek unto our Savior Christ for advice and direction, who is given us for a
Counselor.

Q. By what means may we come to him for advice?

A. By humble Supplications, and prayers made unto him.

Q. How may we receive advice from him?

A. By the doctrine of God, drawn out of his holy word; and testimonies, which
therefore David calls Psalm. 119. 24.
his Counselors, or the men of his Counsel.

Q. What follows?

A. That he is wonderful in might, and the strong God?

Q. What have we here to learn?

A. First, that as he is wise, to advise and foresee things pertaining to the
good of his Church: so he is of power to execute and effect all that he
advises, wisely.

Secondly, that as there is in us no advice of our selves; so there is in us no
found strength to keep us from any evil; but that as he gives good advice
to his, so does he (by his own power) perform and effect Phil. 2. 13.
it. And therefore although we be as the vine, of all other trees the weakest;
or as the sheep, of all other beasts the simplest: yet we have for our
gardener, and for our shepherd, Christ Jesus the mighty strong God.

Thirdly, that we should take heed how we depart from his obedience; for he
both can, and will do what pleases him.

Q. What other property follows?

A. Two other, which are (as it were) the branches and effects of the former:
first, that he is the father of Eternities: secondly, the Prince of peace.

Q. Does not this title, The father of eternities; argue a confusion of the
Divine persons?

A. In no case: for it is a borrowed speech, signifying, that he is the author
of eternity.

Q. What do you learn from hence?

A. That where other Kingdoms alter and come Dan. 2.
to an end, his is everlasting.

Q. What doctrine is to be gathered from thence:

A. First, that the Kingdom of our Savior Christ being perpetual, he
dasheth and crusheth in pieces, all other Monarchies, and Regiments (how mighty
soever) that rise up against him and his Kingdom; and therefore that his
Church and subjects generally, and every particular member, need not fear any
power whatsoever.

Secondly, that whatsoever we have by nature or Esaias 40. 6. 1. Pet. 1. 24. 25.
industry, it is momentanie, like unto the grass that fades away; and
whatsoever durable thing we have, we have it from Christ.

Q. What is the second property arising out of the former?

A. That he is the Prince of peace; that is, the procurer, cause, and ground of
peace, that procures peace for his subjects, and causes them to continue in
quietness.

Q. Of what nature is this peace?

A. It is spiritual: for first, we have peace with Romans 5. Ephesians. 2. 14.
God: secondly, we have peace in our consciences: thirdly, there is peace
between men, which arises out of both the former.

Q. Where is this peace established?

A. Upon the throne of David, that is, in the Church of God.

Q. Are not we also in some measure partakers of this honor of his Kingly
office?

A. Yes verily, as well as of his Priests office. For we Romans 6. 12. Romans 16.
20. Revel. 1. 6.
are Kings, to rule and subdue our stirring and rebellious affections, and to
tread Satan under our feet.

Q. What is the cause of all this?

A. The love and zeal of God breaking through all lets; either inward from our
selves and our own sins, or outward from the enmity of the devil, and
world.

CHAP. 33.
Of the excellency of Christ's Kingdom in special.

It consists First, in Wisdom. Righteousness, or Justification, parts
Forgiveness of sins. Imputation of righteousness.

Secondly, in Sanctification, parts, Mortification. Vivification.
Redemption.


1. COR. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
Q. Wherein more specially does the excellency of Christ's Kingdom consist?

A. In certain special treasures, brought unto us by his Prophetical and
Priestly office, and made effectual unto us by his Kingly office.

Q. What are those treasures?

A. They are certain special fruits mentioned by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1. 30.

Q. What is the first, he here names within us?

A. That he is made unto us Wisdom.

Q. Is this necessary to our salvation?

A. Yea: for having absolutely lost all godly and saving Prou. 30. 2. 3.
wisdom, wherein we were first created, it is to be repaired again, ere we
can be partakers of life eternal.

Q. Why? have we not wisdom enough of our own, by nature, to bring us to
eternal life?

A. No verily: for although we have wisdom naturally engrafted in us, to
provide (in some measure for this present life, and sufficient to bring us to
condemnation in the life to come; yet we have not one grain of saving
wisdom, to enable or direct us so much, as to make us step one foot forward
to life eternal.

Q. Where is this wisdom to be found? 2. Tim. 3. 15. Psalm. 19. 7.


A. In the Word of God.

Q. How come we to it?

A. By Christ: for God dwells in Light which 1. Tim. 6. 16. John 1. 18.
no man has approached unto; only the Son, which was in the bosom of his
Father, he has revealed him.

Q. What is the second fruit the Apostle names?

A. That Christ is made unto us, Righteousness.

Q. What is meant here by Righteousness?

A. Our Justification before God: whereby we are delivered from the guilt and
punishment of all sin, and are accounted righteous, even by the
righteousness of our Savior Christ imputed unto us, by means whereof we are
restored to a better righteousness, then that which we lost in Adam?

Q. This doctrine, that a man should be made righteous by the righteousness of
another; is it not as absurd, as if a man should be said to be fed with the
meat another eats? or to be warmed with the clothes another wears? or be
in life and health, with the life and health of another?

A. No doubtless: for if the sin of Adam, (being a man only) were of force
to condemn us, because we were in his loins; why should it seem strange,
that the righteousness of our Savior Christ, both God, and man, should be
available to justify Romans 5. 12. 19.
others?

Q. But how can the righteousness of one, justify so many?

A. The manhood being joined to the Godhead, and subsisting therein, makes the
righteousness of Christ of infinite merit.

Q. How do you prove this righteousness here, to be meant of the
righteousness which is in Christ?

A. Because he speaks afterward of Sanctification, which is the
righteousness that is within us.

Q. What are the parts of Justification?

A. Two: the not reckoning or forgiveness of Romans 4. 6. 7. 8. Philip. 3. 9.
Romans 5. 19. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Zach. 3. 4. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
our sins; and the imputation of Christ's righteousness: both which are
merited by his Priesthood.

Q. How did he merit the forgiveness of our sins?

A. By his sufferings, in abasing himself to suffer death, even the death of
the Cross.

Q. If Christ have merited the forgiveness of our sins; how comes it then,
that the godly are yet in this world afflicted for them; and that for the most
part, more then the ungodly?

A. The affliction of the godly is not the punishment, 1. Cor. 11. 32. Prou. 1.
32.
that in justice is due to sin; but a fatherly correction and chastisement in
the world, that they should not perish with the world; whereas the wicked, the
longer they are spared, and the less they are punished in this life, their
danger is the greater: for God reserueth their punishment to the life to come.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That we should not grudge at the prosperity of Ioh. 12. 3. Job. 21. 30.
the wicked, when we are in trouble: for as sheep and kine use to be put in
fat pastures, to be prepared to the shambles: so they, the more they receive in
this life, the nearer and the heavier is their destruction in the life which is
to come.

Q. Having our sins forgiven by the merit of his sufferings: what necessity
is there that his righteousness should be imputed?

A. Very great: for except that we be also made righteous, we cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven, and enjoy the blessed presence of God: a bankerupt
as soon as his debt is paid, is not by and by fit to be made the Burgess of a
City, without goods; neither is a beggarly prisoner, as soon as he is at
liberty, Genesis 41. 14.
fit to serve the Prince, unless he be new apparelled.

Q. How did Christ merit our righteousness?

A. By his fulfilling the Law, in that he walked in all the Commandments, and
failed in no duties, either in the worship and service of God, or toward men;
whereby we are made fully and wholly righteous in the sight of God.

Q. Hitherto of the two first fruits, what are the two other?

A. Sanctification, and redemption.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. It is a freedom from the tyranny of sin, into Romans 6. 14. Psalm. 19. 14.
the liberty of righteousness, begun here, and increased daily, until it be
fully perfected in the life to come.

Q. What differences are there between Righteousness imputed, and
sanctification?

A. Diverse: as first, Sanctification is in us, Righteousness 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
4. Romans 5. 14. 17. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Romans 3. 21. 22. Revel. 22. 11.
imputed is inherent only in our Savior Christ. Secondly, the imputed
righteousness increases not; Sanctification does (as it were) grow in us by
degrees. Lastly, the righteousness of our Savior Christ is the root or cause,
Sanctification the effect. Romans 8. 30.


Q. Do Righteousness and Sanctification go together?

A. Yes, in time they go together: for so soon as John 15. 2. Jam. 2. 18.
a man is made partaker of Christ's Righteousness, he is made holy in some
measure; although in nature the imputed righteousness goes before, as the
cause before the effect.

Q. Is there any such Sanctification or holiness of life in us, as deserves
to be accepted of God; and rewarded by him?

A. None; because corruption cleaves to the best of our good works.

Q. But when our Sanctification (here begun) shall be perfected in the world
to come; shall we not then be justified by an inherent righteousness?

A. No, but by the imputed righteousness of our Savior Christ: which being
once given us, is never taken from us, although faith (whereby we apprehend
this) fails, and falls away. ^. Cor. 13. 13.


Q. How is the pollution aforesaid, conveyed into the good works which God
works in us?

A. There is (beside the work of his own hand, through the operation of his
holy spirit), a pollution in us, and an infection of ours, which comes from
Esaias* 64. 6.
the sin that dwells in us: as clear water put into an unclean vessel,
running through a filthy channel, receives some evil quality thereof.

Q. Wherein do our good works fail of Gods Justice?

A. Partly in the isntrumental causes, from which they proceed: and partly in
the final cause, or end, whereunto they aim.

Q. What are the isntrumental causes hindering the perfection of our works?

A. First, the defect of our understanding, in that the work is not done with
knowledge absolute and thoroughly perfect. Secondly, the feebleness of our
memory, that does not so fully retain that which the understanding
conceiueth. Thirdly, the perverseness of our wills and affections, which come
short of their duty. Last of all, the weakness and dullness of our bodies,
which are not so apt and nimble, for the execution of good things, as is
required.

Q. Express this by a similitude.

A. We are in the Isntrumental causes like to a common labourer, which being
hired by the day, works with one hand, whereas both are required; or works
a piece of the day, being hired for the whole.

Q. What is the final end wherein good works fail?

A. In that we have not a direct eye to Gods glory, or the good of our
neighbor, as is required; but look indirectly at those duties which are
enjoined to us: like to such Artificers, as prefer their own credit in their
skill, before their masters profit.

Q. If then it be so that sin cleaves to our best works, are not our good
works sins, and are not all sins equal?

A. Be it far from us to think either the one, or the other. Only the
imperfection and defect in the work is sinful, and not the work it self:
and in bad and evil actions, (as has been showed already), some are less
sinful then other.

Q. How is this pollution taken away?

A. By the intercession of our Savior Christ, Exodus 28. 36. 37. 38. 1. Pet. 2.
5.
through which our good works are of account before God.

Q. What doctrine is here to be gathered?

A. A doctrine of great comfort to the children of God, serving to stir them
up to abound in good works, seeing (notwithstanding their defects) they are
acceptable to God in Christ Jesus: for where men know any thing to be
delightsome to their Prince, they will (with all endeavor) strive for it: how
much more ought we to be pricked forward to the service Mat. 12. 20.
of God, who quenches not the smoking flax, nor breaks the bruised reed;
yea who forgets not a Mat. 10. 42.
cup of cold water given in faith, and for his sake?

Q. What other reasons are there to stir us up to good works?

A. We ought to remember Gods benefits bestowed upon all his children: as our
Election, Creation, Psalm. 103. 2. and 105. 44. 45.
Redemption, Calling, Justification, Sanctification, continual Preservation:
and then particularly such blessings as God hah severally bestowed upon every
one of us.

Q. Are not the judgments of God also to be thought upon, for furtherance to
this duty?

A. Yes verily, to make us fear to offend in our Genesis 18. 17. 18. Jer. 3. 8.
ways.

Q. Remains there yet any more?

A. Good company, which (with David) we must Psalm. 119. 63 79 Prou. 13. 20.
cleave unto; not the noblest, or of greatest account, but the godliest: for if
we will avoid any kind of sin, we must avoid all company that delight therein;
which is no less dangerous, then good company is profitable.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That whosoever makes no choice of his company* makes but small
conscience of sin: as those that dare keep company familiarly with Papists,
thinking that they may keep their conscience to themselves.

Q. What are the parts of sanctification?

A. Two: Mortification, and Vivification, or a rising to righteousness.

Q. What is Mortification?

A. Mortification is a continual dying unto sin, Romans 6. 3. 6. Gal. 5. 24,
or a daily slaying, killing, or deadning of sin; proceeding from the virtue
of Christ his death and burial.

Q. What is the sin that must be mortified?

A. First, our natural corruption, or the old man, called Original sin,
viz. that natural readiness and pronesse that is in us, to all that is evil;
and that frowardness and backwardness to that which is good: called also
flesh, or the body of sin. Secondly, the fruits thereof, which are called the
members of that body. Coloss. 3. 5.


Q. What is sin compared unto in this regard?

A. Unto base rags, and filthy stained clothes, Esaias 64. 6. Coloss. 3. 5.
Zach. 3. 3.
which we cannot endure to look on, and which we use to cast off, and fling
from us with hatred.

Q. What is Vivification, or quickening, or rising to righteousness?

A. It is a rising to newness of life, proceeding from Romans 6. 4. 5.
the power of Christ his resurrection.

Q. So much of Sanctification: what is Redemption?

A. A deliverance from all the enemies of our faluation; which happy estate
shall be fully accomplished at the last day.

CHAP. 34.
Of the parts of Christ's Kingdom.

Christ's Kingdom has two parts; his government Till the last day, consisting
in means, by which the former fruits are effected: Inward. Outward things,
which God gives to us, as 1. word in General. Special. Chap. 35.
2. Sacraments. Chap. 36. Discipline.

We give to God, Chap. 39.
Persons. Chap. 40.

At the last day. Chap. 53.

1. THESE. chap. 5. verse. 19. 20. 19. Quench not the spirit.

21. Despise not prophecyings.


Q. HItherto of the excellency of Christ's Kingdom: What are the parts thereof?

A. First, his government till the last day. Secondly, his government at the
last day.

Q. How does he govern till the last day?

A. By bestowing those means whereby the former fruits are effected.

Q. What are those means?

A. Two: inward, and outward; as appears, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. 20. both which are
ordinarily joined together.

Q. What are the inward means?

A. His Spirit.

Q. What mean you by the Spirit of God in this place?

A. That power of God which works in the hearts of men, things which by
natural reason cannot be comprehended.

Q. How may we come to some understanding, and apprehension of this work of
the Spirit.

A. By the things whereunto it is compared in the John 3. 8. Act. 2. 2. Hebr.
1. 9. 1. Ioh. 2. 27. John 4. 14. Ezech. 30. 25. 27. Mat. 3. 11. Act. 2. 3.
Scriptures: as first, it is compared to wind, to show the marvelous power
thereof in operation. Secondly, to oil, that is of a hot and moist nature; and
therefore pierces and suppleth. Thirdly, to water, that cools, scoureth and
cleanses. Fourthly, to fire, that seuereth good metal from the dross.

Q. How does the Spirit work in the hearts of men?

A. Diversely, in diverse respects: It mortifieth, quickens, wounds, heals,
terrifieth, comfort, enlighteneth, softeneth, etc.

Q. Hitherto of the inward means, what are the outward, by which the Spirit
works?

A. They are either things, or persons.

Q. What are the things?

A. They are either such as God gives to us, or such as we give to him.

Q. What are the things which God gives to us?

A. Those things which are here comprehended under the word Prophesying.

Q. What is meant by the word Prophesying?

A. First, the word of God preached and interpreted, which is the principal,
and that which is properly and principally meant by Prophesying. Secondly,
herein also (by a figurative speech) is meant all other outward means, whereby
God uses to give his holy spirit, and by means whereof it ordinarily works;
as the Sacraments, and the discipline of the Church.

Q. Before we enter into this matter, there are some difficulties to be cleared
in the words of the text. And first tell me, why the Apostle has set the
Spirit, before the preaching of the Word, meant by prophecy; considering that
by, and after the preaching of the Word, the Lord gives his Spirit?

A. Because the Spirit is the chief of the two; the word being but the
instrument whereby the spirit of God works. And secondly, for that the work
of the spirit is more general, and reaches to some, to whom the preaching of
the word cannot reach. Lastly, for that the word is never profitable without
the spirit: but the spirit may be profitable without the word, as after will
appear.

Q. Another difficulty is this: It may seem by these words, that the spirit
of adoption and sanctification, proper to the faithful, may be lost; seeing
he exhorts that we should not quench the spirit.

A. Nothing less: but as God does assure the faithful of their continuance in
him; so he does declare by these exhortations, that a special means whereby
John 4. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
he will nourish this holy fire in us, is, by taking heed unto the preaching
of the word.

Q. Come then to the matter: Is it not lawful to separate these means?

A. In no case: for that which God has joined Matthew. 19.
together, no man may separate.

Q. How does it appear more evidently, that God has joined these together?

A. By that which the Prophet says (Esa. 59). That he will make this covenant
with his people, that his spirit shall be upon them; and that his words which
he Esaias 59. 21.
has put into their mouth, shall not depart out of their mouth, nor out of the
mouth of their seeds seed, for ever.

Q. What learn you hereby?

A. That no man is to content himself, with this fancy, that he has the
spirit, and so neglect the Word, because ordinarily they go together. Yea
always, where God vouchsafes to give his word.

Q. Who are by this condemned?

A. The Anabaptists, Papists, and Libertines, which ascribe to the spirit yt
which they lust, though it have John. 14. 26.
no warrant from the word: whereas the spirit does not ordinarily suggest any
thing to us, but that which it teaches us out of the Word.

Q. What other sort of men is here condemned?

A. The Stancarists, who esteem the word to be fit Mark. 4. 1. 2. etc.
compared with Esaias 2. 1. 2. etc. 2. Pet. 3. 15. 16. Dan. 9. 2.
to catechize and initiate, or enter us in the rudiments and first beginnings
of Religion; but too base to exercise our selves in afterward: whereas the
Prophets and Apostles (most excellent men) did notwithstanding continually
exercise themselves in the Scriptures.

Q. Are none saved without hearing of the word?

A. Yes: for first, children (which are within the Genesis 17. 7. 1. Cor. 7. 14.
Covenant, and belong to Gods Election) are saved, without the ordinary means
of the Word and Sacraments. Secondly, some also of age, who are in places Mat.
2. 1. Heb. 11. ^1.
where those means are not to be had. Thirdly, some also, which living in
place where such means are, yet have no capacity to understand them: as they
which are deaf borne, etc. which (by the way) serves to show that God is not
tied to the means, but can, and sometimes does, (when and where it pleases
him) work without them. Yet here we must take heed of Mat. 13. 3. 1. Cor. 3.
6. 1. pet. 1. 23.
presuming; for if God vouchsafe the means, and give capacity for the use of
them, and we shall despise them, we have no more cause to expect salvation by
Christ, then the husbandman a harvest, that despises to plow and sow his
ground.

CHAP. 35.
Of the special working of Gods spirit in the Church, by the Word.

Gods spirit works things, Common to the wicked and godly concerning the
covenant of Grace, as to 1. Understand and consent to the truth of the
doctrine. 2. Delight in it, and have a glimpse of the life to come. To have
some care to keep it.

Works, as 1. Terror of conscience. 2. Contrition, or sorrow for sin. 3.
Confession of sin. 4. Doing many outward duties, restitution, etc. 5. Desire
to die the death of the righteous.

Proper to the godly, as Receiving the seed (that is, the promise of salvation
by Christ) into a good heart. Bringing forth fruit with patience.


MATTHEW. chap. 13. verse. 3. to the 9. and 18. to the 24. 3. And he spoke many
things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow.

4. And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the ways side, and the fowls came
and devoured them up.

5. Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith
they sprang up, because they had no deepnesse of earth.

6. And when the Sun was up, they were scorched: and because they had no
root, they withored away.

7. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up and choked them.

8. But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred
fold, some sixty fold, some thirty fold.

18. Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.

19. When any one hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not,
then comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his
heart: this is he which received seed by the way side.

20. But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that
hears the word, and anon with joy receives it:

21. Yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended.

22. He also that received seed among the thorns, is he that hears the word,
and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word,
and he becomes unfruitful.

23. But he that received seed into the good ground, is he that hears the
word, and understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth some
an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty.


Q. TO proceed to speak more specially of the word of God, and of the diverse
working of Gods spirit in his Church, by the same word. What does Gods spirit
work by the word?

A. First, it works things common to the godly with the wicked. Secondly,
things proper to the godly, as is clearly taught by the parable, Mat. 13. 3.

Q. What are the things common to both?

A. First, such as concern the covenant of grace: secondly, such as concern
the covenant of works.

Q. What are the things common to both, concerning the covenant of grace which
it works?

A. First, some understanding of the word of grace; and some kind of consent
unto the same.

Q. If they understand it, how is it, that one sort are said not to understand?

A. Not that they have no understanding at all, but they are said to have none,
because it is not effectual; for they come without affection, and go away
without care.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. First, to take heed that we deceive not our selves in a bare profession, or
light knowledge of the word; and that we hear it with zeal, and depart from
the hearing thereof with care to profit.

Secondly, to beware also of the great subtilty of Satan, who (as a swift and
ravenous bird) snatcheth the word out of unprepared hearts; even as thieves use
to take away whatsoever they find loose, and carelessly laid up.

Q. What second thing is common to both?

A. To have some kind of delight in the word, and a glimpse of the life to come.

Q. What difference is there between this kind of delight and the joy of the
godly?

A. This is like the blaze of a fire, and is neither lasting Psalm. 4. 7.
nor firm: whereas the joy of the godly is solid and sound, and above that
which the worldly man has in gold and silver. Secondly, the wicked's delight
Psalm. 119. 33. 34
arises from a wrong end and motive: as to satisfy some humorous desire to
know something more then other; etc. whereas the joy of the godly is to know
further, to the end they may practice.

Q. Why is it said, they have no root?

A. Because they understand the things, but are not rooted and grounded in the
truth thereof, by saving faith.

Q. What else is common to both?

A. To have some care to keep that which they have heard, (it may be with some
suffering of persecution): and yet the thorns of covetousness, or of worldly
delights, may ouergrow the good seed, and make it unfruitful.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. That to have suffered persecution for the truths sake, ought not to make us
secure and careless of proceeding: for of them that suffer, some may fall away
and perish, as did Alexander the Copper-smith, etc.

Q. So much of things common to both, pertaining to the covenant of grace. Now
declare the like in those things which are common to both, concerning the
covenant of works?

A. First, the wicked (by means of the word) may Exodus 9. 29. Act. 24. 25. 1.
Sam. 24. 17. Mark. 6. 20. Numb. 23. 10.
be brought to confess their faults. Secondly, they may be pricked in
conscience with a terror of them. Thirdly, they may be sorry for them.
Fourthly, they may do many things that are taught. Fifthly, they may desire to
die the death of the righteous; and all these only for fear of judgment:
whereas the godly confess their sins, are stricken with remorse and 2. Cor.
7. 10.
sorrow for them, because they have offended a loving God, and a gracious
Father; and endeavor to do not some things, but all that they are commanded;
and desire to be saved, to the end they may glorify God. Psalm. 119. 6. Philip.
1. 20.


Q. May we conclude from hence, that three parts of four in the Church are
likely to be condemned by this parable?

A. No, in no case: for though of four sorts of men, there be three sorts
wicked, and but one sort good; yet it will not follow, that the wicked in the
Church, are thrice as many in number as the good; and to affirm the same, is
both curious, and uncomfortable.

Q. So much of the things common to the godly with the wicked. What are things
proper to the Godly?

A. Two things: first, the receiving of the seed into a good heart: secondly,
the bringing forth of fruit with patience.

Q. What is here meant by receiving of the seed into a good heart?

A. By the seed, is meant especially the word of promise; whereby God has
said, he will be merciful unto us in Christ, if we repent and believe. By the
receiving into a good heart, is meant, the receiving of it by faith in Christ.

Q. What is faith?

A. A persuasion of my heart, that God has given Galath. 20 20.
his Son for me, and that he is mine, and I his.

Q. What? has a man a good heart, before he receives that seed?

A. No doubtless; for naturally all men are alike corrupt; and as the face
answers to the face in the Prou. 27. 19.
glass; so one of the sons of Adam, is like another, in that nature which
they have received from their parents.

Q. Why then are they said to have a good heart? Iam. 1. 21.


A. It is called a good heart, in respect of Gods changing of it, by the
ingrafted word: and by these words, he puts difference between the fruits
of the former, and the fruits of this last: for that there is no difference in
the outward show of fruits, but only in regard that those fruits proceeded
from an unclean heart, and this from a heart which is cleansed.

Q. How must we approve our selves that we be good ground?

A. By good fruits.

Q. What are those fruits?

A. First, free access to God. Secondly, the love Romans 5.
of God shead into our hearts. Thirdly, a feeling of peace with God. Fourthly,
the spirit of adoption, that assures us to be the sons of God: whereof
arises that we call God Father, and hope for the inheritance with patience,
which is a patient waiting for the performance of Gods promises. Fifthly,
repentance, which 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Gal. 5. 6.
is a changing of all the powers and faculties of the soul, and members of the
body; effected by that love, which proceeds from true saving faith.

CHAP. 36.
Of the Sacraments in general.

The Sacraments are to be considered In general; wherein is showed, First,
What a Sacrament is. What be the parts.
2. What be the persons, 1. By whom it is instituted. 2. By whom they are to
be Administered. Received.


In special, Chapter 37.

ROMANS chap. 4. verse. 10. 11. 10. How was it then reckoned? when he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness
of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of
all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousness
might be imputed unto them also:


Q. HItherto of the word of God, which is the principal outward means; what
other outward means are there where by the Spirit works?

A. There be two: the Sacraments, and Censures of the Church.

Q. What is to be considered in a Sacrament in general?

A. First, what it is, and what be the parts thereof.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, or an action of the
Church, wherein by outward things done according to the 1. Cor. 11. 23. Genesis
17. 7. 10. 11. Exodus 12 6. Luke 1. 59.
ordinance of God, inward things being betokened, Christ and his benefits are
offered to all, and exhibited to the faithful, for the strengthening of their
faith in the eternal Covenant.

Q. Why call you it an action?

A. Because it is not a bare sign alone, but a work. 1. Cor. 11. 24. 25.


Q. Why call you it an action of the Church?

A. Because it is a Exodus 12. 6. 47 2. Chron. 30. 5. 13. Mat. 3. 5. 6. Luke 1.
59. and 3. 21. 1. Cor. 11. 33.
public action, and appertains to the whole Church: and it is as great, or a
greater indignity for the Sacraments to be administered in private corners, as
for civil judgment Amos 5. 15.
which ought to be open and public. Also, the sacrifices under the law, were
not so excellent as these; yet was it not Deuteronomy. 6 11. 13. Leuit. 17. 34.
lawful to offer them in private houses. Hence it appears, that the Sabbath
is the fittest time for the celebration of the Sacraments, when the Church is
assembled together, to perform the other parts of Gods worship.

Q. What are the parts of a Sacrament?

A. The visible creatures ordained for signs and figures of Christ, and the
invisible things signified and represented thereby.

Q. Why are visible creatures ordained hereunto?

A. They are ordained to this end, that by comparing and conferring them with
the things which are inward, they might help: first, our understanding, in
which regard they are ( Gal. 3. 1.
as it were) images or glasses. 2. Our remembrance, in Luke 22 19. 1 Cor. 11.
24.
which respect they are monuments. 3. and especially, the persuasion of our
hearts, by reason whereof they Romans 4. 11.
are seals and pledges.

Q. What may be observed from hence?

A. First, what gross blindness, forgetfulness, and hardness of heart, and
infidelity is in us by nature, when the word and oath of God is not sufficient
to confirm our faith in the promises of God, but we must have such aides as
these. Secondly, we are to note also the mercy of God, that thus applies
himself to our weakness. And thirdly, what miserable men they are that
neglect and contemn the Sacraments, which are pledges of so great favors, and
such effectual helps unto us.

Q. What else have we to observe?

A. The goodness and wisdom of God, that has chosen common things, and such
as are easy to be had, for so high and singular mysteries: whereas he might
have chosen things more rare, and of greater price, to set out such excellent
benefits as are offered unto us in the Sacraments: and herein Gods goodness
appears more unto us under the Gospel, then to them under the Law.

Q. What are the spiritual things represented by the visible creatures?

A. Christ Galath. 3. 27. 1. Cor. 10. 4.
Jesus with all his saving benefits, which are exhibited in the outward signs,
and sealed to the worthy receivers thereby.

Q. How does that appear?

A. First, in that it is usual in the Scripture, to Genesis 17. 10. Exodus 12. 5.
11. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
give the name of the thing signified to the sign, which is not only in
regard of the resemblance and proportion that is between them, but to show the
inseparable conjunction of the thing signified with the sign, in the worthy
receiver, in which regard they are called Romans 4. 11.
seals.

Q. Do they seal nothing else but Christ and his benefits to us?

A. Yea, they seal also our promise to God, viz. Genesis 17. 11. Exodus 13. 9.
that we take him only for our God, and our redeemer, whom alone by faith we
rest upon, and whom we bind our selves to obey.

Q. Hitherto of the description and parts of a Sacrament, what further is to be
considered concerning a Sacrament in general?

A. The necessary circumstances concerning the same; to wit, the person
instituting the Sacrament, the persons that are to administer and receive the
same.

Q. Who is the institutor of a Sacrament?

A. God only, in whose hands alone it is to give 1. Cor. 11. 23.
the inward grace, represented by the outward signs.

Q. May not any persons administer and receive the Sacraments?

A. No, but such as are appointed thereunto by Gods own ordinance.

Q. Who then by Gods ordinance are to administer the Sacraments?

A. The Ministers of the Word, who represent unto Matthew. 28. 19. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
us the Lord, whose stewards they are.

Q. What is the Ministers office herein?

A. To consecrate the elements, and then to distribute them.

Q. Wherein consists the consecration of the elements?

A. Partly in declaring the institution of the Sacraments, and partly in going
before the Congregation in prayer unto God. First, in praising God, who has
ordained such means for the relief of our weakness: then in suing to God, that
he would be pleased to make those means effectual to that end, for which
they were ordained.

Q. Is not the substance of the elements changed by this consecration?

A. No verily; only the use is altered, in that they are separated from a
common to a holy use, which change and alteration continues only whilst the
action is in hand.

Q. Does the Minister with the sign, give the thing signified also?

A. No: he only Mat. 3. 11.
dispenses the signs, but it is God that gives and dispenses the thing
signified.

Q. Is God always present to give the thing signified, to all them that the
Minister gives the sign?

A. No, not to all: for some in receiving the signs, receive together with
them 1. Cor. 11. 29.
their own judgment: yet he is always ready to give the thing signified to
all those that are fit to receive the Sacraments, and to such persons the
signs, and things signified are always conjoined.

Q. Who are the persons that are to receive the Sacraments?

A. All Christians that are prepared thereunto.

Q. Is there any special preparation required to the receiving of the
Sacraments?

A. Yes verily: for seeing men ought to come with Exodus 3. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
preparation to the hearing of the Word alone: they ought much more so to come,
when the Sacraments are administered also, wherein God does offer himself more
familiarly and visibly to us.

Q. What is the preparation that is required in them that come to receive the
Sacraments?

A. There is required in those that are of years of discretion, to a worthy
participation of the Sacraments, knowledge, faith, and feeling, both in the
Law, and in the Gospel.

Q. Seeing no man is able to attain to the knowledge of the Law and the
Gospel perfectly, much less the simple and common people: Tell me how far
is this knowledge, faith, and feeling necessary?

A. 1. concerning the Law, it is necessary that ye receiver of the Sacrament
be able to understand and believe the common corruption of all men, both in the
bitter root of original sin, and in the poisoned fruits thereof, together with
the curse of everlasting death due thereunto; and that he be able to apply both
these, that is, the sin and wages thereof to himself. Secondly, concerning
the Gospel, that he be able (in some measure) to understand the covenant of
grace, which God (in Christ) has made with the sons of men: and then, that
by faith he be able (in some measure) to apply the same to himself.

Q. What arises from this knowledge, faith, and feeling, to a further
preparation thereunto?

A. A true and earnest desire to be made partaker Mat. 3. 13. Act. 8. 36. Luke
22. 15.
of the Sacraments; with a conscionable care to perform special duties, in
and after the action of receiving.

Q. What duties (in the action of receiving) are to be performed.

A. First, a grave and reverent behavior, befitting such holy mysteries.
Secondly, an attentive heedfulnesse in comparing the outward signs and actions
in the Sacraments, with the inward and spiritual things which they betoken..

Q. What duties are to be performed after the partaking of the Sacraments?

A. If we have a sense and feeling of the gracious work of God by them, we are
to rejoice with thanksgiving; if not, we are to enter into judgment with our
selves, and to humble our selves for our want therein. And though we ought to
be humbled, if we feel not the work of God in us, in or after the
Sacraments, as that which argues want of preparation before, or attention in
receiving of them; yet ought we not therefore to be altogether dismayed: for
as the sick man feels not the nourishment of his meat, because of his
malady; and yet notwithstanding is nourished: so is it in such faithful ones,
as do not so sensibly feel the working of God, in and by the Sacraments,
through the weakness of their faith. And although we cannot feel it
immediately, yet after, (by the fruits thereof) we shall be able to discern of
our profiting thereby.

CHAP. 37.
Of Baptism.

The Sacraments in special, are Baptism, wherein note the First, the
Description. Parts.
Persons that are to receive They yt are of years of discretion. The children
of the faithful.

The Lords Supper. Chap. 38.

MATTHEW. chap. 3. verse. 5. 6. 5. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea,
and all the region round about Iordane,

6. And were baptized of him in Iordane, confessing their sins.

MATTHEW. 28. 19. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.


Q. HOw many Sacraments are there?

A. To omit how many there were under the Law; under the Gospel, there are but
two only: viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. How may that be proved?

A. First, because we read of no other Sacraments instituted by Christ in the
new Testament, Mat. 3. 15. and 21. 25.
but only these two.

Secondly, these two do sufficiently and fully seal unto us 1. Cor. 12. 13.
and 10. 1. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 8. Gal. 3. 27. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
the covenant of grace, and all the benefits that God offers therein; as our
regeneration and ingrafting into Christ, and of our growth and continuance in
him.

Thirdly, under the Law (when the number of Sacraments might have been of more
use), there were but two fixed and ordinary Sacraments, viz. Circumcision, and
the Passover; unto which, Baptism; and the Lords Supper do answer. And
those other Sacraments of the old Testament, which were temporary and
extraordinary, have also a correspondence with these: for Genesis 7. 6.
the passing the flood Exodus 14. 22.
through the red sea, and the Exodus 13 21.
staying under the cloud, were but a kind of Baptism. And Manna Exodus 16. 14.
15.
from heaven, and water Ioh. 6. 31. Exodus 17. 6. 1. Cor. 19. 1. 2. 3.
out of the Rock, were but answerable to the Supper of the Lord.

Fourthly, Christ has given precepts to his Ministers for the Mat. 28. 19. 1.
Cor. 11. 23.
administering of these, and has not appointed the administration of any other.
Neither did Christ himself partake of any other: therefore those five other of
the Church of Romes addition; viz. Matrimony, Orders, Penance, Confirmation,
and extreme Unction; the three first whereof, though they be divine
ordinances, yet are not of the nature and number of Sacraments, and the two
latter are merely coined by the Papists, as they are used by them.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is the first Sacrament of the Gospel, wherein, Tit. 3. 5. Gal. 3. 17.
Mat. 28. 19.
by the washing or sprinkling of our bodies with water, into the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; our regeneration or new birth, or our entrance and
ingrafting into Christ, and into the body of Christ (which is his Church) is
represented and sealed unto us.

Q. Why call you it the first Sacrament.

A. Because our Savior Christ requires of his Matthew. 28. Exodus 12. 48.
Disciples, in that commission which he gave them to teach all nations; that
after they have taught men to believe, they should be baptized, and thereby
(as it were) be enrolled amongst those of the household of God; or entered into
the number of the Citizens and burgesses of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Secondly, to note an abuse of the ancient Church, who upon an erroneous
conceit, that those which fell after Baptism, could not repent, and so be
saved, deferred Baptism till the hour of their death.

Thirdly, to note, that it ought to be administered but once only, at our first
admittance into the visible Church of Christ. For first, it is said the Church
continued Act. 2. 42.
in prayer, and breaking of bread, not in baptizing. Secondly, it is a pledge
of our new birth; now as a man being borne once, has no need to be borne
again: so he that is once baptized, needs not to be baptized any more: and
although (in the Epistle to the Hebrews) mention be made of the doctrine of
Baptismes; yet thereby is not meant that Christians were then taught to be
often baptized, but that they were to acknowledge and seek for a double
Baptism; the one outward of water, the other inward of the spirit; both which
the faithful receive at one and the same time.

Q. Why is it required that we be baptized into the name Mat. 28. 19.
of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost?

A. Because by Baptism we are consecrated to Mat. 28. 19. Act. 11. 26. Genesis
48. 16. Esa. 4. 1.
God, to bear his name, as a wife bears the name of her husband; or as a
child bears the name of his father.

Q. Is it necessary that we that are baptized, should be ingrafted into
Christ?

A. Yea: for being naturally, after the fall, cut off from God, we must needs
be ingrafted into him again as new plants, if we look to live by him
everlastingly.

Q. What force has Baptism in this ingrafting?

A. It is a seal and a pledge of it, and not that, by which the ingrafting, or
incorporation it self is effected; considering that we are baptized, in the
right only of being members of Christ before. Besides, ordinarily such of Gods
elect, as are baptized at years Mat. 3. 6. Act. 8. 36. 37. 38.
of discretion, are (so far as man can judge) actually ingrafted into Christ,
before they receive this Sacrament: and such of them as are baptized in their
infancy (living till they come to years of discretion), are ordinarily
ingrafted into Christ afterward, by the spirit, through faith, gotten by the
hearing of Gods word.

Q. What fruit arises from this ingrafting into Christ?

A. A new birth, of which also this Sacrament is a seal and pledge, and whereof
we being once partakers, can never be deprived. Ioh. 3. 5.

Q. What are the outward signs in Baptism?

A. Water, and the washing or covering with water the party baptized.

Q. What does the water signify and represent?

A. The spirit and the blood of Christ, applied by the spirit in the work of
our Regeneration.

Q. What does the washing or covering with water signify?

A. Our Regeneration, and putting on of Christ, the covering of our sins
through the imputation of Gal. 3. 27.
Christ's death: our Righteousness by Christ's obedience, Romans 6. 3. 4. Coloss 2
12. 1. Cor. 10. 2.
in the fulfilling of the Law. The burial of the old Adam with our Savior
Christ: and, as after the water is applied to the body, and it taken out of it,
the body appears white and clean, and (as it were) raised again from the
dead: so Gods spirit applying unto our soul the blood of Christ, by a lively
faith, works in us newness of life: whence this Sacrament is called, the
Baptism of Repentance. Mark. 1. 4.

Q. What learn you hereby?

A. That although sin does dwell in our mortal bodies, and many leaud
motions rise and rebel in us; yet if we be the children of God, we shall find
it mortified, by the death of our Savior Christ; and although we be by nature
sluggish to good things, yet shall we find our selves quickened by him.

Q. What persons are to receive this Sacrament?

A. All that by the Laws of Charity, are to Act. 10. 47.
be esteemed within the Covenant of grace; of what nation, sex, or age soever.

Q. Who are to be esteemed to be within the covenant of grace?

A. First, those which (being of years of discretion Mat. 3. 6. and 28. 29.
Act 2. 41. Mark. 16. 10. Act. 8. 15. 37. and 10. 46. 47.
) give assent unto the doctrine of the Gospel, and profess faith, and
repentance.

Q. How are those that are at years of discretion, to prepare themselves to
the receiving of this Sacrament?

A. First, they are to submit themselves to be instructed in the Heb. 6. 1.
principles of religion, commonly called the Catechism. Secondly, they are to
make solemn Mat. 3. 6. Act. 2. 41. Mat. 3. 6. Act. 8. 37.
profession of their faith, and confession of their sins, with faithful
promise to forsake them. Thirdly, As a testimony of their faith and unfeigned
repentance, after this they are to desire Baptism, of them that have the
dispensation thereof, and to procure the same, as soon as they can.

Q. Who else are to be esteemed within the covenant of grace, and consequently
to have a title to Baptism?

A. The infants of those Parents that are themselves Act. 2. 39. Genesis 17. 7.
Luke 18. 16.
within the Covenant, and have been baptized.

Q. Is it necessary that both the Parents be in the Covenant?

A. No: it is sufficient, for the intitling of the child 1. Cor. 7. 14.
to baptism, if either of them be.

Q. How do you prove that Infants are to be baptized?

A. There is the same use of Baptism under the Gospel, that was of
Circumcision under the Law; and the Infants of Christians are under the
Covenant as well as theirs; and Baptism is a sign of the Covenant, as well as
Circumcision: if therefore Genesis 17. 12. Col. 2. 11. 12.
Infants were circumcised, and Baptism possess the room of Circumcision,
except there can be showed a special prohibition or restraint in Gods word,
it will follow that Infants also may be baptized. Further, the Apostles are
said to baptize Act. 16. 15. and 18. 1. Cor. 1. 16.
whole families, amongst which it is ordinary, that there be some children,
and there is no reason to limit the words to them that are at years. And this
use has continued in the Church since the Apostles times, and was never
gainsaid by any but those, that by the universal Church, have been judged
heretics.

Q. Is Baptism absolutely necessary to the salvation of Infants? or are we to
judge all those damned that die unbaptized?

A. Such a conceit is both unchristian, and uncharitable, and without all
ground, offering wrong to the grace of God, and the virtue of his Covenant,
wherein he promises that he will be the God of the faithful and their seed.
And seeing this Sacrament is not the cause, but a testimony and seal only of
salvation; and the fault is not in the Infant, that he is not baptized; and
seeing in cases of mere necessity, where there is no contempt of the means,
but the party does as much for the obtaining of them as he can do, God does
not tie himself to the means; but can (and often does) give the thing without
the means: neither have we herein more warrant, to judge the Infants of
Christians damned, that (without any default of their own) die without
Baptism, then the Infants of the Israelites, that died before the eighth day,
or whilst they were in the wilderness.

Q. What preparation is to be required of Infants that are to be baptized?

A. None can be required of them, who in regard of age are but mere patients;
but that which is to be performed, is to be done of them that bring the child
to Baptism, and that are present at the baptizing thereof.

Q. Who are they?

A. The Parent, or the rest of the Church.

Q. What is the Parent to perform?

A. First, he is to consider of the goodness of God, that has received not
only himself, but his Genesis 11. 17.
child; and therefore to rejoice in this love and favor of God; and then to
confirm himself in this hope, that as God has quickened him after his
Baptism; so will he his child. Secondly, he is to present 1. Sam. 1. 20.
Luke 1. 60. 63.
the child. Thirdly, to give, or to take order for the giving of some such
name, as may put the child in remembrance of some good duty, by the
signification of it; or by setting before him in it, the example of some, whose
faith and virtues are commended in the Scriptures. Fourthly, after Baptism,
when the child Ephesians. 6. 4.
is capable, he is to catechize, and to bring it up in the fear and
information of the Lord, or to procure it to be done by others that are more
able.

Q. What are the duties of the rest of the Church?

A. First, to rejoice, and to give thanks to God for the increase of his
Church. Secondly, to give attendance to the doctrine, and to pray that the
child may be made partaker of Christ and his benefits. Thirdly, when it comes
to age, to do such duties unto it, as one member owes to another.

CHAP. 38.
Of the Supper of the Lord.

Wherein consider The parts, Signs, Elements. Actions about them.
Things signified.
The circumstances, Time. Persons.


MATTHEW. chap. 26. verse 26. 27. 28. 29. 26. And as they were eating, Jesus took
bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said,
Take, eat, this is my body.

27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of it:

28. For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins.

29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.


Q. SO much for Baptism. What is the Lords Supper?

A. It is the other Sacrament of the Gospel; whereby is sealed unto us our
continuance, minishment, 1. Cor. 11. 20.
and growth in Christ, and in his body, which is his Church.

Q. What are the outward signs in this Sacrament?

A. Bread and wine, and the sacramental actions, in, and about the same,
Matthew. 26. 26. etc..

Q. What manner of bread is fittest?

A. Ordinary bread; for such our Savior (at the first institution) took, as
was at that time commonly Exodus 12. 18. 19
used. It was indeed unleavened bread, but no other at that time was lawful,
nor to be had in that place.

Q. What does the bread and wine signify?

A. The body and blood of Christ. Mat. 26. 26. 28.


Q. Why did the Lord make choice of these creatures of bread and wine to this
end?

A. Because they are (of all the means of our nourishment Psalm. 104. 15.
) the chiefest; and therefore meaning to set forth our spiritual nourishment
by bodily things, he made choice of them.

Q. Why did he not content himself with one of these only?

A. That he might thereby show, that by him we have whatsoever is needful to
nourish us to life everlasting, and that we have a plentiful and assured
redemption in Christ. Wherefore the practice of the Papists, in taking away the
cup, is answerable to their doctrine; who teach, that neither we are saved
wholly nor certainly by Christ.

Q. What are the sacramental actions about the bread and wine?

A. The Actions of the Minister, or Communicants.

Q. What are the Ministers actions?

A. First, after the example of our Savior Christ, he consecrateth the bread
and wine.

Q. How did our Savior consecrate them?

A. First, by separating the bread and wine from the ordinary use to this holy
use, by prayer and thanksgiving; the latter whereof being plainly expressed by
the Apostle, does imply the former. Whereby we may understand, that our
Savior Christ prayed to Mat. 26. 26. 1. Cor. 11. 24.
God his heavenly Father, to this effect, that his death in it self sufficient
to save, might by the working of his spirit, be effectual to the elect; and
that those outward signs of bread and wine might (through the operation of his
holy spirit) be effectual to the purposes they are ordained for.

Q. Does this consecration change the bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ?

A. No: but they still continue in nature and substance bread and wine still,
and are but only types and seals of Christ's body and blood.

Q. But does not our Savior say of the bread, This is my body; and of the
wine, This is my blood?

A. Though he do; yet it thence no more follows, that the bread is his very
real body, and the wine his blood, then that he is a material door, or vine,
because he says, I am the door, I am the vine.

Q. How is our Savior then to be understood?

A. To speak by an usual figure, where the name of the thing signified, is
given to the sign. After the same manner that in the old Testament,
Circumcision is called the Covenant, and the Lamb, the Passover, Act. 22. 16.
Tit. 3. 5.
because they were signs of those things.

Q. What special reasons have you against the change of these elements into
the very body and blood of Christ, commonly called Transubstantiation?

A. First, then at the first institution, there must needs be two Christ's, one
that gives, another that is given.

Secondly, If the bread be the very body of Christ, etc. then there is no true
and proportionable sign to represent the thing signified, and consequently no
Sacrament.

Thirdly, the same individual body must then of necessity be in more places
then one at once, which is not only against the nature of a true humane body,
but of a body in general also.

Fourthly, the Apostles, and Evangelists call it bread and wine after the
consecration. 1. Cor. 10. 16. 26. 27. 28. Matthew. 26. 29.

Fifthly, if there were any such change, it were the greatest miracle in the
world, but all other miracles are such, as have been apparent to sense.

Sixthly, then the wicked as well as the godly, should receive Christ Jesus and
his quickening spirit, which is never separated from him. Yea (which is
horrible to consider) mice and rats may eat the true body of Christ, and
drink his blood.

Q. But it is not likely, that at this time, and in this place, our Savior
would use a figurative speech, and speak obscurely, whereas he might have
spoken plainly?

A. First, it is plain, that at the same time he used as John 14. 6. and 15. 5.
figurative a speech as this. Secondly, in this institution also we must of
necessity acknowledge, that he uses a figure when he says, that Luke 22. 10.
the cup is the new Testament. Thirdly, there is often more light and
plainness in a figure, then in a proper speech.

Q. But what may be noted out of this form of speech?

A. The near and sure conjunction of the sign, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
with the thing signified, which it has in them that shall receive it
worthily; in so much as they which partake of the one, receive the other also.

Q. Then it seems, that though upon the consecration, the bread and wine be
not changed into the real body and blood of Christ, that yet they are present,
in, with, or under the bread and wine?

A. Not corporally, substantially, or locally; for then, first, the body of
Christ should be every where; which does as much destroy the nature of a humane
body, as to be in many places at once. Secondly, then as in transubstantiation,
the body and blood of Christ should not be a spiritual food of the soul, but
bodily, such as the wicked eat of as well as the godly. Thirdly, then also (as
in transubstantiation) Christ should be eaten as ye Capernaites fancied,
really, and with the body, John 6. 26.
which our Savior denies. Fourthly, it should not then be true, which is
said, Act. 3. 21. That the heavens shall contain him, till the time that all
things be restored. Fifthly, it is the nature of that faith by which we lay
hold on, and receive Christ, to seek him, and Coloff. 3. 12. Philip. 3. 10.
Hebr. 6. 10.
behold him, in heaven, and to feed upon him there.

Q. Thus much of the first action of the Minister: what other actions are there
of his?

A. He takes the bread and breaks it, and the wine and pours it out,
delivering them unto the receivers, and showing the signification of them.

Q. What is meant and signified hereby?

A. That Christ himself (of his own accord) offers his body to be boken,
and his blood to be shead for our sins; and that this body so broken, and his
blood so shead, being received by faith, is that food by which we live
everlastingly.

Q. Why does our Savior say, This is my body which is broken for you, when yet
it was not broken?

A. It is usual in the Scripture, to show the certainty of that which is to
come, by speaking of them, as if they were present. Esa. 9. 6. Ezech. 39. 8.

Q. Why does Christ call the cup, the cup of the new Testament?

A. Because it is a seal of the promise of God touching our salvation in
Christ; which being in old time under the Law, shadowed by the sheading of the
blood of beasts, is now under the Gospel, accomplished by the blood-sheading
of Christ.

Q. What are the sacramental actions of them which receive?

A. To take the bread, and to eat it; and the wine, Mat. 26. 26. 27.
and to drink it.

Q. What is signified thereby?

A. The applying of Christ crucified and all his merits, unto our selves by
faith, as the only means by which we look to live eternally.

Q. What is the fittest time for the celebration of this Sacrament?

A. The Lords day in the morning. Act. 20. 7.


Q. But our Savior celebrated it upon another day, and both he and his
Apostles, at another time, even in the night?

A. First, our Savior did this occasionally after supper, in regard of the
Passover, in the room whereof this was to succeed; and therefore he did
institute it presently after the eating of it. Secondly, that it might go
immediately before his passion, the better to show whereunto it has relation.
Thirdly, the Apostles did it in the night, upon necessity, for fear of
persecution; and therefore where there is no such cause of fear, the custom of
our own Churches is to be performed, which celebrate it in the morning, when
our wits, memories and capacities are most fresh.

Q. But is there no special matter to be observed, that our Savior
celebrated this Sacrament after supper?

A. Yes verily: for thereby we learn, that we are not to come to this table
to fill our bellies; but we are to have our minds lifted up from these
earthly elements, to our Savior Christ, represented by them. For it is not the
use after supper to set bread and wine upon the table, but banqueting dishes:
which reproues them which come only for a draught of wine, and such as rest
only in the receipt of the outward elements.

Q. How often are the Sacraments to be celebrated?

A. As often in a year, as the Church where we are members may conveniently
(and agreeable to the dignity of the mystery) communicate therein. 1. Cor.
11. 26.


Q. What persons have title to this Sacrament?

A. All Christians, that are of years of discretion, 1. Cor. 11. 27. 28.
and have been baptized, being fitted thereunto.

Q. May not infants and children partake thereof?

A. No, because they cannot perform that duty which the Apostle requires of
all worthy receivers; 1. Cor. 11. 28.
that is, they cannot try and examine themselves.

Q. By what means may we be fit receivers of this Sacrament?

A. First, by a careful preparation before the action, great heed in the
action, and a joyful and thankful close and shutting up of it.

Q. How are we to prepare our selves before the action?

A. We are, first, to examine our knowledge, as in the grounds and principles
of religion; so also in this Sacrament, whether we understand the meaning and
use thereof, viz. the signification of the signs, and the graces that they
seal.

Secondly, we are to examine what faith we have, and what repentance; not
only in the general, but for our particular sins; whether we do bewail
them, or judge our selves for them, otherwise we shall stir up Gods wrath
against us, and those that belong 1. Cor. 11. 28. 31
unto us, and move him (although not to condemn us in the world to come) yet
to inflict fearful plagues and judgments upon us in this world.

Q. What heed is to be taken in the action?

A. That in the act of receiving, with the signs we consider and call to our
remembrance the particular matters signified. Seeing the bread broken, and the
wine poured out, we are affectionately to remember the body of Christ broken,
and his blood shead for us; and by the eye of faith, behold him crucified (as
it were) before our eyes. Further, beholding the Minister reaching forth these
elements unto us, we are to behold Christ himself therein, offering himself,
and all his merits unto us, if we will receive them by faith. Lastly, in the
stretching forth of our hands to receive these elements, we are to labor to
have a sense and feeling of our faith, laying hold upon Christ and all his
saving benefits: and in our eating of this bread, and drinking this wine, we
are to labor to feel such a spiritual refreshing of our souls, with the
body and blood of Christ, as we feel in our bodies by the bread and wine.

Q. How are we to close and shut up this action?

A. We are to be comforted in heart, in the sense of Gods favor toward us:
from whence we should be ready (with feeling joy) to sing a Psalm unto the
Lord, of praise and thanksgiving: and feeling our selves strengthened in the
new man, we are to depart with a Mat. 26. 30.
resolution to walk more strongly, and steadily in the ways of God, all the
days of our life afterward. For this is a Sacrament, not of our incorporation
into Christ, but of our growth in him.

CHAP. 39.
Of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Censures, wherein note their Kinds, they are either Medicinal, Private.
Public.
Of punishment.
Power and authority.

MAT. chapter 18. verse. 15. to the 20. and 1. COR. 16. 22. 15. Moreover, if thy
brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother.

16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that
in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be established.

17. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a
Publican.

18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

19. Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching
any thing that they shall ask: it shall be done for them of my Father which is
in heaven.

20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them.

1. COR. 16. 22. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha.


Q. HItherto of the Sacraments; now follows the Discipline of the Church:
what is it?

A. The spiritual Censures of the Church, executed against such members of the
Church, as have fallen into any scandalous sin.

Q. What need is there of them?

A. Very much, both to help the godly, and to restrain and root out the
wicked out of the Church; even as much as of the sword of the Magistrate in the
Commonwealth, or the rod in the house; yea, so much more, as these are for the
body, and this life, the other for the soul, and the life to come.

Q. What is to be considered in this text, concerning these Censures?

A. First, the kinds: secondly, the power and authority.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. They are either of sovereign medicine, or of fearful revenge.

Q. What are medicinal Censures?

A. They are such as serve to bring men to repentance, and are either private
or public.

Q. Speak first of private Censures.

A. They consist in such admonitions, as are to be given to brethren that have
offended, whereof there are sundry degrees.

Q. Which is the first degree of admonition?

A. If thy brother offend against thee, or in thy knowledge, first tell him
thereof, and that only between thee and him.

Q. Are we bound to reprove all men, of what profession soever?

A. No, but him that is of the same profession of Christianity that we be, whom
the Scripture terms a brother; thereby shutting forth Turks, Jews,
Papists, and Atheists.

Q. What learn you thereby?

A. That we are not to contemn or make light of the admonitions of our
brethren, but to account of them as of precious balm.

Q. How must we reprove our brothers fault?

A. We must convince him by the word of God, of that fault we reprove, so as
he shall not be able to gainsay the same without show of obstinacy and
contempt.

Q. What may be gathered hereof?

A. That unless we reprove him, we are partakers of his sin.

Q. What further?

A. That it must be done in love, not of hatred; or to reproach him, as one that
is glad of something to hurt his good name.

Q. What is meant by tell him between thee and him?

A. That we should have a special regard to the good name and report of
another man; if his fault be private, we are not to spread it abroad: as some
that think they be burdened, unless they tell it to others; which is not
according to the rule of charity.

Q. Why is this added, If thy brother hear thee, thou have gained thy brother?

A. As a notable means of encouraging us in this duty, whereby we may be a
means of saving a soul.

Q. What if I gain not my brother?

A. Notwithstanding thou loosest not thy labor; for God will recompense it
plentifully, and lay it up amongst the rest of thy good deeds: also it shall
serve to further his judgment, for refusing such profitable means.

Q. Which is the second degree of admonition?

A. It is private, although less private then the former: for if thy brother
hear thee not, thou must yet take with thee one or two: for although he hear
not the first admonition, yet love will not give him over, but as the case
requires, and as the nature and condition of the offender may be discerned to
be easy, or hard to relent, thou must take one, or (if need be) two at the
most to join with thee in this duty.

Q. What choice is to be made for the second admonition?

A. Not this enemy, or one that is not able to convince; but one or two such
are to be chosen, as are likest to take effect, and fittest both for their
gifts and authority to recover him.

Q. May the first admonisher substitute another in his place the second time?

A. No: for our Savior Christ does not leave it free so to do, but will have
him that did first admonish, to be one; as it may seem, both for the better
confirming of the former dealing with the latter, as also for the keeping of
the fault of the offender in as much secrecy as may be.

Q. What is gathered hereby?

A. The great love and care of our Savior Christ, toward poor sinners: as
also what diligence we must use, and what care for our brother.

Q. Why may not one alone deal with him, the second time?

A. Because by the testimony of two or three, he might be brought to
reverence that counsel, that he would not regard at the first admonition; and
further, that, way may be made to the public judgment of the Church: for
otherwise there would be but the one man's yea, and the others nay, before the
Church, which under two testimonies (at least) cannot proceed further against
him.

Q. And thus far of private Censures, the public follow: what is that?

A. Excommunication.

Q. What is Excommunication?

A. The casting of an obstinate offender out of the Church, accounting of him,
as the Jews did of an Heathen, excluding him from the prayers and Sacraments
of the Church, and as of a Publican, with whom they would neither eat nor
drink.

Q. How are they to proceed in this censure?

A. If he will not harken to the private admonitions aforesaid, the Church is
to be told.

Q. What is here meant by the Church principally?

A. The Governors of the Church, who are as the mouth of the Church. Where
again appears the singular love and mercy of God toward his children; for as
when the Kings son is very sick, there uses to be assembled the whole
College of Physicians, for his recovery: so also for the healing of the
sons and daughters of the great King, he gathers (as it were) a college of
wise and discreet men to heal them.

Q. What if he hear not the Church, must he presently be cast out?

A. No: for as a good Physician, or Surgeon, before he cut, burn, or sear,
will use all other means; so, good and wise Governors of the Church, will
pause some convenient time, using prayer and fasting, to find (if it may be)
favor with God, that he may repent, before the fearful Censure of
excommunicating and cutting off, be executed against the offender.

Q. But if he have been admonished, and admonished again; if he have been
suspended from the Sacrament, and the Church have been long patient, if no
remedy be left undone, what are the Governors of the Church to do then?

A. They are to proceed to the excommunication aforesaid.

Q. Ought he not to be dealt with afterward for his conversion, and may we not
buy and sell with him?

A. Yes; the Ministers of the Word must endeavor to convert him; neither can
the Church forbid him to occupy his trade, for it is a civil thing: and
therefore the Pope, by discharging subjects from their allegiance to their
Princes being excommunicated, does wickedly and leaudly; showing himself
thereby to be that man of sin.

Q. Hitherto we have heard of the dealing of the Church, both private and
public, with a stubborn sinner, even to the excommunicating of him from all
the public exercises of the Church: Now what are the causes, that the Lord
uses these medicinal means, for the recovery of such a sinner?

A. The cause is double: first, in regard of God himself: secondly, in regard
of men.

Q. How in regard of God?

A. Because that his holy name and religion should not be evil spoken of, by
suffering wicked and unclean persons in the Church; as blasphemers, adulterers,
etc. Psalm. 101. 7.
For if in houses of good report, a proud person, detractor, or liar (much
less a drunkard, or filthy person) is not suffered: then surely ought not
such an one to be in the Church, which is the house of the living God, lest
the Gospel come by reproach through such; seeing godless persons would thereby
take occasion to open their mouths against the truth.

Q. How in regard of men?

A. That is of two sorts: first, in regard of other men: for if such remain in
the Church and be not banished, other men would be in danger to be infected
with those sins, and not fear to offend: whether the Apostle compares a
scandalous person to leaven, for as a little leaven will sour the whole batch;
so one wicked man will infect the whole Church. Likewise the weak would
thereby take occasion of falling away from the truth; and others (yet without)
would hereby be holden from coming into it.

Q. Which is the other regard?

A. It is in regard of the person excommunicated, for the bringing of him to
repentance; as the Apostle says of the incestuous person, that he should be
cut off, for the destruction of the flesh. 1. For the subduing of his natural
corruption, and for saving the spirit, that is, The inward man and regenerate.
1. Cor. 5. 5. 1. Tim. 1. 20.

Q. Thus far of medicinal Censures: Which is the Censure of revenge and
punishment?

A. It is the most fearful thunderclap of Gods judgment, pronounced by the
Church against one, which (after knowledge of the truth) is a blasphemer of
Gods word, a railor, a despiser, a persecutor of Christ in his Church; even
such a one as our Savior affirms to have sinned against the holy Ghost. Gal.
1. 8. 1. Cor. 14. 22. Gal. 5. 12.

Q. What is this curse called?

A. Saint Paul sets it forth in these words, Anathema, 1. Cor. 16. 22.
Maran*atha, that is, cursed until the coming of our Lord, or everlastingly.

Q. Hitherto of the kinds of the Churches Censure: what is their authority?

A. That is confirmed by our Savior Christ in this text, when he says,
Whatsoever ye bind on earth, (meaning according to his rule) shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: and it is
as much as if a Prince should give authority to one of small reputation, and
say unto him, Execute Justice, and I will bear you out.

Q. What is gathered hereof?

A. That all sorts and degrees of men are to subject themselves to the
judgment of God in his Church.

Q. How is the authority of the Church further confirmed?

A. By that which our Savior Christ says, If two or three shall agree upon
any thing, and shall ask it in my name, it shall be granted: how much more
shall he ratify that, which the Church shall do in this kind, according to
his own will.

Q. Why is it said, And shall ask it in my name?

A. To declare, that (by prayer to God in the name of our Savior Christ) all the censures of the Church, but especially Excommunication should be
undertaken.

CHAP. 40.
Of Prayer, or Innocation.

In prayer is to be considered The 1. Motives. 2. The parts, Petition -- unto
which are annexed Confession.
Thanksgiving. --
The sorts, 1. Private. Public.
2. Ordinary. Extraordinary, whereunto are sometimes adjoined Fasting. Chap.
41. Feasting. Chapter 42.




The rule of prayer. Chapter, 43.

ROMANS chap. 10. verse. 14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher?
Q. HItherto of the things which God gives to us: what are those which we give
to God?

A. Prayers, and Vows.

Q. What is Prayer or Invocation?

A. It is a calling upon God alone, in the name of Mat. 6. 9. Romans 10. 14.
Psalm. 50. 15. Act 9. 14. Coloss. 3. 17.
Christ, by the titles where with (in the Scripture) he is set forth unto us;
as well thereby to do service and homage unto the Lord, as to obtain all
necessary graces.

Q. What are we generally to consider in Prayer?

A. First, to whom we are to pray: secondly, for whom: thirdly, by what
strength and power: fourthly, by what motives.

Q. Unto whom are we to pray?

A. Unto God alone. Esa. 42. 8. and 49. 11. Romans 10. 14.

Q. Why are we to pray to God alone?

A. First, because he only Act. 1. 24. Psalm 7. 10. and 33. 3. and. 44. 21.
knows our hearts and desires, and what we want, and what is good for us.

Secondly, Prayer is a principal Deuteronomy. 6. 11. Mat. 4. 10. Psalm. 50. 15. Mat.
6. 9.
part of Gods worship, and therefore not to be given unto any but God.

Thirdly, he is not only Almighty, and able to give us what we ask, but most
merciful and gracious; and therefore most ready to grant our requests. Esa.
63. 16.

Fourthly, because we ought to Romans 10. 14.
pray only to those in whom we are to believe, and we are to believe only in
God.

Fifthly, we have neither precept nor example of any Saint, that called upon,
and prayed to any but unto God.

Sixthly, the Lords Prayer (which is a perfect direction for all prayers,
directs us only unto God. Mat. 6. 9.


Q. What follows here-vpon?

A. That the communicating of this honor with Saints and Angels, is detestable
and abominable.

Q. For whom are we to pray?

A. For our selves and others, even all 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
sorts and degrees of men: Magistrates, Ephesians. 6. 19. Coloss. 4. 3.
Ministers, yea Mat. 5. 44.
our very enemies.

Q. Are no sort of men excepted?

A. None, but those which have committed the 1. Ioh. 5. 16.
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.

Q. By what power and strength do we pray?

A. Not by the power and strength of our own natural gifts (if our prayers
be good and acceptable Psalm. 109. 7. and 51. 15. Phil. 4. 6. Iud. 20.
unto God) but by the power and motion of the spirit of God sanctifying our
hearts, and drawing from them this holy service.

Q. What motives have we to stir us to this duty of Prayer?

A. First, God has Mat. 7. 7. 1. These. 5. 7.
commanded this service, and that it should be performed Mat. 7. 7. Luke 11.
13. Psalm. 34. 16. and 140. 18.
continually, that is, daily at set times, without intermission.

Secondly, he has appointed prayer as a means, unto which he has tied the
procuring and obtaining of those graces, which he intends to bestow upon us;
so that it is as a key, to open therewith the storehouses of all Gods
treasures, and (as it were) the only hook whereby we reach all the blessings
of God, which otherwise would be out of our reach. So that as the covetousness
of Popish Priests gave occasion of a reproachful proverb: No penny, no
prayer: the truth of God on the contrary side, does teach us, No prayer, no
penny.

Thirdly, without prayer, the use and enjoying of all things we have is
unlawful. For as when we take any 1. Tim. 4. 5.
thing that is our neighbors without asking him leave, we are thieves and
usurpers: so to lay our hands upon any thing that is Gods (whose all things
are) without asking them at his hand, is a spiritual kind of fellonie.

Fourthly, by this means we have the more assurance and feeling wrought in
us, that those good things that we enjoy or receive, we have them from God,
and not by accident or Fortune. Psalm. 50. 15.

Fifthly, prayer is a special means to appease Gods anger toward us, and to
make way to his favor, when by any special sin we have provoked him. Psalm.
6. and 51.

Sixthly, they are in Gods estimation, as Incense and sweet perfumes are to
men, exceeding grateful and acceptable. Psalm. 141. 2. Revel. 5. 8.

Q. How can God so infinitely wise, take any such delight in our weak and
simple prayers?

A. Because in 1. Pet. 2. 5.
Christ he takes us for his children; as therefore parents take more pleasure
to hear their own children stammer, then others to speak eloquently: so does
the Cant. 2. 14.
Lord take pleasure in the prayers of his children, how weak soever.

Q. Does not God often bestow his benefits without prayer?

A. Yea sometimes he bestows benefits on the wicked, either to provoke them to
repent, or to make them inexcusable; or upon his children (as a loving father
uses) because of their ignorance, though they be negligent.

Q. What are the parts of prayer?

A. Petition, and thanksgiving. Philip. 4. 6.

Q. What is Petition?

A. A part of prayer, whereby we desire any thing that may be prayed for by
Gods word; and it is either for things of this present life, with this
exception, so far forth as the same shall be thought good by the wisdom of
God; or (and b that especially) for the things of the life to come, and that
without exception.

Q. With what mind and affections are we to make our petitions to God?

A. First, with a true sense and feeling of our wants. 1. Sam. 1. 10. Dan. 9.
4. 5. 16.

Secondly, with an earnest desire that God would supply them. Psalm. 130. 1. and
143. 6.

Thirdly, with confidence, that (if the fault be not in our selves) they shall
be supplied. 1. Ioh. 5. 14. 15. Mark. 11. 24.

Q. What is thanksgiving?

A. A part of prayer, wherein we magnify the 2. Sam 19. 25. 26. Mat. 8. 2. 1.
Ioh. 5. 14. Luke 11. 13.
goodness of God: and it is either in praising him for all his goodness,
wisdom, power, mercy, generally showed in the government of the world,
especially of his Church; or for those particular benefits, that by petition,
or without, we have received from his merciful hands. 1 Thessalonians 5. 18. Ephesians.
5. 20. Coloss. 3. 16. Psalm. 36. 8. 9.

Q. What is annexed unto both these kinds of prayer?

A. Confession of sins, and of the righteous judgment of God against them; at
the view whereof we being humbled, may come the more prepared to prayer in both
kinds. Dan. 9. 8. 9. Psalm. 143. 6.

Q. What are the sorts of prayer?

A. They are public or private; both which are also ordinary, or
extraordinary. Act. 6. 4. 1. Tim. 2. 12. Mat. 6. 6. Act. 10. 4.

Q. What is public prayer?

A. That which is made by the congregation solemnly.

Q. What is private prayer?

A. It is either less private, as when a whole family joins together in
that exercise; or more private, when either one of the members of the family,
or some few, by reason of some special duty jointly pray together. Ester. 4.
15. Nehem. 1. 4. 5. 6. Genes. 25. 21. 1. Pet. 3. 7.

Q. Is it enough for every one in the family to make prayers with the rest of
the household?

A. No: for as every one has committed special Mat. 6. 6. Zach. 12. 12. Genesis
24. 63.
sins, and has special defects, which others in the family happily have
not; and may have received special favors which others have not; so in these
regards it is meet, that he should more specially and privately resort unto
God, in confession, petition, and thanksgiving.

Q. What is ordinary prayer?

A. It is that prayer which is made daily upon ordinary Psalm. 55 18. Dan. 6.
11.
occasions.

Q. What is extraordinary prayer?

A. That Psalm. 119. 62.
which is made upon some special and extraordinary occasion, and Act. 12. 5.
as the occasion falls out to be more great and extraordinary; so should our
prayers be more fervent. Unto which kind of prayers are often annexed a holy
fast, and a holy feast.

CHAP. 41.
Of Fasting.

In holy fasting are considered The parts consisting in Bodily exercises, as
abstinence in general from Food. some kind of apparel.
In special, from the marriage bed.
Spiritual, Affections. Exercises.

The kinds Public. Private.


LVKF, chap. 5. verse. 33. 34. 35. 33. And they said unto him, Why do the
Disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of
the Pharisees: but thine eat and drink?

34. And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bride-chamber fast,
while the bridegroom is with them?

35. But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they fast in those days.


Q. WHat is holy fasting?

A. It is a religious abstinence from Ion. 3. 7. 8. Joel 2. 16. Leuit. 23. 28.
30
all comforts of this life, so far as necessity and comeliness will suffer;
to the end that thereby in the due consideration of our sins and punishment,
we Leuit. 23. 27. 29. Mat. 9. 15. Neh. 1. 4. Joel 2. 12. 13. Judge. 20. 26.
being afflicted in our souls, may (in faith grounded upon the promises of
God) Ioh. 3. 8. Neh. 1. 4. Esaias 58. 4.
more earnestly call upon God, either Judge. 20. 26. Act. 10. 30-32 and 13. 3.
and 14. 23.
for the obtaining of some special favor we have need of; or 2. Chron. 20. 3.
Est. 4. 16. Jon. 3. 7. 8.
for the avoiding of some notable judgment hanging over our heads, 2. Sam. 12.
16. 1. Chron. 21. 16.
or already pressing us.

Q. What are the parts of fasting?

A. First, an outward bodily abstinence: secondly, spiritual affections and
exercises, moved and furthered by the outward abstinence, without which the
abstinence is nothing acceptable to God, but mere hypocrisy.

Q. Wherein does this outward abstinence consist?

A. First, in an utter forbearing of all meats and Ester 4. 16. Io. 3. 7.
drinks, during the time of the fast, and not in a sober use of them only,
which ought to be at all times. This is noted here in the text, in that it is
said, The Disciples of John and the Pharisees fast, but thine eat and drink.
And this kind of abstinence the word notes, and from it the whole exercise
has the name.

Q. What is here to be considered?

A. Anotorious abuse in Popery: for the greater sort of people amongst them,
in the day of their fast, fill their bellies with bread and drink; and the
richer sort with all kind of delicates, (flesh, and that which comes of flesh
only excepted): so that the fastings of the one, and the other is but a
fullness; and the latter, may be more truly said to feast, then to fast.

Q. Wherein else does this outward abstinence consist?

A. In wearing of old, homely and meaner apparel; Exodus 33. 4. 5. Jonas 3. 6.
also in ceasing from labor on the day of the fast; to the end we may the
better attend unto the holy exercises Leuit. 23. 28. 30. 31. 32. Numb. 29. 7.
used in fasting; and this abstinence is required of all that celebrate the
fast: but Joel 2. 16. 1. Cor. 7. 5.
of married persons there is further required, a forbearance also of the
company each of others.

Q. Is there any necessity of this outward abstinence?

A. Yea, as the words of our Savior in this place do declare, who says, that
the time shall come, when his Disciples shall fast. For even after the
ascension of Christ, when the graces of Gods spirit were most abundant upon
them, they should need this exercise.

Q. What may be noted (by the way) from this, that our Savior would not have
his Disciples fast, till after his ascension?

A. His kindness and care over their weakness, that would suffer no great
trouble, or cause of fasting to befall them, before they had strength to
undergo the same, and to make a right use thereof.

Q. They then that are sick and weak, are not tied to this strict abstinence?

A. No; they may take somewhat for necessary sustenance, thereby to be better
enabled to serve God in the day of the fast; provided that they do not abuse
this liberty to the satisfying of the flesh.

Q. What are the spiritual affections?

A. First, Leuit. 23. 27. 29. Judge. 20. 26. Neh. 1. 4. Joel. 2. 12. 13. Mat. 9.
15.
special anguish and grief of our hearts, conceived for our sins, and the
judgments of God due unto them, grounded upon the meditation of the Law and
threats of God: secondly, a special sorrow for those special judgments of
God that are upon us, or are likely to fall upon us, with a holy fear of the
increase or continuance of them, without special humiliation and repentance.
Where we may (by the way) note the great abomination in Popery; for in stead
of being truly humbled in soul, the Papists in the day of their fast Esaias 58.
3.
pride themselves, and lift up their hearts, thinking they deserve some great
matter at Gods hand, for their very outward abstinence.

Q. What are the spiritual exercises upon this day?

A. First, an acknowledgement and profession of our unworthiness of any
blessing or benefit from God, either concerning this life, or the life to come,
and of our worthiness of all judgments and calamities, even death it self,
which by the abstinence aforesaid we testify, and which the holy Fathers in
times past did signify, by putting ashes or dust upon their John 3. 8. Esaias
58. 4.
heads. Ester. 4. 1. Lament. 2. 10. Dan. 9. 3. The truth whereof remains
still, although the ceremony be not used. Secondly, earnest and strong crying
and calling upon the name of God for mercy, grounded upon the meditation of the
promises of God, touching the removing of our sins, and that judgment that is
upon us for them, and for the bestowing of such gifts and graces upon us as we
stand in need of. Thirdly, an humble and careful harkening unto such parts of
Gods word, as may further us in the affections and exercises.

Q. Thus much of the exrcise of fasting in general. What are the kinds thereof?

A. Two; either public, or private.

Q. What is the public?

A. It is when (for a general cause) the Churches do fast: and it is either
more public, when all, or many Churches fast generally; or less public, when
some Jonah 3. 7. Judge. 20. 26. Ierem. 36. 9. Joel 14. and 2. 17. Dan. 9. 3.
Neh. 1. 4.
particular Church is humbled by fasting.

Q. What is the private fast?

A. It is either less private; as when a particular house; or more private,
when a particular person is humbled in fasting.

CHAP. 42.
Of a holy Feast.

Where, of The parts consisting in Certain duties To God. Man, Friends. Poor.

Liberal use of food and apparel.
The sorts, Public. Private.


ESTER, chap. 9. verse. 17. 18 etc. 17. On the thirteenth day of the month
Adar, and on the fourteenth day of the same, rested they, and made it a day of
feasting and gladness.

18. But the Jews that were at Shushan, assembled together on the thirteenth
day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the fifteenth day of the
same, they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.

19. Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled towns,
made the fourteenth day of the month Adar, a day of gladness and feasting,
and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.

20. And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews, that
were in all the provinces of the king Ahassuerus, both nigh and far.

21. To stablish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of
the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly:

22. As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month
which was turned unto them, from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good
day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.

23. And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had
written unto them:

24. Because Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of all the
Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur (that
is, the lot) to consume them, and to destroy them.

25. But when Ester came before the King, he commanded by letters, that his
wicked device which he devised against the Jews, should return upon his own
head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.

26. Wherefore they called these days Purim, after the name of Pur: therefore
for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had seen concerning
this matter, and which had come unto them,

27. The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all
such as joined themselves unto them: so as it should not fail, that they would
keep these two days, according to their writing, and according to their
appointed time every year:

28. And that these days should be remembered, and kept throughout every
genereation, every family, every province, and every city, and that these days
of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them
perish from their seed.

29. Then Ester the Queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew,
wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim.

30. And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty and
seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth:

31. To confirm these days of Purim, in their times appointed, according as
Mordecai the Jew and Ester the Queen had enjoined them, and as they had
decreed for themselves, and for their seed, the matters of the fastings and
their cry.

32. And the decree. of Ester confirmed these matters of Purim, and it was
written in the book.


Q. HItherto of a holy Fast: what is a holy Feast?

A. A day of rejoicing before the Lord, for some singular benefit, especially
for some great deliverance from some notable evil, either upon us, or hanging
over our heads; which ought to be the greater, if upon our humiliation by
fasting and prayer, God has granted the same?

Q. What is the most convenient time for a holy feast?

A. That time especially which is nearest unto the mercy and benefit received,
as we may perceive by this story; where the Jews that were in the country,
and in the provinces, did celebrate it the fourteenth day of the month Adar;
because they had overthrown their adversaries the thirteenth day before: and
the Jews that were in Susis, because they made not an end of the slaughter of
their enemies before the fourteenth day was past, they celebrated their feast
the fifteenth.

Q. Wherefore is it most convenient to take the time that is next the
deliverance especially?

A. Because we use to be most strongly and thoroughly 2. Chron. 20. 26.
affected with the benefit we receive at that time, that first it is bestowed
upon us, especially (as has bin said before) when there is not only a notable
benefit befallen unto us; but withal we are freed thereby from some notable
evil that was upon us, or near unto us.

Q. Wherein consists this holy feast?

A. Partly in certain holy duties to God and man; and partly in a more
liberal use of food, apparel, and other comforts of this life, so far forth
as they may further the said duties. Deuteronomy. 14. 26. Nehem. 8. 10.

Q. What is our duty unto God in the day of the feast?

A. First, to lift up our voice in thanksgiving to God, Psa. 116-1. 4. 103. 1.
etc.
not only for that special benefit, which is the occasion of the feast, but
for other his mercies, which that benefit should bring to our remembrance.

Secondly, by a diligent meditation of the present benefit 2. Cor. 1. 10.
to confirm our faith and confidence in God; that he that has so mightily
and graciously delivered us, will also (in the same or the like dangers)
deliver us hereafter, so far as the same shall be good for us.

Q. What is the duties we should perform to men?

A. An exercise of special kindness and liberality Deuteronomy. 12. 17. 18.
according to our power, out of the feeling of the bountiful hand of God
toward us.

Q. How must this be showed?

A. By mutual sending of gifts and presents one Reu. 11. 10. Neh. 8. 10.
to another, and portions to the poor and needy.

Q. How many kinds of a holy feast are there?

A. Two, public and private, as of a holy fast.

CHAP. 43.
Of the rule of Prayer: where, of the Lords Prayer in general.

The special rule of prayer, is the Lords prayer which consists of A preface.
and the prayer it self which is A form of petition, of things concerning Gods
glory, which concern The glory it self, Chapter 40. 44. The means, Chapter 45.
Our selves, and our neighbors, Chap. 47.
and of thanksgiving, Chapter, 50.


M^r. chap. 6. verse. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
Q. HItherto of the sorts of Prayer: what principal rule are we to follow for
our direction in the matter and manner of our prayers?

Q. We are herein (for help of our weakness) to look unto the prayers of the
holy men of God set down in Scripture, according as the estate wherein they
were at the time of those prayers, may best sort with the special cases and
conditions that we are in when we pray. But especially and above any other,
yea above all of them, we are to look unto that most absolute prayer, Mat. 6.
9. Luke 11. 2.
which our Savior Christ has taught us in the Gospel.

Q. Do you call that a prayer, which of some is thought only a for me to
direct our prayers by?

A. It is both a prayer, which we may and ought to use; and also a form of
prayer, whereunto we are to conform, and by which we ought to square all our
prayers by; and therefore as Christ bids us pray Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
after this sort; so in Luke he bids us say, Our Father; etc.

Q. May there not, besides this prayer of the Lord, be now under the Gospel a
set form of prayer in the Church?

A. Yes verily; and it is convenient it should be so, so that it be left to
the liberty of the Church to alter it.

Q. Wherefore is it convenient that there be a set form of prayer?

A. First, for testifying the consent of all true Churches, in the things that
concern the worship and service of God, which may appear by such books.
Secondly, for direction of the Ministers to keep in their administration (for
substance) like soundness in doctrine and prayer. Thirdly, to help the weaker
and ruder sort of people especially; and yet so, as the set form make not men
sluggish in stirring up the gift of prayer in themselves, according to diverse
occurrents; it being incident to the children of God to have some gift of
prayer in some measure. (...). 12. 10.


Q. What is the Lords prayer?

A. It is a prayer which the Lord Jesus Christ taught his Disciples, which is
an absolute prayer in it self, and a prayer giving a perfect direction to
frame all other prayers by.

Q. What are we to consider in this prayer?

A. Two things: the preface, and the parts of prayer.

Q. What gather you of this, that there is a preface set before the prayer?

A. That Christian men are not to come rashly unto Psalm. 10. 17. Eccles. 5. 1.
2.
prayer, but with preparation: for the Angel of the Lord stands at the
entry, to strike with hardness and blindness, etc. those that come without
preparation: for if we come not without preparation before an earthly Prince,
but bethink us of our words and gesture; how much more ought we to do it,
when we come before the Prince and Lord of heaven and earth?

Q. How are we to prepare our selves?

A. Not only by putting off our evil affections, Exodus 3. 5. Psalm. 26. 6. 1.
Tim. 2. 8.
but even our honest, and (otherwise in their due time) necessary cogitations,
as the cares and thoughts of our particular vocations, as of house, or family,
etc.

Q. What is the Preface?

A. Our Father which art in heaven.

Q. What is to be considered in the word, Father?

A. That in prayer we come to the Father, the first person in Trinity, by his
Son, through assistance of the holy Ghost: although it be also lawful to
pray unto Act. 7. 59. 2. Cor. 13. 13.
Christ, or to his blessed spirit particularly, and by name, so that in our
understanding we do conioyne all the three persons, as those that cannot be
separated in any action concerning us, either belonging to the life to come, or
pertaining to this life.

Q. What further?

A. That we are to come with confidence of obtaining our suits and desires: as
young children use to Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Heb. 11. 6. Psalm. 103. 13.
come unto their fathers bosom; so we by prayer (if it be with faith) do (as
it were) creep into the Lords bosom, he being our merciful father, whose
bowels are larger in pitiful affection to wards us the^ any parents; yea, the^
the mother toward her tenderest child: for if Esaias 49. 15. Mat. 7. 11.
parents will give good things to their children when they ask them; much more
will the Lord give his spirit to them that ask it of him without doubting.

Q. What further is to be considered in these words?

A. That we are to pray to God only in the name of Christ, in whom alone he
is our father; and therefore to come in any other name is unlawful; which
truth as it was Exodus 19. 24. and 24. 2. Leuit. 16. 17.
figured under the Law; so is it more clearly taught by the 1. Tim. 2. 5.
Apostle; and therefore it is abominable to come unto God in prayer, by, or in
the name of Saints or Angels, as in Popery they do.

Q. What is to be considered by these words, Our Father?

A. First, that in prayer we are to apply unto our Ioh. 20. 28. Iam. 1. 6.
Mat. 27. 46.
selves by faith, the love and favor of God in Christ, having this confidence
that he is our father, and therefore that we are dear in his eyes.

Secondly, that albeit our Savior alone is the natural son of God, yet that
we are his sons also by grace and adoption.

Thirdly, that in our prayers we are not only to be Psalm. 51. 1. 18. 1. Tim.
2. 8. Mat. 5. 23. Esaias 1. 15.
mindful of our selves, but of our brethren, and to pray for them as for our
selves, and together with our selves, coming also with such love and affection
as one brother bears toward another; and therefore we are to reconcile our
selves, if there be any breaches between us.

Q. May not then one in prayer say, my Father?

A. Yes, and that with warrant of our Saviors Mat. 26. 39.
own example.

Q. What are we to learn by these words, which art in heaven?

A. First, that in prayer we are to come with reverence Eccles. 4. 16. and 5.
1. Nehem. 1. 5.
of his Majesty, he being in the highest heaven, and we but worms creeping
upon the earth; therefore we are to use reverent behavior in this service, and
not to have our minds carried away with wandering thoughts.

Secondly, that we are to have our hearts and affections in the time of our
prayer, lifted up from the earth to heaven, and heavenly things; and that
heavenly gifts are specially to be desired, and earthly, so far as they may
be a means of heavenly.

Thirdly, that God, as he is willing to help us, so being Psalm. 115. 3. 2.
Chron. 20. 6. Psalm. 103. 19.
in heaven is able to do it.

Q. Why is he said to be in heaven, who is in all places, and whom all the
world is not able to contain?

A. For two causes: one is, for that there he does make himself, and his
goodness known to the Angels, and blessed spirits of men immediately. The
other, because he communicates himself and his goodness more plentifully
with them then with us; and so in the like respects God is said to be present
Psalm. 11. 4.
in the Temple, 2. Cor. 6. 16.
and in the elect.

Q. What are we to learn out of these words jointly?

A. A special argument that God only is to be prayed unto: for although
there be other fathers besides Romans 10 4. Psalm. 73. 25.
God, and other in heaven besides him; yet there is none which is our father in
heaven, but God alone; and therefore he alone is to be prayed unto, this being
a perfect pattern of all prayers, and therefore all our prayers (as in other
points, so in this) must be framed according to it.

Q. What are the parts of this prayer?

A. Petition, and thanksgiving.

Q. What is taught hereby?

A. Phil. 4. 6. Col. 4. 2. Ephesians. 5. 20.
That whenever we come unto God in petition, we are also to give him thanks,
as a duty not to be severed from prayer, and a Genesis 32. 9-11.
mean to make way for further graces and benefits to be obtained; and Luke 17.
17. 18
therefore that it is our great fault that when we are distressed, we are ready
to go to God in petition, but are slack to return thanksgiving for the
benefits received.

Q. How many sorts of petitions are there?

A. Two: one sort is of those things that belong to Gods glory: the other sort
does concern our own and our neighbors good.

Q. What is general to be considered in those petitions that concern Gods
glory?

A. That we are to seek the service and glory of God before our own
affairs; as also the Commandments Mat. 2^. 37. 38. Romans 9. 3.
teach us, which being divided into two tables; the first concerns the
worship of God; the second our selves.

Q. What learn you from this?

A. Our great and usual hypocrisy: for were it not for our selves, and for
our own wants, we would not come at all in prayer unto God. Whereas this word
Thy, in all these petitions, does shut forth the consideration of our selves,
to the end that we might have our minds altogether fastened upon the service
and glory of God.

Q. How are the petitions that concern Gods glory divided?

A. Into two: the first concerns Gods glory it self; the other two the
means whereby God is glorified.

CHAP. 44.
Of the first Petition.

The glory of God it self in the first petition; of which 1. The meaning of
the words. 2. The special graces we pray for.

MATTHEW. 6. 9. -- Hallowed be thy name.
Q. WHat is the first petition concerning Gods glory it self?

A. Hallowed be thy name.

Q. Why is this Petition set in the first place?

A. Because that which is required therein, is that Prou. 16. 4. 1. Cor. 10.
31. Ioh. 12. 27.
which ought to be dearest unto us, and that unto which all things else ought
to be referred.

Q. What is to be understood by the word NAME?

A. Whatsoever he gets unto himself glory by; as first, 1. King. 5. 5. Act.
1. 15.
his Godhead or Essence, subsisting in three persons, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost.

Secondly, the properties and attributes of God, as his Justice, Mercy,
Wisdom, etc. which in the Esaias 26. 8. Prou. 18. 10. Micah 4. 5. Exodus 3. 14.
and 6. 3.
Scripture also are called the Name of God. Also his Names and titles, as
Jehovah, etc.

Thirdly, the actions Psalm. 8. 1.
and works of God, as the Creation and government of the world, his special
mercies and judgments, etc.

Fourthly, all the holy Act. 9. 15. Psalm. 22. 22. John 17. 6. 1. Tim. 6. 1.
Leuit. 22. 2.
ordinances of God, as his Word, Sacraments, discipline, etc.

Q. What is meant by [hallowing]?

A. The setting of any thing apart, from either a Exodus 20. 11. and 29. 33. 34.
and 30. 31. 22.
profane and unholy, or common and civil use, to a holy and religious use.

Q. Can we add holiness unto the name of God?

A. No: but then we are said to hallow the name of God, when we Psalm. 96. 8.
acknowledge and repute his name to be holy, and are so affected therewith in
our own souls, that we break out in all praises thereof, both to God and men.

Q. What special matters do we ask in this Petition, for our selves and
others?

A. First, the Psalm. 67. 2. 3.
knowledge of God, and of the means whereby we should glorify him, as, his
word and works.

Secondly, Ioh. 3. 33.
faith to believe his word, and to behold that glory of God, which cannot be
beheld with the eye of flesh; wherefore Numb. 20. 12.
Moses and Aaron are said not to have sanctified the name of God, because they
believed not: contrariwise Romans 4. 20.
Abraham glorified God in believing.

Thirdly, Grace to acknowledge both to God and man, his infinite Wisdom,
Justice, Holiness, mercy, and whatsoever else tends to the glory of God.

Fourthly, to love and fear the Lord alone, and not Esaias 8. 12. 13. 1. Pet. 3.
14.
man, any further then it shall stand with the love and fear of God, and be
ruled thereby.

Fifthly, that God may get glory by Mat. 5. 16.
our godly conversation; Psalm. 103. 1. 2. 20 21. 22.
also, that we may praise him for his benefits; 2. Sam. 7. 18. Psalm. 8. 4. and
144. 3. Luke 1. 48.
more particularly, that he grant the grace of humility to our selves and
others, without which we cannot glorify God as it is meet: from whence 1.
Sam. 3. 18. Esaias ^9. 8.
arises patience, whereby we do willingly submit our selves unto the
correcting hand of God, as did Ely and Ezekias. Esaias 2* 11. 12. 1^. 14. 15. 16.
17
We pray also here against all lofty and high things, that hinder, that God
only be exalted, especially the pride of our hearts, which we are to confess
and lament. Psalm. 104. 1. etc. and 10^. 1. etc. and 106. 1. etc. and 107. 1.
etc.
Lastly, (which is a singular hallowing of Gods name) that we may speak of and
praise him for his wonderful works in the Creation and government of the
world, and of the Church especially.

CHAP. 45.
Of the second Petition.

The means whereby Gods name is hallowed, viz. his kingdom, In this world,
wherein we pray for those things which co^cern the government of the world. the
government of the Church.
In the world to come.

MATTHEW. 6. 10. Thy Kingdom come --
Q. HItherto of that Petition which concerns the glory of God it self: it
follows to speak of them which concern the means of his glory. Which is
the first of these?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Q. What is meant by the Kingdom of God?

A. Either his Psalm. 103 9. Dan. 4. 32.
general Kingdom, that he exercises over all the creatures; or his special
Kingdom, whereby he rules his elect, which is the Kingdom of grace in this
world, and of glory in ye world to come.

Q. Are both these Kingdoms understood here?

A. Yea, but especially the latter.

Q. What is meant by the word Come?

A. That we may feel the comfort and benefit of being subjects in this
Kingdom.

Q. What do we desire concerning the general Kingdom?

A. That as the Lord does govern Job. 9. 8. Psalm. 66. 7. and 97. 1. and 104.
3. Mat. 6. 13. Ioh. 17. 2.
all creatures, Esaias 10. 5. 15. Act. 4. 28.
even wicked men, and Judge. 9. 23. 1. King. 22. 22. Job. 1. 12.
the devils themselves: so that this his government Job. 1. 21. 2. Sam. 16. 10.
may be rightly acknowledged by our selves and all men; and that Romans 8. 28.
1. Cor. 3. 22.
thereby all things may be so ordered, as may best serve for his own glory,
and the good of his Church.

Q. What do we desire concerning the Kingdom of Grace?

A. First, that it Esaias 2. 2.
may here in this world be enlarged, and Psalm. 1 22 6.
continued in a peaceable estate, governed by Christ the head of the Church; to
the perfect salvation of the elect, and the utter destruction of the reprobate,
whether open rebels, or hypocrites and hollow-hearted Subjects, and that by
such means as himself has appointed.

Q. What great need is there, that we should pray for the coming of this
Kingdom?

A. Because in regard of the kingdom of Satan Mat. 12. 24. 25. Ephesians. 6. 1^.
Revel. 2. 10.
and darkness, which opposes strongly against this kingdom; as also in regard
of the world and the flesh, that in like manner are opposite thereunto, with
all their might and strength. Galath. 5. 16. 17. Romans 8. 7 Ioh. 15. 18. 19. and
16. 33.

Q. Why, all men naturally abhor Satan, even to the very name of him.

A. They do in words and show; but when they do his will, live under his
laws, delight in his works of darkness, subject themselves to Antichrist,
and other instruments of his, Ioh. 8. 44. Ephesians. 2. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 26.
they are found indeed to love him as their father, and honor him as their
Prince, whom in words they would seem to abhor: for as they approach unto God
with their lips, and have their hearts far from him; so in their lips they
are far from Mat. 15. 8. Ier. 12. ^.
Satan, but near him in their hearts.

Q. What be the means, by which our Savior Christ does govern his Church in
this world, and which in this petition we pray for?

A. Inward, and outward.

Q. What be the inward means we pray for?

A. That Ephesians. 1. 17. Philip. 1. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
God would give his holy spirit, as the chief and principal worker, whereby
our Savior Christ gathers and rules his Church, conueying his spirit of
knowledge and of good motions unto his people; and consequently, we pray
against the motions Romans 7. 24. 2. Cor. 12. 8.
and tentations of Satan, and of our own flesh.

Q. What are the outward means we pray for?

A. Those, whereby the spirit is conveyed: viz. the word, and the dependances
thereof (the Sacraments, and discipline of the Church).

Q. What pray we for concerning the word?

A. That it being Psalm. 110. 1. Esaias 11. 4. Mark. 1. 14.
the scepter of Christ's kingdom, ( Mat. 13. 19.
and called the word of the kingdom, and the kingdom of heaven Mat. 9. 38. 2 Thessalonians. 3 1. 2.
) may be plentifully and freely preached every where. And that, that only
having place, all traditions and inventions of men may be rejected.

Q. What pray we for concerning the Sacraments?

A. That as they are the seals of Gods promises, and of the covenant of grace;
so they may be both ministered and received in that pureness and sincerity,
which is according to his word; and that all false Sacraments and sacrifices
may be put under foot, and abandoned out of the Church.

Q. What pray we for concerning the discipline of the Church?

A. First, that not only private persons, but the whole Church may be ruled
by the line of Gods word; that so, well doers may be advanced, and evil doers
censured and corrected, according to the degree of their fault: and therefore
that all impunitie, or tyrannous tortures of consciences may be taken away.

Secondly, that God would furnish his Church Romans 12. 68. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12.
with all such officers as he appoints; that being endued with special
gifts, may be both able and willing to execute their charge diligently and
faithfully.

Thirdly, that where these things are only begun, they may be perfected, and
that every Church may be polished and garnished, that Sion may appear in her
perfect beauty; and Romans 10. 1. and 11. 12. 15.
so the Jews may be called, and so many of the Gentiles as belong unto
Christ; and Mat. 5. 44. Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
the contrary enemies may be either converted or confounded.

Q. With what affection ought we to pray for the kingdom of grace?

A. With a sorrowful heart, out of the sense and feeling of our spiritual
bondage under Satan and sin: b even as poor captives are always laboring to
be freed of their bolts, and to be at liberty.

Q. What pray you for concerning the kingdom of glory?

A. That we may have our title and interest therein, and that Christ would
hasten his coming for the elect sake, who with singular love and affection
long for Revel. 21. 20. 2. Tim. 1. 8.
it, saying: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Which day unto the wicked is a day
of darkness, wrath, and vengeance. Amos. 5. 18. Revel. 6. 16. 2. Thessal. 1.
8. and therefore there is no cause why they should desire it; but to the godly
a day of comfort. Luke 21. 33. Luke 2. 29.

CHAP. 46.
Of the third Petition.

The second means of hallowing Gods name, is the third Petition, wherein we
pray, First, To know Gods will. To do the same.
Secondly, to do it willingly, and readily.

MAT. 6. 10. -- Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
Q. THus much of the second Petition, which concerns the first means whereby
the name of God is hallowed: the third Petition concerning a second means
follows: What is that?

Q. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What is here meant by the will of God?

A. The will of God is diversely understood: first, it is taken for his Psalm.
33. 11. Ephesians. 1. 11. Matthew. 10. 26.
most wise counsel and absolute determination of all things. This will is
always Esaias 46. 10.
done, and all creatures, even the devils themselves do fulfill and accomplish
the same, and Romans 9. 19.
it cannot be resisted; and from this will a man may Act. 16. 7. Luke 19. 41.
sometime dissent and yet not sin, Act. 4. 28. 29.
and fulfill the same and yet sin: and therefore we need not pray for the
fulfilling thereof, any further then that (whatsoever it is) we may with
patience submit our selves thereunto, and in all events acknowledge his good
pleasure and will, and the holiness Coloss. 1. 12.
thereof, and that nothing may displease us that shall please him. Secondly,
the will of God is taken for that which he propounds to us, and requires of
us, to embrace and entertain in our wills and affections; that is, that law and
rule by which our wills are to be framed, if we look that he should bless
us. And this will is John 4. 34. and 7. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. Romans 12. 2.
revealed unto us in the Law and Gospel, and is contained in all the precepts,
Deuteronomy. 29 19.
threatenings, exhortations, and John 6. 29. Act. 22. 19.
promises thereof. This will may be, and daily is resisted and opposed. And this
is that will which either only or principally is meant in this precept.

Q. What do we then more specially pray for in this Petition?

A. First, Ephesians. 5. 17. Col. 1. 9. 10. Romans 12. 2. Psalm. 67. 2.
that we may know and understand his will, without the which we cannot do it.

Secondly, Ephesians. 4. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
that as good subjects, we may be obedient unto the revealed will of God, Mat.
6. 33.
which is also called the righteousness of Gods kingdom; so that there is a
mutual relation between this petition and the former: for there we pray that
God may rule and govern; here, that his rule and government may be obeyed.

Thirdly, that our own wills may be suppressed, Psalm. 51. 10. Genesis 6. 5. and
8. 21. Ephesians. 2. 1. Mat. 26. 24. John. 1. 13.
subdued and renounced, which are by nature opposite to the revealed will of
God, and are as apt and prone to all sin, as is a match to take fire: which
is implied in the word Thy.

Fourthly, that we may not only intend and endeavor, but Phil. 2. 13. Act.
20. 24.
accomplish his will, although with grief and smart, and against our own
wills, and seeing we cannot do it by our own natural strength, that God
would assist and help us to do it by power of his grace.

Fifthly, that we Psalm. 40. 8. 110. 3. and 119. 60. Cant. 1. 3.
should perform our obedience to his will most willingly, readily, patiently,
cheerfully, and perfectly, not by the halues, doing one duty, and leaving
another undone; but so to do it, Psalm. 103. 20. Mat. 18. 10. Esaias 6. 2.
as the Angels, and Saints in heaven do it thoroughly: so that here we pray
against all unwilling, forced, and idle obedience, and Ezech. 1. 7.
all murmuring and Phil. 2. 14.
repining against the will of God.

Sixthly, Psalm. 40. 8. and 110. 3. and 119. 60. Cant. 1. 3.
that we should perform our obedience and service unto God most willingly,
readily, cheerfully, patiently, and wholly, not doing one duty, and leave
another undone; Psalm. 103. 20. Mat. 18. 10.
but so to do it, as the Angels and Saints in heaven do the will of God; who
therefore are Esaias 6. 2.
set forth winged, to show their speediness. And so all unwilling obedience,
or enforced by law, is Ezech. 1. 7.
here condemned, and prayed against; as also all murmuring and disputing
against his will. Philip. 2. 14.

Q. But seeing we are sinful, and the Angels holy, how can we imitate them?

A. We should endeavor to the like holiness, and so grow therein daily more
and more, till we be like unto them: not that we can perform it to the full,
as they do. God himself says, Be ye holy as I am Leuit. 11. 44. 1. Pet. 1.
16. Mat. 5. 48.
holy; yet we are not to think that any man can attain unto the holiness of
God, though he be commanded to follow it. This petition also agrees well with
our desire of hastening the Lords coming, in the former petition.

CHAP. 47.
Of the fourth Petition.

The three Petitions following which concern our selves. Wherein we ask
Either the things of this life, whether of Necessity. Delight.
Or of the life to come. Chapter 26.

MATTHEW. 6. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.
Q. HItherto of the Petitions which concern God; those which concern our
selves follow: what is generally to be considered in them?

A. First, that there is no lawful use of these petitions which follow, or
hope to get that which we request in them, unless we first labor for the
graces, which we are to ask in the former petitions, concerning the service of
God; considering that godliness 1. Tim. 4. 8. Luke 17. 8.
has the promises of this life, and the life to come.

Secondly, that as in the former, the word (Thy) shows, that they only
respect God; so in these following, Ephesians. 6. 18. Psalm. 25. 22. and 51. 18.
Job. 30. 25.
these words (Our and us) teach us to have a fellow-feeling of the miseries and
necessities of others; and therefore in making them, we are to remember their
necessities as well as our own; which is the trial of the true spirit of
prayer.

Thirdly, that for all things required therein, we depend on Gods providence,
mercy, and power.

Q. How are these Petitions divided?

A. First, there is one only for the things of our bodily life. Secondly, two,
that belong to the things of our spiritual life.

Q. Why have we but one petition concerning our bodily life, and two for the
things concerning our spiritual life?

A. To teach us, how smally earthly things are to be Mat. 6. 32. Phil. 3 19.
Luke 16. 11.
accounted in regard of heavenly; and therefore that our prayers for things of
this life should be short, and more large for heavenly things.

Q. Why is the petition for the things concerning our bodily life, put before
the petitions for the things concerning our spiritual life?

A. First, because as the natural 1. Cor. 15. 48. Psalm. 78. 34. Hos. 5. 15.
life is before the spiritual; so the necessities thereof are sooner felt then
the necessities of the former. Secondly, Prou. 30. 7. Genesis 32.
because men having outward things in some competent measure, are less
distracted, and more free to call upon God for spiritual and heavenly graces.

Q. What is that petition which concerns bodily life?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

A. What is meant by (Bread?

A. First, all outward things, both for our necessity and Christian delight, as
clothing, food, peace, liberty, etc. Secondly, all the means and helps to
attain them, as good Princes, Magistrates, Laws, seasonable 1. Cor. 15. 46.
weather, etc. Wherein also we pray for the remouall Psalm. 78. 34. Hos. 5. 15.
Mat. 8. 2. 2. Sam. 15. 25. 26.
of the contrary; as tyranny, war, plague, famine, evil weather. All which
must be asked with this exception, if it seem good unto his Majesty: which
exception is proper to this petition.

Q. What need is there of asking these things?

A. Because Mat. 6. 32.
the frailty of our nature is such, that we are not able to continue in health
scarce one day, without these helps and (as it were) props to uphold this
decayed and ruinous cottage of our mortal bodies; less able to forbear them
then many beasts: for Genesis 1. 29.
seeing there was a necessary use of our meat in the time of our innocence,
the necessity by our fall is much greater.

Q. What learn you from the word (Give?)

A. First, that all things in this life come from God, Psalm. 104. 27. 28. 29.
30. Ezec. 16. 17. 19.
which we are ready to ascribe, either to the earth, or to our money wherewith
we buy them, or to our friends that give us them; as if we should look upon
the Act. 14. 17.
Steward only, and pass by the Master of the family; or upon the breast that
gives suck, and neglect the nurse.

Secondly, that although in regard of our labor or purchase, it may be called
ours; yet we say, Give Lord, to show that we cannot deserve the least crumme
of Psalm. 136. 25.
bread, or drop of water, much less the kingdom of heaven.

Thirdly, that seeing God gives to whom he will, and what he will; we learn to
Heb. 13. 5.
be content with whatsoever we have received. Moreover, to be thankful for
it, seeing 1. Tim. 4. 5.
all things are sanctified to us by the word and prayer, with thanksgiving.
And last of all, Mat. 20. 15.
not to envy other men's plenty, it being Gods gift.

Q. What reason is there that they should pray for these things to God, who
have them already in their Garners, Cellars, etc.

A. Very great: First, for that we in Adam have lost the right of them all;
which Heb. 1. 2. Psalm. 8. 7-9. 1. Cor. 3. 22.
in Christ the heir of the world we only recover: so that although we
possess them, yet are we not right owners of them but by faith, which also we
declare by praying for them.

Secondly, for that the things we do possess, we 1. Sam. 30. 16. 17. Dan.
5. 5. 2. King. 7. 17. 19.
may easily a hundred ways be thrust from the possession of them, before we
come to use them; according to the proverb, that many things come between the
cup and the lip.

Lastly, Esaias 3. 1. Hagg. 1. 6. Prou. 10. 22. Dan. 1. 13. 14. 15. Psalm. 78. 30.
31.
for that although we have the use of them, yet will they not profit us,
neither in feeding, nor clothing us, unless we have the blessing of God upon
them; yea, without the which they may be hurtful, and poysonable unto us. By
all which reasons it may appear, that the rich are as well to use this
petition as the poorest.

Q. Why is this added (this Day)?

A. That we are to pray for bread for a day, and not Exodus 16. 19. 20. 21.
Prou. 30. 8. Heb. 13. 5.
for a month, or year, etc. which is to teach us to restrain our care, that
it reach not too far, but that it rest in Gods providence, and present
blessing; and therefore that we be not covetous.

Q. Is it not lawful to provide for children and family?

A. Yes verily, Genesis 41. 34. 35 Act. 11. 28. 29. 2. Cor. 12. 14.
not only lawful, but also needful: but here our affections are only
forbidden to pass measure; as Mat. 6. 34.
to have a distracted and troubling care, seeing the vexation of the day is
enough for it self: but Psalm. 37. 5. Prou. 16. 3.
to commit our ways unto the Lord, and to roll our matters upon him, who will
bring them to pass.

Q. Why is the bread called ours, seeing that God must give it?

A. To teach us, that we must come unto it by our Genesis 2. 15. and 3. 19. Psalm.
128. 2. 1. These. 4. 11. 2. These. 3. 8. 9. 10.
own labor; in which respect, he that will not labor should not eat.

Q. Why is it called (Daily bread)?

A. This word in the Evangelists, and in the original language of the
Scripture, is, Mat. 6. 11. Luke 11. 3.
the bread fit for me, agreeable to my condition; which is an especial lesson
for all estates and callings, to keep them within the bounds, not only of
necessity, but of Psalm. 104. 15. Joh. 12. 3.
Christianity Prou. 30. 8. 1. Tim. 6. 8. Romans 13. 14. Jam. 4. 3.
and sober delight, and not to ask them to the fulfilling of their fleshly
desires.

CHAP. 48.
Of the fifth Petition.

The things that concern our spiritual life. Petition 5. wherein we pray for
Justification, consisting in Forgiveness of sin. Imputation of Christ's
righteousness.
Petition 6. for sanctification. Chap. 52.

MAT. 6. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
Q. THus much of that Petition which concerns our bodily life, those other
which concern our spiritual life follow: viz. the fifth, and sixth; what is
the fifth Petition?

A. Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

Q. What are the parts thereof?

A. The petition it self, and a reason to enforce it.

Q. What is the sum of that which we desire in the petition?

A. First, the forgiveness of our sins, which is the first part of our
Justification. The necessity whereof is set forth here by a contracted
comparison, drawn from such debtors as are not able to pay their creditors:
wherein our sins are compared to such debts, as we are not able by any means
to make satisfaction for, and for which we are to look for extremity of
punishment in the Justice of God, if it please not him to forgive the same.

Q. What do we then more specially pray for herein?

A. First, that we may have a true knowledge and feeling of our sins, both
original and actual. Secondly, that Psalm. 51. 3.
we make an humble and frank confession of them, and of our inability to make
any the least satisfaction for them.

Q What use is there of the confession of our sins?

A. Great: for that we have naturally a senslesnes Psalm. 36. 2. Eccles. 4. 17.
1. Sam. 15. 20. Psalm. 51. 3. Act. 22. 4. 1. Tim. ^ 15. Psalm. 32 3. 4. Prou. 28
13. 1 John. 1. 8. 9. John 7. 20. 1. Sam. 2. 19. Psalm. 19. 12.
of sin; or else being convinced thereof, we are ready to lessen it, and
make it light. The contrary whereof appears in the children of God.

Q. How can a man confess his sins, being not known, and without number.

A. Those that are known, we must expressly confess; and the other that are
unknown, and cannot be reckoned, generally.

Q. How appears it, that we are not able to make satisfaction?

A. First, because by the Law, as by an obligation, Deuteronomy. 27 26. Galath. 3. 10.
every one is bound to keep it wholly, and continually, so that the breach
thereof even once, and in the least point, makes us presently debtors; and
there is no man that can either avoid the breach of it, or when he has broken
it, make amends unto God for it: considering that whatsoever he does after the
breach, is Esaias 64. 6. Luke 17. 19.
both imperfectly done: and if it were perfect, yet it is due by obligation of
the law, and therefore cannot go for payment, no more then a man can pay one
debt with another; considering also that the due recompense of the least
breach, is everlasting death of body and soul: so that our estate herein is
like his that owes ten thousand Talents, and is not able to pay one farthing.

Q. But are we not able to satisfy some part of it, as a man in great debt is
sometimes able to make some satisfaction, especially if he have day given him?

A. No: and therefore we are compared to a child Ezech. 16. 4. 5.
newborn, not able to help himself: and to captives close shut up in prison
and fetters, kept by a strong Luke 4. 18. Luke 11. 21.
one; so that there is as small likelihood of our deliverance out of the power
of Satan, as that a poor lamb should deliver it self from the gripes and
paws of a lion.

Q. What else do we pray for, then in this Petition?

A. That we may be freed from them by such means as God has ordained, and
will stand with his wisdom and Justice; and therefore we are taught, being
pressed with the burden of our sins) to flee Mat. 11. 28. Psalm. 25. 11. 18.
and 51. 1. Neh. 13. 22.
unto the mercy of God, and to entreat him for the forgiveness of our debt,
even the cancelling of our obligation, that in law it be not available
against us: in which respect, the preaching of the Gospel is compared Luke 4.
19.
to the year of Iubilee, when no man might demand his debt of his brother.
Also that we may obtain this at Gods hands, by the only blood and sufferings
of Christ, as the only ransom for sin; and not fancy with the Papists,
that we are freed from our Mat. 26. 28. Act. 5. 31. and 10. 43. and 13. 38. 1.
John 1. 7. and 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 7.
original sin by Baptism; and that we may make some part of satisfaction
for our actual sins, by whipping and scourging our selves, etc. which is
abominable superstition.

Q. Do we here pray for the forgiveness of the sins of this day, as before
for the bread of this day?

A. Not only for them, but also for all that ever we Psalm. 25. 7.
have done at al times before, to the end that we might-be the further
confirmed in the assurance of the remission of all our sins.

Q. What further do we pray for in this petition?

A. For the imputation of righteousness, which is the second part of our
justification: for as Christ has taken away our sins by suffering; so he
has also clothed us with his righteousness, by fulfilling of the Law for us.
For as in the former petition, by bread, was understood all necessities
belonging to this bodily Dan. 9. 24. Zach. 3. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Revel. 19. 8.
life: so in this, under the first part of justification, is comprehended the
other part also, by the like figure of speech.

Q. What need was there of this?

A. Because we cannot appear naked before God: for as it is not enough for a
beggar (to come before a King) to want his rags, unless he have convenient
Gen 41. 14. 42.
apparel and ornaments: so for us it is not enough to have our filthiness
done away, unless we be clothed with convenient righteousness.

Q. What else do we pray for here?

A. We pray for the spirit of prayer, whereby (with Zach. 12. 10. Mark 9. 24.
grief and sorrow for our sins, we may crave pardon for our sins, and
increase of faith.

Q. So much of the petition: how is the reason drawn?

A. From the less to the more, thus: if we wretched sinners upon earth can
forgive others; how much more will the gracious God of heaven forgive us? if
Matthew. 7. 11.
we (having but a drop of mercy) can forgive others; much more will God, who is
a sea full of grace; especially when we by forgiving, sometimes suffer loss;
whereas God by forgiving us loses nothing.

Q. To what use serves this reason?

A. It serves not only to move the Lord to forgive Mat. 5. 7. and 6. 14. Mark
11. 25. 1. John 2. 10.
our sins, but to be a note also to certify us, whether or no our sins are
forgiven unto us.

Q. Does not God only forgive sin: how then can we forgive sin?

A. We forgive not sin so far forth as it is committed against God, but
only as it brings grief and hurt unto us.

Q. Does this reason tie God to forgive us?

A. No otherwise then by his gracious and free promise; Mat. 18. 24. 28.
for it is a necessary consequent and fruit of the other, and not a cause;
considering the inequality between our debt unto God, and men's debts unto us.

Q. Wherein stands the inequality?

A. First, in the number of our debts to God, being compared to ten thousand;
men's debts to us, to one hundred. Secondly, in the weight; our debts to God
being compared to talents, and those to men being compared to pence.

Q. How arises this great inequality in the weight?

A. From the great inequality between God and man: for if to strike a King be
much more heinous then to wound or kill a poor subject; what is it then to
offend God, who is infinitely greater then all the Kings of the earth?

Q. What is to be gathered of this?

A. That as this is a testimony to our hearts, that if Mat. 6. 15. Esaias 1. 15.
Mat. 5. 23. 24. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
we can heartily forgive others, God will forgive us: so on the other side, if
we can show no favor to others, we may look for none at the hands of God;
and therefore to pray without forgiving such as have offended us, were not
only a mere babbling; but also a procuring of Gods wrath more heavily against
us.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. The hypocrisy of many, which assuring themselves in great confidence of
the forgiveness of their sins, yet cannot find in their hearts to forgive
others.

Q. Are we hereby bound to forgive all our debts?

A. No verily; we may both demand our debts, Exodus 22. 9.
and if there be no other remedy, go to law, if it be in a simple desire of
Justice; yet so, that if our debtors be not able to pay, we are bound in
duty to forgive Esaias 58. 3. Deuteronomy. 22. 27. and 24. 12. 13. Job. 24. 3. 9.
them, or at least to have a conscionable regard of their inability.

Q. What further learn we by this reason?

A. That as our forgiveness is nothing, unless the danger of imprisonment be
taken away, which inability of paying the debt does draw with it: so it
avails Psalm. 32. 5. Gal. 3. 13. Ephesians. 2. 16.
us nothing to have our sins forgiven us of God, unless the punishment also be
forgiven.

Q. What follows of this?

A. The erroneous conceits of the Papists, that teach, that the sin and guilt
of our sins is taken away by Christ; but that we must satisfy for the
punishment of them: wherein they make God like unto those who will seem to
forgive, and yet keep a secret grudge in their hearts; watching all occasions
and advantages for revenge, such as say, they will forgive, but not forget.

CHAP. 49.
Of the last Petition.

In the second petition belonging to the life to come, we pray Not to be led
into tentatio^. To be delivered from evil Inward. Outward.


MATTHEW. 6. 13. Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil.
Q. SO much of the first petition concerning our spiritual life, for
justification: the second follows for sanctification, which is the sixth and
last in number: what is it?

A. Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

Q. What is meant here by the word (tentation)?

A. First, all things whatsoever whereby a man is Deuteronomy. 8. 21. Luke 8. 13.
Prou. 27. 21. 2. Chron. 32. 31. Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 1. Cor. 11. 19. Matthew. 4. 1. 1.
Cor. 7. 5. Gal. 6. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Iam. 1. 13. 14.
tried, and occasion given to him to know and bewray what is in his heart, as
prosperity, affliction, etc. Secondly, all prouocations and persuasions,
whereby a man is stirred up and moved to sin.

Q. Do we then here pray against all afflictions, and such like tentations of
the first kind?

A. No: because God sees them good and profitable for us; in which regard they
are pronounced blessed which fall into diverse tentations; and therefore ought we
not to pray simply and without exception, not to be tempted by them, but to be
delivered from them, so far forth as (through the corruption of our natures)
Psalm. 119. 71. Jam. 1. 2. 12.
they shall be occasions of sin unto us.

Q. What then do we pray for in this petition?

A. That we be not given over to the power of any tentation, so as it should
overcome us, and draw us 1. Tim. 6. 9. Luke 22. 32. John 17. 15. 1. Cor. 10.
13. Ephesians. 6. 13. Psalm. 119. 79. and 141. 5.
to sin against God, but that we may have a good issue and escape from the
danger of it; and that we may have all such means granted to us as may further
us in holiness; as good company, good counsel, and the like.

Q. Why are afflictions called tentations?

A. Because by them God tries our obedience Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
thereby to make known our faith, and also our patience, both toward our
selves and others; and whether we will follow him or not: and therefore we may
be assured, that so often as in them we beat back or Heb. 12. 6. 7. Revel.
3. 19.
overcome the tentations, we receive so many undoubted testimonies of his love
to us.

Q. What is here to be observed in regard of the order; that this petition is
placed in?

A. In that this petition follows upon the former, to strengthen our faith
for the obtaining of it, we must be assured of the former; that seeing God has
forgiven Psalm. 85. 8.
us our sins, he will also mortify our flesh, and quicken our spirit, which
are the two parts of sanctification desired in this petition, and never severed
from true justification.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. That we cannot rightly desire God to forgive us our sins past, unless
out of the hatred of them, we crave also power to abstain from the like in
time to come. So far are men from being justified, when Psalm. 51. 9-12.
they have not so much as a purpose to leave their sin, where it is not enough
to purpose it, unless we also pray for grace to perform it. For who being
delivered from a great disease, will return to it again, and not rather
desire a diet whereby he may be preserved Prou. 26. 11. 2. Pet. 2. 22.
from it? Swine (indeed) after they are washed; and dogs after their casting
return, the one to their walter, and the other to their vomit. As also it is
the fashion of the Papists, who (after auricular confession concerning
themselves, to be discharged from sins past) go to their sins afresh
again afterward: but those that are truly washed with the blood of Christ,
will never give themselves over to their sins again.

Q. If they cannot return to their vomit, what need have they to pray?

A. Yes, very great notwithstanding: for God Mat. 26. 41. Ephesians. 6. 18.
has ordained prayer to be a chief means of keeping them from revolt; and
they ought to be so much the Luke 22. 31. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
more earnest in prayer, as they are more subject to be beaten and buffeted
with tentations, then others.

Q. What learn you from thence?

A. Much comfort in tentations, in that it is a token of Gods favor, and of
pardon of our sins, that we are tempted.

Q. What other cause is there to pray, that we be not lead into tentation?

A. For that the condition of them that are called to John 5. 14. 2. Pet. 2.
20. 22. Mat. 12. 43* 45.
the hope of life, will be worse then the estate of those, that never tasted of
the good word of God, if they give themselves to evil; as a relapse in
diseases is more dangerous then the first sickness was.

Q. But how agrees it with the goodness of the Lord, to lead men into
tentation, when it is said that God tempts Iam. 1. 13.
none, as he is tempted of none?

A. When all things are of him, and by him, it Romans 11. 36.
must needs follow, that the things that are done, are guided and governed by
him; yet in such sort, as none of the evil which is in the transgressors,
cleaves unto him.

Q. But how can that be, without stain of his righteousness?

A. It is a righteous thing with God to punish sin with sin; and so to cast
a sinner into further sins by way of just punishment: therefore we desire
God not to give us over to our selves by withdrawing his spirit from us: as
when men do delight in lies, he gives them over to believe lies; and for
Idolatry, men 2. Thoss. 2. 11. Romans 1. 24.
are often justly punished with corporal filthiness in the same degree. Now
being naturally prone to sin, when this readiness (by the just judgment of
God) is strengthened, how rush we into all evil? even as a horse into the
battle, to whom we put the spurs; or as an Eagle flees to her prey.

Q. How can it be showed out of the Scripture, that God has a hand, whereby he
governs even the transgressions that are done against his holy will?

A. It is expressly said, that God did send Joseph before Genesis 45. 5. 7.
into Egypt, and that his brethren did not send him. Wherein God is said to
have had a further and a stronger hand in his sending into Egypt, then his
brethren; and therefore it is manifest that God did that well, which the
Patriarchs did sinfully. Hitherto is referred that which is said, that it was
of God, that Rehoboam 2. Chron. 10. 15.
hearkened not to the people. Also that it is said that God had commanded
Shimei to curse David; and 2. Sam. 16. 10.
that the devil was bidden of God, (sitting in the seat of his righteous
judgment) to be a lying spirit in the 2. King. 22. 19. 20. 23.
mouths of the false Prophets. And to be content with one more amongst many
testimonies, let us consider how the vilest and most horrible act that ever was
done upon the face of the earth, the Lord God is said to have wrought most
holily. For as Judas, the Jews, and Pilate, are all said to have given Christ
to Act. 2. 23. and 4. 28. Romans 8 32.
death: so the Father and Christ are said to have done the same, and that in
the same words, though the manner and purpose be diverse.

Q. Does God any more then suffer such things to be done?

A. He suffers them indeed; but this is not an idle permission, as some
imagine, but joined with a work Act. 2. 23. and 3. 18. and 4. 28.
of God: as in the crucifying of Christ, it is said they did nothing, but that
which the hand of God had determined before.

Q. But does not this draw God to some stain of sin, from which he is most
free, as that which he hates and punishes?

A. In no wise: for God is the author of every action, Act. 17. 28.
and the devil and our concupiscence the authors of the evil in it: as he
that rides on a lame horse causes him to stir, but is not the cause of his
halting.

Q. How can God have a hand in these things, and yet be free from sin?

A. As a cunning workman, with an ill tool can work artificially; and a
skillful Apothecarie make a sovereign medecin of the vipers flesh; so the
Lord can guide and order the poysonfull sins of men in such sort, as they
shall turn to his glory, and good of the Church; and yet cannot therein be
charged with sin, no more then the Apothecary with poisoning, in so governing
the poison, as it does the contrary by his skill, to that which by nature it
would have done. And as in painting, the black color gives grace to other
the beautiful colors, in making them show better: so it is in this work of
God, in which the sin and untruth of men, as by a black and dark color,
causes the truth and righteousness of God, as the white, to be more
commended, and to appear better.

Q. But how are these actions of the wicked discerned from the work of God in
them?

A. First, from the cause from whence the action comes: for Joseph's brethren
of envy sent him into Egypt, but God of love. So Shimei cursed of malice, but
God in justice against David's murder and adultery sent him to do it.
Rehoboam out of the unadvisedness of his heart, refused the request of his
people; but God by his wise counsel did so dispose of it. The devil from hate
to Achab, was a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets; but God in
justice against his Idolatry, appointed it to be so. Pilate of ambition and
fear, the Jews of malicious ignorance; and Judas of covetousness and
coffeehouse: but God gave Christ, and Christ gave himself of love to his
Church.

Q. How else is Gods working in these actions discerned from the working of the
wicked?

A. By the end whither they tend: for Joseph's brethren sent him, to the end he
should not come to the honor he foretold out of his dream: but God sent him
to provide for his Church, and to fulfill that was foretold. Shimei cursed, to
drive David to despair; but God directed him for exercise of David's patience.
The devil lied in the false Prophets, to ruin Achab; but God justly to punish
him for his Idolatry. Rehoboam, to satisfy the desire of his young beardlesse
counselors: but God to perform the word that he had spoken by his Prophet.
Pilate, to please the people, and to keep his credit with Caesar: Judas, for
the obtaining of the money he desired; and the Jews, that our Savior Christ
should not reign over them; but God and Christ to save his people.

Q. But were it not better to say, that these things were done by Gods
permission only, then by his providence and government, thereby to avoid an
absurdity in Divinity, that God is the author of sin?

A. It is most true, that God is not the author of sin, whereof he is the
auenger: As true it is also, that they are done by Gods permission: but it is
not an idle permission, separated from the providence and government of God;
and therefore the distinction of Gods permission, separated from his government
in the actions of wicked men, is not good.

Q. Why so?

A. Because this distinction does not defend the Justice of God, for the which
it is devised.

Q. How may that appear?

A. If he permit sin, he does it against, or with his will: if he do it
against his will, then is he not Almighty, as one that cannot let that which
he would not have done. If with his will, how can his Justice be defended, if
there were not some good thing, for which he does willingly permit it? For if a
Captain should suffer willingly his soldiers to be murdered, when he might
hinder the slaughter of the^, although he put no hand to the murder, he is not
therefore excusable and free from the blood of his soldiers.

Q. What else can be alleged against the permission, that is separated from
the powerful government and providence of God?

A. That by this means God should be spoiled of the greatest part of the
government of the world: seeing the greatest and most part of the world are
wicked, all whose actions are (as they themselves are) wicked.

Q. Is there yet any further matter against this distinction?

A. If because God is said to permit sin, he should therefore be thought to
have no hand in guiding and governing it; then he should neither be
acknowledged to have a hand in the guiding and governing of good things: for as
it is said, that he permits sin; Heb. 6.
so it is said also that he permits that which is good.

Q. May not earthly Magistrates thus punish sin, by suffering men to sin?

A. No verily, it were a cursed thing in Magistrates so to do; but God is
above all Magistrates, who even for our natural corruption, may justly give us
over to all naughty affections.

Q. Why do some say this petition thus, And suffer us not to be lead into
tentation?

A. In a vain and foolish fear of making God to Exodus 4. 21. and 9. 16. 1.
King. 22. 20. 21. 22. Romans 1. 24. 26. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Romans 9. 18. Esaias 65.
17.
be guilty of sin, if he should be said, to lead us into tentation; and
therefore they thus lay the Lords words (as it were) in water, and change his
tongue, and set him (as it were) to school, to teach him to speak, which
teaches all men to speak; whose folly is so much the greater, because the
usual phrase of the Scripture makes so evidently against them.

Q. What inconvenience follows upon this addition?

A. Very great: for by this bare permission of evil, they rob God of his
glory, working in the most things Heb. 6. 3.
that are done of men; yea even of the best things, the doing whereof is
attributed to his permission.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. The wisdom and Justice of God, which can work in an evil action, and be
free from evil.

Q. May we not offer our selves into tentation, as Christ did?

A. In no wise: for he was carried extraordinarily Luke 4 1.
by the power of his Godhead into the desert to be tempted for our sakes,
that in his victory we might overcome.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. First, that no man should choose his dwelling among those of a sinful
profession, as a chaste man among stews; a temperate man among drunkards,
belly gods; but shun and avoid it by all means. Secondly, Genesis 13. 11. and
39. 10. 12. Prou. 5 8. and 14. 16.
if we fall into such company or occasions at unawares, or upon necessity, as
did Joseph, and David; that we pray to God for his assistance to carry our
selves so, that in no wise we be infected by them.

Q. What is meant by Deliver us from evil?

A. This expounds the former by the contrary, as thus: Lead us not into
tentation, but pull us out of it, 2. Pet. 3. 17. Jude 20. 21. Cant. 1. 4. John
6. 44.
(even when we fall into it by our own infirmity) and that with force: teaching
us, that we are deeply plunged into sin, as a beast in a mire, which must be
forcibly pulled out; although a beast will help it self more, then we can do
our selves, of our selves.

Q. From how many kinds of evils desire we deliverance in general?

A. From two: first, the inward concupiscence of our own hearts, which are our
greatest enemies. Secondly, the outward, as the devil and the world, which do
Iam. 1. 13. 14.
work upon us by the former; and therefore if we can subdue the inward, these
outward cannot annoy us.

Q. Is not the devil an author of all evil?

A. Yes, he is the first author; but properly those evils or tentations are
called his, which in his own person he suggesteth.

Q. From what evils are we to desire more specially to be delivered?

A. From those whereunto we are most bent, and naturally inclined; or wherein
our Country especially, or our neighbors amongst whom we converse, do most
delight in: that so we may make the hedge highest, where Satan strives most
to leap over; who, although he knows not our hearts, yet seeing he is
subtle, and able to discover our disposition even by a beck and countenance,
we must desire wisdom of God to discern of his tentations, and power also
to resist him.

CHAP. 50.
Of thanksgiving the second part of the second prayer.

Herein note the Parts. Conclusion, in the last word Amen.

MATTHEW. 6. 13. For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for
ever. Amen.
Q. SO much of the Petitions: what is the thanks giving?

A. For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

Q. What have we to learn in this thankes*giuing?

A. First, we learn the sacrilege of the Papists, who usually steal away
this thankes*giuing from Revel. 22. 19.
prayer, as if it were no part of it; which is no marvel, seeing that in the
whole body of their doctrine, Gods glory is usually buried in a deep silence
amongst them.

Q. What observe you secondly?

A. That this thanksgiving, consisting in the praise Genesis 32. 9. 11. Romans 1 8.
10. Ephesians. 1 16. Philip. 1. 3. 4. Coloss. 1 3. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2.
of God, is a reason of all the petitions going before; and therefore a further
assurance of obtaining our suites: for so good men in praying for new
blessings, do always join thanksgiving for the former.

Q. Whence is this form of thanksgiving drawn?

A. It seems to be taken out of the Chronicles, 1. Chron. 29. 10. 11. 12. 13.
where David's seth the like phrase in praising of God; but that which David
inlargeth there, our Savior shorteneth here, and yet comprehends the marrow
of all.

Q. What observe you more particularly in the words?

A. First, in the word (Thine) these titles of kingdom, etc. are appropriated
unto God, to whom they do belong: for though the same things in Scripture are
ascribed Dan. 2. 37. 1. Tim. 5. 16. Jude 4.
to Kings, yet they have them not of themselves, but from him, and hold them of
him as tenants at will.

Q. What is meant here by the word [Kingdome]?

A. That all right belongs unto God, who has Genesis 14. 19. Exodus 16. 19. 16
Joel 3. 5. Hag. 2. 9.
authority over all, and answers to the second petition; and therefore it
ought to move us to pray to him, and to him alone, as to one that has only
right to any thing we have need of.

Q. What is meant by the word (power)?

A. That besides his right, noted in the former word, he is also able to bring
to pass whatsoever he will: Psalm 135. 5. 6. Mat. 8. 2.
both which concur in God, and not always in earthly Princes; which seems to
be comprised in the third petition, and ought to give us encouragement to pray
2. Cor. 12. 9.
to him, who is able to effect any thing we pray for according to his will;
and to strengthen us to do any thing which in duty we ought to do, although
there be no strength in us.

Q. What is meant by glory?

A. That due, which rising from the two former, of Kingdom and power, does
rightly belong unto God, as following upon the concurrence of the other two:
for if whatsoever we desire be granted unto us, in that he reigns
powerfully; it is reason that all glory and praise should return unto him
again: and it answers to the first petition, and ought to move us to pray to
him, and to assure us that our prayers are granted, seeing that by our prayers
duly made and granted, he Psalm. 64. 5. and 30. 9. and 88. 10. 11. and 11 5.
17. 18.
is glorified. And it is one of the most powerful reasons, that the servants
of God have grounded their confidence of being heard, that the name of God
therein should be glorified.

Q. What is meant by the words (for ever, or for ages)?

A. By ages, he means eternity; and thereby puts Psalm. 145. 13. Dan. 4. 31.
another difference between the Kingdom and power of God, and that in
Princes, whose Kingdoms and power fade; and therefore may fail their Subjects
and best favorites that depend upon them.

Q. What is understood by the word (Amen)? Ierem. 11. 5. John 16. 23. Revel.
3. 14. Iam. 1. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 8. 1. King. 1. 36. Ierem. 28. 6.


A. Not only, So be it, as commonly men say; but, So it is: which notes the
assurance of our faith to receive our desires, at least so far forth as God
sees good for us: for without faith our prayers are rejected. Besides that, it
is a testimony of our earnest affection of having all those things performed,
which in this prayer are comprehended.

CHAP. 51.
Of Vows.

Vows, First, To whom they are to be made. By whom.
Secondly, The matter. The kind.


PSALM. 50. verse. 14. 15. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows
unto the most High.

15. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.


Q. HItherto of Prayer. What is a Vow?

A. A holy and religious promise made unto God by a fit person, voluntarily and
advisedly, whereby he binds himself to the doing or leaving undone of some
special thing, that is acceptable to Genesis 28. 20. and 31. 13. 1. Sam. 1. 11.
God.

Q. It is thought that vows are ceremonial, and not to pertain to the times
of the Gospel?

A. There are indeed very good and worthy persons that think so; which do so
much the more mislike of vows, because they have been so much abused in
Popery; howbeit it seems by this place, that for the general, it is a
constant and perpetual ordinance of God, as shall appear, though not so
necessary as under the Law.

Q. Are we to make our vows to God only?

A. Yea, to him alone, to whom we owe all that we have, and who is the
searcher of the hearts, and Deuteronomy. 10. 17. 23. 21. Psalm. 5. 24.
has power to punish the breach of a vow.

Q. Who are fit persons to make a vow?

A. Such only as are justified before God, and reconciled unto him, otherwise
their gifts and vows cannot please him, and also such as have judgment and
knowledge to discern of a vow, and are free and Eccles. 5. 3. 5.
at their own liberty, to perform the vow they make. Therefore those, which
cannot perform their vows in regard of their subjection to others, as wives,
children, Matthew. 19. 11. Number. 30. 4. 6. 7.
servants, etc. are to take heed, that they vow not any thing that is in their
hands, under whom they are, to infringe or hinder.

Q. What learn we hence?

A. That in making of a vow, we have a respect unto that ability that God has
given us, and that calling which he has placed us in.

Q. What ought to be the matter of our vows?

A. First, those things or actions that are in our choice, and in our own
power to give or perform, it being a folly to promise that unto God, which we
are not able to perform, as the Papists do, in vowing perpetual abstinence
from marriage, etc.

Secondly, things lawful, it being a double indignity to God, to promise to
do that which he hates and forbids to be done; as the Jews did that vowed
Matthew. 14. 7. Act. 23. 14.
to kill Paul.

Thirdly, those things which are of some worth and acceptance, and not base,
and vile, or contemptible matters, such as neither God nor man makes any
account of; it argues a base esteem of God, to promise unto him, by way of
special thankfulness, any vile or contemptible matter. And what thankfulness
can it be unto God to pay such a vow, or what comfort in his trouble can any
man take, by a purpose of the performance thereof?

Such things as imply no contempt or light regard of any of those creatures of
God, which he has made and appointed both in his wisdom and goodness, for
our use; as when the cause of such and such meats, either always, or upon such
and such days are abiured in our vows.

Fifthly, those things which are either parts of Gods worship in themselves, or
furtherances thereof, or of any part of his Law: as founding of Lectures,
building of Colleges and Schools, for maintenance of true religion and
learning, and building Almes-houses, and such like works of mercy and piety,
for the relief of the poor, and that with some strain of our ability.

Q. What is the end of vows?

A. First, in general the glory of God, and the advancement of his worship, or
the profit of our neighbor.

Secondly, in special, either to testify our special thankfulness to God
for blessings received, Genesis 28. 20. Josh. 6. 10. or to chastise our selves to
prevent Gods wrath. 1. Cor. 11. 31. or to make us more wary and heedfull of
those sins that we have formerly fallen into; or to bind our selves the more
strongly to obedience, or to strengthen the weakness of our faith and hope,
etc.

Q. What is the duty of those that have vowed?

A. First, to have a diligent care to perform their Eccles. 5. 4. Psalm. 76. 11.
vows, else we deal worse with God, then we dare deal with many men.

Secondly, not to delay the performance of them. Genesis 35. 1. Deuteronomy. 22. 21.
Eccles. 5. 3.


Q. Is the necessity of performing vows so great, that it may not be omitted,
or put off in no case?

A. No: for to the end that a greater and more necessary Ier. 35. 9. 10. 11.
duty may be performed, a man may omit his vow for a time, and after return
to the observation thereof, and yet be no vow-breaker: as the Rechabites for
safety of their lives, came and dwelt in Jerusalem, notwithstanding a former
vow, that they would not dwell in any house; and yet God witnesses, that their
vow was not broken thereby: so to help our neighbors in some present necessity,
we may Mat. 12. 7.
cease from any vowed duty at that time, and not sin. Wherein the Papists
greatly fail, who having vowed unlawfully, yet think they may not intermit the
same.

Q. If a man in vowing, do not consider sufficiently of the greatness of the
matter, may be not break that vow, if he has not so advisedly made it?

A. No: the vow being otherwise lawful; in this Psalm. 15. 4.
case, his rashness is to be repented, but the vow must be kept.

Q. What are we to learn of all this?

A. That we be advised what we vow, and not after we have made them, to find
some starting hole where to get out, but either let us not vow at all, or
remember our vows, and diligently perform them in their due time.

CHAP. 52.
Of the Church Militant.

The persons, which are the second sort of outward means appertaining to the
kingdom of Christ, are the Church militant, Before the coming of Christ.
After the coming of Christ Universal. Particular.


MATTHEW. chap. 28. verse. 15. to the end. 15. So they took the money, and did as
they were taught: And this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until
this day.

16. Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where
Jesus had appointed them.

17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.

18. And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, all power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth.

19. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost:

20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.

1. Cor. chap. 12. verse. 6. to the 28. 6. And there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God, which works all in all.

7. But the manifestation of the spirit, is given to every man to profit
withal.

8. For to one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the
word of knowledge, by the same spirit.

9. To another faith, by the same spirit: to another the gifts of healing, by
the same spirit.

10. To another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another
discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the
interpretation of tongues.

11. But all these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing to
every man severally as he will.

12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that
one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.

13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and have been all made to drink into
one spirit.

14. For the body is not one member, but many.

15. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body: is
it therefore not of the body?

16. And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body:
is it therefore not of the body?

17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were
hearing, where were the smelling?

18. But now has God set the members, every one of them in the body, as it
has pleased him.

19. And if they were all one member where were the body?

20. But now are they many members, yet but one body.

21. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again,
the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

22. Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble,
are necessary.

23. And those members of the body, which we think to be less honorable,
upon these we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts have more
abundant comeliness.

24. For our comely parts have no need: but God has tempered the body
together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked:

25. That there should be no schism in the body: but that the members should
have the same care one for another.

26. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one
member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets
thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps in
governments, diversities of tongues.


Q. HItherto amongst the outward things appertaining to the Kingdom of Christ,
we have spoken of the things, such as God gives to us, and we to him: it
remains now to speak of the persons. What are they?

A. The Church Militant.

Q. What is the Militant Church?

A. A company Act. 20. 17. 28. 1. Tim. 3. 15. 1. Cor. 11. 16. 22
of Saints upon earth, who from all parts of the world being gathered together
in one spirit of Christ, stand in spiritual fight against the enemies of
Christ's Kingdom: for the teaching and governing whereof he has always given
officers and Ministers.

Q. What is common to these Officers?

A. That they be lawfully called, and that every one of them do faithfully
execute the office, whereunto he is called.

Q. How is the Militant Church divided?

A. Into the Church before the coming of Christ, or after his coming.

Q. What is the Church before the coming of Christ?

A. That Church which being called before the Incarnation and suffering of
Christ, believed in Christ to come in the flesh.

Q. What is the Church after the coming of Christ?

A. That Church which after the Incarnation of Christ, being called by the
Gospel, believes in Christ already come in the flesh.

Q. How is the Militant Church after the coming of Christ divided?

A. Into universal, or particular.

Q. What is the universal Church?

A. It is the society of those who being scattered thorough all the corners of
the world, are by one faith in Christ conjoined to him.

Q. What officers are annexed to this Church?

A. Such only as were extraordinary, and endured but for a time.

Q. What are they?

A. Such as were first called and enabled of God, for the spreading of the
Gospel throughout the world, and for the conquering and subduing of the same
to the obedience thereof; of whom there was no such use after the first
building or planting of the Church, no more then of the General of a field, or
of a Coronell, when the conquest is made; or of master builders after the
platform of a house is set down.

Q. Who are these extraordinary Officers?

A. They are either those that are called immediately of God, as Apostles, and
Prophets; or those that were called by means of men also, as Evangelists.

Q. Who are Apostles?

A. Such as were for the planting of the first Churches set apart immediately
by Christ himself; Act. 1. 21. John 15. 27.
which having both seen and heard him, Mat. 28. 19. Act. 1. 8.
had the charge of the whole world committed unto the^, Act. 8. 14. 15. and 19.
6. etc.
with power to distribute some extraordinary graces of the spirit.

Q. Have the Apostles any successors?

A. To speak properly, they have none to succeed them in the degree and
dignity of Apostleship; and therefore when James was beheaded, none was chosen
Act. 12. 3.
into his place? otherwise all Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel, who are
lawfully called to the dispensation of the Word, Sacraments, and Keys, are the
true and undoubted successors of the Apostles: and have the same commission in
the ministration of the Gospel which they had, though not in the same degree
or dignity.

Q. Who is the head of this universal Church?

A. Only Christ, who is the highest, and who alone conueyeth the powers of
spiritual life and sense into it: for as the natural members take spirit and
sense from the head; so the Church has her spiritual life and feeling from
Christ; who is only able to quicken and give life. Whom by this title of the
head of Ephesians. 1. 21-23. Col. 1. 16-18.
the Church Paul lifts up above all Angels, principalities and powers. And
therefore if the Pope were the successor of Peter and Paul, yet should he not
be therefore the head of the Church; which agrees to none in heaven, or under
heaven that is merely a creature.

Q. What then shall we say to the words of Christ, Thou art Peter, and upon
this rock will I build my Church? Mat. 16. 18.
may it not thereby be inferred, that Peter was ruler of the Apostles, and
consequently of the Church in all the world; and therefore that the Popes, as
Peter's successors, should be rulers over all?

A. No: for the rock whereupon Christ will build his Church, is not Peter
himself, but the effectual confession and faith of Peter, as appears by the
word the Evangelist uses for the rock [viz. (...)] diverse from that whereby
Peter is called, [viz. (...).] And if it be understood of Peter, yet it must
be esteemed, that to avoid confusion, Peter gave answer in the name of all the
rest of the Apostles, upon whom (in respect of their ministry, the Church is
as well builded as upon Revel. 21. 14.
Peter.

Q. How may it be showed that Peter answered for all?

A. Because all were asked: otherwise our Savior Mat. 16. 15.
Christ received no answer; which to think, is a charge of disobedience upon
the other Apostles, and upon our Savior Christ, of negligence: who seeking by
this question to strengthen all the Apostles in the faith toward himself,
should have given them no strength; neither by experience of the work of God
within themselves, nor by the glorious promises which he annexed to this
confession, unless he had in Peter's answer received the answer of others.
Secondly, when it appears other where, by Peter's own confession, that the
rest knew that Christ was the son of the living God, as well as he himself;
what should John 6. 69.
hinder them not to make confession of it, as well as did Peter, and in regard
thereof to be as much respected as he?

Q. If Peter were chief of all, does it follow that the Pope of Rome should be
so?

A. No verily: for howsoever they say Peter was Bishop of Rome, yet indeed that
cannot be proved by Scripture, but rather the contrary: for if Peter had been
at Rome, when Paul was there, amongst many others, he would not have forgotten
to make mention of him, having diverse occasions thereof. 2. Tim. 4. 16.
Especially he would not have wrapped him in the common charge, that all had
forsaken him. Also Peter's proper charge Galath. 2. 7.
being amongst the Jews, who were never frequent, or many in Rome: and Act.
18. 2.
after the few that were there, being banished from thence, what likelihood is
there, that he would most reside there, where he had least to do? And if he
had been there, yet there is no colorable probation that he was Bishop there;
1. Cor. 12. 2^* Ephesians. 4. 11.
the Bishopric being far under the Apostleship whereunto he was called.

Q. But grant he had been bishop of Rome; does it follow thereof, that the
Bishop of Rome must be his successor?

A. No: for first it should have been but a personal right. And secondly, if it
belonged to his successors, Antioch, where he is said to have sat before he is
supposed to sit at Rome, might challenge it as well. Neither can his death,
which they suppose to have been at Rome, give that privilege to Rome above
Antioch, or any other place, more then the death of Christ privileged
Jerusalem, which by the just judgment of God, for the same cause was made an
heap of stones. And thirdly, if it did belong to his successors at Rome; yet
it belongs to his successors in doctrine, and not in place only; considering
that if the Church were builded upon Peter, it was in respect of the doctrine
he taught, not in respect of his person.

Q. Hitherto of the Apostles. Now what were the Prophets?

A. Such as besides an extraordinary gift of preaching, Act. 11. 28. and 21.
10. 11.
had a special gift of prophesying and foretelling things to come.

Q. Hitherto of those immediately called. Who are those that were called also
by the means of men?

A. The Evangelists.

Q. What were the Evangelists?

A. Such as were 1. Tim. 1. 6.
ordained, and Act. 17. 15. and 19. 22. 1 Cor. 4. 17.
directed by the Apostles, for ^. Cor. 3 6.
watering those Churches which they had planted, and confirming those whom they
had converted.

Q. Hitherto we have heard of the universal Church: What is a particular
Church?

A. It is that which besides the fellowship in one Romans 12. 3. -- 8.
spirit, has some other outward knot wherein they are more nearly tied then
the rest of the universal is: and it is either of one nation, or of a narrower
compass.

Q. What is a Church of one nation?

A. It is that which is gathered under one politic or civil government.

Q. What is that of a more narrow compass?

A. It is such a particular Church or Parish, that dwelling in one place, may
be conveniently at one time taught, by the mouth of one Minister.

Q. What is common to all the members of this Church?

A. That every one be wife unto sobriety, behauing Romans 12. 3.
himself according to the measure of grace that is bestowed upon him.

Q. What persons make default against this rule?

A. Two sorts especially: the one, such as ouerweene and think better of
themselves then is fitting, taking a greater state upon them then they are
worthy of: The other, of such as abasing themselves too much, do think
themselves unfit to such duties as they are called unto.

Q. How is the truth of this doctrine cleared?

A. The Apostle declares it by comparing the Romans 12. 3-8.
Church, which is the mystical body of Christ, unto the natural body of a man.

Q. How many ways does this comparison hold?

A. Sundry ways: First, as in the perfect body of a natural man, there is full
furniture of al members needful to the discharge of their several duties;
which are known both how many they are, and what they are: so it is in the
Church of God.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. First, that as a superfluous member in a man's body, as two thumbs, or a
finger more then ordinary in one hand, is a blemish and deformity in the body:
even so superfluous members must needs be accounted a blemish and deformity in
the Church of Christ.

Q. What further?

A. As the want of any natural member breeds grief in the body: so the want
of any the appointed members in the Church, must needs be faulty and grievous.

Q. Proceed to the other points of the comparison?

A. As in the body to have a member misplaced, as to have an eye where the nose
should be, or a foot for the hand, causes both horror and grief: so the like
disorder in the Church of Christ must needs be grievous and horrible.

Q. Wherein does this comparison further hold?

A. That as in the body of a man, every member has his own several function
to discharge, and no member can well and fitly discharge the duty of another:
So it must be in the Church of God. And as all the several members of the body
are knit and united to their head: so are all the members of the Church unto
their head Christ. Further, as in the natural body every several member, is
(as it were) the member of every other in serving to their good; as the eye
does see, the hand does take, the mouth does speak for the good of any other
member. So it is in the Church of God.

Q. What are the parts of a particular Church?

A. Such as have preeminence, and such as are inferior unto them.

Q. Who are those that have preeminence?

A. Those whom Christ has appointed for the continuance of the Churches (which
were builded by the extraordinary officers) to the worlds end.

Q. What things are common to all these ordinary officers?

A. First, that they be unblameable of life, which being required of all
Christians, is in greater measure required of them, as being the lights of the
Church. Secondly, examination, whether they have gifts, for the discharge of
that special office they are called unto. Thirdly, a calling, consisting
partly in the election of the Church, directed by the governors thereof; and
partly in ordination by the said governors, which by prayer and laying on of
hands, are to consecrate and separate them to that function, with assurance of
the assistance of God, in doing their duty faithfully.

Q. What fourthly?

A. That every one of these ordinary officers are tied Act. 20. 28. and 14.
23. Tit. 1. 5.
to one flock.

Q. So much of the general properties of the ordinary officers: what are the
kinds of them?

A. They are either such as deal in the ministry of the word, viz. Pastors
and teachers, or assistants unto them.

Q. What is the ministry of the word?

A. A holy and spiritual calling, wherein men are Romans 12. 6. 1. Cor. 14. 3.
set apart to the interpretation of the Scriptures of God, for the edification
of the Church, which is called also by the Apostle, Prophecy: unto which also
belongs the administration of the Sacraments.

Q. How prove you, that by prophecy is meant there the office of interpreting
the word, rather then of foretelling things to come?

A. First, because prophecy is set down there, as a perpetual office in the
Church, whereof Solomon says, When prophecy fails, the people perish.
Secondly, the prophet Prou. 29. 18.
is charged to continue in prophesying, whereas no Prophet continued always in
foretelling. Thirdly, For that this prophecy consists in teaching and
exhorting.

Q. Why is it added, that he must do it to the edification of the Church?

A. To teach, that a Minister in his sermons should 1. Cor. 1. 4. 5.
not use profound speculations of Philosophy, strange languages, and such like
ostentation of learning; but that he should so labor to speak, that as well
he that cleaves wood, as he that sits on the throne, even the simplest
should understand, and learn what is the good will of God.

Q. Is it sufficient, that the Minister of the word be able to teach?

A. No; there is further required of them, that they 1. Tim. 3. 6.
be no new and green plants in the Church of God, but such as by a long abode
in the Church, may be as timber well seasoned; and therefore fit to bear the
stresse and weight of the ministry in the Church of God.

Q. What further?

A. That (as in other respects) so in regard of the weight of their charge,
they are to be severed (as much as may be) from all other offices and charges
in the Commonwealth. And certainly if a man were never so well graced of God,
yet the ministry of the word 2. Cor. 2. 16.
alone (if faithfully discharged) would be employment enough for him, which
requires the whole strength of a man: and if the Act. 6. 2. 4.
Apostles would not attend upon the Deaconship being so near to the ministry,
much less is it fitting for any other to entangle themselves with other
offices.

Q. What other things are general to them?

A. That as they are Gods mouth in preaching the word to the people; so they
are the peoples mouth to God in prayer.

Q. What is the Teachers duty?

A. To interpret the Schriptures, teaching the people Ephesians. 4. 14. Tit. 1. 9.
11. Neh. 4. 17.
committed unto him, for the establishing of their minds in the truth of the
doctrine of God: confuting the contrary errors; like to them that reedified
the walls of Jerusalem, who wrought with one hand, and held their swords in
the other.

Q. What is the Pastors duty?

A. Out of sound doctrine, to exhort and feed his Tit. 1. 9. 2. Tim. 4. 2.
people by applying the doctrine to the present use and necessity of his
flock, and so to bring them to the obedience of God.

Q. How is doctrine applied to the present use and necessity of the flock?

A. Luke 12. 42. 1. Cor. 12. 8. and 14. 3.
By applying it according to their several estates and occasions present: and
this is that wisdom which ought to be in the Pastor, to comfort the
afflicted, strengthen the weak, beat down the proud, lift up the humbled,
heal the broken, and 1. Tim. 5. 1.
to know that, Magistrates must be otherwise exhorted then the subjects;
masters otherwise then servants; and so of the rest.

Q. What are the other assistants?

A. Such as 1. Tim. 5. 17. Act. 14. 23. 1 Cor. 12. 38. Romans 12. 8.
help the Ministers, either in the oversight of the behauiours of the several
members of the Church, and in the administration of discipline, or such Romans
12. 8.
as attend upon the poor, collecting for them, and distributing unto them,
according to their several conditions and necessities, with simplicity of
mind without partial affection.

CHAP. 53.
Of the day of Judgment in general.

2. PET. chap. 3. verse. 3. to the 12. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall
come in the last days, scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

4. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.

5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the
heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water:

6. Whereby the world that then was, being ouerflowed with water, perished.

7. But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in
store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
men.

8. But (beloved) be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.

9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count
slacknesse) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.

10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, What manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

12. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the
heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat?


Q. Having spoken at large of the government of Christ in this world: what
follows?

A. His government in the day of Judgment.

Q. What is the day of Judgment?

A. It is the day appointed of God for the general Act. 17. 31.
Judgment of all men, concerning their everlasting estate.

Q. Is there not just cause given to doubt thereof, seeing God has delayed it
so long?

A. No, for to take away all doubt thereof out of Revel. 10. 6.
our minds, our Savior Christ has not only often told of it; but has also
sworn it shall be.

Q. But if there be an end of the world, then it and the Genesis 8. 21. 2. Pet.
3. 4.
things therein should by little and little wear away and consume; but they
do not seem so to decay, for that they remain as they were from the
beginning of the Creation; therefore (it may seem) the world shall have no end.

A. So indeed it seemed to some in the Apostles times, and seems still to
vain and wicked men; but we shall be free from any such wicked and erroneous
conceit, if we take heed to the words of the Prophets, and the commandment of
the Apostles, of the Lord our Savior, as the Apostle Peter teaches here.

Q. How does he confute this godless conceit out of the Scripture?

A. First, by affirming that the heavens and earth being created by the word
and will of God in a small time, may also in a small time be changed.

Secondly, by denying that the world has continued always the same it was at
the beginning of the creation, in as much as the earth (by water in the flood)
was covered in a short time, and by the same reason, may in a short time be
consumed by fire.

Q. But it seems that this promise of his coming fails, for that he has
said, he would come shortly, when notwithstanding, more then 1600. years are
past, since that promise came out.

A. The shortness of the time must not be measured 2 Pet. 3. 8.
by our estimation, because we are of small endurance here in this world; but
it must be measured by the judgment of God, with whom a thousand years are
but as one day.

Q. Howbeit, it seems that he should hasten that day more then he does, for
the advantage of those that be his, considering that they are evil handled
here in the world.

A. There are two causes of this delay: one, that all that is prophesied,
especially in the book of Revelation may be fulfilled: the other, that none of
the elect should perish: so that it is for the advantage of those who are his,
that their Lord makes no more have; which ought to make us patiently to wait
for his coming.

Q. Is there yet any further reason for the confutation of that godless
opinion?

A. Yea, for in that our Savior Christ has declared, that his coming should
be sudden, as the thief in Mat. 24. 42. 44.
the night, that error is confuted; for it would not be so, if things should
decay by little and little.

CHAP. 54.
Of the day of Judgment in special, and of Antichrist.

Touching the day of Judgment in special, note the Tokens of the same Remote,
that is, the Apostasy under Antichrist; where of the Head. Members.
Nearer.
Judgment it self.

2. THESE. chap. 2. verse. 3. to the 13. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means,
for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition,

4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.

5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?

6. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.

7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work: only he who now lets,
will let, until he be taken out of the way.

8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming:

9. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying wonders.

10. And with all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, in them that perish:
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie:

12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved
in the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth,


Q. What have we to consider in this Judgment more specially?

A. First, the tokens going before: secondly, the Judgment it self.

Q. What are the tokens going before it?

A. They are either further off, or nearer unto it.

Q. What are the tokens further off?

A. A general Apostasy under the Antichrist of 1. Tim. 4. 1.
Rome, as the Apostle teaches, 2. Thessal. 2. 3-13.

Q. What was the occasion of this doctrine of the Apostle?

A. It may seem some of the Thessalonians misconstrued these words in his
former Epistle, viz. That we which live, and remain at the Lords coming,
shall not prevent them that are dead; as if the Thessalonians, to whom Paul
wrote, should live till then: which bred this error among them, that the day
of Judgment was at hand: and this in his second Epistle he confuteth, by
putting them in mind, that first there must be a general Apostasy, or
falling away from the truth of the Gospel.

Q. Was it not a tolerable error, considering that thereby they might be
stirred up unto greater care and watchfulness?

A. No: for God will have just things done justly, and no truth can be well
builded upon falsehood. Besides this, a subtle practice of Satan appears in
it: that when they had long looked for the day, and saw no alteration of
things, nor other appearance of it, they might fall into a flat unbelief, that
no such thing should come to pass at all.

Q. Is it meant, that the whole Church shall fall from Christ?

A. No: for it is impossible that a perfect head should be without a body at
any time.

Q. Why is it then called general?

A. Because the Gospel having been universally preached throughout the world,
both whole nations did fall from it, and the most part also even of those
nations that kept the profession of it; howbeit, still there remained a Church,
although the estate thereof was not publicly known to the world.

Q. What are the parts of this Apostasy?

A. The head and members; the head of this Apostasy is Antichrist; the members
his subjects and vassals: for as Christ is the head of the true Church, which
is his body; so is Antichrist the head of those which shall fall away, and they
his body.

Q. Who is this Antichrist and his body?

A. The Pope, and the Church of Rome under him, as by the Apostles description
following, does evidently appear.

Q. Then this Apostasy is as large and general as Popery. But how is it
likely, that the Lord should suffer so many nations as lived under Popery, and
that so long, to fall away?

A. Why not? and that most justly: for if the whole body of the Gentiles were
rejected, when the Church was only in Jury for some fourteen hundred years:
and seeing even of the Jews, ten tribes were rejected, and of the remainder,
but a few were of the Church; with great reason has the Lord rejected those
nations and people for so many ages, seeing they rejected Gods grace in falling
away from the Gospel, which the Lord most graciously revealed unto them,
passing by their fathers that were before them.

Q. How is this Antichristian head described unto us?

A. First, he is described what he is toward others: and then what he is in
himself.

Q. What is he toward others?

A. That is declared by two special titles, of the man of sin, and son of
perdition; declaring hereby, not so much his own sin, and perdition, which
is exceeding great; as of those that receive his mark, whom he causes to
sin, and consequently, to fall into perdition; as Jeroboam, who is often
branded with the mark of causing Israel to sin: and he is so much more
detestable then he, by how much both his Idolatry is more execrable, and has
drawn more Kingdoms after him, then Jeroboam did Tribes.

Q. In what respect is he called the man of sin?

A. In that he causes many to sin: and this the Pope does in a high degree;
justifying sin, not by oversight, but by laws advisedly made; not only
commanding some sins, which we are by our corrupt nature prone unto, as
spiritual fornication; but also (to the great profanation of the holy name
and profession of Christ) permitting and teaching for lawful, such as even our
corrupt nature (not wholly subverted through enormeous custom of sin)
abhors, as incestuous marriages, and breaking of faith, and leagues,
equiuocating, and the like, which profane men (by the very light of nature)
do detest.

Q. In what sense is he called the child of perdition?

A. Not as the unthrift mentioned in the Gospel; Luke 15. 32. John 17. 12.
neither as Judas, who is passiuely called the son of perdition; but
actiuely, as it is otherwhere expounded, where he is called the destroyer,
because he destroyed Revel. 9. 11.
many: and that the Pope is such a one, some of his own secretaries make it
good; confessing that many that were well disposed persons, before their entry
into that See, became cursed and cruel beasts, when once they were settled in
the same: as if there were some pestilent poison in that seat, infecting those
who sit therein.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. That the calling of the Pope is unlawful: for every office or calling
which the Lord does not bless, or wherein none occupying the place, grows in
piety, is to be esteemed for an unlawful calling; for in a lawful calling,
some (at the least) in all ages are found profitable to the Church, or
Commonwealth.

Q. What is the use of all this doctrine?

A. That whosoever are partakers of the sins of Rome, are also under the same
curse; and therefore such of us as have lived in Popery, should examine our
selves if we have truly repented us of it: first, by the change of our
understanding; as whether we have grown in the knowledge of the truth: and
secondly, by the change also of our affections; as whether we hate Popery,
and love the truth unfeignedly. And so let every one judge himself, that he
be not judged, and that with harder judgment, according as Romans 2. 4.
God has been the longer patient toward us.

Q. What further?

A. That there can be no sound agreement betwixt Popery, and the profession of
the Gospel; no more then betwixt light and darkness, falsehood and truth, God
and Belial: and therefore no reconciliation can be devised betwixt them: for if
the members of Antichrist shall be destroyed, we cannot in any sort
communicate with them in their errors, unless we will bear them company in
their destruction also.

Q. Why? does every error destroy the soul?

A. No verily: for as every wound kills not a 2. Pet. 2.
man; so every error depriueth not a man of salvation: but as the vital parts
being wounded or infected, bring death; so those errors that destroy the
fundamental points and heads of faith, bring everlasting destruction: in which
kind is Popery, which sundry ways overthrows the principles and grounds of
our holy faith; and therefore is termed an Apostasy, or departure from the
faith.

Q. Is it not then impossible for a Pope to be saved?

A. No, it is not impossible, his sin being not necessarily against the holy
Ghost, to which only repentance is denied: for some (in likelihood) have entered
into, and continued in that See ignorantly; and therefore may possibly find
place to repentance. But if any be saved, it is a secret hidden with God: for
concerning any thing that appears by the end of any one Pope, since he was
lift up into the Emperors chair, and discovered to be the man of sin, there
is no grounded hope given to persuade, that any one of them is saved.

Q. So much of the Antichrist, what he is toward others. What is he in
himself?

A. That is set down in two points: first, in that (contrary to right, and by
mere usurpation) he seateth himself in the Temple of God, as if he were
Christ's vicar, being indeed his enemy; both which the word Antichrist notes.
Secondly, in that he is here expressly named an Adversary, and one that is
contrary to Christ.

Q. Wherein is the Pope adversary unto Christ?

A. Every way; in life, and in office.

Q. How in life?

A. In that Christ being most pure and holy, yea holiness it self; the Popes,
many of them, are, and have been most filthy and abominable, in blaspheming,
coniuring, murdering, covetousness, whoring, and that incestuously, and
Sodomitically, and yet will they in their ordinary titles be called holy; yea
holiness it self, which is proper only to Christ.

Q. How in office?

A. First, in his kingdom: Christ's kingdom is without all outward show or
pomp; but the Popes kingdom consists wholly in pomp and shows, as
imitating his predecessors, the Emperors of Rome, in his proud, stately, and
lordly offices, Princely trains, and outrageous expenses in every sort.

Secondly, in his Priesthood, in raising up another sacrifice then Christ's,
another priesthood then his, other mediators then him.

Thirdly, in his Prophetical office, in that he teaches clean contrary to
him: Christ taught nothing but what he received of his Father: the Pope sets
out his own canons and decrees of Councels: and in them he teaches such
doctrine, as overthrows the maine foundation of that which Christ taught.

Q. What is the second effect?

A. That he is exceedingly lift up against all that is called God.

Q. How does this agree to the Pope?

A. More fitly then to any other person: for Christ being very God, abaseth
himself unto the assuming of the nature of man: the Pope a vile man, aduanceth
himself to the throne of God. Christ being above secular power, paid tribute,
and was taxed, and suffered himself to be crowned with a crown of thorns,
and bare his own cross: But the Pope, being under all secular power, exalts
himself above all secular powers; exacteth tribute of Kings; sets his foot
on the neck of Emperors; carries a triple crown of gold, and is borne upon
men's shoulders.

Q. But he calls himself the servant of servants.

A. Though he do, yet by the confession of his own Canonists (he does it)
but dissemblingly, and in hypocrisy, which is double iniquity: for they say,
that he does in humility only say so, not that he is indeed, so as he says.

Q. What are the effects of this his pride?

A. They are two: first, he sits in the Church as God; for he binds the
consciences of men by his decrees, which no Princes laws can do: for though
men observe not such laws, yet if they break them not of contempt, they are
discharged, if they bear the penalty prescribed in them.

Q. By this it seems, that the Church of Rome is yet the Church of God,
although corrupt, seeing it is said, that he sits in the temple of God?

A. No verily: but it is so said, first, because it bears the name of the
Church; for the Scripture gives the name to a thing according to that it has
been: as when Christ says, the abomination of desolation shall stand in the
holy place; he means not, that the temple was then holy, which at that time
(being no figure nor shadow of Christ, and his Church) was profaned, but that
it had been holy: so we confess there has been a true Church in Rome, which
is now no Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan. Secondly, he is said to
sit in the Temple of God, because he exercises his tyrannical rule in the
Christian world, and is most busy in those places where Christ has his
Church, and the Gospel is professed, laboring in all places, either by
himself or his wicked Instruments, to overthrow or corrupt, poison or hinder
the free course of the Gospel: so that in this regard he may be said to sit
in the Temple of God, that is, to reign and tyrannize in the Church of God;
and yet the city (where he is) be Sodom, and the Church, whereof he is head,
the synagogue of Satan.

Q. What is the other effect of his pride?

A. He boasts that he is God, as the Popes flatterers in the Canon law call
him, Our Lord God the Pope. Neither does his pride stay there, but also he
challenges to himself things proper to God; as the title of holiness; also
power to forgive sins, and to carry infinite souls to hell, without check
or controlement; and to make of nothing, something; yea, to make the Scripture
to be no Scripture, and no Scripture to be Scripture at his pleasure; yea, to
make of a creature the Creator.

Q. It may seem to be an impossible thing, that men should be carried away
from the faith of the Gospel, by one so monstrous and directly opposite to
Christ.

A. It might seem so indeed, if at once and at a sudden, he had showed
himself in such foul colors; and therefore by certain degrees of iniquity,
he raised himself to this height of wickedness, and did not at the first
show himself in such a monstrous shape and likeness.

Q. How does that appear?

A. By the Apostle, who in this place shows of two courses the devil held to
bring this to pass; one secret and covert, before this man of sin was
revealed; the other, when he was revealed, and set up in his seat.

Q. What were the ways of Antichrists coming before he was revealed?

A. Those several errors which were spread, partly in the Apostles time, and
partly after their time, thereby to make a way for his coming. And in this
respect, this mystery of iniquity was begun to be wrought (as it were) under
the ground, and secretly in the Apostles time.

Q. How was this mystery of iniquity wrought in the Apostles time?

A. By many ambitious spirits (as it were) petty 3. Ioh. 1. 9. Act. 5. 1. Gal.
1. 6. 7. and 2. 16. Col. 2. 18. 21. 1. Tim. 4. 3.
Antichrists, which were desirous to be lords over the Church; and wicked
heretics, which then sowed many errors and heresies, as Justification by
works, worshipping of Angels, and which put religion in meats, and condemned
marriage, etc. which were beginnings and grounds of Popery and
Antichristianisme.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That those, whom God has freed from the bondage of Popery, should strive
to free themselves from all the remnants thereof; lest if they cleave still to
any of the^, God in judgment bring the whole upon the^ again.

Q. How shall Antichrists kingdom be continued and advanced after that he is
revealed?

A. By the power of Satan, in lying miracles, and false wonders.

Q. What difference is there betwixt Christ's miracles, and theirs?

A. Very great every way: for Christ's miracles were true, whereas these are
false and lying, and by legerdemaine. Christ's miracles were from God; but
theirs, where there is any thing strange, and above the common reach of men,
from the devil. Christ's miracles were for the most part profitable to the
health of man, but theirs altogether unprofitable, and for a vain show. Christ's
miracles were to confirm the truth, but theirs to confirm falsehood.

Q. What gather you of this?

That seeing the Popes Kingdom glories so much in wonders, it is most like
that he is Antichrist; seeing Mat. 24. 24. Deuteronomy. 13. 12.
the false christ's, and the false Prophets shall do great wonders, to deceive
(if it were possible) the very elect, and that some of the false prophets
prophesies shall come to pass; we should not therefore believe the Deuteronomy. 13.
3.
doctrine of Popery, for their wonders sakes, seeing the Lord thereby tries
our faith, who has given to Satan great knowledge and power to work strange
things, to bring those to damnation, who are appointed unto it. Moreover,
whatsoever miracles are not profitable to some good, neither tend to confirm a
truth, are false and lying; so that as the Lord left an evident difference
between his miracles, and the enchantments Exodus 7. 12.
of the Egyptians; so has he left an evident difference between the miracles
of Christ and his Apostles, and those of the Romish Synagogue.

Q. Are not miracles as necessary now, as they were in the time of the
Apostles?

A. No verily: for the doctrine of the Gospel being then new unto the world,
had need to have been confirmed with miracles from heaven; but it being once
confirmed, there is no more need of miracles; and therefore we keeping the same
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, must content our selves with the
confirmation which has already been given.

Q. What arises out of this?

A. That the doctrine of Popery is a new doctrine, having need to be confirmed
with new miracles; and so it is not the doctrine of Christ, neither is
established by his miracles.

Q. What force shall the miracles of Antichrist have?

A. Marvelous great, to bring many men to damnation; God in just revenge of
the contempt of the truth, sending a strong delusion upon them.

Q. Hitherto we have heard Antichrist described by his effects and properties.
Now tell me where is the place, where he shall have his seat of special
residence?

A. That is the City of Rome.

Q. How does that appear?

A. First, because he that let at the time when Paul wrote, was the
Emperor of Rome, who did then sit there, and must be disseated (as the
learnedest Papists themselves grant) ere the Pope could enter upon it.
Secondly, John calls that City where he must sit, Revel. 17. 18.
the Lady of the world; which at that time agreed only to Rome, being the
mother City of the World. Thirdly, it was that City that was seated upon seven
hills; which by all ancient records belongs properly Revel. 17 9.
and only to Rome. As for the occasion of the Popes placing there, it came by
the means of translating of the seat of the Empire from Rome to
Constantinople; from whence ensued also the parting of the Empire into two
parts; by which division it being weakened, and after also sundred in
affection, as well as in place, was the easier to be entered upon, and obtained
by the Pope.

Q. What do you further gather of that the Apostle says, that he that lets
shall let?

A. That the Antichrist is not one particular man, as the Papists do fancy:
for then by the like phrase he that lets must be one particular man; where
it cannot be that one man should live so many hundred years; as from Paul's
time, to the time of the translation of the Empire from Rome; much less until
within two years and a half of the latter day, as they imagine the time of
Antichrist. And therefore as by him that lets, is understood a succession of
Emperors, not one man alone; so by Antichrist the man of sin is understood,
a succession of men, and not one only man. So in Daniel 7. 3. 17. the four
beasts, and the four Kings do not signify four particular men, but four
governments; in every one whereof there were sundry men that ruled. So that the
argument of the Papists, who upon the words the man of sin, would prove, that
the Antichrist the Apostle speaks of, is one singular man, is but vain, and
has no consequence in it.

Q. But how can Antichrist be already come, seeing the Empire yet stands?

A. The name of the Empire only remains, the thing is gone: for he has
neither the chief City, nor the tribute, nor the commandment of the people;
and therefore he can be no let to the Antichrists coming, especially the Pope
having gotten such an upper hand upon him, as to cause him to wait at his gate
barefoot, and to hold his stirrup.

Q. What shall be the end of this Antichrist?

A. God shall confound him with the breath of his mouth; that is, with the
preaching of the word: which serves for an other argument to prove the Pope to
be Antichrist: for whereas he had subdued Kingdoms and Empires under his feet,
he has been of late mightily suppressed by the word preached, and not by
outward force, as other potentates use to be.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. The marvelous power of Gods word to suppress 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
whatsoever rises against it: for if the mightiest cannot stand before it,
much less the smallest: and therefore it is expressed by a mighty wind, which
carries all before it; and by fire, which consumes all, Act. 2. 2. 3.
and pierces all. And it declares a marvelous easy victory against the
enemies, when it is said, that with the breath of his mouth he shall consume
his enemies.

Q. What else shall be the overthrow of Antichrist?

A. The glorious appearance of the Son of God in the latter day.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That before the last day he shall not be utterly consumed; whereof
notwithstanding it follows not that the head shall remain till then: for the
Beast, and the false Prophet shall be taken, and cast into the fire before the
latter day: but some shall retain a liking of him, and his errors and
superstitions, even till the last day.

Q. Hitherto of the head of this general apostasy. What are the members of it?

A. They are first described by their end, even a number of people that shall
perish; which accords with that name and property of the head, the destroyer,
or son of perdition, being truly verified in them, in regard of the fearful
end he shall bring them to.

Q. What is the use of this?

A. That as no poison can take away the life of an elect: so, small occasions
carry away such as are appointed to destruction.

Q. How otherwise are these members of Antichrist described?

A. By this, that they never loved the truth, although they understood it, and
professed it.

Q. How should a man love the truth?

A. For the truths sake; not for vain glory, fleshly delight or commodity.

Q. How appears it, that men love the word of God?

A. When they walk accordingly, and keep faith in a good conscience; which
some losing by their wicked life, lost also their faith; that is, their
religion. 1. Tim. 1. 19.


Q. How is it to be understood, that God gives men up to strong delusions?

A. Because God is a just Judge, which by them either punishes or corrects
former sins, and especially the contempt of the Gospel; in which regard,
even amongst us now, some are cast into the sink of Popery; some into the
family of love; some become Arians; some Anabaptists: all which are (as it
were) diverse goales and dungeons: whereinto he throws those that are cold
and careless professors of the Gospel.

Q. What learn you by this?

A. That they which imagine God favorable unto them notwithstanding their
sins, because their life, or goods, or honors are spared, are foulely
deceived: for when the Lord cease to reprove any, or to Romans 1. 24. 26.
strive with them; then does he give them up into vanity of their own minds,
to do their own wicked wills, which is the greater judgment, and very
usual with God to do.

Q. What is our duty in such cases?

A. To pray unto the Lord to keep us from all error: but if for our trial,
or further hardening of others, it please him to send errors amongst us, that
it would please him to preserve us in that danger, that we taste not of that
bait, whereby Satan seeks to catch us.

Q. What other cause is there of sending these errors?

A. That those may be damned, which believe not the truth: for as God has
appointed them to damnation; so betwixt his counsel in rejecting them, and the
final effect of it, there must be sin to bring that effect justly upon them.

Q. What reason is annexed of their just damnation?

A. Because they rest in unrighteousness, having their ears itching after
error, which they drink in, as the earth drinks up rain, or the fishes
water. So that albeit they be powerfully sent of God in his just judgment;
yet are they also greedily desired and affected of them.

CHAP. 55.
Of the nearer signs before the day of Judgment.

They are such as shall come Either within an age: Or be nearly joined to the
same.

MATTHEW chap. 24. verse. 23. to the 29. 23. Then if any man shall say unto you,
Lo, here is Christ, or there: believe it not.

24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders: insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very elect.

25. Behold, I have told you before.

26. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go
not forth: Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.

27. For as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the
West: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

28. For wheresoever the carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered together.

29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken.


Q. HItherto we have heard of the tokens, that go long before the coming of
Christ. What are the nearer tokens of the latter day?

A. They are either such as shall come within an age of the second coming of
Christ; or such as shall be nearer to it (as it were) joined with it.

Q. What is the first?

A. That there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders.

Q. What have we here to consider?

A. Two things especially: first the error; secondly, the remedy against it.

Q. What is the error?

A. That it shall be said, here is Christ, or there: for there shall be false
Christ's, which shall pretend the very person of Christ, otherwise then
Antichrist, who terms himself the vicar of Christ. These also shall have
their ministers; namely, false Prophets, which shall get credit unto the false
Christ.

Q. What learn you by this?

A. That the Church of God shall be put under trial: first, of their knowledge
and understanding, whether they can discern between error, and truth:
secondly, of their love and fidelity; whether after they know the truth, they
will stick by it, or no.

Q. What do you note of this kind of error?

A. The danger of it, in that it makes show of the corporal presence of
Christ, whereunto we are naturally greatly given; as appears, not only by
the Papists, but by the holy Apostles themselves, which were too much addicted
to the corporal presence of Christ: secondly, also by reason of the great
means they shall have to prevail, through the wonderful miracles they shall
do; especially considering that the true Ministers of God shall not have (for
any warrant we have out of the word) any such power, as has already been
showed.

Q. What further do you learn of this?

A. The extreme impudency of the devil in those days, which has never been
heard of before, that shall so possess the spirit of a sinful mortal man,
that he shall take upon him to be the son of the most High: for
notwithstanding there were many, that took upon them to be the Messiah;
before and after the first coming of our Savior Christ; yet they imagining
the Messiah to be a bare man, were never so impudently arrogant, as to
challenge to themselves to be the very natural son of God.

Q. What note you of this, that if it were possible, the very elect should be
deceived?

A. First, the certainty of their happy estate, from whence they cannot fall.
Secondly, that the same has a foundation, not in any thing that is in men, but
in the purpose and counsel of God, which cannot be deceived.

Q. So much of the error. What is the remedy against it?

A. First, an admonition; then, a confutation.

Q. What is the admonition?

A. First, not to go out, that is, so certainly to be resolved of the untruth
of the thing, notwithstanding the greatness of the miracles, as not once to
enquire after it: for those that have itching ears, and wanton rolling eyes,
to hear and see things, are oftentimes by Gods just judgment deceived,
although they have a purpose to the contrary. Secondly, although by reason of
some particular calling, they be constrained to be present at the place where
such are, or otherwise be brought forcibly unto them; yet not to believe them
when they see or hear those things.

Q. What is the confutation?

A. That it cannot be Christ, that they should go out into the wilderness to
see: first, because he shall come with great brightness, as the lightning
comes from the East, and shines unto the west; neither shall one need to go
unto the wilderness to see him: because his light shall be seen in all places
of the world alike. Secondly, he will not come on the earth, but will show
himself in the air only. Thirdly, he shall come suddenly, as in a moment;
whereas before he had space to go from place to place. Fourthly, neither shall
it avail then to go out after and seek him; because as speedily as the
Eagles are gathered to the dead carcass; so the children of God, being
compared unto Eagles, shall suddenly be gathered to our Savior Christ; who is
compared to a dead body, in respect of his death.

Q. So much of the tokens which come within an age of the latter day. What are
the nearest tokens, or rather such as are joined with the second coming of
Christ?

A. The nearest are, that the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not
give her light; the Stars shall fall from heaven, the Sea shall rore
terribly, the earth shall tremble; and in a word, all the powers of heaven and
earth shall be shaken.

Q. At what time shall these signs come to pass?

A. Immediately after the false Christ's and Prophets, which (as has been
spoken) shall raise up a marvelous error, and by means thereof great
vexation; and therefore it is said, after the tribulation of those days, shall
the immediate signs of the coming of Christ be accomplished.

Q. What is the cause of these signs appearing, and of the coming of Christ
immediately upon them?

A. The faithful prayers of the Saints of God, which cry unto him to make an
end of these dangerous wicked days.

Q. Is not the day and hour of the coming of Christ revealed unto man?

A. No verily; man may gather by the signs going before, that it is not far
off; but the day and the hour no man knows, no not the Angels. Mat. 24. 36.


Q. What gather you of this?

A. Not that there is any want of love in God toward us, in conceiling the day
of his coming, for as much as the Angels, who are said to be full of eyes in
Ezech. 1. 18. Mat. 24. 36. Mark. 13. 32.
regard of their singular wisdom, know it not: yea and that which is more,
Christ himself, who is much wiser then Angels, is ignorant of it.

Q. But how can that be, that he which governs all things, should be
ignorant of that day?

A. As he is God he knows it; but not as he is the son of man, especially
unglorified; that is to say, before his ascension into heaven.

Q. What is meant by this, that one generation shall not pass till all be
fulfilled? Mat. 24. 34.

A. That as it was said before, that one generation should not pass, until
the destruction of Jerusalem were accomplished, which indeed was effected about
forty years after. So it is likely that after all the signs aforesaid,
before one age shall pass, the day of Judgment aforesaid shall come.

Q. Wherefore is this vehement asseneration used, That heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass away? Mat. 24. 35.

A. Against those mockers, which shall come in the latter times, and shall
charge the ministry of the Gospel with untruth, because they see no
alteration in the course of nature.

Q. What is the reason of this concealment?

A. First, that the Lord thereby might try the humility of men, whether they
would be so impudently bold, as to go about to break open the secret closet of
God.

Secondly, that by this concealment, we might be made more watchful; for as
the harlot is said to be the bolder to commit wickedness, because the day of
her husbands return was set and appointed by him: so it would fare with us.
Prou. 7. 20.


Q. What shall be the general state and disposition of them, which are
living at the coming of Christ?

A. Generally the world shall be drowned in security, as was the old world in
the days of Noah, immediately before the flood; and as was Sodom immediately
before the fire and brimstone came down from Luke 17. 26. 31.
heaven: for as in the days of Noah, notwithstanding he forewarned them by
his preaching, and by his building of the Arc, they were eating and drinking;
marrying, and giving in marriage, until the flood came and took them away: and
as in the days of Lot, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they
builded, till fire fell down from heaven and destroyed them all: so likewise
it shall come to pass in the latter days.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That thereby the Lord will take a trial of the consciences of his
children, whether they will be carried away with the inticements of these
pleasures, as before he took trial of their knowledge by the false Christ's,
and false Prophets; and withal by this course he disposes of the means,
whereby the wicked may deservedly perish, in that those whom one mischief does
not entangle, another may reach.

Q. Why? shall these things spoken of, be imputed as if they were sins,
seeing they are both lawful and necessary?

A. True it is, that eating and drinking, and giving to marriage, buying, and
selling; planting, and building, are in their own nature lawful and
necessary; but our Savior Christ means the abuse of these things; and
thereby declares, that a great condemnation may be due unto those things,
which before men are not condemned.

Q. How does it appear that he means the abuse of these things?

A. First, by the Hebrew phrase of eating and drinking, which being uttered in
the present time, notes a continuance of eating and drinking. Secondly, from
the Evangelist Lukes manner of utterance of them, without any copulative
conioyning of them, on this manner: They ate, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they builded; that is to say, they were excessiuely, and
above measure, given ouervnto these things. Like bruit beasts, from whom (some
think) this metaphor is borrowed, that eat all the day, and some part of the
night. As in the matter of buying and selling, when Mat. 22. 5. Luke 14. 18. 19.
men do employ themselves so much therein, that they cannot attend to the
service of God. So in building, when men build excessiuely; that is, further
then their 1. Cor. 7.
ability, calling, or manner of the country wherein they live will afford.
And in the matter of marrying, and giving to marriage, when the children of God
shall take Gen...
unto them profane women, such as their eyes like best. Or when men do join
themselves in Matrimony for living, or parentage only, without respect of
religion. Or when men live unchastly even in wedlock, whereas 1. Cor. 7. 29.
they that have wines, are commanded by the Apostle, to be as if they had none;
that is, to use this benefit of marriage soberly, 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
and that with prayer.

Q. What other sin will be then?

A. Security, carelessness, and sensuality, living as mere natural men; yea
as very bruit beasts and Atheists in the world,

Q. How so?

A. In that it is said, that as it was in the days of Noah, notwithstanding
they were forewarned of the flood, both by the preaching of Noah, and the
building of the Arc; yet as men being cast into a deep sleep; they cried
peace, peace, unto themselves, until the flood swallowed them up: so it shall
be in the latter days, that men shall be overtaken suddenly, (as a woman
with child) with the judgment of God, when they think all to be well with them.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. That we should not defer the time of our repentance, until we see the
nearest signs of the latter day; as the darkening of the lights of heaven, and
the roaring of the seas; for as much as they will minister greater matter of
fear unto us, then of conversion.

Q. What general use are the children of God to make of all these signs?

A. They are to be watchful, and to prepare themselves, because they know not
what hour he will come; which our Savior urges by a similitude of an
householder, which if he knew what hour the thief would come, he would surely
watch: the^ much more should we watch, because in an hour that we think not,
will the Son of man come.

Q. What preparation is required?

A. That which our Savior teaches in two parables.

Q. What is the first?

A. The parable of the ten Virgins. Matthew. 25. 1-14.

Q. What is the scope and drift of it?

A. Effectually to stir us up to prepare our selves for the coming of Christ.

Q. What difference is there betwixt this parable, and others tending this way?

A. Very little, or none at all: for as the other do solicit us to watch both
for the day and hour of Christ's coming, that we be not surprised at
unawares; so this parable does teach how dangerous it is, and how desperate our
estate shall be, if we be careless thereof; and withal presses that same
point especially of watching, even for the hour or moment when our Savior
Christ comes.

Q. Why does our Savior Christ use so many parables, for declaration of his
second coming?

A. Because the dullness of our capacities, and the corruption of our
affections is such, that we are hardly lifted up from earth to heavenly
meditations; and being raised up, we are ready of our natural weakness,
eftsoons to fall: in which regard, the multiplying of parables, are as helps
to lift and uphold our affections to the meditation of the former doctrines
concerning his second coming; besides the weight and importance of the matter
is set forth by the number of parables.

Q. From whence is this parable of the ten Virgins taken?

A. It is borrowed from the manner of the country where our Savior taught;
where a maid given Judge. 14. 11. Mat. 9. 15.
to marriage had her maidens, and the bridegroom his young men, which gave
attendance on them; fetching the bride from her friends to his house; which was
done it the night.

Q. What is the meaning of this parable?

A. By the bridegroom, is signified our Savior Christ himself, whose spouse
is the Church; and by the ten Virgins, are meant the professors of the Gospel,
professing their attendance upon Christ their redeemer.

Q. What did the Virgins, to declare their diligence in waiting for his
coming?

A. They took with them their lamps, whereby they made profession of their
attendance and expectancie of his coming.

Q. Wherein stands the wisdom of the wise Virgins?

A. In that before their slumber, (that is, before the day of their death, or
before their change at the latter day) they labor to provide themselves of
such graces, as shall not forsake them when they come to judgment.

Q. Wherein stands the folly of the foolish Virgins?

A. Not that they had not the light of any of Gods graces in them at all; but
that all the light they had, was of that kind that dies with them, not being
the graces of true faith, sanctification, and repentance: so that when they
were to be changed, or raised in the latter day, they have no saving grace at
all found in them, whereby they might with boldness appear before the Judge
of all the world.

Q. What other parable is there, whereby Christ teaches us to prepare for his
coming?

A. The parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. 14-31.

Q. What is the sum of this parable?

A. The same in effect with the other of the ten Virgins; for as there was in
the other a bridegroom, and a bride; virgins wise, and foolish; the wise
received, the other rejected: so here there is a master, and his servants; of
whom, some be faithful, and some unfaithful; the faithful plentifully
rewarded, the unfaithful justly punished: yet this does more effectually
prepare us to his coming, then the former.

Q. How so?

A. Because it has more arguments then the former: First, in that they had
received their masters goods, whereof they were to give an account: secondly, in
that their just reward is more lively declared.

Q. What is the parable?

A. A certain householder about to go into a strange country, gave to each of
his servants a portion of his goods, answerable to their estate and ability, to
occupy until his return; and as they gained by employing the same; so they
received their reward.

Q. What is the meaning of the parable?

A. Christ is the householder; the heavens are the Luke 19. 11. 12.
strange country in regard of us; whither when Christ ascended, he distributed
his gifts and graces to his Ephesians. 4. 8.
Church, that we might use them in this life, and render a just account of them
unto him at his next coming.

Q. Did not Christ bestow his graces upon his Church, before his ascension?

A. Yes no doubt; but the graces which he bestowed after his ascending, did
far exceed the other.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. First, the exceeding mercy of God, in giving so liberally unto his
servants: and secondly, his wisdom, in giving more to some, and less to
others, and yet to the least a talent; that is to say, very much.

Q. What is the use of this?

A. First, if a faithful servant will be careful for the account of
perishable money; much more ought we, for the Lords spiritual treasure.

Q. What secondly?

A. If they grudge not at the measure of others, much less should we grudge
at the greater graces of God in other men: and if they rested in their masters
wisdom and judgment, who might fail, much more should we rest in the
judgment of our God, who cannot fail; nay rather, we are assured, that
whatsoever he bestows upon any one, is for the good of all: for every one
has his portion in other men's gifts.

Q. If God bestowed his gifts according to the quality of men, then there is
desert in them?

A. Not so: for although some natural men excel others in wit and judgment,
whereby they are furthered to the discharge of their temporal affairs; yet
Phil. 1. 6. and 2. 13.
it is not so in the spiritual, seeing the beginning, proceeding, and
perfection thereof is the free gift of God.

Q. So much in the distribution of talents. What consider you in the occupying
of them?

A. That if men labor earnestly for gain in using worldly money; much more
should we in the use of the spiritual; especially seeing the best adue^turers
may be crossed in the gain of their merchandise: but the gain of this
spiritual mercha^dize is most assured, when it is employed according to the
mind of the giver.

Q. How did they occupy their talents?

A. He that received five, gained five more; and he that received two; gained
likewise two more.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. That the gain should be answerable to the receipt; and therefore that no
man should measure himself by another man's foot, as if it were enough to do
as others do: but as God has measured out his graces 1. Pet. 4. 10*
to us, so should we practice; neither ought he that receives but two talents,
to take an occasion to do nothing, because he cannot do so much as others
which have received five; but to labor faithfully, according to the gifts
which God has bestowed upon him.

Q. What further arises out of this?

A. That a Christian man ought to know the measure of his gifts (so that he be
neither proud nor dejected thereby) the better to know his account.

Q. Did all that received talents gain accordingly?

A. No: for the third receiving but one talent, hid it in the ground until his
masters return, and did not use it at all; which sets out the naughtiness,
sloathfulnesse, and unfaithfulness of evil servants.

Q. Why did he choose to set down their unfaithfulness in the least, and not
in the most?

A. Because otherwise men failing in the lest, would think this fearful
judgment not to belong unto them.

Q. Is this judgment proper only to the slothful?

A. No; it agrees as well to all those that seek their own gain, and not
their Lords, how earnest soever they seem to be in the use of their gifts,
eating the bread of carfulness, and drinking the water of affliction.

Q. Hitherto of the talents, and the use of them. What consider you in the
accounts?

A. First, that the day of account shall come, although the time (indeed short)
seem long in our opinion. Therefore we must continue without fainting, in the
earnest practice of godliness: for if the certainty of the masters coming
makes the servant watchful, who notwithstanding may die before his master
come home, and his master also die before the taking of accounts; much more
should we continue our watch, who are undoubtedly assured of the coming of
Christ, and of our appearance before him. Secondly, we must labor to be
found faithful in our accounts: for though an earthly master may be deceived
in his accounts; yet our master Christ cannot be deceived: and if good
servants have been found faithful, though they have been sure not to be called
to accounts; let us much more be faithful, being assured of 2. King. 12. 15.
our accounts which we shall give.

Q. What was the reward of the faithful servants?

A. Twofold; one in honor, another in joy: the honor was first in word, of
praising and calling them faithful servants, which is an excellent thing,
especially coming from God: and secondly, in deed, by giving them a singular
rule and preferment over others, according to their degree.

Q. What is the reward in joy?

A. In partaking their masters joy, which is unspeakable, and such as none can
conceive, but they only who enjoy it.

Q. So much of the reward of the faithful servants. What is the reward of the
unfaithful?

A. Not only the depriving them of those good things before mentioned; but
also a casting of the^ into perpetual dishonor, and torments unspeakable.

CHAP. 56.
Of the Judgment it self.

Where note, Christ's preparation to the judgment, in His glorious appearing.
The glorious effects thereof.
The parts, the Sentence, For the faithful. Against the wicked.
Execution thereof.


MAT. chap. 24. verse. 29. to 31. and chap. 25. verse. 31. to 45. 29. Immediately
after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and the
Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the
powers of the heavens shall be shaken.

30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven,
to the other.

Chap. 25. verse. 31. to the 45. 31. When the Son of man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of
his glory:

32. And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats.

33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

36. Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38. When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed
thee?

39. Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, In
as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

42. For I was hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
no drink.

43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.

44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee?

45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, I say unto you, In as much as
ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.


Q. HItherto of the signs going before the day of Judgment. The Judgment
itself follows; what are we to consider therein?

A. First, our Saviors own preparation to it. Secondly, the parts thereof.

Q. What consider you in the preparation?

A. The glory of Christ, first, in his appearance: secondly, in other glorious
effects going before the Judgment.

Q. Wherein shall the glory of Christ's coming appear?

A. Partly in himself, and partly in the things belonging unto him at his
coming.

Q. What is it in himself?

A. That suddenly breaking out of the heavens, his glory shall be of such
singular brightness, that the Sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall loose
her light: for if when our Savior Christ was transfigured upon ye Mount
Thabor, being then mortal, his face did shine Mat. 17. ^.
as the Sun; then much more at his second coming his Majesty shall be
wonderful, seeing it is now both immortal and glorified.

Q. How shall the glory of his coming appear in the things belonging unto
him, at his second coming?

A. First of all in his Angels.

Q. How shall his glory appear in them?

A. In their number, and in their excellency.

Q. How in their number?

A. In that they are infinite thousands; which before Mat. 5. 25. 31.
having been severed in their diverse services they have been employed in, shall
then altogether and jointly attend upon Christ, and the service of that day.

Q. How in their excellency?

A. In that they also shall be of great glory; for if an Angel appearing be
like unto lightening; then much more there must be great glory and brightness
in the innumerable company of Angels, that shall attend upon our Savior
Christ.

Q. What is further belonging to the glory of his coming?

A. His glorious throne, whereupon he shall actually and really sit, shadowed
out by the glorious throne of Solomon, which was of pure gold; whereof
howsoever the matter be unknown unto us, yet we know it shall be suitable to
the excellency of his Majesty.

Q. What is the proper use hereof?

A. To be armed against all shame and fear, in the Mark. 8. 38.
profession of Christ and his truth, before whatsoever earthly Monarchs, whose
judgments are (as it were) scar-crowes to the judgment of Christ; to whom
that properly belongs, which Rabshakeh foolishly bragged of his master,
concerning the ability of the Esaias 36. 9.
least of his servants.

Q. What are those glorious effects that go before?

A. First, the world shall be consumed with fire, and the heavens and the earth
shall be renewed. Secondly, all that are dead shall be raised again, and
ranged before him.

Q. How shall they be raised?

A. He will send his Angels, and they shall do it by the sound of the trumpet,
which shall not be of brass, or such like mertall: for the Angels have
sufficient might and skill to make a sound, like unto the sound of a trumpet,
without any such instrument; in which respect Exodus 19. 16. 19.
it is also said, how that they shall see the sign of the son of man, in the
heaven; as the Captains set up their flag and banner to gather their soldiers.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. The unspeakable power of Christ in his Angels; John 5. 28.
at whose found, not only the living shall be changed; but the dead, even
from Adam to that time, shall be raised; who shall not be prevented of the
other, but all appear together before Christ; it being 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15.
al one with his power, to gather the dead, as the quick. Yea, they shall be
changed suddenly in a moment, and in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump. 1. Cor. 15. 52.


Q. What furtber learn you of this?

A. The infinite knowledge, wisdom, and power of God, in coupling every bone
to his proper joint in his own body, with the proper flesh and sinews
thereof; notwithstanding the confused mass of all things that they shall be
turned into; whether dust, air, or other element whatsoever: Notwithstanding
also, that they are so diversely distracted in place.

Q. What is the reason thereof?

A. That those that have glorified God in their bodies, might be also glorified
in the same: and contrariwise, 2. Cor. 5. 10.
those that have dishonored him in their bodies, might receive dishonor of
God.

Q. How shall the sound of the trumpet raise up the dead?

A. No otherwise but by the quickening of God, through the power of his spirit;
whereby it shall come to pass, that the dead shall be raised out of the dust,
and of mortal shall be made immortal.

Q. But cannot God do this without the sound of a trumpet?

A. Yes verily, he is able to do it without any such instrument; as he is
also able to save men extraordinarily, without the preaching of his word; yet
he has determined to use this means, at that day, for the raising of his
Saints from bodily death; as he uses his word for an ordinary means to call
them from the death, and out of the grave of sin. For the very like power of
Christ is exercised in us whilst we live here, who quickens us by the
Gospel to his obedience, that are by nature dead in sin; and so not only
unable, but also unwilling and auerse to any thing that is good: wherefore, God
joins power to his word, to raise from death to life, as well spiritually in
the first, John 5. 28.
as corporally in the second resurrection; which first resurrection, is a
manifest pledge of the second, there Revel. 20. 6.
being greater difficulty in the first, then in the second; for in the second
resurrection, though there be no will Romans 8. 7.
to rise, yet there is no enmity or gainsaying, which in the first is great.

Q. After what manner shall the resurrection be?

A. First, the godly shall arise to everlasting salvation; and then the wicked
to eternal damnation. 1. These. 4. 16.

Q. In what manner shall all men then be ranged and ordered?

A. That is set forth by a parable of the shepherd Mat. 25. 31.
and the sheep: for as the shepherd when the evening comes, gathers his
flock, and separateth the sheep from the goats: so in the evening of the
world our Savior Christ shall gather all nations by the ministry of the
Angels, and then there shall be a full separation, the godly being set on the
right hand, and the wicked on the left.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. The difference between the judgments of God, and the judgments of men,
where both the innocent and the guilty are confusedly presented at one bar;
but then there shall be two bars, through a separation of the wicked and the
godly; which separation the Angels can most easily make, in discerning between
them, as otherwise, so even by their cheerful or fearful countenances.

Q. Shall not some ungodly men be saved for the godlie's sake, with whom they
converse?

A. No; for our Savior says, that then two shall be in the field, one
received, another left; two in one bed, one taken, another rejected, etc. Luke
17. 34. 36.


Q. What learn you of this?

A. That then it shall not avail a wicked man to be in the company of the
godly: for as much as they shall then be separated: whereas in this world the
wicked Ge^. 18. 32. and 19. 21. John 4. 15.
are sometimes spared for the godlie's sake.

Q. What further instruction do you gather from this?

A. That we should so use our societies here, that in the life to come we may
have comfort in the continuance of them.

Q. Is not this separation now in these days?

A. Yes verily, here it begins, when the Gospel Luke 12. 51. 53. and 8. 13.
Revel. 21. 27. Psalm. 1. 5.
and afflictions sever the wicked and the godly; but then shall be a full
separation, when neither Canaanite, Iebusite, or Moabite shall be amongst the
children of God.

Q. What special effects shall there be of this glorious preparation?

A. There shall be some in the wicked, and othersome in the godly.

Q. What are those that shall be in the wicked?

A. Mourning and lamentation, for fear and terror of the power and Majesty of
Christ and his Angels coming in the clouds, which shall be a beginning of
hell unto them, before they shall feel it: even Revel. 1. 7.
as guilty prisoners shall be terrified at the sight of the Judges, before
there be any execution of judgment against them.

Q. What gather you of it?

A. First, that at the bare sight of these signs the wicked shall be so
terrified; how much more when they having received the sentence of damnation,
the same shall be executed? Again, if the godly having Luke 1. 12.
their sins forgiven them, are afraid at the appearance of one Angel; much
more the wicked, who have their sins tied fast upon them, will be afraid at
the sight of so many Angels. And if a spark of godliness, Mark. 6. 20.
without any appearance of glory, in a godly man be terrible to the wicked;
much more will the Majesty of the Son of God, altogether holy and glorious,
strike an infinite fear into them; and make them desire that the rocks and
mountains falling upon them, might hide them from his sight. Luke 23. 30.
Revel. 6. 16.


Q. What are the effects of Christ's coming in the godly?

A. They shall rejoice and be glad at this glorious coming, which they looked
and prayed for; even as a faithful servant is glad, when his master comes
with much honor and good speed in all his affairs, the honor and glory of
his master serving to his further advancement.

Q. How does our Savior Christ garnish and enlarge this doctrine?

A. By a parable of the fig tree, which elegantly declares the certainty and
comfort of the former doctrine; Mat. 24. 32.
that when the fig tree brings forth her leaves, we know the summer is
near: so when we see the signs aforesaid come to pass, the day of the Lord
is even at the doors, and the summer of the Church of God is at hand.

Q. What learn you of this?

A. That as the summer is the most pleasant season, and most of all others to
be desired: so we should long after the coming of Christ, when we shall enjoy
a perpetual summer, without all manner of winter, storms, or troubles.

CHAP. 56.
Of the sentence of the Judge.

The parts of the judgment are the Sentence of the Judge For the faithful.
Against the wicked.
The execution thereof. Chap.

MATTHEW. chap. 25. verse. 34. to the end. 34. Then shall the King say unto them
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, in herit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world.

35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

36. Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison,
and ye came unto me.

37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?

38. When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed
thee?

39. Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

40. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, In
as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

42. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave
me no drink.

43. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.

44. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee?

45. Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, I say unto you, In as much as
ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous
into life eternal.


Q. So much of Christ's preparation to the Judgment: what are the parts thereof?

A. Two: first, the sentence of the Judge; which is twofold; one for the
faithful, another against the wicked: and secondly, the execution of the
sentence.

Q. What is the former sentence, which is for the faithful?

A. It is this; Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you before the foundation of the world, etc.

Q. Why does the judgment begin at the godly?

A. Because our Savior will have them to fit with him to judge the wicked;
therefore he fitteth them thereunto, by clearing them first, 1. Cor. 6. 2.
Revel. 3. 21.

Q. What gather you of this order?

A. A notable comfort to the godly against all trouble; that as the Lord in
mercy begins his correction at them in this life: so in the last day he
shall begin with them the judgment of joy and comfort; and that having bin
mis-iudged here, they shall then judge their Judges, unless in time they
repent.

Q. What learn you out of this former sentence?

A. First, a notable harmony betwixt Christ and his Church; that as they say
unto him, Come Lord Jesus, Revel. 22. 20.
come quickly: so shall he say unto them; Come ye blessed of my Father, Come;
declaring their exceeding desire of mutual fellowship, and society.

Q. What else?

A. That life everlasting is called a kingdom; and therefore every godly one
shall be made partaker of a most glorious kingdom.

Q. How comes this kingdom? by grace, or desert?

A. By the only grace of God in Jesus Christ.

Q. Declare the same more evidently?

A. First, it is the blessing of God; and therefore of grace. Secondly, it is
given to us as to heirs, not as the wages of a servant, which commonly
deserves more then a son. Thirdly, it was prepared for us from the beginning
of the world; and therefore is of the mere love of God, and not of merit.

Q. So much of the sentence. What is the reason of it?

A. When Christ was an hungered, they fed him; when he was a thirst, they gave
him drink; when he was naked, they clothed him; when he was sick, and in
prison, they visited him.

Q. Does not this reason plainly strengthen the doctrine of merits?

A. Not so, seeing (for) imports not here the For.
cause, but the effect: as we say, Summer is come, for flowers do spring;
and, It is a good tree, for it brings forth good fruit; these are effects and
not causes. Moreover, if Christ would have taught merit; then would he have
chosen the greatest and chiefest works; as of his own worship in the first
table: else some might justly complain that they were not rewarded, according
to the measure of their good works, having yielded a greater obedience to the
first table then others.

Q. Why then does Christ choose those works of the second table?

A. Because they are most manifest to the world; following therein the custom
of earthly Judges, who insist most upon plainest proofs, either to convince
the guilty, or clear the innocent: so Christ pronounces his sentence rather
according to works, then to faith, and those of the second table, rather then
of the first; because works are more visible, then faith; and it is easier to
play the hypocrite in the obedience of the first table, then of the second.

Q. Why does Christ here use so long a catalogue of these works?

A. To teach us to exercise mercy in all those duties, and not content our
selves with any one of them.

Q. How could they do these things unto Christ, whom most of them did never
see?

A. When they did any of them to his poor members, Mat. 25. 41.
then they did it unto him.

Q. What gather you of this?

A. That seeing it was a great honor to lodge Angels at unawares in stead of
strangers: this is a far more excellent honor whereunto Christians are called;
being assured that in receiving such poor as are there spoken of, they receive
Christ himself; which should stir up the bowels of mercy and compassion in
us toward them; seeing not so much as a cup of cold water Mat. 10. 42.
shall be unrewarded.

Q. So much of the former sentence. What is the latter against the wicked?

A. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels,

Q. What is the equity of this speech?

A. It is likewise answerable to their own deserts, Amos 6. 3. Job 21. 14.
who in their life thrust away from them the day of the Lord, and (as it were)
bid Christ depart.

Q. When do the wicked say so to Christ?

A. When they refuse to know his will; when they disdain the ministry, are
unmerciful to the poor, and the stranger, or the like.

Q. What are the parts of this his judgment?

A. First, to be deprived of Gods presence, as it is a great part of glory to
be continually in his presence. Secondly, to be everlastingly tormented in
hell fire.

Q. What is the reason of this sentence?

A. It is (clean contrary to the former) for leaving those duties undone which
the godly did. And although the good works of the godly were not the causes of
salvation; yet these evil works are the very next cause of damnation.

Q. How can that be?

A. Because the best works of the godly are imperfectly good, and cannot
deserve life: but the evil works of the evil, are perfectly evil; and
therefore deserve death.

Q. What is to be considered in their answer?

A. Their exceeding blindness whiles they lived here, in that they never
considered that in rejecting the poor, they rejected Christ.

CHAP. 57.
Of the execution of Gods Judgment.

Herein note the Eternal death and misery of the wicked. Perfect blessedness
of the godly, Common to all Freedom from all evil. Fruition of all good.
Special.


MATTHEW. chap. 25. verse. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.

DAN. chap. 12. verse. 2. 3. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt.

3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.


Q. HItherto of the sentence of the Judge; the execution of it follows: what
is the order thereof?

A. Contrary to the order of the sentences, for it shall begin at the wicked.
And this is agreeable to the Deuteronomy. 25.
order of justice, which the Lord appoints in the Law, that the malefactors
should be executed in the eye of the Judge.

Q. What then are the parts of this execution?

A. The eternal death and misery of the wicked, and the eternal life and
perfect blessedness of the godly.

Q. How shall the eternal death of the wicked be effected?

A. The Angel of God shall presently take and Mat. 13. 49. 50. and 22. 13.
bind them and cast them to hell.

Q. What shall their estate be in hell?

A. They shall for ever be separated from the blessed presence of God, they shall
be shut up into utter darkness, where shall be nothing but horror and confusion,
Esaias 66. 44. Apoc. 22. 8. Mat. 9. 22.
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and have their portion with the
devil and his angels, in a lake (burning vnquenchably) of fire and brimstone.

Q. What is the blessedness of the godly?

A. That is set forth by the Prophet, Dan. 12. 2. 3. where is also touched the
shame and confusion that shall befall the wicked.

Q. What is the scope of this place?

A. The scope of the Prophet is, to hold the faithful afflicted in a constant
course of duty and obedience to the Lord, by consideration of the rich reward
of the godly, and fearful punishment of the wicked, at the second and glorious
coming of Christ.

Q. It seems by the word many, that all shall not rise?

A. There seems indeed to be some advantage given to the Jews, who imagine
that there is no resurrection of the wicked; which notwithstanding is
manifestly confuted, even by this place it self, where it is said, that many
shall awake to shame everlasting.

Q. How then is this to be taken?

A. It is taken severally by it self, as one whole which is divided into his
parts: As if he should say, an infinite number shall awake; an infinite or a
great number of just; and an infinite or great number of the wicked. And the
like form of speech to this is used of the Apostle, Romans 5. verse. 15. 19. he
says, that many are dead by the sin of Adam; and yet in the eighteenth verse
he shows, that by those many, he means all; and so speaks that all were
condemned in Adam: likewise in the eighteenth verse it is said, that the
benefit of Christ's death comes to all; meaning the faithful, that by faith
are one with Christ, as we were all naturally with Adam; yet in the 15. and
19. verses, those that he called all, he terms many. Although if he speak
of the wicked by themselves, and of the godly by themselves, it may be truly
said, that neither all the wicked, nor all the godly shall awake out of the
dust: because some of both sorts shall not die, but be changed only. 1. Cor.
15. 51.


Q. What do you consider in this text?

A. The perfect happiness of the good.

Q. What does this text teach concerning the same?

A. Two things: the first, of the happiness which is common to all the good,
in the second verse; and the other of the special happiness that some shall
have above their fellows, in the third.

Q. From whence comes this happiness, both common and special?

A. From our communication and participation Reu. 21. 3.
with God in Christ, which is set forth by this, that God will dwell with us,
and we with him: and by a similitude of eating and drinking with him; and
eating of Reu. 3. 20. Mat. 26. 29. Revel. 2. 7. 17. Revel. 3. 5. and 2. 26. 27.
the tree of life, and of the hidden Manna; glorious clothes of rule and
dominion.

Q. Wherein stands the happiness common to all?

A. Partly in freedom from all evil; and partly in the enjoying of the
fullness of that which is good.

Q. How is the first set forth?

A. He shall wipe away all tears, there shall be no Revel. 21. 4. and 22. 3.
5.
more death; no sickness, no sorrow, no crying, no labor, no darkness; no
not so much as the danger or Revel. 21. 25.
peril, or fear of any evil: the gates shall not be shut; and therefore in
their minds and souls, they shall be free from all those affections that have
any pain joined with them; as wrath, mercy, pity, compassion, fear, care,
repentance, and such like.

Q. How is the enjoying of good things laid forth?

A. We may consider it, either by that which is without, or else that within
us.

Q. How consider you that which is without?

A. The place which they shall be in, for the pleasant Psalm. 15. 1. Revel. 21.
10.
situation, likened to a high hill, as that which is above the stars; for the
delicacie of it compared to Paradise; called for the certainty and worth thereof
an inheritance and crown immortal, incorruptible, undefiled, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
Revel. 22.
and that which withers not, and the glory of it is described at large.

Q. How else?

A. By the company we shall have, and fellowship Heb. 12. 22. 23 24. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 1. Mark 9. 5. 6.
with the Saints and Angels; in which respect eternal life is set forth;
partly by being with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and the Apostle adiureth us by
the great assembly. And we see what delight the Apostles took to see Moses and
Elias, so as they would feign have had them tarried with them, although through
their infirmity, they were afraid of the sight of them: how much more then
shall the joy be, when we shall behold their glory, without all fear and
astonishment!

And specially, in beholding, even with their bodily eyes, the glory of our
Savior Christ, from whom also comes all the good of the Saints and Angels
John 17. 24. 1. John 3. 2. Revel. 22. 4.
we shall delight in, as also the Father, and holy Ghost, with the eyes of
their souls.

Q. Hitherto of the happiness and good without them. What is that which is in
themselves?

A. In their bodies; and then in their souls.

Q. How shall they be in their bodies?

A. They shall be made conformable unto the glorious body of our Savior
Christ, whose glory has Philip. 3. 21.
been told before. And therefore they are said that they shall shine as the
Sun. So that Absaloms beautiful Mat. 13. 43. 2. Sam. 14. 25.
body, which had never spot or wenne in it, from the top of the head, to the
sole of the foot, is but a shadow of that beauty and comeliness that shall be
in the bodies of the Saints.

Q. How in their souls?

A. Their knowledge shall be perfect; for we shall 1. Cor. 13. 10. -- 12.
know, as we are known. Which is set out by comparison of the less: that our
knowledge then shall differ from that now, as the knowledge of a child,
differs from the knowledge of a perfect man; and as the knowledge by a
glass, differs from the knowledge by seeing the thing it self: and as
knowledge of a plain speech, from that which is a riddle. And as the knowledge
is perfect; so the understanding and memory.

Q. How further?

A. Their holiness shall be perfect, and also their love. 1. Cor. 13. 12.


Q. What is the measure and quantity of this good which all the elect shall
enjoy?

A. It is unspeakably great; such as neither eye has seen, ear has heard,
not has entered into the mind Esaias 64. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Revel. 2. 17.
of any, and which none but God knows, and he which does enjoy them.

Q. Hitherto of the felicity common to all. What is that which is special?

A. It is described in the third verse, where he says, Dan. 12. 3.
that those that have taught many, and justified many; or (as the Apostle
speaks) saved many; that is, have 1. Tim. 4. 16.
been the Lords good instruments to save many, shall shine as the firmament,
and as the principal stars, and be preferred before those whom they have
taught: for if the skill of interpreting a matter, do lighten and Eccles. 8. 1.
cause the face to shine in this life; it will much more cause it to shine in
the life to come.

Q. Shall all teachers have one glory?

A. No: for as here it is said that the Ministers shall 1. Cor. 3. 8.
excel others: so it is elsewhere declared that one Teacher shall have greater
glory then another: as he that planteth and lays the groundwork, more then
he that waters and builds upon it.

Q. But amongst those that are no Ministers, shall not there be difference of
glory?

A. Yes: as the Martyrs shall be preferred before the rest; for every one
shall not be a pillar in the Revel. 3. 12.
Church: and as every one has gone beyond others in right use of the gifts
bestowed upon him; so he shall Luke 19. 17. 18.
receive his reward, more or less.

Q. But it seems this doctrine should argue some want in those that have
less.

A. None at all: for all shall be full of glory, although one have more then
another: as a vessel containing a gallon, is as full for the bigness, as that
which contains ten; and the foot may (for the proportion of a foot) be as
beautiful as the hand, although it have not so much beauty in it as the hand,
which would be no grace in the body.

Q. But this doctrine seems necessarily to draw merit with it?

A. Net so: for albeit they receive according to their works, yet they receive
it not for their works. And as God bestowing greater graces upon one here in
this life, more then upon another, is not therefore esteemed to have bestowed
them in regard of merit: so in bestowing greater glory in the life to come,
upon one more then another, is not to be esteemed to do it for merit; but that
which he does, is only of mere and free grace in Jesus Christ, in and
through whose merits he bestows upon his elect the degrees of blessedness
aforesaid, as it has been formerly taught unto us: Wherefore to him alone, and
to his mere mercy be given all the praise and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, CONTRACTED into a short Catechism, by the
Author himself.
Question. WHat is Catechizing?

A. It is Heb. 5. 12. 13. 14. and 6. 1. 2.
an Instruction, especially of the ignorant, in the grounds of Religion.

Q. What are the parts of a Catechism?

A. They Act. 8. 12. and 28. 23.
are either of GOD, or of his kingdom.

Q. What is God?

A. God is an Exodus 3. 14. John 8. 58.
essence, that has his being from himself.

Q. What do you consider in God?

A. First, his attributes: secondly, the persons that are in God.

Q. What is an attribute of God?

A. Whatsoever is attributed and given unto God 1. Pet. 3. 12. 1. Ioh. 4. 16.
Psalm. 145.
in the Scriptures, according to the diverse manner of his working.

Q. What is a person in God?

A. It is Ioh. 15. 1. and 14. 16.
a distinct subsistence, John 14. 9. and 17. 21. Coloss. 2. 9.
having the whole God head in i^.

Q. How many persons are there?

A. Mat. 28. 19. 1. John. 5. 7.
Three: the Son, Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Father?

A. The first person in Psalm. 2. 7. John 14. 1. Heb. 1. 3.
God, that of himself eternally has begotten his only Son.

Q. What is the Son*

A. The second Person in As before by relation. Prou. 8.
God, that is eternally begotten of the substance of his Father.

Q. What is the holy Ghost?

A. He is the third person in John 14. 26. Romans 8. 9.
God, proceeding eternally from the Father and the Son.

Q. These three, being every one the true and ever living God: are they any
more then one God?

A. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1. John 5* 7. 1. Cor. 8. 5. 6.
No.

Q. Hitherto of God: what is the kingdom of God?

A. A Esaias 97. Dan. 2. 44. 3. 33. Luke 1. 33.
kingdom, appointed and ruled by the counsel Romans 11. 34. Psalm. 11. 5. 3.
of his own will.

Q. What are the parts of his kingdom?

A. 1. Cor. 2. 16. Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 90. 4. Act. 4. 28.
His decree, and the execution thereof.

Q. What is his decree?

A. It is his most perfect Psalm. 99. 4. Ephesians. 1. 11.
will concerning every thing, which also makes it most perfectly good.

Q. What decree of God is that, which is especially to be considered.

A. That of man and Angels, called Predestination.

Q. What is Predestination?

A. It is the decree of God 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Romans 9. 22. 23. 1. Pet. 2. 8. Mat.
25. 41.
touching the everlasting estate of men and Angels.

Q. What are the parts of Predestination?

A. Election, and reprobation.

Q. What is Election?

A. It is the Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. Romans 9. 22. 23.
eternal predestination of certain men and Angels to eternal life, to the
praise of his glorious grace.

Q. What is Reprobation?

A. It is the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.
eternal predestination of certain men and Angels to eternal destruction, Of
the contrary end of election.
to the praise of his glorious justice.

So much of the Decree.

Q. What is the execution?

A. It is an Ephesians. 1. 11. Act. 4. 28.
action of God, effectually working all things he has decreed.

Q. What are the parts thereof?

A. Psalm. 33. 9. 10. 11. and 146. 67.
Creation, and providence.

Q. What is Creation?

A. It is the execution of Gods decree, of Genesis 1. 7. and Heb. 11. 3.
making all things that are made of nothing, very good.

Q. What is providence?

A. It is the Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 11. 36. Psalm. 139. 2. 3. Coloss. 3. 11.
execution of Gods decree, in the effectual disposing of all things to their
proper end, whereof that providence that is of Mat. 6. 26. 8. 10. 29. 30. 31.
men and Ezech. 11. 4. 5. 6.
Angels is chief.

Q. What do you consider especially in that part of providence?

A. The fall of both, Genesis 3. 1. 23. 4.
and repair Genesis 3. 15.
of man.

Q. Which of them fell first?

A. The Jude 6. Job. 4. 18.
Angels, which were also John 8. 44.
an isntrumental cause of man's fall.

Q. What was their fall?

A. The Jude 6. John 8. 44. 2. Pet. 2. 4.
departing from their estate which God had set them in.

Q. Wherein consists that their departure?

A. In forsaking their Job 4. 18.
innocence, and 2. Pet. 2. 4.
committing of sin, which caused Gods Lam. 3. 39. Esaias 64. 5. 6.
anger against them.

Q. What is sin?

A. It is the 1. John 3. 4.
transgression of Gods Law.

Q. What was the first sin of man? Genesis 2. 16. 17. 36. 7.


A. The eating of the fruit that was forbidden: from whence also do come other
sins; original, and actual.

Q. What is due to these sins?

Guilt, and Punishment. Romans 2. 15.
Romans 5. 12.


Q. What is the guilt of sin?

A. The Romans 3. 19.
desert of sin, whereby we are subject to Gods wrath. Genesis 2. 17. John 5. 24.
28. 29. 3. 18. 19.


Q. What is the punishment of sin?

A. Everlasting death, begun here, and to be accomplished in the life to come.

Q. What is that which God has ordained for the repair of man?

A. His John 5. 25. 6. 68.
word.

Q. What is his word?

A. It is a doctrine of saving Ioh. 5. 25. 29. 2. Tim. 3. 11. 16. 17.
men's souls, written by divine inspiration.

Q. How is this word made profitable to us?

A. By the Romans 10. 14. Luke 1. 3. 4. The practice of all the Apostles, who
never wrote but to the Churches, and such as already believe.
preaching and publishing of it, to the begetting and confirming of faith.

Q. Will not the knowledge of the wisdom, power, and goodness of God, in the
creation and government of the heaven and earth, with the things that are in
them, be a sufficient means to recover our lost estate?

A. No. It Romans 1. 19. 20. 21.
serves rather for further condemnation, without the word: as 1. Cor. 1. 21. 2^
by, and with the word it is a good help.

Q. What are the parts of the word?

A. The Romans 10. 5. 6. Gal. 3. 11. 12.
Law, and gracious promise: (otherwise called the Covenant of works, and the
Covenant of grace) which from the coming of Christ, is called the Gospel.

Q. What does the Law (containing the Covenant of works) enjoin us?

A. All Leuit. 18. 5.
such duties as were required of Adam in his innocence, and all Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
such as are required since, by reason of his fall, with reward of life
everlasting to the doers of them, and curses to him that does them not.

Q. Is any man able to do them all?

A. No, Gal. 3. 22. Romans 8. 3.
not in the least Philip. 3. 9. Titus 3. 5. Esaias 64. 6.
point.

Q. What then avails the Law to us?

A. Very much: first, to show us our sins, and punishment thereof, thereby to
drive us to Christ: and secondly, to teach us how to Mat. 5. 17. Luke 1. 6.
Deuteronomy. 66.
walk, when we are Gal. 3. 24. Romans 3. 20. 77.
come to him.

Q. What is the sum of the Law?

A. Mat. 22. 37. 38. 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind: this is the first and great Commandment, and the second is
like to this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, etc.

Q. What are the parts of the Law?

A. Deuteronomy. 10. 1. 2.
The first and the second table.

Q. What Commandments are in the first table?

A. The first four, Exodus 20. 1. 2. 3. etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 4. 6. etc.
which contain our duties toward God.

Q. What is common to these four?

A. That every one of them has his several reason annexed, which in the first
Commandment goes before: and in the other three, it comes after.

Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc.

Q. What is the sum of this Commandment?

A. The inward worship of God.

Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.

Q. What is the sum of this Commandment?

A. The outward worship of God, not according to the tradition of men, but
according to the will of God revealed in the Scripture.

Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Q. What is the sum of this Commandment?

A. A holy use of the titles, works, and actions of God.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it.

Q. What is the sum of this Commandment?

A. To set our selves apart to Gods worship, at such times as are here
commanded.

So much of the first Table.

Q. How many are the Commandments of the second table?

A. Six, containing our duties toward our neighbor.

Q. What is the sum of the Commandments of the second table?

A. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you to them.

Q. What is general to the Commandments of the second table?

A. That the works thereof are in higher or lower degree of good or evil, as
they are kept or broken toward one of the household of faith, 1. Cor. 6. 8* 10.
32. Gal. 6. 10.
rather then toward a neighbor simply?

Q. What is the first of them, being the fifth in order?

A. Honor thy father and mother, etc.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. All especial duties to our neighbor, in respect of his and our calling.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not murder.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. All general duties to our neighbor in respect of his person.

Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. All general duties to man in respect of chastity.

Q. What is the eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. All general duties to man in respect of his goods.

Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. All general duties to man in respect of his good name.

Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. That we keep our heart pure from all evil; not thoughts only, but even
from all pronenesse of sinning against our neighbor.

Q. What forbids this Commandment, that was not forbidden in the former?

A. The former do condemn only evil thoughts, with consent: which are here
condemned, before and without consent.

Hitherto of the Covenant of Works.

Q. What is to be considered in the Covenant of Grace?

A. First, Act. 10. 43. 3. 24. Romans 1. 34.
Christ, and then the 2. Cor. 5. 20. Mat. 6. 33.
means of applying Christ unto us.

Q. What things have we to consider in Christ?

A. Two: His person John 1. 14. 3. 33.
. His office Esaias 61. 1. 2. Luke 4. 18.
.


Q. What is his person?

A. Christ, both God, and Man Romans 1. 3. 4. and 9. 5. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
.

Q. What have we to consider in his person?

A. His two natures: His Godhead, and His Manhead, which subsisteth and has it
being in the Godhead.


Q. Being God before all worlds, how became he man?

A. He was Mat. 1. 20. Luke 1. 31. 32.
conceived in time by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary.

Q. Are these his natures separated?

A. No verily: 2. Cor 13. 4. 1. Pet. 3. 18. 1. Cor. 15. 27. 28.
they are inseparably united in person, and yet distinguished in substance,
properties, and actions.

So much of the person of Christ.

Q. What is the office of Christ?

A. To be Tim. 2. 5. Heb. 9. 15.
a Mediator betwixt God, and man.

Q. What are the parts of his mediation?

A. His Psalm. 1 10. 2. 3. 4. Heb. 7. 2. 3. Act. 3. 22.
Priesthood, and his Kingdom.

Q. How does he fulfill his Priesthood?

A. In Esaias 61. 2. 3. 4* Psalm. 2. 6. 7. Dan. 9. 24. Ephesians. 2. 14. 15. 16.
opening his Fathers will, and working the merit of our redemption.

Q. How does he open his Fathers will?

A. In teaching us the whole will of God, both in his Matthew. 13. 8. 9. 10. 27.
5.
own person, when he was upon the earth; and by the Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16.
Ministers, from the Heb. 1. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 11. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19. 2. Pet.
1. 19. 20. 21. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12. 13. Hos. 4. 6. Mat. 2. 6. 17.
beginning of the world, to the end thereof.

Q. How has he wrought the merit of our redemption?

A. Partly by that which he did in his estate of humiliation, partly by that he
did, and does in his glory.

Q. Wherein consists that which was done in his estate of humiliation?

A. In his conception, birth, life, poverty, hunger, thirst, weariness, and
other sufferings even unto death.

Q. What arises of this?

A. His whole Phil. 2. 5. 6. 7. 8. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
obedience; consisting in his sufferings, and in his fulfilling the Law.

Q. What did he suffer?

A. He suffered in body and soul Esaias 5. 3. Mat. 26. 27.
yt which was sufficient fully to satisfy for whatsoever we should have
suffered: having drunk the full cup of Gods wrath, filled unto him for our
sakes: whereby he has taken away our sins.

Q. How did he fulfill?

A. By doing all that the Psalm. 40. 7. 8. Gal. 4. 4. 5. Romans 8. 3. 4.
Law required, whereby he purchased a righteousness for us.

Q. What are his actions in glory?

A. His Act. 2. 31. 36.
resurrection, his ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God his Psalm.
110. 1. 2. 5. 6.
Father, whereby he fulfilled Heb. 9. 24. 25.
his Priesthood, and made himself a way for his kingdom.

Q. What are the effects of all these actions toward us?

They are two: Luke 1. 69. Heb. 7. 24. 25.
Redemption. Romans 8. 34. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Exodus 29. 33.
Intercession.

Q. What is Redemption?

A. A Romans 5. 15. 16. 17.
deliverance of us from sin, and the punishment thereof, and a restoring of
us to a better life then ever Adam had.

Q. What are the parts of Redemption?

A. 1. Cor. 1. 30. and 6. 11. 1. John. 5. 6.
Reconciliation, and Dan. 9. 24. 25. 26. 27. Act. 13. 38. 39. Romans 4. 25.
Sanctification. 1. Cor. 15. 45.


Q. What is Reconciliation?

A. That, whereby the wrath of God is taken from us, and we restored to his
favor.

Q. Wherein does it consist?

In remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness.

Q. What is remission of sins?

A. The Col. 2. 13. 1. John 1. 7. 9. Heb. 9. 28. and 10. 2. and 2. 14. 15.
abolishing and taking away of all our sins by his death.

Q. What is the imputation of righteousness?

A. The Col. 1. 22. Romans 5. 18. 19.
reckoning of Christ's righteousness unto us, and the taking it for ours.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. A freedom within us Romans 6. 12. 3. 4. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
from the bondage of Satan, and restitution of us to a godly life.

Q. What are the parts of it?

A. Mortification and quickening Ephesians. 4. 22. 23 24. Col. 3. 8. 10.
.

Q. What is Mortification?

A. The restraining and subduing of our natural corruption, whereby we
endeavor to refrain from all evil Romans 6. 3. 4. Col. 3. 5.
.

Q. What is quickening?

A. A renewing of us to newness of life, whereby we delight in doing good Romans
6. 4. Col. 3. 10. 12.
.

So much of Redemption.

Q. What is Intercession?

A. It is that Romans 8. 34. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Exodus 29. 38.
work, whereby Christ, sitting at the right hand of God his father, takes
away the pollution that cleaves to our good works: which depends upon the
merit of his passion.

Hitherto of the Priesthood of Christ.

Q. What is the kingdom?

A. That Luke 1. 32. 33. Ezech. 34. 34.
whereby his Priesthood is made effectual unto us; yea, without the which, all
the actions of his Pristhood are to us void and fruitless.

Q. What have we to consider in his kingdom?

A. First, the government of his Church in this 1. Cor. 15. 25. 26. 27. 28.
Mat. 25. 24. 31. 33. 4. 5.
world. Secondly, his last Judgment in the world to come, from which all the
means of applying and making effectual unto us Christ and all his benefits
do come.

Q. Wherein consists his government in this world?

A. In 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. 20. Act. 10. 44.
things, and in persons.

Q. What are the things?

A. Partly inward, and partly outward.

Q. What are the inward?

A. The Gal. 3. 2. 3. 1. Tim. 1. 14.
spirit of God, which is given by the outward.

Q. What does the spirit of God work in the godly?

A. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Faith, whereby they take hold of Christ, with all his benefits.

Q. What is faith?

A. A Act. 16. 21. Gal. 2. 20. and 3. 26. John 6. 15.
persuasion of the favor of God toward me in Jesus Christ.

Q. How do you know that you have true faith?

A. By the fruits thereof; Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. 8. 1. 2. 3. 4. Ephesians. 2. 6. Col. 2.
1. 2. 3.
Reconciliation, and Sanctification, which have been already declared.

So much of the Inward.

Q. What are the outward things, whereby the spirit is given?

A. They are either those which God gives us, or which we having received
from God, give unto him again.

Q. What are the things which God gives unto us?

A. The word of grace before named, and the dependants thereon.

Q. What is the sum of the word of grace?

A. Mark. 9. 23. Act. 16. 31. 32. 33. Romans 3. 28.
Believe in Christ, and thou shall be saved: by which God bestows the spirit
of adoption.

Q. What are the dependants of the word?

A. The Sacraments, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. and the Mat. 18. 15. 1. Cor. 5.
censures.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A mystical sign, and effectual instrument, whereby Christ with all his
benefits is offered to all in the Church, and received also of those that are
faithful.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two: Baptism, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. and 12. 13. Romans 4. 11. Genesis 17. 11.
12. Mat. 26. 26. and 28. 19.
and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Mat. 28. 19. Act. 8. 27.
A seal of our entrance into Christianity.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. A Mat. 26. 26. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
seal of our growth and continuance in Christianity.

So much of the Sacraments.

Q. What are the Censures?

A. They are judgments given for ratification of the Word and Sacraments
abused.

Q. Of how many sorts are they?

A. Two: either in word, or in deed. Mat. 18. 15. 16. 1. Cor. 5.


Q. What are they in word?

A. They are Christian admonitions, or rebukes of 1. Cor. 16. 22. Iam. 1. 14.
2. Tim. 4. 14.
the Church for sin: and they are either Mat. 18. 15. 16. Leuit. 18. 17.
private by one first, and then by two or three at the most, (whereof he that
first admonishes must be one) or 1. Tim. 5. 20. Mat. 18. 17.
public by the whole Church.

Q. What are they in deed?

A. The Numb. 12. 14. Exodus 33. 6. 7.
suspension from the Sacraments, or Mat. 18. 17. 1. Tim. 1. 20.
excommunication from all the benefits and society of the Church.

So much of the outward things that God gives us.

Q. What are the outward, that we having received, give to God again?

A. They are vows and prayers Psalm. 50. 13. 14. and 66. 13. 14.
.

Q. What is a vow?

A. A solemn promise to God of some lawful thing that is in our power, for
the confirmation of our faith, and testifying our thankfulness to God?

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a calling upon God in the name of Christ, for the more ample and full
fruition of the good things we have need of

Q. What is annexed to prayer?

A. An holy fast, or feasting.

Q. What is an holy fast?

A. It is an abstinence from all earthly comforts, so far as necessity and
comeliness will permit; to the 1 Leuit. 23. 27. 28. 29. Joel 2. 12.
end that our selves being humbled and cast down, we may more fervently call
on God, either for the obtaining of some singular benefit, or to avoid some
special punishment.

Q. What is an holy feast?

A. A Zach. 8. 19. Hest. 9. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22. 30. 31.
solemn thanksgiving for some notable benefit obtained of God; specially when
we have obtained it by a fast before.

Q. Are we limited and bound in certain, how and wherein to pray?

A. Not always: but we have a perfect pattern of prayer of all kinds, in the
Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
Lords prayer.

Q. What be the parts of the Lords prayer?

A. Two: The preface, The prayer it self.


Q. What is the Preface?

A. Our Father which art in heaven.

Q. What are we taught in the preface?

A. To come to God as to a father with boldness, and yet with reverence of his
Majesty that fills the heavens.

Q. What does the prayer contain?

A. A form of request and thanksgiving.

Q. What are the parts of the request?

A. They are of two sorts: whereof the first three being of the first table do
concern God: the other three being of things that concern the second Table,
belong to our selves, and our neighbor.

Q. What is the first of those three that concern God?

A. Hallowed be thy name.

Q. What is the sum of this Petition?

A. That in all things God may be glorified in his children.

Q. What is the second?

A. Thy kingdom come.

Q. What is the sum of this?

A. That the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, both by the inward working of
his spirit, and also by the outward means, may be enlarged daily, until it
be perfected at the coming of Christ to judgment.

Q. What is the third?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. That obedience be given to God by us, as it is by the holy Angels.

So much of these that concern God.

Q. How are they divided that concern our selves, and our neighbor?

A. Into two sorts: 1. Touching things of this life. 2. Touching things of the
life to come.


Q. What is the Petition concerning the things of this life?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

Q. What is the sum of that?

A. That God would provide not only for our necessities, but also for our
Christian and sober delight, according to our calling, and the blessing of God
upon us; with this exception (if it be his good pleasure.)

Q. What is the former of them which belong unto the life to come?

A. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. In it we pray for justification, which stands in the remission of sins,
and imputation of the righteousness of Christ.

Q. What is the latter petition?

A. And lead us not into tentation, but, etc.

Q. What is the sum of it?

A. In it we pray for sanctification, which stands in mortification and
quickening.

Hitherto of the Petitions.

Q. What is the thanksgiving?

A. For thine is the kingdom, the power and glory, etc.

Q. What is the sum hereof?

A. That we ground our assurance of obtaining our prayers in God, from whom
all things we ask do come, and to whom therefore all glory must return.

Q. What does this word (Amen) signify?

A. It is a note of confidence: as though he should say, so it is as we have
prayed.

So much of the things.

Q. What are the persons?

A. The Church.

Q. What is the Church?

A. A company of those which are Ephesians. 1. 1. Col. 1. 2. 27.
in Christ.

Q. What are the parts of the Church?

A. They Phil. 1. 1. Heb. 13. 17.
which have pre-eminence in the Church, and the rest of the body of it.

Q. What are they that have pre-eminence in the Church?

A. They are either 1. Tim. 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17. 1. These. 5. 12 13. 1. Cor. 12.
28.
governors, or helpers.

Q. What are the rest of the body of the Church?

A. The people that are governed.

Q. What is their part?

A. To yield obedience Philip. 1. 1. Heb. 13. 17.
to the lawful governors, according to Gods word.

Q. Having spoken of Christ's kingdom in this life; it follows to speak of
the same in the latter day. What is that day of Judgment?

A. It is Romans 14. 10. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
as it were the great Assizes, wherein every one must appear, and be either
acquitted or condemned.

Q. What are we to consider in this Judgment?

A. Two Mat. 24. 29. 31.
things: 1. The tokens going before. 2. The manner of it.


Q. What are the tokens going before? ^ Mat. 24. 21. Luke 21. 25.


A. Diverse; but the nearest unto that are the darkening of the lights of
heaven, and the roaring of the sea.

Q. What shall be the manner of it?

A. The John 5. 28. 29. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
Archangell shall make a mighty noise; whereby the dead shall be raised, and
those which are then alive shall be changed all in a moment.

Q. What shall then be done?

A. The Angels shall gather and present them Mat. 25.
before Christ in the air.

Q. Being so gathered, what shall then be done?

A. Christ (appointed the Judge of all) will first give sentence of life
eternal upon the faithful.

Q. Why will Christ first give sentence upon the faithful?

A. That they being first acquitted, may be Mat. 19. 28. 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3.
assistant to him, in judging the wicked to everlasting death.

Q. What shall be the execution of the Judgment?

A. The Mat. 13. 41. 42.
wicked shall be cast into hell, by the Angels, who shall Luke 16. 22.
carry the faithful into heaven, John 17. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
there to remain with Christ for ever.

FINIS.
Faults amended.
Page 9. answ. 2. lin. 6. read, bounded. p. 49. a. 2. l. 2. r. grossest sins.
p. 49. a. 3. l. 5. r. going about to make us surmise. p. 50. a. 5. l. 1. blot
out as. p. 53. q. 2. l. 1. r. having their eyes. p. 52. q. 4. l. 1. r. that
that Adam did eat. p. 65. q. 3. l. 2. r. there was. p. 65. a. 4. l. 2. r. law
written. p. 114. q. 2. l. 1. r. that in. p. 127. a. 2. l. 1. r. members. p.
135. a. 5. l. 7. especially for piety, follows, foot to the lame. p. 136. a.
3. l. 12. for, so that it be after he have first, r. or use it, having not
first. p. 197. a. 1. l. 3. r. or running. p. 201. a. 3. l. 3. r, be
comprehended. p. 219. a. 1. l. 12. r. the flood, the passing. p. 219. a. 1. l.
23. r. unction are superfluous. p. 230. a. 2. l. 3. r. his. p. 231. 2. 1. l.
10. r. preferred. p. 239. a. 3. l. 4. r. whence. p. 264. a. 5. l. 1. blot out
because. p 271. a. 2. for former. r. spiritual. p. 282. a. 1. l. 7. r.
conceiting. p. 287. a. 5. l. 2. r. glorious working. p. 294. lin. 12. r. use.


